CIHM ICMH 


Microfiche Collection de 
Series microfiches 
(Monographs) (monographies) 


| ise lane] [Pause [oleae ts (Ramee) RAR cmd ey (taser (ey Uf tars WIR rons eu eee 


f=) 


Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions / Institut canadien de microreproductions historiques 


©1998 | 


Technical and Bibliographic Notes / Notes techniques et bibliographia 


The Institute sas attempted to obtain the best original 
copy available for filming. Features of this copy which 
may be bibliographically unique, which may alter any of 
the images in the reproduction, or which may 
significantly change the usual method of filming are 
checked below. 


# 


This item is filmed at the reduction ratio checked below / 
Ce document est filmé au taux de réduction indiqué ci-dessous. 


oe wae aaa ele eas 


Coloured covers / 
Couverture de couleur 


Covers damaged / 
Couverture endommagée 


Covers restored and/or laminated / 
Couverture restaurée et/ou pelliculée 


.Cover title missing / Le titre de couverture manque 


Coloured maps / Cartes géographiques en couleur 


Coloured ink (i.e. other than blue or black) / 
Encre de couleur (i.e. autre que bleue ou noire) 


Coloured plates and/or illustrations / 
Planches et/ou illustrations en couleur 


Bound with other material / 
Relié avec d'autres documents 


Only edition available / 
Seule édition disponible 


Tight binding may cause shadows or distortion along 
interior margin / La reliure serrée peut causer de 
l'ombre ou de la distorsion le long de la marge 
intérieure. 


Blank leaves added during restorations may appear 
within the text. Whenever possible, these have been 
omitted from filming / Ilse peut que certaines pages 
blanches ajoutées lors d’une restauration 
apparaissent dans le texte, mais, lorsque cela était 
possible, ces pages n'ont pas été filmées. 


Additional comments / 
Commentaires supplémentaires: 


L'Institut a microfilmé le meilleur exemp! 
é1é possible de se procurer. Les détails 
plaire qui sont peut-étre uniques du poin 
ographique, qui peuvent modifier une ima 
ou qui peuvent exiger une modification d 
de normale de filmage sont indiqués ci-des 


SER Seon See ele 


LJ 


Coloured pages / Pages de couleur 
Pages damaged / Pages endommag 


Pages restored and/or laminated / 
Pages restaurées et/ou pelliculées 


Pages discoloured, stained or foxed, 
Pages décolorées, tachetées ou piqu 


Pages detached / Pages détachées 
Showthrough / Transparence 


Quality of print varies / 
Qualité inégale de l'impression 


Includes supplementary material / 
Comprend du matériel supplémentair 


Pages wholly or partially obscured b 
tissues, etc., have been refilmed to er 
possible image / Les pages to! 
partiellement obscurcies par un feuille 
pelure, etc., ont été filmées a nouvez 
obtenir la meilleure image possible. 


Opposing pages with varying co 
discolourations are filmed twice to en 
possible image / Les pages s'oppos: 
colorations variables ou des décolc 
filmées deux fois afin d’obtenir la me 
possible. 


The copy filmed here has been reproduced thanks 
to the generosity of: 


National Library of Canada 


The images appearing here are the best quality 
possible considering the condition and legibility 
of the original copy and in keeping with the 
filming contract specifications. 


Original copies in printed paper covers are filmed 
beginning with the front cover and ending on 
the last page with a printed or illustrated impres- 
sion, or the back cover when appropriate. All 
other original copies are filmed beginning on the 
first page with a printed or illustrated impres- 
sion, and ending on the last page with @ printed 
or illustrated impression. 


The last recorded frame on each microfiche 
shail contain the symbol — (meaning “CON- 
TINUED"). or the symbol Y (meaning “END"), 
whichever applies. 


Maps. plates, charts, etc., may be filmed at 
different reduction ratios. Those too large to be 
entirely included in one exposure are filmed 
beginning in the upper left hand corner, left to 
right and top to bottom, as many frames as 
required. The following diagrams illustrate the 
method: 


L’exemplaire filmé fut reproduit grace.a la 
générosité de: 


Bibliothéque nationai. du Canada 


Les images suivantes ont été reproduites avec le 
plus grand soin, compte tenu de la condition et 
de la netteté de l‘exempiaire filmé, et en 
conformité avec les conditions du contrat de 
filmage. 


Lec exemplaires originaux dont la couverture en 
papier est imprimée sont filmés en commencant 
per le premier plat et en terminant soit par ia 
derniére page qui comporte une empreinte 
d'impression ou d’illustration, soit par le second 
plat. selon le cas. Tous les autres exemplaires 
originaux sont filmés en commencant par la 
premiére page qui comporte une empreinte 
d‘impression ou d’illustration et en terminant par 
la derniére page qui comporte une telle 
empreinte. 


Un des symboles suivants apparsitra sur la 
derniére image de chaque microfiche. selon le 
cas: le symbole —& signifie “A SUIVRE”, le 
symbole V signifie “FIN”. 


Les cartes. planches, tableaux, etc.. peuvent étre 
filmés a des taux de réduction différents. 
Lorsque le document est trop grand pour étre 
reproduit en un seul cliché, il est filmé a partir 
de I‘angle supérieur gauche, de gauche a droite. 
et de haut en bas, en prenant le nombre 
d'images nécessaire. Les diagrammes suivants 
illustrent la méthode. 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


FFEEEER 


FE 


= 


APPLIED IMAGE Inc 


1653 East Main Street 
Rochester, New York 14609 USA 
(716) 482 - 0300 - Phone 


(716) 288 - 5989 - Fax 


THE ONLY TWO RELIGIONS; 


AND 


OTHER GOSPEL PAPERS. 


BY 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


NEW YORK: 
LOIZFAUX BROTHERS, BIBLE TRUTH DEPOT 
63 FOURTH AVENUE. 


TORONTO, CANADA: 
HOME FRIEND OFFICE; 486 YONGE STREET. 


PRINTED AT 


THE BIBLE TRUTH PRESS, 63 FOURTH AVENUE, 


NEW YORK, 


0 901244 


PREFACE, 


N this little volume the word religion is used in 
| its popular, not its distinctively Biblical sense. 
In the Scriptures it is but seldom found, and 
where used it refers, undoubtedly, to outward ob- 
servances, Paul ‘‘ profited in the Jews’ religion.” 
He gave himself up to the carrying out of all its 
legal enactments, James contrasts with this the 
‘‘pure religion and undefiled,” which is, not Chris- 
tianity itself, but the outcome of it. Alas, how 
many stumble right here—designating a system 
of philanthropy and correct living as Christianity 
itself ; mistaking the result for the cause from which 
it springs; denying the truth of God—unwittingly 
though it may be. 

But, as generally used, the word religion covers 
both the faith and the practice of its devotees— 
according to Webster, ‘‘a system of faith and wor- 
ship;”’ and it is in this sense it is used in the pres- 
ent collection of papers. 

The first article is introductory to all the others; 
which throughout are designed to contrast God's 
way of salvation with the numberless ways of 
man’s devising—the end of which will be death, 
moral and spiritual. 

The fact that they were written as separate pa- 
pers, and are now collected into a volume for the 
first time, will account for occasional repetitions 
of thought, and even statement. 

If they lead any to value Christ more, and hu- 
man religiousness less, they will have fulfilled the 
object for which they are sent forth. 


BH. A. E 


CONTENTS. 


Tue OnLy Two Retigions . . . ..-.-- + § 
A Heprew’s SEARCH FOR THE BLOop OF ATONEMENT 11 
Gop’s REMEDY : VERSUS THAT OF THE PRIEST . . 15 
Won Tame 5 4 ok se ee ee BB 


THE MORMON’s MISTAKE; OR, WHAT I8 THE GOSPEL? 20 


THe TRAMP WHO BECAME A DEACON... . . 33 
RELIGION Runs 1N ovr FAMILy, Sik! . . . . ~ SL 
THe DyIna GAMBLER ©. 7) ee st 56 
Micaw’s RELIGION . © «© «© + «© © «© «© » 62 
CONCURRENT BLESSINGS. . . - + © © «© + 76 
WHo HATH BEWITCHED You? . . . . . - - 86 


THE SCRIPTURAL PLACE or GooD WoRKS . . . 93 


THE ONLY TWO RELIGIONS. 


‘There are only two religions in the world: 
The TRUE and the FALSE. 
All phases of false religion are alike. They all say: 
‘ Something in my hand I bring,’ 
The only difference between them being as to what the ‘some- 
thing’ is. 
The TRUE religion says: 
‘ Nothing in my hand I bring.’ ”’ 


INES well worth pondering are these, reader, 
and we beg you to consider them. 

You are, we will suppose, a religious per- 
son. Most people are. ‘‘ Man,” said an ancient 
philosopher, ‘‘is a religious animal ” 

You may have your particular ideas about re- 
ligious questions, then; but are yours the TRUE, 
or the FALSE? 

Recently, while presenting the gospel on the 
streets of a California city, we were often in- 
terrupted about as follows: ‘Look here, sir] 
There are hundreds of religions in this country, 
and the followers of each sect think theirs the 
only right one. How can poor, plain men like 
us, find out v-hat really is the truth?” 

We generally replied something like this: 
“Hundreds of religions, you say? That’s 
strange; I’ve heard of only Two.” 


6 The only two Religions. 


“Oh, but you surely know there are more 
than that!” 

“Not at all, sir. I find, I quite admit, many 
shades of differeuce in the opinions of those com- 
prising the two great schools; but after all there 
are but the two. The one covers all who expect 
salvation by doing; the other, all who have 
been saved by something done. So you see the 
whole question is very simple. Can you save 
yourself, or have you to be saved by Another? 
If you can be your own savior, you do not need 
my message. If you cannot, you may well listen 
to it.” 

This we would press also upon you, reader, 
and for a few moments ask your attention toa 
picture drawn by Christ Himself of the only two 
religions. A word picture it is, and a graphic 
one. You will find it in Luke xviii. 9-14. It is 
the well-known parable of the Pharisee and the 
publican. The first is the poER, the man with 
“something” in his hand, which he offers God, 
hoping to buy a seat in heaven. Note his 
prayer: “God, I thank Thee that I am not as 
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, 
or even as this publican. I fast twice in the 
week, I give tithes of all that I possess.” He 
is, surely, a representative man in the great 
CHURCH OF THE DoErs. What a handful he 
brings!—his character, his fasts, and his tithes. 
A Pharisee he is called, but he will be found un- 
der a score of other names. We have beheld 


The only two Religions. 7 


him in the garb of Papist and Jew, Churchman 
and Dissenter, Unitarian and Evangelical, The- 
osophist and Spiritist, Buddhist and Brahmin, 
Mormon and Mohammedan, Christian Scientist 
and Confucian, Jezreelite and—what not? His 
robes are various; his prayers—the pith of them 
—are ever the same. Sometimes he quotes 
Scripture. Sometimes he rejects it. 

We heard him once in the village church, tell- 
ing how, by living an exemplary life, attending 
to religious duties, and keeping the command- 
ments, he expected to go to heaven after death. 
His manner was earnest, his words were fer- 
vent. He had been advertised as a wonderful 
evangelist and revivalist. He dwelt much on 
reformation, lauded creature-righteousness, and 
had apparently forgotten that Christ had ever 
died, though he quoted the verse that says, 
“Work out your own salvation with fear and 
trembling,’ omitting to emphasize the fact that 
salvation must first be youR OWN, and that this 
verse was written to those who are saints, or 
saved already. 

Not long after, we listened to the Pharisee 
again, in the person of a Mormon elder, telling 
how His faith, HIs repentance, HIs baptism, the 
fact that hands had been laid on unis head, and 
HIs good deeds, assured him, if he kept on to the 
end, of an exalted place after death; but not a 
word he uttered about the Lord Jesus—His 
cross, His death, His blood, His resurrection, or 


8 The only two Religions. 


His Priesthood; and although he dwelt much 
on the doctrine of “justification by works,” 
he neglected to tell his hearers that such justi- 
fication waS BEFORE MAN—not before God! 
What need of Christ if he could do so much 
himself ? 

We met this Pharisee also one day as a Spirit- 
ist medium, and asked him his ground of hope. 
He told us of his benevolence and righteousness, 
and vaunted loudly his earnest desire to “help 
the world,’ and “better his fellowman,’’ but 
not a syllable did he utter of Him whom God 
hath made ‘‘to be wisdom, righteousness, sanc- 
tification and redemption” to poor sinners who 
receive Him. 

A few months since, also, we questioned a 
Chinese merchant as to whether he had peace in 
view of death. He said, in fairly plain English, 
that he tried to be a good man: he neither 
smoked opium nor gambled in the lottery (the 
two great sins of the Americanized ‘‘ celestial ’’); 
besides, he worked hard and attended to the 
precepts of Kung Fu Tze (Confucius); so he saw 
no reason to fear. A Pharisee, though he wore 
a queuel 

Different men were all these, and widely dif- 
fering many of their views; but on one point 
they all agreed: SALVATION COULD BE WON BY 
EFFORT—no need for the Christ of God! 

The publican in our chapter—how different 
was his case! Righteousness he had none to 


The only two Religions. 9 


plead. Character he is almost ashamed to men- 
tion. ‘‘Me, THE SINNER,” he cries, and beats 
upon his breast. Fasting and tithes he cannot 
tell of. Empty-handed he appears before God, 
his only hope that Divine love may find a way 
whereby Divine holiness may remain untar- 
nished and Divine righteousness be fully vindi- 
cated, yet he, a guilty wretch, be savep instead 
of DAMNED. 

The latter he deserves. His true condition he 
does not try to hide. Has God, then, grace for 
such as he? and can He, without compromising 
the dignity of His throne, let the poor sinner go 
free—nay, more, JUSTIFY him before that throne 
and bless him eternally ? 

Hecan. An apostle, once a Pharisee himself, 
but emptied at last of all his fancied goodness, 
tells us How, and IN WHAT NAME, IT CAN BE 
DONE. ‘Be it known unto you therefore, men 
and brethren, that through THis Man is 
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and 
BY Hi all that believe are justified from all 
things from which ye could not be justified by 
the law of Moses” (Acts xiii. 38, 39). Here, 
then, is that on which even the publican can 
rest. Here is the religion for the lost and help- 
less. Every phase of the false one says, “po;”” 
but alas, he cannot do even what the law of 
Moses demands. He tries and struggles, but all 
in vain. To wash out the stain of one sin is, for 
him, impossible. 


10 The only two Religions, 


Blessed the message, then, that ‘‘ TRUE RELIG- 
I0N”’ brings. It tells that 


“Christ, in death, has wrought sALvaTION. 
God has raised Him from the tomb.” 


Is this YOUR GROUND OF PEACE, dear reader; 
or do you belong to that great church started 
by Cain at the dawn of earth’s long day, who 
hoped by fruits plucked with toil from a cursed 
ground to satisfy the claims of a holy God 
against sin, instead of, like Abel, RESTING ON 
THE BLOOD OF THE SACRIFICE? 

Only the two religions, then—only two to- 
day. WuicH is yours? Do you trust in self, or 
Christ? There is no third party on whom to 
rst. “To him that worketh not, but believeth 
on Him that justifieth the ungodly, is FAITH IS 
COUNTED FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS’? (Rom. iv. 5). 


IJ 


A Hebrew’s Search for the Blood of 


Atonement. 


N the spring of 1898, I was holding some 
gospel meetings in San Francisco, and sev- 
eral times addressed the Jews attending a 

‘Mission to Israel.’”’ On one occasion, hav- 
ing concluded my discourse, the meeting was 
thrown open for discussiou with any Hebrews 
who desired to ask questions or state difficulties, 
as also for any who had been brought to Christ 
to relate their conversions. 

The experience of one old Jew interested me 
greatly, and, as nearly as I can,I give his re- 
marks in his own words, though not attempt- 
ing to preserve the inimitable Hebrew-English 
dialect. 

He said: ‘‘ This is Passover week among you, 
my Jewish brethren; and as I sat here, I was 
thinking how you will be observing it. You 
will have put away all leaven from your houses; 
you will eat the ‘motsah’ (unleavened wafers) 
and the rozsted lamb. You will attend the syn- 
agogue services, and carry out the ritual and 
directions of the Talmud; but you forget, my 
brethren, that you have everything but that 
which Jehovah required first of all. He did not 
say, ‘When I see the leaven put away, or when 
I see you eat the motsah, or the lamb, or go to 
the synagogue;’ but His word was, ‘When I 


12 The only two Religions, 


see the blood I will pass over you.’ Ah, my 
brethren, you can substitute nothing for this. 
You must have blood, BLOOD, BLOOD!”’ 

As he reiterated this word with ever-increas- 
ing emphasis, his black eyes flashed warningly, 
and his Jewish hearers quailed before him. 

“Blood!” Itis an awful word, that, for one 
who reveres the ancient oracle, and yet has no 
sacrifice. Turn where he will in the book, the 
blood meets him; but let him seek as he may, he 
cannot find it in the Judaism of the present. 

After a moment’s pause, the patriarchal old 
man went on somewhat as follows: “I was 
born in Palestine, nearly seventy years ago. As 
a child I was taught to read the Law, the 
Psalms and the Prophets. I early attended the 
Synagogue and learned Hebrew from the Rabbis. 
At first I believed what I was told, that ours 
was the true and only religion, but as I grew 
older and studied the Law more intently, I was 
struck by the place the blood had in all the cer- 
emonies outlined there, and equally struck by 
its utter absence in the ritual to which I was 
brought up. 

“Again and again I read Exodus xii. and Le- 
Viticus xvi., Xvii., and the Jatter chapters es- 
pecially made me tremble, as I thought of the 
great Day of Atonement and the place the blood 
had there. Day and night one verse would 
ring in myears. ‘It is the blood that maketh 
an atonement for the soull’ I knew I had 


A Hebrews Search for the Blood. 13 


broken the law. I needed atonement. Year 
after year, on that day, I beat my breast as I 
confessed my necd of it; but it was to be made 
by blood, and there was no blood ! 

“In my distress, at last, I opened my heart to 
a lcarned and venerable rabbi. He told me that 
God was angry with His people. Jerusalem was 
in the hands of the Gentiles, the temple was 
destroyed, and a Mohammedan mosque was 
reared up in its place. The only spot on earth 
where we dare shed the blood of sacrifice, in ac- 
cordance with Deuteronomy xii. and Leviticus 
XVii., was desecrated, and our nation scattered. 
That was why there was no blood. God had 
Himself closed the way to carry out the solemn 
service of the great Day of Atonement. Now, 
we must turn to the Talmud, and rest on its 
instruction, and trust in the mercy of God and 
the merits of the fathers. 

“T tried to be satisfied, but could not. Some- 
thing seemed to say that the law was unaltered, 
even though our temple was destroyed. Noth- 
ing else but blood could atone for the soul. 
We dared not shed blood for atonement else- 
where than in the place the Lord had chosen. 
Then we were left without an atonement after 
all? 

“This thought filled me with horror. In my 
distress I consulted many other rabbis. I had 
but one great question—Where can I find the 
blood of atonement? 


14 The only two Religions, 


“IT was over thirty years of age when I left 
Palestine and came to Constantinople, with my 
still unanswered question ever before my mind, 
and my soul exceedingly troubled about my sins. 

“One night I was walking down one of the 
narrow streets of that city, when I saw a sign 
telling of a meeting for Jews. Curiosity led me 
to open the door and go in. Just as I tooka 
seat I heard a man say, ‘The blood of Jesus 
Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.’ It 
was my first introduction to Christianity, but 
I listened breathlessly as the speaker told how 
God had declared that ‘without shedding of 
blood is no remission;’ but that He had given 
His only begotten Son, the Lamb of God, to 
die, and all who trusted in His blood were for- 
given all their iniquities. This was the Messiah 
of the fifty-third of Isaiah: this was the Sufferer 
of Psalm xxii. Ah, my brethren, I had found 
the blood of atonement at last. I trusted it, 
and now I love to read the New Testament and 
see how all the shadows of the law are fulfilled 
in Jesus. His blood has been shed for sinners. 
It has satisfied God, and it is the only means of 
salvation for either Jew or Gentile.” 

Reader, have you yet found the blood of 
atonement? ‘Behold the Lamb of God, who 
taketh away the sin of the world” (John i. 29). 
Are you trusting in God’s smitten Lamb ?—the 
sacrifice of God ? 


ee 


GOD’S REMEDY 
VERSUS THAT OF THE PRIEST. 


ECENTLY we listened to a Romish father 
of the Paulist order as, for some time, he 
depicted with fervor and eloquence—we 

might even say power—the exceeding heinous- 
ness of sin. A fell disease he showed it to be—a 
dreadful curse, a terrible affront to a holy God. 
He spared no words in declaring the undone 
condition of the sinner, his loss for time, his aw- 
ful fate for eternity. Our own heart was moved 
by it. We doubt not many others were. 

When, at last, he had well-nigh exhausted his 
magnificent vocabulary in picturing sin’s direful 
work of destruction, he paused a moment, then 
asked, dramatically, “Is there no remedy? 
Must the sinner be eternally lost? Or, is there 
a means of deliverance even for the one guilty 
of mortal sin?” 

Anxiously we waited for his answer, feeling 
that perhaps the fate of many souls in the great 
cathedral trembled in the balance. 

“Yes,” he said, ‘‘a remedy there is. God has 
provided it. All can avail themselves of it. Lis- 


— paeneeneemae eemegpenetn eipseee: atithreen vir ian apsesenaabsaneaas seans= eames heaped bs 


16 The only two Religions, 


ten, O sinner, listen—you who sigh for deliver. 
ance! The remedy is—” Another pause, that 


“Penance!” 

Poor, misled and misleading old man! Did 
he tell his vast congregation but a few moments 
before that they were all lost and ruined as sin- 


it all as at the beginning, for— 


God’s Remedy versus the Priest’s. 17 


‘“‘None but Jesus 
Can do guilty sinners good.” 


Of Him it is written, “Whom God hath set 
forth to be a propitiation through faith in His 
blood, to declare His righteousness for the re- 
mission of sins that are past, through the for- 
bearance of God: to declare, I Say, at this time 
His righteousness; that He might be just, and 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus” 
(Rom. iii. 25,26). And lest any should think it 
needful to add to this their own poor works— 
penance or aught else—we are told, ‘“‘Now to 
him that worketh is the reward not reckoned 
of grace, but of debt. But to him that work-‘*: 
not, but believeth on Him that justifieth the 
godly, his faith is counted for righteousness ”’ 
(Rom. iv. 4, 5). 

Turn, then, reader, if unsaved, from every 
other remedy, and ‘‘behold the Lamb of God, 
that taketh away the sin of the world” (John 
i. 29). 


18 


“WHICH THIEF?” 


“(\H, of course, I intend to be saved some 
time; but there is no use being in a hurry 
about it. There is always a chance, even 

at the eleventh hour. Remember the dying 

thief!” carelessly said a young man at the close 
of a meeting, when spoken to about his soul, 

“Which thief?” pointedly asked his ques- 
tioner. 

“Why, I had really forgotten there were two. 
I mean the saved one,” was the reply, as an 
anxious expression came over his face. 

“Yes, one was saved, and is in heaven now. 
The other, who had an equal opportunity for 
salvation, is wailing in hell. What warrant 
have you that you will not spend eternity as he 
will, rather than as the other?” 

It was a word fitly spoken, an arrow that 
pierced the joints of his harness; and the young 
man was led to see the folly of further procras- 
tination, and that night was saved for eternity, 
through receiving the Lord Je us Christ as his 
personal Saviour. 

Thousands, like him, forget there were “two 
thieves.” They remember the mercy of God 


eos ee ee 


“Which Thief?” 19 


that saved the one, while forgetting the judg- 
ment of God meted out to the other. Carelessly 
they wander on, hoping to be saved at last ; 
but, alas, how many are cut off in sin and 
damned forever, to whom the gospel was often 
presented, but who, presuming on the patience 
of God, rejected it until ‘there was no remedy.” 

Which thief, reader, we affectionately ask, 
would you be like? We recollect speaking once 
to a very refined and elegant lady on a steamer, 
who asked, indignantly, ‘You do not mean to 
say Ihave got tr co to heaven like the dying 
thief, do you?” 

““No, madam,” we replicd, ‘you do not have 
to. Ifyou reject Christ, you will have to go to 
hell with the other.” 

And so we would <emind the reader: 

The saved thief believed on the Son of God, 
and is with Christ now. 

The lost thief scorned a Saviour, and is in 
the depths of woe. 

You must be with one or the other for eter- 
nity. 

“Because there is wrath, beware lest He take 
thee away with His stroke: then a great ran- 
som cannot deliver thee.” 


Re I ANS NARI nama 


20 


THE MORMON’S MISTAKE; 


OR, 


WHAT IS THE GOSPEL ? 


OT long since, there came to my door a 
N young man dressed in the conventional, 
pseudo - clerical style that readily pro- 
claimed, to one at all acquainted with the so- 
called Latter-day Saints, that he was a Mor. 
mon “elder”— though ‘‘younger”’ might be a 
more correct term, (1 Pet. vy. 5) as scriptural eld- 
€rs were invariably men of years and experi- 
ence," who could care for the flock of God (1 Pet. 
v. 1-3), but were not to lord it over the people 
of God as over POssessions, 
In the case mentioned, the Mormon intro- 
duced himself as a “ minister of the Sospel, doing 


of California, and stated that he would be 
pleased to put before me some of ‘the principles 
of the gospel.” Intimating that I myself was 
also seeking to give forth God’s good news to 
poor sinners (1 Tim. i. 15), he was told that if 


* See 1 Tim. iii, 2-7; noting, as shown in Titus i, 5-7, that 
“elder” and “bishop” are the same; the former word refer- 
ring to the age of the man ; the latter, to his Office. As to all 
this, Mormonism igs in dire confusion. 


The Mormon’s Mistake, 21 


such was indeed his object, I would be glad to 
converse with him; so bade him be seated. 

“And now, sir,” he was asked, “would you 
kindly favor us”’ (a number were present) “ with 
a short statement of what the gospel really 
is?” 

“Certainly,” he replied. “The gospel consists 
of'four chief points. The first is repentance; the 
second, faith; the third, baptism for the remis- 
sion of sins by one duly qualified; while the 
fourth is the laying on of the hands of a man 
called of God, for the reception of the Holy 
Ghost.”’ 

“Well, aad supposing: one has gone through 
all this, is he then saved?” 

“Oh, of course, no one can know that in this 
life. If one goes on to the end, he will be exalted 
in the kingdom.” Thereupon he proceeded to 
open a little Testament, with which, however, 
he was but slightly familiar, and pointed us to 
some proof texts showing conclusively that the 
Lord and the apostles preached repentance and 
faith, as also that Peter spoke of “ baptism for 
the remission of sins” (Acts ii. 38; let the reader 
carefully note the verse and its context), and 
that in at least two instances (Acts viii. 14-17; 
xix. 1-6) apostles laid their hands on people in 
order to their receiving the gift of the Holy 
Spirit. An effort was also made to find a verse 
to prove that no one can know he is saved now; 
but in the face of Eph. ii.4—8; 1 Pet.i.9; 1 Cor. 


22 The only two Religions, 


1.8; 2 Cor. ii. 15; and 2 Tim. i. 9, this was an 
utter absurdity, though he pointed to Matt. 
xxiv. 13, “He that endureth to the end, the 
same shall be saved,” in defense of his position. 

As to this, one need only say that endurance 
certainly is a proof of reality. One who said he 
was saved, yet did not endure, would thereby 
prove the emptiness of his profession.* 

“TI quite agree with you,” I said, “as to the 
fact that Scripture speaks of the four points 
you mention; but, possibly, you did not under- 
Stand my query. I asked you for a statement 
of the gospel. If these so-called ‘four princi- 
ples’ be indeed the 8ospel, then you have a gos- 


gives us a clear statement of his gospel, and ac- 
tually says nothing of either oe or other of the 
various points upon which you have dwelt. No 
doubt you will recollect the passage?” 

He did not, however. He was not aware of 
any such direct statement on the subject. In 
fact, it was soon evident that, with the excep- 
tior of a few verses Ou his favorite themes, his 


*I would commend to the notice of the reader who has 
difficulty here, ‘Fallen from Grace ; or, Castaway,’ by W. 
Barker: also, “The Perseverance of the Saints,’ by F. w. 
Grant, 5 cents each; to be had of Loizeaux Bros., 63 Fourth 
Ave., New York, 


The Mormon’s Mistake, 23 


Bible was practically a sealed book. He turned, 
however, at my direction, to the fifteenth chap- 
ter of 1st Corinthians, to which, for a little, I 
would invite the reader’s careful atiention. 

Commencing at the first verse of this precious 
and wondrous portion of Scripture, we read: 
“Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the 
gospel which I preached unto you, which also 
ye have received, and wherein ye stand; by 
wich also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory 
what I preached unto you, unless ye have be- 
lieved in vain. For I delivered unto you first of 
all that which I also received, how that Christ 
died for our sins according to the Scriptur -” 
(see Isa. liii. 5, 6); “and that He was buried, 
and that He rose again the third day according 
to the Scriptures: and that He was seen of Ce- 
phas,” etc. 

Here I stopped, as the rest of the passage is 
devoted to bringing forth the eye-witnesses of 
Christ in resurrection, and therefore could 
hardly be considered doctrinal; though the 
reader will derive much benefit by meditation 
on the entire portion at his leisure. 

“Now,” I said, turning to the Mormon, “we 
have here a statement of the gospel—the gospel 
which Paul preached; and it is dangerous to 
preach any other, as we find from Gal. i. 8,9 
that the person who does so, though it be an 
angel from heaven, is under a curse, or devoted 
to judgment. I understand that you teach that 


Sage rmRG erro eterna mere 


oo 3 EE ET EL, Tg ee 
ne ne ee ee 
ae reaysioontateauiot 
r as “ 


A a A a AE RY al ml 


oe 


senate 


24 The only two Religions, 


your gospel was revealed to Joseph Smith by an 
angel. If true, that would prove nothing, if it be 
found, upon examination, to be other than that 
proclaimed by the apostle to the Gentiles. His 
gospel had been received by the Corinthians ; in 
it they stood; by it they were saved, if real he- 
lievers. It was not, you will notice, a carefy] 
obedience to certain Ordinances or a walking 
according to certain rules, such as you men- 
tioned a few minutes ago, that would insure 
their salvation, however blessed such might be, 
if properly understood; but it was keeping in 
memory this gospel. 

“T notice, then, to begin with, that his gospel 
iS concerning a Person, and quite a different 
person than yours brings before us. It is ‘con- 
cerning the Son of God,’ as Rom. i. 3 tells us, 
Your gospel did not have a word about Him 
in allits four points. The subject of Paul’s gos- 
pel has not a word about any one or any thing 
save Him. Perhaps we might say it also could 
be divided into four heads, though more prop- 
erly three; but even divided into four (to go as 
far with you as we can), what marked differ- 
ences do we find! Your four heads are all con- 
cerning the poor sinner, and might be put this 
Way: 

1. The sint. or repents ; 

2. The sinner has faith ‘ 

3. The sinner is baptized ; 

4. The sinner has hands laid on him, 


Ue cestbsbaksihcns | iba 


The Mormon’s Mistake. 25 


Now, in contrast to this, see how the true gos- 
pel can be put: 


1. Christ died ; 

2. Christ was buried : 

3. Christ has been raised again; 

4, Christ is the object for the hearts of His 
own. 


‘Surely the two gospels have nothing in com- 
mon. You teach, I believe, that Christ died for 
Adam’s transgression, not for ours; but main- 
tain that while Adamic sin is met by the Cross, 
our sins as individuals must be washed away 
by baptism. Paul’s gospel tells us that He died 
for our sins; and if that be so, and ‘the blood 
of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth us from 
all sin,’ where does baptism in your sense ap- 
ply? If all my sins are met by His precious 
blood, if they were borne ‘in His own body on 
the tree’ (1 Pet. ii. 24), how many are left to be 
cleansed by baptism?* Assuredly none. But, 
alas, this is but one instance in which the false 
gospel of Mormonism is opposed to the precious 
gospel of the grace of God as revealed in the 
Bible. 

‘‘But I go on to the second point. Christ not 
only died, but ‘was buried ;’ yet it was written 


* We quite admit that governmental, or administrative, for- 
giveness of sins was conferied in baptism, as receiving the hap- 
tized among the body of believers. This is a different thing to 
eternal forgiveness before God. See John xx. 22, 23. 


iid Coe eee 
s-ditnieiailiaetaaiataeraeaamemeiane cnn 2 
re “Ace agra ——— =e ecns ceeancoeeee 
Sra » 


26 The only two Religions, 


of Him, ‘Thou wilt not leave My soul in hell, 
neither wilt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see 
corruption” (Acts ii. 27; Psa. xvi. 10). His 
burial declares the reality of Iis death, and 
surely speaks of His being forever through with 
the place He took on earth. It is the end of all 


raised with Him. His place is now mine as to 
acceptance with God. ‘He was delivered for 


tion ;’ His resurrection being God’s open decla- 


“And now the One who is alive forevermore 
(Rev. i. 18) is Presented as an object for the 
hearts of His Own. ‘He was seen ;’ and the 
Same apostle exclaims, in another Place, ‘ We see 
Jesus!’ (Heb. ii. 9). Poor sinners are first led 
to see the utter impossibility of improving or 
rendering themselves more fit for God’s pres- 


ell, 


sciatic BadicERASAA issih Paid ish Sheaddaad aaah 


The Mormon’s Mistake. 27 


ence. The eye of faith is then directed to the 
One who died, in whom believing, they are ‘jus- 
tified from all things’ (Acts xi. 38, 39). Now 
they have also an object for the heart, even 
Christ in glory (2 Cor. iii. 18). How different 
this to what you have presented! Here, 
‘’Tis Jesus first, ‘tis Jesus last, 
’Tis Jesus all the way,’ 

while you are cast entirely on yourself. 

“But now, another question. You spoke of 
men with authority to baptize and lay on 
hands. Where do you get that in Scripture ?”’ 

For answer, he turned to Heb. v. 4, and read, 
‘Ard no man taketh this honor unto himself, 
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” 

“What ‘honor’ is here referred to?” I asked. 

‘“‘The honor of the priesthood giving author- 
ity to baptize and confer the Holy Ghost.” 

‘‘No; the first verse contradicts this. It is 
not a question of the ‘priesthood’ at all. As 
all believers now are priests, there is no special 
priestly class in Christianity, as is clearly shown 
by referring to Rev.i.6; and 1 Pet.ii.5,9. The 
subject in Heb. v. is that of High Priesthood, 
and is referring to the Lord Jesus Christ, called 
of God, as noted in ver. 6. Nor is there a word 
about baptism or imposition of hands; but it is 
a question of ‘offering gifts and sacrifices for 
sins’ (ver. 1; also Heb. ii. 17), and then of suc- 
coriag His people in this world of trial. To ap- 
ply such a scripture to human ministry is simply 


28 The only two Religions, 


but little weigh’. compared with « present-day 
revelation,” despite the word of Paul in Col. i. 
25 (for “fulfil,” read “complete,” the correct 
word); so he went on his way, trusting to his 
fleshly religion, aud ignoring the « gospel of 
God.” 

Ere dismissing the subject, I might remind the 
reader that neither faith nor repentance is ever 


pent; trusting the work there accomplished, the 
soul is saved. 


In its Biblical Sense, repentance is self-judg- 
ment; the owning that one is lost and guilty, 


The Mormon’s Mistake. 29 


righteously deserving the wrath of a ho.y God. 
Faith is trusting in Christ, whose finished work 
puts away sins forever. It is not simply credit- 
ing the statement that God exists, or that the 
historical Jesus was the Son of God. “If thou 
shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, 
and believe in thy heart that God hath raised 
Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved; for 
with the heart man believeth unt> righteous- 
ness, and with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation”’ (Rom. x. 9, 10). 

Of you, reader, we would affecticnately ask, 
Are you making the same mistake as the “eld- 
er?” You might ridicule the poor, benighted 
Mormon, and be amazed at the semi-heathen- 
ism taught by his church, but do you, perhaps, 
trust in something just as hollow, when judged 
by the book of God? 

Remember : penances; wrought-up repentance, 
consisting in peculiar frames, feelings, and re- 
nunciations ; intellectual acquiescence to the 
truths of the Bible, miscalled faith; baptism, 
whether administered by Mormon elder or or- 
dained clergyman; laying on of hands, or any 
other human rite or divinely »rescribed cere- 
mony, will avail nothing for you. 

Christ, and Christ alone, is your only salva- 
tion. Discarding all else, fly, then, to Him. 
“Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou 
shalt be saved” (Acts xvi. 31). 


30 The only two Religions, 


NOTE ON MORMON DOCTRINES, 


N the preceding paper it has been my aim not to 
| follow all the devious errors of Mormonism, and 
seek to refute them, but rather to endeavor to 
slow how opposed the system is to the gospel of the 
glory of the blessed God, which He has revealed in 
His Word. 

It has been suggested, however, that a brief epitome 
of some of the more important doctrines of the sect, on 
other lines, might be helpful in serving as a warning to 
any who, allured by fair speeches and sophistical rea- 
sonings, are drifting towards its awful vortex. 

The following statements can readily be proven to 
be part of the weird paganism of this dreadful quasi- 
religious cult, by examination of the more “advanced ” 
of their publications, though some of them are often 
denied by the traveling “elders,” whose business it is, 
not to alarm by making public the “ depths of Satan,” 
but to allure by presenting a creed as near like that of 
orthodox Christianity as Possible. Nothing could be 
more misleading than the statement of the “doctrines 
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints” 
which is now being circulated by thousands all over 
the land. This was compiled by the assumed prophet 
Joseph Smith in the infancy of the movement, long 
before « present-day revelation” had introduced the 
many vagaries with which it abounds to-day. 

The leading doctrines accepted among them to-day 
are, briefly, as foliows: 


iets | ees 


si lbediaiais ise 


bi ta 


Note on Mormon Doctrines. 31 


They profess to believe in the Bible, but gain addi- 
tional “light” from the “Book of Mormon,” a collec- 
tion of rubbish which one but needs to scan to see its 
utter absurdity and incongruity with the word of God. 
“The Book of Doctrine and Covenants,” purporting 
to be a series of revelations, chiefly to Joseph Smith, 
is also considered inspired, as is ‘‘ The Pearl of Great 
Price,” which includes “The Book of Abraham,” and 
other apocryphal works; while prophets and apostles 
abound who may at any time give forth further com- 
munications, all of equal authority with these. 

They are really polytheist, and believe that there 
are many gods, but that all (save possibly the first—as 
to this their statements are conflicting) were at one 
time men, but gained their exaltation to divinity by 
their faithfulness in this state. It is the hope of each 
man to become a god eventually. Their gods are sup- 
posed to retain their human forms and functions. 

It is in connection with this that polygamy comes 
in. This relationship is carried on eternally. The 
progeny of the gods and their numerous wives will 
constitute their “kingdom” in the ages to come. 
Woman’s welfare depends on her being united to one 
of the faithful. 

As to this world (to them there are many), they teach 
a Trinity, who administer its affairs. God and Christ 
are both said to have human bodies, parts, and pas- 
sions; but the Holy Spirit is omnipresent, though of a 
material substance. 


The preceding paper has outlined their teaching as 
to the salvation of the living. They also publicly pro- 


dina. 


32 The only two Religions, 


claim salvation for the dead, to whom the gospel is be- 
ing preached, and who can be saved if their friends on 
earth will be baptized for them. 

As to eschatology, they have a system of prophetic 
teaching embodying an exceedingly carnal view of the 
Millennium, ushered in by the return of Chri to re 
gather Israel, including the ten tribes, to a zion in 
America (!), and to destroy all the enemies of “the 
saints.” The dead will be raised, and will appear on 
the earth, Referring to this time, Parley Pratt says 
in his “Voice of Warning,” “Our father Adam will 
sit enthroned as the Ancient of Days,” etc., ascribing 
the words of Dan. vii. 9, 10 to refer to him! 

A final judgment will conclude all things; but no 
one will be eternally lost. There are three spheres, 
terrestrial, celestial, and éelestia/ In one of these all 
will eventually be found. 

Such a system needs no attempt at refutacco. It 
refutes itself. No child of God, who has at all appre- 
hended the Cross, could be ensnared by it; but it is 
because many unwary and simple ones, anxious to be 
Saved, but ignorant of God’s way, are daily being en- 
trapped by it, that this paper has been penned. 


The Lord use it to deliver many from such “abom- 
inable idolatries ” (x Pet. iv. 5). 


FPP ok ees. 
SE a (RI ee cee 


4 
= 
4 
$ 
: 
4 
| 
; 
F 


TO ATT TT REE Wena mls sR 


anes 


od 


Aiko | Baul iuaalur Psa eit wen ire tik ice eta ng 


33 


THE TRAMP WHO BECAME A DEACON; 
AND HOW HE FOUND PEACE WITH GOD. 


RAGGED, travel-stained and hungry-look- 
ing tramp was idly shambling along one 
of the principal streets of the thriving city 

of Louisville, Kentucky, some few years ago, 
furtively eyeing the passers-by, as though won- 
dering who would be most likely to respond to 
a touching plea of ill-luck and various hard- 
ships, when suddenly a police officer touched 
him on the shoulder. 

“Look here,” he said, “you're not fit to 
be seen on the streets of this place. I’ll give you 
jvst forty minutes to get out of town; and if 
you’re found in the city limits after that time, 
I'll run you in for sixty days.” 

The tramp hastily beat a retreat, and started 
for the railroad. He would not have minded 
thirty days in jail. In fact, it would have really 
been in the nature of an accommodation, and 
would have rather pleased him; for, when let out 
again the present cold weather would probably 
have passed away, and he would have food and 
rest, at least, in the interim. He had plenty of 
the _ as it was, but the former had been ex- 


34 The only two Religions, 


ceedingly difficult to obtain of late; for beyond 
occasional scraps of bread dropped by the train 
hands along the track, and dried corn found in 
the fields, he had tasted nothing for several 
days. 

A month in jail would certainly be preferable 
to spending the same length of time in his pres- 
ent half-starved condition. In fact,he finally con- 
cluded that even two months, long as it seemed, 
would be better than to goas hungry as he 
had recently. So, suddenly deciding to accept 
the hospitality of the city, he turned right- 
about and began retracing his steps, looking for 
the officer who had threatened his arrest. He 
got back to the corner from whence he had been 
ordered away, but no policeman was in sight. 
He roamed where he would, according to his 
own will, and still no officer appeared. 

He began to despair of any present relief. No 
one would part with their means to assist him, 
and he could not even run across a policeman 
who woula arrest him. He was turning discon- 
solately away and heading for the railroad 
again, when a kindly-visaged individual, evi- 
dently noting his forlorn appearance, stopped 
as he passed him, and dropped a five-cent piece 
into his hand. The surprised and gratified va- 
grant mumbled some unheard words of thank- 
fulness as the gentleman passed on, 7d then 
hastened off to a nearby store, wh: | he in- 
vested in some crackers, thinking he y ovl' et 


The Tzamp who became a Deacon. 35 


of these the 'argest amount. Ordinarily the 
drinking ¢i'ouxu would have claimed him, but 
on this oc asion he de.ided that hunger should 
have the firsi place; thirst would be attended 
to next time. Eagerly grasping his purchase, 
he hastened off to an out-of-the way place to 
satisfy the cravings of his appetite. 

Ensconced on a pile of railway ties, he was 
munching his dry meal, when the door of a cot- 
tage across the street opened, and a little girl,a 
bright-faced, cheery child of perhaps eight sum- 
mers, stepped out and came straight over to 
where he sat; bearing in her dainty hands a 
cup of steaming hot coffee. 

“Here, poor man,” she said, my mama sent 
this to you, because it’s so cold, and she saw 
you eating your supper without anything warm 
to drink. She didn’t put any cream init, for she 
thought perhaps you might not like it; but if 
you do, I'll run and get you some.” 

With that, the little miss handed the refresh- 
ing cup to the wretched young man on the ties, 
who, long unused to such kindness, was too as- 
tonished, for the moment, to utter even a word 
of thanks, but took it from her hands in silence. 
When he returned the cup to the house, and did 
essay to speak, his feelings quite overcame him; 
and bursting into tears, he thanked the mother 
for her kindness to one so worthless. 

As the tears roiled down his rough cheeks, she 
faltered some words of comfort, but he turned 


36 The only two Religions, 


hastily from the door, and started down the 
road, anxious to be alone with his own 
thoughts. 

And think, he did. That little act of thought- 
ful kindness, those sympathetic words, had 
touched a hidden spring in the heart of the wan- 
derer that seemed to set all the wheels of mem- 
ory, long clogged, in motion. It is true he was 
only a tramp, and, as such, considered to be 
feelingless, and possibly soulless, by the most of 
the people whom he encountered. But he was 
a man for all that, and for his soul, as for all 
others, Christ had died. Dirty and dissolute as 
he was, the God of all grace, who declares that 
“there is no difference,” in that all alike have 
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, was 
looking upon him in compassion and love, and 
had followed him through all his tangled path- 
way. 

He had not always been in the plight we have 
seen him in. Born ona little farm in the state 
of Pennsylvania; the child of honest, hard- 
working parents, it had doubtless never entered 
his mother’s mind, as night -“er night she 
tucked her baby boy away in his bed, that some 
day her darling would be a homeless wanderer, 
a slave to drink and kindred vices, spurned by 
the self-righteous, hunted by the officers of the 
law, and a stranger generally to affection, com- 
fort, and purity. Yet so it was. As he left 
childhood behind, he grew up without God; and 


Sr 


a 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 37 


when, at an early age, he had to go out to 
work, he soon fell in with evil companions, who 
introduced him to ‘‘the pleasures of sin,’’ in 
forms he had known nothing of in the quiet 
home of his earliest days; so that he became 
quite accustomed to the taste of tobacco and 
strong drink while yet in his teens, and was 
often drunk before he was twenty. 

He was not yet at that age, when he left the 
more prosaic East for the wilder West; though 
at that time getting no farther than the state 
of Illinois, where he worked for a short period; 
then, after a brief visit home, he turned his steps 
towards Ohio. For a few months he worked 
on a new railroad ; but this put him in company 
with men of the hardest character, who r=: “ily 
helped to mold him in the same way. He was 
an apt pupil, and had not quite attained to his 
majority, when he gave up his job, and, c¢ciding 
that begging was more congenial than work- 
ing, set out to see the world, at the expense of 
any who would be prevailed upon to help him. 

The particular part of the world to which he 
turned was that portion known to Americans 
as “The South.” The chains of an almost un- 
controllable appetite now held him tightly. 
Liquor he would and must have. Food was 
rather an after consideration. Fc~ some years 
he roamed through the country, tramping and 
“beating his way” through se en states. Sel- 
dom did thoughts of ETERNITY press on his 


yea eeania ne tseste sin enoanasniveaiaes isin joe “lb-iRiteentinetiermverte 


| 

f 
H 
[ 
} 


rete 


38 The only two Religions. 


spirit. Never, perhaps, did he calmly weigh his 
condition as a poor sinner hastening on to meet 
aholy God. These things had occupied him to 
no great extent when at home. They were even 
less to him now. Yet that forgotten One, so 
grievously sinned against, was very gracious to 
him, again and again saving him from death 
and—what must have followed—an ETERNAL 
HELL, when circumstances seemed to have com- 
bined to destroy him. On one occasion he and 
a companion had stolen a ride on the ‘‘ Panhan- 
dle Road,” going from Pittsburg to Columbus. 
They were riding on the bumpers between two 
cars. Rain began to fall, accompanied by heavy 
crashes of thunder and lurid lightning. He pro- 
posed to his partner to seek shelter in the cattle 
car behind them. Crawling around on the edge 
of it, they crept through an open sidedoor. The 
next instant there was a tremendous crash. A 
rear-end collision had taken place in the dark- 
ness. Terrified, the tramps jumped from their 
hiding-plaee. They found that the end of the box 
car in front had been thrown out against the car 
into which they had crept. Had they not changed 
just when they did, certain death must have 
been their portion. The train men were cursing 
and swearing. He of whom I write turned 
away, shocked at profanity at such a time. He 
felt instinctively that he owed his life to the 
God who was being blasphemed, and for a time 
his conscience was somewhat aroused ; but, the 


— = ceaiasiatiaiatniinninin ae ee 
eisai Oath het | Pao it s 
i 3 SHG Giidbind wines aadnce ”, 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 37 


danger over, its voice was unheeded. On other 
occasions, not necessary to mention here, he ex- 
perienced the preserving grace of God who, in 
this sense, is ‘the saviour of all men, specially 
of those that believe” (1 Tim. iv. 1%). 

Once, in those years of dissipation and godless- 
ness, he wrote home to let his parents, who had 
mourned him as dead, know of his whereabouts. 
And dead he was—not actually, as men speak, 
but morally so—‘‘ dead in trespasses and sins;”’ 
for he was “without hope and without God in 
in the world.’”’ See Eph. ii. 

But the God who had given His Son to die for 
such as he, had set His hearc upon him, and the 
day was approaching when his very condition 
was to be the means of his awakening. For 
some little time previous to the incident first 
mentioned, he had been proving, in a manner 
more bitter than ordinarily that “ the way of the 
transgressor is hard.” A few months prior to 
that, he had turned from his aimless life,for sev- 
eral weeks,and gone to work; but toil he had 
become unaccustomed to; and giving ‘+ up, he 
took his wages and went up the Mississippi 
river, from Bolivar to Memphis. On the third 
and last night of the trip, while sleeping on deck 
beneath the boilers, he was chloroformed and 
robbed by the colored roustabouts. Upon re- 
gaining consciousness, he found his pockets cut 
open and all his earnings gone, save a few odd 
cents which the thieves had overlooked. 


40 The only two Religions, 


From this time on he experienced hardship 
after hardship. It was God’s way of bringing 
him to himself. In no other way, perhaps, could 
he be broken down. At times he would think 
of turning over a new leaf, and giving up his bad 
habits; but with no thought of what was due 
to God—simply for his own betterment. 

On the night referred to above, however, when 
the genial kindness of the mother and the little 
girl was shown him, a new thought came to his 
mind. These people had been good to him when 
he deserved nothing. Who made them so? 
Could it be God? It surely must have been, else 
why would they have cared about him? And 
how had he treated this “most blasphemed and 
yet indulgent God’? Alas, the past years of 
neglect, of transgression, of forgetfulness, what 
a tale did they tell of mercy slighted and of 
grace despised | 

It was not yet the gospel—God giving His Son 
to die for lost, guilty sinners—that had spoken 
to him. “ong, weary months, even years, were 
to go by ere his soul rested on this. But the or- 
dinary mercies, the dispensations of Providence, 
the every-day evidences of divine care—these 
were the things that were used to convict this 
wretched drinking tramp of his terrible wicked- 
ness in spurning a God who could be so gracious 
to those so undeserving, and who makes His 
sun to shine and His rain to fall on just and nn- 
just alike. The more he reflected on this, the 


' 
} 
j 
| 
| 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 41 


more he felt a sense of sin crushing him. He 
loathed himself as he thought of his wretched- 
ness and degradation. He alone was to blame, 
for it might have been so different. Like an enr- 
lier prodiyal, he said, “How many hired serv- 
ants of my father have bread enough and to 
spare, and I perish with hunger!” Temporally 
and spiritually he had not gained, but lost, by 
his wayward career; and if in time he had found 
life so hard, what of ETERNITY? He had “run 
with the footmen,” and they had wearied him: 
“contend with horses,’ he could not. In the 
land of peace—this world, in which he hoped to 
find his fill of pleasure and folly—he had become 
wearied and sick of all that Satan had used to 
allure him on. How would he do “in the swell- 
ings ot Jordan”? Ah, there was something ter- 
rible in the thought of some day having to leave 
the shores of Time behind him, to buffet with 
and be buffeted by the icy billows of death, 
sweeping him on to ETERNIT7! God must be 
faced. His own evil record must be met; and, 
without a Bible to tell him so, he knew that an 
eternal hell awaited such as he. 

He went on from Louisville to a town in Ohio. 
Here he grew so miserable that he made up his 
mind that something must be done. He was 
going on to judgment. He must call a halt, and 
seek to put matters right with the God he had 
sinned against so long. He yave up his vaga- 
bondish life, and went to work. His craving 


> 
ft 
' 
- 
i 
ei 
Bir 
Bi 
7 
! ; 
a 
Fa 
a 
| 


42 The only two Religions. 


for liquor he sought to conquer. He fought 
hard to be free, and in some measure succeeded. 
He tried to do right to atone for the past, and 
hoped God would be merciful; but he was in ag- 
ony of mind still. At last he decided to see a 
minister, in order to learn how he might put 
away his sins. He sought out aclergyman. A 
very good and sincere person he was, no doubt, 
but evidently blind to the need of a soul and ig- 
norant of the gospel of God. Ushered into his 
presence, the erstwhile tramp broke out with— 
“I’m lost, and I want to be saved. Fora year 
I’ve been in anguish. I cannot sleep. IfI die as 
Iam, I'll have an awful eternity. Can you tell 
me what I must do?” 

The minister was interested, and really anx- 
ious to help. As a first step, he advised him to 
join a class in the Sunday-school and learn the 
Scriptures. He did as he was told. He became 
a regular attendant, and for a time conscience 
was lulled to rest; but true peace with God he 
knew not. When the minister thought he was 
ready for it, he was told to learn the catechism, 
and thus be prepared to join the church. He 
had a bad memory, but he pored over his task. 
For six months he went to the lectures on it. 
He managed to memorize most of the ten com- 
mandments at last; the minister telling him 
God would be satisfied if he learned as much of 
it as he could. But this gave him no peace; for 
what comfort could the law, which is the “ min- 


Ke ga es. 


_ : > 
ARR lacs intaint lerstemna eee is. sw Oe halt 


| 
/ 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 43 


istry of condemnation ”’ (2 Cor. iii. 9), and ‘‘the 
strength of sin’ (1 Cor. xv. 56), minister to a 
man already groaning beneath the weight of 
the very sin that the commandment only made 
“exceeding sinful” (Rom. vii. 13)? Willing to 
do all he was told, he was baptized and joined 
the church, and then took the sacrament as a 
further means of grace; but still he was with- 
out peace. He joined the ‘‘ Christian Endeavor 
Society” also, and sought to be faithful in the 
discharge of all his religious duties. For overa 
year this was kept up. On one occasion he 
traveled forty miles to be present on sacramen- 
tal Sunday to partake of the bread and wine, 
that told of a crucified Christ, as yet unrevealed 
to his soul. 

Ido not mean to say that there had been no 
change in his outward life. There had been a 
most marked one. He gave his employers faith- 
ful service; mastered, bit by bit, the appetite 
that had well-uigh ruined him body and soul; 
kept company only with people of high moral 
character, in place of the dissolute companions 
of former days; and was outwardly a very dif- 
ferent man to what he had been. Alas! it was 
yet outside work with him. Inwardly he was 
still ignorant of the grace of God, even as when 
ordered off the streets of Louisville as disgrace- 
ful to himself and dangerous to the public peace. 
He had yet to learn that ‘“‘Except a man be 
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”’ 


44 The only two Religions. 


The difference between his past and the then 
present was this: Before, he had been an im- 
moral sinner; now, he was a moral sinner: he 
had been a cursing, blaspheming sinner; now, 
he was a prayer-saying and hy mn-singing sin- 
ner. He was once an idle, vicious sinner; now, 
he was a hard-working, religious sinner. He 
had been a sinner in his own proper place—out- 
side the circle of those who were, in name at 
least, Christians; now, he was a baptized, 
church-going, sacrament-taking sinner, but still 
a Christ-ignoring sinner; or, if Christ had any 
place at all in his thoughts, it was, at best, that 
of a crutch to a lame man—a mere helper to 
better himsel. 

As he had no peace, spite of all his earnestness 
and punctilious attendance upon the various 
means of grace he knew of, he again repaired to 
his minister. It was suggested that possibly he 
was not devoted enough. Let him give freely 
of his money to the support of the church, for 
‘the Lord loveth a cheerful giver,” and doubt- 
less blessing would follow. As an added incen- 
tive, he was made a deacon; and it thus de- 
volved on him to assist in collecting the pastor’s 
salary. He was now actively employed in 
church work, which he took up faithfully ; but 
to peace with God he was still a stranger. 

This went on for about a couple of years, 
when he made a visit to his old home in Penn- 
sylvania. He was walking one evening down 


i ASR ARRAN RITE MC MS Bytes ce SERN Sa Ley RE De lS OTR et en er 


Baba iit | Mea TtesaAMRES ects ene at Sc ALOMOMN Nene cathe 08 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 45 


the streets of Reading, when he was attracted 
to a crowd of people gathered about a street 
preacher. There was a ring of confidence and 
assurance about this man’s address that our 
frie:.d the deacon (for we can call him the tramp 
no longer) had not been used to. His theme 
was God’s love to poor sinners. He dwelt at 
some length on the grand evidence of it in the 
giving of His Son to die, “that whosoever be- 
lieveth on Him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.” The unhappy deacon listened at- 
tentively as God’s way of salvation through 
simple faith in the Lord Jesus Christ was clearly 
set forth. ‘Not of works, lest any man should 
boast:’’ ‘‘For by grace ye are saved through 
faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift 
of God” (Eph. ii.8), were the words which rang 
from the preacher’s lips. This was the first 
gleam of the true light that had so far shone 
into his darkened soul. He began to realize 
that not all his earnestness and religiousness, 
his liberality and his reformation, nor yet any- 
thing that he could add to them, had brought, 
or could bring, him one step nearer salvation. 
He had not advanced by all his efforts a hair’s- 
breadth in all those two weary years. The dea- 
con had been as ignorant of God’s salvation 
even as the tramp. But he was learning that 
lesson ; and it is a great one. They were, per- 
haps, far from agreeable truths; but truths 
they were nevertheless, as the questioning reader 


46 The only two Religions. 


can see by referring to the third chapter of the 
epistle to the Romans. 

But if the deacon found out that he could do 
nothing to save himself, he also found out that 


“All the doing has been done, 

As God has clearly shown, 
When, by the offering of His Son, 
His purpose He made known.” 


The result of the preaching, which was listened 
to for several evenings, was that he trusted in 
Christ, and ceased from his own works. Thus 
the deacon had become a Christian. He was 
still weak; there was much that he did not un- 
derstand ; but one thing he was clear about, viz., 
that God had loved him enough to give His Son 
to die for him. Surely, then, he could trust Him 
for the rest. With this thought filling his mind, 
he returned to Ohio. He did not yet know the 
full meaning of ‘‘ peace with God,” but his soul 
rested on His love as shown in Christ; and 
more was to follow. 

Shortly after his return, an evangelist came 
to his town to hold “Union meetings.” He was 
cordially received by the various churches, and 
the services opened with a great deal of enthusi- 
asm, and numbers professed to find blessing. It 
was not long, however, until a strong under- 
current of dissatisfaction set in. Ministers and 
church-members began to become angry and 
alarmed, and finally he was turned out of the 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 47 


pulpits, and the ‘‘ Union meetings” were at an 
end. The reason is simply given. He preached 
that all are on one plane before God. Men 
might make distinctions; He made none. All 
are lost and guilty, and so wretched is their 
plight that they can do nothing to save them- 
selves; that God knew that; in love He had sent 
Christ; Christ had done it all; now, therefore, 
all who believe in Christ are justified from ALL 
THINGS, and can know it here and now, on the 
authority of the word of God. This, the same 
doctrine as the street preacher’s, was unpalat- 
able teaching for that highly respectable com- 
munity, and they would have no more of it. 

A number of weary workers for salvation, 
however, had obeyed the gospel and accepted 
the invitation to 


“Cast your deadly doing down, 
Down at Jesus’ feet; 
Stand in Him, in Him alone, 
Gloriously COMPLETE.” 


These were not disposed to acquiesce in the 
summary dismissal of the strange preacher with 
che mxrpopular message; so, meetings of a more 
prrvae mature were held in various homes. 

The deacon attended these regularly, and, 
have rested in the cross for pardon before, he 
now saw that he was not only forgiven, but 
tuity justified; the judgment he deserved had 
been fully borne, and ended in the judgment of 


» but eterna 
had eternal life. “J ive unto them 


and they shall n€ver perish; neither shall any 
man pluck them out of My hand” 
Now his Cup of joy was full. 

with God was his: he could Say: 


“That which can Shake the Cross 


as never died, 
Nor ever left the grave,” 


He gave up his diaconate 
zing that what he now po 
Sympathy with h; He subse- 
quently returned to Reading, intending to go on 
to New York, With the Purpose of uniting with 


* This exceedingly hel 
to thousands, can be proc 
Loizeaux Brothers, 63 Fo 


Pfal paper, which hag been blessed 
ured by sendin 
urth Avenue, 


& & four-cent stamp to 
New York. 


e a 
n q 
n é 3 
: 
f | 
y ima t 
€ 
t 
j 
i 
+ 
a 
3 


The Tramp who became a Deacon. 49 


a society there of which he had heard. It was 

represented as being both pentecostal and apos- 

tolic: its leaders were said to be men of marvel- 
ous faith and personal holiness, who could heal 
the sick and perform various other wonders. 

But God had something better than this for 

him; for in Reading he once more found upon 
the streets the man who had before told him of 
God’s love and grace. He gladly heard him 
again, attending indoor and outdoor meetings 
for some weeks. In this time he made a further 
wonderful discovery : he found he was not only 
a justified man, the possessor of eternal life, but 
he was, from the moment he believed the gospel, 
a member of the only church he could find any- 
thing about in Scripture, called “the Church, 

which is His body,” of which the Lord Jesus is 
the one Head. He learned that upon believing 
the gospel he had received the Holy Spirit, and 

had thereby been made a member of this Church, 

‘‘for by one Spirit are ye all baptized into one 

body.” (See 1 Cor. xi.) He at once saw the in- 
congruity of joining anything, inasmuch as he 
was already a member of the Church of God. 
He therefore relinquished the idea of going to 
New York. 

From this time on, the word of God became 
his daiiy companion and his almost constant 
study. He saw from it the divine principle of 
gathering to the precious name of the Lord 
Jesus heist alone, in the confession of his mem- 


50 The only two Religions, 


bership in the body of Christ, in common with 
all true Christians; “For where two or three 
are gathered together in My name, there am I 
in the midst of them” (Matt. xviii, 20). 


He was persuaded to let this account of his 
godless life, his efforts for Salvation, and the 
way he found peace with God, be sent forth, in 


‘Maia aC els Si al ines saan 


“RELIGION RUNS IN OUR FAMILY, 
SIR!” 


E were speeding across the plateaus of Col- 
orado. My little son had taken a pack- 
age of gospel papers and gone through 

the sleeping-car, distributing them to the jaded 
passengers. On my way to the pla.form shortly 
afterwards, a lady accosted me with the words, 
“I beg your pardon, sir, but I think it was your 
child who gave me this tract; was it not?” 
Replying in the affirmative, she looked up 
brightly and said, “You can’t imagine how 
pleased I was to know there are other religious 
people on board besides myself. It is always a 
pleasure to meet those who are engaged in do- 
ing good.” 

She invited me to sit down in her section to 
chat together upon matters religious and phil- 
anthropic. After running on for some little 
time, telling of her church connection and the 
various good works in which she was engaged, 
she said, with great satisfaction, “It is so nice 
to feel you are of some use in the world, and 
that you love the Church and the Sabbath. So 
many people seem to have neither time nor 
taste for these things.” 


52 The only two Religions, 


“Your last remark,” I now put in, “‘is very 
true indeed. May I ask if you have been con- 
verted yourself?” 

Her face expressed the surprise she felt at such 
a question, put so abruptly. She looked slightly 
hurt, as well as embarrassed, as she replied : 
“Why, I’ve always been interested in these 
things. My father was a class-leader, and I 
have an uncle and two brothers who are all 
clergymen.” 

“Indeed!” I answered. “And have you been 
converted yourself ?”’ 

“You do not seem to understand,” was the 
grieved reply, “these things have always inter- 
ested me. My father was a class-leader for 
many years, and my uncle and two brothers are 
earnest clergymen.” 

“Yes, madam, I understood all that; but I 
mean, have you been truly converted to God 
yourself?” 

Looking at me in a bewildered manner, she 
said, “I guess it is I who do not understand 
you. I thought, when I told you of my father, 
and my relatives who are clergymen, you would 
see that religion runs in our family, sir!” 

It was said with such evident sincerity that 
for a moment or two I was at a loss for a word, 
and could scarcely forbear smiling. Her simple, 
¢arnest manner appealed to me; and yet it was 
clear to me that she was building on a founda- 
tion of sinking sand. 


Religion runs in our Family, Sir! 53 


“But have you not read,” I asked, at last, 
“‘the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, “‘ Except 
ye repent and become as little children, ye shall 
not enter into the kingdom of heaven ?’’ 

‘“Yes, sir, I remember the words,’’ she an- 
swered, in a dazed kind of a way; “‘but ina re- 
ligious family like ours—do you think they have 
the same application as to others?” 

Faithfully as I knew how, I sought to show 
her that religion was not Christ. A moral and 
religious training, especially if the Bible be the 
text-book of instruction, is of inestimable value 
in the bringing up of a child; but morality and 
religion do not save sinners for eternity. Were 
it so, what place would there be for the cross of 
Christ? What would be the value of the blood 
of Jesus? 

Religion may be handed down from parent to 
child. To use the lady’s words, it may run in 
the family. But new birth is a very different 
thing. Grace is not inherited. To every soul of 
man the words are addressed, ‘‘ Ye must be born 
again.” 

In John i. 12, 13 we read of three ways by 
which people cannot become children of God. 
It says, ‘‘As many as received Him” (that is, 
Jesus), ‘‘to them gave He power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on His 
name: which were born, not of blood, nor of 
the will of the flesh, nor of the v Il of man, but 
of God.” 


54 The only two Religions, 


To this I drew the attention of the lady in 
whose family religion ran, 

First, salvation, or new birth, is “not of 
blood.” The child of godly parents is not “born 
regenerated,” as I once heard a clergyman con- 
tend. Like all other sons of Adam, he is born 
in sin, and needs to be born anew. 

Second, it is not “of the will of the flesh.” 
Human resolutions, vows, determinations, turn- 
ing over new leaves, and such like, will never 
effect new birth. The flesh can rise no higher 
than itself. As “that which is born of the flesh 
is flesh,” so all that springs from it, whether it 
be religion or aught else, is but fleshly too. 

Third, it is not “ of the will of man.” Neither 
church, priest, nor clergyman, with all the ordi- 
nances combined, can make one a child of God. 
It is beyond the power of the holiest man on 
earth to re-create one soul. 

How, then, can it be brought about? The 
last phrase gives the answer. It is “of God.” 
He works through His Word. Believing that 
Word, trusting what He has said, the man is 
regenerated. 

To the lady on the train all this seemed new 
and strange; and as I left her, she remarked, 
“Well, I have never heard it put this way be- 
fore. I must think it over.” What the result 
was, the coming day will reveal. 

Undoubtedly she was but one of a large class 
who have never learned to distinguish between 


Religion runs in our Family, Sir] 55 


religion and Christ as a ground of hope. All 
who rest on religion, however earnest and or- 
thodox, will find, in the day of the coming 
storm, that they have been building a house on 
shifting sands. When the rains descend and the 
floods come, the fall must be great; and it will 
be too late to choose a more secure foundation. 

Those who rest on Christ, and stay their souls 
upon His words, “the word of the truth of the 
gospel,” are building upon the Rock that never 
can be shaken. Creeds of men will change and 
fall: human systems will pass away; but Christ 
abides eternally—the resting-place of all who 
trust His love and grace. 

Even though religion may run in the reader’s 
family, do not, I beseech you, trust to the piety 
of godly ancestors or the devotion of loved rela- 
tives. Make sure you trust in Christ for your- 
self. He gave Himself for our sins, and through 
Him “all that believe are justified from all 
things.” 

Rest not till you can sing with assurance 
founded on the testimony of the word of God, 


‘‘On Christ the solid Rock I stand: 
All other ground is sinking sand.” 


rte 


56 The oniy two Religions, 


The Dying Gambler. 


— 


“He died for sinners, and that’s me exactly.” 


4) HILE holding £ospel meetings in the 
) town of Albuquerque, N. M., we were 
told one morning of a man who was 
reported to us as being under deep con- 
Viction of sin, the Lord having awakened him 
through the Preaching on the street. Our in- 
formant told us that he was one who never 
went to a church or mission hall, as he would 
not have anything to do with religion or its 
advocates, But, happening to be out upcen the 
Streets in the evenings, he had twice listened to 
the Word as there proclaimed, and was now in 
deep distress about his soul. No more cheering 
intelligence can be conveyed,to one whose heart 
is in the work of evangelization, than that God 
has been using the message to the awakening 
or the conversion of sinners; so, giving thanks 
for what we had heard, Mr. M@— and I went 


OR ER eS. eee 


The Dying Gambler. 57 


over to the house in which the convicted man 
was living. 

We found him in deep distress. He was a 
consumptive who had come to Albuquerque 
from the Indian Territory in search of a climate 
where his disease would be more readily checked. 
But it was easy to see that his days on earth 
were fast drawing to a close. In broken accents 
he told us his story. He had been a most un- 
godly person. Gambling was his occupation, 
and all its attendant evils had held him in their 
snare. His had been “the pace that kills,” and 
now he was reaping the bitter fruits in his own 
body of a life spent in reckless dissipation in the 
service of the devil. The reason why he had, 
although awake to his wretched physical con- 
dition, avoided all Christians who might have 
been able to help him, now came out. He real- 
ized that he was dying. He was in dread of 
death with the awful judgment which he knew 
must follow. But he had long since concluded 
that there was no hope for him. He was too 
far gone for the mercy of God to be extended to 
him. His sins were crying for vengeance. There 
was no solace to be expected in religious meet- 
ings, so he had kept away, as it only aggravated 
his mind to see others happy in the knowledge 
of the forgiveness of their sins while for him 
there wras nought but the “blackness of dark- 
ness”’ forever. 


Through the goodness of God he had been led 


58 The only two Religions. 


to listen to the preaching on the corner; and 
for the first time he began to realize that there 
might be mercy even for him. But accompany- 
ing this faint hope had come a deeper sense of 
his own iniquity, so that he was tossed about 
between hope and despair. We read the word 
of God and conversed with him, but he was 
quite gloomy, though he said, “I’m praying; 
and I’ve made up my mind that if I have to go 
to hell, I'll go praying.” Earnestly we sought to 
impress upon his mind that salvation was God’s 
free gift, offered “without money and without 
price” to all who confessed their sins, and who, 
as guilty, lost men and women, were ready to 
receive it for nothing. He did not seem to grasp 
it, but frequently remarked, “I won’t give up 
praying.” 

It is hard for man to realize the perfect free- 
dom of the offer made by the God of all grace 
to needy sinners. It is neither by prayer nor 
by works of Luman righteousness that salva- 
tion is obtained. The believing sinner, saved 
by grace divine, gladly owns: 


‘*Could my zeal no languor know, 
Could my tears forever flow, 
These for sin could not atone : 
Thou must save, and Thou alone.” 


Jesus it was who did all the doing; there re- 
mains nothing for the repentant sinner but the 
taking. 


SERNA eRe NORE 


The Dying Gambler. 59 


But the very freedom of it all seemed to stum- 
ble the poor dying gambler. He promised to 
be out to the meeting however; and so, after 
praying that he might be led to see the perfec- 
tion of the finished work of Christ, we left 
him. 

In accordance with his promise he was pres- 
ent at night. He seemed to listen eagerly, but 
with a look of bewilderment that implied in- 
ward anxiety and confusion of mind. Upon the 
conclusion of the meeting we handed him several 
gospel booklets, which he promised to read. 

The following evening he came to the hall, 
and it was easy to see that some great change 
had taken place. After the preaching he spcke 
to Mr. M—— and brokenly told what had that 
day transpired. His voice was so weakened by 
the inroads of disease that he could only speak 
in short whispers. He said, “This afternoon 
—I lay on the bed—I took the tracts and tried 
to read.—My aunt came in—I asked her to read 
them to me.—Every time she came to a verse 
from the Bible—I said, ‘Look it up.’—She said, 
‘Tain’t necessary.’-I said ‘It is—I can’t af- 
ford to make any mistake—I must be sure.’ She 
got a Bible and looked them up—They were all 
just the same.—At last I saw it—I said, ‘That’s 
it—Christ died for sinners—that’s me exactly. 
—He shed His blood for sinners—He saves all 
who trust Him—I can trust Him now—He diea 
for sinners—That’s me.’—I felt happy then—I 


60 The only two Religions. 


knew it was all right—I know He won’t cast 
me out.” 

Together we rejoiced that thus he had been 
led to rest upon Him whose blood cleanses 
from all sin. 

And now a remarkable change took place. 
When we went to see him the next day, we 
found that physically he had failed to an amaz- 
ing degree. He could no longer go about. It 


Three days later he passed away. Just before 
the end came he looked up and asked, “‘Do you 
hear it? I hear them Singing. Jesus died for 
Sinners. He died for me.’’ And so the redeemed 
gambler had gone into the Presence of Him who 
delights to show mercy to the vilest, 

To the unsaved reader we would address a 
word in closing this brief account. Whether a 


The Dying Gambler. 61 


sinner of the deepest dye, crushed beneath the 
weight of the iniquities of a life-time spent in 
high-handed rebellion against the God who 
created you, and who, though you have neither 
known nor acknowledged Him,has yet been 
your preserver through all your devious paths; 
or whether you may be generally accounted 
moral and religious, but are still guilty of that 
greatest of all sins—the rejection of the Lord 
Jesus Christ—“‘unto you is the word of this 
salvation sent.”” For you God’s blessed Son 
died upon the cross, having borne the judgment 
due to sin; and now, through the work He there 
accomplished, you, like the poor gambler, may 
be “justified from all things” and prepared 
to enjoy an eternity of bliss in His own pres- 
ence, 

Christ received, means eternal joy; Christ 
rejected, means eternal misery. 


62 


MICAH’S RELIGION ; 


OR, 


REFORMATION Is NOT SALVATION, 


HE Scriptures contain, not only many beau- 
tiful stories and incidents which illustrate, 
as no human record could, the Salvation 


mount Ephraim. 

He had at one time been far from an exem- 
plary character. Details as to his past life be- 
fore his reformation are lacking ; but he tells us 
himself one 8reat fact. He had been a thief. 
Nor was he a mere robber of the kind abound. 


shekels of silver—a most respectable sum in 
those times. This money Micah stole from her 
and put away to use for himself, 

Upon discovering the theft, the old woman 
told him of it, probably little dreaming that he 
had been the guilty one. Filled With indigna- 


Micah’s Religion. 63 


then, evidently considering that the money was 
gone forever, she “‘ wholly dedicated it unto the 
Lord” if it should ever be found and returned 
to her. 

Micah’s fears were apparently aroused by his 
mother’s curses. In an ignorant and supersti- 
tious age, he dreaded being thus made an object 
of Divine vengeance. There is no hint that he 
repented towards God of his sin. There is no 
record of his bringing Him into account at all. 
But in verse 2 we learn that, tormented by the 
fear of condign judgment, he went to his mother 
and returned the money, making a clean breast 
of his sin tc ‘er. ‘‘He said unto his mother, 
The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were 
taken from thee, about hich thou cursedst, and 
spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver 
is with me; J took it. And his mother said, 
Blessed be thou of the Lord, my son.” 

Now all this might, to a superficial reader, ap- 
pear very right and proper. Micah had sinned 
against his mother. To his mother he confessed 
his sin. He had robbed her. He restored what 
he had robbed. More than that, his future life 
shows that he was a truly reformed man. He 
had turned over a new leaf, as people say. 
What more could be asked ? 

Ah, a great deal more was required to put Mi- 
cah right with God, as well as with his mother. 
Sin, is not merely against our fellow-creatures: 
it is primarily against our Creator Himself; and 


64 The only two Religions, 


this is what so intensifies its Seriousness, In 
David's case, dreadful as his crime had been 
against Uriah and Bathsheba, he confesses, when 
awakened as to the ey} he had done, “ Against 
Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done this 


demns himself, as the psalm makes evident 
throughout. There is nothing of this in Micah’s 
case. His fears are Stirred. He returns the 
money. He confesses to his mother. He reforms 
his life. That is all. There is not one rea] move 


In Lev. vi. 1-7 we have, in the instructions 
as to the trespass offering, just what was re- 
quired in a case like that of Micah. “If a soy] 
sin...ina thing taken away by violence, or 
hath deceived his neighbor; . . . because he hath 
sinned, and is guilty, he shall restore that which 
he took violently away; ... he shall even re- 
store it in the Principal, and shall add the fifth 
part more thereto, and ive it unto him to 
whom it appertaineth, in the day of his being 
found guilty ” (margin) “And he shall bring 
his trespass offering unto the Lord,a ram with- 
out blemish out of the flock: . . and the priest 
shaJ) make an atonement for him before the 


Here we have not merely the wrong righted 


———— 


RAN ee en cy: 


Micah’s Religion, 65 


that was done to one’s neighbor, but, what was 
of infinitely more importance, the trespass was 
put right before God on the ground of the offer- 
ing and the shedding of blood. An atonement 
was required. By blood alone could it be made. 
Micah ignored the blood, and neglected the offer- 
ing. His highest thought was putting matters 
straight with his mother. God is not brought 
into his affairs at all. 

This is the root evil of a great mass of relig- 
ious profession at the present day. The blood 
of atonement is ignored, or despised. But God 
has said, ‘‘ When I see the blood, I will pass over 
you.” Nothing less than this will satisfy Him. 
Where, then, is that blood to be found? The 
guilty sinner is not called upon now to procure 
an offering, and to bring it to a human priest. 
God has Himself provided the Victim, in the per- 
son of His own spotless, unblemished Son. He 
is the true Trespass Offering. In the sixty-ninth 
psalm we see Him taking that place, and hear 
His cry in verse 4, while suffering the awful ig- 
nominy of the cross: ‘‘I restored that which I 
took not away.” God's holy judgment fell upon 
Him when He gave Himself for our sins. Oh, 
how guilty, then, is the man who, despising this 
one offering, setting at naught all His suffering 
and anguish for sin, essays to reach God in any 
other way than by the cross of Christ! 

To pay one’s debts; to forsake evil ways; to 


turn from wicked companionships; to become 
i] 


sation ats pe poems Togo 


a 
7 
le 

4 


66 The only two Religions, 


religious—not any of these things, nor all of 
them combined, can ever put away sin. It is 
the blood of Jesus, and the blood alone, “in all 
its solitary dignity,” that can do that. 

How plainly then, do we see in Micah a merely 
reformed man! Not a converted man; not a 
repentant sinner; but a man who gives up his 
iniquitous ways only to fall into worse ones 
—becoming an idolater, as we shall see fur- 
ther on. 

His poor mother was as easily satisfied with 
his sham co:-version as are many good people 
nowadays. Delighted, she cries, “Blessed be 
thou of the Lord, my son!” She is as ready 
now to bless as she was to curse before. But, 
remembering her vow, she adds, “I had wholly 
dedicated the silver unto the Lord from my 
hand for my son, to make a 8taven image and 
a molten image: now therefore will I restore it 
unto thee” (ver. 3), 

Her measure is easily taken. She is a sample 
of multitudes of pious-speaking people who have 
no sense of what really suits God, but who 
fancy He is“ altogether such an one as thyself.” 
This class art ever ready to make pledges and 
promises, hoping thereby to propitiate His fa- 
vor. In times of distress they cali upon Him. 
When all goes well, He is comparatively for- 
gotten. Nor is there any intelligence as to His 
mind, for His Word is refused and their own 
vain thoughts substituted. How common the 


Se een. oe 


199 8 


Micah’s Religion. 67 


expression among this class, “I think,” or, “I 
do not think”! It is the human mind working 
in the holy things of God. Of what He has said, 
they never inquire; but deify their own poor 
brains and follow the dictates of their own 
deshly minds. 

How manifestly is this the case here! Had 
Micah’s mother been reading her Bible, she 
would have found it recorded, ‘“‘ Thou shalt not 
make unto thee any graven image, or any like- 
ness of anything that is in heaven above, or that 
is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water 
under the earth: thou shalt not bow down 
thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the 
Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the 
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto 
the third and fourth generation of them that 
hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of 
them that love Me, and keep My command- 
ments” (Exod. xx. 4-6). But without stop- 
ping to inquire, ‘What has God said in His 
Word?” the poor, deluded woman dedicated 
the silver to the Lord to make a graven and a 
molten image. 

Micah refused to handle the money again; so 
she ‘‘took two hundred shekels of silver, and 
gave them to the founder, who made thereof a 
graven image and a molten image: and they 
were in the house of Micah” (ver. 4). So much 
for vows made in distress, when the trouble is 
over! She had dedicated the missing silver 


eee pete eggs ~ eee 


see +) 


ae 
fe 
} 

GB 
ag 
BP 
Bi 

P Bae 
i 
5 
i 
§} 
(| 


68 The only two Religions, 


wholly to the Lord. Having recovered it, she 
kept nine parts of it, and used two parts in ac- 
cordance with her pledge. Who can measure 
the deceitfulness of the heart away from God! 

But, turning from this self-deceived old woman, 
we go on to view her son in a new role—as the 
religious man of his tribe, albeit an idolater | 
What a difference between Micah the thief and 
Micah the reformed, devoted man of verse 5] 
“The man Micah had a house of gods, and made 
an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of 
his sons, who became his priest.” The change 
is very marked. The man’s whole life is altered: 
but the sin-question remains unsettled still! 
Neither his “chapel,” nor his images, nor his 
giving his son up to religious service, can settle 
that. It is the blood of atonement he needs, 
and that blood he ignores, and goes proudly on 
doing “that which was right in his own eyes” 
(ver. 6). 

However, he seems to have felt that there was 
one flaw in the system he had built up. In the 
secret of his own heart he is not quite sure that 
his priest has the authority needed to ensure his 
soul’s salvation and blessing. If man refuse the 
simple plan of God’s appointment, he at least 
wants something venerable and authoritative 
upon which to lean. How many a soul has 
been troubled for years as to whether he was in 
“the true church,” or enjoying the ministry of 
a properly ordained clergy; and then, when 


Micah’s Religion. 69 


once assured in his own mind that all was well 
on these lines, has settled down into a false 
peace and a carnal security that, perhaps, was 
never disturbed till he awoke in hell! 

Micah is uneasy. His soul is not at rest. 
The ministrations of his son may not be valid, 
as he is not in the direct priestly succession. 
Very well; then the devil will give him a man to 
suit! 

“There was a young man out of Bethlehem- 
judah of the tribe of Judah, who was a Levite, 
and he sojourned there. And the man departed 
out of the city from Beth-lehem-judah to sojourn 
where he could find a place: and he came to 
mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he 
journeyed” (vers.7,8). The name of this active 
young Levite is given in the next chapter, as 
also his pedigree: ‘Jonathan, the son of Ger- 
shom, the son of” (not, as in the A. V., Manas- 
sch, but, according to the R. V.,) “Moses ”’ | 
(ver. 30). Here surely was one holding orders 
that were unimpeachable. Did not Moses talk 
with God face to face? Who so fitted to attend 
to Micah’s spiritual interests as his grandson ? 

But, alas, grace is not inherited, nor yet gift to 
minister in the holy things of God! 

Jonathan the Levite was out looking for a 
call. It must have seemed to be nothing less 
than Divine Providence that led him to visit the 
house of Micah. The one wanted a priest, the 
other wanted a living: what could be more 


70 The only two Religions, 


marked? In answer to Micah’s query, “ Whence 
comest thou?” the young man is not slow to 
reply. “Iam a Levite of Beth-lehem-judah,”’ he 
Says, ‘‘and I go to sojourn where I may find a 
place” (ver. 9). This suits Micah exactly, and 


of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite 
went in” (ver, 10). A bargain is struck imme- 
diately; and now Micah feels satisfied that all 


Though but a mere boy in comparison with 
his patron, the Levite-priest is, like m 
other pretentious youth since, designated “* fa- 


How is it with the reader? Micah’s mistake 
Was in >-utting reformation, religiousness, and 
a “clergyman,” in the place of the Trespass Of- 
fering and the blood of atonement, 


Are you, 


ss aid hig 
. 


i ni 


Micah’s Religion. 71 


dear friend, making the same fatal mistake? 
Perhaps you rest upon your church-member- 
ship, your baptism, your confirmation, your 
sacrament-taking, or your benevolence or phi- 
lanthropy. Oh, I beseech you, remember that 
it is the blood, and the blood alone, that maketh 
an atonement for the soul. No church, however 
ancient; no clergyman, however talented; no 
priest, however holy, can avail to put away 
your sins. Jesusis the only Saviour. His blood, 
nothing more and nothing less, cleanseth from 
all sin. 

Mark, that mere assurance that all is right 
does not make it so. Micah believed all was 
well because he had a Levite for his priest; but 
his belief was grounded upon his own thoughts, 
not upon what God had said. This is the differ- 
ence between faith and presumption. The latter 
relies upon some word or thought of man; the 
former rests upon the word of God, and knows 
all must be well. 

Micah’s false confidence was doomed to be 
terribly shaken. The next chapter relates the 
coming of some men to his house, who were on 
their way to spy out a new country for some 
of the children of Dan. They knew “Father” 
Jonathan of old. Upon their second journey, 
with a company of emigrants, they decided it 
would be well to start their new settlement in a 
religious way. Accordingly, ‘the five men that 
went to spy out the land went up, and came in 


aig lle 0 AE 


sathadiadthadtiie, acumen dedi act adi ote ee 
oe ses ka . ” 


", 


* 


= os 


sogitteptzaee sees: 
LTE pdb 


72 The only two Religions, 


thither” (to Micah’s chapel), “‘and took the 
graven image, and the ephod, and the tera- 
phim, and the molten image: and the priest 
stood in the entering of the gate. . . . Then the 
priest said unto them, What do ye? And tkey 
said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thy hand 
upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us 
a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be 
a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou 
be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel ? 
And the priest’s heart was glad; and he took 
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven 
image, and went in the midst of the people” 
(vers. 17-20). What a picture have we here! 
“The hireling fleeth because he is a hireling.’’ 
The man who could so readily accept the care 
of Micah’s soul for a monetary consideration is 
just as ready to forsake him when the opportu- 
nity presents itself to better his own condition. 
He sees in the rude action and the surly offer of 
the children of Dan a call toa larger sphere of 
usefulness—to use a popular expression ; and, 
without a word of farewell to his patron, he 
goes off with a delighted heart to his new fields, 
where he establishes a hierarchy that lasted till 
the captivity of the ten tribes (ver. 30). How 
hollow is the whole priestly system, after all! 
But what of Micah in regard to allthis? He 
has been away from home, apparently; but 
upon his return, learns of the spoliation of his 
chapel and the carrying off of his priest. Gath- 


una fr es aP FP: 7) 2 onc emcee mg Ht tomtigg  e 


Micah’s Religion. 73 


ering some of his neighbors together, he sets out 
to pursue the children of Dan, and soon over- 
takes them. ‘And they cried unto the children 
of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said 
unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest 
with such a company?” (ver.23). It was add- 
ing insult to injury. The priest discreetly holds 
his peace. Micah despairingly replies, ‘‘ Ye have 
taken away my gods which I made, and the 
priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I 
more? and what is this that ye say unto me, 
What aileth thee?” (ver. 24). Note the pathos 
in the question, “ What have I more?’’? What 
a confession as to the true state of affairs! All 
his religion had consisted in outward obser: - 
ances. Now his gods and his priest are gonc, 
and he is bereft of all. What had he more? 
Nothing! 

He had never been in the presence of God 
about his sins; he had never consulted the sure 
word of the Lord given through Moses; he had 
rested only upon what his own deceived and de- 
ceitful heart persuaded him would suit Jehovah’s 
holy eye; and now all was gone! He had lost 
his religion, and he knew not God’s way of sal- 
vation. His confidence had proven to be but 
vain confidence after all. His “Now I know” 
of the previous chapter was changed to this sol- 
emn ‘“ What have I more?” 

It was a rude awakening from his dream of 
security; but we read of no repentance even 


74 The only two Religions. 


now. The chapter closes leaving him mourning 
his losses, and his gods set up among the chil- 
dren of Dan. His fancied light had proven but 
an untrustworthy will-o’-the-wisp. 

Before dismissing the subject, we would seek 
once more to press the question home upon the 
reader’s conscience. Are you certain you have 
any surer hope for eternity than that which de- 
luded Micah? If suddenly bereft of all the out- 
ward forms and ceremonies of religion, would 
you have to cry, with him, “What have I 
more?’ Or, could you, on the other hand, take 
up the cry of a poor woman once found dying 
on the floor of a garret, bereft of everything to 
comfort or cheer, who, when questioned as to 
what she desired, exclaimed in triumph, “I have 
Christ: what want I more!” 

Oh, be persuaded, dear unsaved one, this is 
very different to merely doing your best, stri- 
ving to live a religious life, trying to keep the 
law, or depending upon church, sacrament, or 
priest! Many of these things may be in them- 
selves very good, but they cannot save poor sin- 
ners. “It is not possible that the blood of bulls 
and of goats should put away sin.” And it is 
equally impossible to put it away by human 
effort, however earnest and well-meaning. Were 
it possible so to fit yourself for the presence of 
God, be assured He would never have given His 
Only-begotten Son up to the death of the cross, 
there to bear His awful judgment against sin. 


Micah’s Religion. 75 


It was because there was no other way that 
God ‘‘ made Hin to be sin for us, who knew no 
sin; that we might be made the righteousness of 
God in Him” (2 Cor » 1). Either He must 
endure the wrath «{f (0d aye’.ic* iniquity, or 
the sinner must sin): ‘encuth it tc ce: or. In infi- 
nite love and gre. {2 cook Orn pine, bore our 
judgment, and no. “oi of s at-., free par- 
don to all who (one to ftim ‘n cue name of 
Jesus, confessing thei: sv. tis Word declares 
that “If we confess vue sius, ile ‘s faithful and 
just to forgive us ovr -15, and ~o cleanse us 
from all unrigkteousne:: (1 Juun 1.9). Dis- 
carding every other hope as unreliable and vain, 
turn to Him now, ere His patience be exhausted 
and the door of grace be closed forevermore. 

‘“‘ Because there is wrath, beware; lest He take 
thee away with His stroke: then a great ran- 
som cannot deliver thee’’ (Job xxxvi. 18). The 
‘great ransom” is Christ Himself. He died, 
the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us 
to God. All who come to God through Him are 
saved eternally. All who pass from “his life 
neglecting or rejecting Him are lost rever. 
‘“‘Now is the accepted time;”’ while God, in 
grace, is still beseeching men to be reconciled to 
Himself. Accept, and live! Refuse, and diel 
“He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not life” (1 Jno. v.12). 


76 


CONCURRENT BLESSINGS, 


HEN a poor, weary sinner comes in his 
W guilt and misery to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
his utmost expectation, as a tule, is to 
obtain forgiveness for the sins committed up to 
the time of his awakening and conversion. 
Even this he realizes to be wonderful grace, and 
imagines that to ask or expect more would be 
the greatest presumption. Like the prodigal, if 
pardoned for the past, he will sue for a hired 
servant's place for the future (Luke xv. 12-24), 
Blessed it is, however, that God deals with 
souls in accordance with His own thoughts. 
He has no hired servants. His word is, “‘ Bring 
forth the BEST ROBE, and put it on him; puta 
ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.” So 
arrayed, the saved one is given a place at his 
Father's table, where both together feast on 
Christ. 

In this paper I wish to consider a few of the 
blessings bestowed, through grace, upon the 
one who trusts in the Lord Jesus as his Saviour. 

The word of God declares that “He hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heay- 
enly places in Christ” (Eph. i. 3). Among 


Concurrent Blessings. 77 


Christians there is no special aristocratic class. 
All alike have been ‘made meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light” (Col. i. 
12), and all alike are dear to the Father’s heart 
as Christ Himself (John xvii. 23). 

There are seven things which may be predica- 
ted of every one who has trusted Him whose 
precious blood puts allsin away ; and it is these 
blessed truths I desire to bring before the con- 
verted reader. 


(1) New Birth. 


All Christians have been born anew. “ Who- 
soever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born 
of God” (1 John v.1). The word of God re- 


ceived in faith results in new birth. “Of His 
own will begat He us by the word of truth.” 
“Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but 
of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liv- 
eth and abideth forever.” ‘And thisis the word 
which by the gospel is preached unto you”’ (Jas. 
i. 18; 1 Pet. i. 23, 25). 

By new birth the Christian receives a nature 
the bent of which is absolutely righteous; just 
as, by the natural birth, he inherited a nature 
whose tendency is ever evil. ‘That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born 
of the Spirit is spirit” (John iii. 6). These two 
natures exist side by side in the believer. “ The 
flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit 
against the flesh: and these are contrary the 


78 The only two Religions, 


one to the other; s0 that ye might not do the 
things that ye would” (Gal. v.17,N.tr.). But 
as he walks in the Spirit, he does not fulfil the 
desires of the flesh. “We know that whoso- 
ever is born of God sinneth not.” “He cannot 
sin” (literally, be sinning), “because he is born 
of God” (1 John v. 18; 1 John iii. 9). Heis no 
longer to be controlled by the old nature. De- 
nying that, acting as born again, he does not 
sin. It is a question of practice. The Christian, 
whatever his failures, is characterized by right- 
eousness. 

““As many as received Him, to them gave He 
title to become the sons of God, even to them 
that believe on His name : which were born, not 
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the 
will of man, but of God” (John i. 12, 18). 


(2) Eternal Life. 


In unmistakable terms, the Scriptures affirm 
Over and over again that every believer has 
eternal, or everlasting, life. Some have tried to 
make a distinction between the two words; but 
they are simply different renderings into English 
of the one Greek word. “Ag Moses lifted up 
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the 
Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him should not perish, but have eter- 
nal life.” “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that heareth My word, and believeth on Him 
that sent Me, hath everlasting life, and shall 


Concurrent Blessings. 79 


not come into condemnation ” (judgment, R.V.), 
“but is passed from death unto life” (Jno. i11. 14, 
15; v. 24). 

This life is communicated in new birth, as nat- 
ural life was communicated at the birth accord- 
ing to nature. Itis not immortality. All will 
live forever, in conscious bliss or woe (Matt. 
xxv. 46); but only those who trust in Christ 
have eternal life. ‘‘ This is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom Thou hast sent” (John xvii, 3). 
It is not to be defined, but enjoyed. Christ is 
the believer’s life as to source, and is likewise 
the sustainer of it when communicated. Heaven 
is its proper sphere. There we shall enter into 
life eternal. That is, we shall be in the scene 
that is suited to its full display. This is why, in 
some passages of the Pauline epistles, and the 
synoptic Gospels, it is presented as the goal. 
But throughout the Gospel and the first epistle 
of John it is viewed as the present possession of 
all believers. ‘‘ These things have I written unto 
you that believe on the name of the Son of God ; 
that ye may know that ye have eternal life”’ 
(1 John v. 13). 

To deny that ali Christians have it is to make 
God a liar! 


(3) Justification. 


“By Him ALL THAT BELIEVE are justified from 
ALL things" (Acts xiii. 39). This is far more 


80 The only two Religions. 


than being merely pardoned—unmerited grace 
as that might be. To be justified is to be en- 
tirely vindicated from every charge that might 
be brought against me. It is “the sentence of 
the judge in favor of the prisoner.” 

The ground of this is the finished work of 
Christ, He bore the judgment due to aL my 
sins. Therefore God can be “ just and the jus- 
tifier of him which believeth in Jesus” (Rom. 
ili. 26). 

Justification is not a sTaTE of soul. Itis the 
standing of the once guilty sinner, before God, 
in absolute righteousness, “ Who shall lay any- 
to the charge of God’s elect ? It is God that 
justifieth” (Rom. viii. 33). This settles every 
question as to guilt. If God has justified, none 
can condemn. 

As no work of man could avail to procure jus- 
tification, so no act of man can cause it to be 
forfeited. Christ having been made sin for sin- 
ners, they who believe are made the righteous- 
ness of God in Him. The new life which they 
receive is one to which sin can never attach. 
They stand before Him in “ justification of life” 
(Rom. v. 18); and this on the ground of one 
accomplished act of righteousness, which has 
settled the sin-question forever, in a manner 
fully satisfactory to God. All the believer’s sins 
were laid on Jesus. All were atoned for, All 
were put away for eternity. None can ever 
be mentioned to hin: again. His justification 


Concurrent Blessings. 8) 


is perfect, complete, and therefore once for 
all. 


(4) Sanctification. 


Not only is EVERY believer justified, he is also 
sanctified, i.e., set apart. Christ is his sancti- 
fication. In God’s eye he is not only cleared 
(justified), but he is likewise cleansed from the 
pollution of sin as well as from its dreadful 
guilt. He is “sanctified by the offering of the 
body of Jesus Christ once for all.” ‘By one 
offering He hath perfected forever them that are 
sanctified” (Heb. x. 10, 14). 

Paul could address all saints as ‘sanctified 
in Christ Jesus” (1 Cor. i. 2), though many of 
them were far from being practically so. This 
latter must never be ignored. It is of tremen- 
dous importance. It is by the word of truth 
and the Spirit of God (John xvii. 17; Eph. v. 
26; 2 Thess. ii. 13). Positional, or absolute, 
sanctification is by the blood of Christ. 

Saved through His death, He is made unto me 
sanctification (1 Cor. i. 30), for I am in Him; 
but Iam to make this practical by daily walk- 
ing in subjection to the word of God, in the 
power of an ungrieved Spirit. 

Sanctification, in Scripture, never means the 
eradication of the sinful nature, which, as we 
have seen, remains in every believer until the 
Lord shall fashion anew these bodies of our 
humiliation, and make them like unto His glo- 

6 


so be that the Spirit of 
if any man have not t 


Spirit” is on 


82 The only two Religions, 


ous body (Phil. jii. 21). The Lord Jesus, in His 
great intercessory prayer, said, “ For their sakes 
I sanctify Myself, that they also might be sanc- 
tified through the truth” (John xvii. 19). He 
was ever holy. This negatives all thought of 
sanctification refering to inward cleansing from 
pollution. He set Himself apart as an object 

for His people’s hearts, that they might be prac- 

tically separated from all evil by the truth, even 

as they are already viewed by God as set apart 
in Him. 

The old nature is too bad to be sanctified. 

The carnal mind “; 


18 not subject to the law of 
God, neither indeed can be” (Rom. viii. 7). 


8 absolutely holy, and does 
not require to be sanctified. It is the man him- 


-ose again, 


(5) The Holy Spirit. 
In addition to havin 
trust in Christ are ind 
“But ye are not in the 


8 4 new nature, all who 
welt by the Holy Ghost. 
flesh, but in the Spirit, if 
God dwell in you.* Now 
he Spirit of Christ, he is 


——s+ 


*“Tn the m. ‘In the 


flesh is our Position as born of Ada 
T Dew position as born of God. 


Concurrent Blessings. 83 


NONE OF His” (Rom. viii. 9; see, also, verse 11). 

This is true of the youngest babe in Christ, as 
1 John ii. 20, 27 will make clear. It is not the 
“‘fathers,’”’ or the “young men,” who are there 
addressed, but the babes, the “little children.” 
To such John says, ‘‘Ye have an unction from 
the Holy One,” and ‘The anointing which ye 
have received of Him abideth in you.” 

Likewise, in addressing the Galatians, Paul 
asks, ‘‘Received ye the Spirit by the works of 
the law, or by the hearing of faith?” (Gal. iii. 
2). This is not a “second blessing,” but the 
beginning of the Christian course. 

The ‘certain disciples’? often referred to in 
Acts xix. 1-6 were not on Christian ground at 
all, but, as the passage itself makes plain, were 
Jewish believers, disciples of John the Baptist. 

All Christians have the Holy Spirit from the 
moment of their believing the testimony of the 
gospel. 

He is the earnest of what is to come when the 
child of God is taken home. He is also the seal 
that he is the Lord’s down here. ‘In whom ye 
also trusted, after that ye heard the word of 
truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom 
also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with 
that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest 
of our inheritance until the redemption of the 
purchased possession, unto the praise of His 
glory.” 

This sealing is not for a brief period, but Eph. 


84 The only two Religions, 


iv. 30 says, “Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, 
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemp- 
tion.” 

Believers are quickened by the Spirit, sancti- 
fied by the Spirit, baptized by the Spirit into the 
body of Christ, anointed by the Spirit, and, as 
they walk with God in obedience to His Word, 
filled with the Spirit. 


(6) In Christ. 


Again, every Christian is in Christ; in con- 
trast to his previous condition, in Adam, (See 
Rom. v. 12—21 and 1 Cor. xy. 45-49.) If the 
reader is unsaved, he is in Adam, and therefore 
under condemnation. If he is saved, he is in 
Christ, in a “new creation,” (2 Cor. vy. 17 ), and 
“there is therefore now no condemnation to 
them that are in Christ Jesus” (Rom. viii. 1). 

He is linked up forever with the glorified Head 
of the new creation. All in Adam die; all in 
Christ shall be made alive. 

It is of the utmost importance to see this. If 
in Christ, I am loved by the Father as He iS; as 
secure from judgment as He is; as certain of be- 
ing forever in glory as He is. My destiny is 
linked up with His. I died with Him. I have 
been raised with Him. I am accepted in Him. 
I am seated in heavenly places in Him. “As He 
is, 80 are we in this world” (1 John iv. 17). 
“He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit ” 
(1 Cor. wi. 17). 


Concurrent Biessings. 85 


All who are now “in Christ” are certain to 
be in the glory “‘ with Christ.” 


(7) The Church. 


Lastly, every Christian is a Church member. 
He does not need to join a church. He is jonED 
TO THE CuurcH. In Acts ii. 47 we read, “The 
Lord added to the Church daily such as should 
be saved.”” This Church is the Body of Christ. 
He is its only Head (Eph. v. 22-32; Col. i. 18). 
The way believers are brought into the Body is 
given us in 1 Cor. xii. 13: “For by one Spirit 
ARE WE ALL baptized into one Body.”’ 

As of old, so now, the Spirit’s baptism brings 
each saved one into the Church, or Assembly, 
which consists of all in every place who have 
trusted in Christ. 

The responsibilities flowing from this are 
clearly set before us in the Corinthian epistles, 
and the letters to Timothy and Titus, as also 
in other portions of the New Testament, nota- 
bly the last half of Ephesians and Rom. xii. 

May grace be given to reader and writer to 
enter more fully into the wondrous privileges of 
the Christian place, and wisdom be given to 
walk in subjection to the practical truths flow- 
ing therefrom! 


“WHO HATH BEWITCHED YOU?” 


THE BELIEVER’S RELATION TO THE 
LAW. 


HE great question of the soul’s salvation 
settled, another very soon arises to perplex 
and trouble many a new-born babe in 

Christ. What is the Christian’s relation to the 
law? Granted that human enactments and 
man-made ordinances have no place in Christi- 
anity, can the same be said of that “ fiery law” 
which the New Testament declares is “holy, 
just,and good?” The more sincere and earnest 
a soul is, the more will this question trouble and 
perplex. 

For answer, let us turn to the third and 
fourth chapters of the epistle to the Galatians, 

These assemblies of Galatia consisted, in large 
measure, of honest souls from among the hea- 
then, who had been but recently converted to 
the Lord. Paul had been to them the messen- 
ger with feet beautiful upon the mountains, who 


“Who hath bewitched You?” 87 


had brought them the glad tidings of peace 
with God through the blood of His Son. They 
had received him as an angel of God, and would 
have plucked out their own eyes and given them 
to him, had such a thing been possible. Loving 
the Saviour, they loved the one who had been 
the bearer of His gospel. 

Having fulfilled his ministry among them for 
the time, he had gone to labor elsewhere. 
There the news of a strange reaction reached 
him. His beloved Galatian converts had been 
thrown into confusion and trouble of soul. His 
own apostleship even was called in question, 
for it was bruited that his was but a partial 
gospel, which stopped short of the full truth of 
Christianity. (See first two chapters. ) 

Disaffected men from Judea had gone up to 
Galatia, and were busy spreading among these 
Galatian converts the pernicious doctrine that, 
while faith in Christ was all very well as a 
means of obtaining salvation, obedience to the 
law of Moses was the divinely appointed meth- 
od of retaining it! How like much that one 
hears in Christendom to-day | 

Stirred to the soul by the havoc being wrought 
among these simple saints, the apostle sits down 
and with his own hand pens a letter, as many 
suppose, in large, awkward characters* de- 


* It is a question whether Chapter vi. 11 should read, “how 
large a letter,’’ or, ‘‘in what large letters.’’ The latter would 
imply that he was near-sighted. 


ee aa . ae 


ee ids Ste me i 


MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
(ANS! and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


FFFEEEE 
FERE 


FE 


g 
F 
fe 


APPLIED IMAGE _ Inc 


1653 East Main Street 
Rochester, New York 14609 USA 
(716) 482 - 0300 - Phone 

(716) 288 - 5989 - Fox 


88 The only two Religions. 


signed to deliver them from the snare into 
which they were falling. 

After declaring the reality of his apostleship, 
he exclaims, in chapter 3, “O foolish Gala- 
tians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should 
not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus 
Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified 
among you?” Their vaunted clearer light and 
new teaching was but the work of the enemy of 
souls, blinding their eyes to the true meaning 
of the cross of Christ, and shutting them up to 
the darkness and bondage of Judaism. 

Now this first question, rightly understood, 
settles the whole matter. Jesus Christ has been 
crucified! This simple yet solemn fact bears a 
tremendous relation to the entire subject of the 
Christian’s place in regard, not only to the law, 
but to sin, the world, and all fleshly religion. 

Why was Jesus Christ crucified ?—All had 
sinned. From the mass of mankind God selected 
one nation. To them He gave a holy law. 
That law decreed judgment upon the breaker 
ofit. ‘As many as are of the works of the law 
are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is 
every one that continueth not in all things 
which are written in the book of the law to 
do them” (ver. 10). None ever “continued.” 
Therefore all were under the sentence of doom. 
Into such a scene Christ came to take that curse 
upon Himself, and to bear the sinner’s judg- 
ment. He was crucified. Upon the tree, God 


“Who hath bewitched You?” 89 


dealt with Him as though He were the guilty 
one. He fully met all the claims of that broken 
law. ‘‘Christ hath redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is 
written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a 
tree” (ver. 13). He, then, has delivered from 
the law every believing Jew; and no Gentile was 
ever under it in the full sense. Has His work, 
then, no bearing upon their state? It has. He 
bore the wrath, and was made a curse, not 
alone to redeem the Jew, but “that the blessing 
of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through 
Jesus Christ ; that we might receive the promise 
of the Spirit through faith” (ver. 14). 

Long before the giving of the law, it had been 
declared to Abraham, ‘In thee shall all nations 
be blessed.”” ‘‘So, then, they which be of faith 
are blessed with believing Abraham ” (vers. 8,9). 
And so “the Scripture hath concluded all under 
sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ 
might be given to them that believe”’ (ver. 22). 

These Galatians had believed (at least, so the 
apostle hoped, though their readiness to turn 
from Christ to law made him fear for their real- 
ity, chap. iv. 11): by thus trusting in Christ, 
they became ‘‘sons of God” (chap. iii. 26). As 
such, they never had been, nor were they now, 
under the law. 

Before faith came, the Jews were “kept under 
the law, shut up unto the faith which should 
afterwards be revealed” (ver. 23). That faith, 


iB 
Re 
; 
©, 
i 
4 
i a 
‘ 
a 
el ec 
3 
2 
eu 
i. oe 
, ee 
# 
é 
5 
& 
ba 
Ls 
rf 


LI Bit 


aan eke aH p Slt gs ar omy 


90 The only two Religions. 


the precious truth of the gospel, had now come; 
therefore they who believed among the Jewish 
nation were taken out of the place of childhood 
and tutelage, which they had occupied so long, 
and given the full place of sons. ‘‘ When the ful- 
ness of the time was come, God sent forth Ilis 
Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to 
redeem them that were under the law, that we”’ 
(i.e., converted Israelites) ‘‘might receive the 
adoption of sons” (chap. iv. 1-5). 

What, then, of the Gentiles who believed? Ta- 
ken out of heathenism, they had been at one 
time subject to the judgment of God against 
their manifold iniquities; but they had never 
been under the law of Moses at alll Saved 
through grace, they found themselves at once 
in the same position as the redeemed Jew. ‘‘ Be- 
cause ye (i.e., the Gentiles who were converted) 
are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His 
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father”’ 
(ver. 6). 

Why, then, go back to the place from which 
God had delivered believing Jews? Such a step 
was to give up Christianity, to ‘fall from 
grace” (chap. v. 4). It would be setting at 
naught grace, and going back to the yoke of 
bondage. Against this he warns them with all 
the fervor of his soul. 

And yet this is exactly what the mass in 
Christendom have done! Owning with more or 
less clearness that justification somehow de- 


“Who hath bewitched You?” 73 


pends upon the blood of Christ, the one who 
has trusted in that precious blood is put back 
under the law as a rule of life. This has well 
been called “the Galatian heresy.”” He who be- 
witched these saints of apostolic days, has suc- 
ceeded in entangling untold thousands in the 
same yoke of bondage. And this in the face of 
the clear teaching of this trenchant letter to the 
Galatians, and the equally clear instruction of 
the second great section of the epistle to the Ro- 
mans! (See chap. v.12 to the end of chap. viii.) 

The uniform teaching of the inspired apostle 
to the nations is, that ‘“‘I through the law am 
dead to the law, that I might live unto God”’ 
(Gal. ii. 19) That Jaw which slew our Substi- 
tute, has no longer any claim upon us who have 
died to the law. 

But, at once, the question arises, What, then, 
is to be the Christian’s rule of life? Is he to be 
lawless because not underlaw? Assuredly not! 
He has a far higher rule than the Mosaic tables, 
even Christ in glory. ‘For in Christ Jesus nei- 
ther circumcision availeth anything, nor uncir- 
cumcision, but a new creature”’ (or, literally, a 
new creation). “And as many as walk accord- 
ing to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, 
and upon the Israel of God” (chap. vi. 15, 16). 

Here is all the rule that is needed. The be- 
liever is now in the new creation. The law was 
the standard of righteousness for man in the 
flesh, in the old creation. The Head of the new 


2. AANA SAE AN ARE RRA ETA IT EAP TENNER MNS HEISE 


Aarts 


¢ 


92 The only two Religions. 


creation is Christ Himself, risen and glorified, at 
Gou’s right hand. This is the rule of life for the 
child of God. And this is something infinitely 
higher than the ten words given on Sinai, which, 
after all, are never said to be the strength of 
holiness, but distinctly declared to be ‘the 
strength of sin” (1 Cor. xv. 56). 

Occupation with Christ in the glory of God is 
the strength of holiness. Turn your eye, dear 
fellow-believer, not back to Sinai, with its cloud- 
capped top and its fire and smoke, but up to 
heaven, where the Lord Jesus has gone. Let 
the heart be fixed upon Him, and the walk will 
be right. He has become the Mediator of the 
New Testament. Search, then, His Word, and 


seek grace to order your ways in accordance 
with it, which will be joyful service indeed, when 
‘ the heart beats true to Him. 


93 


THE SCRIPTURAL PLACE OF 
GOOD WORKS. 


Tis a great mistake to suppose that because 
salvation cannot be merited by good works, 
the instructed Christian does not believe in 

them. The same apostle who wrote “ This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, 
tha‘ Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners; of whom I am chief” (1 Tim. i. 15), 
also penned another “‘faithful saying” in Titus 
iii. 8: ‘This is a faithful saying, and these 
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that 
they which have believed in God might be care- 
ful to maintain good works. These things are 
good ond profitable unto men.” No one insists 
more earnestly than he on the absolute worth- 
lessness of good works as a procuring-cause of 
justification. On the other hand, he is behind 
none in pressing the necessity of good works 
upon those already saved. The Christian, he 
declares, is ‘created in Christ Jesus unto good 
works, which God hath before ordained that we 
should walk in them” (Eph. ii. 10). Notice the 
preposition—“‘created ... unto” (not by means 
of) “good works.” Right living springs from 


s 
ye 


A UDA Se ATR 


a angarRsenmagt ae 


sagt age 


a 
bad 
¥ 


94 The only two Religions. 


new birth. When born of God, a life is commu- 
nicated that is divine and eternal. This life is 
manifested in obedience. 


‘‘T would not work my soul to save; 
For that my Lord has done. 
But I would work like any slave, 
For love to God’s dear Son.” 


If this be not the motive, there can be but 
“dead works.”’ The only true good works are 
the fruit of the new life, springing from affection 
for Him who has said, ‘‘If a man love Me, he 
wili keep My words.” 

Has the reader given up all pretension to hu- 


man merit? Has he ceased to look for blessing 
on the ground of his own righteousness? This 
is repentance: to own oneself lost and guilty, 
deserving of naught but judgment. If such is 
the ground you have taken, do you now trust 
alone in Him whose precious blood was shed to 
atone for all your black and dreadful sins? Oh, 
be assured, if such is the case, that all your guilt 
is forever put away. ‘“‘To Him give all the 
prophets witness, that through His name who- 
soever believeth in Him shall receive remission 
of sins’’ (Acts x. 43). There can be no uncer- 
tainty about it. Every believer has been eter- 
nally forgiven, because of what the Lord Jesus 
accomplished, when He died to put away sin by 
the sacrifice of Himself. 


The Scriptural place of Good Works. 95 


If thus able to rejoice in present, perfect justifi- 
cation by pure grace, you are now free to devote 
your life to good works, and thus to evidence 
the gratitude of your heart to Him whose lov- 
ing-kindness has brought you into blessing so 
wondrous. But your works will be the obedi- 
ence of a child to a Father, not the toil of a serv- 
ant seeking to win the favor of a master. Ow- 
ing all to Him who has redeemed you, your walk 
and ways in this world will testify that your 
heart is true to the One whose grace has 
saved. 

So may it be with reader and writer till called 
into His own blessed presence! 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, 68 FOURTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, 


