HAROLD  B.  LEE  LIBRARY

BRJGHAM  YOUnG  UNIVESSITY

PROVO, UTAH


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet17newy


THB


§xtMktt*s  Complete  ^omikttcal

COMMENTARY


ON  THE


OLD   TESTAMENT

coir  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN).


m


VARIOUS  AUTHORS.


Wrto  Torft

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

2892


THE


PREACHER'S     COMMENTARY


ON  THE  BOOK  OP


JEREMIAH.


CONTAINING  :-


EXEGESIS :  Supplying  Expository  Kotes  to  each  Chapter  on  Chronology,
Contemporaneous  History,  National  Affah's,  Geography,  Manners  and
Customs,  Literary     Criticisms,   &c.

H0MILETIC8 :  Consisting  of  over  Eight  Hundred  (mostly  original)  Outlines
and   Breviates   on  the    Sections,    Topics,  or  Verses  of  each  Chapter.

ILLUSTRATIONS :   Furnishing  Side-lights  on  the  Homiletic  Themes.


BY  THE


REY.  W.    H.    JELLIE,

AUTHOK   OF  "  CROWDS   OF  THE  BIBLE,"  ETC.


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  &  Toronto

1892


THE    L

PROVO,  UTAH  ^-^S^TV


PREFACE.


Many  of  tTie  choicest  hours  of  the  past  five  years  have  teen  devoted  to  tne
production  of  this  Homiletic  Commentary  on  Jeremiah.

Judging  from  the  surprisingly  few  sermons  or  outlines  on  texts  in  Jere-
miah unth  which  our  search  through  homiletic  literature  for  aid  in  compiling
this  volume  was  rewarded,  it  would  seem  that  this  inspired  hook  has  been  to
most  preachers  an  untraversed,  or  at  best  an  unfrequented,  path.  Owing  tc
this  notable  scarcity  of  material,  the  task  of  preparing  thi'  Commentary  hat
been  proportionately  greater ;  for  there  has  been  hut  slight  opportunity,  in  this
respect,  "  to  boa^t  in  another  man's  line  of  things  made  ready  to  our  hand  *'
(2  Cor.  X.  16).

Notuntlistanding  this  paucity  of  resources,  this  volume  'mil  he  found  to
contain,  in  brief  or  fuller  form,  about  eight  hundred  and  fifty  outlines  for
sermons.  And,  that  it  may  be  understood  to  what  extent  this  Commentary
is  a  creation  rather  than  a  compilation  of  homilies  on  Jeremiah,  it  may  be
added,  that  of  these  eight  hundred  and  fifty  outlines,  it  has  been  our  personal
part  of  the  labour  to  construct  no  fewer  than  four  hundred  and  seventy
homiletic  plans  upon  texts  in  Jeremiah,  which  appear,  so  far  as  literature
affords  evidence,  to  have  been  hitherto  left  by  preachers  unused.

Thus,  in  addition  to  nearly  five  hundred  original  outlines,  this  volume
contains  over  three  hundred  which  have  either  been  condensed  from  printed
sermons  by  renowned  preachers,  or  supplied  by  ministers  whose  aid  was
sought  in  order  to  bring  variety  into  the  "  Commentary!*  The  sources  of  help
include  the  Rev.  Andrew  Fuller,  Dr.  Chalmers,  James  Sherman,  C.  H,
Spurgeon,  T.  B.  Power,  M.A.,  W,  Hay  M.  E.  Aitken,  Robert  Hall,  W.  H.
Murray  M'Cheyne,  Samuel  Martin,  J.  Kennedy,  M.A.,  D.D,,  Bishop  Regirvald
Heber,  Dean  Alford,  Dr.  Jabez  Burns,  Charles  Simeon,  M,A.,  Dr,  Guthrie,
"  A.  K.  H.  B.,"  John  Foster,  Archbishop  Tillotson,  Payson,  T.  Gordon,  B.D,,
Dr.  South,  Job  Orton,  D.D.,  Edward  Dorr  Griffin,  D.D.,  Henry  Ward  Beecher,
Stephen  H.  Tyng,  De  Witt  Talmage,  President  Davies,  Albert  Barnes,  8,
Baker,  D.D.,  E.  Jarman,  W.  Whale,  S.  Thodey,  J,  Farren,  W.  Forsyth,
Matthew  Henry,  Hannam's  *'  Pulpit  Assistant,"  "  The  HomUist,**  Brooks*
" Plans,"  and  Origen's  " Homilies"  Where  no  name  is  fawnd  at  the  foot  of
an  outline,  it  indicates  that  the  work  is  origin^.

Reference  to  the  Comments,  which  are  interwoven  with  the  outlines,  wiU
show  that  the  most  apt  and  helpful  suggestions  which  English  and  foreign
scholarship  has  afforded  respecting  the  meaning  of  verses  have  been  i/ntro^


PREFACE.

dueed  ;  and  the  touree  of  tht  eomment,  if  harrowed,  i$  in  aU  cases  acJcnovh
ledged.

It  may  he  hoped,  without  immodesty ,  that  m/iny  a  sttuzent  and  preacher
may  find  encouragement  and  stimulus  from  this  "  Commentary  "  to  preach
more  freely  from  themes  in  this  suggestive  and  admonitory  "  hook  of  prophecy  ;**
for,  indeed,  many  of  the  messages  of  Jeremiah — faithful,  pensive,  rousing—^
are  scarcely  less  suited  to  our  age  than  to  his  own.

In  the  production  of  the  volume  one  hope  and  aim  has  ruled — that  every
text  in  Jeremiah  on  which  it  seemed  possible  that  a  sermon  could  he  based
should  he  forced  to  give  up  its  richest  meaning  and  most  practical  hints ;  so
that  no  preacher  shall  turn  to  the  homilies  in  this  "  Commentary  "for  help  on
any  verse  in  Jeremiah  without  finding  here  valuable  aids  to  thought  and
sermon  preparation.

The  Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes  heading  the  chapters  are  intended  to
supply  all  needful  informxition  for  the  satisfactory  exposition,  during  public
reading,  of  each  chapter.  The  Sectional  treatment  of  whole  paragraphs  may
help  to  a  broader  survey  of  the  main  themes  contained  in  each  prophetic  mes-
sage than  can  be  gained  hy  isolating  every  verse.  The  Homilies  and  Outlines
on  successive  verses  udll  offer  hints  for  sermons  on  every  single  text  which
appeared  to  hold  a  homiletic  theme.  The  Noticeable  Topics  which  follow  this
verse-by-verse  treatment  of  each  chapter  supply  more  lengthened  outlines  on
texts  of  special  significance.  The  Addenda  Section  to  each  chapter  supplies
"  Illustrations  and  Suggestive  Extracts  "  likely  to  he  useful  in  illu/minating
or  enforcing  texts  to  which  they  apply.

The  threefold  index  will  render  reference  to  any  topic  prompt  and  easy.

In  sending  out  this  volume  to  fellow-workers  in  the  broad  fields  of  Chris-
tian ministry  and  Scripture-teaching,  the  prayer  is  in  our  heart  that  the
Divine  "  lord  of  His  servants "  may  condescend  to  use  even  this  product  of
our  patient  studies  as  one  channel  along  which  to  answer  the  cry  addressed
at  times  hy  all  wearied  or  perplexed  workers  to  Him : —

"  Lord,  give  me  light  to  do  Thy  toork.
For  only,  Lord,  from  Thee
Can  come  the  light  by  which  these  eyes
The  vfork  of  Truth  can  teej*

W.  H.  JELLIE.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY


ov


JEREMIAH.


INTEODUCTORT.
L

PERSONAL  CAREER  OF  THE  PROPHET.

L  Parentage  and  calling.  Hilkiah,  his  father,  was  a  priest  of  the  honse  of
Dhamar  (Keil),  (1  Kings  ii  26),  of  Fhinehas  (Wordsworth) y  (1  Chron.  vi  13),
residing  in  the  sacerdotal  city  Anathoth  (now  called  Anata),  situate  within  easy
distance  of  Jerusalem,  **  about  three  Roman  miles  north  "  (Jerome).

(a.)  His  birth  was  an  incident  of  great  domestic  joy  (xx.  15).  (b.)  Called  to  the
prophetic  office,  according  to  Lange  and  Bishop  Wordsworth,  B.C.  627  ;  Keil  and
Dr.  William  Smith  use  the  more  recently  established  chronology,  and  give  the  date
as  B.C.  629  ;  but  the  '*  Speaker's  Commentary"  points  out  tljat  the  discovery  of  the
Assyrian  cuneiform  inscriptions  bearing  upon  the  Assyrian  period  ot  Jewish  history
shows  an  entirely  altered  series  of  dates,  which  fix  the  year  of  Jeremiah's  call,  *'  the
thirteenth  of  Josiah,"  as  B.C.  608.  (c.)  Quite  young  wJien  designated,  to  his  sacred
work,  "  a  child  "  (Jer.  i.  6).  (d.)  His  mission  was  defined  as  both  destructive  and
constructive  (i.  10) ;  should  be  devoted  to  Judah  yet  extend  to  other  nations.
(«.)  He  was  located  at  Jerusalem  (ii.  2),  yet  travelled  through  the  provinces  (xi.  6),
and  frequented  hia  native  town  in  fulfilment  of  his  prophetic  ministry.  (/.)  His
work  was  to  follow  up  Josiah's  outward  national  reformation  by  calling  Judah  to
true  repentance  and  renewal  of  heart  and  life.  But  the  crisis  in  which  he  lived
involved  him  in  all  the  political  tumults  and  disasters  which  gathered  upon  his
nation.  f

IL  Temperament  and  character.  Instinctively  tender  and  retiring,  shrinking
from  pubUc  life  and  political  prominence  (ix.  2),  keenly  sensitive  to  misinterpre-
tation and  injustice,  sympathetic  with  his  nation's  sorrows,  afitected  even  to  suffering
by  the  criminality  he  witnessed  and  denounced,  yet,  with  a  patriotism  glowing  and
inflexible,  clinging  to  his  doomed  nation  and  land  to  the  last  (xL  4-6).  So  peace-
ful was  his  nature  that  antagonism  dismayed  him  (xx.  8,  9) ;  even  at  times  inclin-
ing him  to  suppress  the  severer  portions  of  his  Divine  message  (xxvi.  2).  Never-
theless, amid  all  the  hardships  and  sufferings  of  his  work,  he  became  evermore
unremitting  in  his  diligence,  unswerving  in  his  fidelity,  and  intrepid  in  the  discharge
of  his  prophetic  functions — alike  before  kings  and  nobles,  priests  and  populace.
"  More  of  a  John  than  a  Peter." — Lange,  "He  was  no  second  Elijah." — Hengsten-
herg,  "  The  most  sympathetic  of  the  prophets." — Gregory  Naziam,  "  A  kind  of
feminine  tenderness  and  susceptibility." — Maurice,  "  But  his  weakness,  timidity,
and  impatience  belong  to  the  earlier  stage  of  his  career.  As  his  sufferings  became
more  intense  he  received  more  grace,  gained  fresh  courage,  and  derived  inspiration
from  difficulty  and  dap|rer" — Wordsiod'^h,


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


TEL  Scenes  of  his  prophetic  work.  Called  to  his  office  in  the  thirteenth  year  of
Josiah,  he  immediately  delivered  \n&  first  prophecy  in  Jerusalem  (ii.  2).  In  the  eight-
eenth of  Josiah  the  Book  of  the  Law  was  found,  and  the  king,  eager  for  prophetic
counsel,  sent  his  state  representatives  to  Huldah  the  prophetess.  Jeremiah  must  there-
fore have  been  absent  from  Jerusalem,  or  he  would  have  been  sought ;  but  as  "  the
king's  business  required  haste,"  and  as  Huldah  was  resident  at  Jerusalem,  she  was
consulted.  Yet  Jeremiah  was  not  far  distant,  for  his  second  prophecy  was  now
delivered  before  the  assembly  which  the  king  summoned  (2  Chron.  xxziv.  29).
Most  probably  he  resided  at  Anathoth  during  the  first  five  years,  retiring  thither
immediately  he  had  uttered  his  first  prophecy  in  the  hearing  of  Jerusalem.  Being
near,  he  could  quickly  appear  on  the  scene  when  the  Book  of  the  Law  was  found ;
and  he  then  came  with  his  second  message  (iii.  6).  His  naturally  timid  and  retiring
disposition  might  have  rendered  necessary  that  royal  summons  ere  he  would  appear
in  Jerusalem  again.  For  during  that  residence  of  five  years  at  Anathoth  he  endured
no  little  abuse  and  misjudgment  from  the  "men  of  Anathoth"  (xi.  21),  making  him
reluctant,  unless  constrained,  to  resume  his  prophetic  functions.

After  these  ^vd  years  at  Anathoth,  he  seems  to  have  received  God's  command  to
travel  through  "  the  cities  of  Judah "  (xi.  6),  and,  returning  on  his  way  through
Anathoth,  his  townsmen,  exasperated  by  his  bold  reproofs  of  their  guilt,  conspired
against  his  life  (xi.  21).

From  this  time  he  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  during  a  period  of  thirty-five  or  thirty-
six  years  proclaiming  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  temple  (xxvi.  1  sq.),  in  the
gates  of  the  city  (xviL  19),  in  prison  (xxxii.  2),  in  the  king^t  hoiise  (xxii.  1,  xxxvii.
17),  in  the  potter's  house  (xviii.  1),  and  the  valley  of  Hinnom  (xix.  2),  until  the
Chaldean  captivity  led  him  away  to  Egypt.

In  Egypt  he  spent  the  concluding  years  of  his  prophetic  life.

IV.  Treatment  he  received  from  his  nation.  For  twenty-two  years  during
Josiah's  reign,  and  under  his  royal  protection,  his  mission  was  free  from  special
hardship,  excepting  the  Anathoth  antagonism.  Jehoahaz  seems  to  have  allowed
him  to  prophesy  unopposed,  but  heeded  him  not.  Throughout  the  eleven  years  of
Jehoiakim^s  reign  he  was  maltreated  and  imperilled  (xxvi.)  The  next  king,
Jehoiakin,  received  his  admonitory  denunciations  without  resentment  or  molesta-
tion. Indignity  and  abuse  reached  their  culmination  under  Zedekiah.  With
implacable  hostility  the  princes  and  priests  persecuted  him  (xxxviii.  4),  and  the
king  could  not  restrain  them.  He  was  imprisoned  on  a  fictitious  charge  (xxxvii
11  sq.\  "endured  all  sorts  of  torments  and  tortures"  (Josephus),  nor  regained  his
liberty  during  the  entire  period,  eleven  years,  of  Zedekiah's  reign.  Ultimately,  it
is  believed,  he  fell  a  martyr  at  the  hands  of  his  own  countrymen  in  Egypt.

V.  Length  of  his  official  ministry.

a.  It  began  when  he  was  very  young,  "a  child"  (i.  6).  The  word  "1^^,  "a  boy,*
is  used  for  infant  (Exod.  ii.  2),  and  also  of  Joseph  when  he  was  seventeen  years  old
(comp.  Gen.  xxxvii.  2  with  xli.  12).  Maurice  accepts  the  word  as  denoting  "  almost
a  child  ; "  "  young  enough  to  make  the  most  literal  sense  of  the  text  reasonable.'*
Lange  suggests  twenty  years ;  Thwnley  Smith  eighteen  to  twenty ;  Bagster  fourteen,
so  also  the  Rabbins.

b.  It  continued  among  his  people  before  the  Captivity  for  forty  and  a  half  year$
(i.  2,  3) ;  i.e.,  under  Josiah  eighteen  years,  Jehoahaz  three  months,  Jehoiakim  eleven
years,  Jehoiakin  three  months,  and  Zedekiah  eleven  years.

c.  It  was  carried  on  in  Egypt,  first  at  Tahpanhes  (xliii.  8),  and  "  ten  years  later
Pathros  (xli v.  1),  in  Upper  Egypt,  where,  at  a  festival  of  the  Moabitish  goddess,
Astarte,  Jeremiah  for  the  last  time  raised  his  prophetic  voice  in  warning  and
rebuke." — Lange.  It  is  certain  that  he  lived  some  years  in  Egypt,  till  about  B.O.
580  (Br.  Smith),  570  (Lange).  His  labours  therefore  must  have  extended  over
fifty  years,  thus  showing  that

d.  His   prophetic  ministrj  was  prolonged  till  he  wa$  aboui    probably  over

2


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


teventp  years  of  age  [Lange  computes  it  as  seventy-seven].  According  to  Jerome,
TertuUian,  and  Pseudo-Epiphanius,  he  was  stoned  to  death  at  Tahpanhes  (Daphne
of  Egypt) ;  and  his  sepulchre  used  to  be  pointed  out  near  Cairo.

VI.  Contemporaneous  prophets.  Nahum  (dr.  b.o.  625,  onwards).  Zephaniah
"in  the  days  of  Josiah"  (Zeph.  i.  1;  from  B.C.  642-611).  Huldah,  also  in
Josiah's  time  (2  Kings  xxii.  14).  Habakkuky  probably  about  the  twelfth  or
thirteenth  year  of  Josiah  (dr.  B.C.  630,  Dr.  Smith :  Lange  suggests  Jehoiakim's
reign).  Daniel^  carried  to  Babylon  "  in  the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim "  (Dan.  i,
1,  B.C.  604).  Urijah,  during  Jehoiakim's  reign  (b.c.  608-597),  and  slain  by  the
king  (Jer.  xxvi.  20-23),  Ezekielf  "  in  the  fifth  year  of  King  Jehoiakiu's  captivity  "
(Ezek.  L  2 ;  B.C.  595).

IL

STRUCTURE  AND  SCOPE  OF  HIS  PROPHECIEa

I.  Leading  topics,  (a.)  His  prophetic  programme  was  simple ;  its  central
theme,  the  coming  supremacy  of  the  Chaldean  nation :  and  this  at  a  time  when
nothing  was  feared  from  Babylon,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  was  unknown,  when  Egypt
vk  as  ascendant  and  Pharaoh-necho  the  terror  of  Judah.  He  foretold  the  overthrow
of  the  Jewish  nation  by  this  power  from  "  the  North ; "  defined  the  term  of  the
Chaldean  ascendancy  and  Judah's  captivity,  and  predicted  the  emancipation  of
Judah  and  restoration  of  Jerusalem  when  the  seventy  years  had  expired,  (6.)  The
design  of  his  prophecies  was  threefold  :

a.  To  forewarn  the  Jews  of  impending  doom  on  account  of  national  pollution
and  apostasy.

iS.  To  invite  them  to  repentance,  promising  immediate  Divine  forgiveness  and
ultimate  redemption  from  Babylon.

y.  To  assure  the  godly  among  them  by  predictions  of  Messiah's  gracious
advent,  and  the  spiritual  blessings  incident  to  His  reign.

IL  Literary  style.  The  book  is  an  admixture  of  prosaic  narrative  of  events,  and
poetic  utterances  of  prophecy.  While  his  style  in  the  narrative  parts  may  some-
times appear  unpolished  [*'  rusticior,"  Jero7ne\  the  poetic  portions  are  often  distin-
guished by  an  eloquence  at  once  vigorous  and  sublime.  His  writings  throughout
are  characterised  by  a  reiteration  of  imagery  and  phrase,  and  a  ruggedness  of  form
natural  to  impassioned  sorrow  and  indignant  remonstrance.  Though  there  are
marks  of  **  negligence  in  diction  "  (Keil\  and  while  *'  not  disregarding  art  alto-
gether, he  has  far  less  polish  than  Isaiah  "  (Lange) ;  yet  **  his  thought  is  ever  rich,
and  his  speech  incisive  and  clear"  (Keil) ;  whilst  "  of  all  the  prophets  his  genius
is  the  most  poetical "  (Umhriet).

III.  Composition  and  compilation.  His  prophetic  utterances  were  first  com-
mitted to  writing  at  the  command  of  Jehovah  "  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  *'
(xxxvi.  1),  for  the  purpose  of  their  being  read  in  the  Temple  by  Baruch  the  scribe
at  the  approaching  national  fast.  The  king,  incensed  by  their  contents,  destroyed
the  roll.  They  were  immediately  rewritten ;  Jeremiah  dictating  them  afresh
to  Baruch,  with  important  additions  (xxxvi.  32).  Otiier  portions,  subsequent  to
this  date  (4th  of  Jehoiakim — 11th  of  Zedekiah,  over  eighteen  years)  were  written
at  different  intervals  in  separate  parts  (xxx.  2,  xxix,  1,  li.  60).  The  entire  hook,
therefore,  includes  the  roll  written  by  Baruch,  the  various  fragments  penned  by
Jeremiah,  with  subsequent  additions  by  the  prophet,  either  while  he  lingered  in
Palestine  under  Gedaliah,  or  while  in  Egypt  among  his  exiled  people.  The  com-
plete prophecies  would  speak  with  accumulated  emphasis  to  the  heedless  captives  of
the  steadfastness  of  God's  word  and  the  consequences  of  disregarding  His  voice,

IV.  Order  and  arrangement,  (a.)  Chronologically  the  book  is  in  disorder  and
confusion ;  e.g.,  xxi.  and  xxiv,  8-10,  belong  to  Zedekiah's  time,  the  latest  king ;
while  xxii.  11, 12,  refer  to  Jehoahaz,  the  second  king;  and  XZY.  deals  with  Jehoiakim,

3


HOMILBTW  COMUENTART :  JEREMIAH,


the  third  king.  Distinct  prophecies  are  mingled  together  regardless  of  date  of
delivery.  (6.)  Topically^  there  is  arrangement:  the  book  divides  itself  into  two
sections  according  to  the  reference  of  the  prophecies.  Thus,  L  to  xlv.  relate  to  the
prophet's  own  country;  :dvi.  to  IL  to  foreign  nations;  while  liL  is  a  historic
account  of  the  captivity  appended  after  the  whole  book,  i.— IL,  was  put  together,
and  the  inscription,  i  1-3,  written.  This  might  have  been  the  latest  act  of  Jeremiah
himself.

V.  Genuineness  and  canonicity.  (a.)  The  prophet's  individuality  is  so  impressed
on  his  writings  as  to  disarm  suspicion  of  their  authenticity,  "  His  prophecies  are
his  autobiography." —  Wordsworth,  The  expression,  attitude,  and  colouring  of  the
whole  book  i^Ewald)  show  the  same  author.  [For  critical  comparison  of  the  dis-
crepancies between  the  LXX.  and  Hebrew  text,  see  Keil,  Lange,  Henderson,  and  Dr.
Smith.]  (6.)  The  canonicity  i^  vindicated  by  New  Testatment  allusions  to  Jeremiah
and  his  writings  (Matt,  ii.  17,  xvi.  14,  Heb.  viii.  8-12),  and  by  the  list  of  canonical
books  in  Melito,  Origen,  Jerome,  and  the  Talmud.  Ecclesiasticus  (xlix.  7)  quotes
Jer.  i  10,  and  Philo  affirms  that  the  prophet  was  an  "oracle."

VI,  Verification  of  the  prophecies.

a.  During  Jeremiah^i  life,  his  predictions  were  fulfilled  in —

(a)  The  captivity  of  Jehoiakia  and  his  queen-mother  (xxil  24-26  ;  ef,  2  Kings
xxiv.  12).

(j8)  The  death  of  Hananiah,  the  deceitful  prophet,  at  the  time  foretold  (xxviiL
15-17).

(7)  The  inglorious  end  and  shameful  burial  of  Jehoiakim  (xxiL  18,  19,
xxxvi.  30).

ih)  The  fate  of  Zedekiah  (xxxii.  2,  3 ;  c/I  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  19,  and  Jer.  lii.  11).

(e)  The  invasion  of  Judah  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  Jewish  captivity  (xx,
4,  (fee).

[&)  The  rifling  of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (xxvii.  19-22).

m)  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  fire  (xxi.  10,  xxxii.  29,  xxxvii.  8-10).

(i)  The  Chaldean  subjugation  of  Egypt  (xliii.  10-12,  xliv.  29,  30);  and
supremacy  over  surrounding  nations  (xxvii  1-8).

b.  After  the  prophefs  decease  :

(a)  The  termination  of  the  Babylonish  captivity  after  seventy  years  (xzv,  11 ;
see  Dan.  ix.  2).

ijS)  The  return  of  the  Jews  Jo  their  own  country  (xxix.  10-14).
y)  The  downfall  and  desolation  of  Babylon,  and  date  of  the  event  (xxv.  12),

(h)  The  advent  of  Messiah  (xxiii.  3-8,  xxxl  31-34,  xxxiii.  6-9,  1.  4,  5).

Those  prophecies,  seen  by  exiled  Judah  fulfilled  in  their  most  literal  form,  effected
a  complete  revolution  in  the  esteem  with  which  Jeremiah  became  cherished.  His
predictions  of  their  deliverance  and  restoration,  and  his  promises  of  Messiah,  upheld
their  most  patriotic  and  ardent  hopes ;  and  he,  whom  they  had  molested  as  the
herald  of  their  national  doom,  became  revered  as  the  evangel  of  their  redemption.
Legends  gathered  around  his  name  investing  him  with  an  ideal  glory.  The  Jews
who  returned  from  their  captivity  regarded  him  as  "•  gr^of^njf,"  even  in  the  sense
and  as  the  fulfilment  of  Deut.  xviii.  18,  and  believed  he  would  reappear  as  the  fore-
runner of  Messiah — a  belief  which  survived  the  interval,  and  of  which  we  have
traces  in  New  Testament  times  (Matt.  xvi«  14  j  John  L  21,  tl  14,  yii  40).


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  MI AR.  ohaf.  l


CHAPTER  L

Obitioal  and  Exeobtioal  Notbs.— 1.  Chronologf,  Yer.  1-8,  penned  or.  B.O.  678 ;  rer.  4,
tg.  B.O.  629.  But  the  recently  discovered  Assyrian  chronology  would  make  the  date  of  the
"thirteenth  of  Josiah"  to  be  B.C.  608.

2.  Gotemporary  Scriptures.  2  Kings  xxii.  1,  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  1-7.  Books  of  Habakkuk
and  Zephaniah.

3.  Historic  Facts.  Judah  tributary  to  Assur-Banipal,  king  of  Assyria;  yet  the  kingdom  at
rest :  for  her  northern  foe,  Assyria,  had  ceased  invasions  since  Sennacherib's  overthrow  (2  Kings
xix.  36,  36,  B.C.  710) ;  and  her  touthem  foe,  Egypt,  was  engrossed  and  disabled  from  aggression
by  intestine  wars.  Josiah  had  reigned  thirteen  years ;  began  religious  reformation  of  Judah
B.O.  634 ;  was  vigorously  prosecuting  it  when  Jeremiah  began  his  prophetic  ministry,  B.C.  629
(or,  according  to  Assyrian  chronology,  B.O.  608).

4.  Gotemporary  History.  General  outline  :  International  ascendancy  had  been  temporarily
with  Assyria  (cm  680-640)  during  the  reigns  of  Esar-Haddon  and  Assur-Banipal :  Saracus  saw
its  overthrow.  Judah  was  tributary  to  Assyria  when  Josiah  reigned.  During  the  thirty-one
years  of  Saracus,  Assyrian  power  was  being  undermined  by  the  defection  of  its  chief  province,
Babylonia,  over  which  Nabopolassar  was  appointed  governor  by  Saracus,  and  this  at  a  time  when
Egypt  was  consolidating  its  power  under  Psammeticus  (B.C.  664),  and  thus  menacing  Assyria.
The  Median  empire  was  founded  in  the  sixth  year  of  Josiah's  reign  (B.C.  633),  by  Cyaxares,
the  Ahasuerus  of  Dan.  ix.  1.  Four  years  after  Jeremiah  began  his  mission  (B.C.  625),  Baby-
lonia, under  Nabopolassar,  rose  in  revolt  against  Assyria,  aided  by  Cyaxares  with  his  Median
forces,  took  Nineveh,  and  thereby  overthrew  the  Assyrian  domination,  and  with  it  the  empire,
on  whose  ruins  rose  the  Babylonian  empire,  Nabopolassar  its  king.  To  him  Judah's  tributary
dependence  was  now  transferred.  Egypt*  under  Psammeticus'  successor,  Pharaoh- Necho,  then
rose  against  Babylonia,  and,  by  victorious  war  at  Charchemish,  claimed  a  short-lived  interna-
tional ascendancy.  [Josiah  succeeded  by  Jehoahaz.]  This  defeat  was  soon  redressed  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, son  and  successor  to  Nabopolassar,  in  a  decisive  conquest  over  Egypt  at  Charche-
mish, whereupon  he  became  monarch  of  the  all-powerful  Chaldean  dynasty.  Judah,  having
been  subject  to  Egypt,  was  then  reduced  to  vassalage  under  Chaldean  supremacy.

6.  Geographical  References.  Ver.  1.  ^* Anathotk,  in  land  of  Benjamin"  {cf.  1  Chron.  vi.
60).  Situate  on  or  near  the  great  road  from  the  north  to  Jerusalem  {Dr.  Smith);  =  An^ta,
1\  hour  distant  N.N.E.  of  Jerusalem  {Robinson).  Remains  existing  of  walls  and  strong  founda-
tions. "  A  poor  village  of  only  about  twenty  housefl/' — Dr.  Pqrter.  Ver.  15.  "  Families  of  the
kingdoms  of  the  North  ;  "  denoting  the  "  numerous  tribes  or  smaller  nations  of  which  the  king-
doms forming  the  Babylonian  empire  were  composed.'*  This  description  is  itself  a  prophecy
of  the  compound  elements,  the  admixture  of  petty  nationalities,  which  would  constitute  the
(then  non-existing,  but  destined  to  become)  ascendant  Chaldean  dynasty.

6.  Personal  Allusions.  Ver.  1.  ^^  Jeremiah"  see  Introduction,  p.  1.  "  HiUdoJi"  idem.,  also
Literary  Criticisms  below.  Ver.  2.  ^*  Amon,  king  of  Judah,"  son  and  successor  of  Manasseh,
reigned  two  years,  B.O.  642-640,  killed  in  a  conspiracy  (2  Chron.  xxidii.  21-24).  "Josiah,"  a
most  religious  king  (2  Kings  xxiii.  25).  Ascended  throne  in  eighth  year,  awoke  to  religious
life  and  divine  claims  in  sixteenth  year  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3,  B.C.  634),  commenced  reformation
of  Judah  in  twentieth  year  (B.C.  630),  restored  Temple  services,  re-established  worship  of
Jehovah,  and  cleansed  the  land  of  flagrant  vice  and  idolatry.  Book  of  the  Law  found  during
Temple  restoration.  Reigned  thirty-one  years;  during  the  latter  eighteen  years  Jeremiah  pro-
phesied in  Jerusalem.  Fell  in  war  at  Megiddo  when  resisting  Pharaoh- Neoho,  king  of  Egypt,
in  his  advance  upon  Assyria  (B.O.  610).  Ewald  conjectures  that  Psalm  lix.  was  composed  by
Josiah  during  a  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Scythians.  "  Jehoiakim  "  (see  infra),  "  He  was  an  im-
pious man,  and  impure  in  his  course  of  life." — Josephus.  The  nation,  fearing  his  despotic
character,  passed  him  by,  and  elected  Josiah's  second  son,  Jehoahaz,  as  king.  But  Pharaoh-
Necho,  returning  after  three  months  from  Assyria  (war  at  Charchemish),  deposed  Jehoahaa
and  enthroned  Jehoiakim  as  dependent  king.  Reigned  eleven  years ;  slain  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
the  then  all-conquering  monarch  of  Chaldea  (b.c.  599).  ** Zedekiah"  (see  infra)  followed
Jehoiachin,  son  of  Jehoiakim,  he  reigning  only  three  months  and  ten  days.  He  was  the  yoifngest
son  of  Josiah,  name  Mattaniah  ;  placed  on  throne  by  Nebuchadnezzar  as  his  vassal,  who  named
him  Zedekiah.  "  A  despiser  of  justice  and  duty." — Josephus.  "  Not  so  much  bad  at  heart  as
weak  in  will." — Dr.  Smith,  In  eleventh  year  of  his  reign,  his  Chaldean  master  ravaged
Jerusalem,  put  out  the  king's  eyes,  and  carried  him,  with  the  nation,  into  Babylonian
captivity  (B.C.  588).

7.  Natural  History.    Ver.  11,  **Jtod  of  an  almond-tree."    Lua  (^7),  the  wUd  tree  (Qen.  xxx.

87) ;  shaked  C^^J^)  the  cultivaUd,  here  mentioned  :  so  suggests  Rosenmoller.    Earliest  tree  to

bloom  ;  in  January  {KiUo),  Resembles  peach-tree  in  leaves  and  blossoms  ;  bears  white  flower
(allusion  made  in  Eccles.  xiL  5)  ;  and  almonds,  ^ich  *'in  the  warm  southern  latitude  mature
in  March  '*  {PaxUm).

8.  Manners  and  Gnstoms.  Ver.  \Z.**  A  seething  pot,"  a  large  caldron  used  for  cooking  pur-
poses (2  Kings  iv.  38  ;  Esek.  xziT.  d-5).    Ver.  15.  *'Sa  hi*  throne  at  the  entering  of  the  gate.*'

6


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


Inside  the  gates  of  Oriental  cities  wide  covered  streets  or  squares  were  and  are  found :  these
were — {a.)  places  of  concourte  (Neh.  viii.  1) ;  (6.)  of  merchandise  (2King8vii.  1) ;  (c.)  of  judicial
administration  (Deut.  xvi.  18,  xvii.  2,  xxv.  7 ;  Amos  v.  10,  12,  15)  ;  {d.)  of  royal  judgment  (2
Sam.  xix.  8,  xv.  2) ;  (e.)  of  court  councils  (1  Kings  xxii.  10  8q.).  Possessing  the  gate  implied
dominion  (Gen.  xx.  17  ;  Isa.  xxiv.  12).  These  words  were  literally  fulfilled;  see  Jer.  xxxix.  3.
[Refer  to  "Land  and  Book,"  pp.  26-28.]

9,  Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  1-3.  **  Words  of  Jeremiahy^*  &c.  The  title  to  the  entire
book;  not  merely  to  Baruch's  roll,  which  ends  with  Jehoiakim's  reign  (ch.  xxxvi.  12).  Yet
Henderson  suggests  Baruch's  authorship.  Michadis  thinks  Jeremiah  prefixed  them  to  the
whole  collection  of  his  prophecies  ere  he  gave  them  to  his  captive  countrymen  to  carry  with
them  to  Babylon.  But  Lange  remaiks  that  the  book  contains  prophecies  of  later  date  than
Zedekiah  (ch.  xl.-xliv.),  and  supposes  Jeremiah  cairied  on  the  writing,  under  Gedaliah,  or  in
Egypt.  Ver.  1.  **  Hilkiah  of  the  pnests."  Clement  Alex.,  Jerome,  Eichhorn,  Umbriet,  and
others,  think  him  the  high  priest  of  that  name  (2  Kings  xxii.  4);  but  Henderson,  Words-
worth, Keil,  &c.,  object,  for  the  name  was  a  common  one;  and  the  high  priest  was  limited  to
the  line  of  Eleazar  and  the  house  Phineas,  not  Abiathar  ;  and  the  high  priest  would  live  at
Jerusalem,  not  Anathoth  ;   moreover,    he  would   have  been  "  designated  by  the  appellative

71  liln  injn^  the  high  priest,  or  at  least  l'^'^'-',  the  priest,  by  way  of  eminence ;  **  instead
"of  the  priests  at  Anathoth."  Yet  Lange  thinks  "it  is  possible,  but  cannot  be  proved,"  he  was
Hilkiah  who  found  the  "Book  of  the  Law; "  while  the  "Speaker's  Commentary  "  affirms  that  be-
yond a  doubt  he  was  the  high  priest.  Ver.  4.  "TAcn  the  word;"  TAther  And  or  Now ;  a  conjunc-
tion, not  adv.  of  time.  Ver.  5.  *^  Sanctified  thee."  Hendersony  *' separated  trowL  a  common  to
special  purpose;"  Keil^  **  consecrated;^'  but  Gesenius  points  to  this  passage  as  illustrating  the
Piel  significance  of  ^"JP,  **to  declare  anyone  holy.'*  Ver.  6.  **  I  cannot  speak,  for  I  am  a
child."  Sharpe  translates,  "  I  know  not  how  to  speak,  for  I  am  a  youth."  Keilj  "  I  know  not
how  to  speak,  for  I  am  too  young  "  (1  Kings  iii.  7).  The  Rabbins  understood  by  '<*J  a  boy
in  his  fourteenth  year.     Ver.  11.  **  A  rod  of  an  almond-tree."     Three  interpretations  of    m7.^>

for  here  is  a  noticeable  paronomasia  ;  "  I  see  "     'l^^  »  "Thou  hast  well  seen,  for  I  will    '1^*^,
&c.     Jerom£,  *'  a  watchful  twig  ; "  a  twig  whose  eyes  are  open,  whose  buds  have  burst ;  denot-
ing God  would  be  *' watchful"  over  Hia  word;  it  should  not  fail.      Keil,   "a  wakeful  rod,"
suggestive  of  alacrity,  haste;  for  God  would  quickly  perform  His  word  (E.  V.,  "  I  will  hasten

my  word,"  &c.).  So  also  Henderson,  rendering  ^pM  to  be  awake,  vigilant ;  so  called  because
the  almond-tree  wakes  ea/rlier  than  all  other  trees  from  the  sleep  of  winter ;  meaning  therefore
"God's  determination  to  execute  with  all  promptitude  His  threatened  judgments."  Kimchi,
Lange,  Schmidt,  and  others,  render  the  words  "  an  almond-tree  staff;  "  the  reverse  of  leafy
and  blossoming  ;  stripped,  "a  tJireatening  rod  of  castigation  ;'*  urging  that  an  instrument  of
chastisement  is  required  by  the  context.  "  I  see  a  wakeful  rod ;  for  I  will  be  swift  (alert)  to
strike."  The  event  shall  follow  quick  upon  the  prediction.  Ver.  13.  "Face  toward  north.**
Keil,  "  it  looketh  hither /rowi  the  north  ;  "  the  direction  whence  would  come  the  "  evil ;  "  and

being  "blown'*  (  -  ^'^))  ^^^^  ^®i^  over,  pouring  its  contents  upon  Judah.  Among  Arabs  a
steaming  pot  figures  war  is  preparing.  Ver.  14.  "  Out  of  the  noi'th,"  &c.  Not  from  south — via.,
from  Egypt,  whence  disaster  was  dreaded;  but  from  Chaldea,  which  as  yet  showed  no  menace-
All  armies  marching  from  the  Euphrates  towards  Palestine  entered  the  land  from  the
north ;  thus  explaining  the  geographical  discrepancy ;  Chaldea  being  on  the  east,  not  north.

Ver.  17.  "  Be  not  dismayed,  lest  I  dismay  thee.**  Another  paronomasia  *'0\}y  first  in  Niphil,
then  in  Hiphil.  "The  Niphil  signifies  broken  in  spirit  by  terror  and  anxiety ;  the  Hiphil,  to
throw  into  terror  and  anguish." — Keil.  If  Jeremiah  appeared  before  his  adversaries  in  terror,
then  he  will  have  cause  to  be  terrified  for  them.     Sharpe  translates,   "Be  not  afirighted  at  their

faces,  lest  I  af right  thee  before  their  faces,"  for  the  repetition  of  the  verb  /I/IH  jg  followed  in
each  case  by  D»^  J3,  with  prefix    ^  o,t  and  ^  to  or  before  respectively.

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  UPON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  L

Section      1-3.  God's  messenger  to  rebellious  Judah.

„         4-10.  The  prophet's  call,  consecration,  and  commisBion.

„       11-16.  Premonitory  visions.

„       17-19.  Fearless  performance  of  perilous  service.

Ver.  1-3.     Theme:  Qod*b  Mibsknoer  to  Rebellious  Judah.

Introduction.      Jeremiah's  ministry   would  prove  lengthy  and  chequered.      For
forty  years  in  Jerusalem  he  would  sustain  the  arduous  duties  of  his  office,  amid  the
successive  reigns  of  five  kings,  under  each  of  whom  the  nation  sank  to  lower  stages
6


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JERBMIAH.  OUF.L

of  decrepitude  and  vassalage,  until  at  length  the  ruthless  Chaldean  forces  swept
down  upon  the  apostate  and  impenitent  people,  and  wrought  the  captivity  of  Judah,
the  demolition  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  desolation  of  the  sacred  land.

That  so  prolonged  a  period  intervened  illustrates  the  Divine  forbearance  (Ps.
ciii.  8 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9) ;  that  God  grants  lengthened  respite,  and  opportunity  to  re-
pent and  escape,  ere  He  rises  to  punish.  Through  "  so  long  a  time "  He  spake
unto  them  by  His  prophet,  if  so  they  would  forsake  transgression  and  turn  aside
the  judgments  impending.

Yet,  however  long  the  interval  of  respite,  the  threatened  calamitiee  will  surely
come  (2  Pet.  iii.  10) ;  and  they  came  "  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah,  in  the  carry-
ing away  Jerusalem  captive  "  (ver.  3).

L  Godly  parentage  recognised  and  honoured.  **  Jeremiah,  eon  of  Hilkiah  of
the  priest"  &c.

Besides  Jeremiah  (and  Nathan,  1  Kings  iv.  5,  ITioltick),  the  prophet  Ezekie]
(i.  3 ;  cf.  Josephus,  Ant.  x.  5,  1),  and  most  probably  Zechariah  (i  1,  Kohler),  were
of  sacerdotal  origin. — Lange.

1.  Sacred  ancestry  Divinely  selected,  Jeremiah  was  to  be  ''sanctified"  for
God's  services  even  ''  before  birth ''  (ver.  5)  :  it  was  appropriate  that  his  parents
should  be  holy  to  the  Lord.  So  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i.  13)  and  Timothy
(2  Tim.  i.  5).  This  messenger  of  Jehovah  had  existence  in  the  Divine  ndnd  before
he  was  conceived  (ver.  4) ;  and  his  birth  into  the  world  was  an  incident  of  Divine
arrangement.  God  appreciateSy  recognises,  and  honours  religious  ancestry.  Samuel's
dignity,  which  so  greatly  honoured  Hannah,  the  reward  of  her  piety  and  prayers
(1  Sam.  i.  27,  28;  il  1).  Solomon  also  (1  Kings  ii.  1-4  sq.) ;  Esther  (ii.  6-7,  17)  ;
and,  in  a  special  sense,  the  Child  Jesus  (Matt.  i.  18,  23;  Luke  i.  28,  30).  Godly
parents  are  not  lost  sight  of  by  CM',  and  their  of  spring  are  objects  of  His  special
regard.     (See  Addenda,  " Parentage")

2.  The  child's  birth  a  home  Joy  (xx.  10)  :  "  Making  him  very  glad.**  Possibly
the  child  was  a  gift  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  hence  the  great  joy ;  as  with  Hannah.
Surely  his  birth  was  anticipated  by  prayer,  and  followed  by  dedication,  as  an  ex-
pression of  gladness  and  gratitude.  It  was  unsuspecting  joy,  for  they  knew  not
to  what  eminent  office,  and  to  what  a  career  of  suffering,  their  son  was  bom.  How
is  a  child's  life  overshadowed  by  ignorance  and  mystery !

3.  Honour  to  the  household  through  the  child.  Hilkiah  had  been  unknown  to
history  and  Christendom  but  for  his  son  I  Who  would  have  heard  of  the  widow
Anthusa  but  for  her  son  Chrysostomf  Or  of  devout  Monica  but  for  her  son
Augustine  t  Or  of  the  household  of  the  Wesleys  but  for  the  boys  John  and
Charles  ?  A  child  may  bring  dignity  and  undying  fame  to  his  family  and  to  his
birthplace.  For  Anathoth  is  thereby  raised  from  obscurity.  As  is  Stratford-on-
Avon  and  Olney,  Ac.  The  son  may  take  higher  office  than  his  parents  (cf,  ver.  1,
6)  ;  '* prophet"  more  than  a  ^'priest"  Loftier  honour  to  stand  and  speak  for  God
among  men  than  to  appear  for  men  before  God.  Hereditary  social  status  is  not
regarded  by  God  (1  Sam.  ii.  8).

II.  Social  seclusion  invaded  by  Divine  reotuirements.  The  messenger  of  God
was  born ;  in  due  time  God  would  demand  him.  Boyhood  spent  in  studious  and
reverent  pursuits.  His  scriptural  knowledge  gained  during  those  years ;  his  pro-
phecies show  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  law.  At  length,  to  the  quiet  home
at  Anathoth,  Ood  came,  to  seek  for  Himself  a  prophet.

(a.)  God  can  seek  out  whom  He  chooses ;  and  (6.)  speak  to  whom  He  selects :  ''  To
whom  the  word  of  the  Lofd  came,"  <fec.  (ver.  2).

1.  A  communication  from  God  works  wondrous  changes  in  him  who  reaivet  it
It  wrought  such  changes —

a.  In  Jeremiah  hinuelf;  a  new  creature  that  moment ;  no  longer  a  mere  Anathoth
boy ;  awoke  to  a  new  eonsciotunese,  new  visions,  new  truitt,

b.  In  hit  relation  to  others;  belonged  to  Hilkiah  before,  now  to  God;  had  some-

7


(MAF.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .  JEREMIAH,


thing  which  was  not  his  own,  "  word  of  the  Lord;  **  not,  therefore,  to  be  kept  foi
himself,  not  to  be  silenced;  he  must  speak  what  he  had  heard;  others  must  know
(1  Sam.  iil  17 ;  1  John.  I  3).

c.  In  his  lifers  worth  and  work.  Until  now  he  was  nothing  beyond  his  own
home,  now  of  worth  to  all  Judah ;  his  work  had  began,  and  it  was  a  ministry  for
his  nation.  Communication  from  God  implies  commission  for  Qod  (Acts  ir.
18,  20).

2.  Our  natural  inclinations  may  not  interfere  with  God*s  claims.  To  Jeremiah
seclusion  and  irresponsibility  would  have  been  far  more  congenial  than  publicity^
with  all  its  hazards  and  solicitudes  (ix.  2) ;  but  God  cannot  be  restricted  by  our  pre-
ferences, nor  determined  by  our  sense  of  aptitude  and  qualification  (ver.  6).  If  so,
the  "  natural  man  "  would  dominate  over  spiritual  laws  and  Good's  demands.  Self
must  be  subordinate  when  God  calls.  "Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee ;  but  let  m^first^
<kc.     Christ  would  hear  of  no  evasions  or  inclinations.

3.  God^s  messengers  cannot  tarry  in  seclusion.  So  Anathoth  had  to  be  left
(ii.  2).  There  is  an  outside  world  which  must  see  and  hear  those  who  love  and
serve  the  Lord.  No  timidity  can  justify  seclusion;  open  witness  for  Christ  is
needed.  The  times  were  evil  for  Jeremiah,  the  sufferings  entailed  severe;  but  he
boldly  spoke  for  God  (Acts  iv.  29).

m.  Speech  for  God  the  outcome  of  inspiration  from  God  (ver.  1).  "  The
words  of  Jeremiah"  Yet  his  first  outcry  was,  **  /  cannot  speak  '*  (ver.  6).  Never-
theless, we  have  in  this  book  speeches  enough  to  disprove  his  own  plea.  The
explanation  lies  in  ver.  2,  "  To  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord  came"

1.  Natural  destitution  of  gifts,  no  disqualification  for  service.  He  found
"words"  (ver.  1).  See  xx.  9.  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  10).  When  duty  for  God  ^xe^%t%
upon  us,  our  insufficiency  falls  out  of  the  question.  What  ample  assurance,  what
inexhaustible  resources,  what  provision  against  our  own  poverty,  dwell  in  2  Cor,
ix.  8.

2.  Human  speech  the  channel  of  Divine  communications.  "  The  words  of  Jere^
miah  ;  "  yet  they  but  expressed  and  conveyed  "  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Angels
brought  the  Law  (Heb.  ii  2) ;  but  all  God's  messages  have  come  through  human
speech ;  even  "  TJie  Word"  (John  i.  1-14)  was  made  incarnate  that  Man  might
speak  to  man  {cf.  Heb.  i  1,  2,  ii.  3,  4).

3.  The  personal  characteristics  of  inspired  messages.  Though  it  was  "  the  word
of  the  Lord  ;  "  these  communications  were  "  words  of  Jeremiah  ;  "  his  personality,
temperament,  experiences,  style  of  thought,  modes  of  expression,  are  all  stamped
upon  these  Divine  messages.  Inspiration  does  not  obliterate,  scarcely  subordinates
individuality.  Hence  the  graceful  variety  and  naturalness  of  the  Scriptures  ;  their
humanness  as  well  as  Divinity;  and  the  manifold  unity  of  the  whole.  God  employs
the  man,  his  own  true  self,  "  sanctifies  "  him  (ver.  5),  "  moves  him  by  the  Holy
Ghost "  (2  Pet.  121);  but  does  not  do  violence  to  his  natural  gifts  and  qualities
of  character.  In  our  work  for  Him  whose  we  are,  all  our  faculties  are  needed ;
Christ  asks  our  every  talent,  our  whole  true  self.

rV.  Gk)d's  messenger  witnessing  amid  national  convulsions  and  overthrow&
(ver.  2,  3).  Jeremiah  came  to  Judah  at  an  eventful  crisis  and  prophesied  amid  ap-
palling events.     But —

1.  His  mission  was  originated  to  m^et  the  crisis.  To  help  Josiah  in  his  work  of
reformation  ;  to  resist  Jehoiakim  in  his  reckless  impiety ;  to  remonstrate  with
Zedekiah  in  his  weakness  and  folly ;  and  to  show  his  captive  nation  their  sin  and
their  Saviour.  God's  servants  are  called  to  their  mission  at  the  right  hour.  He
does  not  allow  any  age  to  be  destitute  of  a  messenger  from  Him.  There  may
always  be  heard  a  voice  for  Qod,  whatever  the  aspect  of  the  times.  Alas  1  (Isa.
I  3.  4).

2.  However  circumstaneei  may  vary,  GhcTs  prophet  must  do  his  work.  Friendly
or  hostile ;  Josiah  king  or  Jehoiakim ;  when  Jadah  is  reforming/,  or  hastening  back


HOMILBTIO  OOMMENTART:  JEREMIAH.  obaf.  l

to  ahomtnation,  whether  men  heed  or  oppose.  Times  of  calamity  afford  special
opportunities  for  Gk)d'8  voice  to  be  heard.  When  kings  fall,  and  foes  are  at  the
gates,  and  the  kingdom  is  endangered,  then  Qod  should  be  heeded.  Judah  was  a
Theocracy — God's  nation ;  and  with  every  epoch  and  change  He  sent  directions,
warnings,  denunciations,  promises,  according  to  the  hour.  This  is  the  work  of
every  preacher,  every  Christian ;  to  address  himself  to  the  hour ;  to  make  God^s
Word  heard  amid  confusion,  degeneracy,  disobedience  :  to  ''  warn  the  people,"  lest
their  blood  be  upon  him.

3.  1^0  calamity  hef ailing  man  places  him  beyond  the  Divine  message,  Josiah's
death  was  an  evil  incident  to  Judah ;  the  kingdom  was  doomed  from  that  hour.
But  God  remained,  and  He  would  have  spoken  hopefully  to  the  bereft  nation  had
they  hearkened.  Nevertheless,  though  they  despised  His  Word,  it  came  still  to
Jeremiah  for  Judah ;  when  at  peace,  or  amid  war ;  before  the  Captivity  and  after ;
in  their  own  land  and  in  Egypt.  Nothing  befalls  us  but  God  observes ;  and  He
sends  some  "  word  "  for  us  suited  to  the  time.  Wherever  we  are,  amid  privileges
or  in  exile  from  all  joys,  still  He  sends  messages  of  mercy  and  promise.  Man  is
never  beyond  the  need  of  God  s  message,  nor  beyond  its  reachf  nor  beyond  the
consequences  which  follow  on  reception  or  rejection ;  **  life  unto  life  "  to  the  observant
and  obedient,  but  "  death  unto  death "  to  those  who  will  not  heed  the  call  to
repentance  and  salvation.     *^  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live.''

Ver.  4-10.    Theme:  The  Prophet's  Ciix,  Consecration,  and  Commission.

The  Divine  call  involves —  to  a  special  office  in  His  kingdom  He

L    With  respect  to  him  who  is  called  :        equips  with  the  gifts  and  graces  needed

a.  The  duty,  to  discharge  the  commis-      for  the  exercise  of  his  functions."

fiion  without  fear  of  man,  and  without  IIL   Signs  which  unveil  his  mission,

regard  to  his  oum  weakness.  These  he  "  saw  in  spirit."     God  inter-

b.  The  privilege,  being  assured  of  preted  them  to  him  as  confirmatory
Divine  protection  and  aid,  and  certain  tokens  of  his  Divine  commission ;  they
success  in  the  work,  are  a  surety  of  the  Divine  promise  :  (a.)

II.    With  respect  to  those  to  whom  he      Of  the  speedy  and  certain  fulfilment  of

is  commissioned:  the  word  of  God  proclaimed  by  him;

a.  The  urgency  of  their  believing  sad  (b.)  the  contents  of  his  preaching;  dis-
obedience.  aster   and   ruin  which  the  North  will

b.  The  certainty  of  the  Divine  message      pour  out  on  Judah.

being  fulfilled ;  no  doubt  of  their  realiia-  IV.  Supernatural  assurances  of  help.

ing  the  threaienings  ox  promises  addressed  Jeremiah  is  charged  to  address  himself

to  them.  stoutly  to  his  duties,  to  discharge  them

ZiNDENDORT  from  Lomge,  fearlessly,  and  is  assured   of  powerful

Divine  assistance.     "  Only  by  unshaken

Call  and  consecration.     The  inves-  confidence  in  the  power  of  the  Word  he

titure  of  Jeremiah  with  the  prophetic  preaches  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  will

office  is  effected  in  four  distinct  acts :  he   be  able  to   accomplish    anything."

L  The  call  of  Jehovah,  4-8.     This  Gk)d  will   furnish  strength,  will  miie

was  not  the  product  of  a  reflective  mus-  him  valiant  and  impregnable.

ing,  nor  the  result  of  an  inward  impulse,  Condensed  and  arranged  from  KeiL
but  a  supernatural  Divine  revelation,  an

inspiration,  a  voice  from  unihout.  Commission  of  the  Prophet.     In  all

IL  His  Divine  consecration,  9,  10.  oases  it  applies  equally  as  with  Jeremiah —

He  felt  the  hand  of  the  Lord  touch  I.  As  to  the  work  in  the  vineyard  of

him:  "a  palpable  pledge  of  His  sup-  the  Lord:

port.**     Touching  his  mouth  meant  en-  1.    It   must  be   performed  bj  men

dowment     Equipment  and  qualification  whom  He  prepares  and  sends,

for  God's  work  must  be  from  God.    "For  2.  It  \b  sk  work  hoik  difficult  tatl  dan-

the  uuui  Qod  has  chosen  before  his  birth  geraut,

t


OEAI,  L


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


3.  Tet   it  is  rich  in  itieeesta  and

rewards.

IL  As  to  f^  office  to  which  the  Lord
appoints:

1.  It  is  for  the  purpose  of  Accom-
plishing His  wilL

2.  It  needs  the  means  which  the
Lord  Himself  provides.

Nabqelsbaoh  in  Lange,

Provision  for  the  Church.

I.  The  Lord  never  allows  His  Church
to  lack  the  strength  which  time  and  place
demand.  He  does  not  seek  this,  or  wait
for  it :  He  makes  it  (ver.  18).

II.  He  chooses  to  Himself  despised  and
inefficient  agents  for  His  service.  Now
He  selects  one  who  to  himself  and  to
others  appears  too  joung;  as  else-
where He  chose  what  was  foolish,  weak,
and  base  in  the  sight  of  the  world  (1
Cor.  i  19-29 ;  Matt,  xl  25 ;  John,  vil
48  ;  James  ii.  6).  "  It  is  not  always  the
greybeard  who  is  wanted." — Forster.

IIL  When  God  gives  office  He  give.^
also  understanding,  (a.)  It  would  be  pre-
sumptuous to  begin  a  great  work  in  one's
own  strength.  (6.)  It  is  natural  in  view
of  a  great  and  difficult  task  that  one
should  be  afraid,  (c.)  But  it  would  be
wrong  if,  from  any  pusillanimous  despon-
dency or  love  of  ease^  one  should  take  no
heed  to  an  evident  call  of  God.

ly.  It  devolves  upon  God  to  protect
the  cause  of  His  servant.  Since  (a.)  It
is  not  our  cause,  but  His ;  and  (6.)  we
do  not  undertake  it  in  our  own  strength,
but  in  obedience  to  His  command.

V.  To  hear  a  Divine  offijce  ensures
Divine  succour.  When  the  office  is
received  from  the  Lord,  and  is  conducted
according  to  His  purpose  and  in  His
spirit,  there  the  Lord  Himself  h  present
with  weapons  of  defence  and  offence.

VI.  God^s  Word  is  mighty^  however
weak  His  messenger,

a.  It  may  be  in  the  mouth  of  the
humblest  of  His  servants.

h.  It  is  nevertheless  a  hammer  which
breaks  the  rock  in  pieces.


e.  And  no  rock  is  too  hard  or  high  for  ii
Arranged  from  Naeoelsbaoh
in  Lange,

Jkbbmiah's  Missioir.

Some  saints  have  been  consecrated
from  the  womb.  The  Baptist  was;
Jeremiah  was  (ver.  6).  The  time  came
for  calling  Jeremiah  out  to  his  work
(ver.  4,  &c.).  His  age  uncertain,  but
he  was  evidently  in  the  morning  of  life.
Gbd's  call  was  clear,  precise,  peremptory.
Look —

I  At  his  objection,  as  here  given.
Not  unreasonable ;  for  his  age —

1.  Would  indicate  inexperience.  2.
Insufficient  knowledge.  3.  Modest  dif-
fidence. Yet,  4.  His  age  and  defects
time  would  remedy.

n.  How  God  overrules  his  objection.

1.  He  refers  to  his  pre-ordination.
"  Knew,  sanctified,  ordained  "  (ver.  5).

2.  He  refers  to  his  commission.  "  Go
to  all  that  I  shall,"  &c.  (ver.  7).

3.  He  was  to  speak  God's  words.
Did  not  require  his  own  knowledge.

4.  He  pledged  His  Divine  presence
(ver.  8).     Shield,  help,  deliverer.

5.  Then  there  was  supernatural  com-
munication (ver.  9).

IIL  Important  lessons  suggested.

1.  Gk)d,  and  not  man,  arranges  the
affairs  of  His  moral  kingdom.  He
plans  as  to  the  work  and  the  agency,  &c,

2.  God  qualifies  the  instruments  He
employs.

S.  God  often  selects  His  agents  not
as  men  would  do.  Men  the  mature,  He
the  yoi^ng ;  learned,  illiterate ;  the  re-
spectable, the  poor.

4.  God  gives  His  own  message  to
His  messengers.     "  My  words."

5.  The  ministry  of  God's  servants  is
mighty  for  good  or  evil  (ver.  10).  How
great  the  results ;  portentous ;  solemn  I
Jonah,  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  the  Apostles.

a.  Let  us  listen  when  God  speaka

b.  Obey  when  He  commands
c  Trust  when  He  promises.

Bev.  J.  Busks,  D.D.,  LL.DI


Ver.  11-16.     Theme:  Premonitoby  YisioNa

Introduction,     Jeremiah  glides,  almost  imperceptibly  to  himself,  from  being  a
hearer  into  the  office  of  a  seer.     He  had  listened  only  as  yet  (ver.  4-10),  now  he  is
asked  to  penetrate  and  gaxe.     It  is  a  preparatory  and  initiative  incident ;  his  first
10


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chip,  t


exertion  of  the  prophetic  faculty  of  seeing  visions.  God  is  thereby  gently  leading
him  on  towards  the  prophetic  oflSce.  Without  realising  that  he  is  undergoing  his
first  lesson,  he  passes  through  it.  God  allures  him,  surprises  him,  indeed,  into  the
exercise  of  the  perceptive  powers  needful  for  his  mission ;  and  He  thus  renders
self-evident  Jeremiah's  aptitude  for  the  work.  So  that  when  he  answered  the
Divine  inquiry,  "What  seest  thou?"  God  could  respond,  "  Thou  hast  well  seen;"
thus  virtually  saying  to  him,  You  already  prove  your  power  of  spiritual  discern-
ment, your  possession  of  the  prophetic  insight  (Addenda  to  chap.  i.  11).

In  this  cautious  manner,  dealing  so  tenderly  with  Jeremiah^s  misgivings  and  sense
of  inability,  God  leads  him  on.  It  is  the  second  stage  in  the  process  of  his
induction.  First  he  hears  that  he  is  selected  to  this  mission.  Now  a  proof  is
unwittingly  supplied  by  Jeremiah  to  himself  that  God  has  not  erred  in  entrusting
him  with  the  prophet's  office ;  for  he  shows  immediate  ability  to  discern  the  sym-
bolic force  and  teaching  of  things.

I.  Truths  pictured  in  symbols.  "  What  seest  thou  ? "  And  his  eye  rested  on
the  blossoming  bough  of  an  almond -tree.  "What  seest  thou?"  And  he  perceived
a  boiHiig  pot,  whose  contents  ran  over  from  the  north.  Each  thing  seen  held  a
truth  j  and  a  truth  which  ran  through  all  Jeremiah's  after  history  and  work.

1.  Helpfulness  of  objective  signs.  Better  for  God  to  show  Jeremiah  these  truths
than  to  merely  say  them.  Signs  are  impressive;  they  are  remembered;  they  fix
their  teaching  on  the  understanding.

The  childlike  temperament  of  man  is  always  assumed  by  God ;  He  teaches  him
by  pictures ;  not  tells  him  abstract  truths.  All  Bible  revelation  is  a  series  of
pictures,  an  array  of  symbols  which  hold  truths.  We  have  very  little  direct  teach-
ing compared  with  picture-teaching  in  the  Scriptures.  All  the  Temple,  its  services
and  incidents,  were  symbols.  All  Christ's  miracles  were  truths  acted  out  in  inci-
dent; parables  in  action.

2.  The  eye  an  avenue  of  instruction.  When  Pharaoh  and  the  magicians  saw
Aaron's  rod  effect  mightier  results  than  their  rods  could  work,  they  needed  not  a
word  to  convince  them  of  the  supreme  power  of  Aaron's  God.  It  was  convincing
argument ;  the  lesson  was  trenchant  and  decisive.  Jeremiah  never  lost  the  lessons
of  these  visions  ;  he  knew  that  events  would  follow  quickly  upon  his  prediction  (ver.
12,  "  hasten  ") ;  and  that  calamity  would  come  upon  Judahfrom  the  north  (ver.  14,
15).  Our  Lord  knew  the  value  of  lessons  seen  ;  hence  He  continually  appealed
to  His  hearers  to  look  at  things  around  and  heed  their  teaching :  "  Behold  the  fowls
of  the  air,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  25).  "  Behold  a  sower,"  &c.  (xiii.  3).  "  Behold  my
hands,  and  feel  that  it  is  I "  (Luke  xxiv.  39).  This  Divine  plan  with  the  prophets,
and  Christ's  plan  with  His  apostles  and  the  multitudes,  supplies  the  model  for
effectively  teaching  sacred  truths.

3.  Hidden  meaning  in  things.  The  almond  bough,  the  seething  pot,  were  for
signs  j  and  Jeremiah  saw  their  significance.  Some  persons  see  nothing ;  "  have
eyes  but  see  not ; "  blind  with  a  blank  literalism.  Everything  is  merely  what  it  is.
They  have  no  imagination,  no  perceptive  power,  no  spiritual  vision.

**  The  primrose  on  the  river's  brim
A  yellow  primrose  was  to  him,

And  it  was  nothing  more.** — Peter  BeU,

Yet,  to  discerning  eyes,  all  things  hold  hidden  truths,  a  Divine  suggestiyeness.
The  world  is  full  of  parables,  in  wLich  sacred  teachings  are  portrayed,  and  in
which  the  enlightened  soul  perceives  some  counsel  or  promise  from  God.

To  a  few  even  the  Bible  is  nothing  more  than  a  printed  book,  sealed  and  silent,
with  no  revelation  for  them.  "  The  veil  is  upon  their  heart."  Yea,  the  gracious
Jesus,  "  fairest  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely,"  has  to  them  "  no  beauty
that  they  should  desire  Him.**

This  barren  materialism  closes  the  universe  around  a  man  like  the  grim  walls  of
a  prison.

11


OHAF.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  T :  JEBEMIA  H.


**  Two  worlds  are  ours  :  'tis  only  Sin
Forbids  us  to  descry
The  mystic  heayen  and  earth  within,
Plain  as  the  sea  and  sky."

How  different  this  from  the  thoughts  breathed  in  Keble's  hymn,  "  There  is  ft
book  who  runs  may  read  ! "  so  full  of  enlightened  discernment  of  the  sacred  side
of  natural  objects.  If  we  see  "the  deep  things  of  God/*  it  is  because  of  grace;  and
we  have  reason  to  say —

**  Thou,  who  hast  g^yen  me  eyes  to  see
And  loTe  this  sight  so  fair,
Oiye  me  a  heart  to  find  out  Thee,
And  read  Thee  eyery  where. — See  Addenda  to  chap.  L,  "  Vitumt.**

TL  The  Prophet's  initiation.

He  was  not  ushered  suddenly  into  the  dazzling  splendours  of  prophetic  visions,
making  heaviest  demands  on  spiritual  insight ;  the  first  step  was  simple,  the  grada*
tions  gradual.

1.  The  learner  tested.  "  What  seest  thou?"  Exert  your  own  perceptive  powers;
try  how  far  they  will  carry  you  towards  truth.  It  is  wise  to  educe  a  learner's
powers.  So  Jeremiah  looked  out  first  upon  nature.  Would  he  see  anything  1
Among  all  the  arboreous  growths,  would  ant/thin^  suggestive  strike  him  ]  Trees  were
all  black  in  winter's  death ;  no  fertility,  no  vitality  ;  barrenness,  somnolence  every-
where !  But  lo  !  one  solitary  tvng  among  the  trees  hears  blossom;  it  is  an  early  fulfil-
ment  of  God's  word,  which  pledged  the  spring :  he  calls  it  *^  the  wakeful  tree,"  quick
to  bloom,  hastening  into  activity  with  earliest  dawn  of  spring.  And  Qod  commended
his  vision,  for  he  had  " seen  well"  or  aright.

He  then  turns  towards  the  habitations  of  men :  activity  is  everywhere ;  on  th«
open  hearth  steams  the  caldron ;  many  things  are  happening  which  would  engross
the  idle  gazer ;  does  anything  stand  out  specially  on  Jeremiah's  vision  1  One  ob-
ject arrests  him,  and  he  sees  that  only,  all  else  is  excluded ;  it  has  a  significance  to
his  mind — a  pot  boiling  over  in  a  certain  direction.  He  observes  every  minute  par-
ticular.    It  makes  evident  his  faculty  of  suggestive  discernment.

There  stands  a  Cross  on  Calvary.  Men  pass  by.  "  It  is  nothing  to  them ; "  but
"  What  seest  thou  ?  "  All  depends  on  your  discernment.  Is  it  merely  a  symbol  of
suffering,  or  of  salvation  9

2.  Progressive  stages  of  instruction.  The  first  vision  was  easier  far  than  the  second.
The  almond  bough  was  the  only  living  thing  within  his  gaze.  Noticeable,  there-
fore, by  contrast  with  surrounding  death ;  readily  discernible.  Having  passed  that
test,  the  second  demand  comes.  This  "seething  pot"  was  only  one  of  many
noticeable  things ;  not  conspicuous ;  it  required  more  efi'ort  on  his  part  to  detect
the  suggestive  object.

But  more.  The  truth  taught  by  the  sign  was  harder  to  bear.  The  first  simply
taught  that  God  would  early  perform  His  ward ;  the  second  indicated  mixed  ele-
ments in  the  pot,  boiling  over,  with  its  face  from  the  north,  meaning  that  mingled
nations  which  would  constitute  the  Northern  scourge,  which  would  overflow  its
boundaries  and  pour  calamities  on  Judah.  Thus  our  Lord  gave  to  His  disciples
teachings  "  as  they  were  able  to  bear  "  them,  holding  back  the  weightier  truths  till
they  had  learned  the  simpler.

God  has  more  to  show  us  of  Divine  purposes,  more  great  and  marvellous
truths ;  but  He  leads  on  as  we  are  fitted  to  discern  them.  The  Israelites  under
Sinai  heard  once  God's  voice,  then  entreated  that  it  might  never  speak  again;
but  Mosesy  who,  reverently  regarded,  went  up  to  the  heights,  saw  visions  of
resplendent  glory,  and  talked  face  to  face  with  God.  Our  power  to  receive  visions
is  the  only  limit  to  larger  revelations.

3.  Personal  preparation.  The  visions  Jeremiah  would  eventually  behold  would
be  full  of  awf ulness  and  dark  with  threatenings.  God  showed  him  an  outline  first,
that  he  might  be  prepared  to  meet  the  wider  portrayal  of  things  to  come.

U


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  fmks,  l


His  mind  received  the  germ  of  truth,  and  he  had  been  exercised  in  prophetic
perception.  His  eyeiA  had  now  been  Divinely  opened.  He  most  conclusively
showed  his  aptitvde  for  sacred  communications.  He  could  "  see  well."  This  apti-
tude was  not  at  first  manifest ;  but  the  visions  had  taught  him  his  qualifications
and  mission.  He  was  to  be  a  seer,  a  "  prophet."  It  is,  then,  right  to  remark  that,
If  God  calls  us  to  use  powers  in  His  service  which  we  do  not  think  we  possess,  (a.)  Be
assured  that  we  have  them  :  (6.)  He  will  teach  us  to  use  them :  (c.)  They  will  be  suf-
ficient for  our  work  :  (d.)  They  will  grow  into  vigour  by  further  use.     Reflections  :

1.  God  never  errs  in  calling  us  to  service  for  Him ;  He  will  qualify  us.

2.  Cultivate  a  discerning  eye  of  signs  God  puts  before  us.

3.  Simplest  things  may  hold  sublime  teachings.  Christ's  parables  were  simple,
but  they  contained  truths  of  eternal  value  to  the  world.

in.  The  messages  taught  by  the  visions.  1.  That  his  prophetic  word  would
he  followed  quickly  hy  the  event  (ver.  12).  Some  prophecies  pointed  to  distant  years ;
but  these  were  nigh.  Therefore  his  mission  was  urgent;  the  judgments  gathered
thick  and  fast.  Comp.  Jonah,  his  preaching  to  Nineveh.  Analogy  :  Our  testi-
mony of  the  nearing  hour  of  death ;  the  "  accepted  time  "  hastening  away ;  the
Spirit  grieved,  ready  to  depart.     "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,"  <kc.

2.  That  an  unexpected  foe  was  gathering  his  forces  for  their  destruction.  They
dreaded  Egypt ;  but  the  Chaldean  dynasty  would  soon  gather  together  the  "  families
of  the  kingdoms,"  and  become  a  scourge  to  Judah.

a.  Where  we  look  not  for  calamity  it  may  come  (ver.  14).

6.  God  prepares  retribution  for  transgressors  (ver.  15).

e.  Apostasy  from  Him  cannot  go  unpunished  (ver.  16).  (See  Addenda  to  chap,
i,,  "  Out  of  the  North:')

Such  was  the  prophet's  announcement !  The  Gospel  admonitions  and  denuncia-
tions are  equally  appalling.  May  they  who  hear  them  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to
come."  For  in  Christ  "  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even  the  forgive-
ness of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace  "  (Eph.  L  7).

Ver.  17-19.     Theme:  Fearless  Performance  op  Perilous  Seryiob,

Jehovah's  **  charge  "  to  His  servant.  3.  He  would  be  assailed,  as  a  ''  de-
Paul's  charge  to  Timothy  is  empha-  fenced     city "    is    besieged,    ver,     19,
tic    and    vigorous   (2    Tim.    iv.    1-5),  "  Fight  against  thee."
pointing  out  the  hazards  and  difficulties  IH.  Hostility  would  he  impotent
of  his  ministry,  the  forms  of  hostility  An  "  iron  pillar "  which  could  not  be
which  would  assail  his  word,  and   en-  overthrown ;  "  brazen  walls "  which  fire
couraging  him  to   assurance,  diligence,  could  not  consume,
and  fidelity.  Judah  would  be  overthrown,  and  Jerw-
But  this  is  a  charge  from  the  Almighty  salem  burned;  but  not  God's  prophet :
God  Himself  to  His  prophet,  who  had  for

shown  much  reluctance  and  trembling,  1.     A    Divine  promise   of   safety   is

(See  Addenda  to  ch.  i,  "7  cannot  speak,'*)  given :  "  They  shall  not  prevail."

I.  Attitude  must  be  valiant,  ver.  17.  2.  The    Divine    Presence   would   be

1.  Not  craven:  "Stand,"  or  "arise."  around  him  :  "For  I  am  with  thee."

2.  Not  apologetic :  "  Speak."  3.  The   Divine  Power  would  be  ex-

3.  Not  awed  by  men  :  "Be  not  dis-  erted  for  him;  "To  deliver  thee,"
mayed."

4.  Not  forgetful   Whom  you  serve :  A  prophet's  work.

"Lest  I  confound  thee."  L   I'he  Divinely-called  prophet  becomes

II.  Strength  shall  be  invincible,  ver.  18.  a  sacrifice  and  instrument  for  God.

1.  God  had  made  him  impregnable :  1.  He  regards  only  God's  will  and
"  /  make  thee,'*  <fec.  command.

2.  His  work  would  be  "  against "  all  2.  Must  do  and  proclaim  what  the
ranks  of  the  people.  Lord  bids  him  do  and  preach.

13


OHAP.  L


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JEREMIAH.


3.  Must  expose  himself  to  consequent
hostility.

4.  Must  meet  antagonism  with  fear-
lessness of  man  and  faith  in  Qod.

II.  The  fvrong  and  results  of  sin  must
he  proclaimed  to  ally  heedless  of  tlieir
station^  ver.  18.

1.  The  anger  of  God  against  sin  will
certainly  overtake  them.

2.  The  preacher  must  set  forth  these
facts :  sin,  and  Qod's  consequent  dis-
pleasure.

3.  This  must  be  declared  to  the  whole
people  :  "  All  the  land."

4.  Equally  before  governors  as  sub-
jects j  the  high  as  well  as  the  low.

IIL  A  teacher,  in  view  of  gross  cor-
ruptum,  must  not  proceed  softly.

1.  Vigorously  overthrowing  wrong,
ver.  10.

2.  Having  by  the  Law  destroyed  the
kingdom  of  Satan  in  the  hearts  of
men;

3.  He  must  seek  to  **  build  up "  the
kingdom  of  Christ  therein  by  the  Qos-
pel.

IV.  Resentment  may  he  the  only  re-
turn men  make  for  faithful  work  for
God.

1.  Kings  and  subjects  equally  hate  a
reprover.

2.  Sense  of  its  justice  makes  reproof
more  exasperating.

3.  Yet  God's  witness  must  fearlessly
tell  the  whole  truth.

4.  In  courageous  service  God  will
protect  His  messenger.

Enlarged  and  evolved  from
Starke  in  Lange.


Servants  of  GkxL
L  Their  duty.

a.  Always  to  have  their  loins  girded,
ver.  17.

b.  To  proclaim  without  fear  of  man
whatever  the  Lord  commands.

n.  Their  privilege.

a.  Mighty  through  the  power  of  God.

h.  Unyielding  to  any  power  on  earth,

IIL  The  LordHs  requirements  of  His
servants.

a.  To  be  always  ready  for  His  ser-
vice :  "  Gird  loins.**

h.  To  accomplish  what  is  bidden  with-
out delay :  "Arise  and  speak.**

IV.  The Lord^s  promise  to  His  servants.

a.  That  He  will  be  with  them.

6.  That  no  earthly  power  shall  con-
quer them.

Naeoelsbach,  in  Langs,

Gk)d*s  witness.

L  He  must  he  quick:  "Arise,"  and
lose  no  time.

II.  He  must  he  husy :  "  Speak  unto
them,**  in  season,  out  of  season.

III.  He  must  he  hold:  "Be  not  dis-
mayed."

IV.  He  must  he  faithful;  for

1.  He  must  speak  all  that  he  is
charged  with.  Forget  nothing,  conceal
nothing.

2.  He  must  speak  to  all  that  he  is
charged  against.

a.  Because  he  has  reason  to  fear  the
wrath  of  Qod  if  he  should  be  false.

h.  Because  he  has  no  reason  to  fear
the  wrath  of  man  if  he  is  faithful.

Matthew  Hbney.


HOMILETIC  TREATMENT  OF  SUCCESSIVE  OR  SELECTED  VERSES

IN  CHAPTER  L


Ver,  1.  ^^  The  word  of  Jeremiah.^*  A
revival  of  prophecy  marked  this  epoch.
Long  silent  under  Manasseh  and  Amon,
it  now  was  heard  again  (see  Intro,  i.  6).

The  name  "  Jeremiah  "  means  either
"  Jehovah  throws  down  "  (Hengstenherg
and  Lange,  deriving  the  name  from
**  Kamah  "),  indicating  that  God  would
overthrow  by  him  His  foes :  or  "  Jeho-
vah exalts"  (Speaker's  Commentary ,  from
word  "  Earn/*  high),  denoting  that  none
should  cast  down  him  whom  God  up-
holds.

14


But  the  name  was  borne  by  others  of
no  significant  character,  exalted  office,
or  special  missiou.  (1  Chron.  v.  24,
xii.  4,  10,  13;  2  Kings  xxiii.  31;
Neh.  X.  3,  xii.  1 ;  Jer.  xxxv.  3.)  It  is
not  our  name  makes  us  great;  the
mission  we  fulfil  and  the  grace  Gk)d
bestows,  these  make  our  lives  of  worth.

I.  The  voice  of  prophecy  heard
among  men.  He  was  entrusted  with
"  words  **  to  speak  to  Judah  and  the
nations.

\.    The    necessity  for  Divinely  -  sent


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHA.P   T.


words.  Nation  was  ignorant  (Book  of
Law  lost) ;  indifferent  (to  conscience,
memory,  Divine  claims)  ;  insensible  (not
believing  in  or  preparing  against  loom-
ing peril).  Certainly  desirable  some
voice  should  appeal  fur  God  and  truth.

2.  The  mission  of  Divinely-sent  words.
To  arouse  the  people  to  repentance,  to
true  piety  (not  merely  the  '*  form  of
godliness*'),  and  to  escape  by  national
humiliation  "  the  wrath  to  come  "  (chap.
xzxvL  3).

3.  The  results  of  Divinely-sent  words,
E£fect  of  Jeremiah's  preaching  on  Judah
would  be  either  (a.)  To  lead  hack  the  heart
to  God,  and  so  prove  a  "  savour  of  life
unto  life ; "  or  (6.)  to  increase  their  hard-
ness of  heart,  their  responsibility,  guilt,
and  doom ;  '^  a  savour  of  death  unto
death."

Divine  words,  by  a  Divinely-inspired
speaker,  cannot  be  heard  without  re-
sults, saving  or  hardening,  on  hearers.

So  when  Christ  spoke:  John  xv.  22,
ix.  41,  "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."

n.  The  messages  of  prophecy
brought  to  men.

Before  a  prophet  it  is  natural  to  ask,
What  words  he  comes  to  utter  1  (Acts
xvii.  18-20,  X.  33.)

1.  The  tidings  which  the  "  words  "  c<wi-
vey,

a.  Of  mingled  import.  Not  all  de-
nunciatory. Dark  though  Judah's
criminality,  God  did  not  send  only
words  of  wrath  and  menace,  but  pitiful,
pleading,  promising  also.

h.  Suggested  by  man's  spiritual  case.
Our  state,  mood,  actions,  call  forth
specific  "  words."  God's  messages  meet
man  in  every  circumstance  and  con-
dition. We  turn  from  the  vile  in  silent
loathing,  refuse  words  with  those  who
wrong  us ;  but  God  speaks  to  all.

c  Foretelling  doom  and  redemption
Doom  from  "  the  North  ;  "  redemption
by  the  "  Lord  our  Righteousness."
Temporal  ruin  to  Judah ;  but  a  darker
destiny  for  those  who  reject  the  salva-
tion of  Christ.  Temporal  restoration,
and  a  Messiah  incarnate  in  Palestine,  to
Judah ;  but  a  spiritual  return  to  God,
and  possession  of  Heavenly  Land,  for
those  who  rest  in  Jesus.  *'  With  Him
in  paradise."


2.  The  calling  which  the  Prophet
fulfils,

a.  He  utters  what  he  receives  from
God.  Is  not  a  philosopher,  to  evolve
truths;  but  a  prophet,  to  accept  a
message  and  utter  it.  His  are  not,
therefore,  earth-born  speeches,  not  of
human  wisdom  or  human  wishes.
Preachers  are  to  "tell  what  seen  and
heard  "  (Luke  vii.  22).

h.  Announces  truths  with  a  grieving
heart.  Sorrowing  over  the  sin  he  hai>
to  denounce,  and  the  doom  he  has  to
pronounce.  Not  angry  with  the  people
(Num.  XX.  10);  "not  desiring  the
woeful  day"  (Jer.  xvii  16);  but  with
tearful  pity  (chap.  ix.  1),  as  with  Paul
(Phil.  iii.  18).

c.  Suffering  at  the  hands  of  those  he
warns,  (John  iii.  20,  x.  31,  39;
Gal.  iv.  16.)  The  preacher  of  right-
eousness is  a  living  denunciation  of  those
who  love  sin  and  disobey  God.  So,
too,  is  every  Christian  whose  charac-
ter and  actions  speak  out  for  the
Lord  against  human  indifference  and
iniquity;  therefore  he  is  maligned  and
maltreated.

3.  The  hearers  to  whom  the  words
apply.  To  Judah  first,  as  being  his
own  nation.  "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."
For  there  is  a  patriotism  of  Divine
service  (comp.  Rom.  ix.  1-3,  x.  1).

But  also  "  to  the  nations,"  ver.  4.  The
world  needs  the  "  wo>  ds."  "  Go  ye  into
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature."

Ver.  2.  "To  whom  the  word  of  the
Lord  came  in  the  days  of  Josiah,"

Theme:  The  Prophet's  timely  .ab-

BIVAL.

Jerusalem  and  Judah  had  already
heard  the  Divine  sentence  of  overthrow
from  former  prophets ;  now  the  time  was
near;  and  as  the  interval  diminished,
God  raised  up  this  earnest,  pleading
witness  under  the  third  king  before  the
Captivity.

I.  God  discerns  the  spiritual  neces-
sities of  the  age.

He  had  given  Josiah  as  king;  but
more  was  required,

1.  The  royal  reformation.  The  king,
alone  in  his  pious  zeal,  was  doing  all  a
king  could  :  rectifying  the  evil  customs,

16


OBAP.  I.


EOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


Instituting  religious  observances,  stem-
ming crime,  establishing  Jehovah's  wor-
Bhip.  But  notwithstanding  all,  there
remained  still :

2.  The  nation* 8  degeneracy.  The
king's  work  could  not  reach  the  nation's
heart,  could  not  renew  Judah,  and
recall  the  people  to  spiritual  allegiance
to  Jehovah.  All  was  external  thus
far.  There  was  needed,  and  therefore
sent:

3.  The  sacred  call.  It  was  Jeremiah's
work  to  plead  for  Gk)d,  speak  to  the
heart  of  Judah,  allure  the  nation's  trust
and  love.  This  inner  work  remained  to
be  done.  And  the  prophet  came  upon
the  scene  to  supply  the  lack  which  the
king's  work  made  more  evident.

IL  God  sends  companionship  in
holy  and  arduous  work.

Jeremiah  came  to  the  aid  of  Josiah.
*'  At  first  no  man  stood  by  him."  But
lonely  service  will  weary  the  most  heroic
heart.  Christ  sent  His  disciples  *'  two
and  two."  All  sacred  ministry  asks
helpful  companionship.

1.  It  supplemented  the  royal  dejiciency.
Not  only

a.  The  impotence  of  the  king,  who
could  not  attempt  the  persuasive  minis-
try, the  spiritual  pleading  with  the
people,  needful  to  awaken  their  sym-
pathetic response  to  his  reforming  plans ;
but

h.  The  ignorance  of  the  king.  The
Scriptures  were  lost;  Josiah  did  not
know  the  Law  and  Covenants  until  after
he  had  reigned  eighteen  years,  when  the
Book  was  found.  A  child  of  guilty
Amon,  brought  up  in  a  corrupt  court,
he  could  have  received  no  religious
instruction.  Jeremiah  supplied  this
lack,  as  Aaron  supplemented  Moses'  de-
ficiency.

2.  It  sanctioned  the  royal  work,
Jeremiah's  timely  arrival  would  :

a.  Show  the  king  God's  approval  of
his  designs ;  and

h.  Impress  the  nation  with  the
urgency  and  need  of  a  complete  return
to  God.

III.  God  supplies  effective  helps  to
conversion.

Could  He  have  done  more  to  aid
Judah  to  return  to  Him  than  by  giving
16


to  devotedly  religiotu  a  Kn^,  and  so
pathetically  patriotic  a  prophet  f

1.  Guilt  and  irreligion  were  con-
demned and  discouraged.  Both  king
and  prophet  expressed  Divine  disap-
proval of  wrong.  None  were  left  in
doubt  whether  to  "  call  good  evil  or  evil
good."  Sinners  cannot  plead  ignorance
or  uncoTisciousness,  of  sin.

2.  Calls  and  opportunities  were  offered
to  neumess  of  life.  Oh,  how  they  surround
us  !  The  Gospel,  the  Cross,  the  Spirit,
our  instructors,  all  plead  with  us.  Jere-
miah's ministry  was  an  interval  of  hope
to  Judah.  We  have  "  an  accepted  time,
a  day  of  salvation."

3.  Neglect  of  God  was  left  without
justification  or  excuse.  They  would  not
hearken  (Heb.  x.  26-29).  "  How  shall
we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salva-
tion?"

Ver.  2,  3.    Them^:  The  changeful

INCIDENTS  OF  A  LIFE's  WORK.

Life  is  full  of  changes,  reverses,  and
uncertainties.  (See  Addenda  to  chap,  i.,
**  Changes:')

1.  His  mission  began  in  auspicious
times.

All  encouraging  and  helpful  to  the
prophet's  mission.  King  friendly  to  his
work;  nation  aroused  by  royal  activities;
Temple  services  re-established  ;  Book  of
Law  soon  found.

IL  His  office  continued  amid  regal
changes,

\,  The  various  character  of  kings.
Each  unlike  the  other.  Royal  goodness
not  hereditary.  (See  Critical  Notes,  6,
above.)

2.  The  royal  attitude  towards  the
prophet.  What  an  influence,  in  further-
ing or  retarding  the  servants  of  God,
the  throne  exerts !

3.  The  overthrow  of  royal  opponents.
Each  crowned  head  that  lifted  itself
against  God's  purpose  and  the  prophet's
mission  was  bowed  to  ignominious
shame  (Ps.  ii.  2-4).

III.  His  prophecies  closed  amid  na-
tional calamity.     Destruction  and  exile.

\,  His  warnings  fulfilled  upon  the
disobedient.

2.  His  messages  followed  the  captives.
He  still  was  with  them,  and  spoke  for
God  among  them  in  Egypt


BUMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  L


3.  His  promises  lighted  up  their
exile,  pointing  them  on  to  Eestoration
and  to  Christ.

Thus:

L  We  cannot  perceive  the  end  of  a
thing  from  its  beginning,  A  career
began  amid  national  reformation,  closed
amid  utter  overthrow  and  ruin.  What
reverses  enter  life  !  How  may  promises
perish  amid  disaster !

ii.  God  hides  the  sterner  duty  from
us  at  the  outset.  Strength  and  courage
and  faith  must  grow,  or  Jonahs  would
always  flee  from  life's  severer  ordeals
and  tasks.  "  He  tempers  the  wind  to
the  shorn  lamb,"  does  not  lay  upon  us
more  than  we  can  bear.

iil  Sacred  work  must  he  done  regard-
less of  surroundings.-  It  is  not  for  the
Lord's  servants  to  '*  faint  in  the  day  of
adversity."  Kings  may  menace,  perils
may  arise :  but

**  Where  duty  calls  or  danger.
Be  never  wanting  there.'*

Painful  as  are  the  mutations  around  us —
and  they  were  to  Jeremiah — still  wo
must  be  loyal  in  our  duty  to  God,  and
responsive  to  sacred  claims.

iv.  Our  mission  is  to  act  the  part  the
hour  demands.  Help  the  good  Josiah  ;
withstand  the  rebellious  Jehoiakim ;
chide  and  correct  the  compromising
Zedekiah ;  go  with  the  captives  into
their  affliction.  Suit  our  work  for  Christ
to  the  characters  around  us,  and  to  the
circumstances  in  which  we  find  them.
Human  life  is  not  stereotyped;  Chris-
tian work  must  be  versatile.

V.  Uverg  crisis  finds  the  dutiful  servant
sufficient  and  sustained.  For  God  is  able
to  make  him  stand  ;  yea,  and  he  shall  be
hold  en  up.  So  this  prophet  found.  So
all  who  are  the  Lord's  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).

Yer.  5.  Foreknowledge  and  predes-
tination.

God's  address  here  is  unequivocal  and
emphatic.  Two  antagonistic  opinions
held  :  1.  Divine  purposes  are  absolute
with  man,  and  include  the  determina-
tion by  God  of  man's  will  and  life.  2.
Divine  purposes  are  conditional  on  man ;
they  foresee  and  accord  with  man's  own
determination.

Certainly  Jeremiah'g  will  had  to  be
subordinated ;  but  it  was  a  free  subor-


dination. There  was  no  violation  of  his
liberty  of  action ;  God  gently  conquered
his  reluctance  and  rectified  his  fears.
This  Divine  work  upon  him  gave  him
liberty,  set  him  free  from  enthralling
misgivings  and  dreadful  apprehensions ;
raised  him  into  assurance  and  reliance
on  Jehovah;  his  subjugation  was  his
'^translation  from  the  bondage  of  cor-
ruption into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the
children  of  God."
I.  Facts  afELrmed.

1.  The  unborn  child  foreknoton  of  God.
"  Before  I  formed,  I  knew  thee."  The
Divine  idea  antedates  the  Divine  act
(Ps.  cxxxix.  16).  Yet  this  assertion  of
mere  foreknowledge  is  not  all  which
the  Hebrew  word  "  knew "  implies.
"  Yerbum  cognitionis  verbum  favoris
est."  It  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of
having  a  regard  for ;  I  approved  of  thee.
"  I  hnow  him  (Abraham),  that  he  will
command  his  children,"  &c.  (Gen.  xviiL
19;  comp.  Ps.  1,  6;  Nahum  1,  7.  See
cognate  N.  T.  word,  Matt.  vii.  23).
"  Those  who  know  (revere  and  cherish)
Thy  name,"  <fec.  (Ps.  ix.  10 ;  comp.
Hos.  viil  2).

2.  A  life  predestinated  to  God's  service.
"  Before  birth  I  sanctified  thee.'*  Not
from  (after)  birth,  but  from  before  birth.
We  may  understand  the  word  "sanc-
tified "  as  meaning  (with  Henderson  and
Lange)  set  apart  to  sabred  service ;  they
contending  that  primarily  the  word
*'  does  not  mean  to  be  pure  or  holy ;
that  God  had  cleansed  Jeremiah  from
the  pollution  of  original  sin,  or  had  re-
generated him  by  His  Spirit ;  but  that
He  had  separated  him  in  His  eternal
counsel  to  his  appointed  work."  So
Samson  (Judges  xiii.  5);  Isaiah  (xlix.  1);
John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i.  16) ;  Paul
(Gal.  i.  15).  Others  claim  that  the
primary  significance  is  to  be  pure^  clean
(Speaker^s  Commentary) ;  and  here,
therefore,  "I  made  thee  holy,"  and
"  so  to  dedicate  to  holy  purposes "
(comp.  2  Sam.  viii.  11).  Keil  observes
and  infers  that  "  God  has  predetermined
before  our  birth  what  is  to  be  our  calling
on  earth,  and  He  has  accordingly  so  in-
fluenced our  origin  and  growth  in  the
womb  as  to  prepare  us  for  what  we  are
to   become    and    to    accomplish,"   &c

17


OOAF.  L


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


Three  interpretations :  (a.)  Eternal  separ-
ation to  God!s  service,  {b.)  Absolute
sanctification  prior  to  birth;  personal
purity,  (c.)  Control  over  the  life  prior  to
birth  so  as  to  effect  individual  adaptation
for  the  sacred  services  he  would  have  to
fulfil.

The  last  is  preferable.  He  whom  God
foreknows  is  born  with  a  Divinely  secured
aptitude  for  Divine  work.  (See  Addenda
to  chap,  i.,  ^*  Fore-ordination,**)

3.  God*8  prophet  a  Divine  production.
"I  ordained/' — 1.«.,  "appointed"  or
"  gave.**  A  prophet  is  a  Divine  benefac-
tion ;  he  is  born  as  a  boon ;  his  ministry
is  a  gracious  bestownient.     Thus  :

a.  Gifted  witnesses  of  God  are  gifts  to
the  age  from  God(comp.  Eph.  iv.  11,  12).
How  melancholy  if  the  Divine  Father
sent  forth  no  messenger  to  an  erring
world  !  "  All  gone  out  of  the  way,  none
seeketh  after  God ;" — yet  God  leaves  men
to  their  own  wilfulness,  unchecked,  unin-
formed, uninvited  !  Dreadful  if  always
true — "  I  looked,  but  there  was  none  to
help,  and  I  wondered  that  there  was  no
intercessor.*'  But  comp.  Jer.  xL  7,  vii.  25.

b.  Their  presence  among  men  a  testi-
mony of  God,  and  their  voice  a  testi-
mony from  God.  A  prophet  is  a  proof
that  God  is :  his  endowments  and  mis-
sion are  supernatural :  and  his  attesta-
tions are  miraculous :  and  his  word
speaks  from  God ;  inspired,  authorita-
tive. "He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  Me."
Such  are  the  assertions  of  this  verse.

n.  Truths  evolved.

1.  Events  of  time  do  but  unfold  pro-
jects of  eternity.  Occurrences  on  earth,
as  if  the  veil  is  thrown  aside,  show
Divine  arrangements  till  then  hidden.
God  is  planning  ;  time  is  unrolling  His
plans,  "bringing  hidden  devices  to  pass."
God  is  interested  therefore  in  all  inci-
dents ;  they  lie  within  His  anticipation.
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto."

2.  Opportune  incidents  are  Divinely
regulated  events.  It  was  opportune  that
Jeremiah  came  just  at  that  juncture  of
Judah's  history,  while  Josiah  was  en-
deavouring to  reform  the  nation,  and
ere  the  foe  was  at  the  gates.  Was  it
merely  fortuitous,  a  coincidence  ?  Or
rather,  "  He  worketh  all  things  after  the
counsel  of  His  own  will."

Id


3.  A  child* 8  birth  and  occupaiion  work
out  God*8  purposes.  There  is  a  provi-
dence therefore  over  our  entrance  uito
life.  Yes,  and  the  fitfulness  of  child-
hood, wilfulness  of  youth,  the  risk  and
uncertainty  of  opening  manhood  (as  we
see  them),  only  screen  the  movements
of  a  Hand  which  controls  all,  directing
the  life  into  appointed  paths.  We  work
into  and  work  out  Divine  intents.

4.  Messages  from  God  await  the  ad-
vent of  a  herald.  God  had  much  to  say
to  Judah,  even  while  Josiah  worked  on
alone ;  but  Jeremiah's  hour  was  not  yet.
Startling  to  think  of  solemn  messages
laid  up  in  heaven,  kept  sealed,  until  a
babe  is  born  at  Anathoth,  and  nourished
into  youth.  But  the  word  of  the  Lord
comes  by  the  appointed  herald  at  the
needed  hour.  "  O  Lord,  send  by  whom
Thou  wilt  send."

Thus,  therefore,  a  man  pleading  for
God  is  God's  pleading  with  man.

Query.  Is  the  Divine  foreknowledge
and  predestination  true  only  of  eartKs
greatest  sonSy  and  God's  special  witnesses  f
In  a  sense  true  of  all  men.  **  Known
unto  God  are  all  His  works,  from  the
beginning  of  the  world."  **A  man's
goings  are  of  the  Lord."  Each  should
realise  his  place  in  God's  plans,  and  ask,
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  T*  v

**  Stand  up  1  thou  art  as  true  a  man  v***^.

As  moves  the  human  mass  among  ;
As  much  a  part  of  the  great  plan
That  with  creation's  dawn  began.

As  any  of  the  throng.
.....
"  The  great !  what  better  they  than  thee  t
As  theirs,  is  not  thy  will  as  free  f
Has  Qod  with  equal  favours  thee
Neglected  to  endow  ?

"  With  these,  and  passions  under  ban.
True  faith,  and  holy  trust  in  God,
Thou  art  the  peer  of  any  man  I
Look  up,  then,  that  thy  little  span
Of  life  may  be  well  trod."

Ver.  6.  The  pleadings  of  fear.

Literally,  '*Alas/  my  Lord  Jehovah  Z*^
There  is  no  resistance  on  Jeremiah's
part,  but  he  shrinks  back  alarmed.  So
at  the  vision  of  the  cherubim,  Isaiah
cried,  *'  Woe  is  me  !"  and  Ezekiel  '*  sat
astonished  seven  days."  Jeremiah's
gentle  and  tender  spirit  submits,  but
with  a  cry  of  pain  "  {Speaker^s  Comr
mentary),     ** /  cannot  speak**  <fcc.     Th*


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAM.


CUAf .  L


Targam  paraphrases  this  correctly,  "  /
cannot  prophesy  " — t.c.,  I  have  not  the
powers  of  oratory  necessary  for  success.
The  prophets  of  Israel  were  the  national
preachers  in  religious  matters,  and  their
orators  in  political.  The  reluctance  ex-
hibited by  God's  servants  (Exod.  iv.  10,
vi  12,  30 ;  Jonah  i.  3)  to  accept  the  call
shows  that  they  did  not  assume  the
office  under  the  impulse  of  self-deceiv
ing  fanaticism.

I.  Weakness  it  the  channel  of  Divine
efficiency.  God  works  by  weak  things
(1  Cor.  I  26-29);  for  they  most  magnify
God  (Ps.  viiL  2).

II.  Conscious  disqualification  the
preparation  /w  noblest  achievements.
Equipped  with  nothing  of  self,  there
was  room  for  God's  grace  to  clothe  him.
He  became  mighty  because  he  felt  him-
self nothing.

A  prophet's  qualification  is  not  apti-
tude for  uttering  Divine  discourses
or  foreseeing  calamities,  but  speaking
words  given  him  with  all  assurance,  and
as  an  ambassador.  (Addenda  to  chap,  i.,
^^  I  am  a  child,*  and  "7  cannot  speak")

III.  Terror  in  the  presence  of  re-
sponsihility.

a.  Overwhelmed  with  vastness.  "  Ah,
Lord  GodT'

h.  Timidity  shrinks  appalled.   "  Ah  I  *'

c.  Inexperience  dreads  duty.  A  child
to  speak  /

d.  Incapacity  urged.  "I  cannot  speaf

e.  Youth's  natural  misgivings.  *'  I  am
a  child."

Ver.  6-7.  Theme  :  Fears  and  com-
forts IN  PROSPECT  OP  LABOUR  FOR  GOD.

Here  is  a  young  man  trembling  on
^  the  threshold  of  a  life  of  arduous  ser-
vice. Here  is  the  Master  equipping  him
for  the  service,  dissipating  his  fears  and
assuring  his  heart.

The  scene  is  a  common  one.  Trem-
bling fingers  ever  gird  on  the  armour.
Nor  is  it  wonderful.  Think  of  magni-
tude of  the  undertaking,  feebleness  of
instrument,  deadly  hostility  of  foe.  God's
Davids  always  had  to  meet  the  world's
Goliaths  with  nothing  but  sling  and  stone.

I.  The  fear  of  God's  servants  in
prospect  of  labour.

1.  He  feels  his  weakness,     "  A  child."


a.  Having  no  influence.  Men  will
listen  to  those  of  riper  years.  Speakers
who  can  appeal  to  public  services
rendered,  and  to  old  and  tried  friends,
thus  secure  attention.  Jeremiah  had
no  such  advantages.

b.  Having  no  experience.  How  can
a  "  child  "  find  the  clue  to  intricacies  of
human  heart?  How  successfully  com-
bat sophistries  of  man  1

e.  Being  unstable.  "A  child"  is
easily  influenced,  soon  afraid.  While
seeking  to  deliver  others,  himself  may
be  ensnared.

2.  He  feels  his  ignorance.  How  speak
of  themes  which  exhaust  vocabulary  of
angels  1  How  little  know  of  Thy  word
and  ways,  or  of  deplorable  and  dreadful
condition  of  men !

Every  preacher  should  feel  this.  Think
of  the  surpassing  excellencies  of  Jesus;
and  we  but  beggars  outside  the  city
gate,  who  yet  have  to  tell  of  the  Majesty
dwelling  amidst  splendours  of  palace !
We  only  know  in  part ;  have  seen  but
glimpses  of  the  King.  True,  we  know
enough  to  bless  ourselves,  but  not  enough
to  do  Him  the  honour  He  deserves.

How  little  we  know  of  man.  Each
different  from  his  fellow;  exposed  to
specific  temptations  and  sorrows.

3.  He  feels  his  unworthrness,  "A
child,"  undistinguished,  unknown.

4.  He  dreads  the  enmity  of  man.
Though  "  a  child  "  he  knows  the  hostility
of  man  to  truth.  Not  unnatural  to
dread  world's  malice.  "Crucified  to-
gether with  Christ,"  is  no  mere  poetic
fancy.  We  have  fellowship  with  His
shame,  scourging,  darkness,  distress.
Men  drove  rough  iron  into  the  Master's
hands,  will  not  bind  ours  with  silken
cords ;  placed  on  His  head  crown  of
thorns,  will  not  place  on  ours  crown  of
roses ;  gave  Him  vinegar,  not  us  wine ;
pierced  His  side,  will  not  merely  menace
ours  !

II.  The  comforts  of  God's  servants
in  prospect  of  labour.

If  our  fears  be  many,  our  consola-
tions abound.

1.  The  assurance  they  are  called  to  the
work.  "  I  ordained  thee  a  prophet."
Despite  his  ignorance,  unwortbiness,  and
fear.

19


CBAP.  L


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


2.  The  knowledge  of  the  purpose  of
God,  "Thou  shalt  go  to  whom  I
send  thee."  Some  find  here  reason  for
inactivity  ;  they  say,  "  He  will  save  His
elect,"  and  then  fold  their  arras.  But
God's  purpose  is  not  only  that  Israel
shall  be  saved,  but  that  Jeremiah
should  "  go."  It  contemplates  the  means
as  well  as  end.

Rejoice  at  the  knowledge  that  it  is
part  of  Divine  plan  to  use  us.

3.  The  promise  of  the  presence  of  God.
"I  am  with  thee,"  <fec.  (ver.  8).  We
have  not  to  carry  out  His  purpose  with-
out His  help.  This  promise  a  sovereign
antidote  for  every  fear.  Was  he  weak  f
The  Almighty  was  near.  Ignorant  f
The  *'  wisdom "  was  at  hand.  Un-
worthy ?  The  Lord  of  glory  stood  by
him.

4.  The  fact  that  the  message  was  from
God.  "  Whatsoever  I  command  thee,
thou  shalt  speak."  We  have  not  to
guess  our  theme ;  we  have  the  mind  of
Christ.  The  teacher  sent  from  God  may
and  must  be  dogmatic. — *^  Items  and
Ttvigs."

Ver.  8.  He  had  never  occupied  any
public  station  or  performed  any  public
duty.  "  You  need  not  fear  their  faces
— the  thing  that  timid  young  men  are
most  wont  to  fear.  Think  only  that
the  Lord  is  with  you,  and  let  his  presence
be  your  joy  and  strength."

1.  His  ministry  would  lead  him  before
high  and  mighty  personages.

2.  His  messages  would  arouse  the
malignity  of  haughty  potentates.

Not  easy  to  confront  such  men,  to
condemn  them,  to  iTicur  their  hatred,  to
denounce  their  designs.  Fear  of  man  must
retire  before /ea%  to  God.

Ver.  9,  10.  Theme:  Incapacity  Di-
vinely RECTIFIED.

There  is  a  special  feature  in  Jeremiah's
preparation  and  equipment — no  human
presence  came  upon  the  scene  to  render
aid,  as  with  Saul  of  Tarsus  (Acts  ix.  17)  ;
nor  even  angelic  interposition,  as  with
Joshua  (Zech.  iii.  4,  5) ;  nay,  nor  yet
exalted  seraphim,  as  with  Isaiah  (vi.  6, 7)
—  it  was  a  direct  act  of  Jehovah.  Al-
ready there  had  been  (ver.  8) —

I.  Courage  inspired.  For  God  re-
20


quires  valour,   and  a  dauntless  faith.
These  he  called  into  exercise.

II.  Ahilitg  conferred  (ver.  9).

1.  The  act :  stretching  forth  of  the
Divine  hand  =  exertion  of  Divine  power.
Something  was  accomplished.  There
was  more  than  an  exertion;  an  emanation
of  power.

2.  The  touch  :  it  indicated  Divine,
energy  communicated.  It  had  passed
into  him  whom  the  Hand  touched,  like
electric  fluid  into  a  receiver.

3.  The  localisation  of  power:  the
"  mouth."  Jeremiah's  power  was  to
be  in  speech ;  not  in  physical  vigour,
nor  even  mental  force,  but  in  uttering
God-given  "  words."  The  local  incapa-
city rectified.

III.  Communication  intrusted.  "  I
have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth."  This
was  a  tangible  pledge  of  inspiration.
God  committed  His  messages  into  Jere-
miah's charge.  Henceforth  he  would
not  speak  of  himself,  but  "  as  the  Spirit
gave  him  utterance."

It  was  a  real,  not  imaginary  occur-
rence ;  a  positive  contact  of  Deity  with
the  now  divinely-endowed  prophet,  and
it  imparted  to  him  his  sacred  commission.

IV.  Installation  completed  (ver.  10).

1 .  The  dividing  line  of  his  life.  ".  This
day."  A  mere  Anathoth  youth  until
that  day ;  henceforth  God's  prophet,
"  All  things  become  new."

2.  His  exalted  mission.  "  Set  over,"
<fec.  God's  deputy :  placed  as  overseer,
above  kings  and  nations,  to  supervise
and  control  events.  For  his  word  would
work  more  potently  than  royal  designs
or  strife  of  armies  (Jer.  xxiii.  29).  The
issue  showed  this  (comp.  Acts  v.  38,
39).

V.  Work  defined.  "  To  root  out,"  <kc.
He  had  the  highest  authority  (comp.
Mark  i.  22).  He  moved  amid  magnates
doing  Heaven's  behests,  foreshadowing
the  Lord's  mission  (John  v.  2).  God's
Word  has  much  to  overthrow  and  demo-
lish— in  nations,  in  human  habits,  in
secret  affections  and  thoughts.  All
forms  of  sin  must  fall  before  its  con-
demnations (Heb.  iv.  12,  13).  On  the
scene  of  ruin  it  then  begins  **to  build
and  plant**  (comp.  Eph.  iii.  20-22,
ij.  10).


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


OHAP.  I.


Such  is  the  work  every  man  of  God
has  to  do.  Taking  the  sword  of  the
Spirit,  he  is  to  exterminate  and  slay  all
hostility  to  God;  and  then  to  rear  on
the  ruins  of  sin  a  "  holy  temple  unto
the  Lord/'   "  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God."

Ver.  9.  Theme  :  Thb  touch  of  God.
"  The  Lord  touched  my  mouth"

Query,  Was  the  act  objective,  or  only
subjective ;  an  actual  occurrence,  or
an  impression  on  the  inner  conscious-
ness t

"  The  Lord  cannot  literally  have  put
His  words  into  the  prophet's  mouth ;
He  can  only  have  given  him  the  charism
of  which  the  words  were  the  necessary
result. " — Lange,

"  Attactus  oris  signum  est  notans  effi-
caciam  spiritus  sancti,  quippe  qui  digitus
Dei  sit,aperiens  labia  ministrorumverbi'*
(Ps.  IL  13,  U,  17;  Luke  xxi.  16).—
Forster,

A  purely  subjective  transaction,  "as
the  moment  when  the  presentiment  first
flashed  clearly  through  the  soul  of  Jere-
miah that  his  prophetic  culling  was  of
Divine  appointment." — Ewald,

**  A  physical  and  literal  incident ;  "
and  that  "  the  Son  of  God,  in  pre-inti-
mation  of  His  blessed  incarnation,  ap-
peared to  Jeremiah  in  a  human  form."
— Starke,

*'The  hand  is  the  instrument  of
making  and  doing;  the  touching  of
Jeremiah's  mouth  by  the  hand  of  God
is  consequently  an  emblematic  token
that  God  frames  in  his  mouth  what  he
is  to  speak.  It  is  a  tangible  pledge  of
ifM<7rvsv(rig,  inspiration  embodiment  of  that
influence  exercised  on  the  human  spirit
by  means  of  which  holy  men  of  God
speak,  being  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  act  is  a  real  occurrence,  taking  place
not  indeed  in  the  earthly,  corporeal
sphere,  but  experienced  in  spirit,  and  of
the  nature  of  ecstasy" — Keil,

"  An  appropriate  symbolic  act.  .  .  .
The  touching  of  the  lips  of  Isaiah  with
a  live  coal  (chap.  vL  7),  and  the  giving
of  a  book  to  Ezekiel  to  eat  (chap.  ii.
8-10),  were  similarly  symbolical  of  pro-
phetic qualification,  and  implied  a  gift
of  inspiration  (comp.  Dan.  x.  16).  In
all  these  instances  the  actions  occurred
in  supernatural  vision." — Hendertmi,


"  The  symbol  of  the  bestowal  of  divine
grace  and  help,  by  which  that  want  of
eloquence,  which  the  prophet  had  pleaded
as  a  disqualification,  was  removed ;  and
distinctly  was  an  external  actf  impress-
ing itself  objectively  upon  his  conscious-
ness, though  in  what  manner  it  is  im-
possible for  us  to  telL" — Speaker's
Com,

I.  The  varied  conseauences  of  the
Divine  touch.

Old  Testament,

1.  Expiation  (Isa.  vi.  6).

2.  Inspiration  (Jer.  i  9 ;  comp.  Ezek.
ii.  8-10;  Isa.  li.  16;  comp.  Acts  ii
3).

3.  Impartation  of  strength  (Dan.  z.
16).

J^ew  Testament.

Blessing  infants  (Luke  xviii.  15).

Kemoving  organic  defects  (Mark  vii.
32,  viii.  22).

Curing  diseases  (Matt.  viii.  2,  15).

Upraising  the  prostrate  (Mark  ix.
27).

Awaking  the  dead  (Luke  vii.  14).

Reviving  the  overwhelmed  soul  (Rev.
i  17).

Infer :

1.  2%at  the  liand  of  power  and  re-
newal is  the  same  in  the  Old  and  New
I'estaments,  "  My  Father  worketh  hither-
to, and  I  work."

2.  That  all  remedial  changes  in  man
are  Divine.  "  He  that  sat  upon  the
throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things
new  "  (Rev.  xxi.  5).  "  We  are  His  work-
manship" (Eph.  ii.  10).

IL  Human  need  of  the  transforming
touch  of  God.

1.  These  varied  incidents  denote  marHs
varied  ailments  and  afflictions,

a.  Incompetent  for  Divine  work  (Isaiah,
Jeremiah,  Daniel).

b.  Suff'ering  from  physical  malforma-
tions and  maladies.

c.  Bowed  down  before  visions  of  glory
(John  on  Patmos).

2.  The  gracious  issues  of  the  Divine
touch  reveal  the  suitability  and  sufficiency
of  grace  in  God,

Power  unlimited  is  in  His  hand.  The
everlasting  hills  tremble  and  smoke  if

21


OBAP.  I.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


He  touch  them.  "Right  hand  of  the
Lord  doeth  valiantly."  He  never  stretch-
ed forth  His  hand  to  work  on  frail
humanity  without  (a.)  immediate  results,
no  delay  in  the  remedy;  nor  without  (6.)
appropriate  results,  the  very  effect  de-
sired ensued  ;  nor  without  (c.)  beneficent
results ;  in  all  cases  "  He  put  His  hands
upon  them  and  blessed  them."  Con-
tact with  Christ  is  life-giving,  healthful,
saving.

Ver.  10.     Theme:  Thk  Prophet  a

8UBVERTER  OF  KINGDOMS.       "  /  have  set

thee  over  the  nations"  <fec.

The  strict  and  literal  import  of  words
here  used  assign  to  the  Divine  teacher
a  sway  above  sceptres,  a  power  mightier
than  potentates,  a  spiritual  domination
over  dynasties  and  temporal  kings.

As  he  stands  before  God  he  is  a  mere
servant,  a  trembling  child;  but  as  he
stands  in  God's  stead  among  men,  he  is
above  rulers  and  princes,  installed  as
vicegerent,  swaying  the  destinies  of
kingdoms.

This  title  (P4keed)  is  given  only  to
those  invested  with  high  authority —
Egyptian  officers  (Gen.  xli.  34),  Abime-
lech's  viceroy  (Judges  ix.  28),  the  high-
priest's  deputy  (2  Chron.  xxiv,  11),  the
Levitical  representative  (Neh.  xL  22^,
chief  governor  in  Temple  (Jer.  xx.  1).
Jeremiah  was  God's  highest  officer,  su-
preme above  monarchs  and  nations.

L  His  official  supremacy  and  super-
vision.    "  I  have  set  thee  over,"  &c.

1.  Empowered  with  a  sway  superior
to  kings;  for  their  sway  was  soon
broken,  their  word  frustrated ;  but  his
endured  and  was  accomplished.  For
there  was  a  Power  behind  his  word,  and
therefore  power  in  his  word.

They  thought  to  defeat  Jeremiah's  in-
fluence by  imprisoning  him ;  but  his
sway  w ent  on,  "  The  word  of  God  was  not
bound;"  it  still  worked  towards  fulfil-
ment Every  living  servant  of  God  is
thus  endowed  with  a  sway  and  a  dignity
above  potentates.  A  chained  prisoner
could  say  to  "King  Agrippa"  and
"  noble  Festus,"  "  I  would  to  God  ye
were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  cw
/  am  /  "

2.  Intrusted  with  tJie  de$tiny  of  king-
doms.    "  He  was  to  have  his  eye  upon

22


the  conduct  of  nations,  and  to  utter  pre-
dictions of  prosperity  or  adversity  ac-
cordingly." —  Hendei'son.  What  was
effected  in  accordance  with,  is  spoken  of
as  a  consequence  of,  his  word.  This
mode  of  speech  also  indicates  the  cer-
tainty of  the  events  he  announced  :  they
would  follow  as  effects  of  the  cause.
The  prophet's  word  would  thus  deter
mine  the  fate  of  nations  (comp.  Ezek.
xliil  3 ;  Jer.  xxv.  15-17  sq,;  Hos.  vi.  5).

II.  The  irresistible  activity  of  his
word.

In  this  case  the  spiritual  was  ascen-
dant over  temporal  authority.  Divine
speech  is  more  stable  than  sceptres ;
words  are  mightier  than  swords.  "  His
words  were  at  the  same  time  deeds,  real
exhibitions  of  power." — Lange.  "  The
word  of  God  in  His  prophets  has  power
to  do  what  it  says  will  be  done." — Words-
worth. "  With  the  words  of  the  Lord
he  is  to  destroy  and  to  build  up  peoples
and  kingdoms.  The  Word  of  God  is  a
power  that  carries  out  His  will,  and
accomplishes  that  whereto  He  sends  it
(Isa.  Iv.  10  sq.).  Against  this  power
nothing  earthly  can  stand." — KeiL

"  At  first  we  should  say,  *  Such  words
can  never  be  applied  in  their  literal  im-
port to  any  seer  or  teacher  :  they  belong
to  the  warrior  and  the  conqueror.  We
must  explain  them  by  a  figure  of  speech
— he  who  discourses  of  the  fall  of  king-
doms is  represented  as  himself  the  over-
thrower  of  them.'  I  do  not  think  that
either  the  analogy  of  language  or  the
facts  of  the  case  justify  that  method  of
interpretation.  If  the  prophet  only
talked  of  what  was  happening  or  what
was  to  happen,  no  poetical  licence  could
permit  us  to  confound  him  with  the
subverters  of  thrones  and  societies.  But
have  we  yet  to  learn  that  a  great  teacher
or  reformer,  though  he  may  never  take
a  sword  into  his  hand,  does  that  which
swords  cannot  do ;  that  swordsmen,  in
fact,  only  carry  out  upon  the  surface
that  which  he  is  doing  underground?
The  uprooting  of  the  thoughts  and  prin-
ciples in  which  acts  originate,  the  plant-
ing the  seeds  of  life  which  are  hereafter
to  bring  forth  fruits  that  all  will  recog-
nise, are  his  functions.  If  he  has  re-
ceived any  inspiration,  any  vital  power


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAff.


CBAF.  I.


at  ally  it  must  be  one  which  enables  him
to  produce  a  movement  at  the  very
heart  of  human  life  and  society,  in  a
region  of  which  the  ordinary  statesman
knows  nothing." — Maurice.

This  power  would  be  used  for  the
most  part  destructively ;  the  overthrow-
ing being  expressed  by  four  different
similes;  yet  also  constructively,  though
to  a  lesser  extent — only  two  words  de-
scribing this  part  of  his  mission.  The
first  is  accomplished  by  'prophesying
Divine  judgment ;  the  second,  by  pro-
mising Divine  mercy.

See  the  power  of  prophecy  (Ezek.
xxxvii.  7-10),  and  of  the  Living  Word
(Rev.  ii.  16,  xix.  15;  Isa.  xi.  4).

Ver.  15.  Theme :  War  the  stroke
OP  God.

"  I  will  call,"  =  /  am  calling.  The
present  tense  of  Hebrew  indicates  judg-
ment has  begun ;  the  Almighty  has
risen  up  to  decisive  action ;  a  Voice
which  will  be  obeyed  is  calling  for  the
long-delayed  retribution ;  Jehovah  is
summoning  His  hosts  to  the  war.  (See
Addenda  to  chap,  i.,  "  War.")

I.  Divine  punishment  by  human
agency.     **  I  will  call,"  <fec.

This  fact  is  the  basis  of  text.  What
man  does,  he  does  in  obedience  to  a  Force
higher  than  himself.     God  uses  him.

1.  Miraculous  forms  of  justice  art
needless.

God  has  them,  and  used  them  (2
Kings  vi.  15-17,  xix.  35).

But  the  armies  of  nations  are  His,  to
do  with  as  He  wills.  So  also  affliction,
accident,  reverses  of  fortune,  mental
and  physical  disasters.  Even  crafty
and  covetous  men,  who  can  wreck  strong
fortresses  of  wealth  and  position,  God
can  use.

2.  Common  incidents  of  calamity  art
not  the  less  supernatural.  If  God  em-
ploys them,  though  His  hand  be  not
seen,  they  are  supernatural.  He  now
avoids  the  extraordinary  methods  of  old
times,  and  works  by  the  ordinary.

II.  Jehovah's  forces  of  retribution.
"All  the  families  of  the  kingdoms,"  <fec.  =
Nebuchadnezzar's  motley  combination
which  made  up  the  Chaldean  army
comp.  Isa.  xiiL  4,  5).

1.  Armies  asstmble  at  His  bidding.


Nebuchadnezzar  or  Cyrus  may  lead
their  war-hosts  to  the  siege,  but  God
reigns  over  rulers  ;  the  "  King  of  kings  *'
doeth  "  according  to  His  will  among  the
armies  of  heaven  and  inhabitants  of
earth."  All  wars  have  behind  them  a
Divine  use.

2.  National  overthrow  testifies  to  na-
tional sin.  So  in  Judah's  case.  Guilt
is  the  occasion  of  all  catastrophes.  His-
tory shows  this  so  with  nations  (see
Nineveh,  Babylon,  Jerusalem;  and  re-
cently Paris).  Eocperience  reveals  the
same  law  at  work  among  men.

III.  Military  counsels  fulfil  Qod's
commands.

*'  They  shall  set  every  one  his
throne,"  <kc. ;  indicating  a  tribunal  of
judgment,  a  council  of  war  concerning
the  fate  of  Jerusalem.  The  decision
would  be  as  God  had  determined  (comp.
Critical  Notes,  above,  8).

1.  Over  decisions  of  court  the  ^^  Judge
of  all  the  earth'*  presides.  This  still
true  concerning  senates,  chambers,  par-
liaments. See  the  fact  as  relating  to  our
Lord  (Acts  iv.  27,  28,  ii.  23 ;  Isa.  xiv.
24-27).

2.  (Over  the  plots  of  armies  the  "  Lord
of  hosts  "  sways  rule.  Their  stratagems
He  oft  defeated;  their  designs  He
sometimes  prospered.  (See  "  Scripture
battles.")  This  equally  true  of  plots  of
wicked  against  righteous,  and  of  hellish
foes  (Ps.  xxxvii.   12,    13;  Ezek.  xxxv.

10 ;  Rev.  xx.  9).

IV.  Foes  sweep  down  on  those  whom
God  abandons.  "  Every  one  his  throne
against  Jerusalem."

1.  The  protection  of  Providence  with-
drawn,  they  invite  the  spoilers.  "  Where
the  carcase  is,  there  the  eagles  will
gather  together."

2.  The  restraint  of  Providence  with-
dravm,  the  spoilers  hasten  to  the  prey.
Just  as  serpents  in  the  wilderness  rushed
into  camp  as  soon  as  God's  restraining
care  was  forfeited.

a.  Unkept  by  God,  our  life  is  hourly
imperilled.    How  different  this  from  Ps
xci.  1-7.

b.  Around  those  Divinely  forsaken  the
hosts  of  evil  quickly  assemble.

c.  Left  to  our  enemies  ensures  utter  rain.
As  with  Judah  (2  Thess.  ii.  10-12).

23


OHAF.   I.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  16.  **  I  will  utt^  my  Judgments"
Ac.  This  phrase,  "to  speak  or  pronounce
judgment,"  is  properly  to  have  a  lawsuit
tuith  one,  an  expression  peculiar  to
Jeremiah  {cf.  iv.  12,  xii  1,  xxxix.  5),
is  equivalent  to  pleading  with  a  person
{cf.  xii.  1  with  ii.  35  ;  Ezek.  xx.  35),
and  signifies  not  only  remonstrating
against  wrong- doing,  but  also  the  pass-
ing of  condemnation,  and  so  includes
trial  and  sentencing. — Keil.

"  To  pronounce  a  judgment  or  judi-
cial sentence  upon  any  one.  Jehovah
threatened  the  Jews  with  punishment
on  account  of  their  rebellious  conduct ;
He  now  declares  He  will  carry  His
threatenings  into  ejQTect  by  means  of  their
enemies,  who  would  sit  in  judgment  and
inflict  the  calamities  upon  them  they
merited.  The  sentences  delivered  by
the  foreign  princes  would  be  in  effect
the  judgments  of  God.  He  would  em-
ploy them  as  His  instruments  in  carrying
them  into  execution." — Henderson.

"  By  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  God  as
judge  pronounces  solemn  condemnation
upon  her." — Speaker's  Com.

*' Viewed  in  one  light,  war  is  the
boiling  caldron  of  human  passion,  upset
by  hazard,  and  bringing  only  ruin  in  its
course ;  in  the  other,  it  is  God  sitting  in
judgment,  with  the  kings  of  the  earth
as  His  assessors,  solemnly  pronouncing
judgment  upon  the  guilty." — Idem.

Through  these  idolatrous  enemies  of
God's  people  Jehovah  would  execute
His  judgments.

Theme:  Unoonsoious  Divine  agents.

I.  Divine  control  over  the  workings  of
the  human  will.

II.  The  ungodly  may  unknowingly
further  God^s  designs.  So  Joseph's
brethren  who  sold  him.  So  Israel's
enemies  in  the  wilderness.

III.  Reckless  hostility  may  hut  obey
His  behests.  "  The  wrath  of  man  shall
praise  Him."  Indulging  their  idolatrous
hatred,  they  wrecked  the  Temple  and
the  city  of  God,  and  thus  chastised
Judah  as  God  designed ;  and  fulfilled
prophecy f  thus  confirming  revelation  for
after-time.

IV.  Man  in  his  most  impious  moods
%$  still  a  subject  of  Divine  government,

34


The  godless  cannot  repel  the  Almighty
from  their  lives.  He  may  work  by  their
very  impiety,  and  compel  them  blindly
to  obey  Him.

V.  To  be  in  the  hands  of  God  for  His
use  in  our  rebellion,  forewarns  our  being
in  His  hands  for  our  Just  requital.  As
Egypt  (Jer.  xlvi.  13);  as  Chaldea  (Jer.
1.  1-3,  9,  10).

Ver.  17.  I.  God's  method  of  holding
Judgment.  Brings  nations  before  Jeru-
salem, and  lets  them  determine  the  fate
of  the  city.  Their  resolves  respecting
Jerusalem  would  express  God's  thought
and  plan.

II.  God*s  chastisements  ai'e  hosed  upon
deserts.  "  Judgments  touching  their
wickedness,"  &c.  They  would  suffer
nothing  they  had  not  merited.  Judicial
sentence,  righteous,  deserved.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  Heroism  in  God's
SERVICE.  ^^Gird  up  thy  loins,  stand
and  speak"  &c.

Girding  the  loins  =  resolute  prepara-
tion for  the  performance  of  duty.  A
metaphor :  the  Orientals,  who  wore  long
robes,  bound  them  up  with  a  girdle  ere
attempted  work  or  started  on  journey
(com p.  2  Kings  iv.  29 ;  Job  xxxviiL  3 ;
Luke  xii.  35 ;  Eph.  vi.  14).  Gk)d  here
summons  Jeremiah  to

(a.)  Earnest  exertion ;  (6.)  firm  pur-
pose ;  (c.)  ready  alacrity ;  (d.)  cheerful
hope,  not  despairing  that  good  might
ensue  from  his  ministry.

He  is  further  reminded  that

(a.)  Fear  is  a  snare  and  dishonour.
(6.)  God  is  greater  than  the  greatest,
therefore  should  His  servants  bear  them-
selves with  assurance,  (c.)  Cowardice
will  entail  confusion  and  contempt.
*'  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall
be  measured  to  you  again."  (Addenda
to  chap,  i.,  "  Courage  before  kings.'')

1.  God  will  be  served  by  courageous,
not  by  craven  souls.

A  ministry  of  "  whispering  humble-
ness" is  puerile  and  revolting.  The  age
wants  men.  Men  appreciate  manly  for-
titude. God  is  dishonoured  by  a  fawn-
ing ambassador.  Lion-hearted  preachers
wanted.

IL  God's  work  requires  resolute
preparation  and  purpose.

^'  Gird  and  stand,"  =  Equip  thyself,


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  i,

and  with  a  stalwart  heart  preach  My  all-coTiquering  importunity,  "lest  their

words  to  the  land.  blood  be  required  at  thy  hand  "  (Ezek.

\.  It v&n determined vfOT)L,    "Whether  xxxiii.).     "Necessity  is  laid  upon  me;

they  will  hear  or  forbear.**  yea,  woe,*'  <fec.  (1  Cor.  ix.  !?6,  17).

2.  It  is  a  denouncing  work.  "  Speak  3.  With  unabashed  fortitude,  remem-
to  them  all  that  I  command,'*  "against  henngforWhom  he  speaks.  "I  command
kings,'*  <fec.,  ver.  18.  thee:"    "be    not    dismayed    at    their

3.  It  is  a  destructive  work.  "  To  root  faces."  For  who  is  man,  even  the
out,  pull  down,"  <fec.,  ver.  10.  mightiest,  when  God  is  in  our  thought  I

4.  It  is  a  Divine  work.  In  God^a  What  can  man  do  to  silence  us,  when
stead  and  name,  speak.  "  Who  suflfi-  we  bethink  of  the  eternal  issues  at  stake,
cient  ?  **  and  the  urgency  of  redemption  ?

IIL  God's  servants  must  confront         Ver.  18  and  19  suggest  further
all  menaces  with  a  dauntless  faith  in         IV.  God's  witness  assured  of  invin-

Him.  cible  strength.

1.  As   one   hearing    awful    tidingsy  1.  The  hostile  array,  ver.  18.
which  must  not  be  trifled  with.    "  Stand          2.  Their  malevolent  treatment,  ver.
and  speak  all  I  command  thee.**  19.

2.  As  a  messenger  who  will  himself  he  3.  His  impregnable  strength,  ver.  18.
condemned  if  he  fail  in  his  charge.  4.  His  Almighty  fortress^  ytv,  19,  "I
Warn  the  people ;  with  earnestness,  and  am  with  thee.**


OUTLINES  ON  NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  AND  TEXTS.

Ver.  5.     Topic:  The  Divinb  Foemation  of  a  Human  Lifb,     Text:  "/

formed  thee"

This  rectifies  the  scientific  idea  of  natural  development ;  asserts  an  Active  Cause
working  for  definite  ends  in  the  instance  of  an  individual;  that  God  has  some^
thing  to  do  with  our  formation  and  our  career.

It  also  explains  the  startling  individuality  ©f  character  and  work  which  is  often
apparent,  and  which  caimot  be  accounted  for  by  parentage  and  circumstances;
children  do  not  reproduce  their  ancestry  always ;  grand  departures  from  the  rule
have  given  the  ages  their  greatest  and  most  useful  men.  Hence  it  is  right  to
affirm  that

I.  Individuality  of  character  and  life  is  a  specific  creation  of  God.

1.  Our  natural  qualities  are  not  accidents  of  human  progeniture.  (See  Addenda
to  chap,  i.,  ^^  Divine  formation  of  a  life")

2.  Our  religious  disposition  is  not  determined  by  domestic  culture— e.^.,  Manas*
seh  was  the  wicked  son  of  good  Hezekiah,  Josiah  the  good  son  of  wicked  Amon.

3.  Our  personality  is  a  factor  in  society  which  God  authorises  and  employs.
Urgo,  a.  The  sacredness  of  our  individuality.

6.  God*s  interest  in  each  life,  and  our  use  of  life.

e.  Our  place  in  Divine  regard.     His  readiness  to  befriend  and  bless.    His

desire  for  our  piety  and  salvation.     He  who  made  us,  made  us  for

Himself,  for  His  glory  and  our  weal.
n.  The  Divine  purposes  forecast  the  issues  of  human  birth.

1.  Our  existence  argues  that  there  is  a  place  for  us  in  the  world;  awaiting  U8,
suited  to  us,  needing  us.

2.  Our  being  in  the  world  is  itself  an  incentive  to  the  faithful  use  of  life.

3.  Our  special  aptitudes  denote  and  designate  our  calling.  God  gives  us  our
distinctive  powers.  His  purpose  for  us  is  that  we  use  ourselves,  and  in  the  most
useful  way,  and  that  we  make  earthly  existence  a  pathway  to  eternal  blessedness
and  reward.

35


CHAP.  L  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.

IIL  A  mission  on  earth  is  predetermined  to  the  man  of  God.     '<  I  ordained

thee  a  prophet."

God  does  not  ordain  the  careers  of  evil  men.  Men  are  free  to  resist  and  reverse
God's  plans  for  them.     They  are  not  helpless  slaves  of  Divine  decrees.

1.  For  the  Divine  servant  there  awaits  a  Divine  service.  "Lord,  what  wilt
Thou  have  me  to  do  ? "

2.  A  life  of  religious  usefulness  works  out  God's  plans.  Ergo^  His  plans  are
beneficent.  He  who  uses  life  to  bless  others,  and  brings  wanderers  back  to  God,
does  what  God  desires  and  designs.

3.  No  career  of  godly  activity  can  be  fruitless  or  unrewarded.  For  it  effects
what  God  arranged.     And  "  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work,"  <fec.

IV.  Eauipment  for  sacred  duties  is  the  effect  of  Divine  grace.  "  I  sanctified
thee."

Catholic  theologians  argue  that  Jeremiah  was  born  without  original  sin.  Neuman
interprets  the  statement  as  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  communicated  to  him  before
birth.  Hoffman,  Henderson,  Lange,  <kc.,  regard  the  word  as  denoting  the  sacred
designation  of  his  life.

1.  The  importance  of  a  good  life,  both  to  God  and  man.  The  life  we  live  does
affect  Him  who  formed  us,  and  its  influence  on  others  may  be  vast  and  imperish-
able.    What  majestic  work  one  life  may  do  for  God  !

2.  A  life  wrecked  and  wasted  by  sin  is  a  calamity.  It  arrests  the  aim  of  God's
grace ;  it  adds  some  force  to  the  rule  of  evil ;  it  deprives  a  man  of  his  birthright ;
it  is  a  melancholy  perversion  and  an  irremediable  catastrophe.  Even  if  the  soul  is
saved  at  the  last,  the  life  is  lost,

3.  Divine  grace  avails  for  the  salvation  and  sanctification  of  each  one.  Jere-
miah, like  Paul,  only  illustrates  the  fulness  of  redemption,  the  abounding  grace  of
God  for  others  (1  Tim.  i  16).

Ver.  7.  Topic:  The  Human  Outoey  Silenced.  Text:  **The  Lord  said  unto
me,  Say  not/'*

This  outcry  was  born  of  shrinking,  lowliness,  apprehension.  It  indicated  a  lack
of  fortitude  and  faith.  If  allowed  to  rule,  it  would  have  arrested  God's  plans,  and
deprived  Judah  of  one  of  her  noblest  prophets,  and  of  a  warning  ministry  urgently
needed.

I.  The  human  heart  is  prone  to  speak  out  against  God.

1.  In  self-assertion,  (a.)  Sometimes  pride  objects  to  God's  commands  and  plans  :
"  I  dislike  this  kind  of  service,  this  mode  of  salvation.  It  levels  me  ! "  (6.)  Or
self-will  utters  itself  :  "  I  cannot  bow,  cannot  acquiesce,  cannot  think  it  right.  My
wUl,  not  Thine,  be  done ! "

2.  In  self-excusing,  (a.)  Cowardice  tremblingly  pleads  :  "  I  cannot  take  up  that
cross.  I  should  make  shipwreck  of  faith.  I  am  not  fit  to  serve."  (6.)  Indifference
answers  with  subtle  voice :  *'  Sacrifice  is  not  required  of  all.  God  cannot  have
given  pleasures  merely  to  deny  them.  It  is  not  urgent  that  I  seek  the  Lord,  or  do
His  bidding."  (c.)  Graceless  humility  urges  its  plea  :  "  I  am  unworthy,  I  am  not
qualified.     Surely  God  doesn't  mean  or  want  me  ! "

n.  Heaven's  claims  override  all  human  reluctance.

1.  God  has  rightful  authority  over  His  creatures.  "  Thou,  Belshazzar,  hast  not
humbled  thine  heart,  but  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  of  heaven  ;  and  the
God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways,  hast  thou  not  glori-
fied" (Dan.  V.  22,  23).  "Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye  say  well,  for  so  I
am!"  (Johnxiii.  13).

2.  Man's  true  attitude  is  unhesitating  acquiescence.  "  Who  art  thou  that  repliest
against  thy  Maker  ?  "

3.  Divine  prescience  never  errs  in  demands.  It  is  folly^  therefore,  and  presump
Hon  for  us  to  question.     He  does  not  mistake  the  man  or  the  appointment.     He

26


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,  OHAF.  L


never  calls  to  service  or  salvation  the  wrong  person  (John  vi.  45  and  37 ;  Rot.
xxii.  17).

ni.  God  silences  altercation,  and  summons  to  obedience.  "  Say  not  1 "  ''  Thou
shalt  go  ;  thou  shalt  speak."

With  unquestioning  promptitude  we  should  reply  to  His  call,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for
Thy  servant  heareth."     His  work  is  solemn,  urgent,  all-constraining.

1.  Our  mil  and  faculties  subordinated  to  God.  Even  as  Abraham  **  obeyed,  not
knowing  whither  he  went."  Do  not  raise  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  God's  plans.
If  He  wants  to  use  you,  let  Him ;  if  to  save  you,  let  Him ;  if  to  honour  you,  let
Him.     *'  It  is  the  Lord ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good  !  "

2.  Our  lives  expended  in  service  for  God.  Times  of  sore  hardship  may  make  U0
falter ;  ready  again  to  speak  out  against  God.  "  Then  I  said,  I  will  not  make  men-
tion of  Him,  nor  speak  any  more  in  His  name,"  &c.  (xx.  8,  9).  But  our  sole  course
is  to  "  endure  to  the  end."

3.  Our  entire  self  completely  abandoned  to  God,  No  word  of  excuse  (Luke  ix.
57-end,  xiv.  18).  No  looking  back.  No  reservation  (Luke  xviiL  28).  For  "ye
are  not  your  own."  Calvin's  motto  on  his  crest  was,  "  I  give  Thee  all;  I  keep  back
nothing  for  myself."    (See  Addenda  to  chap,  i,  "  Obedience.'*)

Ver.  10.  Topic:  Charge  to  Pastors  :  their  Work  defined.  Text:  **  See  I
have  this  day  set  thee  over  nations  and  over  kingdoms  to  root  out,  and  to  pull  doum,
and  to  destroy,  and  to  throw  doum,  to  build,  and  to  plant,**

Differences  between  the  prophet's  and  pastor's  office :  his  an  extraordinary,
yours  ordinary :  his  was  to  be  exercised  over  nations  and  kingdoms,  yours  over  a
church  and  congregation.

Yet,  even  in  his  case,  there  was  no  civil  power :  he  was  no  pope :  nor  was  he  in-
vested with  the  authority  of  a  modern  bishop  :  no  secular  sway ;  he  pulled  down
and  built  up  prophetically.  Though  you  have  no  such  power  as  this,  given  by
extraordinary  inspiration,  yet  in  the  way  of  declaring  God's  word,  "  whosesoever
sins  you  remit,  they  are  remitted,  and  whosesoever  sins  you  retain,  they  are  re-
tained."

Your  labour  is  less,  yet  the  nature  of  your  work  is  the  same;  and  the  same
spirit  of  faithfulness  is  required  over  a  few  things  as  over  many.

Your  work  is  divided  into  two  parts  :

1.  To  discourage  evil,  "  root  out,  pull  down,  destroy,  and  throw  down,'*

2.  To  encourage  good,  "  build  and  plant"

The  imagery  is  of  two  kinds :  that  of  a  house,  and  that  of  a  garden,

1.  The  Church  is  God^s  house,  God's  building,  and  you  are  appointed  to  "  labour
together  with  God,"  to  pull  down,  destroy,  and  throw  down  the  rubbish,  and  then
to  build  upon  a  new  and  good  foundation,

2.  The  Church  is  also  GodJs  garden,  and  you  are  appointed  to  work  in  it,  keej
it  in  order,  root  out  weeds,  plant  and  cultivate  the  godly  fruit.

I.  Inauire  what  are  the  evils  against  which  you  must  contend,  and  thd
methods  you  are  to  adopt  in  this  opposition.

1.  By  your  public  ministry  root  out  errors  in  doctrine.  Respecting  God  :  His
character.  His  ways  with  men.  His  law,  both  in  precepts  and  penalty.  Respecting
Christ :  defend  His  dignity,  maintain  His  atonement.  Respecting  your  people :
such  as  self-righteousness  and  presumptuous  hope.  Pull  down  also  the  vain  expec-
tations of  sinners.

2.  By  leading  the  Church,  in  the  exercise  of  faithful  discipline,  root  otU  evil-doers.
Churches,  formerly  respectable  and  prosperous,  are  decaying  for  want  of  discipline.
Some  pervert  the  parable  of  wheat  and  tares  as  excuse  for  negligence ;  but  the
field  is  the  world,  not  the  Church.

3.  By  rendering  your  pastoral  viiits  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  conviction  and

27


CHir.L  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.

correction.  There  are  cases  which  you  could  not  touch  in  the  pulpit  without  irri-
tating ;  others  which  do  not  fall  under  church  censure,  which  should  come  within
the  cognisance  of  the  pastor.  This  is  difficult ;  consequently  some  have  declined
it,  pleading  it  would  offend  and  damage  the  cause.  Leave  results  with  Christ.
Yet  all  may  be  done  without  offence ;  mingle  counsel  and  encouragement  with  cen-
sure, as  did  Paul  with  the  Corinthians.

n.  What  is  that  good  which  you  are  to  encourage :  what  the  work  denoted  by
building  and  planting  1

In  general,  encourage  and  impart  JMS^  sentiments.  Encourage  and  cultivate  holjf
tempers  and  dispositions.  A  company  of  modest,  humble,  upright,  diligent,  holy
people  evidences  "  a  good  minister."     But  more  particularly —

1.  As  a  Builder.

1.  Be  sure  you  lay  a  right  foundation,  Christ  is  the  foundation  :  of  Qod's  lay-
ing, of  apostles'  and  prophets' ;  and  you  must  lay  Him  as  the  foundation  of  faith
and  holiness.

2.  See  that  your  materials  be  fitly  framed  together  (Eph.  ii.  21) :  implying
that

a.  They  be  hewed  and  squared.  What  could  a  company  of  proud,  prejudiced
professors  do  together  with  the  godly  ?     These  sins  must  be  cut  off.

b.  They  be  formed  by  the  same  rule.  Whatever  variety,  in  some  respects  there
must  be  uniformity  :  similarity  of  views ;  hearts  renewed  after  image  of  Christ ;
for  "what  fellowship,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  vi.  U-18).

c.  Every  one  be  put  in  the  situation  for  which  he  is  formed.  Some  have  splendid
gifts,  stones  in  front  of  building,  for  ornament  and  strength.  Others  have  more,
private  excellences,  affectionate  in  counsel,  grave  in  deportment.  Every  gift  should
be  disposed  of  as  that  it  shall  be  of  greatest  use  to  the  whole.  Offices  filled  by
men  because  of  their  property,  perverts  this  law.

3.  So  frame  the  lohole  cw  that  it  may  be  a  fit  habitation  for  God.  It  must  be
God's  house,  not  yours.  Because  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  vanity,  "  This  is  the  house
/  have  built ! "  All  buildings  are  with  a  view  to  habitation.  Build  so  that  God
may  take  up  His  abode  with  you.

2.  As  a  Planter.

1.  Sow  "  wholly  a  right  seed."

2.  Give  attention  to  the  plants  as  you  see  them  grow.

3.  Cultivate  them  by  every  means.

4.  Pray  that  they  may  be  watered  by  the  Holy  Spirit.

a.  While  pulling  down  or  building,  rooting  out  or  planting,  in  God's  house  and
vineyard,  do  not  overlook  your  own.  Personal  religion  is  of  utmost  importance  to  a
minister.

b.  Consider  that  you  are  "  a  labourer  together  with  God,*'  He  that  employs  you
will  reward  you. — Bev,  Andrew  Fuller.

Ver.  19.     Topic:  OPPOSITION.     Text:  *'  And  they  shall  fight  against  thee,"  Ac

Every  servant  of  God  sure  to  meet  opposition.  In  proportion  as  we  are  faithful
to  God  expect  to  be  assailed  by  man.  Doctrines,  habits,  and  acts  of  true  servants
of  God  antagonistic  to  maxims  and  tastes  of  world  :  they  are  protests  against  what
sinners  love.  Success  in  God's  service  fills  them  with  alarm  :  *'  these  men  turn
world  upside  down ; "  and  would  expel  us  from  every  paradise  of  pleasure,  cut  off
•very  supply  of  gratification,  and  abandon  us  to  a  life  of  melancholy.

L  The  vehemence  of  our  foes.     ''  Fight  against  thee,"

Not  fight  against  j^rtTicip/c  so  much  as  persmis.  Aim  to  wound  the  saint  more
than  refute  his  doctrine.

1.  Formerly  this  virulence  was  manifested  in  revolting  cruelties  ;  lit  fires  of
martyrdom ;  crowded  prisons  with  sufferers  for  conscience'  sake ;  drove  thousands

2d


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohat.  1

into  exile ;  even  disturbed  ashes  of  pious  dead  to  emphasise  their  execrations  of  the
living.

2.  Now  opposition  resorts  to  more  secret,  though  not  less  deadly  means.  Seeks  to
prison  confidence  and  joys ;  impede  progress,  disturb  peace,  destroy  spirituality.

The  angel  of  tolerance  and  specious  doctrine  is  seen,  not  the  foul  enemy  :  but
the  same  implacable  heart  of  hate  prompts  hostility.  '*  They  shall  Jigkt "  to  end
of  time,  though  methods  vary.

II.  The  certainty  of  our  security.     "  They  shall  not  prevail."

Saints  may  be  weary,  maimed,  fearful,  but  cannot  be  ultimately  defeated.  False
professors  will  fall  a  prey  :  indeed  they  tempt  the  tempter ;  but  true  men  are  sure
of  victory.     Issue  has  ever  been,  "We  are  more  than  conquerors."

nL  The  source  of  our  confidence.     *'  I  am  with  thee,  to  deliver  thee.'*

This  assures

1.  The  abiding  presence  of  the  Lord,  Near  to  observe  our  behaviour^  hear  our
entreaties,  stimulate  our  hearts.

2.  The  constant  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the  Lord.  "  To  deliver ; "  ».«.,  such
help  shall  be  vouchsafed  that  every  one  of  His  soldiers  shall  "  work  out  his  own
salvation."

Word  of  caution  :  Let  us  be  careful  that  our  enemies  are  the  enemies  of  truth ;
that  our  strict  adherence  to  Divine  commandments  is  the  sole  occasion  of  their
hostility.

If  we  suffer,  let  it  be  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake,  or  we  shall  not  inherit
the  benediction.

It  is  possible  to  fight  for  God,  and  yet  not  be  fighting  with  God,  nor  with
Divinely-appointed  means:  in  which  case  defeat  is  neither  wonderful  nor  un-
deserved.— "  Sermon  Framework.**


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  I:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  1.  '*  Anathoth."     A  poor  village  Neh.  vii  27).     .     .     .     The  cultivation

of   some   twenty   houses,    built   among  of  the  priests  survives  in  tilled  fields  of

white  rocks  and  white  ruins,  on  a  bare,  grain,  with  figs  and  olives.    .    .    .    The

grey  mountain  side.     No  trees,  no  ver-  quarries    still    supply    Jerusalem     with

dure,    no    richness,    no    grandeur,    no  building-stone. — Dr.  SmitKs  Dictionary.

beauty  :    amid   mountain   solitudes  and  Mean  as  the  place  is  now,  it  was  then  a

rocky  dells,  he  (Jeremiah)  mourned  and  walled  town,  and  its  ruins  still  afford  some

wept  over  the  foreseen  calamities  of  his  traces  of  its  ancient  importance. — Kitto.

beloved  country.     .    .    ,    One  can  trace  "  Son  of  HiUdahy      Parentage.      A

in  nearly  all  the  images  and  illustrations  young  minister,  when  about  to  be  or-

with   which    his    writings   abound,    the  dained,  stated  that  at  one  period  of  his

influence    of    those    wild   scenes    amid  life  he  was  nearly  an  infidel.      *'  But,"

which  he  passed  his  boyhood.     Moun-  said   he,  "there  was  one   argument   in

tains,  rocks,  wild  beasts,  shepherds,  are  favour   of    Christianity   which    I    could

again  and  again  introduced. — Dr.  Porters  never  refute — the  consistent  conduct  of

*'' Syria's  Holy  Places.^'  my  father."

Hither  to  his  "  fields  "  Abiathar  was  Richard  Cecil,  from  contemplating
banished  by  Solomon  after  the  failure  of  his  mother's  holy  character  and  inward
his  attempt  to  put  Adonijah  on  the  peace,  was  persuaded  of  the  Faith,  and
throne  (1  Kings  iL  26).  This  was  the  led  to  consecrate  his  life  to  most  success-
native  place  of  Abiezer,  one  of  David's  ful  devotion  to  the  Redeemer,
thirty  captains  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  27),  and  Plato,  seeing  a  child  do  mischief,
of  Jehu  (1  Chron.  xii.  3).  The  "  men  went  and  corrected  the  father  for  it.
of  Anathoth "  returned  ftom  the  cap-  Ver.  2,  3.  Mutations  of  life.  When
tivity   with   Zerubbabel   (Ezra  ii.    23 ;  one  sea  floweth,  another  ebbeth.    When

2d


OHAP.  L


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


one  star  riseth,  another  setteth.  When
light  is  in  Goshen,  darkness  is  in  Egypt
When  Mordecai  groweth  into  favour,
Haman  groweth  out  of  favour.  When
Benjamin  beginneth,  Rachel  endeth.
Thus  we  are  rising  or  setting,  getting  or
spending,  winning  or  losing,  growing  or
fading,  until  we  arrive  at  heaven  or
hell. — Henry  Smith.

Predestination.  *'If  Jeremiah  had
fancied  he  was  a  prophet  because  there
was  in  him  a  certain  aptitude  for
uttering  Divine  discourses  and  foreseeing
calamities,  who  can  tell  the  weariness
and  loathing  he  would  have  felt  for  his
task  when  it  led  to  no  seeming  results,
except  the  dislike  of  all  against  or  for
whom  it  was  ezercised,-^still  more  when
the  powers  and  graces  which  were
supposed  to  be  the  qualification  for  it
became  consciously  feeble.  Nothing
but  a  witness,  the  more  sure  for  being
secret,  *thou  wast  marked  and  sealed
for  this  function  before  thou  hadst  done
good  or  evil ;  all  thy  powers  are  endow-
ments to  fit  thee  for  fulfilling  thy  voca-
tion, but  do  not  constitute  it ;  .  .  .  it
may  produce  nothing  but  pain  to  thy-
self and  to  those  who  are  brought  with-
in thy  influence  ;  .  .  .  still  the  words
must  be  spoken,  the  acts  must  be  done ;
for  they  are  not  thy  words  or  thy  acts; ' —
nothing  but  such  a  persuasion,  written
and  rewritten  in  a  man's  heart,  could
sustain  him  against  the  conflicts,  out-
ward and  inward,  which  pursue  the
true  prophet." — Maurice's  '^  Frophets  and
Kings"

Ver.  5.  Divine  formation  of  a  life.

Fore-ordination,  *^  Propheia  nascitur
non  jit,  A  man  is  not  educated  unto
a  prophet,  but  originally  formed  for  the
office.  Samuel  declared  a  message  from
God  to  Eli  when  he  was  a  little  child.
Note,  God  can,  when  He  pleases,  make
children  prophets,  and  ordain  strength
out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  suck-
lings."— M,  Henry.

Children  do  not  always  reproduce  their
parents.

Origen  had  Christian  parents,  but
Clement  of  Alex.,  and  Justin  Martyr
were  born  and  trained  amid  heathenism  ;
rising  like  stars  out  of  night.  St.
Francis  of  Assisi,  again,  had  parents
^0


who  were  gross,  brutal,  and  sordid;
whereas  he  himself  became  one  of  the
loveliest,  holiest,  and  most  self-abnegat-
ing of  men  which  Christendom  has
known.  Erasmus,  also,  the  eminent
Christian  scholar,  had  a  parentage  whose
history  was  one  of  sorrow,  shame,  and
monastic  bigotry;  yet  he  rose  to  great
usefulness  and  honour  in  the  Church.
Parentage  does  not  always  determine
the  character  and  career  of  the  child.

Ver.  6.  "  /  am  a  child.^^  Lowliness  of
mind.  "Self-distrust  is  the  first  proof
we  give  of  having  obtained  a  knowledge
of  ourselves." — Zimmerman,  St,  Augus-
tine being  asked,  What  is  the  first  thing
in  religion  %  replied.  Humility ;  and
what  is  the  second  %  Humility  :  and
what  the  third  ?  Humility.  "  Humility
is  the  truest  abstinence  in  the  world.
It  is  abstinence  from  self-love  and  self-
conceit,  the  hardest  and  severest  absti-
nence." "  Humility  leads  to  the  highest
distinction,  because  it  leads  to  self-
improvement." — Sir  B.  Brodie.  "We
must  be  little  children  in  our  own  sight,
in  order  to  be  prophets." — Bishop
Wordsworth,  God  dwells  with  the
humble.

'*  The    saint    that  wears  heaven's  brightest!
crown
In  deepest  adoration  bends ;
The  weight  of  glory  bows  him  down
The  most  when  most  bis  soul  ascendi ;
Nearest  the  throne  itself  must  be
The  footstool  of  humility. "

— MONTGOMKBT.

"  I  cannot  speak J^

"Eloquence — a  plague  upon  the
word  when  we  are  talking  of  Jesus  and
of  souls  I — has  no  gift  or  benediction." —
F.  W.  Faber,

"  The  sign-posts  that  point  the  way
by  the  side  of  the  road,  never  have  a
quotation  of  poetry  upon  them,  or  sen-
tences from  Isocrates  or  Sophocles.
There  is  just  the  word,  and  that  is
enough." — (7.  H.  Spurgeon,

Having  heard  Massillon  preach  at
Versailles,  Louis  XIV.  said  to  him,
"Father,  when  I  hear  others  preach,  I
am  very  well  pleased  with  them ;  when
I  hear  you,  I  am  dissatisfied  with  my-
self ? "

"  Even  the  world  honours  consistency
and  courage,  and  the   plainest  speaker


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  I.


will  haye,  in  general,  the  most  hearers.
The  only  part  by  which  a  bull  can  be
safely  taken  is  the  horns." — Power,
Ver.  7.  Obedience.

**  Submit  yourself  to  Qod,    and    you    shall
find
God  ii^aU,  the  battles  of  a  will  resigned,"

— Bishop  Ken.

"  We  can  have  no  idea  what  we  should
be  able  to  do  if  we  were  completely  lost
in  accord  with  God ;  if  we  sought  no
will  but  His;  if  not  a  word  of  our
mouths,  not  a  beat  of  our  hearts,  not  a
thought  of  our  minds,  not  a  movement
of  our  souls  or  bodies  but  were  turned  to
Him  obediently,  in  the  spirit  of  Samuel,
*  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth.'
There  have  been  men  who  have  shown
what  a  man  can  do — a  Luther,  a  Calvin,
a  St.  Paul,  a  Moses — these  men  have
shown  what  a  man  can  do  when  he  only
seeks  to  obey  the  will  of  God.*' — A,
Monod.

"Blessed  is  that  simplicity  which
leaveth  the  difficult  paths  of  dispute,
and  goeth  on  in  the  plain  and  sure
path  of  God's  commandments." — Thomas
ci  Kempis,

Ver.  1  \,  «  What  seest  thou  f  "  *'  Pro-
phets have  need  of  good  eyes  ;  and  those
that  see  well  shall  be  commended,  and
iHit  only  those  that  speak  well." — M.
ilenry,

•'  Almondrtree,**  The  rods  which  the
princes  of  Israel  bore  were  almond  rods,
at  once  the  ensign  of  their  office,  and
the  emblem  of  the  vigilance  which  be-
came them  as  leaders  of  God's  chosen
people  (Num.  xvii.  6-8).  Aaron's  rod,
that  blossomed  and  yielded  nuts,  was
an  almond  bough.  The  almond-tree  has
always  been  regarded  by  the  Jews  with
reverence.  Its  fruit  was  among  the
presents  which  Jacob  charged  his  sons
to  take  with  them  on  their  second  visit
to  Egypt  (Gen.  xliii.  11);  and  the  orna-
ments of  the  golden  candlesticks  were
made  after  the  pattern  of  almonds  (Exod.
XXV.  33) ;  and  even  to  this  day  the
modern  English  Jews  on  their  great
feast-days  carry  a  bough  of  flowering
almond  to  the  synagogue.  An  allusion
is  made  in  Eccles.  xii  5,  to  the  white
or  silver  hair  which,  ere  one  is  well
aware,  covers  the  head  of  old  age.


**  The  hope,  in  dreams,  of  a  happier  hour.
That  alights  on  misery's  brow,
Springs  out  of  the  silvery  almond  flower,
That  blooms  on  a  leafless  bough."

Ver.  11.   Visions.     Refer  to  KebeVs
hymn  for  Septuagesima  Sunday.

■**  Earth  is  crammed  with  heaven.


And  every  common  bush  on  fire  with  God,
But  only  he  who  sees  takes  off  his  shoes."

— Unknown.

'*  And    this   our  life,   exempt  from    public

haunt,
Finds  tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running

brooks,
Sermons  in  stones,  and  good  in  everything."

— **  As  You  Like  It,"  Shakespeark.

Ver.  14.  "  Out  of  the  North."  "  The
swelling  waters  of  a  flood  are  a  usual  type
of  an  overwhelming  calamity  (Ps.  Ixix.
1,  2),  and  especially  of  a  hostile  inva-
sion (Isa.  viii  7,  8) ;  but  this  is  a  flood
of  scalding  waters,  whose  very  touch  is
death.  The  caldron  represents  the  great
military  empires  upon  the  Euphrates.  .  .
The  tide  of  passion  and  carnage  is  sure
finally  to  pour  itself  upon  Judea.  The
caldron  looks  ominously  towards  Jeru-
salem, but  it  has  not  yet  overturned;
and  if  Judah  repent,  God  may  make  it
exhaust  its  fury  upon  itself  [Nineveh
and  Babylon  being  in  conflict],  or  a
defeat  instead  of  victory  at  Charchemish
may  alter  the  whole  tide  of  events.
But  if  Judah  remain  impenitent,  it  must
become  the  prey  of  whosoever  conquers
in  the  plains  of  Mesopotamia." —
Speaker's  Com.

Ver.  15.    War,

**  *Twas  man  himself
Brought  Death  into  the  world ;  and  man  him<

self
Gave  keenness  to  his  darts,  quickened  his  pace,
And  multiplied  destructions  on  mankind.

•  •••••

"  One  murder  made  a  villain  [Cain],
Millions  a  hero  [warrior].     Princes  were  pri-
vileged
To  kill,  and  numbers  sanctified  the  crime.
Ah  1  why  will  kings  forget  that  they  are  men^
And  men  that  they  are  brethren!"

•  •  •  •  •  9

"  Still  monarchs  dreaiB
Of  universal  empire  growing  up
From  universal  ruin." — PoRTEUS.

Ver.  17,  18.  *'Be  not  dismayed.^
Courage  before  kings.

Said  the  Eomau  Emperor  to  Chrysot-

31


CHAP.  L  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


torn,  "I  will  fta/iaVt  <^e."  "  Thou  canst  lease  you!"  Polycarp  answered,
not,"  was  his  answer,  "  for  the  world  is  **  Eighty  and  six  years  have  I  served
my  Father's  house."  "Then  will  I  kill  Him,  and  He  hath  done  me  no  wrong;
thee."  "  That  is  not  in  thy  power,  for  and  how  can  I  speak  evil  of  my  King,
my  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  **  I  my  Saviour]  "  The  pro-consul  replied,
will  depHve  thee  of  all  thou  possessest"  "  I  have  wild  beasts ;  to  these  I  will
"Nay,  for  my  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and  cast  you,  if  you  change  not  your  mind."
my  riches  are  within  me."  "  But  I  will  But  he  boldly  rejoined,  "Thou  seemest  not
exile  theCf  that  thou  shalt  not  have  a  to  know  what  I  am  ;  hear  me  freely  pro-
friend  or  companion  left."  "Neither  fessing  it  to  thee — I  am  a  Christian."
canst  thou  do  that ;  for  my  Friend  is  <«  ^^^^  ^ow  can  man  die  better  than  facing
He  who  will  never  leave  me,  and  from  fearful  odds,

whom  none  can  sever  me.     /  defp  tliee,  For  the  ashes  of  his  fathers,  and  the  temple

proud  emperor;  thou  canst  do  me  no  harm  ^^  ^^^  gods."— Macaulat.

at  all !  " — From  "  Crowds  of  the  Bible,"  **  He  holds  no  parley  with  unmanly  fears  ;

When   Polycarp  was   brought  before  Where  duty  bids  he  confidently  steers,

the   pro-consul,    this    officer    addressed         IrdnrurgTn'htTo^.'l.u^lS^li  th.m
him  :  "  Kenounce  Christ  and  I  will  re-  all." Cowpbr.

CHAPTER  IL

Critical  and  Exeobtioal  Notes.  — 1.  Chronology.  Most  probably  in  thirteenth  Josiah,  quickly
after  his  call.  Dr.  Dahler  (Stratsbourg)  would  interpose  chapters  iv.,  v.,  vi.;  deferring  this  chapter
till  after  them.  But  Hitzig  sees  in  chap.  ii.  and  iii.  (where  they  think  this  discourse  ends)
all  the  characteristics  of  an  inaugural  prophetic  deliverance  ;  for  "  in  its  finished  completeness  it
gives  the  impression  of  a  first  uttered  outpouring  of  the  heart,  in  which  are  set  forth,  without
restraint,  Jehovah's  list  of  grievances  against  Israel."  We  may  safely  regard  this  as  Jeremiah's
earliest  public  utterance  ;  its  place  must  be  within  the  thirteenth  and  eighteenth  years  of  Josiah.

2.  .Cotemporary  Scriptures,  as  in  chap.  i.

3.  Historic  Pacts.  Josiah  engaged  in  his  religious  reformation  of  Judah.  Auspicious  advent
of  this  discourse  :  for  it  was  calculated  to  (a.)  Animate  the  king  and  nation  in  rectifying  dese*
orations  and  apostasy ;  and  (6. )  arrest  the  policy  of  the  Egyptian  party  in  Jerusalem  who  were
urging  alliance  with  that  power  (ver.  18).

4.  Cotemporary  History.  Egypt  rising  into  dominance  under  Psammeticus.  In  Jerusalem
this  event  was  hailed  with  satisfacti'^  as  a  counterpoise  to  Assyrian  tyranny.  Nineveh's  down-
fall was  approaching.  This  growtk  of  Egyptian,  and  decay  of  Assyrian,  power  led  statesmen  in
Judea  to  covet  the  friendship  of  Egypt  (ver.  16,  18,  86).  In  consequence  of  Jeremiah's  pro-
test, it  seems  probable  that  Josiah's  course  became  changed;  he  turned  from  hope  in  Egypt,  and
then  rose  in  fatal  resistance.  See  Critical  Notes,  chap,  i.,  Personal  allusions,  6.  **  Josiah."  The
exact  juncture  of  this  chapter  therefore  seems  to  be  when  the  king  and  counsellors  of  state  were
contemplating  a  protective  alliance  with  Egypt.

6.  Geographical  Eeferences.  Ver.  2  and  6.  **  Wilderness  "  **land  of  deserts  and  pits,'*
&c.  **A  more  frightful  desert  it  had  hardly  been  our  lot  to  behold.  The  mountains
beyond  presented  a  most  hideous  aspect ;  precipices  and  naked  conical  peaks  of  chalky
and  gravelly  formation,  rising  one  upon  another,  without  a  sign  of  life  or  vegetation."
— Dr.  Robinson.  **  The  whole  country  is  made  up  of  arid  and  barren  plains,  intersected
by  rocky  mountains,  amid  the  precipices  of  which  are  depths  and  caverns  of  the  most
horrid  gloom." — Henderson.  Ver.  7.  "A  plentiful  country ;"  lit.  a  Carmel  land;  a  beauti-
ful garden  like  Carmel  (comp.  Isaiah  xxxiii.  9,  xxxv.  2).  The  name  used  metaphori-
cally, and  as  an  adjective,  also  in  Isaiah  x.  18,  xvi.  10,  xxxvii.  24.  Ver.  10,  **  Isles  ofChittim:'*
originally  the  name  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cyprus ;  Phoenician  colonists,  who  founded  Citium
on  S.E.  coast.  Greeks  called  them  Kittaei.  The  Seventy  render  Kittim  by  K-qrioi,  Ketii  or
CetiL  They  extended  commerce  to  all  the  islands  and  maritime  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean ;
to  all  which  inclusively  the  name  "  Isles  of  Chittim  "  became  applied.  These  Chittaans  are
here  made  to  represent  the  peoples  on  the  West.  "  Keda/r  "  (son  of  Ishmael,  Gen.  xxv.  13).  The
Kedarenes  were  a  pastoral  people  inhabiting  the  Arabian  desert ;  but  the  name  became  extended
to  the  Bedouins  generally,  who  occupied  the  regions  east  of  Palestine. — Henderson,  Kedar
thus  represents  the  East.  Ver.  16.  *'  Noph,"  called  by  Greeks  Memphis,  a  few  miles  south  of
Cairo ;  the  capital  of  Egypt  in  the  time  of  the  patriarchs,  Pharaoh,  and  the  Exodus.  Situate
just  at  that  point  of  the  Delta  where  the  Nile  separates  into  streams.  As  the  residence  of  the
court  of  the  Pharaohs,  it  was  the  scene  of  Joseph's  varying  fortunes  :  chief  seat  of  Egyptian
literature  and  idolatrous  worship  :  temple  of  Apis  there,  the  most  splendid  erection  in  Egypt:
the  pyramids  stood  close  by — the  sepulchres  of  the  kings.     **  Tahapanes"  in  Oreek  Td^yi},

32


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  tt


Daphne^  the  first  Egyptian  town  on  crossing  the  border  frona  Palestine,  about  sixteen  miles  south
of  the  flourishing  seaport  Pelusium,  and  on  the  margin  of  the  Lake  Menzala,  thus  enjoying
facilities  of  traffic  with  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Ked  Sea.  One  of  the  palaces  of  the  Pharaohs
stood  there  (Jer.  xliii.  9).  Being  one  of  the  most  influential  cities  of  Egypt,  it  and  the  capital
stood  for  the  country  and  the  government  itself.  Ver.  18.  "Sikor,"  a  Hebrew  word  =  "  the  black,"
meaning  the  Nile,  whose  appearance  is  turbid  when  loaded  with  alluvial  matter,  and  whose
deposit  is  black  soil.  "  The  river  "  (of  Assyria)  means  the  Euphrates.  Ver.  23.  **  Thy  way  in
the  valley: "  a  definite  locality  is  designated  ;  the  vale  of  Hinnom.  This  runs  along  the  south
side  of  Mount  Zion,  and  was  infamous  for  the  celebration  of  the  horrid  rite*  of  Moloch  (chap.
vii.  31,  xxxii.  35).

6.  Natural  History.  Ver.  15.  "  The  young  lions  roared  upon  hiniy"  &c.  Never  roars  but
when  in  sight  of  prey  or  when  striking  it  down.  Roar  =  signal  of  attack  and  consequent
destruction  (Isa.  xxxi.  4;  Amos  iii.  4).  Entire  regions  are  sometimes  depopulated  by  his
fury  (Jer.  iv.  7).  These  are  mystical  lions  ;  but  the  valour  of  a  conquering  tyrant  and  the
rage  of  a  savage  lion  work  like  eflects.  Ver.  21.  "J.  noble  vine,  a  degenerate  plant.**  Noble,
properly  reddish ;  a  Sorek  vine,  producing  red  wine  (Prov.  xxiii.  31 ) ;  a  symbol  of  perpetual
biesbednesa  and  bounty  (Gen,  xlix.  11).  But  Israel  had  become  degenerate  branches;  not
"plant,"  but  sprouts  or  suckers  ;  evil  outgrowths  of  a  good  stock,  like  Deut.  xxxii.  32.  The
noble  vine  of  Palestine  (Num.  xiii.  23)  yields  clusters  weighing  ten  or  twelve  pounds,  and  the
grapes  are  like  plums.  Ver.  22.  *^ Nitre,  soap."  Nitre  is  the  natron  of  Egypt,  a  mineral
alkali  found  in  the  Nile  valley  after  the  water  has  evaporated.  Soap,  or  potash,  Borith,  is  a  vege-
table alkali  obtained  from  the  ashes  of  plants.  These  were  the  most  powerful  detergents  known
{Speaker' s  Com.).      Ver.  23.     ** Swift  dromedary,'*      TVM^"^  a  young  female,  which  has  never

T  :    •  '

yet  had  a  foal.  **  Dromedary  "  is  famed  for  amazing  speed.  Arabs  affirm  it  will  get  over  as
much  ground  in  one  day  as  will  take  one  of  their  best  horses  ten  days.  Hence  used  to  carry
despatches  in  haste  (Esther  viii.  10).  Ver.  24.  **  Wild  ass,  snuffeth  up  the  wind**  The  Onager,
of  the  mule  kind  {Henderson) :  "accustomed  to  the  rfe5eri,"  =  wild,  reckless,  ungovemed,  obedient
to  nothing  but  desire:  ^* snuffeth  up  tAe  mwd,"  t.c,  scenteth  the  male.  Extremely  swift,  of
slender  form  and  animated  gait.  Mr.  Morier,  alluding  to  its  peculiar  cry  with  its  nose  (Jer.
xiv.  6,  iL  24),  says,  "  In  crossing  the  desert  we  gave  chase  to  two  wild  asses,  which  had  so
much  the  speed  of  our  horses,  that  when  they  had  got  to  some  distance  they  stood  still  and
looked  behind  at  us,  snorting  loudly  with  their  noses  in  the  air  "  {Journey  through  Persia,  quoted
by  Dr.  Paxton)

7.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  3.  ** First-fruits  of  His  increase;**  God's  consecrated
portion  of  the  harvest  (Exod.  xxiii.  19).  Ver.  13.  '^  Hewed  cisterns.**  Tanks  for  rain-
water, common  in  East  in  cities  and  along  roads ;  wells  are  scarce.  These  cisterns  become
dilapidated,  cracked;  and  in  consequence  the  rain  which  falls,  or  water  poured  into  them,  sinks
into  the  earth  and  becomes  lost.  **  The  Hebrews  give  the  name  living  water  to  that  which
welled  from  a  fountain,  and  flowed  along,  as  if  possessing  the  property  of  life." — Henderson.
Ver.  20.  **  Upon  every  high  hill,"  &c.  Spots  chosen  for  idolatries  and  the  worship  of  nature
(Deut.  xii.  2;  1  Kings  xiv.  23;  Ezek.  vi.  13).  Ver.  32.  "Ornaments  and  attire.'*  Oriental
females  wear  profusion  of  decorations,  rings,  jewels,  bracelets,  &c.  {cf.  Isa.  Ixi.  10):  "attire"
here  me9^u&  girdle,  sash,  worn  across  the  breasts  (Rev.  i.  13),  often  beautifully  embroidered ;  an
object  of  great  pride  to  the  wearer.  Ver.  37.  **  Hands  upon  thine  head  ;  "  the  natural  attitude
of  mourning  (2  Sam.  xiii.  19).  *' With  hands  clasped  upon  the  head,  Israel  would  retrace  her
steps,  disgraced  and  discarded." — Speaker's  Com,

8.  Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  2.  "  Go,  cry  in  ears  of  Jerusalem ;  **  a  form  of  address  im-
plying his  absence  from  the  city.  When  he  dwelt  there  the  address  assumed  an  altered  form
(chap.  xvii.  19,  xxxv.  13).   "  I  remember  thee,**=ot  thee,  to  thy  credit,  for  thy  sake.     ""131

with  /  means  to  remember  to  one's  account  that  it  may  stand  him  in  good  stead  after-
wards. Of.  Neh.  xiii.  22,  31  ;  Ps.  xcviii.  3." — KeU.  ** Kindness  of  thy  youth;**  either  Mine
to  thee,  or  thine  to  Me :  God's  generous  regard  and  l^wish  privileges  for  Israel,  or  Israel's
ardour  and  devotion  to  the  Lord.  The  latter  is  preferable.  Ver.  3.  **  Was  holiness.'*
Lange  renders  it  **  a  Sanctuary.*'  Keil  favours  this :  '*  Israel  was  so  shielded  by  Him,
as  His  sanctuary,  that  whoever  touched  it  must  pay  the  penalty "  (Ps.  cxiv.  2).  But
Bishop  Hall,  Henderson,  and  Speaker's  Com.  —  an  offering  consecrated  ;  Sharpe,  "  holy  unto  the
Lord"  (ef.  Exod.  xix.  6,  with  Lev.  xx.  24,  Deut.  vii.  6).  Ver.  4.  *' Families  of  the  house  of
Israel;**  not  Judah  only,  but  all  Israel  inclusively,  though  ten  tribes  were  dispersed;  not
merely  the  few  members  of  those  tribes  still  in  Jerusalem,  but  an  ideal  audience,  the  whole
nation.  Ver,  12.  ** Be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye  very  desolate ;**  lit.,  shudder  and  be  withered
away  (Zanjire).     An  evident  paronomasia — D^Dl£^  ^Di£^.      Impassioned  personification:   "Be

horrified ;  be  exceedingly  aghast "  at  the  monstrous  spectacle.     Il"in   to  be  parched  up,  de-

..   T    '

prived  of  vital  force  ;  devastated.  "Places  devastated  have  such  an  unsightly  look." — Maurer,
"  They  home  forsaken  me,"  lit.,  Mb  have  they  forsaken  ;  force  in  the  initial  pronoun,  raising  into
prominence  Him  whom  they  have  thus  wronged.  Ver.  16.  *^  Broken  the  crown  of  thy  head**^
will  feed  down  the  crown  {Henderson) ;  depasture  the  crown  {Lange) ;  feed  upon  thy  crown

0  33


OHAP.  IL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  JEREMIAH.

(JTeiQ.    ny^   to  eat  up  by  grazing  (Micah  ▼.  5).    OeseniuSf  **  They  derotir  the  crown  of  the

head.*'  **  The  hair  of  the  head  being  held  in  high  estimation  by  the  Hebrews,  baldness  waa
regarded  as  ignominious  and  humbling"  {cf,  chap,  xlvii.  6,  xlviii.  87).  This  fulfilled  both  in
the  sense  of  depojmlating  the  land  and  draining  the  resources  of  the  nation  by  taxation.  **  Shave
thee  bald,"  points  to  extreme  devastation  and  misery  {cf.  Jer.  xliv.  12).  Ver.  17.  "Mast  thou
not  procured  this  f  "  &c.,  i.e. ,  Hath  not  thy  forbaking  Jehovah  procured  this  to  thyself  ?  "  Led
thee  by  the  way  ;**  query  J  lu  what  way  f  A  distant  /m^oric  way,  in  Arabian  wilderness?  (So
Speaker's  Com.  and  Keil.)  But  this  would  affirm  that  their  fathers*  sin  in  the  desert  originated
the  criminality  which  would  eventuate  in  Judah's  ruin.  But  Kimch%  Uitzig^  ffenderson^the
right  way,  the  way  of  huliuess ;  not  through  the  wilderness  merely,  but  the  course  of  moral
training  under  the  Mosaic  dispeuautiun.  Ver.  18.  "  2'o  drink  the  vxiterSf'  i,e.,  to  draw  from
these  sources,  Egypt  or  Assyria,  power  and  reinvigoratiou.  Ver.  20.  **  I  have  broken:"  many
authorities  reject  the  Masoretic  punctuation,  which  makes  the  verb  first  person,  and  read  "  Thou
hast  broken.'*  If  the  A.V.  stands,  it  =  God's  emancipation  of  Israel  from  Egyptian  bondage.  If
**  thou  hast  broken "  be  substituted,  it=  Israel's  rebellion  against  Qod's  rule.  **  Thou  wanderest"
&c.  ;  stretchest  thyself.  "  Under  every  leafy  tree  thou  layest  thyself  down  as  a  harlot "
{Speaker's  Cum.),  indicating  her  ready  prostration  before  objects  of  idolatrous  worship.  Ver.  22.
"Thine  iniquity  is  marked;**  is  a  stain,  is  ingrained;  i^.,  a  filthy  blot  which  no  acids,  or
devices,  or  remedies  can  purge.  Ver.  23.  "Traversing  jer  tray*," = rambling  in  her  courses  ;
"  running  in  all  directions  in  quest  of  a  male." — Henderson.  Ver.  24.  **  Snvffeth  up  the  wind
at  her  pleasure ; "  a  symptom  of  excited  passions  {Lange).  "  In  her  occasion,**  &c.,  =  as  for  her
heat,  who  can  repel  it  ?  {Henderson).  Keil,  **  That  in  her  lust  panteth  for  air;  her  heat,  who
can  restrain  it  ? "  **All  that  seek  her,**  &c.  :  she  will  not  hide  from  them,  herself  too  ready  to
be  found.  **  In  her  month  ;  "  at  the  pairing  season.  Ver.  25.  **  Withhold  thy  foot**  &c.  Cease
this  wearing  &nd  feverish  rushing  after  idols;  for  only  wounded  feet  and  a  dry  thirst  will  ensue.
"  No  longer  undertake  fruitless  journeys  to  places  of  idolatrous  worship,  which  wore  out  their
shoes,  injured  their  feet,  and  entailed  extreme  thirst." — Henderson.  **  God,  the  true  Husband,
exhorts  Israel  not  to  run  barefoot,  and  with  parched  throat,  like  a  shameless  adulteress,  after
strangers." — Speaker's  Com.  Ver.  29.  "  Wherefore  will  ye  plead  V*  =  Why  do  ye,  or  to  what  purpose
will  ye,  contend  against  Me  ?  Their  propensity  to  complain  against  God  (see  Exod.  xvii.  2,  3,
7 ;  chap.  v.  19,  xiii.  22,  xvi.  10).  Ver.  80.  "  They  received,"  i.e.,  they  accepted  no  correction.
Ver.  31.  "  TFe  are  lords.**  *!•')"),=  to  ramble  about  in  an  unbridled  manner;  they  had  thrown
off  the  reins,  and  wandered  at  will  after  idolatrous  gratification  (Hos.  xi.  12).  Ver.  33.  "  Taught
the  wicked  ones  thy  ways  ;  **  either  taught  idolatrous  nations  new  idolatries,  or  taught  thy  ways
wickedness,  i.e.,  trained  thyself  to  habits  of  atrocity.  Ver.  34.  **  Not  found  it  by  secret  search."
Henderson^  =  "  by  deep  search,  i.e.,  atrocities  have  not  been  perpetrated  in  subterraneous  caverns,
as  too  horrible  to  bear  the  light  of  day,  but  openly  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  within  the  sacred
precincts  of  the  Temple,  and  about  Jerusalem."  "But  upon  all  these,** =\ipon  all  thy  skirts.
Speaker's  Com.  gives  a  wholly  new  interpretation,  =  t^ow  didst  not  find  than  (the  poor  innocents)
breaking  into  thy  house,  i.e.,  they  had  committed  no  orime  justifying  violence.  **  By  secret
search,  "  =  c2»^^'n^,  i.e.,  digging  through  the  walls  of  a  house  for  the  purpose  of  breaking  into  it.
{Lange  renders  the  words,  in  the  place  of  burglary.)  "But  upon  all  these,'* =because  of  all  this,
i.e.,  thou  killedst  the  poor  innocents,  not  for  any  crime,  but  because  of  this  thy  lust  for  idolatry.
Ver.  37.  "  Oo  forth  from  him,'*  from  thence  ;  **  not  prosper  in  them,"  have  no  success  with  them.
Hastening  to  Egypt  in  hope  of  succour  and  strength,  at  a  time  when  Nineveh  is  tottering  be*
fore  the  armies  of  Cyaxares  and  Nabopolassar,  thou  shalt  return  ifepelled  and  forlorn.

HOMILETIC  TREATMENT  OP  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  11^

Section     1-3.  Beautiful  retrospect — reciprocation  of  love.
„  4-8.  Lamentable  changes — violated  faith.

„        9-13.  Facts  for  amazement — reckless  apostasies.
,,      14-19.  Looming  disasters — outward  results  of  impiety.
ff      20-29.  Baseness  of  idolatry — reflex  degradations  of  impiety*
„      30-37.  Affecting  expostulations — incorrigible  impenitenoo.

Ver.  1-3.  Piety  a  Reciprocation  op  Love.

By  Israel's  "  youth "  is  meant  the  period  spent  in  Egypt  and  of  the  exodus
thence  (Hos.  xi.  1,  ii.  15).  From  the  exodus  till  Sinai's  covenant  constitutes  the
ieason  of  plighted  affection  and  betrothal  (Exod.  xix.  4-8).  The  bridal  relation-
•hip  was  consummated  there,  and  God  was  a  Husband  unto  Israel  from  that  hour
(cf.  Keil  and  Hend.).  God  emphatically  calls  Himself  "  the  husband  of  her
youth "  (Joel  i  8),  so  tender,  full  of  fond  memories,  sacred  and  intimate,  was  the
union.

34


BOMILETTO  COMMEITTAltT:  JSRBMIAB.  OHAF.  n.


Query,  whether  here  is  meant  Israel's  love  to  God,  or  God's  to  Israel  1  Chiysostom
originated  the  latter  explanation ;  many  still  contend  for  it. — Graf.,  Bosenm,,
Venema^  Jcc.  But  the  accumulated  decisions  of  interpreters  favour  the  former.
"The  kindness  (or  grace)  of  thy  youth/'  and  "thy  going  after  Me  in  the  wilder-
ness," can  refer  only  to  the  bride.  Yet  who  can  think  of  the  bride's  love  without
instantly  reverting  to  the  higher,  grander,  vaster  love  of  the  Bridegroom  ?  (See
Literary  Criticisms  above,  ver.  2.)

L  Love's  origin  and  alliance.     In  the  case  of

L  JehovaNs  love  for  Israel^  it  led  to  (1.)  Perception  of  excellencies:  "  the  grace
of  thy  youth ; "  for  although  there  was  Httle  to  admire  in  Israel  when  in  Egyptian
bondage,  or  when  released — a  wild  horde  in  the  desert — God  saw  graces,  appreciated
**  kindness ; "  for  love  is  quick  to  perceive  and  admire.  (2.)  Covenant  of  attachment :
"espousals;"  the  Lord  drew  Israel  into  plighted  alliance;  He  must  claim  her  all
for  Himself  as  His  beloved.  (3.)  Leading  her  forth  into  a  new  world  and  a  new
life:  "after  Me  in  the  wilderness;"  a  different  but  better  scene  than  Egyptian
degradation  ;  life  spent  in  the  society  of  her  Bridegroom  ;  "  all  things  become  new."

ii.  Israel's  love  for  the  Lord  was  (1 .)  Ardent :  it  was  her  "  first  love ;  "  glowing,
joyous,  full  of  graces  and  kindness  {cf  Exod.  xxxv.  20-29).  (2.)  Single:  she
asked  no  paramour  then,  sought  no  "  other  lord," — God  was  all-sufficient.  "  They
saw  no  man  save  Jesus  only/"  (3.)  Unhesitating:  she  ready  to  go  anywhere
"after"  Him;  even  into  "wilderness."  His  will  was  her  law,  her  bliss.  "Lord,
I  am  ready  to  go  with  Thee,  both  into  prison  and  to  death "  (Luke  xxiL  33),
"  Let  us  go  also  that  we  may  die  with  Him  "  (John  xi.  16).  Such  is  the  attitude
of  "first  love."     (See  Addenda  to  chap,  ii.,  "Love  of  thine  espousals")

II.  Love's  outgrowth  and  manifestation.

i.  God's  love  was  (1.)  Redeeming :  from  Egypt,  from  enemies,  from  perils,  from
wilderness.  (2.)  Disciplinary :  educating  her  and  preparing  her  for  higher  posi-
tion, nobler  advantages,  larger  enjoyments  and  privileges.  (3.)  Enduring  :  through
forty  years  in  desert.  (4.)  Unwearied:  never  alienated  or  exhausted  by  all  Israel's
forgetfulness  and  failings.

ii.  Israel's  love  was  (1.)  Human,  therefore  variable  and  perishable.  (2.)  Yet
trustful,  surrendering  herself  and  her  future  to  God.  (3.)  Responsive^  going
after  Him,  carrying  out  His  precepts,  though  with  many  defects  and  even  occa-
Bional  disobedience.  (4.)  Grateful ;  for  a  religious  regard  and  reverence  charac-
terised Israel's  early  career.     Alas  !  she  was  sometimes  also  querulous.

III.  Love's  honours  and  blessedness.

Its  object  must  be  beautified  and  enriched ;  love  ever  acts  thus.

i.  The  Divine  affection  for  Israel  took  delight  in  lavishing  beauty  and  dignity
upon  its  object.  (1.)  It  robed  Israel  with  sanctity  ("  Israel "  was  holiness) ;  invested
her  with  national  distinction  and  privileges.  (2.)  It  constituted  Israel  God^s  abode,
(See  Literary  Criticisms,  chap.  ii.  ver.  3).  (3.)  It  secured  to  Israel  Divine  over"
«Aac?omw^  ("All  that  devour,  .  .  .  evil  shall  come  upon  them ").

ii.  Israels  affectionate  allegiance  found  expression.  (L)  Her  '^first-fruits  "  were
yielded  to  God :  this  was  the  gift  of  her  most  prized  possessions ;  it  avowed  that
God  was  first  in  her  thoughts,  and  first  to  receive  the  acknowledgment  of  her
grateful  love.  (2.)  Her  history  witnessed  for  God,  made  Jehovah  known  to  sur-
rounding nations ;  His  character,  mighty  acts,  supreme  deity.  (3.)  Her  worship
was  a  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord :  the  Tabernacle  services,  the  altar  sacrifices,  the  gift*
and  offerings  of  the  people,  all  were  precious  to  Him — ^an  oblation  of  love  (Pa
Ixxvi.  1,  2,  Ixxxviii.,  xlviii).

Truly  a  beautiful  retrospect.  Piety  flowing  forth  in  love  for  God,  in  faith  that
worketh  by  love,  in  zealous  attachment  and  lavish  offerings  and  loyal  devotion.
God  "  remembers  "  it  with  delight.  It  is  the  garden  of  Eden,  luxuriant  and  lovely,
before  sin's  devastation  blighted  the  fair  scene.  Alas  !  that  on  the  sacred  blessecU
ness  and  beauty  of  "  first  love"  could  come  so  withering  a  blight  I


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  4-8.  Lamentable  Changes — Violated  Faith,
(See  Addenda,  chap.  ii.  ver.  6 :  "  Neither  said  tUey,  Where  is  the  Lord  t ")

The  "  love  of  youth "  might  be  referred  either  to  Jehovah  or  Israel ;  for  early
affection  was  reciprocal.  But  there  can  be  no  double  reference  of  this  dark  fact —
vows  broken,  love  false,  loyalty  abandoned.  God  is  incapable  of  inconstancy
(James  i.  17).  It  is  only  in  man  to  deteriorate,  to  forget  (what  God  ^^  remembers^*
ver.  2)  the  "  first  love  "  (Rev.  ii.  4,  5).

There  should  be  a  reason  for  all  our  courses  of  conduct ;  we  could  ordinarily
iustify  our  proceedings,  in  commerce,  politics,  <fec.  It  should  be  so  in  spiritual  as
in  temporal  affairs.  God  here  reviews  Israel's  career,  sets  sins  in  array,  calls  her
to  justify  her  conduct,  summons  her  to  account.  Foreshadows  this :  "  Every  one
must  give  account  to  God."

i.  A  startling  contrast  (ver.  6)  between  God's  fidelity  and  their  in-fidelity.
ii.  An  unanswerable  challenge.  Their  conduct  was  without  reason,  iii.  An  appal-
iing  charge.  Asked  not  after  God  (ver.  6,  8),  despoiled  God's  heritage  (ver.  7),
violated  duty  and  knowledge  (ver.  8).  The  guilt  of  backsliding  stands  out  in  Tivid
portrayal  here.     (Addenda,  ver.  10,  11,  *^  Idolatry.")     Thus  is  shown  :

I.  That  apostasy  from  God  is  wholly  unjustifiable.

The  question  of  its  guiltiness  remains  in  abeyance  till  the  appalling  injustice  of
It  is  proved  (ver.  5).  "  What  iniquity"  <fec.  The  word  ^3^,  dvel,  stands  opposed  to
P'}r^,  tsedeky  righteousness;  and  means  perversity,  wrongfulness;  the  contrary  of
good  faith  and  truthful  deed — injustice  therefore :  Ergo,  their  action  was  un-
justifiable.

1.  Could  they  adduce  any  provocations  to  apostasy  ?  Had  3 ehoYah  failed  to  do
what  they  might  expect  of  Him  1  Had  He  done  aught  they  could  complain  oil  In
any  way  had  He  been  unkind,  unfaithful,  unjust  1  If  so,  they  might  justify  their
having  "  removed  far  from  Him  "  (ver.  5).  Let  men  charge  God  with  wrong  done
to  them  individually  if  they  can,  and  so  prove  their  neglect  and  hostility  reasonable
and  right.  Against  all  complaints  shall  be  set  the  grsmd  facts  of  God's  love,  verity,
and  abounding  grace.

2.  Had  they  derived  any  advantages  from  apostasy  f  "  Walked  after  vanity  **
(ver.  5) ;  "  after  things  that  do  not  profit "  (ver.  8).  To  lose  the  good  and  pursue
an  evil  is  a  double  loss,  a  twofold  calamity.  Losing  God  is  a  frightful  loss ;  but
losing  Him  means  the  surrender  of  all  and  failure  of  everything.  A  man  hanging
over  a  chasm  lets  go  his  only  hold — a  piece  of  projecting  rock,  to  grasp  shadows
thrown  across  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  chasm  :  he  clutches  at  vanity,  and  falls
headlong  to  ruin.  See  Mark  viii.  36,  37.  Interrogate  men  as  to  the  substantial
*'  gains  of  godliness."  The  world  will  yield  us  at  last  nought  but  a  grave;  but
"  when  heart  and  flesh  fail,  God  will  be  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion
for  ever."

n.  That  apostasy  is  felt  by  God  to  be  a  gross  ii^ustice.

It  is  unreasonable  in  itself,  and  equally  undeserved  by  God.  It  is  impossible  to
miss  the  fact  that  God  felt  their  conduct.  He  does  not  regard  it  impassively ;  it
occasions  grief  and  calls  forth  sadness.     Man's  conduct  affects  God.

1.  Heartless  ingratitude  for  favours  (ver.  6).  Did  not  heed  them  ;  felt  no  sense
of  obligation  for  them  ;  acted  as  if  none  had  ever  been  shown  them.  Flagrant,  in-
sensate, graceless  ingratitude,  (a.)  They  owed  to  God  all  their  deliverances :  from
Egypt  (Micah  vi.  4) ;  oppression  of  Pharaohs  (Exod.  iii.  7) ;  from  pathless  and  inhos-
pitable deserts ;  **  land  of  pits,"  full  of  rents  and  fissures,  and  deep,  waterless  valleys,
parched  and  unfruitful,  of  deadly  terrors  and  dangers;  of  ^^ shadow  of  death"  (so
Sheol  is  named,  Job  x.  21),  utterly  solitary,  offering  neither  path  nor  abode  for
travellers.  Instead  of  this  heartless  insensibility,  we  should  say  with  David,  ^'  Blesa
36


riOMi'LETia  COMMENT  Ant  ;  JEREMIAH,  CHAP.  O.


the  f  tord,"  &c.  (Ps.  ciiL  1-4).  (6.)  7%ey  Aac?  received  from  God  all  their  blessings
(ver.  7).  They  were  nothing,  had  nothing,  never  gained  anything  by  themselves
or  for  themselves.  **  What  hast  thou  which  thou  hast  not  received  %  "  We  are
indebted  to  God  for  "  all  things  richly  to  enjoy ;  "  and  for  redemption,  sanctifica-
tion,  and  heavenly  hope.     "  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  1 "

2.  Base  abuse  of  favours.  Never  asked  after  the  Giver  (ver.  6,  8) :  pros-
tituted their  possessions  to  vile  idolatrous  uses  (ver.  7),  and  handed  God's  "  inheri-
tance" over  to  traitorous  rival  deities  (ver.  7).  Frightful  desecration.  Comp.
Rom.  vi.  1 ;  Heb.  vi.  7,  8,  x.  26-29.

3.  Glaring  dishonour  to  God,  ivho  had  put  His  glory  in  their  charge.  Selected  to
show  forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord  amid  the  nations,  to  be  "  holiness  unto  Him ; "
they  had  "  defiled  "  and  "  made  an  abomination  "  (ver.  7)  of  sacred  things.  Can  this
be  less  than  a  gross  injustice]  Is  not  all  sin  a  flagrant  insult  to  God,  a  virulent
outrage  on  the  very  purpose  of  our  existence,  a  return  of  hate  for  wondrous
love?

III.  Tiiat  apostasy  is  an  offence  of  greatest  criminality.
There  may  be  an  unconscious  decline  from  religion,  unintentioned.     This  bad,
yet  not  defiant  and  designed.     But

1.  Consider  who  they  were  who  were  guilty  of  it  (ver.  8).  "  Priests  :  '*  Chrysostom
remarks,  •*  See,  the  evil  springs  from  the  head."  Had  they  done  their  duty,  the
apostasy  had  never  become  national.  Their  sin  was  heedlessness  of  their  work.
"  They  said  not.  Where  is  the  Lord  ? "  "  They  that  handle  the  law^^  —  exponents
of  the  Scriptures:  the  preachers  of  those  days  ignored  God — "knew  Him  not."
"The/)a«^or5,"  t.f.,  shepherds,  temporal  rulers,  civil  magistrates  (Targum  renders  it
kings),  these  disobeyed  and  disregarded  Jehovah's  will.  "  The  prophets,  who
should  have  listened  to  no  voice,  nor  conveyed  any  message  save  Jehovah's,  con-
sulted Baal,  chose  an  alien  deity  and  a  false  inspiration  (cf.  Luke  xii  45-48).
What  is  our  case  1     Can  we  shelter  ourselves  by  the  plea  of  ignorance  ?

2.  Also  their  apostasy  was  deliberate  and  determined.  Positive  act :  "  defiled,"
<kc.  (ver.  7).     Negative  act :  "  Neither  said  ;  knew  not  "  (ver.  8).

3.  And  equally  insensate  and  insolent.  Turned  persistently  and  flauntingly  from
God,  and  *'  walked  after  vanity."  The  Hebrew  idiom,  "  things  that  do  not  profit "
(ver.  8),  means  things  baleful  and  pernicious  (Speaker^s  Com.),  Heed  1  Sam.  xii.
20,  21.  Hitzig  points  out  a  climax  in  the  guilt :  the  ministers  of  Temple  worship
took  no  heed  of  God ;  the  teachers  of  the  law  passed  deliberately  by  the  truths
they  knew ;  the  civil  powers  actively  disobeyed  the  law ;  the  prophets  deserted
God  entirely  for  a  lying  spirit.  It  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to  sin  against  the
Lord.     What  a  fall  from  what  Israel  was  !     Begin  to  sin,  and  where  will  it  end  ?


Ver.  9-13.  Facts  fob  Amazement— Reckless  Desertion  of  thb

Fount  of  Life.

Comments :

The  fidelity  of  Jehovah  had  been  presented  in  contrast  with  Israel's  inconstancy
(ver.  5)  ;  now  the  fidelity  of  the  heathen  is  adduced,  for  they  never  *'  change  tiieir
gods"  (ver.  11),  although  they  are  "no  gods."  How  astounding,  therefore,  is
Israel's  guilt  !

Though  they  might  ** consider  diligently"  (ver.  10),  they  would  find  no  parallel.
Yet  they  might  justly  desert  gods  who  "do  not  profit"  (ver.  11);  whereas,  God's
"people"  had  abandoned  that  which  was  *' their  glory,"  without  hesitation  or
remorse.

''"I^^2)^  glory,  is  the  glory  in  which  the  invisible  God  manifested  His  majesty
in  the  world  and  amidst  His  people.  God  had  shown  His  glory  to  the  Israelites  in
glorious  deeds  of  His  omnipotence  and  grace,  like  those  mentioned  in  ver.  5  and

37


OHAP.  II.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


6.  The  Baals,  on  the  other  hand,  are  nothings,  phantoms  without  a  being,  that
bring  no  help  or  profit  to  their  worshippers." — Keil.

"  Though  the  worship  of  the  one  true  God  is  a  nation's  greatest  glory,  yet  it  is
irksome  because  it  puts  a  constraint  on  human  passions  doubly.  FoVfJirst,  it
requires  obedience  to  a  law  revealed  from  above;  and,  secondly ,  it  endeavours  to
raise  men  to  something  higher  than  the  mere  level  of  human  nature.  Hence  a
true  religion  awakens  an  antagonism  in  man*s  heart,  as  naturally  as  a  false  religion
pleases  and  soothes  it." — Speaker^s  Com.

"  Be  astonished,  0  ye  heavens."  "  The  greatness  of  the  crime  can  be  estimated
by  none  so  well  as  the  over-arching  heavens,  which  can  behold  and  compare  all  that
takes  place." — Lange,

**  These  strongest  terms  in  the  language  show  how  intensely  amazed  all  the  holy
in  heaven  are  at  the  monstrous  folly  of  human  sinning.  That  when  men  might
have  the  infinite  God  for  their  friend,  they  choose  to  have  Him  their  enemy;  might
have  Him  their  exhaustless  portion  of  unmeasured  and  eternal  good,  they  spurn  Him
away,  and  set  themselves  to  the  fruitless  task  of  making  some  ruinous  substitute  :
this  is  beyond  measure  amazing  1  Verily,  sin  is  the  mockery  of  human  reason  ! " —
CowUs.

*'  The  heathen  are  guilty  of  but  one  sin,  idolatry :  the  covenant  people  commit
two,  in  that  they  abandon  the  true  God  to  serve  idols." — Speaker^ s  Com.  "  The  sin
is  twofold  :  (1.)  They  do  not  obey  the  Lord;  (2.)  They  will  labour  tooth  and  nail,
if  only  they  may  not  obey  Him." — Zinzendorf.

"  Forsake  the  fountain"  &c.  *'  His  people,  who  have  the  true  religion,  have  the
fountain  :  they  can  (1.)  obtain  water  without  difficulty  ;  (2.)  as  much  as  they
want.  But  they  substitute  means  which  are  (1.)  difficult ;  (2.)  new ;  (3.)  insuf-
ficient ;  (4.)  deceptive ;  (6.)  rejected  on  trial.  Hence  come  the  works  of  super-
erogation, the  many  ceremonies,  ecclesiastical  regulations,  which  are  unquestionably
twice  as  difficult  as  to  follow  the  Saviour  ;  and  they  have  no  promise  for  this  life  or
the  life  to  come." — Zinzendorf.

*'What  can  quench  the  thirst  of  the  soul?  (1.)  It  cannot  be  quenched  by
drawing  from  the  broken  cisterns  of  earthly  good.  [Though  the  hewn  cisterns
please  us  better ;  and  the  cistern-water  of  this  world  is  more  to  our  taste  than  the
living  water,  the  living  God  and  His  Word. — Hochstetter.'\  (2.)  It  can  be  quenched
only  by  drawing  from  the  fountain  of  life,  from  which  the  soul  originally  sprang,
even  from  God." — Na^gelsh.

"  The  dead  gods  have  no  life  and  can  dispense  no  life ;  just  as  wells  with  rents
or  fissures  hold  no  water  [and  can  yield  none].  But  living  water,  i.e.,  that  origin-
ates and  nourishes  life,  is  a  significant  figure  for  God,  with  whom  is  the  fountain  of
life,  i.e.,  from  whose  Spirit  all  life  comes.  If  man  forsakes  the  living  Q^d,  he
passes,  in  spite  of  himself,  into  the  service  of  dead,  unreal  gods.  For,  created  by
God  and  for  God,  he  cannot  live  without  God." — Keil.  Hence  the  labour  to  sub-
stitute the  loss.

Ver,  14-19.  Looming  Disasters — The  External  Eesult  of  Impiety.

Not  only  is  it  God's  ordinance,  but  an  inevitable  and  spontaneous  law,  that  evil
deeds  work  evil  issues.  To  trifle  with  fire  ensures  burning ;  to  desert  friends  in-
volves desertion  in  turn  ;  to  wound  Christ  inflicts  wounds  on  conscience ;  to  turn
from  Him  as  those  who  "  know  Him  not "  (ver.  8),  will  issue  in  the  doom  **  I
know  you  not,  depart  1"  (Luke  xiii.  27).

I.  God's  free  son  in  unnatural  slavery  through  sin  (ver.  4).  The  answer  to
the  inquiries  in  an  emphatic  negation.  Israel  is  Jehovah's  first-born  (Exod.  iv.  22) ;
how  is  it  he  has  become  a  spoil  ?     Fallen  into  the  hands  of  oppressors.

1.  Not  horn  to  slavery,  as  a  serf  of  the  soil  or  a  child  of  enslaved  parents.
Liberty,  spiritual  freedom  from  tyranny,  the  birthright  of  man.  We  are  none  of
38


SOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAE,  oaiF.  n.


as  born  to  thraldom  to  any  spiritual  adversary.     If  become  slaves,  because  ''  sold
our  birthright."

2.  Not  allowed  to  perish  in  bondage.  Ensnared  in  Egypt,  the  foe  had  them  in
his  power,  and  bitterly  oppressed  them.  Even  as  the  "  devil  led  us  captive  at  his
will "  after  we  had  yielded  to  his  rule.     But  God  redeemed  Israel ;  us  also.

3.  Yet  enslaved  again  by  the  spoiler,  through  wilful  desertion  of  God,  and
**  the  last  state  worse  than  the  first "  (Matt.  xii.  25).

n.  Furious  adversaries  lurking  for  Israel  (ver.  15,  16).  Quick  to  rush  down
upon  the  prey  who  strays  from  safety.  "  Night  and  day,  beasts  of  prey,  lurking,  are
devouring."     (See  Critical  Notes,  chap.  ii.  ;  Natural  History,  ver.  15.)

1.  Envious  of  God* s  heritage  (ver.  15);  for  it  is  a  heritage  to  be  coveted  (ver,  7).
"  These  two  nations  shall  be  mine,"  (fee.  (Ezek.  xxxv.  10).

2.  Thirsting  for  destruction.  "  Your  adversary  walketh  about  seeking  whom  he
may  devour"  (1  Peter  v.  8).

3.  Implacable  in  their  fury  (ver.  15,  16).  (See  Natural  History  on  ver.  15,  and
Literary  Criticisms  on  ver.  16.)    The  devil  "  hath  great  wrath  "  (Rev,  xii.  12).

III.  When  God  is  lost  false  remedies  are  sought  (ver.  18).  The  previous  verse
shows  why  and  how  God  was  lost  by  Israel.

1.  Startling  ;  that  Israel,  once  redeemed  by  God  from  Egypt,  should  be  deserting
God  for  Egypt !  (2  Peter  ii.  19-22).

2.  Admonitory ;  for  Israel  was  nx)t  confident  of  Egypt's  sufficiency;  the  night-hag
of  doubt  was  on  her  heart ;  so  she  provided  an  alternative  should  Egypt  fail —
Assyria.     Not  satisfied  or  sure.     Wicked  have  no  assurance,  no  peace.

3.  IsraeVs  substitutes  for  God.  These  rivers  (ver.  18)  were  to  compensate  the
loss  of  "  the  fountain  of  living  waters  "  Israel  had  forsaken.  The  Nile  was  the
life-giving  artery  of  Egypt;  to  drink  the  waters  of  Sihor  therefore  meant  to
procure  for  herself  the  resources  of  life  which  Egypt  possessed.  So  with  Assyria.
For  what  do  men  forsake  God  1  (ver.  11).

IV.  Sinners  are  the  occasion  of  their  own  overthrow  (ver.  17-19).  The
confederacies  they  entered  into  were  the  agencies  of  their  desolation  (Prov.  i.  31  ;
Isa.  iii.  9).

1.  They  invite  the  enemy  by  abandoning  God.  He  was  their  defence  ;  awed  and
restrained  their  foes.  But  like  lions  they  crouch  (ver.  15),  ready  to  spring  upon
the  prey  which  wandered  exposed  and  unprotected.  Sinners  court  destruction,
tempt  the  tempter.

2.  They  evoke  God* s  judgments.  Though  Divine  punishments  slumber — for  God
does  not  desire  the  death  of  a  sinner,  and  is  slow  to  anger — they  awake  at  impious
provocation  (Rom.  i.  18 ;  Eph.  v.  6).

3.  They  necessitate  the  penalties  of  apostasy.  God  has  menaced  all  disobedience
and  defiance  with  dire  penalties.     *'  Now  consider  this,"  &c.  (Ps.  1.  22).

Application  (ver.  19):  "Know  therefore  and  see,"  i.e.,  at  last  comprehend,
"  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter,"  (fee.  Evil  now  and  bitter  hereafter.  For
**  at  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent  and  stingeth  like  an  adder  "  (Prov.  viiL  36).  A
gospel  counterpoise  (see  Rom.  v.  20,  21).


Ver.  20-29.   Keflex  Degradations  of  Idolatry.

Disasters  come  upon  the  impious  from  without,  but  the  whole  inward,  personal,
spiritual  debasement  which  idolatry  effected  in  the  apostate  was  the  greater
calamity.  Prostitution  of  the  soul  before  idols,  a  more  awful  disaster  than  any
external  degradation.  "  O  Israel!  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;"  the  God-given
nature,  a  wreck  !  Sin  works  a  twofold  doom — debasement  and  destruction.  (For
explanation  of  words  and  similes,  see  Critical  Notes  on  chap,  ii  above.)

"  The  sinful  corruptions  of  humanity — (i.)  Are  not  original  (ver.  21) ;  (ii.)  Bui

39


OHAF.  11  EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


very  deep  (ver.  22) ;  (iii.)  They  cannot  be  denied  away  (ver.  23,  24),  nor  removed
by  external  means  "  (ver.  22,  25). — Naegelsb.  in  Lange,

"  How  ruinous  a  course  it  is  to  trust  in  a  creature  !  (i.)  On  account  of  his
weakness  he  disgracefully  leaves  us  in  the  hour  of  our  need  (ver.  26,  27).  (ii.)
We  thus  insult  God  and  lose  His  help  (ver.  28)." — Idem,

I.  From  immemorial  antiquity  Israel  had  broken  the  yoke  of  the  Divine  law  laid
upon  her,  and  torn  asunder  the  bands  of  decency  and  order  which  God's  com-
mands and  ordinances  put  on  her  (ver.  20).  "  Bands  "  are  not  the  cords  of  love
with  which  God  drew  Israel  (Hos.  xi.  4),  but  the  commands  of  God  designed  to
keep  her  within  the  bounds  of  purity  and  from  riot  in  idolatry.  These  broken
(Jer.  xxxi.  18  ;  Hos.  iv.  16).

II.  In  this  shameless  prostitution  to  false  gods  Israel  shows  her  utter  corruption
(ver.  21) ;  in  her  very  nature  as  much  as  in  her  conduct.

III.  From  the  defilement  of  her  sins,  not  even  the  most  powerful  means  of  purifying
could  cleanse  her  (ver.  22).     (See  Isa.  i.  18  ;  Ps.  li.  4,  9.)

IV.  Her  degradation  is  the  more  deep  in  that  she  denies  her  base  condition  (ver.  23).
Though  openly  practising  idolatry,  she  is  blinded  in  self-righteousness.  Her  con-
duct is  like  irrational  animals,  yielding  to  sexual  cravings.  With  unbridled  desire
she  abandons  herself  to  idolatrous  lust  (ver.  24).

V.  I^he  summons  to  self-restraint  defiantly  resisted.  Advice  is  fruitless,  for  /  love
the  aliens  (ver.  25).

VI.  Disgrace  and  desertion  in  the  evil  hour  will  eventually  follow  Israel* s  sin
(ver.  26-28).  Shame  and  confusion  will  ensue  from  the  frustration  of  her  hopes
in  false  gods.  And  then  to  the  living  God  whom  she  has  long  deserted  she  will
make  appeals  in  vain.

VII.  God  will  send  transgressors,  who  seek  Him  in  their  panic,  back  to  the  gods  for
whom  they  rejected  Him  (ver.  28,  29).  Israel  had  gods  enough  (ver.  28) ;  ought
therefore  to  be  satisfied  and  secure  !  Trouble  will  test  Israel's  hopes,  and  the
worth  of  her  idols.  God  will  not  accept  any  pleading  (ver.  29),  or  regard  "conten-
tion "  from  those  who  ignored  and  deserted  Him  in  their  "  day  of  salvation,"'^
Arranged  from  Keil,


Ver.  30-37.  Affecting  Expostulations — Incorrigible  Impenitence.

When  man  quarrels  with  God,  the  fault  is  always  on  the  side  of  man  (Pt.
U.  6).     For

1.  God  chastises  us,  but  we  do  not  obey  (ver.  30).

2.  He  bestows  on  us  vast  blessings,  yet  we  do  not  adhere  to  Him  (ver.  31).

3.  He  makes  us  partakers  of  the  highest  glory,  yet  we  reject  it  with  disdain
(ver.  32). — Naegsb.

An  unjust  imputation  repelled  by  Jehovah  (ver.  31).  To  an  ingenuous  mind
God  never  appears  so  irresistible  as  when  He  addresses  His  creatures  in  the  lan-
guage of  tender  expostulation.     Christians  treat  God  as  a  wilderness —

1.  When  they  are  reluctant  to  serve  Him.

2.  When  they  seek  their  happiness  in  the  world  [away  from  God],  The  ground
of  complaint  is  in  them,  not  in  Him. — Pay  son.

Who  is  it  thus  vindicates  His  own  character  1     Jehovah  Himself,     Answer  the
challenge  given  and  the  charge  brought  against  you.
L  His  appeal  in  answer  to  charges  brought  against  Him.
[For  ver.   29  shows  Israel  chiding  (not  pleading)  with  God.]

1.  Was  He  to  the  Jews  a  wilderness  or  a  land  of  darkness  ?  Rescued  them  from
wilderness  (ver.  6).  Himself  met  their  every  want,  and  gave  them  full  and  peaceful
possession  of  the  promised  land  (Deut.  xixii.  10-14;  Neh.  ix.  21-25).

2.  Has  He  in  His  conduct  to  us  deserved  any  such  humiliating  imputation  t     We


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTART:  JRRBUIAE.  ohap.  XL


pasaing  througli  wilderness ;  lacked  ye  anything  %  "  No  good  thing  withhold."
Given  Son,  Spirit ;  shown  kindness  and  care.  Charges  against  His  liberality  alto-
gether false  (Isa.  v.  3,  4).

II.  God  is  vindicated;  hut  hear  His  charge  against  you.  He  complains,  and
justly,  of —

1.  The  flagrancy  of  man*  s  rebellion.  Israel,  =  "We  are  lords,"  <fec.  (ver.  31).
You  also  affected  independence,  Satan's  temptation.  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  "  (Gen.
iii.  5).  Independence  is  the  very  essence  of  the  Fall  (Kev.  iii.  17).  Shown  our-
selves proud,  daring,  impious,  self-sufficient  rebels.

2.  The  contemptuousness  of  mans  neglect  "  Forgotten  Him  "  (ver.  32)  after  all
His  mercies.  We  have  forgotten — (a.)  Our  obligations  to  Him.  (6.)  Our  depen-
dence on  Him.  (c.)  The  great  account  we  have  to  give  Him.  By  our  engrossing
attention  to  trifles  (ver.  32)  we  "  provoke  God  to  jealousy."

(a.)  Refrain  from  vindicating  yourselves  (ver.  35);  Hos.  v.  6;  Isa.  zzviii.  5.
Ponder  the  assertion  (Prov.  xxviii.  13).

(|8.)  Humble  ycmrselves  for  your  guilt.  Then  be  encouraged,  for  God's  goodness
was  Israel's  hope  (Deut.  vii.  7,  8),  and  His  love  and  mercy  avail  you  (Isa.  L  18).
— Rev,  C,  Simeon,  M.A,

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SELECTED  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  IL

Ver.   2.     Theme:  An  unforgotten  2.   Yet  no  part  of  our  life  ts  lost.

PAST.     Text:  ** I  remember  thee."  ^^ne  from  us,  and  from  our  recalling,

but  not  from  God.     Nothing  we  have

As  we  advance  in  life —  been  or  done  fades  from  the  mind  of

1.  We  may,  as  Israel  did,  leave  the  Jehovah.  All  things  lie  in  His  im-
best  things  we  once  possessed  in  the  rear.  perishable  thoughts.  *'  God  is  not  un-
We  may  acquire  more  outward  sub-  righteous  to  forget "  either  the  good  or
stance ;  Israel  did  (ver.  7)  ;  may  amass  evil  which  the  past  contains ;  else  how
more,  yet  we  may  lose  our  early  sweet-  could  He  judge  our  years,  and  recom-
ness  of  character,  ardour  of  piety,  sane-  pense  our  life  ?

tity  of  conscience.     And  3.  He  remembers  our  life  in  its  reli-

2.  We  commonly  do  lose  all  recollec-  gious  aspects.  For  that  is  the  only
tion  of  those  better  days.  We  allow  cognisance  God  takes  of  our  existence,
them  to  die  from  thought ;  perhaps  Though  He  cares  for  us  and  ministers  to
helplessly  so  :  it  may  be  we  prefer  it  us  temporally,  as  to  Israel  (ver.  6,  7),
should.  There  is  a  pang  in  memories  He  regards  our  life  in  its  spiritual  bear-
of  days  when  we  were  better,  though  ings,  estimates  its  religious  qualities,
we  had  less.  looks  for  the  moral  and  sacred  elements^

I.    The  unfading  memory  of  God.  not    the    mere    material   accidents    of

"/remember."  human  existence.    We  may  think  much

Not  only  as  a  necessity  that  a  mind  of  our  affairs ;  God,  of  our  condition ;

which  is  infinite  should  be  incapable  of  we,  of   our   circumstances  and    experi-

forgetting,  but  as  a  voluntary  and  inten-  ences ;  God,  of  the  state  the  soul  is  in,

turned  act.  and  the  aspects  of  our  life  religiously.

1.    Our  habits   are  forgetful.      The  What  does  God  think  of  our  past?
past  glides   from  us,    will   it   or  not.         11.    The   memory   of  God  lingers

Much  of  the  good  which  the  past  held,  fondly  over  what  is  good  in  our  life.
and  of  the  good  we  did,  fades  from  re-  There  are  persons  with  keen  recoUec-

coUection  ;  and  alas  !  much  of  the  evil  tions  of  unkindly  and  condemnatory  in-

becomes  lost  to  memory.    Each  wave  of  cidents ;  their  memories  are  storehouses

time  rolling  in  upon  the  shore  oblite-  of  corruptions.     Morally,  they  have  bad

rates  the  former  wave.     What  oblitera-  memories.      The  morbid  remember  all

tions   occur   in    life!      What   erasures  that  is  evil  of  themselves;  the  maliff-

from  memoij  1  nant,  all  that  ia  evil  of  others.

41


cnup.n.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  JMWtAE.


1.  The  Divine  memory  is  benignant
(rer.  2).  "  I  remember  thee,"  is  liter-
ally to  thy  account,  God  keeps  the
good  of  our  life  in  thought :

a.  For  its  own  sake.  He  lores  every-
thing good.  Too  precious,  and  alas !
too  scarce,  to  be  allowed  to  slip  from
thought.

b.  For  our  sake.  He  loves  us  for  the
good ;  it  makes  us  dearer  to  Him  ;  it  is
His  seal  upon  us,  "His  image  and
superscription"  (1  Tim.  il  19).

2.  The  good  of  our  life  may  all  lie  in
the  pa^t.  It  did  with  Israel.  The  time
of  "  youth  "  was  the  best  time.  Alas  !
"her  goodness  was  as  the  morning
cloud  and  the  early  dew,  which  goeth
away."  Had  God  limited  His  attention
to  the  present  state  of  the  nation,  what
a  changed  order  of  things  I  (ver.  11-13).
Oh,  sad  that  so  full  a  blossoming  should
issue  in  such  barrenness  and  dearth.
"Our  youth"  is  too  often  the  purest
and  brightest  era  of  our  life.  Let  the
mature  compare  themselves  now  with
themselves  then.  Nothing  sordid,
grasping,  subtle,  withered,  defiled  ;  but
manhood  and  womanhood,  how  deter-
iorated and  devastated  !  Let  the  aged
review  the  promise  of  youth.

Y       '*  Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy!

Shades  of  the  prison-house  begin  to  close

Upon  the  growing  boy;
But  he  beholds  the  light,  and  whence  it  flows ;

He  sees  it  in  his  joy :
The  youthf  who  daily  farther  from  the  east
Must  travel,  still  is  Nature's  priest,
And  by  the  vision  splendid
Is  on  his  way  attended :
At  length  the  man  perceives  it  die  away,
And  fade  into  the  light  of  common  day."

— Wordsworth.

If,  therefore,  God  is  to  remember  sin-
cere goodness,  He  must  look  to  our
early  years.  How  generous  and  gra-
cious He  who  seeks  not  our  sins,  but  our
few  poor,  short-lived  virtues!

ni.  The  memory  of  God  lingers  over
the  good  of  our  life  for  our  advantage.

1.  I^ot  that  a  past  religious  life  can
exonerate  present  sinfulness.  It  did  not
Israel :  nor  can  it  deliver  any  soul  from
the  consequences  of  degeneracy  (Ezek.
zxxiii.  12,  &c.).

2.  Tet  it  allures  the  Divine  tenderness
and  grace  (Mark  z.  20,  21).

i2


3.  And  God  does  not  lightly  esteem
the  fact  of  our  former  relationship  of
love  with  Himself  He  loves  still,
though  we  may  have  declined.  He
yearns  over  the  child  though  a  prodigal,
and  would  fain  reinstate  him  in  His
grace.  God  is  specially  pathetic  and
pleading  with  those  who  have  formerly
been  His.  He  cannot  reconcile  Him-
self to  their  alienation  and  loss.

4.  If  any  return  to  their  first  love,
He  will  remember  to  their  account  all
the  zeal  and  attachment  they  formerly
showed.

How  encouraging  this  to  spiritual  de-
linquents !  "  Come,  and  let  us  return
to  the  Lord,"  <kc.  (Hos.  vi  1-4).

Ver.  2,  3.  "Every  important  histo-
rical appearance  has  its  paradise  or
golden  age,  as  now  with  Israel  (ver.  2,
3).  It  is  thus  with  humanity  in  gene-
ral, with  the  Christian  Church  (Acts.  ii.
41 — iv.  37),  with  the  Reformation^  so
also  with  individual  Churches  (Gal.  iv.
14)  and  with  individual  Christians.
This  period  of  first  nuptial  love  does
not,  however,  usually  continue  long
(Rev.  ii.  4).

I.  The  joyous  period  of  first  love,

1.  In  experience  extremely  precious.

2.  In  duration  relatively  brief.

3.  In  effect  a  source  of  everlasting
blessing.

II.  The  nuptial  state  of  Chrises  Chureh
in  its  stages.

1.  The  first  stage,  love,

2.  The  second  stage,  alienation,  (Ad-
denda to  chap.  iL  2.)

3.  The  third  stage,  return,

III.  The  covenant  of  Christ  with  His
Church,

1.  Its  ground,  election.

2.  Its  condition,  faith.

3.  Its  promise,  the  Church  an  inde-
structible sanctuary. — Naeg.  in  Lange,

Ver.  1-13.  Theme:  The  evil  nature
of  that  sin  which  is  committed  after  our
conversion  to  God.

Four  things  observable  which  aggra-
vate the  offence :

I.  Committed  in  violation  of  solemn
vows  and  covenant  engagements.

Conversion  is  a  marriage,  wherein
Christ  resigns  Himself,  with  all  He  is


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


oHir.  n.


and  has,  to  us;  and  we  resign  our-
selves, with  all  we  are  and  have,  to
Christ.  "  Thy  vows,  O  God,  are  upon
me."

The  love  we  then  bore  to  Him  =  the
love  of  our  espousals.  At  that  time  we
took  Christ's  cause  for  our  cause,  His
people  for  ours,  His  will  for  our  law,
His  glory  for  our  end,  and  Himself  for
our  portion.  Did  we  love  Him  too  well
then  ?  If  prince  espouse  poor  outcast,
give  himself  and  all  he  has  to  her,  only
requiring  her  heart  in  return,  shall  she
refuse  him  that,  grow  first  dissatisfied,
and  go  after  other  lovers  ?  "0  my
soul !  thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord,
Thou  art  my  Lord.*'

IL  Departures  from  God  have  been
without  any  provocation  whaiever  on  His
part  (ver.  5).

This  question  ought  to  open  every
spring  of  sensibility  and  self-abhorrence.

1.  Was  He  wanting  in  forbearance
when  we  were  in  rebellion  ?

2.  Did  He  axit  unfeelingly  when  we
were  ruined,  in  that  He  gave  His  own
Son  to  die  for  us  ?

3.  Has  He  been  a  hard  Master  since
we  entered  His  service  1  Himself  ever
a  wilderness  to  us,  or  obedience  a  barren
pathi

4.  Has  He  been  a  churlish  Father  to
vlbI  Ever  refuse  us  free  access,  or
give  us  a  stone  1

5.  When  we  have  returned  to  Him
with  our  whole  heart,  has  He  not  al-
ways been  ready  to  receive  us,  and  bury
all  in  forgetfulness  ?  (Dan.  ix.  7).

III.  Sins  after  conversion  show  peculiar
and  horrible  ingratitude  (ver.  6-8).  God
has  not  done  the  self -same  thing  for  us
as  for  Israel ;  but

1.  He  has  given,  not  Egypt  or
Ethiopia  for  our  ransom,  but  His  own
blood.

2.  Has  redeem^ed  us,  not  from  Egyp-
tian thraldom,  but  "  from  the  power  of
darkness,  and  translated  us  into  the
kingdom  of  His  dear  Son.*'

3.  We  never  supported  by  miracles
in  lonesome  deserts  of  Arabia,  but
''having  obtained  help  of  God,  we
continue."

4.  Did  not  possess  Canaanf  but  "  God
hath  provided  some  better  things  for  us."


Our  blessings  abundantly  transcend
theirs,  and  lay  us  under  far  greater
obligations.  To  have  slighted  and  dis-
honoured a  God  of  such  love  as  this  is
indeed  the  greater  sin.

IV.  Such  departures  from  God  are
expressive  of  the  most  extreme  and  singular
folly  (ver.  9-13).

We  should  so  judge  of  a  people  who
removed  their  tents  from  an  overflowing
fountain  and  settled  in  a  parched  desert,
there  to  trust  to  hewed  cisterns.

1.  It  is  an  exchange f  and  a  foolish
one ;  of  liberty  for  drudgery,  peace  for
remorse,  joyfulness  for  anguish,  abund-
ance for  penury  and  misery.

2.  It  is  singular  folly  (ver.  10,  11).
Israel,  the  only  people  in  the  world
having  a  God  worth  cleaving  to,  must  be
the  only  people  desiring  a  change.  The
people  of  the  only  true  God  alone  prove
untrue !

This  not  more  extreme  and  singular
than  our  folly  when  we  shun  God  and
fly  for  happiness  to  sensual  and  carnal
gratification.  — Andrew  Fuller.

Ver.  6.     Theme:  Heaven's  appeal

TO  THE  8INNEB.

I.  The  sinner  is  Divinely  described.
**  They  are  gone  far  from  Me,  and  have
walked  after  vanity."

1.  Sin  is  departure  from  God,  Aliena-
tion of  sympathy  and  soul.

2.  Sin  is  a  progress  of  vanity,  "  An
idol  is  nothing  in  the  world "  (1  Cor.
viii  4).  Everything  about  a  sinner's
life  is  vain.  Sin  is  going  from  the  real
to  the  unreal.

(1.)  The  pleasures  he  seeks  are  un-
satisfactory ;  all  empty,  and  outside  him.

(2.)  The  honours  he  aspires  to  are
unreal ;  neither  enrich  nor  ennoble  the
soul.

n.  The  sinner  is  Divinely  challenged.
"  What  iniquity  found  in  Me  1 "

1.  Implies  that  if  iniquity  were  found
in  Godf  there  would  be  some  justification
for  apostasy  on  the  sinner's  part.

2.  That  the  discovery  of  such  iniquity
is  an  absolute  impossibility.  There  are
three  revelations  of  God,  and  each
shows  Him  of  absolute  perfection.

(1.)  Nature,  Keflected  in  the  uni-
verse, God  is  perfect.

43


oBA?.  n.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


(2.)  Biography  of  Christ,  Perfect
grace,  perfect  truth.

(3.)  The  moral  soul.  They  declare
God  is  perfect.  All  men  feel  bound  to
love  Him;  indicates  innate  belief  in
His  perfection.

No  being  in  the  universe  can  find
iniquity  in  God.  Could  hell  find  it,
its  agony  would  be  mitigated,  if  not
removed. — Homilist,

Comments :

Ver.  8.  Since  priests,  pastors,  and
prophets,  who  have  been  regularly  in-
ducted into  office,  may  be  deceivers,  it  is
necessary  to  try  the  spirits  according  to
the  criterion  given  in  1  John  iv.  1,  sq,
— Lange,

Ver.  9.  Their  ancestors,  themselves,
and  their  descendants,  constitute  a
unity — (1.)  In  moral  guilt.  (2.)  In  per-
sistent backsliding.  Ergo,  (3).  In  con-
sequent penalty.

Ver.  11.  *^  Changed  their  gloryy  (See
Addenda  to  chap.  ii.  11.)  "Gods  no
gods."

1.  Israel  had  no  glory,  dignity,  or
renown  of  her  own  (Deut.  vii.  7).

2.  She  had  derived  from  Jehovah  all
the  glory  she  ever  possessed  (Deut.  iv.
32-38).

3.  God  Himself  was  Israel's  crown  of
glory  and  beauty  (Ps.  cvl  20 ;  Rom.  i
23).

4.  The  Shekinah,  shining  upon  and
filling  with  splendour  the  sanctuary,  was
the  glorious  symbol  of  God's  presence  with
Israel  (1  Kings  viii.  11 ;  c^.  Rom.  ix.  4).

6.  Idolatry  endeavoured  to  materialise
that  ethereal  symbol  of  God :  golden  calf
(Exod.  xxxii.  2-5),  glittering,  brilliant !

6.  The  substitution  of  profitless  idols
for  Jehovah  surrendered  all  Israel's  glory,
and  left  her  baser  than  when  God  found
her  (Deut.  xxviil  15-29).

Ver.  12,  13.  Theme:  Two  astound-
ing EVILS.  (See  Literary  Criticisms,
ver.  12.)

To  forsake  God  does  not  mean  de-
parture from  His  presence  nor  escape
from  His  rulCf  but  moral  alienation  of
soul.

I.  The  force  of  human  freedom.

Mightiest  rivers  cannot  break  from
their  source,  nor  greatest  planets  from
44


their  centre,  but  man  can  from  centre
and  fountain  of  his  being.

1.  This  freedom  is  a  matter  of  personal
consciousness.  This  is  the  invincible
and  ultimate  argument  re  human  respon-
sibility; men  feel  they  are  uncoerced
and  free.

2.  This  freedom  invests  human  exis-
tence with  transcendent  importance.
Makes  them  members  of  the  great  moral
empire  of  the  universe.

II.  The  enormity  of  human  wicked-
ness.

1.  Wh&t  ingratitude.  2.  Wh&t  injus-
tice.    3.  What  impiety.

III.  The  egregiousness  of  human
folly:

1.  In  withdraunng  from  the  satisfying
to  toil  for  the  unsatisfying,

2.  In  withdrawing  from  the  abundant
to  toil  for  the  scanty.  Well  may  the
heavens  be  ** amazed  &nd  horrified**  at
the  freedom,  iniquity,  and  folly  which
they  witness  every  age  and  every  day,
developed  in  the  history  of  our  race. —
Homilist.

Comments :

Ver.  14.  ^tcMoTTi  thinks  the  prophet
here  proposes  to  Judah,  as  yet  spared,
the  case  of  Israel  (the  captive  ten  tribes),
as  a  warning  of  what  they  might  expect
if  they  confided  in  Egypt :  "  Was  Israel
of  meaner  birth  than  Judah?  Nay;
yet  if  Israel  fell  before  Assyria,  could
Judah  hope  a  better  fate  from  Egypt  ? "
But  the  two  parts  of  the  nation  are  not
separated  in  the  prophet's  thought  and
address  (cf.  ver.  13,  18,  36).

It  is  an  inquiry  :  How  comes  it  that
the  nation  which  is  not  a  slave  by
birth,  being  **  Jehovah's  son,  His  first-
born" (Exod.  iv.  22),  is  to  suffer  the
miseries  of  slavery  1

Speaker's  Com.,  however,  renders  it :
If  Israel  is  a  slave,  he  is  home-bom,  and
hence  held  in  respect  (Gen.  xiv.  14),
may  expect  kindness  as  well  as  protec-
tion. Cannot  Jehovah  guard  His  own
household?  How  happens  it  that  a
member  of  so  powerful  a  family  is
spoiled  ?  Next  verse  gives  the  reason :
Israel  is  a  runaway  slave,  deserted  the
family  to  which  he  belonged ;  hence  his
trouble  and  misery.  By  leaving  his
master's  house  he  has  exposed  himself


HOMILETW  OOMMENTARY:  JEJRBMIAH.  <sap.il


to  the  hecuts  of  prey  in  the  toildemess  all  the  way ;  the  life  which  is  ordered

(ver.  15).  so  as  to  please  Him,  and  never  lead  Him

^,  ^  ,  to  depart;  a  loyal  career  of  piety  and  love!

ThtTM :  ISBAEL'8  SLAVERY  AN  EMBtEM  jf  jj^^j    ^^  ^  f^t^j  refractori-

OF     THE     UNIVEESAL    HUMAN    8LAVEEY  ^ggg_   ^^^    ^gg^rtS    the    graCiOUS   Way.

^^  ®^^'  Youth,   though   trained   in    "  wisdom's

1.  In  both  it  is  not  original.     2.  Is  ways,*'  forsakes  them  for  sin.     Even  re-
self-incurred.     3.  Is  severely  punished,  ligious  persons  turn  aside  from  the  Lord
4.  The    punishment   is    the  means    of  and  wander.     Hence :
salvation  (since  it   shows  sin   is   ruin-  1.  The  ci-iminality  of  those  who  desert
ous,  and  godliness  is  life  and  peace). —  God.     "  The  Lord  thy  God."
Naegehhach                                                       2.   The  circumstances  under  which  re-

Ver.  16.  **If  God  wishes  to  chastise  fractoriness  asserts  itself.    "  ITAewHeled

His   people,   He   usually   employs   the  thee."     Not  when  God  seemed  distant

ungodly  for  this  purpose  (Deut.  xxviii.  or  angry.

49,  50);  and  it  often  happens  that  3.  The  course  which  this  refractori-
injury  and  destruction  come  upon  the  ness  pursued.  "Thou  hast /or«a^e»  the
ungodly  from  those  from  whom  they  Lord."  Not  fell  back  in  the  way  be-
have promised  themselves  the  greatest  cause  it  was  difficult  to  follow;  but  an
lielp." — Starke,  (See  Literary  Criti-  entire  and  wilful  leaving  the  path  for
cismSf  ver.  16.)  another.

XT        ^     mi         -n  III-  Sinners  accomplish  their  own

Ver.  .f.     Theme:  Keckless  deser-  ^^^rthrow   by  their  wilful   impiety.

TION  OF  THE  RIGHT  WAY.  .  Thou  bast  procured  this  for  thyself."

Suggests   a    retrospect.      Look   well  (See  Literary  Criticisms,  ver.  17.)
over  your  life  and  mark  your  career;  1.  The  way  led  from  evil  to  good  (ver.

the  points  at  which  you  forsook  God.  6,  7).

Suggests    also   a   calamity.      How   are  2.    Outside  the  way  perils  and  foes

your  present  misery  and  terror  to  be  lurked  for  "prey"  (ver.  15).
accounted  for  I     Examples  :  Youth  with  3.    Leaving  the  way  forfeited  God*$

wasted  constitution.    Merchant  suddenly  guidance  and  protection.
bankrupt.    "Brought  it  all  (^n  himself."  4.  The  end  of  transgression  is  doom

Man   is   too    ready   to    blame    others,  (Matt.  viL  13).

emphatically  God,  for  his  misfortunes.  Ruin  is  entailed,  not  sent ;  doom  is

Text  finds  the  cause  of   our  personal,  the  natural   issue  of   evil;    the  guilty

social,   and    spiritual  disasters    nearer  perish    as   the   inevitable    outcome    of

home.  wrong.     They  had,  therefore,  to  "  bear

L  There  is  a  gracious  way  wherein  their  own  iniquity,"  and  to  blame  them-

Jehovah  leads.  selves  for  their  woes  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).

Through  Arabian  desert  went  with  ,t      -./v       /,tt  r.

Israel.     But  a  way  of  life  is  meant.  ^^r.  19.     Theme:  Sin  its  own  PUN-

1.  This  may  not  approve  itself  to  the  ishment.

unregenerate.  I.  In  the  dealings  of  God  tvith  good

2.  Yet  it  is  a  path  of  pleasantness  men.

and  holy  joy  to  the  godly.  1.  Neglect  secret  devotion,  and  God

3.  Along  it  the  footsteps  of  God,  the  will  refuse  His  blessing  on  other  means
presence  of  Emmanuel,  are  realised  and  of  grace.

enjoyed.  2.  Indulge  secret  sin,  and  God   will

4.  Attended  by  the  Lord  Himself  bring  that  sin  into  open  light  and  con-
he   pilgrim  traverses  this   living   way,  deranation.

which  leads  away  from   bondage   into  3.  Idolise  created  good,  God  will  take

blessed     privilege     and     eternal     rest,  from  us  our  idol,  or  make  it  a  plague

(See  Addenda  to  chap.  ii.  17.)  to  us.

How  blessed,  and  safe,  and  favoured  4.  Act  with  faithlessness  to   others,

that  life  which  has  Jesus  ever  with  it  God  will  permit  us  to  suffer  from  the

45


OHAP.  n.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


treachery  of  others  ;  as  JacoVs  subtlety
with  Esau  came  back  in  Laban's  treat-
ment of  him.

6.  Undutifulness  to  parents  punished
by  the"  defiance  of  our  own  children.

6.  Indifference  as  to  home  piety
returned  upon  us  in  the  irreligion  of
those  in  the  home.     Eli's  sons.

IL  In  the  dealings  of  God  toith  vdcked
men,

1.  Those  who  resent  religious  per-
suasions and  strive  to  stifle  conviction
are  deprived  of  godly  parents  and
friends,  and  left  to  a  fatal  peace.

2.  Those  who  repel  the  Gospel  because
of  its  humiliating  truths  are  allowed  to
"  believe  a  lie  and  be  damned,  because
they    have     pleasure     in    unrighteous-


ness.


71


3.  In  death  and  judgment,  the  punish-
ment of  the  sinner  will  reflect  his  sin.
He  who  bad  said  to  Christ,  "  Depart,  I
desire  >iot  the  knowledge  of  Thy  ways,"
will  hwr  his  own  word  again,  "De-
part!*

The  essence  of  misery  in  that  world
will  consist  in  recollection.  Then  will
"our  wickedness  reprove  us."

Application:  How  dreadful  a  thing
sm  is  in  all  its  operations !  He  who
indulges  in  it  kindles  a  fire  that  will
burn  himself.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will
find  you  out."

There  is  no  radical  cure  but  contri-
tion and  the  Cross. — A,  Fuller,

i.  The  nature  of  sin  :  forsaking  the
Lord  as  our  God,

ii.  The  cause  of  sin :  because  His
fear  is  not  in  us.

iii.  The  malignity  of  sin  :  it  is  an  evil
and  bitter  thing.

iv.  The  fatal  consequences  of  sin :
forsaking  the  Lord  =  without  God,

V.  The  use  and  application  of  all  this :
repent  of  thy  sin. — M.  Henry.

Ver.  20.  I.  The  sacred  yoke  of  God.
(See  Addenda  to  chap.  ii.  20,  "  Yoke.'')

1.  The  Lord's  yoke  is  easy  (Matt.
XL  29);  yet

2.  It  seems  intolerable  to  our  flesh ;
nevertheless

3.  Heartrending  sacrifices  and  suffer-
ings are  the  substitutes  we  procure  for
ourselves  in  its  stead.  Children  given
to  Moloch,  and  infliction  of  self-torture

4$


(1  Kings  xviii.  28).  This,  rather  than
renounce  carnal  freedom  and  bow  to  the
chastisement  of  the  Spirit.

II.  The  sacred  yoke  refused.  The
endeavour  to  cast  that  yoke  off:

1.  An  ancient  one.  The  angels'  re-
volt ;  man's  fall ;  Israel's  apostasy.

2.  A  ruinous  one.  For  (a.)  It  de-
prives us  of  true  freedom  ;  and  (6.)  It
renders  us  the  servants  of  powers  hostile
to  God  and  destructive  to  ourselves. —
Arranged  from  Lange.

Ver.  22.  Theme:  Futile  self-
OLEANSiNO.  (See  Critical  NoteSy  Natu-
ral History,  ver.  22  ;  and  Addenda  to
chap.  ii.  22,  "  Iniquity  is  marked.''^)

I.  Sinners  make  vigorous  efforts  at
external  cleansing.

1.  Driven  thereto  by  remorse  or  ap-
prehension.

2.  Under  a  powerful  impulse  towards
improvement ;  or

3.  As  a  compromise  with  conscience  ;
balancing  inward  evil  by  outward  good.

II.  Approved  and  promising  means
may  be  adopted.     As  here :

1.  Rationalism  prescribes  its  ''  nitre"
of  culture  and  respectability.

2.  Sacerdotalism  recommends  its
"  soap  "  of  confession,  penance,  gifts  to
the  Church,  vows  of  chastity,  <fec.

3.  Self-righteousness  urges  more
"washing,"  tithes  and  phylacteries,  and
prayers;  that  "the  outside  of  the  cup
and  the  platter"  may  be  clean;  *^for
the  Pharisees  wash  oft."

III.  All  this  without  any  true  ap-
preciation of  holiness.  For  that  would
denote  loathing  of  sin  and  of  self,  which
God  accepts,  and  is  the  beginning  of  re-
demption.

1.  Israel  was  not  resolved  on  purify-
ing herself.  There  was  much  ado  about
reformation,  cleansing  Temple,  because
Josiah  was  resolute ;  but  she  still  loved
sin  (ver.  25).

2.  I'he  outward  ejfort  is  impotent  when
without  heart.  There  may  be  ostenta-
tious vigour,  but  it  is  the  inward  long-
ing and  purpose  which  give  effect  to  ac-
tion. "The  Lord  looketh  not  on  out-
ward appearance,  but  searcheth  the
heart."

3.  Cleansing  without  lioliness  it  ietf-


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARJ:  JEREMIAH.


0BAF.1I.


deception  and  abhorrent.  It  is  the
devil's  piety,  a  whited  wall,  a  delusion
to  man,  and  detestable  to  God  (Luke
xvi.  15).

IV.  Therefore  the  guilt  remains
deep  and  immovable.

1.  For  the  sin  itself  is  not  superficial,
but  inherent.

2.  Superficial  cleansing  does  not
touch  the  seat  of  evil.  "  For  out  of  the
heart  proceeds  evil,"  <fec.

3.  Till  sin  is  loathed  it  cannot  be  re-
moved. It  is  incarcerated  within  us,
protected  against  remedies.

4.  It  thus  lies  under  God's  eye  an  in-
delible stain.

Let  the  "  soul  ahlKyr  itself,  and  repent
in  dust  and  ashes ; "  and  lo !  there  stands
ready  a  Saviour,  "the  propitiation  for
our  sins,"  "  mighty  to  save ; "  who,  if
the  sinner  will  but  cry  to  Him,  "Lord,
save,  I  perish  1 "  will  answer,  "  Thy  sins,
which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee  ! "
"  Though  y<mr  sins  be  as  scarlet"  &c.
(Isa.  i.  18).

Ver.  23.  Theme:  What  hast  thou
doneI  Text:  *^ See  thy  way  in  the
valley ;  know  what  thou  hist  done,*

God  undertakes  to  expostulate  with
His  people.  He  finds  them  priding
themselves  on,  and  surrounding  them-
selves with,  an  edifice  of  self-righteous-
ness, a  refuge  of  lies.

How  does  God  confute  this  self-
righteousness  ?  By  simply  pointing  to
bare  fact.  The  prophet  takes  Israel  up
to  the  summit  of  the  hill,  and  points
down  to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  to
the  sight  of  all  those  idolatrous  em-
blems and  monuments  scattered  pro-
fusely there.  God  lays  hold  of  Israel,
as  it  were,  and  says,  "  How  canst  thou
say,  I  am  not  polluted  \  See  thy  way,"
«fcc.  Those  stones  cry  out  against  thee,
those  smouldering  fires  down  there,
through  which  your  children  passed,
are  indications  of  the  guilt  which  has
brought  darkness  and  judgment  down
upon  the  nation.

/  challenge  you  to  take  a  general  view
of  your  past  life,  "  See  thy  way ;  know
what  thou  hast  done.**

1.  Look  at  your  life  in  the  light  of
God's  Divine  purpose,      God  sent  you


into  the  world  with  a  noble  destiny;
to  reflect  His  glory  and  scatter  heavenly
blessings.  He  gave  thee  a  body  to  be  a
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  what  hast
thou  done?  Desecrated  that  sacred  shrine.
Gave  thee  an  intelligence  to  know  Him^
but  He  has  not  been  in  thy  thoughts :  a
heart  to  glow  with  Divine  love ;  but  it
only  glows  under  the  blighting  breath
of  sin.

2.  In  the  light  of  your  social  position,
and  the  circumstances  by  which  you  have
been  surrounded,  God  has  given  some
position,  wealth,  business:  what  done
with  iti  God  asks  it,  but  you  return
Nabal's  answer  (1  Sam.  xxv.  11).

3.  In  the  light  of  the  responsibilities  of
the  domestic  relationship,  God  has  made
you  a  member  of  a  family.  Parents,
negligent  of  souls  of  your  children,  con-
cerned more  for  their  social  prospects,
is  prayer  ever  heard  among  your  chil-
dren 1  What  hast  thou  done  ?  Trained
thy  children  for  hell.

4.  In  the  light  of  your  relationship  to
the  best  and  tender  est  of  fathers.  What
done  to  your  Father  in  heaven?  Pro-
digal son.  That  is  how  God's  mercy  is
treated ;  waste  Divinely-given  substance
in  selfishness  and  sin.  What  hast  thou
done  ?  Turned  thy  back  on  thy  Father's
love,  spurned  His  oflfers  of  mercy,  and
deafened  thine  ear  against  His  call.

5.  In  the  light  of  the  tender  dealings
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  You  can
remember  in  childhood  and  youth  how
that  Spirit  strove  with  you.  In  those
early  days  there  was,  at  times,  a
strange  overshadowing,  a  Voice  that
seemed  to  say,  "Cornel"  It  was  the
Holy  Spirit  who  longed  to  win  you.
What  hast  thou  done  to  that  Holy
Spirit  of  God?  "Ye  do  always  resist
the  Holy  Ghost,"

6.  In  the  light  of  your  relationships
udth  Him,  who,  because  He  loved  you,
was  content  to  hang  as  your  substitute
upon  the  cross  of  shame,  I  plead  for
Him.  I  hold  Him  up  crucified  before
you.  What  hast  thou  done  to  that  blood
of  His?  Infatuated  Jews  cried,  "His
blood  be  on  us  and  our  children  ! "  and
it  fell  as  showers  of  judgment.  "  Is  it
nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by?"
Have  you  taken  home  to  your  heart  the

47


EL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  MIA  TI,


message,  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ
cleanseth  from  all  sin ; "  and  looked
up  with  eyes  of  gratitude  to  your
Saviour's  face,  and  said,  "0  my
Saviour !  Thy  blood  was  shedfiyr  me,  for
me,  for  me  ?  *' — Aitken.

Ver.  24.   Theme:  Self- vindicating

8INNB&3  REPROVED.

Circumstances  under  which  we  sin
aggravates  the  guilt.  Mercies  received
by  us ;  resolutions  they  have  prompted ;
degree  of  our  degeneration ;  all  are
marked  by  God.  But  one  evil  tran-
scends all  others,  a  self-justifying  spirit ;
this  is  pre-eminently  offensive  to  the
Divine  Majesty.

1.  The  self- vindicating  ways  of  sin-
ners.

It  might  be  supposed  that,  when
men's  iniquities  are  so  visible,  they
would  fall  under  the  accusation  and
humble  themselves  before  God.  In-
stead, they  justify  themselves  against
j^\  the  charge :  some
/  \.  In  a  way  of  direct  denial ;  as  Cain
(Gen.  iv.  9,  and  text).

2.  In  a  way  of  vain  excuse;  as  Saul
(1  Sam.  XV.  13-15).

3.  In  a  way  of  hypocritical  palliation  ;
as  Adam  and  Eve  (Gen.  iii.  11-13).

II.  God  substantiates  His  charge
against  His  offending  people.

However  we  may  justify  ourselves,
God  will  set  before  us  the  things  that
we  have  done  (Ps.  1.  21) :

1.  By  an  appeal  to  fact.  "  See  thy
way  in  the  valley ;  know  what  thou  hast
done."  Not  discovered  by  "secret
search "  (ver.  34) ;  it  is  done  without
concealment.  So,  look  at  your  whole
lives,  one  continued  scene  of  rebellion
against  God.  All  your  very  religion  a
shadow,  full  of  shameful  unreality  and
slips.    What  palliations  can  exonerate'?

2.  By  a  most  apt  comparison.  (See
Critical  NoteSy  Natural  History,  Literary
Criticisms,  above;  also  Addenda,  ver.  23.)
Dromedary  and  wild  ass,  when  seeking
their  mate,  are  so  bent  upon  attainment
of  their  desire,  that  efforts  to  catch  them
are  vain ;  no  one  will  weary  himself
with  so  fruitless  a  labour.  But  when
theirtime  of  pregnancy  has  advanced  they
fall  comparatively  an  easy  prey  to  the

48


pursuer.  So  to  little  purpose  that  you
are  followed  with  invitations  and  en-
treaties :  you  '*  will  not  hear  voice  of
charmer,  charm  he  never  so  wisely."

Application :  There  is  a  time  when  we
may  hope  to  prevail  over  sinners.  "  In
her  month "  (ver,  24).  Happy  if  yoi
have  become  "  weary  and  heavy  laden  "
with  your  sins,  and  will  be  led  back  to
God.  "  Only  acknowledge  thine  ini--,
quity"  (iii.  13).  Come  burdened  to
Jesus,  and  He  will  '*  give  you  rest "
(1  John  i.  8,  9). — Simeon.

Ver.  25.  Comments.

Schmidt  interprets  the  words  "  With-
hold thy  foot "  (fee,  as  being  led  barefoot
away  into  captivity,  the  penalty  of
apostasy.  Hitzig  thinks  the  reference  is
to  penances  performed  barefoot  to  idols,
and  the  thirst  the  result  of  vociferous  in-
vocations. Eichhorn  regards  it  as  re-
ferring to  idolatrous  acts,  viewed  as  those
of  a  lewd  person,  who  both  exposes  her-
self and  cries  out  for  paramours.  Umr
briet,  =  God  entreats  Israel  as  His  bride
to  refrain  from  rushing  like  an  adul tress,
barefoot,  and  with  parched  throat,  after
strangers.

The  natural  meaning :  Abstain  from
incontinence  (idolatry) ;  do  not  so
shamelessly  pursue  lovers,  nor  thirst
after  sexual  intercourse.  (See  Literary
Criticisms  on  ver.  28.)

"  There  is  no  hope"  &c,  "  The  plea
of  despair  is  not  half  honest ;  it  is  taken
up  as  an  apology  for  rushing  madly  and
headlong  into  sin." — Cowles.

Ver.  26.  If  "  kings  and  princes  "  are
authorised  to  determine  a  nation's  reli-
gion, and  "  priests  and  prophets  "  to  lord
it  over  individual  conscience  and  judg-
ment, why,  then,  this  people  was  not  to
blame.  Piety,  if  left  to  their  imperious
care,  would  soon  fall  into  a  lamentable
plight.  Let  each  man  be  his  own
"  king  "  and  "  priest "  religiously  ;  *'  be
fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind,"  and
act  as  he  knows  God  requires. — (See
Addenda  to  chap.  iL  ver.  26,  "Kings and
priests.")

Ver.  27.  ''Trouble"  is  a  fine  self
revealer,  and  a  faithful  witness  for  God
Pleasure  and  prosperity  act  on  men  as  opi-
ates, lull  and  befool  them ;  but  affliction
and  trouble  are  quick  restoratives  f  tbey


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  n.


bring   men  to   their  senses.     (See  Ad-
denda to  chap.  ii.  ver.  27,  "  TrovhUJ*)

Ver.  28.  1.  Shame  is  the  only  gain  of
impiety;  it  eventually  covers  us  with
confusion.

2.  Subterfuges  for  God  will  be  an
encumbrance  and  a  torture  to  us  when
we  find  out  our  stupidity  and  their  use-
lessness.

3.  We  shall  want  a  helper  to  "  arise
and  save**  in  the  evil  times  which  are
coming.  May  our  hope  not  make  us
ashamed  !

4.  Necessity  teaches  men  to  pray ;  but
it  is  a  desperate  thing  to  be  calling  upon
"vanities"  in  the  day  of  our  dismay.

5.  God  may  send  back  pleaders  to
their  cherished  delusions.  Then  will
they  know  themselves  as  "having  no
hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world."

Ver.  30.  "  In  vain  have  I  smitten  you."
God  deals  two  different  strokes,  one  for
graccy  another  for  justice  ;  to  save,  or  to
afflict;  to  convert,  or  to  make  sinners
know  their  crime.

The  smiting  was  by  God's  prophets,
whose  words  are  the  "  rod  of  His
mouth,"  and  fall  with  different  effects  on
men,  according  as  they  "hear  or  for-
bear," proving  a  "  savour  of  life  "  to  some,
and  "  of  death  "  to  others.

This  smiting  by  the  prophets  with
"  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  "  was  answered
by  their  smiting  the  prophets  with  the
material  sword  of  slaughtering  revenge
(1  Kings  xviii.  13 ;  Neh.  ix.  26 ;  Matt,
xxiii.  37).  (See  Literary  Criticisms^
ver.  30.)

1.  To  accept  chastisement,  sent  by
word  or  deed,  is  a  sign  of  wisdom  (Pro v.
viii.  10 ;  cf.  Heb.  xii.  9).

2.  To  profit  by  it  requires  that  we
enter  into  the  Divine  purpose  and  re-
spond (Heb.  xii.  5,  10).  (See  Addenda
to  chap.  ii.  ver.  30,  " Correction")

Ver.  31.  "Where  God  bestows  most
benefits,  there  He  receives  the  least  grati-
tude."— Forster,  God  is  "  a  desert "  to
none.  This  is  true — 1.  In  reference  to  all
men  (comp.  Matt.  v.  45).  (a.)  He  regards
their  bodily  wants.  (6.)  He  provides  for
and  seeks  their  spiritual  good.  2.  He  was
always  a  fruitful  land  to  Israel,  (a.)
When  He  blessed  them  and  punished
the  heathen.     (6.)  When  He  blessed  the


heathen  and  punished  them,  (c.)  Even
when  He  allowed  the  Church  of  Christ
to  pass  from  the  Jews  to  the  heathen. —
From  Homilies  on  Jeremiah,  by  Jerome,
quoted  in  Lange.

What  an  attitude  of  graceless  defiance
and  antagonism  this  for  man  to  assume  !
1.  We  refuse  the  Divine  control  com-
pletely, "We  are  lords,"  i.e,,  ramble
unrestrained.  2.  We  are  determined
never  to  return  to  the  Lorrd.  "  We  wil\
come  no  more  unto  Thee."  It  is  an  idle
boast.  (1.)  None  can  escape  God's  con-
trol {cf  Acts  xvii.  28;  Heb.  ix.  27).
(2.)  Every  soul  must  come  back  to  God
(Rom.  xiv.  10-12).  Who  then  shall
stand  before  Him  %  (See  Literary  Cri-
ticisms, ver.  31.)

Ver.  32.  (See  Critical  NoteSf  Manners
and  Customs,  ver.  32.)

1.  The  world's  trifles  are  esteemed
more  than  God's  graces.

2.  Adornment  of  the  person  engrosses
more  time  and  thought  than  enriching
the  soul.

3.  God  receives  worse  treatment
from  frivolous  worldlings  than  their
paltry  trinkets.  They  preserve  and  prize
them ;  but  "  God  is  not  in  all  their
thoughts."

Ver.  33.  Fine  irony.  How  good  thou
makest  thy  way  /  =  amendest(cf.  chap.  vii.
3,  5),  in  order  to  gain  love.  To  succeed
in  wickedness,  to  live  immorally,  necessi-
tates no  little  study,  self-accommodation,
and  effort.  Evil  costs  more  pains  than
godliness,  and  requites  vrith  penalties.

Ver.  35.  *^  Obstinate  impenitence,  (1.)  It
is  blind  to  its  own  guilt.  (2.)  Blas-
phemes God  by  accusing  Him  of  unjust
anger.  (3.)  Will  not  escape  just  punish-
ment."— Naeg.  in  Lange,

i  Self-justification,  ii  Delusive  hope,
iii.  Divine  testing,  iv.  Certain  refuta-
tion.

Ver.  36,  37.  Fear,  defeat,  failure.

I.  Fearful  lest  her  confidences  should
fail,  the  soul  anxiously  multiplies  human
reliances  ;  "  gaddest  about  so  much  to
change  her  way;"  to  make  sure  of
Egypt  when  Assyria  seems  declining.

II.  Dishonoured  by  this  desertion  of
Him  for  other  "confidences,"  God  will
defeat  her  human  hopes.  "The  Lord
hath  rejected  thy  confidences  "  (despised

49


CHAP,  a  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


them)  ;    ^^  thou   shalt   not    prosper    in  Ing  failure  and  shame.     **  Thou  shalt  go

them."  forth  from  him"  (from  thence),  "thine

III.  All  contrivances  to  prevent  herself  hands  upon  thine  head.''     (See  Critical

being  left  desolate  issue  in  overwhelm-  Note9f  ManwT%  and  CuttonUf  ver.  37.)


NOTJOEABLB  TOPICS  IN  OHAFTBR  11.

Tcpie:  Easlt  Pistt  ths  Beauty  of  Youth.     Text  :**  I  remember  the  hindneu

of  thy  youth*'  (ver.  2).

IfUroditction,  The  sacred  grace  of  bygone  days  made  Israel  lovely  in  Qod's  remem-
brance. The  religious  earnestness  of  the  young  ruler  secured  for  him  this — "  Jesus
looking  upon  him,  loved  him."  Young  lives  consecrated  to  the  Lord  are  sure  of  Heaven's
approval  and  blessing.     (See  Addenda,  chap.  ii.  ver.  2,  "  Piety  the  beauty  of  youth,*')

I.  A  picture  of  a  beautiful  youth.

A  portrait  hangs  on  your  wall ;  you  say,  '*  A  lovely  face  ! "  But  something
more  beautiful  and  valuable  than  '*  good  looks."  What  ?  The  character,  virtues,
life.  God  would  not  estimate  by  looksy  appearance.  He  wants  *'  the  ornament  of
a  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  See  what  Scripture  says  about  appearance  as  compared
with  the  inward  spiritual  qualities  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).  Israel's  youth  had  not  been
vitiated  by  sin ;  it  was  given  up  to  God  in  its  freshness  and  beauty.  Shall  yours
be  ]  God  says  of  it  that  it  was — 1.  Full  of  kindness  (to  Him).  2.  Secretly  loving
and  clinging,  "  Espousals :  went  after  me."  Jesus  asks  each,  "  Lovest  thou  me  % "
"  Follow  me."

n.  An  eye  that  fondly  gazes  on  it.

What  loving  eyes,  of  mother,  father,  look  often  on  that  portrait  on  the  wall  I  "  /
remember  thee."  God  could  not  draw  His  gaze  off  from  that  picture  of  Israel's
early  piety.  Oh,  how  God  lingers  with  eyes  of  tender  regard  over  each  youthful
life,  specially  over  those  who  are  early  His !  "  I  love  them  that  love  Me,  and  those
who  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  1 .  God  had  Himself  formed  and  graced  this
youth  with  beauty.  He  was  a  Father  to  Israel,  and  all  her  loveliness  was  derived
from  Him.  So  all  our  goodness  is  His  gracious  work.  2.  God  cherished  Israel  as
being  peculiarly  precious  (Deut.  vii.  6-8).  Oh,  what  hopes  a  father  entertains  about
his  child ;  what  love  he  lavishes  !

HL  A  special  desire  to  preserve  it.         ^

Nothing,  no  one,  must  be  allowed  to  injure  that  much-prized  portrait  So  God
laid  penalties  against  all  who  should  touch  or  damage  Israel  (ver.  3).  For — 1.
There  was  no  equal  in  the  world.  All  the  world  was  idolatrous,  but  '*  Israel  was  holi-
ness." Think  what  it  must  be  for  an  only  child  to  be  lost.  God  does  not  want  to
lose  you,  t.^.,  your  youth,  your  piety.  He  asks  that  your  religion  be  preserved.  It
is  an  incomparably  precious  jewel.  Your  character  is  the  best  thing  about  you ;
that  gone,  you  are  nothing  to  God.  2.  It  could  not  be  replaced.  Youth  once  gone
never  can  be  recalled.  Youthful  piety  cannot  be  recalled  once  lost.  You  may
return  to  God  later  in  life,  but  the  best  part  of  you  would  then  be  wanting.  A
flower  with  its  leaves  falling  off  is  not  so  beautiful  as  the  opening  bud.

IV.  A  dreadful  peril  threatening  it.

Precious  things  always  seem  most  in  danger.  A  portrait  not  valued  would  never
get  damaged  ;  but  that  one  precious  thing,  why,  everything  seems  to  threaten  it.
There  are  dreadful  perils  menacing  a  godly  youth.  1.  Offensive  enemies  (ver.  3,
"  offend ")  2.  Numerous  enemies  ("  all  that  devour ").  3.  Destructive  enemies
(**  devour  ").  Remember  him  who  *'  seeketh  whom  he  may  devcmr"  (1  Pet.  v.  16 ;
cf.  Matt,  xviii.  6,  7).  Think  how  Israel  was  spoiled  (ver.  14).  We  need  the
preserving  care  of  Jesus.  He  can  keep  us  in  safety,  and  guard  our  souls  from  the
spoiler  (1  Tim.  i.  12).


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JBRBMIAB.  cba».  n.


Topic:  Distrust  of  God  issuixo  in  Deseetion.     Text:  **  My  people  have  for-
saken Me  J  and  hewed  out  cisterns  "  (ver,  1 3).

**  Faith  and  unfaith  can  ne'er  be  equal  powers ;
Unfaith  in  aught  is  want  of  faith  in  all."

Let  distrust  begin,  it  will  widen  into  alienation.  It  may  be  small  at  outset,  a
"  little  pitted  speck  "  in  the  ripe  fruit  of  our  faith,  a  mere  doubt  of  God's  promises ;
but  the  leak  has  sprung,  the  fire  has  started,  the  poison  has  entered  the  blood.
The  **  speck  "  spread,  "  rotted  inward,"  and  "  slowly  mouldered  all."  This  is  the
principle  of  the  text,  the  growth  of  unfaith^  the  ultimate  issues  of  distrust  of  God.

Not  applicable  to  those  who  have  never  loved  and  trusted  God ;  but  to  "  My
people,"  who  had  experienced  enough  to  ensure  their  fearless  love.  We  have
known  fuller  demonstration  of  Divine  sufficiency  and  grace  in  Jesus  in  our  per-
sonal redemption  and  adoption.  In  us  **  perfect  love  should  cast  out  fear."  Yet
doubt  has  been  cherished,  and  has  issued  in  desertion.

L  A  fact  for  amazement :  God  was  theirs,  yet  they  deserted  Him.  "  Be
astonished,  saith  the  Lord."  It  is  a  cry  of  amazement  from  God.  "O  ye
heavens ! "  peopled  with  myriads  of  holy  ones,  did  ye  ever  know  such  a  wrong
done  to  your  faithful  and  gracious  King  ?  Silence  your  songs ;  "  be  horribly
afraid  ;  "  for  what  may  not  ensue,  now  that  **  My  people  "  can  act  thus  ?

1.  There  is  overflowing  plenitude  in  God,  "  Fountain ;  "  spontaneously,  from
indwelling  resources,  giving  forth  streams:  ^^  living  water;"  unceasing,  never
stagnant,  always  fresh  and  refreshing  :  "living  waters ;"  many  streams,  diverse  and
multiplied,  suiting  every  taste,  slaking  every  thirst.

2.  It  is  God's  purpose  that  we  should  find  our  all  in  Him,  (a.)  Human  thirst  is
God's  work  in  us.  (6.)  Thirsts  are  implanted  within  us  to  lead  us  to  God  for
supply,  (c.)  We  may  therefore  be  satisfied  fully,  and  can  be  satisfied  alone  in  Him.
Did  our  faith  never  falter,  "  we  might  ask  what  we  will  and  it  should  be  done."
Sad  that  we  have  let  "unfaith  "  come  in;  and,  in  our  want  of  faith,  have  sought
to  provide  substitutes  should  God  fail !

II.  An  effort  of  compensation  :  Having  forsaken  God,  they  constructed  for
themselves  laboured  contrivances.  Withdrawal  of  faith  from  God  does  not  better
us,  but  beggars  us ;  not  set  us  at  rest,  but  drives  us  to  wearying  toils.  Having
lost  our  good  in  God,  we  wander  piteously,  crying,  *'  Who  will  show  us  any  good  1 "
See  how  this  works :

1.  I  become  perplexed.  God  bids,  "  If  lack  wisdom,  ask  of  God."  Instead  of
going  to  Fountain,  "  committing  my  way  and  trusting  in  Him,"  I  seek  counsellors  ;
but  they  do  not  agree,  and  perplex  me  the  more.     "  They  hold  no  water."

2.  I  am  in  grief ;  heart  aches  for  consolation.  I  might  "  lean  on  Jesus*  bosom ; "
but  hard  thoughts  drive  me  to  avoid  Him.  I  seek  human  words  of  comfort,  and
they  fall  on  my  ear — vapid,  succourless.  "  Miserable  comforters  are  ye  all  1 "
**  They  hold  no  water."

3.  The  Church  droops;  numbers  minish,  agencies  fail.  We  must  get  a  more
earnest  pastor,  more  effective  preacher,  make  our  services  more  attractive  !  So
popular  preacher  comes,  sensational  services  are  arranged,  week-night  entertain-
ments planned.  But  can  these  bring  the  "  Breath  of  the  Lord  "  ?  "  They  hold
no  water ; "  and  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church  is  parched  and  perishing  still.

4.  When  persons  lose  vital  godliness,  they  often  grow  valiant  sectarians  and
doctrinal  bigots — their  tenets  are  their  "  cisterns  ; "  or  they  substitute  punctilious
observances  for  spontaneous  piety.

(a.)  Man  has  the  power  to  construct  promising  appliances.  (6.)  He  makes  toil-
some efforts  to  satisfy  his  soul  in  dearth ;  but  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  Wherefore
labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  %  Hearken  diligently  unto  Me."  A  voice  from
the  Gospel  age  speaks,  '*  If  any  man  thirst,  come  unto  Me  and  drink  1 "

51


CHAP,  n,  BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY ;  JEREMtAB.


m.  A  desolating  failure :  MarCs  toilsome  devices  prove  of  no  avail,  **  Broken ;  '*
for  God  is  not  careful  to  preserve  them  (ver.  37).  Better  "  broken  "  than  that  W6
Bhould  be  sustained  by  delusions.

1.  Men  have  left  God  for  pleasure.  Issue  :  "  The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the
grief  are  mine  alone."

2.  For  success.     Issue  :  "  All  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."

3.  Turned  from  Jesus  to  culture.     Issue  :  *'  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,*'  &c
4r.  From  Bible  to  rationalism.     Issue  :  **  Leap  in  the  dark."

Content  yourselves  with  God.  We  are  not  to  be  creators  but  recipients.  Shut
door  of  your  hearts  on  "  unfaith."  Keep  near  Fountain.  "  Ho,  every  one  that
thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters ! "

Topic:  God  no  Babben  Wilderness.     Text:  *'Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto
Israel,  a  land  of  darkness  V^  (ver.  31).

In  the  text  there  are  three  general  parts  considerable :  a  demand,  an  expostula-
tion, and  an  invitation.

I.  A  demand.     "  Have  I  been  a  wilderness,"  <fec.

i  It  hath  the  force  of  a  remonstrance  or  protestation,  t.f.,  I  have  not  been  sa
Not  a  "  wilderness,"  which  is  an  expression  of  unprofitableness;  not  "a  land  of
darkness,"  vihich^uncomfortahleness.  Theme:  That  God's  people  do  not  serve
Him  in  vain  and  for  no  profit ;  neither  are  they  losers  by  their  servings  of  Him.
This  is  evident  from  daily  experience  and  observation  j  and  it  is  founded  upon
God's  royalty,  nobleness,  and  magnificence.  Men  are  wrongly  opinionated  respect-
ing God,  and  the  reasons  are  :

1.  Because  God  is  pleased  sometimes  to  suspend  and  delay  the  expressions  of
His  goodness  to  them.

2.  Because  God  does  not  always  reward  them  in  that  way  and  kind  as  they
desire  and  expect  from  Him.

ii.  It  hath  the  force  of  a  remembrance  or  seasonable  intimation,  ».«.,  I  have  been
the  contrary  J  I  have  in  reality  been  a  paradise.  It  is  an  ironical  inquiry  suggest-
ing the  very  reverse,  intimating  God's  great  goodness  and  overflowing  bounty.
Theme :  That  God  takes  care  of  His  Church,  and  provides  all  things  necessary —
means  of  illumination  and  instruction,  means  of  fructification  and  increase.  His
providence  works  wonderfully  for  it,  keeping  it  from  enemies,  preserving  it  from
dangers  and  destruction.

The  more  God  does  for  any  people,  the  more  He  expects  from  them.  Their
thankfulness  is  to  be  answerable  to  His  mercies,  and  their  obedience  to  their  thank-
fulness.

iii.  It  hath  the  force  of  a  reproach  or  implicit  exprobration,  *.«.,  Israel  hath
rather  been  a  wilderness  to  Mel  And  so  it  represents  to  us  the  unfruitfulness  of
God's  people.     Three  things  aggravate  this  unfruitfulness  :

(1.)  The  mercies  which  they  enjoy.  (2.)  The  means  (of  improvement ;  advantages)
they  partake  of.  (3.)  The  expectations  which  are  upon  them ;  for  God  had  occasion
to  expect  fruitful  returns.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  be  under  the  upbraidings  of  the
Almighty,  for  there  is  certain  to  be  occasion  for  it  when  He  reproaches.

iv.  It  hath  the  force  of  an  appeal  or  provocation  to  them,  i.e.,  let  Israel  speak
what  they  know  of  Me.  God  here  submits  Himself  to  the  judgment  of  their  con-
sciences. He  challenges  them  to  say  the  worst  of  Him.  This  is  grounded  upon
His  own  innocency.  Thus  He  justifies  all  His  dispensations  with  His  people ;  for
if  they  consider,  they  must  acknowledge  that  His  ways  are  equal  and  theirs
unequal  (Ezek.  xxviii.  29).  In  His  goodness  to  His  whole  Church  in  general,  and
to  our  own  persons  in  particular,  God  has  approved  Himself  to  our  consciences  by
manifold  expressions.

n.  An  expostulation.     '^  Wherefore  say  My  people,  We  are  lords,  we  will  come
no  more  unto  Thee  I"
&2


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


CBAf,  tL


L  The  charge  ;  it  is  twofold :

1.  Their  assertion  ;  "  we  are  lords/'  whereby  they  hold  forth  their  own  greatness,
ielf-suflSciency,  arid  independence.  When  men  will  be  their  own  masters,  and  do
what  they  will  without  control,  God  suffers  them  to  be  so,  and  gives  them  up  to
liberty.  But  this  is  the  greatest  misery  in  this  world ;  for  with  our  nature
corrupted  by  sin  we  need  One  better  than  ourselves  to  guide  and  restrain  us.

2.  Their  resolution  ;  "  we  will  come  no  more,"  <fec.,  which  is  a  twofold  sin — (a.)
The  denial  of  their  address.  This  refusal  to  come  showed  disrespect,  want  of  due
affection  for  God ;  for  when  men  come  not  at  God,  it  is  a  sign  they  do  not  love
Him  nor  regard  Him  as  they  should  :  ingratitude;  for  they  had  received  so  many
kindnesses  from  God,  that  His  mercies  should  have  provoked  attendance  upon
Him :  stubbornness  ;  resisted  even  God's  call  and  persuasion.  Ahasuerus  took  ill
Vashti's  refusal  to  come  when  commanded.  Yet  God  has  invited  us  often  by  the
ministry,  Providence,  and  Spirit.  (6.)  The  discontinuance  of  address,  **no  more
come,"  which  denotes  their  self-sufficiency  and  their  aposta^.  **  We  are  lords,"  and
can  shift  for  ourselves.

ii  The  censure,  ^^  wherefore  ?"  which  signifies  that

1.  It  was  without  reason  ;  they  had  no  cause  at  all  for  it ;  God  had  given  them
neither  occasion  or  provocation.

2.  It  was  against  reason.  Consider  their  relation — "  My  people.*'  What  an
unnatural  thing  for  them  to  refuse  to  come  near  God  !  And  their  indebtedness;
kindness  is  a  strong  engagement ;  love  constrains  response ;  yet  here  it  was  all
restrained  and  reversed.

III.  An  invitation.     "  O  ye  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord  ! "

By  "  generation  "  he  meant  the  people  of  the  time.  There  is  a  reflection  in  the
phrase  upon  the  sinfulness  and  wretchedness  of  the  age,  as  if  to  say.  Into  what  a
time  and  age  are  we  fallen  !     Here  then  consider :

Unto  what  this  generation  is  invited.  "To  see  the  Word  of  the  Lord,"  t.^.,
mind  it  and  attend  to  it.  They  had  heard  the  Word  often,  but  it  had  done  no
good  ;  now  called  to  "  see  "  it.

The  weightiness  and  seriousness  of  it  in  its  twofold  bearing — 1.  As  it  respects
God's  own  justification,  "  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  ?  "  and  2.  As  it  respects  IsraeVa
condemnation,  "  Wherefore  say  My  people,"  <fec.

What  improvement  have  we  iyi  this  generation  made  of  our  favours  %  Have  we
shown  faithfulness  and  fruitfulness  ?  God  has  been  no  "  wilderness  "  to  us :  have
we  to  Him  t  No  "  darkness,"  for  the  light  of  truth  and  the  Gospel  shines  around
us  :  have  we  "walked  in  the  light"?  Have  we  waxed  proud  and  self-confident,
saying,  "  We  are  lords "  ]  <fec.  Certainly  the  abominations  which  in  these  days
abound  speak  loudly  against  us.  If  so,  it  is  most  unreasonable.  And  God  calls
us  to  repentance  and  amendment  of  life. — T,  Horton,  D.D.,  London,  a.d.  1678.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  IL    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  2.  "  Love  of  thine  espousals  .•"  its
Divine  origin  : —

**  Yes,  lore  indeed  is  light  from  heaveii,

A  spark  of  that  immortal  fire
With  angels  shared,  by  Alia  given.

To  lift  from  earth  our  low  desire.
Devotion  wafts  the  mind  above,

But  heaven  itself  descends  in  love  ;
A  feeling  from  the  Godhead  caught,

To  wean  from  self  each  sordid  thought ;
A  ray  of  Him  who  formed  the  whole,

A  glory  circling  round  the  soul."

— Btbon.


Ill-requited  : —

**A  mighty  pain  to  love  it  is,
And  'tis  a  pain  that  pain  to  miss;
But  of  all  pains,  the  greatest  paia
It  is  to  love,  and  love  in  vain."

— Cowley.

**/  remember  thy  youth.^^  "The  re-
trospect on  youth  is  too  often  like  look-
ing back  on  what  was  a  fair  and  promis-
ing country,  but  is  now  desolated  by
an  overwhelming  torrent.  Or  it  is  like
visitint?  the  grave  of  a  friend  whom  wo

63


CBAf.n.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


have  injured,  and  are  precluded  by  his
death  from  the   possibility  of   making
him  an  atonement." — J.  Foster,
Piety  the  beauty  of  youth,

"  What  is  beauty  I     Not  the  show
Of  shapely  form  and  features.     No  I
These  are  but  flowers
That  have  their  dated  hours
To  breathe  their  momentary  sweets,  then  go.
'Tis  the  stainless  soul  within
That  outshines  the  fairest  skin. "

—Sir  a.  Hunt,

"  Naturalists  inform  us  that  Oriental
pearls  are  generated  of  the  morning  dew.
That  field  is  full  of  the  richest  corn
which  is  cleansed  of  its  noxious  weeds
in  the  spring.  Jesus  was  carried  in
triumph  upon  a  colt;  the  foal  of  an  ass."
— Seeker,

Ver.  6.  "  Neither  said  they^  Where  is
the  Lord  that  brought  us  from  JSgypt."
Ingratitude.  "  Philip,  King  of  Mace-
donia, caused  a  soldier  of  his,  that  had
offered  unkindness  to  one  that  had
kindly  entertained  him,  to  be  branded
in  the  forehead  with  these  two  words  :
Hospes  ingratus.  Unthankfulness  is  a
monster  in  nature,  a  solecism  in  manners,
a  parodox  in  divinity,  a  parching  wind
to  dry  up  the  fountain  of  further  favour/*
— Trapp,  The  Dead  Sea  drinks  in  the
Jordan,  and  is  never  the  sweeter;  and
the  ocean  t.11  rivers,  and  is  never  the
fresher ;  thus,  we  take  all  God's  mercies
with  insensibility.

Ver.  10,  11.  *^  Nation  changed  their
gods."  Idolatry.  "We  perceive,  as
much  from  the  words  of  the  prophet  as
from  the  history,  that  this  idolatry  has
now  become  deep  and  radical.  The
state  of  mind  latent  in  them  is  .  .  .  the
utter  incapacity  for  acknowledging  a
God  not  appealing  to  the  senses,  which
Jeremiah  discovers  in  his  contempo-
raries. He  boldly  sets  up  the  faith  of
the  heathen  as  a  lesson  to  the  Israelites."
— "  Kings  and  Prophets  ;  "  Maurice.

"A  long  course  of  sin  was  needed  so
to  deaden  and  blind  the  heart  of  man
as  to  make  idolatry  possible.  Age  after
age  gave  in  its  contribution,  ...  so
that,  besides  the  original  sin  of  each
man,  there  was  a  sinful  tradition  of
mankind.  .  .  .  Every  generation  be-
queathed to  the  next  a  further  measure
uf  declension  from  God." — JDr  Manning,


Ver.  11.  **  Gods  which  are  yet  no  gods,"
At  Buhapurum,  a  child  about  eight
years  old,  educated  in  Christian  faith,
was  ridiculed  on  that  account  by  some
heathen  persons  older  than  himself.
"Show  us  your  God,"  said  they.  "I
cannot  do  that,"  answered  the  child,
"  but  I  can  soon  show  you  yours."  Tak-
ing a  stone,  and  daubing  it  with  some
resemblance  to  a  human  face,  he  placed
it  upon  the  ground,  and  pushitig  it
towards  them  with  his  foot,  "  There,"  he
said,  "  is  such  a  god  as  you  worship." —
"Dictionary  of  Illustrations;"  Dickenson,

Ver.  17.  ''Be  led  thee  by  the  way."
The  blessed  pilgrimage.  "Faith  is  the
rod  with  which  he  cleaves  Red  Seas  of
difficulty  ;  and  God's  Word  is  a  pillar  of
guiding  light  amid  the  rocks  of  a  sandy
wilderness  j  and  Sabbaths  are  wells  of
water ;  and  Ordinances  are  beautiful  and
shady  palm-trees;  and  Prayer  brings
down  manna  every  morning;  and  the
sight  of  the  Cross  heals  the  bite  of  fiery
serpents ;  and  Hope  is  a  spy  going  be-
forehand to  bring  back  the  clusters  of
Eshcol;  and  God's  presence  is,  at  the
last,  as  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  the
river;  and  the  pilgrim  passes  dry-shod
into  *  the  land  that  floweth  with  milk
and  honey.'  " — J.  Stoughton.

Ver.  19.  ^'  Thine  own  wickedness  shall
correct  thee  and  reprove  theeJ'*  Sin  its  own
punishment.  "Look  for  the  man  who
has  practised  a  vice  so  long  that  he
curses  it  and  clings  to  it;  that  he  pur-
sues it  because  he  feels  a  great  law  of
his  nature  driving  him  on  towards  it,
but,  reaching  it,  knows  it  will  gnaw  his
heart  and  tear  his  vitals,  and  make  him
roll  himself  in  the  dust  with  ansfuish." —
Sidney  Smith.

When  Nicephorus  Phocas  had  built  a
strong  wall  about  his  palace  for  his  own
security  in  the  night-time,  he  heard  a
voice  crying  to  him,  "  0  Emperor !
though  thou  build  thy  walls  as  high
as  the  clouds,  yet,  if  sin  be  within,  it
will  overthrow  all !"

Ver.  20.  "  Yoke.''  The  yoke  was  laid
upon  the  neck  of  the  beast,  ajid  fastened
with  thongs  to  it  and  to  tne  plough-
beam.  It  thus  symbolised  slavery  or
severe  rule  (as  Egyptian),  while  break-
ing it  suggested   welcome   deliverance.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAF.  m.


Breaking  the  yoke  equally  represents  the
rejection  of  authority,  as  in  this  verse,
and  chap.  v.  5.

Ver.  22.  "  Thine  iniquity  is  marked."
Let  a  blot  lie  a  while  on  a  pure  sheet  of
white  satin  paper ;  try  to  remove  it.
Erasure  may  ultimately  rid  the  sheet  of
that  "one  dark  spot,"  but  the  paper  is
injured,  the  satin  gloss  is  gone,  and  if
you  try  to  write  on  the  place  again,  the
lines  smear.  Sin  effects  permanent  in-
jury, cannot  be  removed  by  most  careful
efforts;  the  ^*mark"  remains  when  all
is  done.  Holiness  is  not  mere  clean-
ness ;  it  has  no  mark  of  injury.  It  is
pure  light ;  the  concentration  of  all  the
prismatic  colours  into  unity.

Ver.  23.  ''Swift  dromedary."  "The
camels  of  the  Bible  are  of  two  kinds,  the
difference  being  the  result  simply  of
breeding  and  training.  The  first  kind,
used  as  a  heast  of  burden,  will  carry  from
500  to  1000  pounds  twenty-four  miles
a  day.  The  second,  used  to  convey  in-
telligence, will  travel  upwards  of  100
miles  in  twenty-four  hours;  this  kind
is  called  the  dromedary." — "  Topics  for
Teachers  ;  "  Ghray.

Ver.  26.  "-Kings  and  priests,"  No  hvr
man  authorities  to  dictate  our  religion.
One  of  the  ancient  fathers  replied  to
a  clamorous  disputant  who  shouted
**Hear  m«,  hear  me"  "I  will  neither


hear  thee,  nor  do  thou  hear  me,  but  let
us  both  hear  Christ.'* — Dictionary  of
Illustrations.

Ver.  27.  "  In  the  time  of  their  trouble"
(kc.  The  armies  of  Media  and  Lydia  were
in  violent  conflict  on  the  30th  September,
B.C.  610  (while  Josiah  was  occupied  in
reforming  Judah),  when  suddenly,  to
them,  occurred  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,
known  as  Thales*  eclipse.  It  over-
whelmed both  armies  with  such  terror
that  they  gave  up  the  contest,  and  peace
was  negotiated  and  settled  in  the  camp.
Happy  if  the  eclipse  of  trouble,  suddenly
coming  upon  us  when  we  are  at  war
against  God,  should  lead  us  to  cease  a
life  of  antagonism,  and  sue  for  peace.

Ver.  30.  "  In  vain  have  I  smitten  your
children,  .  .  .  correction."  Mr.  Cecil  ob-
served in  the  Botanical  Gardens  a  pome-
granate-tree cut  almost  through  near
the  root,  and  asked  the  gardener  for  the
reason.  He  explained  that  the  tree
used  to  shoot  so  strong  as  to  bear  only
leaves ;  but  now  that  it  was  nearly  cut
through,  it  began  to  bear  fruit  well.
Alas !  that  affliction  on  man  should  be
profitless,  when  nature  accepts  it  and
turns  it  to  account

**  The  good  are  better  made  by  ill.
As  odours  crushed  are  sweeter  still."

— BOGBBS.


CHAPri-:R  III.

Critioal  and  Exeobtical  Notes. — 1.  Chronology.     Exact  date  of  chapter  uncertain.     It

naturally  divides  itself  at  ver.  5,  although  Dahler,  Umbriet,  and  Neuman  contend  for  the
unity  of  the  chapter  as  a  single  prophecy.  Doubtless  there  is  a  continuity  of  imagery  and
reasoning  (ver.  1,  8),  but  the  inscription  to  ver.  6  is  a  difficulty,  and  their  transference  of  that
inscription  to  ver.  1  is  unwarranted.  "  The  Targum,"  Vulgate,  Jerome,  Roseumuller,  Words-
worth, and  Henderson  regard  ver.  1-6  as  a  separate  and  complete  prophecy,  and  plead  that
the  abrupt  commencement  "  to  say"  or  "saying"  (ver.  1)  is  not  without  parallel  (Judges
xvi.  2),  and  indicates  a  Divine  message.  But  Luther,  Kimchi,  Maurer,  Hitzig,  Starke,  Keil,
and  **  Speaker's  Commentary  "  connect  ver.  1-6  with  chap.  ii.  as  a  completion  of  that  prophecy,
and  read  thus  :  "  The  Lord  hath  rejected  thy  confidences,"  &c.  (ii.  37),  "  saying,  If  a  man,"  &c.
(ill.  1).     This  is  preferable.

Ver.  6  onwards  to  vi.  30  gives  a  lengthy  prophecy,  forming  either  one  prolonged  address
[Hend.)  or  a  condensation  into  one  uniform  whole  of  a  series  of  addresses  {KeU)  delivered  during
Josiah's  reign.

Date  of  ver.  1-5,  the  13th  of  Josiah  ;  date  of  ver.  6  sq.,  17th  of  Josiah  {Maurer) ;  before  the
18th,  the  year  of  Josiah's  great  reformation  {Hend.) ;  after  the  18th  {Bagster,  Blayney,  kc).
M.  Henry  gives  the  date  B.C.  620,  i.e.,  the  21it  year  of  Josiah.

2.  Cotemporary  Scriptures.  With  iii.  6  to  vi.  may  agree  2  Chron.  xxxiv.-xxxv.  18  ;  Zeph.
i.-iii.  ;  2  Kings  xxii.-xxiii.  26 ;  Nahum  and  Habakkuk.

3.  Historic  Facts.  Josiah,  personally  journeying  through  Judah  and  Israel,  continues  hia
purification  of  the  nation ;  returns  to  Jerusalem  in  his  18th  year,  immediately  repairs  the
Temple  for  the  restoration  of  Jehovah's  worship  therein.  Judah's  ostentatious  return  to
Jehovah  a  solemn  mockery  (ver.  10).     (Comp.  B.  p.  61,  "  Actual  State  ofJudahy)

i.  Ootemporary  History.    During  these  six  years,  Nabopolaasar  rebels  against  the  king  of

55


OTiF.  nL  HOMILBTIO  OOUMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Assyria,  becomes  king  of  Babylon,  and  thus  founds  the  Babylonian  empire.  Oyszares
(Ahasuerus,  Dan.  iz.  1)  succeeds  Phraortes  on  the  Median  throne,  and  begins  to  make  Media  a
great  power  (B.C.  626).     Psammeticus  continues  to  reign  over  Egypt  at  Nineveh,

6.  Geographical  Beferences.  Ver.  12.  "  Towards  the  north"  i.e.,  to  Mesopotamia,  Assyria,
Media,  where  the  captive  ten  tribes  were  located  by  Tiglath-Pilesar  (B.O.  740;  cf.  2  Kings  xv.
29,  xvi.  7-9 ;  Amos  i.  4,  5),  and  Shalmanezar,  or  rather  Sargon,  his  son  (for  Assyrian  monu-
ments show  that  Shalmanezar  died  during  the  siege  of  Samaria,  and  that  Sargon  carried  Israel
captive),  dr.  B.C.  720;  cf.  2  Kings  xvii.  6,  xviii.  9-11.   (Com p.  A. p.  60,  '*  Facta  re  Outcast  Israel,")

6.  Natural  History.  Ver.  3.  ** Latter  rain"  i.e,f  the  vernal  rain,  which  fell  about  April,
perfecting  the  harvest;  the  "former"  rain  came  early  in  November,  preparing  the  earth  for
cultivation.    (Comp.  C.  p.  62,  "  The  Land  Withered  by  Drought")

7.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  1,  8.  **  Divorce,"  The  law  found  in  Deut.  xxiv.  1-4.  The
"bill "  was  a  legal  document ;  it  guaranteed  legal  cognisance  of,  and  justifiable  reasons  for,  the
husband's  deed.  Ver.  2.  *' The  Arabian  in  the  vdlderness."  The  Bedouin  lurking  and  eager  for
plunder ;  thus  did  Israel  look  out  for  idolatry  ai  for  booty.

8.  literary  Criticisms.    Ver.  1.   **  Yet  return  again  to  Me."    "  Targum,"  Jerome,  and  A.  V.

regard  J  i^j  as  the  imperative.  Keil  renders  it  as  interrogative,  **  Wouldst  thou  return
to  me  f "  as  being  forbidden.  **  Speaker's  Commentary  "  takes  the  verb  as  an  infinitive  ;
"And  to  return  to  me  !  "  that  is,  And  thinkest  thou  to  return  to  Me/  *'  Israel  could  no  more
take  her  place  as  wife."  Henderson  says  it  is  the  infinitive  absolute,  and  as  such  may  be  used
as  an  imperative.  Lange  gives  as  the  sense,  '*  Although,  in  accordance  with  legal  regulations,
I  ought  not  to  receive  you,  yet  I  say.  Return  to  me."  Certainly  ver.  14,  20,  22,  and  iv.  1,.
bear  out  Lange's  sense  of  the  words.     (See  on  ver.  14  below.)

Ver.  5.  "  Behold  thou  hast  spoken/'  i.e.y  fairly,  used  devout  speeches  to  Jehovah  ;  but  actiona
have  contradicted  words  ;  *'and  hast  done  evil  as  thou  couldst,"  i.e.,  without  self-restraint.
Noyeif  "doest  evil  with  all  thy  might."     Calvin^  "with  incorrigible  persistency."

Ver.  7.  **  Her  treacherous  sister"  should  be  rendered,  "and  Treacherous^  her  sister"  as  being
her  appellative.     Falsehood,  Faithless — not  an  adjective,  but  Judah's  name.

Ver.  9.  **  Lightness  "  as  if  /p  were  the  infinitive  of  ^2|^j  levity.     It  is  rather  derived  from

zip   a  cry,  noise  ;  the  tumult  of  her  idolatrous  revelries.     Some  take  it  as  the  cry  which  rose

to  heaven  against  her  ;  but  it  is  here  said  to  "  have  defiled  the  land;"  therefore  "  her  riotous
orgies  "  is  the  more  correct.

Ver.  12.   "  Turn,  thou  backsliding  ;  "  lit.,  "  turn  thou  that  hast  turned."  Note  the  paronomasia

nZltvp  nllw.  **  Not  cause  mine  anger  to  faU."  Lange,  "not  lower  my  face  against  you."
Keil,  "not  look  darkly  upon."    Hend.,  "not  continue  to  frown."

Ver.  14.  **  J  am  married  unto  you."  7P^.  Hitzig,  Umbriet,  I  will  be  your  lord,  master;
suggestive  of  severe  domination.  Hengstenberg,  Lange,  Keil,  **  your  husband  ;  "  for  Jehovah
had  been,  and  would  ever  be,  that  to  Israel.  Kimchi,  JtosenmUller,  De  Wette,  Oesenius,  Hender-
son contend  for  the  signification,  loathing,  disdain  :  "  I  have  rejected  you"  since  both  here  and
xxxi  32  ia  taught  that  God  had  abandoned  Israel  in  consequence  of  her  stubborn  apostasy.
The  A.  V.  is  consistent  with  the  prevailing  language  of  this  chapter  (see  above  on  ver.  1).
Jerome  translates,  "quia  ego  virvester."

Ver.  16.  "  Neither  shaU  that  be  done  any  more,"  i.e.,  the  Ark  being  lost,  no  effort  would  be
made  to  replace  it.     "  Neither  shall  it  be  made  any  more."    (Comp.  D.  p.  62,  "  The  Ark  Lost.")

Ver.  19.  **  But  I  said,  How,"  Ac.  ;  not  "but,''  as  if  it  were  a  difficulty  ;  and  "how  shall  I."
The  sentence  need  not  be  taken  interrogatively,  but  How  gloriously  will  I :  with  what  honours!

**0f  the  hosts  of  nations;  lit.,  beauty  of  beauties  :  P^^^^  ^3^,  not  "  hosts."  The  Hebrew
idiom  means  a  heritage  of  the  chief  beauty  of  nations, — Speaker's  Oom.

Ver.  21.  "  For  they  have  perverted  ;  "  rather  "  because"  supplying  the  reason  of  their  weep-
ing, the  burden  of  their  grief.

Ver.  23.  "  Truly  in  vain  from  the  hills,"  &c.  Umbriet,  **  Verily  a  lie  is  from  the  hills,  tumult
of  the  mountains."  Lange,  "As  certainly  as  the  hills  are  false,  and  mountains  an  empty
sound."  Keil,  "Truly  the  sound  from  the  hills,  from  the  mountains,  is  become  falsehood."
"  The  Targum  "  gives  as  the  sense,  Delusive  and  profitless  were  our  idolatrous  observances  upon

the  heights.  The  word  P^r?  is  rendered  the  "noise  of  revelry"  in  Amos  v.  23  ;  and  here  a
"the  noisy  gatherings  for  idle  worship  on  the  hill- tops." — Speaker's  Com,

Ver.  24.  "  Shame,"  ^^f^u'}',  lit.,  the  shame,  i.e.,  Baal ;  comp.  chap.  xi.  18,  where  the  word
D'^2i2  ^  rendered  "that  shameful  thing,  even  altars  to  Baal "  {qf,  Hoa.  ix.  10).    Oesenius—"  an

idol  which  deceives  the  hope  of  the  worshippers,  and  puts  them  to  shame.**  Calmet  says  :—
"  The  Hebrews,  instead  of  pronouncing  the  name  of  Baal,  of  which  they  had  a  dread,  used  in
its  place  the  name  *  Bosheth' — shame,  confusion.     Thus:  Mephi-Bosheth,  for  Mephi-BaaL"

Ver.  25.   "  We  lie  down,"  i.f.,  prostrate  ourselves  in  abasement,  abashed  at  the  memory  of
Qur  disgraceful  deeds.
0^


aOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEhEMIAE.  chap.  m.


'  EOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OP  CHAPTER  III.

Ssction  1-5.  The  verdict  of  law  and  the  appeal  of  love.
„      6-11.  Israers  divorce  :  its  lessons  lost  upon  Judah.
yy    12-14.  Israel  invited  to  renew  her  marriage  by  repentance.
y,    15-20.  Reetoration  to  lost  spiritual  privileges  open  to  both  Israel  and  Judah.
„    21-25.  Their  penitential  return  to  the  Lord  their  Qod.

Ver.  1-6.  The  Vebdict  op  Law  and  the  Appeal  op  Love,

Judah,  by  her  idolatry,  had  broken  her  marriage  vows  to  God.  Her  consequent
rejection  has  not  been  declared  by  Jeremiah,  but  ver.  1  implies  it.  She  is
spiritually  divorced  from  her  Husband.  God  has  "  put  away  His  wife."  A
solemn  truth  :  sin  breaks  off  our  relationship  with  God.  The  sinner  may  have
"  many  lovers  "  (ver.  1),  but  he  is  "  without  God  ;"  how  will  he  do,  then,  on  whom
call,  in  calamity,  death,  judgment  %  "  Return  "  is  indeed  desirable,  if  it  may  be.
Can  the  guilty  one  "  go  in  unto  the  King,  which  is  not  according  to  law  "  %  (Esther
iv.  16).

I.  Legal  prohibition  (ver.  1;  cf.  Deut,  xxiv.  4).  A  man  may  not  again  marry
his  divorced  wife  after  she  has  united  herself  with  another.  L  There  are  legal
penalties  to  sin.  2.  The  apostate  from  God  is  divorced  from  Him,  3.  It  is  con-
trary to  law  for  the  guilty  to  find  grace.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die"
That  is  law ;  no  more  return  to  God ;  but  having  gone  away  voluntarily^  to  "go
away  "  compulsorily  and  eternally  (Matt.  xxv.  46).

IL  Condemnatory  facts  (ver.  2,  3).  Declares :  1.  Her  unlimited  abandonment
to  guilt  (ver.  2).  2.  Her  shameless  effrontery  and  persistency  (ver.  3).  Our  sins
are  (1.)  not  imaginary,  but  positive ;  (2.)  not  difficult  to  find,  but  glaring;  (3.)  not
mere  indiscretions,  but  appalling ;  (4.)  not  few,  but  multitudinous.  And  our
apostasy  from  God  has  made  us  (L)  insensible  to  affliction  ("  showers  withheld  *') ;
(2.)  hardened  in  shamelessness.    "  Sin  is  not  a  conjugal,  but  an  adulterous  relation."

III.  Conjugal  relationship  recalled  (ver.  4).  "  My  Father,  Thou  wast  the
Husband  of  my  youth"  (cf.  Prov.  ii.  17  ;  see  also  Jer.  iii  20).  1.  God  reminds
her  of  what  she  was  in  her  youth.  How  have  we  deteriorated  and  fallen  !  2.
God  laments  her  present  life  of  falsity.  Backsliding  grieves  the  Lord.  3.  God
would  awaken  her  from  insensibility  to  penitent  reflections.  4.  God  shows  Him-
self still  a  loyal,  loving  Husband.  He  does  not  drive  the  backslider  or  the  sinner
away,  but  mourns,  "  How  can  I  give  thee  up  1 "  (chap.  ii.  2).  Yea,  He  still  calls  to
faithless  Judah,  ^^  Return  to  Me"  (iii.  1).

IV.  Desperate  trifling  with  God  (ver.  6).  1.  Judah  responds  with  fair  words.
"  Will  he  reserve,"  <fec.,  is  Judah's  soliloquy  upon  hearing  God's  appeal  (ver.  4).  The
prophet  chides  her,  "  Behold,  thou  hast  spoken  !  "  Such  is  thine  answer  to  God's
patient  and  pleading  remonstrance.  The  language  shows — (1.)  Conscious  demerit,
**  anger ;  "  (2.)  dread  of  punishment ;  (3.)  belief  in  mercy  :  that  He  will  not  keep
it  to  the  end.  But  there  is  no  cry  of  repentance  and  self-abhorrence.  Have  we
only  thus  spoken  1  or  not  rather  Job  xlii.  6  ?  2.  Judah  persisted  in  foul  deeds.
Although  "thou  hast  spoken"  thus,  yet  **  thou  hast  done  evil  persistently."  To
deyirecate  the  continuance  of  Divine  displeasure,  and  yet  by  our  conduct  to  "  pro-
voke the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  anger,"  is  the  most  solemn  trifling.  How  deplorable
the  state  of  a  soul  which  sins  on  unrestrained  by  conscience  or  f^ir  of  God^s  vnrath
(ver.  6)  ;  and  more,  unmoved  by  the  pathos  of  love  (ver.  4).

Ver.  6-11.  Iskael's  Divorce:  its  Lessons  Lost  upon  Judah.

The  kingdom  of  Israel  had  been  destroyed,  and  the  ten  tribes  driven  into  exile
as  the  Divine  punishment  of  idolatry  and  apostasy.  This  fact  was  daily  evident
to  Judah ;    Israel  cast  off  from  God,  abandoned  to  captivity  for  her  criminal

57


CHA?.  m,  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


Impiety.    What  effect  would  this  produce  upon  "  her  sister  Judah  "? — restrain  her  ?
Keep  her  watchful,  loyaH     Alas  !  (ver.  10,  11).

L  Though  hoth  were  guilty,  there  was  a  distinction  and  a  difference  of
criminality  in  their  respective  sins.  1.  The  distinction.  Israel's  sin  was  apostasy
(ver.  6).  Judah's  sin  was  treachery  (ver.  7).  Apostasy,  i.c.,  utter  desertion  of
God,  is  contrasted  with  falsehood,  i.e.,  criminal  hypocrisy,  dissimulation,  a  show  of
piety  covering  the  vilest  impiety.  2.  The  degree.  Judah  had  the  warning  of
Israel's  example  and  ruin.  Yet  (1.)  Israel  abandoned  herself  to  impiety  (ver.  6),
and  Judah,  instead  of  avoiding  her  sin,  did  the  same.  She  "saw  it"  (ver.  7),  yet,
with  open  eyes,  knowing  the  doom,  she  trod  the  same  course ;  (2.)  Israel  had  gone
into  exile  for  her  iniquity  ;  yet  Judah  despised  the  warning.  She  "  feared  not "
(ver.  8)  j  (3.)  Israel  refused  to  return  at  God's  call  (ver.  7),  but  Judah  professedly
did  respond,  yet  played  a  false  part  (ver.  10).  Feigned  a  piety  she  inwardly
loathed  (Gal.  vi.  7).

n.  Hypocrisy  calls  forth  severer  reproaches  from  God  than  apostasy  (ver.  11).
Judah  had  knowledge,  "saw"  (ver.  7),  yet  cared  nothing,  "feared  not"  (ver.  8),
and  mocked  God  (ver.  10).  Whereas  Israel  acted  blindly,  madly,  wickedly,  but
without  deliberation  or  design.  1.  Hypocrisy  is  deliberate,  not  merely  impetuous.
2.  Flauntingly  insolent,  not  merely  indifferent.  3.  Trifling  and  pretentious,  not
madly  blind.  The  pharisee  worse  than  the  publican  ;  traitor  worse  than  the  rebel.
A  deeper  depravity  of  heart  underlies  the  sin.  A  greater  provocation  to  God  is
furnished  by  the  sin.  To  delude  man  by  a  mock  piety  is  bad,  but  to  attempt  to
pass  a  counterfeit  repentance  on  God  is  daringly  blasphemous.  (Comp.  the
Saviour's  "  anger "  and  awful  "  woes "  against  the  pretentious,  hypocritical
Pharisees,  Mark  iii.  5,  and  Matt.  xziiL)

Ver.  12-H.   Israel  Invited  to  Renew  her  Marriage  by  Repentance.

"  Backsliding : "  a  metaphor  taken  from  oxen  which  refuse  to  draw  in  the  yoke
put  upon  them  (Hos.  iv.  16).

L  God  sends  messages  of  mercy  and  not  of  judgment  (ver.  12).  Well  might  He
have  cast  them  oflf  utterly.  But  He  deligbteth  in  mercy,  and  "  willeth  not  the
death  of  the  sinner."  By  many  prophets  did  He  thus  invite  them  to  return  (2
Chron.  xxxvi  16)  ;  they  even  "  wearied  Him  "  with  their  obstinacy  (Isa.  xliii.  24).

ii.  God  requires  that  they  humble  themselves  before  Him  (ver.  13).  This  indis-
pensable. Not  consistent  with  His  honour  that  He  should  receive  them  while  they
hardened  themselves  against  Him.  To  compensate  for  their  wickedness  was  impos-
sible, but  must  confess  it,  and  humble  themselves  on  account  of  it.

iii.  God  urges  the  most  affecting  considerations  in  order  to  prevail  upon  them,
1.  The  merciful  disposition  He  felt  towards  them  (ver.  12).  2.  The  relation  under
which  He  still  regarded  them  (ver.  14).  3.  The  benefits  which  He  was  still  ready
to  confer  upon  them  (ver.  14  sq.). — From  Simeon,

Ver.  16-20.   Restoration  to  Lost  Spiritual  Privileges  Open  to  both

Israel  and  Judah.

Conditional  on  true  repentance  (ver.  13),  God  pictures  a  bright  future  for  His
erring  people.

i  Suffering  a  common  exile  (ver.  18)  in  "the  land  of  the  north;"  Israel  in
Assyria,  Judah  in  Babylonia ;  because  of  faithlessness  (ver.  20).

ii.  Duration  of  their  banishment  limited  (ver.  16,  18).  "In  those  days" — God
foresees  the  dawn.     "  Seasons  are  in  His  power  "  (Acts  i.  7).

iii.  Simultaneous  return  from  exile  (ver.  18).  "  Come  together."  Israel  went
into  captivity  100  years  before  Judah.     Redemption  simultaneous.

iv.  Restoration  to  the  lost  inheritance  (ver.  18  ;  comp.  Amos  ix.  16).    Laid  waste
by  conquerors,  yet  the  land   was  sacred ;    kept  for  them  by  God,  for  them  to
reoccupy  (Luke  zxi  24).
58


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap.  nL


▼,  Enriched  with  national  prosperity  (ver.  16).  "Multiplied  and  increased  in
the  land."     This  is  frequently  portrayed  (see  xxiii.  3  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  ll).

vi.  Blessed  vrith  spiritual  privileges  (ver.  16,  17).  Transcending  the  value  of  the
ark  and  the  Shekinah  in  the  Temple.

vii.  Sacred  relationship  again  realised  (ver.  19).  "Thou  shalt  call  me,  My
Father."     The  veil  upon  their  heart  removed  :  light  and  love  !

viii.  Revolt  no  more  possible.  "  Neither  shall  any  more  walk  after  evil  heart "
(ver.  17).     "  Not  turn  from  Me  "  (ver.  19).     Loyal :  God  all  in  aU.

ix.  Ruled  by  wise  governors  (ver.  15).  Civil  rulers,  who  will  reign  righteously,
foster  righteousness,  and  encourage  the  people  to  piety.

X.  Glorified  in  the  esteem  of  the  world  (ver.  17).  Attracting  the  heathen  (ver.
19).  *'A  goodly  heritage  of  the  hosts  of  the  nations."  Admired  and  envied
throughout  the  world,

"  That  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled  by  the  return  under  Zeruhbabel  and  Ezra  is
opposed  by  the  fact — (i.)  That  not  even  the  whole  of  Judah^  while  but  a  few  of
Israel,  then  returned  ;  (ii.)  That  not  even  Judah  had  then  returned  to  the  Lord,  still
less  were  the  heathen  converted  (ver.  17).  Its  fulfilment  by  the  founding  of  the
Christian  Church  is  contradicted  by  the  fact — (i.)  That  the  reunion  of  Judah  and
Israel  had  not  taken  place  (Israel  being  still  lost) ;  (ii.)  That  Israel  in  general  has
rejected  the  Lord,  and  refused  to  enter  the  Christian  Church ;  (iii.)  That  though
the  heathen  are  being  drawn  to  the  Lord  and  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above  (Gal.  iv.
26),  yet  this  has  not  taken  place  in  such  a  measure  or  manner  as  to  fulfil  ver.  17,
which  predicts  the  conversion  of  all  nations,  and  the  removal  of  their  hardness  of
heart.  We  must,  therefore,  still  wait  for  the  complete  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy."
— Ifaeg.  in  Lange.

"  The  fulfilment  is  accomplished  gradually.  It  begins  with  the  end  of  the  Baby-
lonian exile,  in  so  far  as  at  that  time  individual  members  of  the  ten  tribes  may
have  returned  into  the  land  of  their  fathers.  It  is  continued  in  Messianic  times
duiing  the  lives  of  the  apostles,  by  the  reception,  on  the  part  of  the  Israelites,  of
the  salvation  that  had  appeared  in  Christ.  It  is  carried  on  throughout  the  whole
history  of  the  Church,  and  attains  its  completion  in  the  final  conversion  of  Israel."
— Keil,

Ver.  21-25.  Their  Penitential  Return  to  the  Lord  their  God.

In  propljetic  prevision  Jeremiah  beholds  his  nation,  broken-hearted  for  sin,
seeking  Jehovah  with  tears,  contrition,  and  shame.  The  revelries  of  idolatry  are
silenced  on  the  heights,  and  cries  of  poignant  grief  sound  loud  throughout  the
scene.  A  nation  weeps  for  her  sin  :  exiles  come  home  with  supplications ;  God's
people  are  restored  to  their  long-lost  rest.  Here  is  fulfilled  the  condition  of  the
sinner's  forgiveness  and  acceptance  (ver.  13).     Their  case  proves —

L  That  privileged  people  may  so  sin  as  to  necessitate  bitterest  repentance.
Israel  and  Judah  had  all  sacred  persuasions  to  spiritual  fidelity  (Rom.  ix.  4,  5).  We
may  stand  amid  religious  surroundings  and  helps,  yet  may  equally  fall  (Rom.  xL
20).  See  the  sin  of  this  people  :  1.  Erring  from  the  right  way  (ver.  21) ;  "per-
verted their  way  :  "  began  with  inconsistent  conduct ;  turning  aside.  2.  Neglect  of
God  (ver.  21) ;  *'  forgotten  the  Lord  : "  advanced  from  error  and  inconsistency  into
habitual  disregard  of  God ;  practical  irreligion.  3.  Positive  resistance  and  dis-
obedience (ver.  25);  "sinned  against  the  Lord:^^  no  longer  negative,  but  wilful,
intentional  antagonism.  4.  Defi,ance  of  Divine  remonstrance  and  appeals  (ver.  25) ;
"not  obeyed  His  voice  :"  though  He  called,  they  refused  ;  despised  His  prophets,
message,  warnings:  they  would  not  allow  God  a  hearing.  This  had  become  a
•settled  state  of  things  (ver.  25) ;  "  we  and  our  fathers,  from  our  youth  even  unto
this  day."  What  a  warning  that  we  "take  heed  lest  we  fall"  1  None  but  may
repeat  their  sins.

II.  That  most  criminal  revolt  from  God  may  terminate  in  penitential  return

5d


OBAV.Ili;  EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.

(ver.  21).  If  these  miglit,  who  may  not?  1.  There  is  hope  for  the  guiltiest.  2.
Those  longest  in  sin  may  awake  to  loathe  it.  3.  True  repentance  is  possible  to
backsliders,  4.  The  end  of  life  is  not  too  late  for  return.  "After  so  long  a  time,"
Israel  "  arose  and  came  to  the  Father."  "  At  evening  time  light."  Let  none  close  the
door  of  hope,  of  opportunity,  of  mercy,  on  others  or  on  themselves.  God  keeps  it  open
to  the  last,  and  for  the  worst,    (xiddenda  to  chap,  iii.,  ver.  25,  *'  Even  unto  this  day^)

III.  That  an  evil  course  of  life  wastes  and  debases  those  who  follow  it
(ver.  24,  25).  (Addenda  to  chap,  ill,  ^^  Shame"  and  *^  Sin  debases.")  1.  Sinners
are  despoiled  of  5e{/-r«s^ec^  /  "shame."  2.  Sinning  is  an  expensive  ]\ixuvy ;  "de-
voured the  labour,  flocks  and  herds."  3.  Sinful  parents  cannot  hold  back  even
their  own  children  from  destruction ;  "  sons  and  daughters."  Moloch  asks  them.
Society  demands  the  children  of  godless  parents ;  and  how  can  they  restrain  them
from  sacrificing  to  pleasure,  vanity,  vice?  4.  Sin  lays  low  all  its  followers  in
abasement  and  confusion  (ver.  25).  Well  if  it  does  this  ere  too  late.  But  tbe  guilty
will  see  themselves  vile  and  foolish  ;  the  day  must  come.

IV.  That  a  voice  of  gracious  expostulation  pleads  with  the  guilty  to  return
(ver.  22).  1.  God's  call  pursues  men  when  they  desert  Him.  2.  A  Divine  plead-
ing is  heard  in  every  heart  3.  Even  the  vilest  are  conscious  that  a  pitying  Father
awaits  their  return.  4.  Man's  duty  is  to  act  on  that  thought;  "return."  5.
There  is  "  healing  "  for  every  wrong  in  God's  graciousness.  6.  Appropriate  address
from  the  penitent ;  "  we  come  to  Thee ; "  for  God  calls  men  to  Himself  not  to
ceremonies,  and  self-improvement,  and  human  remedies.  7.  All-sufficiency  and
perfect  welcome  assured;  "for  Thou  art  the  Lord, ^^  therefore  "nothing  too  hard;"
"  the  Lord  our  God"  therefore  He  is  ready  to  greet  and  receive  them.

V.  That  hopes  of  salvation  are  found  to  be  delusive  until  the  soul  rests  in
God  (ver.  23).

1.  False  hopes:  in  s^row^  things,  "hills  and  mountains;"  in  Tiwmcroi^  objects,
"  multitude,"  =  the  many  gods  and  scenes  of  idolatry.

2.  True  hope:  "  truly  in  the  Lord,"  <kc.  "Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  for
I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else "  (Isa.  xlv.  22) ;  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in
any  other :  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  where-
by we  must  be  saved  "  (Acts  iv.  12).

HISTORIC  EVENTS  INDICATED  IN  CHAPTER  IIL

A.  Facts  connected  with  the  career  of  outcast  Israel  (ver.  12,  14,  18).     (See

Addenda  to  chap,  iii.,  "  The  lost  Ten  Tribes:')

i.  Outcast,  yet  not  lost  (ver.  12).  God  knew  where  they  were.  Denationalised
and  exiled;  yet  God  directed  a  message  to  them  in  "the  north."  (See  Geographical
reference  on  ver.  12  above.)  Since  the  first  captivity  by  Tiglath-pilesar,  115  years
had  passed,  and  nearly  100  since  Sargon  (son  of  Shalnianezar)  swept  the  land
clean  of  Israelites,  and  bore  them  away  into  the  northern  provinces  of  Assyria
(2  Kings  xvii.  18,  23).  Thus  outcast,  they  were  to  lose  all  connection  with
Jehovah,  and  all  recognition  of  their  former  history.  This  was  easy ;  for  their
habitual  idolatry  would  lead  them  into  speedy  surrender  of  all  relics  of  their
religious  distinction;  and,  as  their  numbers  were  not  vast,  they  would  not  long  pre-
serve any  national  distinctness,  but  become  absorbed  amid  the  admixture  of  peoples
which  the  Assyrian  conquests  gathered  together  in  the  north.  But  though  long  lost
to  themselves,  they  were  not  lost  to  God,  He  knew  where  to  address  them.  And
He  will  know  where  to  seek  them  when  the  time  of  their  return  shall  arrive  (Isa.  xL
11,  18;  cf  ver.  18).

ii.  Banished,  yet  still  beloved  (ver.   14).     "I  am  married  unto  you."     God  re-'
spects  and  preserves  His  relationship  to  Israel  unchanged,  although  she  had  been
banished  a  hundred  years,  and  was  fading  from  national  existence.     This  sanctions
Paul's  assertion,  "  God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people  "  (Rom.  xL  1,  2).     And
60


HO  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  in.


this  unchanging  relationship  and  imperishable  love  are  asserted  by  God  in  terms
of  the  most  nnequivocal  and  solemn  character  (Jer.  xxxi.  37).

iii.  Destined  to  local  and  spiritual  restoration.  *'  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city
and  two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  Zion  "  (ver.  14).  "In  those  days  the
house  of  Judah  shall  walk  to  the  house  of  Israel,  and  they  shall  come  together  out
of  the  land  of  the  north,"  <fec.  (ver.  18).  This  promise  cannot  be  limited  to  the
return  from  exile  under  the  edict  of  Cyrus.  The  two  kingdoms,  Judah  and  Israel,
have  not  yet  "  come  together,"  nor  have  they  yet  used  the  language  of  ver.  22.
JSTor  has  Israel  learned  to  cry  '*  My  Father  !*  (ver.  19).  Their  joint  restoration
and  conversion  to  God  are  therefore  yet  future  (cf,  Ezek.  xxxvil  16  to  end).  God
will  keep  and  fulfil  His  covenant  promises.

B.  The  actual  state  of  Judah  under  the  eye  of  God  (ver.  4,  10).  The
words  ^^from  this  iime^''  mark  the  epoch  as  special.  Judah  hath  ^^  turned  unto  Me
feignedly^^  asserts  a  national  show  of  repentance.  For  this  incident,  Judah  pro-
fessedly repentant  before  Jehovah,  we  must  turn  to  2  Chron.  xxxv.  1-19,  the
national  celebration  of  the  passover,  which  succeeded  Josiah's  reforms,  and
asserted  Judah's  restoration  to  the  Lord.  That  this  chapter  coincides  with  that
incident  is  confirmed  by  the  reference  to  t?ie  ark,  both  in  the  arrangements  for  that
passover  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  3),  and  in  this  prophecy  (iii.  16).  Yet,  notwithstanding
the  great  parade  of  national  repentance,  God  declares  it  to  be  unreal  (ver.  10).

Theme  :  Reformation  no  guarantee  of  religion.  A  ritual  piety  not  necessarily  real
piety.  (Addenda  to  chap,  iii.,  ver.  10,  ^^RituaV^  and  ^^Feignedly")  In  Judah's  case  it
was  the  result  of  authority  and  policy.  Josiah  ordered  it :  not  spontaneous ;  therefore
not  sincere.  The  king  had  cleansed  the  land,  and  brought  the  nation  to  yield  a  for-
mal homage  to  Jehovah  :  the  prophet  proclaimed  it  utterly  corrupt  and  hypocritical.

I.  External  reform  may  be  unattended  by  spiritual  regeneration.  Ostensible
repentance,  external  rectitude,  these  co-existed  with  a  heart  withheld  from  God.
Judah  had  not  cried,  **  My  Father,"  <fec.  (ver.  4).

1.  To  rectify  evil  habits  does  not  prove  inward  renewal.  "  Garnished  sepulchres  "
may  contain  "  all  uncleanness."

2.  A  revival  of  ritual  may  not  residt  from  revival  of  religion.  The  passover
observed  with  ostentatious  care  was  a  mockery.  ^Esthetic  ritual  cannot  argue
religious  affections,  sanctified  lives  :  decorated  altars  may  not  imply  devotional
worshippers.  As  well  urge  that  "  hewed  cisterns "  guarantee  pure  and  "  living
water."     Pharisaism  in  general  may  be  but  another  name  for  falsity.

II.  The  distinctive  province  of  the  king  and  the  prophet  in  the  realm  of
religion.  As  far  as  the  king  went,  all  was  right.  He  could  do  no  more  :  effected
complete  revolution  in  religious  habits  of  Judah,  rectified  abuses  of  Temple,  re-
established true  religion.

1.  Royalty  can  dictate  the  forms  and  mode  of  religion.  History  often  shown  this.
What  then  1  Are  people  thereby  made  religious  1  Would  another  "  Act  of  Uni-
formity "  ensure  piety  throughout  England  ?  Can  the  king  rule  conscience,  sway
hearts  ]

2.  Human  effort  pauses  where  true  religion  only  begins.  God  commences  with  the
"heart"  (ver.  10).  Man's  work  must  stop  there  :  he  can  carry  reform  no  further
than  "  making  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter."  Hence  God  sent  the
prophet  to  work  where  the  king  could  not,  to  arouse  the  nation's  inward  and
spiritual  response  to  the  royal  reform :  to  appeal  to  Judah  "  from  that  time,"  so
propitious  for  a  real  repentance,  "  to  cry  unto  Him,  My  Father."

XXL  Reformation  without  spiritual  renewal  may  prove  a  perilous  delusion.
It  may  quiet  and  lull.  Possibly  Judah  felt  herself  religious,  having  done  so  much
that  was  pious.  Reformed  sinners  are  not  easily  won  to  repentance.  They  fortify
themselves  in  a  self-satisfied  pride.  1.  Outward  piety  may  co-exist  unth  inward
tin,     A  compromise :  but  loathsome  to  God^  who  *^  looketh  not  on  appearance."

61


OOP.  m.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,

2.  Outward  piety  is  more  readily  accepted  than  repentance.  It  costs  no  self-humilia-
tions and  heart-conflicts  ;  no  '*  crucifixion  of  the  affections  and  lusts;'*  no  abase-
ment before  God.  3.  Outward  piety  is  evanescent  and  worthless.  The  king's  work
was  effective  :  the  people  responded  :  Judah  became  religious.  But  what  ensued  ]
Revulsion  when  the  king  died.  Nation  rushed  back  to  idolatry  and  vice  so  soon
as  the  outward  restraint  was  gone.  Test  such  a  piety,  and  it  dies.  Take  the  king
away  who  smiled  on  it,  remove  the  advantages  of  such  a  religion,  and  the  thing  is
gone  !     Therefore  God  was  still  angry  with  Judah,  and  doom  was  not  averted.

C.  The  land  withered  by  drought  because  of  sin  (ver.  3).  "  Therefore  the
showers  withholden,  no  latter  rain."

Clearly  affirmed  that  fertility  of  the  land  dependent  on  conduct  of  the  people
{cf.  chap.  ix.  12,  13;  Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20;  Deut.  xxviii.  23,  24).  The  "latter rain"
was  formerly  essential  to  the  beauty  and  fruitfulness  of  the  country  :  these  have
been  permanently  withdrawn  ;  hence  the  sterility  of  the  land  as  it  now  lies,  so
markedly  in  contrast  with  the  ancient  accounts  of  its  teeming  productiveness  and
delightful  richness.  Usually  this  is  accounted  for  by  the  reduced  population  and
neglect  of  culture.  They  may  be  the  effect  rather  than  the  cause  :  cultivation
discouraged  and  population  minished  in  consequence  of  a  disadvantageous  change
in  the  climate  and  seasons.  Observe  that  rain  and  consequent  fertility  were  promised
conditionally  (see  Deut.  xi.  13—15);  the  people's  faithfulness  was  therefore  essential
to  their  being  enjoyed  and  retained ;  that  gone,  these  have  ceased.  This  a  ques-
tion of  fact,  certified  by  competent  authority.  The  physical  condition  of  the
climate,  the  seasons,  and  the  soil  have  been  tested  with  a  view  to  agriculture.  Grass
seed,  carried  from  England  and  sown  there,  would  perish  the  very  first  summer.
The  harvest  is  marred  and  impoverished  because  of  drought.  Vegetables  cannot
keep  alive  ;  flowers  cannot  blow  and  yield  their  sweets.  The  land  has  lost,  what  it
must  formerly  have  enjoyed,  **  the  latter  rain."  God  has,  as  it  were,  turned  the  key
upon  the  refreshing  and  fructifying  bounties  of  the  skies.  He  has  commanded  the
clouds  that  they  rain  not  as  formerly  upon  the  inheritance  of  His  disobedient
people.  Only  in  this  way  can  be  explained  the  present  state  of  the  heights,  which
were  once  mountains  clothed  with  grass,  but  have  become  bare  rocks.  The  grass
must  have  perished  under  the  hot  sun,  which  now  burns  from  April  to  November,
the  soil  become  loose  and  pulverised,  unable  to  resist  the  high  winds  of  the  sum-
mer and  the  floods  of  winter.  This,  repeated  year  after  year,  would  soon  lay  bare
the  rocks.  All  this  is  to  be  remedied ;  promises  portray  the  land  again  fruitful,
the  mountains  rich  with  produce.  It  will  require  no  miracle  to  do  this ;  only  the
restoration  of  "  the  rain  in  its  due  season."  (Of.  Kitto's  Bible  Illustrations  on  this
text.)  The  temporary  withholding  of  all  the  rains  for  three  and  a  half  years
during  Elijah's  ministry  (1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  25)  has  become  permanent  as
respects  the  vernal  rain  ;  sin  being  the  occasion  in  each  case.

D.  The  Ark  lost  in  the  Babylonian  Captivity  (ver.  16).     (Comp.  Literary

Criticisms  on  ver.  16.)

Manasseh  removed  the  ark  from  its  place  in  the  Temple  to  make  way  for  the
"carved  image"  which,  in  his  reckless  idolatry,  he  reared  in  the  holy  place  (2
Chroii.  xxxiii.  7).  This  explains  its  reinstatement  by  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  3).
In  all  probability  this  ark  was  carried  away  or  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (2
Esdras  x.  21,  22) ;  for  it  disappeared  together  with  the  two  tables  of  stone  it  con-
tained at  the  Babylonish  captivity,  when  the  Temple  was  plundered  and  destroyed.
Jewish  authorities  all  are  agreed  that  it  was  never  restored,  or  replaced  in  the  second
Temple.  The  Jews  think  it  will  be  restored  when  Messiah  appears,  but  this  verse
dissipates  the  delusion.
62


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


ooAJf.  nz.


HOMILIES  ON  SELECTED  VERSES  IN  CHAPTER  in.


Ver.   4.    Them:   God's   tender   ex-
postulation WITH  THE  YOUNG.
I.  The  particulars  of  the  proposal

1.  That  you  should  make  God  your
"  Father."  Not  merely  call  Him  so,
but  that  you  become  His  children.  By
disobedience  you  have  put  yourself  out
of  His  family,  like  the  prodigal.  Uow
can  you  become  His  children?  (Gal.  iii.
2Q  ;  John  i.  12).  By  faith  we  are  made
one  with  Christ,  and  admitted  into  "  the
household  of  God  "  (see  Gal.  iv.  6).

2.  That  you  should  choose  God  for
the  "  Guide  of  your  youth."  This  im-
plies that  you  regard  His  authority,  fol-
low His  will,  comply  with  His  direc-
tions :  these  are  made  known  to  us  :

a.  By  His  Word.  *'  Lamp  to  our
feet,"  (fee. :  reveals  Christ  as  *'  the  Way.
Truth,"  (fee.      "Follow  me."

h.  By  His  Spirit.  Enlightens  and
directs  our  conscience,  influences  our
hearts  and  desires.  "  Grieve  not  the
Holy  Spirit  of  God."

3.  That  you  do  these  things  without
delay.  "From  this  time."  A  sad  pro-
pensity to  answer  with  Felix,  "  Go  thy
way  for  this  time,"  <fec.  But  God  coun-
sels that  no  time  is  so  favourable  as
the  present.  *' To-day,  if  hear  His
voice."

II.  The  motives  for  compliance.

1.  The  grace  and  condescension  of
the  proposal.  "  What  manner  of  love  !  "
(1  John  iii.  1).  Can  you  refuse  to  be
drawn  by  these  "  cords  of  love  "  ?

2.  The  reasonableness  of  such  a  pro-
ceeding. Your  own  interests  urge  your
compliance.  Where  lind  a  Father  like
God  1  Numberless  evils  from  which  He
alone  can  save  you.  No  other  Guide  can
conduct  through  intricate  paths  to  eter-
nal rest.

3.  The  seasonableness  of  the  proposal.
Opportunities  lost  are  gone  for  ever.
Present  time  is  your  own.  "Now  is
accepted  time."  "  Wilt  thou  not  from
this  time  cry,"  &c.  1

"  From  this  time  : "  perhaps  this  is  a
special  date  with  you  :  of  affliction,  deli-
ver ancey  rejoicing.  Perhaps  conscious
now  of  a  secret  desire  to  give  yourself
np  to  God. — Rev.  Ed.  Coofer^  ''Prac-
tical JSermons,"  1816.


Theme:,  Youth's  gkaoious  houe;
God's  timely  call.

Enticements  and  appeals  fall  around
the  young.  "Take  me  as  your  guide  !"
cries  Pleasure,  Society,  Gain,  Sin  in
gay  form.  Vice  with  smooth  lips.
Around  none  so  many  calls ;  mature
and  aged  heard  same  voices  in  their
youth,  but  silent  now  to  them.  With-
in none  so  many  cravings  :  as  young  life
unfolds  expectation  awakes,  curiosity
impels ;  hence  snares  surround  and  se-
ducers are  alert.  Falls  a  voice  from
heaven  on  the  young  :  text.  (Addenda
to  chap,  iii.,  ver.  4,  "  The  guide  of  my
youth:')

I.  Youth's  reckless  wanderings.
"  From  this  time  cry  to  Me."'  Had  not
done  so  hitherto :  other  voices  heeded  and
followed  :  Vanity  ;  Fancy ;  Indulgence  ;
Avarice ;  Sceptici:sm.  How  few  young
have  made  God  their  Guide !  Tread
"  broad  road  to  destruction."

II.  Youth's  eminent  value.  Young
life  more  coveted  than  mature.  Splen-
did triumph  for  Satan  when  ruins  a
young  character  1  What  a  history  a
young  man  or  woman  may  mark  out ;
may  go  through  the  years  like  angel  of
light ;  or  a  firebrand.  God  values  young
life.  "Remember  Creator  in  days  of
youth."  What  a  salvation  is  effected
when  young  soul  is  gathered  into
grace !

III.  Youth's  urgent  need.     "Guide."

1.  Way  of  life  is  beset  with  dangers.
Evil  examples;  evil  counsellors.  "Com-
pass sea  and  land  to  make  proselyte."

2.  Young  are  themselves  readily,
deceived.  Through  their  own  wayward
propensities  and  inexperience.  Hence
easily  fall  into  temptation.  Certainly
ill  adapted  to  hold  the  rudder  of  their
own  life,  and  steer  amid  the  hidden
rocks.

IV.  Youth's  precious  opportunity.
"  From  this  time ;  my  youth."  Young
life  most  easily  guided.  Call  the  moun-
tain wanderer  back  ere  he  fall !  Young
— 1.  Not  yet  fettered  in  the  captivity
of  habit.  2.  Not  enthralled  by  settled
companionships  of  life.  3.  Not  lost
the  sacred  intluences  of  early  teaching.
4.  Not  yet  insensible   to  Divine  influ-

63


GBAit.  m.


BOMlLtlTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


ences.  5.  Not  forfeited  opportunity  of
grace.     "  From  this  time  cry."

V.  Youth's  happy  resolution.  *'My
Father,  Thou  art  my  Guide."

The  resolve  indicates:  1.  Discrimina-
tion ;  2.  Decision ;  3.  Distinction ;  for
he  will  "  come  out  from  among  them,
be  separate,"  <fec.

Who  now  ready  with  the  cry  1  Be
resolved.  "  Be  not  like  dumb  driven
cattle."     "  Choose  ye  this  dayP

Ver.  5.  Theme:  The  sinner's  des-
perate DEPRAVITY.  "  Behold  thou  hast
spoken  and  done  evil  as  thou  couldst."

Men  are  as  depraved  as  they  can
possibly  be  in  present  circumstances.
Charge  made  by  the  infinitely  Holy
One  against  every  member  of  the
human  family.  Substantiated  by  con-
sidering :

I.  Thai  Gody  in  His  providence^  has
surrounded  the  sinner  with  many  circum-
stances operating  powerfully  to  modify
human  character.

I.  Education.  2.  Human  law  has  a
similar  effect.  3.  The  law  of  God.  4.
The  troublesome  supervision  of  consci-
ence. 5.  The  whole  Gospel,  interfering
with  the  sinful  pleasures  and  follies  of
men.  6.  All  the  Gospel  institutions.
7.  The  desire  in  man  for  heaven.  8.
The  fear  of  hell.  9.  The  expectation  of
judgment.  10.  Public  sentiment.  11.
The  domestic  affections.  These  are
all  so  many  golden  chains,  restraining
the  sinner  from  wrong.  Ought  to
thank  God  for  these  modifying  circum-
stances. A  man's  state  is  hopeful  in
proportion  as  he  is  held  by  these  moral
bonds.

II.  By  these  circumstances  every  sin-
ner is  actually  restrained  in  his  wicked-
ness, and  held  hack  in  his  downward
career.     In  proof  of  which,  observe  :

1.  Men  are  uneasy  under  these  cir-
cumstances, which  shows  them  to  be
restraints.  2.  Men  are  constantly  try-
ing to  alter  their  circumstances.  3.
When  men  succeed  in  altering  their  cir-
cumstances in  any  of  these  respects,  they
usually  show  out  a  worse  character.  4.
When  these  restraints  are  all  removed,
men  are  uniformly  far  more  wicked  than
if  they  had  not  been  imposed.
64


III.  TJiat  every  sinner  does  make  the
attempt,  and  succeeds,  as  far  as  God  mil
let  him,  to  sunder  these  ligatures  that
would  hold  him  fast  to  reason,  hope,  and
heaven.  Trace  his  steps,  and  see  how  be
breaks  over  and  breaks  through  the  re-
straints of — 1.  Education  ;  2.  Human
laws  ;  3.  God's  laws ;  4.  Supervision
of  conscience ;  6.  Institutions  of  the
Gospel ;  6.  Thoughts  of  heaven  and  fear
of  hell ;  7.  Public  sentiment ;  8.  Do-
mestic affections.

Such  is  the  obstinacy,  rebelliousness,
ingratitude  of  the  sinner.  Must  he  not
then  be  "  born  again,"  have  new  heart
and  right  spirit,  or  never  enter  king-
dom of  God  1  —  "  Preacher's  Trea-
sury."

Comments:  Ver.  6-10.  Juddh  the
guiltier  sister.

The  two  kingdoms  are  described  as
sisters  in  iniquity.  In  Ezekiel  (xxiii.  4)
the  same  metaphor  is  applied  to  the  two
metropolises  of  those  kingdoms,  Sama-
ria and  Jerusalem  :  "  Aholah  and  Aho-
libah."  (Addenda  to  chap,  iii.,  ver.  7,
*'  Falsity.")

Israel  is  stigmatised  as  Apostasy  and
Judah  as  Falsity  :  but  the  heavier  sin  is
laid  to  Judah's  account.  Her  crimin-
ality is  marked  as  having  three  stages  .•  (1)
she  ^^saw"  Israel's  sin,  yet  repeated  it  her-
self ;  (2)  she  ^^ feared  not "  the  penalties
with  which  she  beheld  Israel  punished ;
and  (3)  she  ^^ feigned"  a  piety  when  her
practices  were  impious.  Hence  she  is
called  "  Falsity :  "  and  her  threefold  sin
is  most  solemnly  emphasised.

**She  sinned  against  greater  convic-
tions."—  W.  Lowth.

"  Aliorum  tormenta  aliorum  remedia
sunt." — Jerome.

"Though  the  reform  of  Josiah  was
only  a  pseudo-revival,  it  furnishes  us
with  the  means  of  judging  how  deep  a
genuine  revival  ought  to  go.  Mark  ix.
43-48."— Za/i^e.

This  external  renovation  of  Judah,
which  swept  the  land  of  abuses,  was  un-
comi)rising  and  severe.  Yet  was  not
enough.  God  was  not  content.  How
then  will  they  do  who  profess  and  be-
lieve themselves  Christians,  whose
lives   are    not   self-denying   and   pure!


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.


OHAP.  m.


God  requires  "truth  in  the  inward
parts,"  and  thorougliiiess  in  religious
conduct.  "  No  fellowship  between
light  and  darkness ; "  no  accommodat-
ing our  piety  to  convenience,  circum-
stances, and  sinful  ease.

Ver.  10.  ^^  Judah  hath  not  turned  to
me  with  her  whole  heart,  hut  feignedly^'*
i.e.,  in  falsehood.

i.  FaUe  repentance.  1.  Its  ground —
servile  fear.  2.  Its  effect — external  re-
form.

ii.  True  repentance.  1.  Its  ground —
love  to  God.  2.  Its  effect — honest
fruits  of  sanctification. — Lange,

Ver.  11.  Theme:  Comparative  Cri-
minality.

This  subject  may  not  be  used  for  self-
preference  and  self-complacency,  or  in-
calculable injury  may  ensue  (2  Cor.  x.
12).  Both  had  sinned  grievously:
Israel  more  openly;  Judah  in  a  more
covert  way.  God  declared  Judah's  cri-
minality exceeded  that  of  Israel.  Let
me

I.  State  this  decision  of  the  Lord.
Israel,  from  the  time  they  became  a

distinct  nation,  ca^t  off  God;  therefore
given  into  Assyrian  captivity  and  di-
vorced by  God.

Judah  had  retained  the  worship  of
Godj  but  revelled  in  idolatry  at  the  same
time,  and  paid  divine  honours  to  idols
(Zeph.  i.  5).

Because  of  their  apparent  superiority,
Judah  would  scarcely  own  her  relation-
ship to  Israel  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  24).

Though  their  sins  were  ostensibly/  lesSy
tliey  were  committed  with  tenfold  aggra-
vations ;  for  their  advantages  had  been
greater,  larger  number  of  prophets  sent
them,  enjoyed  stated  ordinances^  pre-
sence of  God  was  in  their  midst  (in
Temple).

Despising  and  abusing  all  these,  their
guilt  was  greater.

We  argue  that  any  religion  is  better
than  none;  that  the  appearance  of  re-
gard for  God  is  better  than  avowed  con-
tempt. God  pronounces  other :  the
form  without  the  power  of  godliness  is
more  offensive  than  entire  impiety.
Therefore  text.

II.  Confirm  this  decision  of  the  Lord.


Specious  insincerity  is  worse  than
open  profaneness,  because

1.  It  argues  a  deeper  depravity  of
heart.  Sin  is  committed  against  con-
science, against  the  motions  of  God's
Spirit  within.

2.  It  casts  more  dishonour  upon  God.
A  sinner  openly  casts  off  God's  yoke ;
but  the  hypocrite  professedly  says,  "I
am  God's  servant,  know  my  duty  and
perform  it !  ^'  It  degrades  holiness,
the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed,  and
the  way  of  truth  is  evil  spoken  of.

3.  It  does  more  extensive  injury  to
man.  His  example  encourages  sinners
in  sin,  and  gives  the  ungodly  a  reason
to  contemn  true  Christians  as  being
"righteous  over -much."  He  thus
offends  God's  people,  and  casts  a  stum-
bling-block before  the  guilty.    Address  :

(1.)  Those  who  are  careless  about  reli-
gion. You  justify  yourselves  on  the
ground  that  you  are  not  hypocrites  and
make  no  profession.  Yet  think  of  the
judgments  which  fell  on  Israel.

(2.)  T]io%Q\f\io  profess  religion.  God
will  have  "  your  whole  heart ; "  no  feign-
edness.  Christ  said  to  Laodicea,  "I
would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot,"  <fec.  Ba
not  "  lukewarm,"  but  wholly  the  Lord's,
— Rev.  G.  Simeon^  M.A,

Comments  :

Ver.  11.  To  what  reflections  should
the  declaration  of  Scripture  give  rise,
that  the  Divine  judgment  is  determined
by  the  comparison  of  men  with  each
other  1  1.  We  should  reflect  that  it  is
impossible  for  us  to  institute  this  com-
parison with  perfect  justice  ourselves.
2.  We  should  therefore  draw  from  com-
parison with  others  occasion  neither  for
despair  nor  false  comfort.  3.  We  should
rather  allow  this  comparison  to  be  a
motive  to  severe  self-discipline.

Vers.  12,  13.  God's  call  to  repentance.
1.  Its  ground  (I  am  merciful).  2.  Its
object  (to  obtain  grace).  3.  Its  condi-
tion (acknowledge  thy  sin). — Lange.
(Addenda  to  chap,  iii  ver.  13,  "  Acknow-
ledge thy  sin.^')

Ver.  13.  Theme:  TAKING  SIDE  WITH
God  against  ourselves  and  our

SIN.   "  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity."

Just  as  the  publican,  abhorrent  with

65


OHAP.  IlL


BOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


bimself,  and  ashamed  of  long  resistance  of
God,  bowed  in  abasement  and  confession.
Holding  out  against  God  no  longer ;
hiding  sin  from  God — refusing  to  own
it — no  longer.  Return  to  God  might
be  through  misery — not  regret  for  the
sin  which  caused  it ;  or  from  policy —
desiring  escape  from  evils  and  gain  of
benefits,  without  heart-grief  or  spiritual
surrender.

I.  What  God  asks  of  the  sinner.
"Acknowledge;"    which    means — 1.

Capitulation  of  his  pride;  realises  him-
self vile.  2.  Contrition  within  his  heart ;
laments  and  upbraids  his  folly  and  re-
bellion. 3.  Confession  upon  his  lips  ]
all  covered  with  shame,  coming  back
prodigal-like,  publican-like  to  God.
"Acknowledge;"  "7/*  we  confess  our
sin,  God  will  forgive,"  &c.

II.  What  God  arrays  before  the
sinner.

*'  Only  acknowledge  that"  <fec.

1.  Spiritual  relationship  violated.
"  Transgressed  against  the  Lord  thy
God."  It  is  the  sin  of  faithlessness  ;
not  of  one  who  never  knew  the  Lord.

2.  Spiritual  prostitution  practised.
"  Scattered  thy  ways  to  strangers."

3.  Spiritual  independence  asserted.
"  Hast  not  obeyed ; "  resented  God's
control.

These  three  aspects  of  sin,  as  God
regards  it,  show  the  course  of  evil  to
be  an  outrage,  debasing ^  defiant  against
all  law  and  all  love.

IIL  What  God  assures  to  the  sin-
ner. Elsewhere  in  His  Word  are  given
precious  assurances  to  the  soul  who
confesses  sin  (Luke  xviii.  14;  1  John
i.  9).

Here  :

1.  Reception  to  His  unalienated  love
(ver.  14.)  "  I  am  married."  Israel's  dis-
loyalty had  not  estranged  Him.  God
keeps  the  door  wide  open  for  the
wranderer.

2.  Reinstatement  in  tlie  covenant  privi-
leges of  Zion  (ver.  14).  Her  wandering
had  surrendered  all — far  off,  in  oppres-
sion ;  but  "  made  nigh,"  brought  again
"  to  Zion."  (Addenda  on  ver.  13,  ''Ac-
knowledge iniquity.")

Ver.  14.  To  Backsliders.

God,  the  loving  Husband.    Sin,  spiri-


ao


tual  adultery.  He  hates  "putting
away,"  and  invites  return  (ver.  1).

I.  The  nature  of  backsliding.  It  is
going  back — 1.  Easily  ;  2.  Gradually  ;
3.  Silently.

Backsliding  is  generally  preceded  by
— 1.  Pride  (Prov.  xvi.  18);  2.  Vain
confidence  (Matt.  xxvi.  33)  ;  3.  Negli-
gence (Matt.  xxvi.  58).

A  man  may  be —

1.  Enticed  by  sinful  pleasures  (2
Sam.  xi.).

2.  Led  back  by  sinful  companions
(1  Kings  xi.).

3.  Driven  back  by  sinful  fears  (Matt*
xxvi.  69-74).

II.  The  misery  of  backsliding.

1.  Heavy  losses.  (1.)  His  self-respect.
(2.)  Tender  conscience.  (3.)  Sweetest
enjoyments.     (4.)  Brightest  hopes.

2.  Severe  disappointment.  His  holy
expectations  are  lost  (of  what  he  might
have  been,  and  done  for  Christ,  and
the  after,  rewards).

3.  Terrible  disgrace.  (1.)  Before  the
world,  as  a  hypocrite.  (2.)  Before  the
Church,  as  "  the  thief  "  (Jer.  ii.  12).  (3.)
Before  God  (Ps.  li.  3-9).

III.  The  remedy  for  backsliding.
"  Return,"  &c.

1.  Immediately.  (1.)  Delay  makes  your
case  worse.  (2.)  God  is  willing  to  par-
don. (3.)  The  Church  is  waiting  to  re-
ceive you.

2.  Humbly.  (1.)  Confessing  sin.  (2.)
Abhorring  sin  (Hos.  xiv.  8).  (3.)  For-
saking sin.

3.  Believingly.  Remember — (1.)  The
love  of  your  espousals.  (2.)  The  in-
dividuality of  your  relationship.  (3.)
The  love  of  your  Husband.  (4.)  Your
own  duty. — The  Study.

Comments :  Ver.  14.

On  " /  will  take  you  one  of  a  city"
&c.,  Dr.  Blayney  remarks :  "This  pas-
sage relates  to  their  call  into  the  Chris-
tian Church,  into  which  they  were
brought,  not  all  at  a  time,  nor  in  a
national  capacity,  but  severally  as  in-
dividuals, here  and  there  one  "  (cf.  Isa.
xxvii.  12).

On  "  /  am  married  to  you"  the
Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.,  writes:
"  These  words  affirm  tliat  a  mysterious
boud^  which  no  sin  of  theirs  had  been  able


BOMiLETiC  COMMENTARY :  J  ERE M IAS.


cfiAf .  m.


to  break,  united  even  those  tribes  wliicb
were  gone  into  captivity  to  the  God  of
Abraham ;  that  He  was  still  holding  in-
tercourse with  them  (ver.  12),  and  seek-
ing to  bring  their  hearts  back  to  Him-
self."— Prophets  and  Kings,

"  God  keeps  His  covenant,  which
men  have  broken  by  their  sins,  as  strictly
and  securely  as  though  they  had  never
broken  it." — Starke.

Ver.  15.  ^^  Pastors ;"  refer  to  notes
on  ii.  8.  Not  military  usurpers,  such
as  Israel  had  herself  preferred  (Hos.
viii.  4),  but  men  "after  God's  heart"
(1  Sam.  xiii.  4).

"The  evangelical  pastorate — L  Its
standard;  *  after  My  heart.'  ii.  Its
task;  to  feed  them  with  doctrine  and
wisdom." — Lange,

Ver.  16,  17.  Theme:  A  Bright  and
Blessed  Vision.  "It  shall  come  to
pass  in  those  days."

It  was  an  outlook  beyond  the  Cap-
tivity ;  beyond  even  the  return  which
Cyrus  granted, — the  prophet's  eye  saw
a  glory  which  excelled  the  gladness  of
that  event :  the  Messianic  age.  "  2'hose
days "  point  definitely  to  Christ's  advent
and  kingdom  {cf.  chap,  xxxiii.  14-16).

In  a  lower  and  lesser  sense  these  pre-
dicted events  may  have  been  verified
in  the  return  from  Babylonian  captivity,
but  were  fulfilled  in  Christ.

I.  The  spiritual  kingdom  :  a  vision
of  joyous  prosperity  (ver.  16.)  "  Multi-
plied and  increased  in  the  land."  The
"  little  flock  "  shall  have  and  "  possess
the  kingdom."  "  Little  one  become  a
thousand,"  <fec.

•*  Far  and  wide,  though  all  unknowing,
Pants  for  Thee  each  mortal  breast ;
Human  tears  for  Thee  are  flowing,
Human  hearts  in  Thee  would  rest.
Saviour  !  lo,  the  isles  are  waiting,
Stretched  the  hand  and  strained  the
sight."  —A.  C.  CoXB;

The  realisation  of  the  world's  hope  is
In  the  kingdom  of  Jesus.

II.  The  spiritual  kingdom :  symbols
and  external  forms  abandoned.

"  They  shall  say  no  more  The  Ark  of
the  covenant,"  <fcc.  (ver.  16).  The  Ark
was  but  a  shadow  of  Christ — in  Him
dwelt  the  law  ;  on  Him  rested  the  She-


kinah.  The  real  displaces  and  abrogates
the  sign;  and  hearts  no  more  rest  in
signs  when  the  real  has  come.  Who
would  longer  bend  over  a  portrait  of  a
child,  when  lo !  the  long-absent  boy  is
now  returned  and  in  the  home  1  From
the  picture  the  heart  turns  to  embrace
the  living  one.  (Addenda  to  chap.  iii.
ver.  16,  17,  ''Symbols:')

III.  The  spiritual  kingdom :  loving
allegiance  to  the  Lord.

Ver.  17.  Gathering  to  and  around  "the
throne  of  the  Lord"  =  binding  themselves
loyally  to  Hiui  :  the  heart  fixed  on  Him  :
no  God  but  Him  :  His  "throne/'  or
rule,  drawing  men  into  happy  subjection
{cf.  Matt.  xi.  29,  30).

IV.  The  spiritual  kingdom :  inward
love  manifested  in  holy  life.

Ver.  17.  "No  more  walk  after  evil
heart."  Loyally  adhering  to  God,  the
life  shall  be  free  from  self-will  and  pur-
suit of  selfish  delights,  walking  in  the
Saviour's  steps,  following  the  Lord
fully.  This  Christian  walk  will  be  the
outward  evidence  of  the  inward  allegi-
ance to  God's  throne.

Comments :

Ver.  17.  Not  the  Ark  "shall  be  called
the  throne  of  the  Lord,"  as  formerly
it  had  been,  but  '''  Jerusalem"  i.e.,  the
Christian  Church  (Rev.  xxi.  2  ;  Gal.  iv.
2^',  Zech.  ii.  10,  11). — Speaker^ s  Comr
mentary.

The  Ark  had  just  been  restored  to  its
place  in  the  Temple  with  much  solem-
nity and  jubilant  celebration  by  king,
and  priests,  and  people.  What  a  sub-
lime and  far-reaching  vision  was  this  of
the  prophet's,  which  descried  an  age
when  the  Ark  would  be  counted  as  no-
thing !  And  how  much  more  glorious
that  age !

"They  will  have  the  true  Ark  in
Christ.  When  the  prophet  says  that  the
Ark  will  no  longer  be  remembered,  and
yet  Jerusalem  will  be  called  the  throne
of  the  Lord  (ver.  17),  he  means  that  the
whole  Levitical  economy — of  which  the
Ark  was  the  centre  and  the  key — would
pass  away,  and  be  succeeded  and  con-
Bunimated  in  the  presence  and  glory  of
the  Lord  in  His  Church."

'^Jerusalem''  (the  Church),  will  re-
ceive all  nations  into  her  bosom :  where

67


efiAp.  m.


JEtOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAS.


Christ  is  enthroned  as  king  (Heb.  xii.
22). —  Wordsworth.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Christ,  the  true
Ark  of  the  covenant.

i.  A  most  alarming  and  unwelcome
announcement  That  the  Ark  would  dis-
appear, and  another  not  made.  "It  was
the  most  costly  jewel  of  the  people,  the
central  point  of  their  whole  existence.''
Overlaid  with  gold,  overshadowed  by-
glory  (Heb.  ix.  4,  5),  visible  symbol  of
Divine  presence :  borne  by  priests  around
Jericho  :  national  amaze  when  it  was
taken  by  Philistines,  joy  when  restored  :
disasters  befell  nation  in  Saul's  days  be-
cause Ark  neglected ;  prosperity  under
David  because  honoured  and  a  "resting-
place"  provided;  and,  finally,  the  display
of  Divine  glory  when  Solomon  trans-
ferred Ark  to  the  Temple.

All  this  taught  Israel  that  their  safety
and  prosperity  were  connected  with  Ark
of  covenant.  Called  "  Ark  of  God's
strength"  (2  Chron.  vi.  41).

By  some  regarded  with  superstitious
awe  rather  than  reverential  fear;  yet
by  all  as  of  incalculable  value  to  the
nation.

ii.  A  bitter  and  irreconcilable  loss.

1.  Prophecy  soon  fulfilled.  After  de-
struction of  Temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
the  Ark  was  no  more  seen.  Absent
from  second  Temple,  which  was  built
soon  after  return  from  Babylon.  This
a  solemn  and  perpetual  intimation  to
them  of  the  approaching  removal  of  the
whole  typical  system.

2.  Loss  deeply  lamented.  These  re-
turned Jews  did  not  cease  to  remember
the  Ark,  but  fondly  hoped  for  its  re-
storation. This  prophecy,  that  an  age
was  nearing  when  the  Ark  **  would  not
come  to  mind,"  remained,  therefore,
unfulfilled  in  them.

iii.  A  surpassing  compensation  pre-
dicted. The  prophecy,  that  the  Ark
would  be  no  more  remembered  or  sought,
implied  a  compensation  which  would  far
exceed  their  loss ;  so  that  what  they
once  deplored  as  a  privation,  they  would
rejoice  and  glory  in  as  an  unspeakable
gain.

1.  The  prediction  must  have  seemed
incredible  at  the  time ;  yet  afterwards
68


proved  consolatory.  For  in  their  loss  of
the  Ark,  this  prophecy  assured  them
God  had  better  things  in  store.

2.  How  was  the  prediction  fulfilled  ?
In  the  appearing  of  Christ,  the  antitype
of  the  Ark,  Himself  *'  the  brightness
of  the  Father's  glory,"  God  manifest  in
the  flesh.

iv.  The  realisation  in  Christ  of  all
the  Arh  symbolised.

1.  The  Divine  nearness.  2.  The
Deity  bending  mercifully  over  men  :  for
the  mercy-seat  was  overshadowed.  3.
The  helpful  and  healing  grace  of  God.

1.  Israelites  who  early  became  Chris-
tians, and  enjoyed  the  presence  of  Christ
on  earth,  must  have  readily  surrendered
and  forgotten  the  Ark  in  the  realisation
of  Jesus  and  His  tender  grace.

2.  Believers,  though  now  not  realising
Christ  bodily  among  them,  experience
His  Spirit's  indwelling,  revealing  Christ
within.     So  that  1  Peter  i.  8.

3.  Contrite  sinners  can  rejoice  in
the  tenderness,  lowliness,  and  compas-
sion of  Christ.  None  need  any  awful
visible  token  of  the  Divine  nearness.

All  can  come  with  boldness  to  the
throne  of  grace  :  '*  having  boldness  to
enter  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."

Arranged  from.  Dr.  Gordon^ s  "  Christ
as  made  known  to  the  Ancient  Church."

Ver.  17.  The  Church  Christ's
throne.  (Addenda  to  chap.  iii.  ^^  Jerusa-
lem^ God's  throne.")

a.  Jerusalem  had  been  of  old  the
throne  of  God:  the  symbol  of  God  rested
on  the  Ark.  Hence  called  the  "  city  of
the  Great  King."

b.  Jerusalem  became  the  throne  of
God  as  never  before  when  Emmanuel
visited  her.  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God  :
Thou  the  King  of  Israel."  Yet  she  re-
jected her  King.

c.  Christ  by  His  death  founded  a
kingdom  in  which  His  Church  has  be-
come the  true  throne  of  God.  This  is
Zion,  on  which  God  hath  set  His  King.
There  He  sways  kingly  power.

I.  In  the  conversion  of  sinners  the
kingly  power  and  authority  of  Christ  is
manifested.  Each  case  is  a  victory  of
Christ  over  the  "  enmity  "  of  the  carnal
mind  and  the  resistance  of  hellish  foea.


BOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  JEUEMIAJS.


OBAF.  nt.


Soul  delivered  "from  power  of   Satan
unto  God."

II.  In  maintaining  His  ascendancy
over  the  lives  and  affections  of  His  con-
verts. "  Law  in  their  members  "  at  war
with  Him.  The  world  strives  to  wrest
them  from  His  rule.  Satan  strives  to
recover  his  lost  power.  But  they  are  held
"  in  obedience  to  Christ,"  and  *'  kept
by  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."

III.  In  governing  the  world  providen-
tially for  His  Church's  advantage.  Christ
reigns  as  Mediator :  "  works  all  things
for  our  good  "  and  His  glory ;  and  6y,
and /or,  and/roTH  His  Church  He  puts
forth  His  power,  that  shall  subdue  all
enemies  under  His  feet.  How  does
Christ's  rule  affect  individual  members
of  His  Church]

1.  To  what  extent  can  and  may  they
enjoy  personally  the  presence  of  their
King  ?  Sits  enthroned  in  their  heart
and  affections  individually.

2.  Christ  must  hold  unrivalled  and
unlimited  sway  and  sovereignty  over
their  lives.  His  kingship  absolute :
their  affections  undivided  :  they  habitu-
ally and  entirely  under  the  constrain-
ing influences  of  His  love.

3.  They  will  recognise  that  His  care
extends  to  every  individual  believer,
sending  expressions  of  His  kindness  and
love  to  each,  and  never — save  in  faith-
fulness— afflicting  them.

In  proportion  as  they  are  thus  subject
unto  Christ  in  everything  do  they  enjoy
the  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God. — Idem.

Vers.  18,  19.  Theme:  Division  and
Keunion.

As  the  separation  of  the  JcingdomSf
Israel  and  Judah,  might  indicate  the
denominational  divisions  in  Christen-
dom, so  the  reunion  here  promised  may
suggest  the  method  and  basis  of  all  true
union.  This  must  rest  on  a  double
negative  and  positive  basis:

i.  On  the  fundamental  return  of  both
from  the  false  ground  on  which  they
have  been  standing  (typified  by  the  exit
of  both  tribes  from  the  north  country,
the  land  of  captivity).

ii.  On  unreserved,  sincere  devotion  to
the  Lord,  who  is  for  both  the  only  source
of  life  and  truth  (typified  in  the  words,
"  Thou  Shalt  call  me,  My  Father  ").


iii.  The  result  of  this  will  be  a  condi-
tion of  glorious  prosperity  in  the  Church
(typified  in  the  first  clause  of  ver.  19). —
Lange.  (See  Addenda  to  chap.  iii.  on
**  Denominationalism.^')

Ver.  19.  Theme:  The  true  source

OF  SALVATION.

By  Jeremiah  God  speaks  as  if  at  a
loss  how  to  exercise  towards  them  the
mercy  He  was  inclined  to  bestow.

I.  How  the  obstructions  to  the  resto-
ration of  the  Jews  shall  be  sur-
mounted.

1.  God  Himself  presents  to  them  the
formidable  difficulty.  Jews  always  had
been  perverse.  In  wilderness  :  when  in
promised  land  :  till  at  length  He  gave  up
ten  tribes  into  hands  of  Assyria,  and  the
other  two  into  hands  of  Chaldeans.
After  restoration  from  Babylon,  still  as
rebellious  :  at  last  filled  up  the  measure
of  iniquity  in  the  murder  of  their  Messiah.
Now,  though  scattered  1900  years
over  the  earth,  as  obdurate  as  ever.
How  restored  to  the  favour  of  God  1  (1.)
Extent  of  their  wickedness  forbids
it.  (2.)  Honour  of  God  forbids  it.  To
admit  rebels  to  privileges  encourages
rebellion.  Appear  an  excess  of  genero-
sity subversive  of  all  moral  government.

2.  These  obstacles^  though  formidable,
shall  be  surmounted.  God  had  expressed
His  desire  for  their  reconciliation.
"Wilt  thou  not  cry,  My  Father?"  (ver.
4).  Now  He  determines  to  effect  it  by
His  almighty  power.  "Thou  sbalt
cry.  My  Father."  This  will  overcome
every  obstacle.  "  If  God  will  work,
who  will  let  it  % "  Vain  was  the  resist-
ance of  Pharaoh,  the  sea,  the  wilderness,
the  united  nations.  As  God  spake  the
universe  into  existence,  so  will  He  form
the  "  new  creation."

II.  How  alone  the  difBLCulties  in
the  way  of  our  salvation  can  ever
he  overcome.

1.  There  are  immense  difficulties  in
the  way  of  our  salvation.  Our  wicked-
ness equals  or  exceeds  the  Jews'.  If
they  "  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,"
have  we  not  "  crucified  Him  afresh  "  1
Jews  of  Christ's  day  were  more  criminal
than  Sodom,  &c.,  because  they  had
greater  light;  but  we  have  far  greater

69


OHAP.  in.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


knowledge  and   advantages  than   even
they.     Yet  Heb.  x.  29.

2.  But  these  shall  he  overcome.  If  we
looked  to  ourselves,  salvation  hopeless  ;
but  are  to  look  to  Him.  He  will  inter-
fere for  us  in  a  way  of  sovereign  grace
and  by  the  exercise  of  His  almighty
power.  (a.)  His  grace  is  His  own,  to
dispense  as  He  will.  Says,  "  Thou  shalt
call  me,  My  Father."  {h.)  And  His  power
will  perform  it.  "  Thou  shalt  not  turn
from  me"  (Isa.  xlvi.  10).

i.  To  those  who  question  the  possi-
bility of  their  own  salvation.    God  is  able.

ii.  To  those  who  have  entertained  no
such  fears.  You  think  salvation  easy  ;
but  only  Christ's  blood  could  atone  for
such  sin  as  yours ;  only  the  Divine  Spirit
could  renew  your  depraved  heart.

iii.  To  those  who  profess  to  have
been  brought  into  the  family  of  God.
Obey  and  trust  Him  as  your  "  Father;"
let  nothing  lead  you  to  "  turn  away
from  Him." — Rev.  G.  Simeon,  M.A.

Note :  God  does  not  (ver.  19)  raise
difficulties  into  sight ;  it  is  not  a  cry  of
amazement  but  of  admiration;  not  a
contemplation  of  obstacles,  physical,
moral,  or  spiritual,  in  tbe  way  of  His
plans,  but  a  joyous  outlook  on  the
gracious  purposes  He  cherishes  ;  not  an
allusion  to  the  demerits  and  crimes  of
Israel  banished,  but  to  the  splendours,
blessedness,  and  exaltation  of  Israel,  by
Divine  grace  restored.  *'  How  will  I  put
theel"     (So  all  modern  commentators.)

The  words  "  Thou  shalt  call  me.  My
Father,"  <fec.,  do  not  furnish  an  answer
to  a  foregoing  inquiry  as  to  obstacles  ;
they  are  a  continuance  of  the  strain  of
admiring  contemplation.

Ver.  20.  "  Surely  as  a  wife  treacher-
ously" <fec.  The  remembrance  of  Israel's
past  conduct  rises  unbidden  in  the
mind  to  cross,  like  a  dark  cloud,  this
bright  hope  of  Israel's  return  to  God,
of  its  consequent  restoration  to  its  place
as  a  child,  and  of  its  filial  love  to
Jehovah.  The  prophet  brushes  away
the  passing  doubt,  and  a  vision  of
penitent  Israel  opens  before  his  gaze.

Ver.  21-25.   True  Repentance.

1.  It  proceeds  from  the  inmost  heart ;
the  weeping  (ver.   21)  and  their  shame
'ver.  26)  evince  this.
70


2.  It  is  free  from  all  dissimulation,
which  might  originate  in  a  spirit  of
compromise,  or  be  prompted  by  alarm
at  consequences  of  wickedness.  Its
principle  is  sorrow  at  having  grieved
God  by  the  abuse  of  His  love  (see
ver.  21).

3.  It  is  made  known  hy  the  honest
fruits  of  repentance ;  i.e.  apostasies
healed  (ver.  22),  detestation  of  evil
(ver.  24),  and  yearning  for  the  Lord
(ver.  25).

i.  Its  form:  *' weeping  and  supplica-
tions" (ver.  21).  ii.  Its  subject:  (a.)
Forgetting  God  and  sinning  against
Him  (ver.  21,  25).  (6.)  The  destruc-
tion resulting  from  sin's  deceptions  (ver.
23  5^'.).  iii.  Its  object :  salvation  in  God
(ver.  24). — Homily  hy  Origen ;  comp.
Lange.

Prayers  and  tears  well  become  those
whose  consciences  tell  them  that  they
have  "perverted  their  way  "  (ver.  21).

1.  They  come  devoting  themselves  to
God  as  theirs  (ver.  22).

2.  They  come  disclaiming  all  expecta-
tions of  relief  and  succour  but  from
God  only  (ver.  23).

3.  They  come  depending  upon  God
only  as  their  (true  and  rightful)  Lord
(ver.  1^3).

4.  They  come  justifying  God,  judg-
ing themselves  for  their  sin  (ver.  24,
25). — M.  Henry.

(See  Addenda  to  chap,  iii.  ver.  24,  25,
''Shame.")

Ver.    25.     Themt:    Prostrate    in

ABASEMENT.

Guilt  wastes  the  sinnei^s  substance
(ver.  24),  as  it  did  the  younger  son's
when  he  rushed  into  prodigality.

But  that  is  not  the  worst:  it  works
devastation  of  the  soul;  spoils  the
character  and  dignity  of  the  man.
How  dreadful  that  God's  living  "  image  "
on  earth,  God's  own  nourished  and  be-
loved child,  should  thus  "  lie  down  in
shame  ! "

I.  An  awakened  sinner's  self-ab-
horrent attitude.

1.  Appalled  at  the  heinousness  of  his
sin.

2.  Horrified  at  the  indignity  done  to
God.


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  III.


3.  Alarmed  at  the  doom  he  has
merited.

4.  Overwhelmed  by  the  grace  he  has
experienced.

II.  An  adoring  sinner's  lowly
approach  to  the  Saviour.

1.  To  hide  his  whole  past  life  in  his
forgiveness  and  atonement.  For  all  his
whole  career  "  from  youth  even  to  this
day"  plagues  him.  He  must  quench
the  burning  fire  of  his  own  memory  in


the  '*  fountain  opened  for  sin  and   un-
cleanness."

2.  To  draw  all  his  hope  for  the
future  from  Christ.  Having  all  along
"not  obeyed,"  his  long-continued  sinful-
ness Las  enslaved  him ;  he  cannot  do  the
good  he  would.  He  must  be  saved  from
himself.  "  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish."
"  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin?"
<kc.  (chap.  xiii.  23).  (Addenda  to  chap.  iii.
ver.  25,  "  We  lie  down  in  our  shame")


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  III,     ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  3.  "  No  latter  rain."  "  Because
we  obstruct  God's  access  to  us,  His
beneficence  does  not  reach  us.  We
throw  heaven  and  earth  into  confusion
For  were  we  in  right
our  obedience  to  God,
the  elements  would  be
But  as  our  lusts  tumultate


by  our  sins,
order  as  to
doubtless  all
conformable.


against  God,  as  we  provoke  Him  by  our
pride,  perverseness,  and  obstinacy,  it
must  needs  be  that  all  things  above  and
below  should  be  in  disorder.  This  is
to  be  ascribed  to  our  sins." — Calvin.

Ver.  4.  "  The  guide  of  my  youth.^^
Are  we  walking  through  life  as  directed
by  our  own  mind  and  heart,  or  by  the
Word,  Spirit,  and  providence  of  God  %
1.  We  are  all  travellers — (a.)  as  to  time  ;
from  youth  to  age  :  (6.)  as  to  'place  ;  from
cradle  to  grave  :  (c.)  as  to  circumstances  ;
from  wealth  to  poverty  or  the  contrary :
(J.)  as  to  mind  ;  from  ignorance  to  know-
ledge :  (e.)  as  to  character  ;  improving  or
otherwise  :  (/.)  as  to  destiny ;  to  heaven
or  helL  2.  We  need  a  guide  who  will
cheer,  sustain,  protect,  direct  us  on  our
way.  God  the  only  safe  guide  for  the
youthful  traveller  (Ps.  xxv.  9,  xxxi.  3,
xxxii.  8;  Isa.  Iviii.  11).

Ver.  7.  *'  Treacherous  Judah,^*
Falsity  ;  hypocrisy.

*'  Satan  was  the  first
That  practised  falsehood  under  saintly  show."

— Milton.

**  An  evil  soul  producing  holy  witness
Is  Kke  a  villain  with  a  smiling  cheek,
A  goodly  apple  rotten  at  the  core.
Oh,  what  a  goodly  outside  falsehood  hath  ! "

— Shakespeare.

"  The  dial  of  our  faces  does  not  in-
fallibly show  the  time   of  day  in  our


hearts ;  the  humblest  looks  may  enamel
the  former,  while  unbounded  pride
covers  the  latter.  Unclean  spirits  may
inhabit  the  chamber  when  they  look  not
out  at  the  window.  A  hypocrite  may
be  both  the  fairest  and  the  foulest
creature  in  the  world  ;  fairest  outwardly
in  the  eyes  of  man,  foulest  inwardly  in
the  sight  of  God.  Unclean  swans
cover  their  black  flesh  with  white
feathers. " — Seeker.

Ver.   10.   External  reform ;  ritual.

"We  make  beautiful  churches  more
often  than  we  do  beautiful  Christians.
We  carve  marbles,  and  rear  fine  propor-
tions in  stone ;  we  decorate  walls  and
altars ;  but  these  are  only  physical
representations,  material  symbols,  while
the  quality  of  beauty  is  in  holiness.
The  beauty  of  love  in  all  its  infinite
inflections,  the  beauty  of  justice  and  of
truth,  these  languish." — Rev.  H.  W.
Beecher.

"  We  are  not  to  judge  a  man  by  the
loudness  of  his  profession.  The  one
determining  question  is  not  '  Have  you
a  label  outside  ? '  but  '  Have  you  the
grace  of  God  in  your  heart  ? ' " — Dr.
Joseph  Parker.

'*  Feignedly,"  "It  is  possible  for  a
man  to  have  a  pulpit,  and  to  have  no
God;  to  have  a  Bible,  and  no  Holy
Ghost." — Idem.

Ver.  12.  The  lost  Ten  Tribes.  The
Beni-Rechab,  sons  of  Rechab,  still  exist
as  a  distinct  and  easily  distinguish-
able people,  in  number  about  60,000.
They  boast  their  descent  from  Rechab,
profess  pure  Judaism ;  all  understand
Hebrew  ;  live  near  Mecca. — Comp*
Grey's  "  Topics,**

71


OHAF.  m.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


There  is  a  vast  population  in  Afghan-
istan, of  very  evident  Israel itish  origin,
their  customs,  traditions  and  names
giving  proof.  The  Jews  of  Bokhara
themselves  suggest  that  the  Ten  Tribes
will  be  found  in  the  vast  interior  of
China.

Sir  W.  Penn  traces  them  in  the
American  Indians;  others  have  re-
cognised them  in  the  Nestorians  of
Oroomiah,  the  Falashahs  of  Abyssinia.
In  British  India  there  are  many  indica-
tions of  their  presence  ;  e.g. ,  the  Karens
of  Burmah,  distinct  from  the  Burmese,
possessing  traditions  of  the  Fall,  the
Flood,  and  the  Divine  anger  against
their  nation  for  worshipping  idols.

Dr.  Smith,  however,  remarks  in  his
''  0.  T,  History;'  that  ''  The  very  wild-
ness  of  the  speculations  of  those  who
have  sought  them  at  the  foot  of  the
Himalayas  and  on  the  coast  of  ^lalabar,
among  the  Nestorians  of  Abyssinia
and  the  Indians  of  North  America,
proves  sufficiently  the  hopelessness  of
the  attempt."

**Like  the  dew  on  the  mountain  (Hos.  xiii.  12),
Like  the  foam  on  the  river  (x.  7),
Like  the  bubble  on  the  fountain,
They  are  gone,  and  for  ever."

Ver.  13.  "  Only  acknowledge  thine
iniquity."  "  Pardon  can  only  be  secured
by  the  consent  of  both  parties.  I  may
have  offended  you.  You  may  come  to
me  and  say,  '  You  have  deeply  grieved
me ;  but  I  forgive.'  I  can  snap  my
fingers  in  your  face  and  say,  *  Take  your
forgiveness  away ;  I  don't  want  to  be
forgiven  by  you.'  Observe,  therefore,
that  you  have  not  the  power  to  forgive
me.  You  can  forgive  the  crime,  but
you  cannot  forgive  the  sinner.  But  if
I  come  to  you  and  say,  *  I  have  injured
you  ;  I  see  I  must  have  given  you  pain  ;
I  did  you  wrong;  I  am  sorry  in  my
heart,'  and  you  then  say,  *With  my
heart  I  forgive  you ; '  then  the  transac-
tion is  based  on  moral  principles.  It
is  so  with  God.  God  cannot  pass  an
act  of  universal  amnesty :  He  cannot
open  all  the  prison-doors  of  the  universe
and  say  to  the  criminals,  *  Come  forth  ;
I  forgive  you  all.'  But  if  they  in  their
condemned  cells  would  but  heave  one
72


sigh  of  penitence,  and  utter  one  cry  ior
God's  forgiving  mercy,  every  bolt  would
fall  off,  every  lock  fly  back,  and  there
would  be  no  prison  in  all  the  universe
of  God:'-^Farker.

Ancient  Hymn,  by  John  Mardley,  1562,
ON  Jer.  iii.  12-25.

"  0  Lord,  turn  not  Thy  face  away

From  them  that  lowly  lie  (ver.  26),
Lamenting  sore  their  sinful  life
With  tears  and  bitter  cry  (ver.  21),

"  Thy  mercy -gates  are  open  wide

To  them  that  mourn  for  sin  (ver.  13),
Oh,  shut  them  not  against  us,  Lord,
But  let  us  enter  in  (ver.  12).

**  We  need  not  to  confess  our  fault,
For  surely  Thou  canst  tell ;
What  we  have  done  and  what  we  are
Thou  knowest  very  well  (ver.  20).

"  Wherefore  to  beg,  and  to  entreat,

With  tears  we  come  to  Thee  (ver.  21,  22),
As  children  that  have  done  amiss
Fall  at  their  father's  knee  (ver.  19)»

"  Mercy,  0  Lord,  mercy  we  seek,
This  is  the  total  sum  :
For  mercy.  Lord,  is  all  our  prayer.
Oh,  let  Thy  mercy  come  "  !  (ver.  22).

Ver.  16,  17.  Symbols  of  the  spiritual.
"  The  time  is  coming  when  institu-
tionalism  shall  be  lost  in  spirituality ;
for  the  seer  said,  'I  saw  no  temple
therein.'  .  .  .  Why  should  we  have  the
sign  when  we  have  the  substance  1  for
He  Himself  is  the  Temple,  and  there
needeth  no  outward  building,  no  outward
light.  He  is  Temple,  He  is  Light; —
and  when  we  stand  before  Him,  all  that
is  material,  visible,  and  most  helpful  by
the  way,  will  be  no  longer  necessary."—
Parker,

**  Jerusalem,  God's  thi'one."

**  Lord,  Thou  didst  love  Jerusalem,

Once  she  was  all  Thine  own  ;
Her  love  Thy  fairest  heritage,

Her  power  Thy  glory's  throne  :
Till  evil  came  and  blighted

Thy  long- loved  olive-tree.
And  Salem's  shrines  were  lighted

For  other  gods  than  Thee.

"  Then  sunk  the  star  of  Solyma,
Then  passed  her  glory's  day.
Like  heath  that  in  the  wilderneai

The  light  wind  blows  away.
Silent  and  waste  her  bowem

Where  once  the  mighty  trod,
And  sunk  those  guilty  towers
Where  Baal  reigned  as  God."

— ^MOOBB,


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARJ :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP  IT.


Ver.  18.  Denondnatumalism,

"  I  do  not  want  the  walls  of  separa-
tion between  different  orders  of  Chris-
tians to  be  destroyed,  but  only  lowered,
that  we  may  shake  hands  a  little  easier
over  them.'* — Rowland  Hill.

Vers.  24  and  25.  "  Shame"  cf.  v.  3,
"  refuseth  to  be  ashamed."

"  Shame  is  a  great  restraint  upon
sinners  at  first ;  but  that  soon  falls  off ;
and  when  men  have  once  lost  their
innocence,  their  modesty  is  not  like  to
be  long  troublesome  to  them.  For  im-
pudence comes  on  with  vice,  and  grows
up  with  it.  When  men  have  the  heart
to  do  a  very  bad  thing,  they  seldom
want  the  face  to  bear  it  out." — Tillotson.

The  legend  says,  that  a  sinner  being
at  confession,  the  devil  appeared,  saying
that  he  came  to  make  restitution.  Being
asked  what  he  came  to  restore,  he  said,
*^ Shame:  for  it  is  shame  that  I  have
stolen  from  this  sinner  to  make  him
shameless  in  sinning ;  and  now  I  have
come  to  restore  it  to  him,  to  make  him
ashamed  to  confess  his  sins." — Dictionary
of  Illustration,

Ver.  25.  Sin  debases  the  soul.  As
Josiah  in  God's  name  desecrated  and


polluted  the  idolatrous  altars  in  the  land

by  burning  dead  priests*  bones  thereon
(2  Chron.  xxxiv.  5) ;  so  do  transgressors
against  God  degrade  their  spiritual
nature,  and  profane  the  altar  within
their  hearts  which  God  intended  for
His  homage  and  resting-place.

^^  Even  unto  this  day."  *'As  it  is
never  too  soon  to  be  good,  so  it  is  never
too  late  to  amend  :  I  will,  therefore,
neither  neglect  the  time  present,  nor
despair  of  the  time  past.  If  I  had
been  sooner  good,  I  might,  perhaps,
have  been  better ;  if  I  am  longer  bad,  I
shall,  I  am  sure,  be  worse." — Warmck's
"  Spare  Minutes.'*

"  We  lie  down  in  our  shame/*

**  Weary  with  my  load  of  sin,
All  diseased  and  faint  within,
See  me,  Lord,  Thy  grace  entreaty
See  me  prostrate  at  Thy  feet ;
Here  before  Thy  cross  I  lie,
Here  I  live,  or  here  I  die.

**  I  have  tried  and  tried  in  vain
Many  ways  to  ease  my  pain ;
Now  all  other  hope  ia  past,
Only  this  is  left  at  last ;
Here  before  Thy  cross  I  lie.
Here  I  live,  or  here  I  die. " —

Wads  Robinsoh.


CHAPTER  IV.

Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — Chronology  of  the  chapter,  Contemporary  Scriptures,  Bis-
toric  Facts,  Contemporary  History  as  in  cap.  iii.  1.  Geographical  Eeferences.  Ver  o.  "  He-
fenced  cities."  Some  existed  in  Canaan  before  Israelites  took  possession  (Numb.  xiii.  28).
Solomon  erected  others  : — Tadmor,  Gezer,  Hazor,  Bethlehem,  Megiddo,  &c.  (1  Kings  ix.  15-19),
But  Jerusalem,  fortified  by  David  (2  Sam.  v.  7,  9,  10),  was  the  chief  stronghold  of  the  nation
(ver.  6).  When  Titus,  later  in  history,  besieged  Jerusalem,  he  viewed  with  amazement,  and
expressed  his  admiration  of,  its  impregnable  strength  (see  Josephus  Wars,  Book  vi.  ch.  ix.  §  1).
Ver.  11.  **  High  places  in  the  wilderness  :  ranges  of  bare  hills  by  which  the  sandy  deserts  to  the
east  of  Palestine  are  intersected  (Hend.).  Ver.  15.  **  Dan  find  Mount  Ephraim."  Z)a7i,  the  most
northern  landmark  of  Palestine,  the  border  town,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Lebanon,  near  source  of
Jordan.  Its  original  name,  Laish  {cf.  Joshua  xviii.  7,  xix.  47)  ;  captured  by  a  detachment  of  the
tribe  of  Dan,  who  went  thither  to  colonise,  because  the  limited  aiea  assigned  to  the  tribe  was  too
strait  for  them  :  these  gave  the  name  Dan  to  the  town.  Mount  Ephraim,  a  range  of  high  lands,
rounded  limestone  hills,  broken  up  by  intersecting  luxuriant  valleys,  running  through  the
territory  allotted  to  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  :  the  name  specially  denoted  the  mountainous  district
ranging  from  Ebal  and  Gerizim  southward  to  Bethel,  in  length  about  twenty  miles.  Thus
Han  was  the  northern  frontier  of  Palestine  :  Mount  Ephraim,  the  northern  boundary  of  Judea.
Their  connection  here  denotes  that  scarcely  would  news  that  the  enemy  had  appeared  at  Dan
(where  the  northern  invaders  would  first  show  themselves)  be  published,  ere  the  foe  would,  in
rapid  march,  have  penetrated  to  the  very  centre  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  scaled  the  frontier  of
Judea.  Ver.  29.  **  Climb  up  upon  the  rocks."  The  fastnesses  of  mountainous  rocks  proved
secure  asylums  from  hostile  invaders ;  where  also,  unable  to  resist  them  in  the  open  field,  the
Israelites  made  unconquerable  resistance  (Judges  vi.  2,  xx.  47,  1  Sam.  xiii.  6,  xiv.  4  sq.,  Isa.  ii.
19,  xxxiii.  16).

2.  Natural  History.  Ver.  3.  "  Fallow-ground : "  land  left  untilled,  not  touched  by  plough  or
■own  with  seed,  for  the  Sabbatical  year  ;  hence  hard,  needing  to  be  "  broken  up,"  and  overgrown
with  thorns,  ■which  must  be  cleansed  away.  Ver.  11.  *^  Dry  vdnd  :**  the  E.  wind  which  was
dry  or  withering  (Ezek.  xix.  12),  or  the  Simoom,  frequently  ijaeotioned  in  Old  Testament,


OTAF.  IT.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


which  blew  from  the  Arabian  desert,  blasting  vegetation  and  human  life  :  "  not  to  fan  and
cleanse"  the  grain,  but  ravage  and  destroy.  Ver.  13.  "  Clouds  and  whirlwind: "  the  Simoom
raises  "  clouds  "  of  sand  and  dust,  which  whirl  up  and  cover  the  sky :  these  are  the  "  chariots,"  and
the  hurricanes  the  "swift  horses"  suggested  by  the  simile.  ^^ Horses:"  the  Chaldean  cavalry,
which  were  exceeding  swift.  "Eagles  :"  Xenophon  tells  us  that  the  Assyrian  armies  {ergo^
the  Chaldean)  bore  the  eagle  with  wings  outspread  as  a  military  ensign  upon  their  banners  (cf,
Hab.  i.  8  ;  Isa.  viii.  8  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  40;  Hos.  viii.  1).  So  also  the  Persians,  and  the  Romans
after  them.     In  Leviticus  xi.  13,  the  eagle  is  ranked  among  the  unclean  birds.

3.  Maimers  and  Customs.     Ver.  6.  *'  Set  up  the  standard : "  to  rally  the  inhabitants  of  the

country  around  to  the  defenced  cities  for  refuge  from  invaders.    Not  a  military  standard  ( '^rTj

but  a  signal  (^j)  a  flag,  some  well-understood  beacon  to  warn  or  summon  the  people.  Ver.
13.  "  Chariots  :  "  fi>rmed  a  marked  feature  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  army  (Ezek.  xxiii.  24,  xxvi.  7).
Their  invention  has  been  attributed  to  Ericthonius  of  Athens,  B.C.  1486;  but  Scripture  shows
that  Egyptians  used  them  earlier  than  that  (Ex.  xiv.  7  ;  cf.  2  Kings  xviii.  24).  Solomon  im-
ported them  from  Egypt  (1  Kings  x.  28,  29).  Ver.  16.  *^  CHve  out  their  voice  against,"  &,c. :
the  war-shout  raised  by  armies  when  about  to  give  battle.  Instance  in  Judg.  vii.  20.  This  was
the  custom  with  Hebrews,  who  also  sometimes  sang  a  war  song  (2  Chron.  xx.  21)  immediately
before  the  attack.  Greek  armies  did  the  same.  Ver.  17.  "  Keepers  of  a  field."  Watch  was
kept  over  pasturing  flocks  (Luke  ii.  8)  and  over  cultivated  fields  and  plantations  :  these
*'  keepers  "  constructed,  for  shelter  from  sun  by  day  and  security  by  night,  booths  (Job  xxvii.  18) ;
probably  then,  as  now,  a  simple  framework  covered  with  branches  of  trees,  and  raised  on  four
poles.  These  fields  were  surrounded  by  keepers  placed  at  given  distances,  one  of  whom  raised
the  cry  on  danger  appearing,  which  the  others  in  turn  took  up,  till  echoing  voices  sounded
around  the  whole  scene.  With  these  booths  are  compared  the  tents  of  besiegers,  and  their  cry
over  danger,  with  the  war-shout  of  the  foe.  Ver.  20.  **  Tents:'*  the  ordinary  habitations
of  Israelites  (2  Sam.  xviii.  17)  :  not  only  did  the  nomads  like  the  Rechabites  live  in  them,  but
the  mass  of  the  population  engaged  in  pastoral  T^ursuita  (Speaker's  Com.).  Ver.  30.  **  Crim-
son," a.  rich  shade  of  scarlet,  a  deeper  dye  :  ** ornaments  of  gold,"  rings  in  nose  and  ear«,
anklets,  embroidered  girdles,  &,c.  *'  Ren  test  thy  face  with  painting :"  "  face"  should  be  "eyes. '
Among  Eastern  females  then,  and  now,  the  custom  prevailed  of  using  a  metallic  ore,  reduce<f
to  an  impalpable  powder,  stibium,  cohol,  antimony,  mixed  into  a  paste  with  oil  or  vinegar,  foi
darkening  the  eyes.  A  smooth  cylindrical  piece  of  silver,  ivory,  or  wood,  shaped  like  a  quill,
about  two  inches  long,  was  dipped  into  the  stibium,  and  drawn  horizontally  through  between
the  closed  eyelids.  This  increased  the  lustre  of  the  eyes,  imparted  a  jetty  blackness  to  the
edges  of  the  lids,  showing  oflf  the  whiteness  of  the  eyes  to  great  advantage.  Frequent  use  in-
jured the  eyes,  making  them  look  as  if  "rent."  The  eyebrows  and  outer  angles  of  the  eyet
were  by  this  "painting"  artificially  extended  across  the  face,  and  the  eyes  apparently  enlarged.
Large  dark  eyes  are  regarded  as  essential  to  Oriental  beauty,

**  There  with  a  tiring  pin  their  eyebrows  dye,
Till  the  full  arch  gives  lustre  to  the  eye
That,  trembling,  darts  lascivious  glances."

— Juvenal's  Satire  II.  137-40.

Xenophon  describes  it  as  a  custom  among  the  Medes  in  the  time  of  the  elder  Cyrus  :  so
great  the  antiquity  and  prevalence  of  this  device  of  vanity.  The  earliest  record  of  this  custom
is  in  2  Kings  ix.  30,  Jezebel.

4.  Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  1.  *' Not  remove:"  Hend.  Noyes  and  De  Wette,  **  not  be  a
fugitive."  Lange,  "then  waver  not."  But  Keil,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  Speakers  Com.  regard  the
words  as  a  second  condition,  "and  strayest,  or  wanderest  not:"  i.e.,  "if  thou  put  away
abominations,  and  wanderest  not,  and  swearest  by  Jehovah,  then  shall  the  nations,"  &c.  It
requires  abandonment  of  idols,  the  end  of  wanderings,  the  oath  of  fidelity.  Ver.  5.  "  Cry,
gather  together  :"  rsiiher,  make  full,  meaning  "  c»-t/  toith  full  voice,"  aloud.  Ver.  6.  ^*  Retire,
stay  not."  Hend.  "flee  for  refuge,  stand  not  still."  Speaker's  Com.  "gather  your  goods  to-
gether, linger  not :  "  the  same  verb  in  Ex.  ix.  19  used  for  removing  property  to  a  safe  place.
Keil,  "save  yourselves  by  flight."  Sharpe,  "flee  in  haste,  stay  not."  "/  vriU  bring.'*  I  am
bringing.  Ver.  12.  **  A  full  wind  :"  i.e.,  a  stronger  wind  than  that  which  comes  to  winnow  :
"shall  come  unto  me  :"  rather /or  me,  as  my  instrument,  to  efiect  my  purpose.     Ver.  14.

"  Vain  thoi^hts  :"  i.e.,  idolatrous,  iniquitous  thoughtM.  H^  =  sin  of  idolatry:  cf.  Hosea  iv,
15,  V.  8,  and  the  Heb.  of  Amos  v.  6,  where  Beih-el  (the  house  of  Jehovah)  is  called  Beth-aven
(the  house  of  idolatry).  Ver.  15.  "  Publish  affliction:*^  the  same  word  as  in  ver.  14.  I  !.^*  here
me&n'mg  calamity :  this  use  of  the  same  word  links  together  iniquity  and  calamity.  Ver.  19.
**  At  my  very  heart: "  translated  as  if  the  Hebrew  words  were  idiomatic  :  but  literally,  "  at  the
walls  of  my  heart.'*     Ver.  23.     "  Without  form  and  void:'*  the  same  phrase  as  in  Gen.  i.  2.

in  J  J  nniM*  the  primeval  chaos  reproduced.  Ver.  24.  *\Mills  moved  lightly:*'  rather,
vehement  motion,    ''^PpS^'l,  the  violent  agitations  of  mountains  during  earthquake.    Ver.

74


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  ohaP.  it.


29.  **The  iohoU  city:**  should  read,  either  the  whole  land  (Targum  and  Lzx),  or  eveiy  city
(KeHf  Speaker's  Com.,  &c).  Ver.  30.  *^  And  when  thou  art  spoiled"  &o.  Omit  italics  inA.V.
•*And  thou  spoiled,"  i.e.,    **And  thou,  0  spoiled  one:"  viz.  Jerusalem:  addressed  aa  a  woman

who  decks  herself  in  her  beat  attire  to  attract  lovers  ;  although  the  masculine  form  l*"^^
is  used  :  but  Keil  suggests,  "  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  adverbial,  and  so  is  without  inflection  ; "
Hend.  suggestto  that  QJ^,  people,  denoting  the  inhabitants,  is  to  be  understood.  Ver.  31.
** My  soul  is  wearied  becaiise  of  murderers :'*  Keil,  "sinketh  powerless  beneath  murderers."
Speaker's  Com.,  "sinks  exhausted  before  them."     Noyes,  "  I  am  dying  of  murderers."


HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  IV.

Section  1-4.    Return  to  God  would  recover  favours  for  Israel,  and  avert  doom  from  Judall*
„        5-18.  Judah  refusing  to  return,  her  doom  is  graphically  portrayed,
„      19-26.  Jeremiah  beholds  the  beautiful  land  utterly  devastated.
„     27-31.  Abandoned  to  judgment,  yet  not  consigned  to  destruction.

Vers.  1-4,   Keturn  to  God  eeootbrs  favours,  and  averts  doom,

Jehovah  requires  of  the  sinful  more  than  return  to  good  habits,  or  to  religious
observances :  tiiey  must  obey  the  call  "  Return  to  Me  1 "  Man  must  come  back  to
God  Himself.     It  is  possible  :  God  desires  it :  and  the  Way  we  know.

I.  Securing  God's  acceptance  must  precede  possession  of  God's  inheritance.
"If  thou  wilt  return  [to  thy  inheritance  in  Canaan],  0  Israel,  return  unto  Me,
saith  the  Lord."  Enemies  cannot  occupy  God's  cherished  possession.  It  is  a  gift
of  grace,  dependent  on  man's  loyalty  and  love.  Sin  forfeits  all  right  to  it ;
surrenders  even  the  occupancy  (as  Israel).  1.  Reconciliation  is  the  pathway  to  privi-
leges. 2.  Repentance  is  the  door  to  reconciliation,  3.  God^s  favour  is  the  qualifi-
cation for  Ganaan,

II.  Surrounding  nations  won  to  God  by  the  event  of  Israel's  conversion.
This  is  portrayed  in  Scripture  as — 1.  A  great  prophetic  fact.  Israel's  return  will
inaugurate  the  millennial  glory,  the  ingathering  of  the  nations  to  Christ.  The  world
cannot  become  the  Lord's  until  this  event  is  realised.  "  All  nations  shall  be  blessed
in  Him  : "  when  He  *'  the  God  of  Israel  doth  wondrous  things  "  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxii.  17-19 ;
Rom.  xi.  12-15).  2.  A  grand  perennial  principle.  The  same  truth  is  constantly
working  itself  out  in  present  experience :  society  is  awakened  to  seek  Christ  in
seasons  of  revival  of  the  Ghurch ;  circles  of  acquaintance  are  impressed  religiously
by  the  conversion  of  one  of  their  company  \  homes  are  won  to  Jesus  by  the  return
of  a  single  member  to  the  Lord.  If  true  that  "one  sinner  destroyeth  much
good  J "  equally  true  that  one  conversion  effects  wide  and  salutary  results.

III.  Gathering  fury  against  sin  may  be  arrested  by  true  Repentance  (ver.  3,  4).
Clearly  it  is  affirmed  that — 1.  Divine  anger  accumulates  as  human  sin  grows.  Thus
prolonged  guilt  and  excessive  guilt  "  heaps  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath."
Man  feeds  the  fire,  and  heats  its  fury,  by  every  act  of  sin.  2.  Divine  anger  mag
be  appeased  by  sincere  human  contrition.  *'  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked,"  but
only  as  long  as  they  persist  in  wickedness.  That  ended,  anger  ceases.  It  is  not
anger  with  the  man  apart  from  this  evil  quality ;  it  is  the  man  plus  his  sin  who
entails  the  displeasure.  Sorrow  in  man's  heart  at  once  quenches  the  fire  of  God's
displeasure.  Horrifying  as  had  been  Judah's  criminality,  contrition  would  avert
its  just  retribution.  Hence,  the  sinner's  escape  is  conditional  upon  himself.  Will
he  deplore  and  desert  his  sin?  God  may  dtsire  to  save;  may  provide  salvation;
but  nothing  avails  until  sorrow  awakes  in  the  soul  of  man.  The  yearning  father
forbears  to  embrace  his  boy  until  he  "  comes  to  himself  "  and  returns,

IV.  Impenitence  will  eventually  be  punished  with  woful  destruction.
There  are  three  aspects  of  God's  anger  denoted  ;  1.  It  x^  fiery  ;  "  like  fire,"  held
in  restraint  now,  but  to  "  come  forth,"  and  burn  with  "  fury"  (Heb.  xii.  29).  2.
It  is  unquenchable  :  i,e,,  when  once  God  lets  it  loose  :  it  "  will  burn  that  none  can

76


CHAP.  IT.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


quench  it"  (Matt,  iii  12).  3.  li  is  merited ;  "because  of  the  evil  of  your  doings."
This  will  create  in  the  sufferer's  heart  '*  the  worm  that  dieth  not,"  and  occasion  the
"wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth."     Comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  17-20.

Vers.  5-18.  Judah  Impenitent  :  Heb  Doom  Portrayed.

Lange  points  out  "  Three  Emblems"  under  which  the  coming  disasters  are  L  re
represented :  First  Emblem,  the  Lion  (vers.  6-10) :  Second  Emblem,  the  Tempest
(vers.  11-13):  Third  Emblem,  the  Keepers  (vers.  14-18).  Modern  German
criticism  has  attempted  to  fix  this  prophecy  on  a  Scythian,  not  Chaldean,  invasion ;
which  is  affirmed,  but  wholly  without  historic  proof,  to  have  occurred  in  the  7th  or
8th  year  of  Josiah.  It  is  the  outcome  of  a  rationalistic  dislike  of  the  supernatural
element  in  prophecy:  hence  these  critics  first  fix  on  an  imaginary  event,  and  then
proceed  to  show  that  the  prophet's  words  are  mere  *'  di^^guised  descriptions  of
historical  events  "  already  past,  or  menaces  of  events  clearly  within  the  sight  of  a
sagacious  observer.  [See  Eichhorn,  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Dahler,  <fec.]  There  is  no  his-
torical evidence  of  a  Scythian  invasion  of  Judea.  Heroditus  (i.  103-105)  records
that  the  Scythians  invaded  Media,  and  dominated  for  28  years  over  Asia :  that
they  came  to  Syrian  Palestine,  on  their  way  against  Egypt,  and  that  Psammeticus,
king  of  Egypt,  induced  their  withdrawal  by  giving  them  presents  ;  and  that  they
committed  no  violence  beyond  plundering  the  temple  of  Ascalon.  There  is
abundant  proof  against  even  this  having  occurred  in  Josiah's  reign.  All  the
description  is  minutely  suggestive  of  the  Chaldean  invasion  ;  this  was  the  Divinely-
employed  agent  of  Judah's  overthrow.     Her  doom

i.  Solemnly  forewarned  (vers.  5,  6)  throughout  the  whole  land ;  loudly  and
clearly  ;  measures  of  defence  counselled  ;  haste  and  precautions  advised.

ii.  Appallingly  real  (vers.  7,  8,  13,  15,  16),  whence  ("  the  north  ;")  savage  (ver.
7);  swift  (13);  approaching  (15) ;  for  war  (16  "give  out  their  voice").

iii  Paralysing  all  resources  of  Jielp  and  counsel  (vers.  9,  10)  ;  sui  passing  all  ex-
pectation ;  rendering  powerless  all  opposition  ;  refuting  all  false  promises.

iv.  Effecting  God's  purposes  (vers.  11,  12).  It  would  be  in  effect  God's
"  sentence ; "  righteous  therefore  and  irrevocable.

V.  Bitterly  retributive  (vers,  17,  18),  the  fruit  of  her  severing  herself  from  God'i
favour  and  protection ;  the  penalty  of  her  sin  ;  bitter  as  death.

vi.  (Salvation  yet  possible  (vGT,  14).  "Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life."
A  cleansed  heart  would  ensure  salvation.

Vers.  19-26.    A  Mournful  Vision:  the  Holy  Land  utterly  devastated.

The  insensate  nation  foresaw  no  calamity,  feared  no  foe.  Vivid  as  all  was  to
the  prophet's  perception  they  dreamed  on  heedlessly  ;  sleeping  amid  iniquity
while  sudden  destruction  sped  towards  them.  He  saw  the  sword,  they  mocked  at
his  warnings.  So  Noah  in  his  generation  :  so  every  prophet :  so  our  Divine  Lord  :
so  the  preacher  of  God  to-day.  His  eye  is  open  to  n earing  woe :  but  the  people
mock,  despise  and  reject,  repudiate  warning,  and  betake  themselves,  besotted  and
blinded,  to  iniquity.

L  The  Seer's  anguish  constrains  him  to  speak  (ver.  19).  This  throws  light
on

i.  The  tSeer's  sufferings.  He  feels  what  he  foresees  :  his  whole  nature  is  wrung
with  grief  at  the  vision  which  none  but  himself  can  perceive.  The  finer  the  man's
nature,  the  keener  his  anguish.  The  clearer  his  penetrations,  the  more  intense  his
sufferings.  The  nobler  his  patriotism,  the  heavier  lies  the  burden  of  his  nation's  woe
upon  his  heart.     The  higher  his  piety,  the  more  bitter  his  grief  over  all.

ii.  The  Seer's  mission.  Inwardly  constrained,  he  speaks  out  of  a  full  and  an
agonising  heart:  "I  cannot  hold  my  peace."  Divinely  enlightened,  he  sees  what
76


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  it.


is  hid  from  the  people,  and  *'  cannot  but  speak  the  things  he  has  seen  and  heard.**
Loving  his  people,  he  would  fain  shield  them  from  tbe  woe  he  forecasts,  and
"snatch  them  as  brands  out  of  the  burning."

II.  The  miseries  of  the  perishing  become  the  prophet's  own  (ver.  20,  21).
^* My  tents  spoiled!  "  &c.     This  suggests  the  true  attitude  of  God's  messenger.

1.  Identification  of  interests  (Rom.  xi.  1)  :  himself  bound  up  with  them  :  suffer-
ing what  they  suffer.     This  is  the  real  shepherding  of  the  flock.

2.  Intense  sympathy  of  soul.  He  hears  and  sees  all  as  if  he  were  involved.
There  is  no  proud  distinguishing  and  justifying  of  himself.  He  and  his  people  are
one.     [Addenda  ver.  19.     Prophet's  distress.]

III.  Rejection  of  God's  messenger,  the  act  of  madness  (ver.  22).  No  uncom-
mon incident.  Every  age  rejects  and  ignores  its  benefactors,  teachers,  and  saviours.
The  more  evidently  these  bear  the  seal  and  dignity  of  God's  messengers,  the  more
*'  the  world  hates  them."     "  If  it  hated  Me,""  says  Jesus,  *'  it  will  you."

1.  Suicidal  folly :  "  My  people  is  foolish,  they  have  not  known  Me  : "  they
frivolously  ignored  this  man  whom  God  had  sent  to  speak  to  them.

2.  Besotted  blindness  :  "  they  are  sottish  children,"  <fec.  Their  intelligence,  dis-
cernment, and  religious  education,  all  were  darkened  by  sin  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).

3.  Spiritual  perversity :  "  wise  to  do  evil,"  not  naturally  witless ;  "but  to  uj
good  they  have  no  knowledge,"  their  religious  nature  brutalised.

IV.  The  horrifying  vision  of  gathering  calamity  described  (vers.  23-26).  1.
Appalling  disorder  and  gloom  (ver.  23) ;  i.e.^  the  withdraw  al  of  all  peace  and
privilege  in  which  God  has  established  Judah.  2.  Terrifying  overthrow  (ver.  24) ;
i.e.f  the  casting  down  utterly  and  hopelessly  of  every  natural  stronghold  in  which
Judah  had  been  wont  to  trust,  and  thought  to  flee.  3.  All  life  perished  (ver.  25) ;
i.e.,  none  should  escape  ;  calamity  would  fall  on  every  one.  4.  Sacrilege  and  ruin
(ver.  26) ;  nothing,  however  beautiful,  cultured  or  revered,  spared  :  lovely  gardens,
noble  and  wealthy  cities,  all  gone.  Nothing  left  of  all  human  trusts  and  treasures:
if,  therefore,  *' without  God,"  total  loss  (see  Rev.  vi.  12-17).


Vers.  27-31.  Abandoned  to  Judgment,  yet  not  Consigned  to  Destrucjtion.

There  is  a  reserve  of  mercy  in  all  God's  strokes  ;  He  softens  the  severity,  keeps
open  the  door  of  hope,  makes  a  **  w.iy  of  escape."  Stars  shine,  though  obscured,
through  the  stormiest  night  :  and  a  promise  may  be  heard  even  amid  God's
heaviest  denunciations  (Gen.  iii.  14,  15).

I.  Merciless  forces  are  under  the  Divine  restraint  (ver.  27).  Though  the
land  should  be  desolated,  yet  " /  will  not  make  a  full  end"  The  overthrow  of
Judah  by  the  Chaldeans  was  God's  work  ;  and  the  limitation  of  the  Chaldean
policy  of  extermination  was  equally  of  the  Lord.

1.  Their  reckless  implacability.  Look  at  the  Chaldean  army,  it  promised  little
restraint ;  it  menaced  with  heedless,  merciless  destruction.  Nebuchadnezzar  seems
to  have  organised  into  a  consolidated  army  wild  hordes  of  freebooters,  mere  relics
of  those  nations  Assyria  had  overthrown  and  absorbed.  These  he  gathered  to-
gether, and  with  them  swept  the  lands  (2  Kings  xxiv.  1,  2,  cf.  Habak.  i.  5-12).
Little  consideration  or  mercy  from  them  !

2.  I'here  is  umc  even  for  them  in  God's  Providence.  They  are  His  scourge  of  re-
bellious Judah.  So  Habakkuk  avers  (i.  12)  ;  these  very  Chaldeans  God  "ordained
them  for  judgment,"  &c.     He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.

3.  There  is  a  limit  to  their  power  and  fury.  *'  Yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end"
(Com p.  iii.  14).  The  ten  tribes  are  lost,  without  national  existence ;  greater
nations  than  Judah  disappear  for  ever — Nineveh,  Babylon  (Jer.  li.  64),  the
Assyrians,  Greeks,  Romans.  But  the  Jews  are  not  annihilated.  *' Hitherto  shalt
thou  Qome  and  no  further,"  Ac.     God  is  mightier  than  mightiest  forces ;  merciful

•7*7


OHAF.  IT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y :  JEREMIAH,


even  when  using  merciless  agencies ;  while  "  the  end  of  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  •
(Jas.  V.  11).

II.  Divine  plans  lie  "behind  all  great  events.  The  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  the
downfall  and  enthronement  of  kings ;  all  are  according  to  the  mind  of  Him  who  is
King  of  kings,  and  doeth  according  to  His  will  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.
Here  is  shown  that  God  regulates — I.  Even  disasters  :  such  as  to  make  heaven  and
earth  mourn  (ver.  28).  2.  Even  victories  of  the  wicked:  He  permits  these  to
triumph  over  the  people  whom  God  had  once  chosen  ;  as  Chaldeans  over  Judah
"  the  house  of  David."  3.  Even  the  punishment  of  God's  people  :  sore  afflictions,
humiliations,  and  disasters  which  overtake  us  (ver.  29).  4.  Even  the  ruin  of  sin-
ners :  God  allows  it ;  purposes  it ;  and  "  will  not  repent : "  so  Judah  was  ruined  !

III.  Rebellion  reduced  to  ultimate  defeat  and  despair  (ver.  30, 31).  Slow  in-
deed to  yield  to  God,  yet  yield  it  shall.

1.  Even  in  her  overthrow  Judah  sought  other  helper s^  not  God  (ver.  30).  She
sought  by  skilful  and  foolish  appliances  to  win  favour,  to  gain  lovers,  and  so  do
without  God,  and  avoid  submission  and  repentance.  Sinners  will  hold  out
against  God  to  the  last.  Yes,  even  in  the  hour  of  affliction,  of  disaster  and  death,
the  *'  rebellious  "  will  refuse  to  seek  the  Lord,  or  cry  to  the  Crucified  One  to  save.

2.  She  realised  at  length  her  absolute  and  completed  misery  (ver.  31).  '*  The
daughter  of  Zion  bewaileth  herself,"  <fec.  Observe  :  her  grief  and  anguish  is  not
for  her  sin,  but  for  "  herself  " — "  woe  is  me  now  I "  for  her  misery  ;  and  also  her
helplesSy  hopeless  ruin :  "  my  soul  wearied  because  of  murderers."  Such  are  the
issues  of  rebellion  :  such  the  shame  and  woe  to  which  the  guilty  are  abandoned.
God  has  reserved  to  Judah  a  last  hope  (ver.  27)  ;  just  so.  He  calls  to  us  "after  so
long  a  time."     Heed  ver.  14.     [Addenda  ver.  31.     Woe-strieken.]

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  IV.

Ver.    1.      Theme :   God   gained   oe  Theme :  Sin  banished,  or  the  soul

Heaven  lost.     *'If  thou  wouldst  re-  banished.      "If   put  away  abomina-

turn  [to  thine  inheritance,  thou  must  tions,  thou  sh alt  not  remove;"  i.e.  (as

first]  return  unto  Me."  some  render  it),  no  longer  be  a  wanderer,

I.  The  alien  outcast  may  return  to  an  outcast  in  a  far-off  land.  (Addenda
God.    By  conversion  ;  renewal  of  heart ;  ver.  1.     Banished  recalled.)

prayer    for    pardon    and     acceptance ;  I.  Sin  cannot  dwell  where  God  is.

humble  faith.  And  God  dwelt  amid  Israel  when  she

II.  The  far-off  banished  one  may  was  "holiness"  (ii.  3).  Becoming
find  God.  None  too  distant  from  Him  guilty  she  was  banished ;  remaining
to  pray,  to  be  heard,  to  be  assured  of  guilty  she  must  keep  afar  from  God.
acceptance,  to  be  restored  to  the  long  Our  guilt  separates  us  necessarily  from
lost  love  and  peace  and  bliss.  Israel  in  Him  (Isa.  lix.  2).  See  instances  of
a  strange  country,  removed  from  her  conscious  unworthiness  (Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Lk.
land  and  altars  and  temple,  could  never-  v.  8).

theless  seek  Him  in  spirit.  II.    Sinners   cannot  possess   God's

III.  The  returning  soul  shall  be  heritage  {cf\  1.  Cor.  vi.  9,  sq.  Kev.
brought  home.  When  God  is  found,  xxl  27).  Retaining  sin  in  the  heart
the  soul  back  again  in  His  love,  heaven  ensures  exclusion :  for  it  creates  unfit-
ly sure  to  follow,  God  kept  Canaan  for  ness^  and  would  incur  the  frown  of  God
Israel,  keeps  it  still  empty  awaiting  her  and  the  horror  of  the  holy  ones — thus
return.  Seek  Uim^  not  heaven  ;  He  will  depriving  heaven  of  all  heavenliness  to
give  that.  Our  sole  concern  is  to  find  the  condemned  soul.  Any  defilement,
the  Father.  "  It  is  His  good  pleasure  even  hidden,  would  destroy  in  the  soul
to  give  us  the  kingdom."  "  Jesus  said,  the  sense  of  fitness  for  God's  glorious
I  am  the  way,  <fec.  :  no  man  cometh  heritage,  and  make  his  existence  self-
unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  condemned;  this  would  desolate  heaven

78


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  IT.


of  joy.  Only  "  the  pure  in  heart  can
Bee  God."

IIL  Sin  may  be  separated  from  the
soul.  **  Put  away  abomination "  {cf,
Isa.  i.  18;  Zech.  iii.  4;  xiii.  1,  2;
Matt.  i.  21;  1  Cor.  vi.  11).  Other
methods  have  been  tried  :  but  "  who
can  bring  a  clean  thinoj  out  of  an  un-
clean  1 "  Jesus  only.  (Addenda  ver.
1.     Sin  banished,  or  no  heaven.)

IV.  Sinners  may  then  have  a  right
to  the  Divine  presence.

1.  A  right  to  enter  through  the  gates
(comp.  Rev.  xxii.  14),  where  the  proper
reading  is,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have
washed  their  robes,  that  they  may  have
right,"  (fee.

2.  Fitness  to  abide  in  God's  sight
(Rev.  xiv.  4,  5).

3.  Assured  of  endless  rest  therein.
"  To  go  no  more  out."  **  Thou  shalt
not  remove.'*  "And  so  shall  they  be
for  ever  with  the  Lord."

Note.  If  the  words  "  thou  shalt  not
remove"  be  rendered  as  with  Henderson,
"not  be  a  fugitive,"  (comp.  Gen.  iv.
12-14).  i.  llie  horrors  of  banishment ;
ii.  llie  conditions  on  which  that  state  may
be  reversed,     "  Put  away,"  &c.

Or  if  rendered,  "  then  waver  not "
(Lange  &  Wordsworth)  i.e.,  be  steadfast
in  thy  repentance,  or  be  prompt  and
firm  and  thorough  in  thy  conversion.
i.  Sin  cannot  be  put  away  partially :  it
is  dishonest,  revolting  to  God.  ii.  Only
resolute  and  entire  repentance  will  avail
before  God,  He  will  accept  us  only
then.

Observe  how  God  views  idols  :  "  abo-
minations."  He  would  have  everything
which  interposes  between  the  soul  and
Himself  "put  out  of  His  sight."  His
love  of  man  is  such  that  He  cannot  con-
sent to  divided  allegiance.  His  loathing
of  sin  is  so  intense  that  He  cannot
allow  it  to  remain  under  His  eye.

Comments :  Ver.  2.  Concerning
Swearing  by  Oath.  "And  thou
shalt  swear,  the  Lord  liveth,"  &c.

The  A.V.  makes  this  verse  unin-
telligible. The  pliiase,  The  Lord
liveth,  is  the  regular  form  of  the  Jewish
oath,  and  means,  not  the  thing  sworn
to,  but  the  thing  sworn  by — By  the  life
of  Jehovah.    But  every  nation  swears  by


the  highest  object  of  its  worship  (Deut.
X.  20,  &c,),  and  the  prophecy  that
Egyptians  should  swear  to  Jehovah  (Isa.
xix.  18),  implied  their  conversion  to  the
true  faith.  Here,  similarly,  the  oath  is  a
confession  of  faith  in  Jehovah,  as  the
true  God.     (Speaker's  Com.)

To  swear  by  Jehovah,  means  to  bind
one's  self  by  a  solemn  profession  to  adhere
to  His  worship  and  service  (comp.  Deut.
vi.  13  ;  X.  20;  Isa.  xix.  18  ;  Amos.  viii.
14).  And  the  profession  should  be  not
alone,  or  merely  that  of  the  lips,  but
accompanied  with  uprightness  of  heart
and  strictest  rectitude  of  conduct. —
Henderson.

Thou  shalt  swear,  not  by  thine  idols
(Amos.  viii.  14;  Zeph.  i.  5),  but  by  the
Lord ;  not  with  vain  oaths,  but  for  such
causes,  and  with  such  conditions,  as
constitute  a  righteous  oath  (Words-
worth). A  good  oath  has  always  these
three  concomitants — truth,  judgment,
and  Justice.  If  these  are  wanting,  an
oath  becomes  a  perjury  (Jerome).
[Addenda  ver.  2.     Thou  shalt  swear.'\

That  we  may  not  take  God's  name
in  vain,  we  must  swear  in  :

1.  "  Truth  : "  commanded  Lev.  xix.
12 :  we  must  not  swear  falsely  to  per-
jure ourselves,  in  assertion,  either  in
cognito,  when  we  know,  or  in  dubio,
when  we  know  not,  nor  in  promission,
when  either  we  resolve  not  to  perform,
or  do  not  perform.

2.  ^^ Justice ;''  which  requires  that
we  only  swear  in  honestis  et  possibilibus,
in  things  honest  and  possible ;  for  that
which  is  dishonest  is  not  just,  and  an
impossible  matter  is  not  at  all  to  be
sworn  to.  A  thing  impossible  or  dis-
honest is  so,  either  from  the  very  be-
ginning, or  Cometh  to  be  so  afterwards.
Thus  Herod's  oath  was  unlawful  both
in  the  making  and  the  keeping  of
it ;  for  in  keeping  it  he  added  two
other  sins  to  that  of  rash  swear-ing :
manslaughter  and  foolish  superstition,
"Wlien  an  evil  thing  is  promised,  cut
the  thread:"  as  David  did  (1  Sam.
XXV.  22,  32).

3.  *^  Judgment :''  which  requireth
three  things  of  us.  (a.)  That  we  take  an
oath  reverently,  not  rashly,  Eccles.  v.  2.
(/5.)  To  take  it  as  a  holy  thing,  and  there-

79


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP,  IV.


fore  not  make  it  common,  (y.)  We  must
account  it  a  matter  spiritual,  and  not
say,  juravi  lingud,  men  (em  injuratam
fferOf  I  swore  with  my  tongue,  my  mind
and  intention  were  not  sworn  ;  for  God
will  take  that  sense  which  the  words
carry.  God  so  understands  an  oath  as
he  who  propounds  it. — Bishop  Ancirewes.
Swearing  by  Jehovah  involves  the
acknowledgment  of  His  deity.  For  no
one  would  swear  by  Him  who  was  not
convinced  that  He  is  the  witness  of
truth  and  the  avenger  of  falsehood.  But
to  swear  by  others  robs  God  of  His
glory  and  gives  it  to  idols  (isa.  xlii.  8).
— Lange,

Theme:     Isr     l's    Return    shall

ALLURE     THE    Gj:.NTILES    TO    THE    LoRD.

If  Israel  repents,  it  will  become  the
means  of  making  the  Gentiles  partakers
of  the  patriarchal  promise  (Gen.  xxii.
18).  Two  great  truths  taught :  i.  That
the  Gentiles  were  to  be  members  of  the
Church  of  the  Messiah  ;  ii.  That  Israel's
peculiar  office  was  to  be  God's  mediator
in  this  great  work.  — Speaker^ s  Com.

i.  If  the  heathen  "bless  themselves"
in  Jehovah,  they  are  become  partakers
of  the  salvation  which  comes  from  Him.
ii.  If  this  blessing  comes  to  them  in
consequence  of  Israel's  conversion,  then
Israel  is  the  channel  of  their  salvation.
Israel's  apostasy  has  delayed  this :  Is-
rael's conversion  is  necessary  to  the  com-
pletion of  the  Divine  plan  of  universal
redemption. — Comp.  Keil,

When  the  long-deluded  and  spiritu-
ally-oppressed heathen  come  to  *'  know
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ
whom  He  has  sent,"  they  will  indeed
"  bless  themselves,"  for  Christianity
blesses  its  possessor ;  but  they  will
" glory  in  Him"  for  it  is  a  worthy  fact
for  glorying  that  not  vain  idols  are  our
gods,  but  that  Jehovah  is  ours, — ours
to  trust,  and  claim,  and  love  :  that
Jesus  has  redeemed,  loved,  and  acknow-
ledged us  as  His !

M.  Henry  says,  If  the  scattered  Is-
raelites will  thus  return  to  God, — i.
They  shall  be  blessed  themselves,  for  so
ver.  i,  may  read — brought  back  out  of
captivity  to  their  own  land  (Deut.  iv.
29,  XXX.  2),  or,  shall  return  to  Me  as  their
80


rest  even  while  in  exile,  ii.  They  shall
be  blessings  to  others ;  for  their  return
shall  be  a  means  of  others  turning  to
Him  who  never  knew  Him ;  Israel
would  influence  the  nations,  among  whom
scattered,  to  "  bless  themselves  in  Him,"
i.e.,  shall  find  their  blessedness  in  Him,
shall  join  themselves  to  Him,  and  "  shall
glory  "  in  the  blessed  change  they  have
made.

Ver.  3.  Theme :  Soul  Agriculture.
"  Break  up  your  fallow  ground,  and  sow
not  among  thorns."

Frequent  Scripture  use  of  imagery  of
tillage  as  illustrative  of  soul-training.
Agriculture,  perhaps  the  oldest,  most
necessary,  and  best  understood  of  all  the
arts  :  also,  most  suggestive  of  the  moral
culture  of  the  human  soul.

Three  things  essential  to  successful
agriculture :

I.  Proper  attention  to  the  soil.
Analogy  between  the  material  soil  and
the  human  soul  in  two  respects:  there
is —

1.  Variety  of  condition.  Christ  speaks
of  the  '*  wayside  "  soil,  "  stony  places,'*
"thorny  ground,"  and  "good  ground."
Their  counterpart  in  men.

2.  Capability  of  improvement.  Farmer
changes  the  character  of  the  soil,  bad
into  good :  pulverises  stones,  mollifies
the  hard  clay,  burns  weeds,  &c.  So
hardened  heart  must  be  broken,  thorny
cleansed.  Unless  hearts  thus  prepared
for  truth,  precious  grain  is  wasted  on
them.  But  can  men  alter  soil  of  their
hearts?  Yes  :  Commanded  in  text,
*'  Break  up,"  «fec.

II.  Proper  attention  to  the  seed.  In
its  selection  and  its  growth.  Soil  might
be  good,  yet  if  seed  bad,  harvest  bad.

1.  Care  in  selection  of  true  spiritual
seed.  It  is  the  Gospel :  (a.)  perfect  in
itself ;  (6.)  fitted  to  grow  in  all  climates  ;
(c.)  but  it  does  not  sow  itself  ;  (d)  it  is
the  support  of  life.

2.  Attention  must  be  also  paid  to  its
growJi.  Carefully  the  farmer  watches,
speciiilly  the  first  stages;  uproots  weeds,
scares  off  fowls  of  heaven.  (Compare
Matt.  xiii.  25  ;  Hos.  viii.  7.)

III.  Proper  attention  to  the  SEASON.
There   "is  a  time  to  sow;"  a   season


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  IV.


when  the  earth  has  its  fecund  power,
and  a  time  when  it  departs.  And  there
are  seasons  for  spiritual  culture  :  1.
Youth.  2.  The  season  of  moral  serious-
nesSj  when  the  heart  has  been  softened.
Many  try  when  faculties  are  shattered,
in  old  age,  on  dying  beds.  The  time
conies  when  the  heart  cannot  grow
Christianity,

Con. :  Earnest  in  work  of  soul-tillage.
Why  1  (a.)  The  field  is  in  a  deplorable
condition  (Pro v.  xxiv.  31).  (6.)  No  work
will  prove  so  remunerative,  (c  )  There  is
no  time  to  lose  :  "  Go,  work  to-day  in  my
vin  ey  ard. " — Condensed  from  *  ^Hom'dist. "
Comments  :

**  To  the  men  of  Judah  ; "  the  word  is
sing.,  to  each  man.  Every  one  is  called
to  personal  contrition.  Repentance,
reformation,  religion,  is  imperative  with
each  man  singly  :  every  one  must  pre-
pare his  heart  and  come  back  himself  to
God.

"  Break  up  fallow,''*  The  seeds  of
contrition  must  not  be  sown  yet.  Pre-
paration is  essential ;  it  must  engage
anxious  and  watchful  concern  :  not  be
done  offhand ;  let  it  be  attempted  with
utmost  painstaking  and  seriousness.
There  must  not  be  left  one  foul  and
thorny  sin  in  the  heart ;  it  must  be
cleansed  thoroughly.  Only  then  will
the  repentance  be  real  and  permanent,
and  accepted  by  God.

Ver.  4.  Theme:  The  fire  op  God's
WEATH.  *'Lest  my  fury  come  forth  like
fire,  and  burn,"  <kc.

Sin  ignites  the  unquenchable  fire.
Impenitence  invites  it.

I.  God's  fury  is  a  terrible  and  a
consuming  reality.  Not  a  shadowy
menace,  not  a  mere  figure  of  speech,
not  an  extravagance  of  fancy,  but  an
appalling  fact.  The  necessary  counter-
part and  consequence  of  insulted  and
incensed  love.  It  is  a  ^^flre ;"  it  is  a
*'  burning  "  fire  ;  it  is  a  ^^  furious  "  fire.
It  must  be  a  fearful  thing  to  encounter
and  endure !

II.  God's  fury  is  restrained  that
men  may  avert  and  escape  it.  '•  Lest
,niy  fury  come  forth."  1.  God  Himself
is  slow  to  let  loose  the  terrors  of  His
anger  against   sin.     2.  Man   has  it   in


his  own  power  to  prevent  its  direful
ravages.  3.  Solemn  forewarnings  and
appeals  are  Divinely  sent  that  the
wicked  may  escape.  Compare  text  and
Nineveh! s  conduct  (Jonah  iii.  5-10).

III.  God's  fury  will  eventually
overtake  the  defiant  transgressors.
Disobey  God's  call  to  repent,  abuse  the
opportunity  of  escape,  and  "the  fury
will  come  forth  like  fire."  1.  Historic
occurrences  show  this  to  be  true  (Gen.
xix.  24,  25 ;  Lev.  x.  2 ;  Numb.  xvL
31-35).  2.  Prophetic  warnings  ^omt  to
the  same  issues  of  sin  (Matt,  xi  21-24,
XXV.  41  ;  Heb.  x.  26,  27).

IV.  God's  fury  once  kindled  can
never  more  be  quenched.  Fire  is  the
symbol  of  destruction.  The  declaration
that  "  none  can  quench  it"  implies  hope
gone  for  ever^ — ameliorations  and  escape
utterly  lost, — irretrievably  past.  From
that  burning  there  will  be  no  Saviour  to
snatch  us  as  brands.  Nothing  can  as-
suage its  terrors, — none  can  quench  its
flames.  Christ's  redeeming  work  avails
now,  not  then.

V.  God's  fury  is  the  inevitable  conse-
quence of  man's  iniquity.  "  God  is
love  ; "  and  ''  loves  the  world  "  (1  John  iv.
16).  The  Divine  displeasure  is  created
by  man.  God's /i^ry  is  the  necessary  in-
dignation  caused  by  sin.  And  it  must
fall  on  the  resolute  sinner ;  for  his  sin
has  reversed  the  love,  and  left  only  this
just  anger.  Alienated  love  means  in-
curred wrath.  Not  that  God  wills  it  so
(2  Pet.  iii.  9) ;  it  is  the  issue  of  an  in-
evitable law, — God's  love  estranged  by
guilt  (for  He  cannot  love  where  guilt  is
cherished),  leaves  nothing  but  the  in-
dignation against  sin  in  the  Divine
heart  towards  the  relentless  sinner.

When,  therefore,  at  the  last,  the
sinner  meets  God,  he  calls  forth,  not
love — he  has  estranged  that — but  the
wrath  he  has  kindled  :  "because  of  the
evil  of  his  doings,"  "  Flee  from  the
wrath  to  come."  (Addenda,  ver.  4,
"  Unquenchable  Jire,**)

Ver.  5-8.  Alarm  sounded:  fleb
TO  the  strongholds.    (Addenda,  ver.

7,  "  The  Hon.'')

1.  The  enemy  advances  (ver.  7).  The
lion  is  rousing  himself ;  already  he  haa

81


OHAP.  IT.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


left  his  lair.  He  is  a  "  destroyer,*^  He
comes  to  "  desolate  "  and  to  "  devour  **
(1  Pet.  V.  8).

ii.  /Strongholds  are  accessible  (ver.  5).
Leave  the  open  country.  Do  not  expose
yourselves  to  the  spiritual  foe.  Fortify
yourselves  in  Divine  securities.  Mount
the  watch- tower ;  "  strengthen  the
things  that  remain;"  pray  always;  have
faith  in  God ;  "  resist  the  devil.'*

iii.  Zion  the  refuge  from  danger  (ver.
6).  It  was  the  strongest  and  best  forti-
fied of  all  the  cities.  Fugitives  from
the  world,  from  sin,  from  pursuing  foes,
may  hide  themselves  in  Zion.  The
Church  is  a  place  of  defence,  of  security,
oi  peace  :  for  God  guards  the  walls,  and
the  King  reigns  within.  (Addenda,  ver.
6,  ^^ Zion  a  refuge")

iv.  The  summons  to  safety  (ver.  5,
6).  This  the  preacher's  work.  "  And
let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come ! "
Everywhere  perils  menace  the  souls  of
men,  1.  The  importunity  of  the  call
(ver,  5).  2.  The  inclusiveness  of  the
summons,  —  none  excluded.  All  may
hear  and  hide  themselves  from  evil.  3.
The  way  of  safety  clearly  pointed  out.
"Setup  standard  towards  Zion ;"  visible,
unmistakable,  direct.  4.  Urgent  haste.
**  Retire,  stay  not."  "  Now  is  the  day
of  salvation."  **  Escape  for  thy  life  ;
tarry  not  in  all  the  plain,  flee  to  the
mountains,  lest  thou  be  consumed."

v.  Bitter  wailing  over  ruin  (ver.  8).
Their  fortresses  are  useless  if  God  be  not
propitiated.  In  vain  to  hide  from  peril
if  God  be  ignored.  1.  Defences  are  de-
lusions unless  Christ  is  our  Saviour.  2.
Salvation  is  impossible  unless  Divine
anger  is  averted  by  repentance.  3.  Woful
the  overthrow  of  the  spoiler.  4.  We  may
"  tuim  back  the  Lord's  anger  "  by  fleeing
to  Christ  (Isa.  xii.).

Comments.

Ver.  9.  L  Ruin  surpasses  all  anticipor
tion.  The  terror  of  the  event  paralyses  all
with  amaze  and  dismay.  Is  there  no  fore-
warning in  this  1  Will  the  future  over-
throw of  transgressors  be  less  appalling]

ii.  Helpers  are  found  helpless  in  the
day  of  calamity.  The  rulers  and  leaders
to  whom  the  people  looked  prove  their
impotency  when  their  aid  is  most  needed,
and  their  perplexity  when  their  devices
82


and  resources  should  have  been  most
ready.  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trust-
eth  in  man,"  &c.

iii.  Religious  advisers  whom  God  does
not  warrant  and  ordain  are  seen  to  b©
mockers  and  delusions  in  the  judgment,
— "  priests  and  prophets."  The  people
despised  the  true  prophet,  God's
messenger,  and  preferred  their  own
idolatrous  priests  and  temporising
teachers.  They  "  believed  a  lie,"  and
**the  storm  shall  sweep  away  the  refuges
of  lies."  Alas  !  this  is  still  done  (2  Tim.
iv.  3,  4) ;  and  the  dire  result  is  ever  the
same  (2  Thess.  ii.  10-12).

Ver.  10.  Theme ;  God  reproached
AS  THE  Author  of  man's  delusions.
"  Ah,  Lord  God !  surely  Thou  hast
greatly  deceived  this  people,  saying,  Ye
shall  have  peace ;  whereas  the  sword
reacheth  unto  the  soul."

Frequently  in  Scripture  the  immedi-
ate cause  and  occasions  of  events  are
overlooked,  and  occurrences  are  un-
hesitatingly traced  to  the  Divine  First
Cause.  This  is  only  in  keeping  with
bold  Oriental  modes  of  expression.
Thus  God  is  said  to  have  hardened  Phor
raoKs  heart  (Exod.  iv.  21,  vii.  3,  13,  ix.
12) ;  yet  it  is  as  emphatically  recorded
that  Pharaoh  himself  hardened  his  own
heart  (Exod.  viii.  15,  32,  ix.  34).  So
concerning  Christ's  crucifixion  (cf.  Rom.
viii.  32  ;  Acts  ii.  23),  and  equally  con-
cerning the  delusions  of  Antichrist  (cf.
ver.  11  with  ver.  12  of  2  Thess.  ii. ;  their
own  hostile  minds  predisposed  them  to
entertain  delusions).

Inquire :  By  whom  had  God  said,
"  Ye  shall  have  peace  1 "  Henderson
suggests,  by  the  false  prophets  who  had
prophesied,  "Peace,  peace,  when  there
was  no  peace."  Supporting  this  view,
Keil  appeals  to  the  striking  passages,
chap.  xiv.  13,  xxiii.  17,  and  explains
that  God  not  only  permitted  these  lying
spirits  to  appear  and  work,  but  ordained
and  brought  them  forth  for  the  hardening
of  the  people's  hearts ;  as  in  Ahab's  case,
that  he  might  perish  for  his  ungodliness
(1  Kings  xxii.  20-23).  Most  commen-
tators prefer  this  view.

Dr.  Payne  Smith  {Speaker's  Com-
mentary) prefers  to  refer  the  words  of


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  OHAP.  IT.


peace  to  real  prophecies  of  future  bless-  desolates    the    scenes    over    which    it

edness    promised    to    the    Jews,    and  sweeps ;  as  Ninereh,  Babylon,  Carthage,

suggests  that  Jeremiah  was  perplexed  II.  How  should  we  as  Christians  and

with  the  twofold   (and  seemingly  con-  patriots  meet  a  time  of  wax  %

tradictory)  aspects  of  prophecy,  at  times  1.  Implore   God's   blessings   on   our

bright  with  promises  of  glory  and  power,  armies  and  our  fleets,  that  they  may  be

at    others    dark  with  threatenings    of  instruments  in  His  hands  for  His  ends,

national    humiliation ;  and    could    not  2.  Let  prayer  be  accompanied  by  deep

now  reconcile  the  doom  he  now  pro-  humiliation  before  God;  for  our  sins,

nounced  with  his  own  previous  prophecy,  and  the  sins  of  our  age,  bring  war.     3.

or  with  the  predictions  of  his  inspired  Active  and  special  benevolence  should

predecessors.     Prophets  did  not  under-  awake ;  for  the  calamities  of  the  time

stand  their   own  messages   (1    Pet.   i.  will  call  for  special  succour.     4.  Let  us

10,  11).  be  found  waiting  God's  will,  not  de-

Lange    remarks,    this    is    only    the  pressed  by  reverses,  nor  unduly  elated

opinion  of  the  prophet  (that  God  had  by   victory;    but    humbling    ourselves

deceived  the  people),   who   here   inter-  under  His  mighty  hand,  that  He  may

rupts  the  discourse  revealed  to  him  by  exalt  us  in  due  time. — Part  of  Quebec

the  expression  of   his   own   subjective  Sermon,  by  Henry  Alford,  B,D,^  A.D.

view.  1854.

rrij           TTT  i»  The  delusive  prophecy.     Guilesoma

Theme:   Warning    against    rAigB  voices  speak  flattery  to  sinnen

^  ii  The  agonising  discovery,     "Sword

It  is — (i.)  A  lie  J  for  men  say  there  is  pierceth,"   <fec.     Experience    at   length

peace  when  the  sword  reaches  even  to  the  disperses  delusions,

soul,     (ii.)  A  misfortune^  for  it  will  dis-  iii   The  reproach  against  God,     Un-

appoint  the  heart  of  those  who  cherish  founded ;  for  He  has   clearly  menaced

it. — Na^g.  in  Lange,  evil  with  punishment.     (Comp.  ver.  18.)

Theme:  Sorrow  and  surprise  at  Ver.  11-13.     Theme:  The  blast  of

THE  outbreak  OF  WAR.  THE  AXMIGHTY.

These  words  express  deep  disappoint-  Winds,  God   created  (Amos  iv.    13),

ment  at   the  frustration   of  a  nation's  holds  in  His  fist  (Prov.  xxx.  4),  rideth

hopes  of  peace,  and  at  the  mysterious-  upon  them  (Ps.  civ.   3),  lets  loose  (Jer.

ness  of  the  Divine  purposes.     God  can-  x.  13),  Christ  can  quell  (Matt.  viii.  26;

not  lie  nor  deceive,  but  His  purposes  xiv.  32).    (Addenda,  ver.  11,  ^^  Blast  of

go  forward  with  a  vastness  of  design  and  the  Almighty. ^^)

comprehension  as  to  surpass  the  grasp  I.  Winds  can  fulfil  Divine  behests,

of  human    calculation,   thus    deceiving  "  Stormy   winds   fulfilling    His   word  '*

those  who  had  prejudged   them.     We  (Ps.  cxlviii.  8).

find  our  wisdom  to  have  been  a  phan-  1.  They   travel    where    He    directs,

toni,    our     prophetic     discernment     a  "  Towards  the  daughter  of  My  people "

delusion.  (ver.  11).

L   Sadly,    but    truly,    these    words  2.  They  awake  to  serve  God's  designs,

point  out  the  real  nature  of  war.  "Shall  come  unto,  i.e.,  for  Me"  (ver.

"  The  sword  reacheth,"  <kc.     So  it  is  12).

wherever  the  consequences  of  war  are  3.  They  carry  out  His  sentence  upon

felt.     1.  It  sweeps  away  the  young  and  man.     *'  Now,    I    will   give    sentence,"

promising,    cuts     down     the     nation's  &c.  (ver.  12).     Winds  are  God's  judicial

bravest  sons.     2.  It  discourages  enter-  agents.

prise,  and  increases  penury  and  want.  II.  Winds   are   typical    of   human

3.  It  blunts  the  moral  feelings,  deadens  agencies.

the  conscience,  and  does  violence  to  the  The    simoom    was   a   figure    of    the

gentlest    and    noblest    inspirations    of  mighty    Babylonian     conqueror.       The

Christianity.     4.    It    depopulates    and  " clouds "  (ver.   13),  were  His  armies]

^4


OHAP.  IV.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


the  "  whirlwind  "  His  cavalry ;  suggest-
ing that  the  Chaldean  forces  would  be
numerous  (as  clouds),  invincible  (as
whirlwind),  swift  to  overtake  and  seize
the  prey  (as  eagles).

Winds  typify  human  agencies,  in  that
they  are  :  —

1.  Variable;  some  "to  fan  and
cleanse,"  others  work  "  woe  and  spoil."

2.  Wilful,  yet  controlled  ;  *'  blowing
where  it  listeth,"  as  men  obey  their  own
impulses ;  as  Nebuchadnezzar  did  in
rising  against  Judea;  yet  obeying  a
Higher  law  and  will.

3.  Powerful,  yet  easily  restrained  by
God.  Mighty  was  this  "  full  wind,"
yet  Nebuchadnezzar  (like  Pilate)  "  could
have  no  power  at  all,  except  it  were
given  him  from  above."  (Comp.  2
Kings  xix.  7,  35.)

Stand  in  awe  of  Him  whom  "  even
the  winds  obey."  Rejoice  that  "  all
power"  is  intrusted  to  Jesus,  over  nature,
over  men.  Safe  from  harm,  even  amid
mightiest  agencies,  are  those  He  keeps.
He  is  a  refuge  from  wind,  and  all  hostile
powers.  Not  befriended  by  Him,  "  woe
unto  us  "  (ver.  1 3).

Ver.  li.    Theme:  Purity  necessary

TO  SALVATION.

"  Wash  heart,"  <kc.  Apply  primarily
to  Jews,  but  equally  to  mankind
universally.

I.  The  natural  depravity  of  the
human  heart.  "  Wash  thine  heart
from  wickedness,"  suggests  the  total
corruption  of  human  nature.

1.  This  doctrine  requires  definition.
Depravity  of  the  heart  includes — (a.)
The  entire  absence  of  the  Divine  image.
(6.)  A  natural  aversion  to  God  and  god-
liness, (c.)  A  universal  propensity  or
disposition  to  evil.

2.  This  doctrine  demands  evidence.
Cannot  be  denied  without  violation  of
conscience,  contempt  of  reason,  rejection
of  Scripture,  (a.)  It  is  divinely  revealed.
(b.)  Practically  exemplified,  (c.)  Deeply
lamented.

II.  The  spiritual  purity  which  the
Lord  req.uires.  "  0  Jerusalem,  wash
thine  heart  from  wickedness ;  how  long
▼ain  thoughts,"  (kc.  ]     Implies —

1.  The  possibility  of  obtaining  purity
84


of  heart.  This  appears — (a.)  From  the
design  of  redemption  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).
(6.)  The  ability  of  the  Saviour  (John  1.
16  ;  1  Cor.  i.  30).  (c.)  The  promises  of
Scripture  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27  ;  1  Pet.
i.  3,  4).  (d.)  The  experience  of  believers
(Rom.  vi.  22  ;  1  John  i.  7).

2.  The  important  duty  of  seeking
purity  of  heart.  This  exhortation  simply
inculcates  an  immediate  and  diligent
use  of  the  means  of  grace  necessary  to
salvation  (Ezek.  xviii.  31).  (a.)  We
must  repent  of  our  sins  (Isa.  Iv.  7 ;
Acts  iii.  19).  (6.)  Believe  in  Jesus  Christ
(Acts  xxvi.  18 ;  Heb.  xii.  24).  (c.)  Give
ourselves  unto  prayer  (Ps.  li.  10;  1
Thess.  V.  23).  {d.)  Seek  the  Lord  with-
out delay.  For  "how  long,"  saith  God,
*'  shall  thy  vain,"  wicked,  unbelieving,
impenitent  "  thoughts  lodge  within
thee  1 "  (Isa.  Iv.  6 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2).

III.  The  absolute  necessity  of  per-
sonal holiness.  "  That  thou  mayest  be
saved."  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou
hast  no  part  with  Me :"  purity  and  sal-
vation go  together.

1.  Personal  holiness  is  a  necessary
property  of  religion.  Not  consist  of —  (a. )
Ceremonial  observances  (Gal.  vi  15).
(6.)  But  dwells  in  the  heart,  sanctifying
every  power  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20;  1  Pet.
i.  15,  16).  (c.)  Without  internal  piety
and  purity,  profession  of  religion  is
empty  parade  and  profitless  (Bom.
xiv.  7).

2.  Personal  holiness  is  a  necessary
meetness  for  heaven,  (a.)  Reason  assures
us  that  there  must  be  agreement  between
the  faculty  of  enjoyment  and  the  object
enjoyed.  God  is  holy  ;  we  must  be  to
enjoy  His  presence.  (6.)  Scripture  as-
sures us  that  '*  without  holiness  no  man
can  see  the  Lord  "  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  I  Cor.
iv.  9,  10).

These  reflections  should,  (i.)  excite  deep
humility  and  self-abasement  in  us  as
fallen  sinners ;  (ii.)  promote  an  earnest
application  to  Jesus,  whose  "  blood
cleanseth  from  all  sin."  —  From
*'  Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons,**

Theme:  Characteristics  and  oob-

RECTIVER  OF  VAIN  THOUGHTS.

Vanity  of  thoughts  may  prevail  in
persons  who  would  be  appalled  at  one


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  IT.


great  Bubstantial  sin.  Yet  a  month,
year,  a  life  of  vain  thoughts  !  in  a  being
preparing  for  an  eternity  of  seriousness
and  thought !  it  is  truly  an  awful  ac-
count !  yet  with  many,  this  stands  for
little  in  comparison  with  some  one  or
two  very  wrong  external  actions.

Observe  :  What  a  mighty  amount  of
thinking  there  is  in  human  spirits  that
does  not  come  under  the  censure  of  the
text.  "  Vain,"  implies  something  trifl-
ing, insignificant,  empty.  1.  It  does
not  include  wicked  thoughts ;  impious,
malignant,  evil  schemings,  &c.,  these
are  not  trivial ;  yet  how  much  of  this
order  of  thinking !  A  man's  thoughts
are  within  his  own  jurisdiction,  and
may  be  concealed ;  he  need  not  be  ex-
posed to  censure  and  shame  for  them ;
unless,  therefore,  he  govern  himself  in  the
fear  of  God,  they  will,  in  their  mere
animal  play,  run  to  vanitj/,  if  not  worse.
2.  If  the  thoughts  are  left  unrestrained
to  commit  folly,  they  will  commit  an
immensity  of  it.  The  thinking  power
is  never  tired  or  exhausted  in  this
frivolity.  Never  stagnant  pool  was
more  prolific  of  flies,  nor  the  swarm
about  it  more  wild  and  worthless.

I.  Characteristics  of  vain  thoughts.

i.  Those  thoughts  are  "  vain "  from
which  we  do  not  and  cannot  reap  any
good.  Survey  thoughts^ — excluding  the
noxious — and  ask,  Have  they  given
me  anything  worth  having;  made  me
wiser  ;  cleared  away  any  previous  igno-
rance ;  rectified  any  judgment ;  fixed
or  forwarded  any  purpose  ;  or  while  ten
thousand  ideas  have  passed  through  my
mind,  might  I  as  well  have  had  none  1
These  passing  visitants  have  occupied
his  faculties  and  consumed  his  time;
gone  away  and  paid  him  nothing  !

ii.  Thoughts  are  "  vain  "  which  can-
not associate  in  any  agreement  with  use-
ful and  valuable  ones.  If  serious  and
useful  thoughts  be  admitted  into  a  mind
filled  with  frivolities,  they  are  resisted
and  resented  as  intruders.

iii.  Thoughts  are  "  vain  "  which  have
to  he  kept  out  in  order  for  the  mind  to
attend  to  any  serious  or  good  purpose.
Experienced  this  npcessity  and  its  dif-
ficulty. Like  a  man  sitting  down  to
study  in  a  room  filled  with  a  moving,


talking  crowd.  This  mental  mob  has
forced  its  way  in,  baffled  and  mocked
you  !

iv.  Thoughts  are  **  vain  "  which  dwell
largely  and  habitually  on  ii  ifling  things.
Sad  propensity  to  allow  mind  to  waste
itself  on  trifles ;  on  personal  display,
fashion  and  routine,  amusements,  bub-
bling incidents  on  the  stream  of  society.
Would  that  some  stern,  alarming  voice
might  break  in  upon  such  thoughts  with,
"  What  is  all  this  to  thee  ?  hast  thou
nothing  else  to  think  of  before  thou  die
and  appear  before  God"?"

V.  Thoughts  are  "  vain  "  which  trifle
with  important  ones.  Great  things  may
be  thought  of  idly  as  mere  matters  of
curiosity  and  speculation,  or  to  throw
them  into  ludicrous  and  fanciful  forms.

vi.  Thoughts  are  "  vain "  which  are
fickle,  not  remaining  with  any  continu-
ance on  a  subject.  In  this  ungoverned
state,  anything  can  divert  thoughts :
without  regulated  connection,  no  rational
links,  no  leading  to  any  ultimate  ob-
ject. Nothing  is  avoided,  repelled,  or
selected.

vii.  Thoughts  are  **vain"  when  the
mind  has  some  specially  favourite  ti'ifley
some  cherished  idolised  toy.  Trifling
in  all  but  its  power  to  fascinate  and
fasten  itself  upon  a  human  soul !  What
shall  we  call  this  enslavement  of  the
whole  mind  to  some  essentially  worth-
less object  of  attention,  but  the  magnet-
ism of  Satan  I

viii.  Thoughts  are  "  vain "  which
continually  return  to  things  justly  claim-
ing a  measure  of  attention  when  the
thinking  of  them  can  be  of  no  advantage.
The  mind  wanders  uselessly  over  the
same  enumeration,  comparison,  calcula-
tion ;  when  nothing  can  be  more  useless.

ix.  Thoughts  are  "  vain  *'  when  the
mind  dwells  on  fancies  of  how  things
might  be  or  might  have  been,  when  the
reality  of  how  they  are  is  before  us.

X.  Thoughts  are  "vain "  which  men
indulge  concerning  notions  and  schem-
ings of  worldly  felicity.

Need  of  a  corrective  discipline ;  that
we  be  earnest  to  have  so  pernicious  an
evil  rectified,  that  our  thinking  and  im-
mortal spirits,  which  should  be  temples
of  the  Most  High,  may  not  be  the  de-

85


ohap.it.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


graded   recesses   of   every   vanity   with
which  the  Spirit  cannot  dwell.

II.  Correctives  of  vain  thoughts.
Evidently  they — 1.  Waste  the  activiiy  of
the  thinking  principle  ;  2.  They  put  us
out  of  the  relation  we  are  placed  in  to
the  highest  objects  and  interests — to  God,
Christ,  eternity.  3.  They  unfit  us  for
matters  of  practical  duty,  making  life's
true  work  irksome.

Observe :  The  evil  habits  of  vain
thinking  is  utterly  unsuited  to  the  con-
dition of  an  immortal  spirit  on  earth,  and
fatally  at  variance  with  its  high  destiny.
It  might  suit  a  creature  whose  utmost
scope  is  to  amuse  away  a  few  years  on
earth,  and  then  sink  in  the  dust  wholly
and  for  ever !

Conscious  that  this  vanity  of  thought
is  a  besetting  evil,  we  should  earnestly
desire  any  corrective  remedy.  But  this
vice  of  the  mind  is  but  a  symptom  of
general  degeneracy,  and  cannot  be  reme-
died without  the  grand  sources  of  our
thoughts — the  passions  and  affections —
be  in  a  rectified  state.  There  are  no
expedients  which  can  avail  indepen-
dently of  resolute  exertion, — no  dexter-
ous device  can  cure  this  habitual  pro-
pensity,— no  "wand  of  enchantment  can
wave  off  the  infesting  swarm.  But,  as
parts  of  a  persevering  discipline —

i.  Have  specified  subjects  of  serious
interest  to  turn  to  when  thought
reverts  to  these  vanities  :  recollections  of
a  perilous  situation,  a  dying  scene,  pro-
vidential interpositions.  These  memory
will  furnish.  Conscience  offers  subjects ;
what  a  man  regards  as  his  greatest  sin,
&c.

ii.  Make  a  sudden  charge  of  guilt  on
your  mind  when  vain  thoughts  prevail.
Enforce  the  thought  "  God  sees*'  This
will  act  as  a  lightning  flash  which  arrests
levity.

iii  Have  recourse  to  the  direct  act  of
devotion.  How  will  they  appear  when
we  confess  and  deplore  them  before
God?

iv.  Interrupt  and  stop  them  by  the
question.  What  is  just  now  my  most  press-
ing duty  ?  Judgment  and  conscience
will  then  speak  and  chide  for  neglect-
ing it.

V.  Have   recourse  to  some  practical


occupation,  matter  of  business,  or  a  visit
to  some  house  of  mourning.

vi.  Constr^ain  our  habitual  thinking  to
go  along  with  the  thoughts  of  those  who
have  thought  the  best,  by  reading  the
most  valuable  books.  How  lamentable
the  light  reading  of  the  age  !  Study
the  Bible.

vii.  Think  to  a  certain  purpose, —
towards  a  purposed  end.  What  a  num-
ber of  things  we  need  to  aim  at  by  a
course  of  thought !

viii.  Reflect  on  how  many  things  we
have  to  do  with  which  "  vain  thoughts "
interfere ;  and  also,  what  would  have
been  the  result  of  good  thoughts  instead
of  so  many  vain  1

ix.  Discipline  of  the  thoughts  greatly
depends  on  the  company  a  man  keeps
(Prov.  xiii.  20).  Society  can  be  found
or  avoided  in  which  every  vanity  of  the
soul  may  be  indulged  or  confirmed.

X.  If  the  complaint  be  urged  that  this
discipline  involves  much  that  is  hard
and  difficult,  we  answer,  It  is  just  as
hard  as  to  do  justice  to  a  rational  and
immortal  spirit  placed  here  a  little  while
by  God  for  its  improvement,  and  then  to
go  where  God  appoints.  Hard,  yet  so
indispensable.  How  welcome,  then,  the
promises  of  the  Spirit's  help, — the  in-
vitations  to  pray  /  We  shall  eagerly  act
on  them  if  we  care  for  our  spiritual
progress  through  this  world,  and  our
appointment  and  employments  in  the
world  to  come.  —  Lectures  hy  John
Foster,  a.d.  1822.  (Addenda,  ver.  14,
*^Vain  thoughts.^')

Comments :

Ver.  15.  ".4  voice  declareth  from
Dan,'^  &c.  It  is  high  time  to  set  about
personal  cleansing,  and  for  abandoning
delusive  thoughts,  for  already  the
calamity  is  announced, — it  swiftly  ap-
proaches,— it  scales  the  heights  which
shelter  Judah.  (See  Geographical
References.)  "The  messenger  comes
from  each  successive  place  towards  which
the  foe  approaches." — Hitzig,  (Addenda,
ver.  15,  ''Dan:')

Ver.  16.  The  words  should  probably
read  thus  :  *'  Proclaim  ye  to  the  heathen.
Behold  I "  (Saint  Jerome  points  out
that  the  heathen  are  hereby  summoned
to   witness    the  chastisement  of  Jera-


86


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  IT.


ialem.)  Thus  they  would  learn  that
the  God  of  the  Jews  had  ordained  the
overthrow  of  His  people ;  that  it  was
not  the  triumph  of  impious  and  idola-
trous forces  against  God  and  His  people,
but  that  He  had  consigned  Judah  to
spoliation  on  account  of  her  treachery
and  neglect  of  Him.  This  would  prove
a  solemn  warning  to  the  nations  around
(ver.  17),  giving  clearly  the  explanation
why  God  permitted  Judah's  foes  to
triumph.

Ver.  18.  The  address  reverts  to  Jeru-
salem :  against  her  Jeremiah  had  to  pub-
lish (ver.  16)  that  watchers,  besiegers,
were  advancing  ;  it  throws  on  Jerusalem
the  whole  blame  of  the  calamities.  Here
consider :

I.  That  sinners  have  the  power  of
awakening  terrible  forces  of  judgment.
**  Thy  way  and  doings  have  procured
these  things ;"  brought  mighty  armies,
— devastating  powers  !  Truly  sin  is  a
dreadful  and  prodigious  factor  in  human
history,

II.  That  sinners  inevitably  entail  retri-
butive miseries.  "  Unto  thee.*'  Sin
awakes  mighty  forces — it  can  do  that ;
but  sinners  bring  those  forces  of  misery
against  themselves,  and  they  cannot  evade
them.  The  eagles  will  sweep  down  on
the  carcass  they  scent.  (Addenda,  ver.
18,  ^^ Bitter  at  last.")

III.  That  the  penalties  of  sin  are  unr
utter  ably  distressing.  "It  is  bitter**
(comp.  ii.  19).  "The  wages  of  sin  is
death."  The  miseries  of  the  siege  and
captivity  were  but  faint  foreshadowings
of  the  woes  consequent  on  rejecting
Christ  and  losing  heaven.

IV.  That  the  wound  and  woe  of  sin
reach  to  the  very  heart.  Neither  is  super-
ficial nor  evanescent,  but  the  rottenness
and  also  the  wretchedness  goes  to  the
very  core  (ver.  10).

Ver.     19-21.      Theme :     A    seer's

ANGUISH  OVER  THE  SINNER's  DOOM.

Henderson  and  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  op-
posing all  other  commentators,  regard
these  words  as  the  outcry  of  the  anguish-
stricken  nation.  And  truly  the  lost  soul
may  utter  such  an  exclamation  of  terror
and  grief  in  the  hour  of  his  judgment.


Yet  the  words  are  more  naturally  tb«
lament  of  the  prophet.

I.  The  occasion  of  these  impassioned
outcries.

1.  His  grief  was  patriotic  ;  distressed
over  the  national  calamities  which  were
coming  upon  his  people  and  his  land.

2.  His  grief  was  personal ,  for  he  felt
individually  the  shame  and  woe  which
the  people's  disloyalty  to  their  God  and
their  faith  were  entailing.  By  identifica-
tion of  interest  he  felt  himself  inculpated
by  their  idolatries  and  vice ;  and  by  in-
tensity of  sympathy  he  felt  the  throes  of
anguish  and  ruin  which  ensued.

3.  His  grief  was  pious;  the  religious
disasters  looming  over  Zion  filled  him
with  amaze  and  sorrow.  Temple  de-
famed and  razed;  Judah  reduced  to
captivity,  land  laid  waste,  sanctities  of
his  nation  profaned  ;  and  more,  Jehovah
contemned  by  the  victorious  heathen,
who  would  scorn  the  God  of  the  land
they  subdued,  and  of  the  people  the)
oppressed.

II.  The  lessons  of  the  prophet'i*
distress.  Moses's  distress  over  sinning
Israel  as  he  descended  Sinai,  the  Psalm-
ist's deeply  troubled  state  over  trans-
gressors (Ps.  cxix.  136,  158),  our  Lord's
pitying  tears  at  the  sight  of  doomed
Jerusalem,  Paul's  "  great  heaviness  and
continual  sorrow  of  heart "  for  his  kins-
men (Rom.  ix.  2,  3),  and  Jeremiah's
pathos  of  lamentation,  encourage  and
summon  us  to  godly  sorrow  over  the
guilty  and  the  perishing.

1.  There  is  enough  of  wrong  around
us  to  evoke  saddest  emotions.

2.  Philanthropy  and  compassion  for
humanity  should  move  us  to  deepest
sorrow.

3.  Fellowship  with  Christ  will  make
us  deplore  the  devastations  of  sin.

4.  The  keener  our  sense  of  right
and  our  love  of  God,  the  more  intense
will  be  our  repugnance  towards,
and  our  distress  over,  scenes  of  ini-
quity.

5.  Memory  of  our  own  redemption
will  awake  in  us  bitter  regrets  that
others  remain  sunken  in  wrong  and
the  woes  of  wrong.

6.  Perception  of  the  foul  agency
which  triumphs    in  human   overthrow

ar


CHAP.  IT.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


will  deepen  our  revulsion  and  horror.
It  was  the  king  of  Babylon  in  Judah's
case  —  imperious,  blasphemous,  impla-
cable; it  is  the  "  adversary  the  devil"
in  our  case  now.

Hence  :  1.  The  shamefulness  of  in-
difference towards  others  in  peril.  2.
The  inarticulate  call  to  our  commisera-
tion which  comes  from  souls  despoiled.

3.  The  urgency  of  faithful  warning
and  friendly  help,  though  it  cost  us
suffering  and  sacrifices,  as  with  Jeremiah.

4.  The  grandeur  of  Christ's  mission ;
His  love  and  redemption.  5.  The  in-
spiration which  lies  in  the  fact  that  there
is  hope  of  our  doing  good  even  to  those
who  hate  us  while  we  seek  their  wel-
fare.

They  who  feel  for  the  woes  of  others,
and  seek  to  redress  them,  cannot  fail  to
fulfil  a  ministry  of  amelioration,  and
shall  not  miss  the  reward  of  loving  ser-
vice and  patient  suffering  (Matt.  v.  12).

Ver.  22.  Theme :  Judah's  Divinely-
sent  TEACHER  IGNORED.

I.  Teachers  are  valueless  unless
men  will  be  listeners.  But  **my
people  are  foolish."  Indifference  to  the
teachings  of  Jeremiah  was  suicidal,
wilful,  shameful.  So  is  the  disregard  of
the  world.

IL  Man's  heedless  attitude  frus-
trates God's  messengers.  They  would
arouse  men  to  their  peril  and  point
them  to^-escape  and  redemption,  but
they  put  life  and  salvation  from  them.

III.  The  insensate  spiritual  con-
dition of  transgressors,  (a. )  Blinded —
"  not  known  me,"  whom  God  in  mercy
sent.  "Have  no  understanding"  of
their  peril,  value  of  Divine  messages,
urgency  of  seeking  salvation.  (6.)  De-
based —  mentally,  **  foolish  f  morally,
**  sottish;"  foolish  heart  darkened  (Rom.
i.  21,  22).  (c.)  Perverted — their  spiri-
tual nature  distorted,  thrown  into  cala-
mitous confusion  and  contrariety  ;  wise
in  evil,  witless  respecting  good.

Hence  easily  deluded,  wilfully  igno-
rant, lamentably  degenerate,  (Comp.
John  iii  21.)


Ver.  23-26.

TIVTS  VISION.

88


A    SOLEMNLY-SUGOES-


The  prophet  sees  bursting  over  Judah
a  visitation  which  convulses  the  whole
world.  In  the  vivid  poetic  language  of
this  picture,  the  mind  is  led  back  to
what  earth  was  before  creation^  and  led
forward  to  what  earth  will  become  at  the
judgment.  It  suggests  that  sin  gathers
into  the  present  the  dreary  desolations  of
the  past  and  the  terrible  devastations  of
the  future.

I.  Chaos  reproduced.  (Comp.  ver.
23  with  Gen.  i.  2.)  Thus— 1.  Sin  de-
faces scenes  of  beauty  (comp.  Gen.  i.
31);  alas!  all  again  in  chaos.  2.  Sin
despoils  the  Spirit's  work  ;  He  brooded
over  and  beautified  earth  (Gen.  i.  2).  3.
Sin  enwraps  the  world  in  gloom — shuts
out  light,  God,  hope,  and  happiness.

II.  Judgment  depicted.  (Comp.  ver.
24-26  with  Kev.  vi.  12-17.)

Jeremiah  glances  again  into  the  awful
future,  and — 1.  He  beholds  the  material
world  in  wild  convulsion  (ver.  24,  comp.
Rev.  vi.  14).  2.  Scenes  of  the  living
changed  into  sepulchral  solitude  (ver.
25,  comp.  Ezek.  xxxviii.  20).  3.  The
works  and  memorials  of  man  swept
away :  plantations  and  cities  (ver.  26,
comp.  2  Pet.  iii.  10).  4.  God's  presence
awakens  a  panic  of  terror  (ver.  26,  **  a<
the  presence  "  lit.  from  the  face  ofJehovahy
from  the  face  of  the  heat  of  His  nostril ;
comp.  Rev.  xx.  11,  vi.  16,  17).

It  is  as  if  the  final  judgment  of  the
world  had  already  arrived.  Infer — 1,
Retribution  must  not  necessarily  be  de-
ferred till  the  distant  judgment-day,
2.  In  a  sinner's  downfall,  the  horrors  of
the  final  judgment  are  all  realised.  3.  If
God  be  not  propitiated.  His  presence
will  terrify  us  whenever  it  appears — in
temporal  calamities,  hour  of  death,  or
day  of  retribution.  4.  Flee  now  to
God  ;  not  then  from  God.  (Addenda,
ver.  26,  *'  Broken  down  at  the  presence  of
God.^')  Lowth  remarks  :  **  These  par-
ticular judgments  are  an  earnest  of  the
general  judgment*'

Ver.  27-29.  Lest  it  should  be
thought  the  prophet  has  spoken  only
under  strong  poetic  feeling,  an  ex-
travagant imagination,  there  comes  the
emphatic,  "  Thus  hath  the  Lord  said,**
It  is  not  fancy,  but  solemn  fact.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  Vt^


I  Qod*s  irrevocable  purpose  (ver.
28).  *'  I  have  spoken  ;  not  turn  back."
The  day  of  redemption  past, — probation
terminated,  —  escape  impossible,  —  re-
])entance  no  avail.

II.  God's  avenging  decision  limited
by  His  mercy  (ver.  27).  "  Yet  not  make
tail  end."  This  always  attested  of
Judah  :  the  sword  should  not  wholly
destroy.  (Comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  44  ;  Amos
ix.  8.)

III.  Earth  clad  in  woful  mourn-
ing (ver.  28).  The  heavens  shrouded
in  sombre  clouds  in  sympathy  with
earth's  misery.  (Comp.  Rev.  vi.  12,
L7.)

IV.  Hiding-places  sought :  strong-
holds abandoned  in  despair.  Their
refuges  prove  insufficient,  insecure,  as
will  all  human  strongholds.  When
these  defenced  '* cities"  fail,  the  recesses
of  forests  and  mountains  will  be  sought.
Implies  :  (a.)  Great  terror  of  the  foe.
(6.)  Deliverance  will  then  be  craved,
redemption  sought  too  late,  (c.)  No
evading  the  judgment;  flight  will  not
ensure  escape.

V.  Melancholy  desertion  of  happy
scenes  (ver.  29).  "  Every  city  for-
saken," <kc.  Homes  gone  for  ever.
Scenes  of  plenty  and  pleasure  aban-
doned perforce.  Families  driven  from
earth's  fond  scenes  into  exile.  So  at
the  judgment — but  worse.

Ver.  30.  Spoiled  yet  adorned.
Jerusalem  simulates  the  beauty  which
has  been  *'  spoiled  "  in  the  vain  hope  of
attracting  to  her  side  the  succour  of
Egypt  against  Chaldea.  (Addenda,  ver.
30,  ^^  Finery,  Flattery:')


i.  Vain  devices  for  covering  misery,
**  Clothest  with  crimson,"  "  deckest  with
ornaments  of  gold,"  paintest  thine  eyes.
Real  wealth  never  feels  the  necessity  of
gaudy  parade.  True  beauty  never  resorts
to  artificial  decorations.  Implies  con-
scious deformity  and  penury.

ii.  Adversity  transforms  flatterers  into
foes.  "Lovers  seek  thy  life."  This
shows  the  character,  the  worth,  the
treachery  of  ungodly  confidences.  Turn
from  God  to  them  in  prosperity,  they
will  turn  from  or  turn  upon  their  dupes
in  their  evil  day.

iii.  Forlorn  attempts  to  regain  love
win  loathing,  *' Despise  thee."  Their
*'  love"  was  only  for  self-aggrandisement ;
it  was  sordid  and  selfish  ;  now  nothing
can  accrue  to  them  from  Jerusalem
she  is  contemned.  Yes  ;  and  her  despi-
cable efforts  hypocritically  to  hide  her
miserable  plight  create  nausea  and  revul-
sion. Even  the  ungodly  hate  deceit,
loathe  decorated  deformity.

Ver.  31.  The  LXX.,  Syriac,  Vulgate,
&c.,  take  the  participle  as  passive,  and
render.  My  soul  faints  because  of  tht
slain.  Better  as  in  A.  V.  ;  or,  My  soul
is  overpowered  before  murderers.

^^  Spreadeth  her  hands."  A  pleading
gesture,  expressing  a  prayer  for  protec-
tion :  as  she  falls  before  assassins  she
beseeches  help.

"  Woe  is  me  now/"  Her  full  and
irremediable  wretchedness  is  at  last
realised  by  her;  she  cries  oi^jb  terrified
by  her  perils  and  pains.  Yet  not  to  God.
Therefore  none  befriends  her.  (Addenda
to  chap.  iv.  ver.  31,  *^  Woe  stricken")


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  IV,

Ver.  2.    Topic:  An  Ancient  Homily  ''On  Swearing."     Text:  ^^Thou  shalt

swear.  The  Lord  liveth"  dhc.

I.  The  command.  Did  Christ  countermand  thisi  (Matt.  v.  34).  The  Son
forbid  in  the  Gospel  what  the  Father  bids  in  the  law  ?  Jerome  says,  "  Oaths  were
permitted  the  Jews  of  policy,  because  they  heard  heathen  swear  by  their  gods."
But  the  explanation  which  accords  both  commands  is  :  God  bids  thee  swear,  so  thj
oath  be  truthful  and  needful ;  Christ  forbids  swearing  which  is  truthless  and  needless.
Christ  came  not  to  destroy  the  law  ;  He  but  forbids  the  gloss  of  the  Pharisees,  who
taught  oaths  were  not  perjury  though  false,  so  that  they  swore  not  by  God's  self
directly.     Yet,  also,  Christ  would  have  His  followers'  tongues  so  true  as  they  shall

89


CHAP.  IT.  HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


not  need  to  swear.  Holy  men's  words  are  oaths.  The  abuse  of  swearing  God
abominates,  man  abhors.  But  not  everything  that  is  abused  by  wicked  men  must
therefore  not  be  used  by  sober  men.  Schismatics  are  they  who  have  refused  oaths ;
Essenes  among  Jews,  Anabaptists  among  Christians.  Bullinger  saith,  "  He  is  not
worthy  the  name  of  Christian  who  refuseth  to  swear  by  the  name  of  Christ."  For,
what  do  I  when  I  swear,  but  call  on  God  to  be  either  witness  to  my  truth  or
avenger  of  my  falsehood]  I  therein  confess  the  Lord  to  be  my  God, — I  acknow-
ledge His  truth,  justice,  and  omniscience.

Precedents  from  Scripture : — Moses  swore  (Josh.  xiv.  5).  David  often — to  Saul,
to  Jonathan.  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob  did — patriarchs  before  the  law  ;  and  Paul,
after  the  law  and  under  the  Gospel,  swore.  Christ  used  His  "Amen,  amen;"  and
God  '*  swore  by  His  own  self."     What  He  bid,  He  did.

Oaths,  public,  as  between  princes  and  before  magistrates,  and  private,  as  between
man  and  man,  are  lawful,  so  the  swearer  take  them  with  religious  heart  and  iu
cause  important.  He  takes  God's  name  in  vain  that  swears  when  he  needs  not,
and  **  God  will  not  hold  him  guiltless."

II.  The  form.  God  bade  us  "  swear;**  now  He  tells  us  how  :  **The  Lordlivetk/**
It  is,  then,  impiety  to  swear  by  creatures ;  grand  sacrilege  to  swear  by  anything  but
God.  The  name  of  a  strange  god  was  not  to  be  heard  in  the  mouth  of  God's
people  (Exod.  xxiii.  13).  Saith  the  old  man  in  Aristophanes,  '*  He  but  jests  that
swears  by  Jupiter."  To  swear  by  anything  but  God  lessens  the  religion  of  an
oath.  When  the  Jews  swore  by  Baal,  and  the  Gentiles  by  Jupiter,  they  thought
them  gods,  for  they  prayed  and  sacrificed  to  them ;  yet  Baal  was  but  a  beast,
Jupiter  but  a  man.  God  prevents  all  evasion  by  the  name  He  here  gives,  ^^the
Lord;"  not  any  god  the  swearer  would  substitute, — as  Papists  swear  by  angels,
called  in  Scripture,  ^^ JElohim"  and  superstition  worships  them  as  gods.  Many
forms  are  used  by  men  of  Scripture  variable  from  this  form,  but  in  all  the  mean-
ing is,  "  The  Lord  liveth."

III.  Three  particulars.  **  In  truth,**  Perjury  is  impious, — makes  that  which
is  the  sign,  ensign,  and  seal  of  truth,  the  cloak  of  falsehood.  It  was  death  with  the
Egyptians ;  St.  Augustine  would  have  it  so  with  Christians  too.  "  God  will
destroy,"  saith  David,  '*  all  that  speak  lies."  What  will  He  do  to  them  that  swear
lies  1  The  Pope,  Christ's  vicar,  panders  perjury !  Swear  promissorily  fealty  to
thy  sovereign,  the  Pope  will  assoil  thee  ;  forswear  assertorily  anything  to  the
magistrate,  the  Pope  will  pardon  thee.  Faith  is  not  to  be  kept  with  heretics.
Equivocation  is  even  commended.  How  dare  thou  dally  with  God  before  whom
thou  swearest  1  He  is  not  mocked  !  An  oath  is  a  hedge  to  fence  thy  faith :
break  it  not ;  thou  betrayest  thy  truth  :  leap  not  over  it ;  there  is  a  pit  behind  it,
without  bottom, — it  is  hell.

"/»  judgment.**     Swear  not  upon  guess  only, — oaths  must  not  be  adventured
Some  swear  where  no  cause  is,  no  gain  is,  no  gainsayer  is,  but  only  of  bad  use.
Augustine  saith,  "  The  world  hath  many  evil  customs,  but  this  of  swearing  is  bad
above  all  that  is  bad."     It  makes  God's  holy  name  vile,  and   engenders  perjury.
Fhilo  saith,  *'  Oaths  are  no  tenise  balls  to  toss  upon  the  tongue."

"/»  righteousness.''^  To  any  act  against  right  or  religion  bind  not  thyself,  let
not  any  bind  thee.  Oaths  must  not  cross  either  piety  towards  God  or  charity  to-
wards men.  Such  an  oath  was  Herod's :  much  better  had  he  broken  his  oath
than  slain  a  prophet.  Bind  not  two  sins  together.  It  is  sin  to  make  it,  not  to
break  it.  Saint  Jerome  saith  of  unlawful  oaths,  "  It  is  condemnation  if  thou  break
them ;  it  is  damnation  if  thou  keep  them." — Condensed  from  Sermon>s  by  Hev^
Hichard  Gierke,  B.D.,  one  of  the  translator*  of  the  English  Bible,  preacher  in
Canterbuiy  Cathedral.     Dated  A.D.  1637*


»o


SOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chip  it.


Ver.  3.     Topic:  Unfit  Soil  Prepared  for  the  Blessino.     Text:  ** Break  up

your  fallow  ground.'*

A  call  to  vigorous  preparation  for  spiritual  blessing.  Many  are  conscious  of
earnest  longing  for  salvation,  more  grace,  spiritual  renewal  and  revival ;  but
"  the  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  him,  for  his  hands  refuse  to  labour."  A  delusion
to  rest  with  desire.

I.  Hardening  forces  have  been  acting  on  the  soil.  *'  Break  up  : "  hard,  there-
fore.    *'  Your  fallow  ground  ;"  seriously  inquire  to  what  this  applies  in  you,

1.  What  is  the  fallow  ground  vdthin  man?  1.  The  heedless  mind.  2.  The
callous  heart.  3.  The  seared  conscience.  4.  The  irreverent  soul.  5.  The  formal
Church  :  first  love  dead,  flame  extinct,  sanctuary  a  garnished  sepulchre.  (Addenda,
ver.  3.  ^^  Fallow  ground")

2.  How  has  your  ground  become  fallow  7  1.  By  neglect:  becomes  hard  itself;
need  do  nothing.  2.  Action  of  time :  years  find  you  harder.  3.  The  cold  of  in-
difference. 4.  Kains  and  sun  cake  the  soil;  the  Saviour's  action,  the  Spirit's
influence  make  the  unyielding  soul  more  alien.

II.  Sowers  can  only  work  on  lands  which  are  prepared  They  are  forced  into
inactivity  by  the  ground  being  fallow.

1.  The  sowers  are  Christy  the  Spirit y  the  preacher,  the  worker  for  human  salvation.
They  can  only  sow  the  Gospel  where  they  find  the  soil  clean  and  ready.  This  is
the  husbandman's  command  (Luke  x.  10-12).  Your  stolid  unconcern  is  an
effectual  obstacle.

2.  All  spiritual  agencies  are  thwarted  by  unpreparedness.  Seed  may  be  the  best,
but  useless  on  hard  soil.  Sun  may  shine,  but  not  germinate.  Rains  fall,  only  to
wash  the  seed  off.     Best  Christian  appliances,  services,  sermons,  (kc,  no  avail.

3.  Therefore^  where  there  is  no  readiness,  the  sacred  blessings  are  withheld,
**  Christ  did  no  mighty  works  because  of  unbelief."

III.  Sowing  time  is  the  season  for  gathering  in  the  living  seed.  Do  nothing
to  anticipate  the  auspicious  hour  of  grace,  and  it  will  come  and  find  you  unfit  to
receive  the  Gospel,  the  salvation  God  would  willingly  give.  Make  ready  for  the
Lord.

1.  There  is  a  special  time  of  grace.  2.  The  season  quickly  passes  by,  3.  It
may  come  to  us  in  vain.  It  was  now  with  Jerusalem  ;  she  was  not  ready  to  benefit  by
it.  Later  on,  when  Jesus  "  wept  over  the  city,''  she  '*  knew  not  the  day  of  her
visitation."  We  may  awake  to  righteousness  too  late;  the  sowing-time  past,  the
"  convenient  season  "  gone.

IV.  The  plough  must  be  driven  through  the  sterile  soiL  Sowers  are  waiting,
seed  is  ready,  season  is  here  and  passing  (text).  1.  Put  the  plough  through  your
indifference;  rouse  yourself  into  attention.  2.  Through  your  indecision;  *' How
long  halt  ye  % "  3.  Through  your  inaction ;  bestir  yourself ;  read,  pray,  repent,
reform.  4.  Through  your  habits  of  sin;  weep  for  them,  desert  them  ;  listen  to
chidings  of  conscience  ;  open  heart  to  the  Saviour  who  knocks.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord
while  He  may  be  found,  call  upon  Him  while  near,"  (fee.

All  this  will  not  make  you  spiritually  renewed.  Ploughing  does  not  ensure  the
harvest,  yet  it  is  preparation  for  it.  It  is  your  part ;  and  God  requires  that
part  of  you.  **  He  hath  commanded  all  men  everywhere  to  repent ; "  "  Break
up,"  (fee.  It  will  not  be  done  for  you  ;  it  must  be  done  by  you.  "  Prove  me  now
herewith,  and  see  if  I  will  not  open  the  windows  of  heaven,"  &c,

Ver.  14.     Topic:  The  Vanity  of  Thoughts.     {Ancient  Homily,)    Text/
**  How  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  f  **

Heart  compared  to  house,  to  entertain  and  lodge  guests ;  into  which,  before
conversion,  all  the  light,  wanton  thoughts  that  post  up  and  down  in  the  world

91


CHAP.  IT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


hare  open  access — lodgeth  them ;  while  they,  like  unruly  gallants,  revel  day  and
night,  and  defile  those  rooms  they  lodge  in.  "  How  long  f "  whilst  I,  with  my
Spirit,  and  Son,  and  train  of  graces,  stand  and  knock,  and  cannot  find  admittance  t
Those  vain  guests  must  be  turned  out  o*  doors  without  warning ;  "  the  time  past
must  sufiSce."  Kept  out  they  cannot  always  be ;  yet  if  they  enter,  "  lodge  "  they
must  not.  "  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  on  your  wrath,**  or  a  worse  guest  may
enter ;  "  neither  give  place  to  the  devil."  Bad  thoughts  may  pass  as  strangers
through  a  believer's  heart,  making  a  thorough/are  of  it,  but  not  a  lodging-place.

L  What  is  meant  by  thoughts.

i.  The  internal  acts  of  the  mind;  reasonings,  resolutions,  consultations,  desires,
cares,  Ac.  1.  The  thinking,  meditating,  musing  power  in  man,  which  enables
him  to  conceive,  apprehend,  fancy.  2.  Thoughts  which  the  mind  frames  within
itself  (Prov.  vi.  14;  James  i.  15;  Isa  lix.  4-7).  These  differ  from  thoughts  in-
jected and  cast  in,  which  are  children  of  another's  begetting,  and  which  do  not
become  ours  unless  we  **  lodge  "  them.  3.  Thoughts  which  the  mind  in  and  by
itself  begets  and  entertains.

ii.  Let  us  see  what  vanity  is.  1,  Unprofitableness  (Eccles.  i.  2,  3).  2.  Light-
ness (Ps.  Ixii  9).  3.  Folly  (Prov.  xii  11).  4.  Inconstancy  (Ps.  cxliv.  4,
cxlvi.  4).  5.  Wicked  and  sinful  (2  Chrou.  xiii.  7 ;  Prov.  xxiv.  9).  Such  quali-
ties are  linked  to  the  word  vanity.  Vain  thoughts  are  sins.  1.  The  law  judgeth
them  (Heb.  iv.  12  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  25),  and  Christ  rebukes  them  (Matt.  ix.  4).  2.
They  are  capable  of  pardon,  and  unless  pardoned  we  cannot  be  saved  (Acts  viii.  22).
3.  They  are  to  be  repented  of  (Isa.  Iv.  7 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4,  5).  4.  They  defile  a  man
(Matt.  XV.  15-17).  5.  They  are  abominable  to  the  Lord  (Prov.  xv.  26).  6
They  hinder  and  spoil  all  the  good  we  should  do  (Isa.  xxix.  16).  Our  thoughts
are  the  first  motioners  of  all  the  evil  in  us.

II.  The  particulars  wherein  this  vanity  of  the  thinking,  meditating  power
of  man  consists.

i  In  regard  to  thinking  what  is  good.  1.  A  want  of  ability  to  raise  and  extract
holy  and  useful  considerations  and  thoughts  from  the  occurrences  and  occasions
which  surround  us.  (Comp.  Ps.  cvii.  43  with  Ps.  xcii.  4-6.)  2.  A  loathness  to
entertain  holy  thoughts,  (Comp.  Ps  cxix.  59  with  Kom.  i.  28.)  3.  The  mind
will  not  long  he  intent  on  good  thoughts.  4.  If  the  mind  doth  think  of  good
things,  it  doth  so  unseasonably ;  intrudes  on  prayer  and  interrupts  it  (Prov.
xvi.  3).

ii  The  readiness  of  the  mind  to  think  on  evil  and  vain  things.  1.  This  vanity
shows  itself  m  foolishness  (Mark  vii.  22),  which  proves  itself  in  the  unsettledness
and  independence  of  our  thoughts.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  if  any  strong  lust  or
passion  be  up,  our  thoughts  are  too  fixed  and  intent.  3.  A  restless  curiosity  con-
cerning things  not  affecting  us  (1  Tim.  vi.  4,  20,  iv.  7 ;  Prov.  xv.  14).  4.  Taking
thought  to  fulfil  the  lusts  of  our  flesh  (Rom.  xiii.  14).  5.  Representing,  or
acting  over^  sins  in  our  imagination  (Jude  8).

Having  discovered  the  vanity  of  your  thoughts  and  estate  thereby — 1.  Be
humbled  for  them  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  2.  Let  us  make  conscience  of  them  for  ever  (Prov.
iv.  33),  dreading  the  revelations  of  the  judgment  (1  Cor.  iv.  6).  After  the  judg-
ment men's  thoughts  will  prove  their  greatest  executioners.

in.  Remedies  against  vain  thoughts.  (Addenda,  ver.  2,  ^^  Thou  shalt  swear^''  dsc.)

1.  Get  the  heart  furnished  and  enriched  with  a  good  stock  of  sanctified  and
heavenly  knowledge  in  spiritual  truths  (Matt.  xiii.  35 ;  Prov.  vi.  22  ;  Dent.  vL

2.  Endeavour  to  preserve  and  keep  up  lively,  holy,  and  spiritual  affections  in
the  heart  (Mai.  iii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxix.  97).

3.  Of  all  apprehensions  else,  get  the  heart  possessed  with  deep  and  powerful
apprehensions  of   Qod's  holiness,  majesty,  omniscience,  and  omnipresenct   (Ps
cxxxix.  1-12).


HOMILETJG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  (MAP.  IT.

4.  In  the  morning  when  thou  awakestj  as  did  David  (Ps.  cxix.  18),  prevent  th«
vain  thoughts  the  heart  naturally  engenders  by  filling  it  with  thoughts  of  God.

5.  Have  a  watchful  eye  upon  thy  heart  all  day ;  though  vain  thoughts  crowd  in,
let  them  know  that  they  pass  not  unseen.  Vagrant  thoughts  will  not  make  their
rendezvous  where  strict  watch  is  kept.  Complain  of  them ;  whip  them  if  they  will
pass  in.

6.  Please  not  thy  fancy  too  much  with  vanities  and  curious  flights  (Job  xxxL
1 ;  Prov.  iv.  25).

7.  Be  diligent  in  thy  calling  (2  Thess.  iii.  11;  1  Tim.  v.  13);  only  encumber
not  the  mind  too  much  (Luke  x.  41).

8.  In  thy  calling  and  all  thy  ways  commit  thy  goings  to  the  Lord  (Prov.  xvi.
3).  A  few  thoughts  of  faith  would  keep  us  from  many  thoughts  of  cares  and  fears.
When  such  waves  toss  and  turmoil  the  heart,  thoughts  of  faith  bring  calm  and
rest. — Condensation  of  a  Homily  by  Rev,  Thomas  Goodwin^  B.D,     Dated  A.D.  1638.

Ver.  19.    Topic:  The  Prophet's  Lamentations  over  his  People's  Doom.

{^Ancient  Homily.)

Jeremiah  travails  with  the  miseries  and  calamities  of  his  people,  and  bemoans
them,  to  draw  his  people  to  the  same  affections  and  dispositions  with  himself.

I.  Tlie  complaint  or  lamentation  itself.  We  have  three  particulars — i  The
parts  affected.  Signify  the  soul  and  inward  man.  Gregory  Myssen  regards  them
as  "  the  intellectual  and  discursive  faculty  of  the  soul."  Because  of  :  1.  The
tecrecy  of  it,  the  mind  and  soul  being  inward  and  hidden.  2.  Because  tlie  mind
receives  and  digests  the  thoughts.  3.  The  mind  is  the  mother  of  thoughts^  con-
ceiving and  generating  them.  ii.  The  grief  of  those  parts.  "  Heart  is  pained,"  <fec.,
both  as  to  the  kind  (*'  pained  ")  and  the  effect  of  the  grief  ("  heart  maketh  noise  in
me").  From  which  infer  :  1.  God  need  not  go  far  for  the  punishment  of  wicked
men ;  He  can  do  it  from  within  themselves ;  punish  a  man  with  his  own  affections
and  thoughts.  2.  What  good  cause  we  have  to  regulate  and  control  our  affections,
avoid  passion  and  excess  of  emotion,  take  care  to  be  pacific,  and  enjoy  a  sabbatic
tranquillity  in  our  s[)irits.  iii.  The  passage  or  vent.  "I  cannot  hold  my  peace."
Passion  will  make  way,  and  force  itself  forth.  It  did  here  in  :  1.  The  speech  of
discovery ;  for  he  cannot  help  revealing  these  workings  of  his  own  spirit.  God's
ministers  find  a  necessity  in  themselves  to  discover  their  thoughts  to  their  people
(Jer.  XX.  9  ;  Job  xxxiii.  18-20).  Moreover,  love  constrains  him  hereunto  (Acts  xx.
20),  that  his  weeping  and  mourning  might  be  a  forerunner  of  theirs :  also  the
consideration  of  his  calling,  as  watchman  and  guide,  urged  him  to  give  warnings  of
sin  and  judgment.  2.  The  speech  of  lamentation:  he  must  bewail  and  utter  com-
plaint, his  anguish  was  so  great  (as  Job  vii.  11).

II.  The  ground  or  occasion  of  his  lamentation.  *'  Because,"  <kc.  i  The
tidings  or  report  itself.  **  Sound  of  trumpet,  alarm  of  war."  This  not  literally  in
a  military  case.  1.  The  trumpet  of  Providence.  2.  The  trumpet  of  the  ITorc?  (Isa.
Iviii.  1).  3.  The  trumpet  of  vision,  or  extraordinary  prophetical  revelation,  ii.
The  conveyance  of  it  to  the  prophet.  "  Thou  hast  heard,  0  my  soul."  1.  The  soul
through  the  corporeal  organ  of  hearing.  2.  TJie  soul  immediately,  as  being  that
which  had  communion  with  God.  3.  The  soul  emphatically ;  that  is  heard  indeed
which  is  heard  by  the  soul.  Hence  (a.)  God's  excelltncy :  He  speaks.  (6.)  Man^s
duty:  he  hears,  iii.  The  improvement  or  use  he  makes  of  it.  1.  His  meditations
aroused  his  affections,  (a.)  Tliis  is  the  aim  of  a  revelation,  (b.)  We  should  en-
deavour to  bring  revelations  for  others  to  our  own  spiritual  advancement  and
profit.  2.  What  these  affections  were  which  the  tidings  aroused,  (a.)  Anger  at  his
people's  obstinacy.  (6.)  j^car  of  the  coming  judgment,  (c.)  Grief  oi  hi^  people's
state  and  doom.  Yet  there  was  no  such  thing  yet  as  war  among  them ,  nevertlie-
less  the  certainty  of  it  pained  him.     To  shut  up  all :  1.   We  tee  how  propliets  and

93


CHAP.  IT.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMJAff.


ministers  should  he  affected  in  themselves  by  the  threateiiings  and  denunciations  of
judgment.  2.  We  learn  how  all  should  he  affected  hy  Divine  warnings.  If  so
dread[*ul  in  apprehension,  what  will  it  be  in  the  infliction  %  3.  Let  us  endeavour  to
meet  God  by  speedy  and  unfeigned  repentance  (Amos  iv.  12). — Abstract  of  Sermon
hy  Rev.  Thomas  Horton^  D.D.     Dated  a.d.  1679.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  IV.    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGOESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  1.  Sin  banished,  or  no  heaven.
**  The  first  physic  to  recover  our  souls  is
not  cordials,  but  corrosives  ;  not  an  im-
mediate ste[)ping  into  heaven  by  a  present
assurance,  but  mourning,  lamentation,
and  a  bitter  bewailing  of  our  former
transgressions.  With  Mary  Magdalene,
we  must  wash  Christ's  feet  with  our
tears  of  sorrow  before  we  may  anoint
His  head  with  the  *  oil  of  gladness.'  " —
Browning.

A  poor  man  told  Rowland  Hill  that
the  way  to  heaven  comprised  three  steps :
"  Out  of  self,  urdo  Christ,  into  heaven."

When  Ben's  master  died,  they  told  him
he  had  gone  to  heaven.  Ben  shook  his
head.  '*I'fraid  massa  no  gone  there."
'*  But  why,  Ben  1, "  "  'Cos  when  massa
go  North,  or  go  journey  to  the  Springs,
he  talk  about  it  long  time,  and  get  ready.
I  never  hear  him  talk  about  going  to
heaven,  never  see  him  get  ready  to  go
there."

"  I  know  the  way  to  heaven,"  said  a
/ittle  girl  to  her  brother.  "  Do  tell
flie,"  the  boy  answered.  "Well,  just
tommence  going  up,  and  keep  on  going
ap  all  the  time,  and  you'll  get  there.
But,  Johnny,  you  must  not  turn  back^

The  banished  recalled : —

*  Driven  from  their  home,  their  pathway  lost,
'Mid  clouds  that  came  upon  the  world's
fair  morn,
By  gloom  and  shadows  cross'd,
Wandered  a  race  forlorn.

•    There  sat  One  o'er  heaven's  highest  hall,
Who,  in  str  nge  charity,  to  exile  went
These  exiles  to  recall

To  that,  His  heavenly  tent.

'*  He  gave  Himself,  their  staff  and  stay.

To  feeble  knees,  strength  to  the  sinking
soul ;
He  was  Himself  the  Way,
He  was  Himself  the  Goal."

— From  the  Latin.

Ver.     2.     "  Thou   sJialt    swear  ^^   dhc.
"Every  time,  whenever  thou  shalt  find
thyself  to  have  let  slip  an  oath,  punish
94


thyself  for  it  by  missing  the  next  meaU"
— Ghrysostom^

**  It  is  great  sin  to  swear  unto  a  sin,
But  greater  sin  to  keep  a  sinful  oath.
Who  can  be  bound  by  any  solemn  vow
To  do  a  murderous  deed,  to  rob  a  man,
To  reave  the  orphan  of  his  patrimony.
To  wring  the  widow  from  her  custom'd  right;
And  have  no  other  reason  for  this  wrong,
But  that  he  was  bound  by  solemn  oath?"
— Shakespeare,  2  Henry  VI.  v.  1.

Ver.  3.  **  Fallow  ground."  Illus-
trates :  1.  Culture  of  the  Church  (1  Cor.
iii.  9).  2.  Of  the  heart.  The  longer
we  leave  the  heart  uncultivated  the
harder  to  break  up.  If  we  do  the  till-
ing, God  will  rain  righteousness  (Hos.  x.
12).  Break  it  up  with  thought,  soften
it  with  repentance,  plant  it  with  truth.
— Topics  for  Teachers.

'*  Have  you  ever  read  the  *  Ancient
Mariner?'  I  dare  say  you  thought  it
one  of  the  strangest  imaginations  ever
put  together,  especially  that  part  where
the  old  mariner  represents  the  corpses  of
all  the  dead  men  rising  up  to  man  the
ship, — dead  men  pulling  the  ropes,  dead
men  steering,  dead  men  spreading  sails.
But  I  have  lived  to  see  that  time  :  have
seen  it  done.  I  have  gone  into  churches
and  have  seen  a  dead  man  in  the  pulpit,
a  dead  man  as  a  deacon,  a  dead  man
holding  the  plate,  and  dead  men  sitting
to  hear." — S pur g eon.

Ver.  4.  Unquenchable  fire.  A  finger
of  lightning  will  write  on  the  sky,  *'For
ever  !  "  and  the  tbunder-peal  echo  among
the  crags  of  death,  "  For  ever !  "  O  those
fire-bells  will  never  stop  ringing,  because
the  conflagration  will  never  be  done  !  (2
Thess.  i.  9.)    It  is  not  I,  but  God  says  it.

Sir  Francis  Newport,  in  his  last  mo-
ments, caught  a  glimpse  of  the  eternal
world  ;  he  looked  into  it  before  he  en-
tered it.  The  last  words  he  uttered  were,
"Oh,  the  insufi'erable  pangs  of  hell!"
The  lost  soul  will  cry,  "  I  cannot  staud


nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP,  n.


this  j  is  there  no  way  out  1  *'  And  the
echo  will  answer,  "No  way  out  for
ever!"— Z>«  Witt  Talmage.

Ver.  6.  Zion  a  refuge.  "  I  wish  they
were  within  the  enclosure  where  the
boar  out  of  the  wood  could  not  waste
them  nor  the  wild  beast  of  the  field  de-
vour them." — H.  Ward  Beecher.

Ver.  7.  '*  The  lion.  Nebuchad-
nezzar, king  of  Babylon,  whose  monarchy
is  represented  by  a  lion  (Dan.  vii.  4).
He  is  called  '*  the  destroyer  of  the  Gen-
tiles," or  rather  "  nations ; "  Judea  and
all  the  neighbouring  countries  being
given  up  into  his  hands  by  God's  decree
(Jer.  XXV.  9,  xxvii.  6). —  W.  Lowth,

Ver.  11.  Blast  of  the  Almighty.
Thevenot  mentions  the  death  of  20,000
men  who  perished  in  one  night  by  one
of  those  burning  winds.  Sir  J.  Ghardin
describes  this  wind  as  making  a  great
hissing  noise ;  that  it  appear!  red  and
fiery,  and  kills  those  it  strikes  by  stifling
them.  Maillet  mentions  its  being  felt
in  the  desert  between  Egypt  and  Mecca,
in  part  of  which  Israel  wandered  forty
years.

A  party  of  travellers  in  the  desert
were  overtaken  by  the  fierce  simoom.
Like  blinding  snow  driven  by  the  winds
of  March  came  the  hot  sand.  Before
the  simoom  had  reached  its  height,  they
came  suddenly  upon  a  rude  building  of
stone,  well  protected  with  roof  and
doors,  which  the  hand  of  charity  had
erected  there  for  shelter.  With  joy  they
rushed  into  it,  closed  the  doors,  and  were
safe.      (Comp.  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21.)

Ver.  14.  "  Vain  thoughts."  "  If
the  flow  of  a  day's  mind-and-heart  ex-
periences were  written,  it  would  be  a
volume,  and  one's  life  a  Bodleian  Lib-
rary ;  but  the  '  book  of  remembrance '
is  yonder,  and  the  life  is  daguerreotyped
on  the  sensitive  pages  of  the  future." —
Beecher,

''  In  hotter  climates,  the  locusts  swarm
80  thickly  in  the  air  as  sometimes  to
hide  from  the  traveller  the  light  of  the
sun,  and  cast  a  cold,  dark  shadow  on  his
]»athway  So  it  is  in  the  world  of  mind :
swarms  of  vain  thoughts  are  ever  float-
ing over  some  minds,  intercepting  the
beams  of  truth  from  falling  on  the
heart.    <uid   thua    keeping    that    heart


barren   of  all  virtue  and  goodness,"—
Rev,  R.  Roberts.

**  *Tis  not  in  things  o'er  thought  to  domineer:
Quard  well  thy  thought ;  our  thoughts  are
heard  in  heaven."  — YouNO.

Ver.  15.  Dan.  "  In  consequence  of
a  large  portion  of  the  canton  of  Dan
continuing  in  the  possession  of  the
Philistines,  it  was  found  too  small  for
its  population,  and  600  Danites,  with
their  families,  emigrated  to  the  northern
extremity  of  Palestine,  attacked  Laish,
a  Zidonian  city  near  Lebanon,  took  pos-
session of  it,  and  changed  its  name  to
Dan.  This  place  is  notorious  in  sacred
history  as  the  spot  where  Jeroboam
established  his  golden  calves  (1  Kings
xii.  29),  and  as  the  place  which  Nebu-
chadnezzar first  seized  on  his  invasion
of  Canaan." — Paxton^s  ^^  Sacred  Geo-
graphy.^*

Ver.  18.  '' Bitter  at  heart."  On  the
walls  of  one  of  the  Egyptian  temples  is
said  to  be  the  inscription,  '^The  impious
shall  commit  iniquity  without  recom-
pense, but  not  without  remorse."

*•  Through  many  a  clime  'tis  mine  to  go.
With  many  a  retrospection  curst ;
And  all  my  solace  is  to  know,

Whate'er  betides,  I've  known  the  worst.
What  is  that  worst  ?     Nay  !  do  not  ask  ;

In  pity  from  the  search  forbear.
Smile  on  :  nor  venture  to  unmask

Man's    heart,   and   view    the   hell's  that
there."  — Byron.

**  'Tis  very  true,  my  grief  lies  all  within ;
And  these  external  manners  of  lament
Are  merely  shadows  of  the  unseen  grief
That   swells  with   silence  in  the   tortured

soul  :
There  lies  the  substance."

— Shakespeare.

Ver.  19.  PropheVs  distress.  "  God's
ministers  must  have  their  hearts  fired,
not  with  passion,  but  with  love.  The
thunderbolt  may  crash,  but  the  sun
melts.  It  is.  better  to  love  as  a  pastor
than  speak  as  an  angel." — Watson^  A.D.
1649.

Ver.  26.  ^^  Broken  down  at  the  pre
seiice  of  the  Lord.''  "  Oh,  that  you  might
all  be  stirred  by  a  dread  of  the  Almighty  I
I  announce  to  yon  the  judgment  to
come ;  it  shall  break  upon  the  earth,
that  day  of  wonder  and  of  terror,  when
from  the  sea,  and  the  mountain,  and  the
desert  shall  swarm  the  buried  familie*

96


CHAP.  ▼.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


of  the  human  kind,  and  the  dead  shall  affords  not  a  sadder  sight  than  a  poor

stand  before  their  God  :  no  shelter  for  Christless  soul  shivering  upon  the  brink

the  proud,  no  mask  for  the  hypocrite,  of  eternity.      To  see  the  poor  soul  that

no  standing-place  for  the  presumptuous."  now  begins  to  wake    out   of   its   long

Melvill.  dream,  at  its  entrance  into  the  world  of

Ver.  30.    Finery:  Flattery.  realities,  shrinking  back  into  the  body

<..,.,      XI-                           4.1   ^.u     j.v,-»  Siud  cry  ins,  0 1  cannotf  I  dare  not  die/"

•'  Ah  I  wheu  the  means  are  gone  that  buy  this  m       t

praise,  — Flavel.

The   breath  is  gone  whereof  '.his  praise  if  "  Come     home,      wandering,      tired,

made.  grieved   soul !      Love   where   thy   love

Feast-won,  fast-lost:    one  cloud  of  winter  ^j^^jj  ^^^  y^^  j^g^^      L^^g  ^^^  that  will

Thesf  fliirare  couch'd."-SHAKEsPEARE.  "ot  reject  thee,  nor  deceive  thee,  nor  re-

,,  quite   thee  with  injuries  as  the  world

"  OM^'i!^lVomtU--Ide,n.  doth.     God  will  receive  thee  when  the

world  doth  cast  thee  oft,  if  thou  cast  off

Ver.  31.     Woe-stricken,    **  The  world  the  world  for  Him  I " — Baxter.


CHAPTER  V.

Cbitioal  and  Exeqetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  chapter.    The  description  here  of

unblushing  immorality  and  total  disorganisation  leads  Kimchi  and  others  to  date  this  chapter
after  Josiah's  times  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  ;  ostentatious  reform  and  superficial  religion  may
be  synchronous  with  abandoned  impiety  and  grossest  corruption.  Matthew  Henry  boldly  puts
an  interval  of  twelve  years  between  the  fourth  and  this  chapter,  two  years  after  Josiah's  death,
bnt  without  argument  or  evidence.

2.  Cotemporary  Scriptares.    2  Chron.  xxxy.  1-19  ;  2  Kings  xxiiL  1-27 ;  Zeph.  i.-iiL  ;  and,
probably,  Nahum  and  Habakkuk.

3.  National  History  and  Cotemporary  History,  as  chap.  iii.

4.  Geographical  References  in  this  chapter.  Ver.  1.  ** Broad  places  of  Jerusalem^**  open
spaces  just  within  the  gates  of  the  city,  places  of  concourse,  the  markets,  &c.  (See  on  chap,  i,
15).  Ver.  22.  *^  The  sand /or  the  bound  of  the  sea."  Seas  known  to  the  sacred  writers  were —
1.  Mediterranean,  situate  in  the  middle  of  the  then  known  regions  of  the  earth,  separating  the
three  great  continents  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa;  2320  miles  by  1080  at  extreme  measurements,
5000  feet  deep  at  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  inhabited  by  over  440  diflferent  species  of  fish,  called  the
Great  Sea  (Num.  xxxiv.  6,  7),  Sea  of  the  Philistines  (Exod.  xxiii.  31).  On  its  shores  were  situate
the  mightiest  empires  of  the  world,  Assyrian,  Persian,  Grecian,  Roman.  Western  boundary  of
Palestine.  2.  Red  Sea,  a  huge  gulf  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  interposed  between  Egypt  and
Arabia;  1400  miles  by  150  ;  area,  about  180,000  square  miles  ;  depth,  about  6000  feet;  divided
at  northern  end  into  Gulf  of  Suez,  190  miles  by  20,  and  Gulf  of  Akabah,  112  by  16  ;  between
these  gulfs  lies  the  peninsula  of  Sinai.  3.  Dead  Sea,  inland  sea ;  believed  originally  to  have
been  a  huge  basin  in  the  channel  which  connected  the  Mediterranean  and  Red  Sea  ;  situate  south-
east of  Palestine,  48  mile?  by  10  at  extreme  measurements,  300  square  miles  area,  depth  about
1300  feet,  and  the  surface  1300  feet  below  level  of  the  ocean.  4.  Sea  of  Oalilee,  also  called
Sea  of  Tiberias,  north-east  of  Palestine,  700  feet  below  level  of  Mediterranean,  12  miles  by  6,
depth  about  700  feet.

**  How  pleasant  to  me  is  thy  deep  blue  wave,  0  Sea  of  Galilee  I
For  the  glorious  One  who  came  to  save  hath  often  Btood  by  thee.**

5.  Personal  Allusions.  Description  of  the  Babylonians  (ver.  16).  **  Mighty  nation,**  called
(1.  23),  the  "hammer  of  the  whole  earth;"  ''ancient  nation,"  the  empire  was  founded  by
Nimrod  soon  after  the  Flood  (Gen.  x.  8,  10,  xi.  4,  9).  Isaiah  suggests  (xxiii.  13)  that  the
Chaldeans  were  a  younger  branch  of  that  venerable  stock,  yet  to  earliest  times  their  origin  ig
traceable,  when  they  were  one  of  the  Cushite  tribes  (Dr.  W.  Smith),  a  fact  proved  by  the  relics
of  their  lar.guage,  which,  as  a  dialect  of  Babylonia,  was  retained  in  use  as  the  learned  language
for  scientific  and  religious  literature  (Dan.  i.  4).  Henderson  states  that  originally  they  in-
habited the  Carducihian  Mountains  and  the  northern  parts  of  Mesopotamia,  and  afterwardg
migrated  into  the  Babylonian  territory  ;  ''whose  language"  the  Jews  knew  not,  nor  could  un-
derstand, either  because  the  Chaldee,  though  only  a  dialect  of  the  Hebrew,  was  so  different  in
its  words  and  construction  as  to  be  foreign  to  a  Jew,  (>r  (as  Hendt-rsou  eiiggeats)  because  tb«

96


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohaf.  ▼.

people  had  retained  their  native  Cushite  tongue,  probably  the  mother  of  the  present  Kurdish,
a  language  totally  different  from  any  of  Semitic  origin,  in  close  affinity  with  the  Persic.

6.  Natural  History.  Ver.  6.  ^*  iXon"  (see  notes  on  ii.  15,  iv.  7).  **Wolfofiheevening»:*'
formerly  abundant  in  Palestine,  now  seen  occasionally  :  character  and  habits  described  Gen.
xlix.  27.  Inferior  to  lion  in  strength  and  to  leopard  in  courage,  yet  if  possible  more  rapa-
cious and  fierce  (especially  in  the  evening)  than  either  (Habak.  i.  8) ;  generally  chooses  as  his
prey  the  weaker  animals,  lambs  and  kids ;  his  depredations  destructive  in  the  extreme,  for  he
assails  not  only  what  his  ravenous  hunger  craves,  but  every  living  thing  he  meets.  He
"dwells  alone,  shunning  even  his  own  species,  except  for  occasional  combined  attack."
"Leojpard  shaU  watch  over  cities : "  predacious  (Hos.  xiii.  7) ;  swift  (Hab.  i.  8) ;  **  has  a  ferocious
air,  a  restless  eye,  a  cruel  aspect ;  "  is  very  nimble  in  his  movements,  swift  and  subtle,
gluttonous  and  rapacious.  Homer  says  the  leopard  can  never  be  satisfied  with  prey  (Pazton's
"Natural  History").

Ver.  17.  **  Vines  and  Jig-trees."  **  Vines"  (notes  on  ii.  21).  **  Fig-trea:**  yerj  akhund&nt
in  Palestine  (Deut.  viii.  8) ;  a  single  tree  would  produce  280  lbs.  of  figs.

Ver.  24.  **  Former  and  latter  rain  "  (see  Critical  Notes  on  iii.  3).  "  Weeks  of  harvest :  **
seven  weeks  which  intervened  between  the  feasts  of  Passover  and  Pentecost  (Deut.  xvL  9).
Barley  harvest  began  quickly  after  Passover  ;  wheat,  which  ripens  later,  was  reaped  just  before
Pentecost,  at  which  sheaves  were  offered  (Exod.  xxxiv.  22).  Rain  never  fell  during  those  weeks
(1  Sam.  xii.  17 ;  Prov.  xxiv.  1  ;  Amos  iv.  7).  The  regularity  of  weather  and  seasons  was  con-
sequent upon  a  special  Providence  and  covenant  promises  (Deut.  xi.  11-14).  The  climate  and
seasons  are  now  very  uncertain  ;  for  the  Providence  has  been  alienated,  and  the  covenant  with-
drawn because  of  sin  (Deut.  xi.  17).

7.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  1.  **Executeth  judgment:**  see  Lit.  Crit.  below.  Ver.  5.
"Broken  the  yoke  and  hurst  the  bonds  "(see  notes  on  ii.  20);  implement  of  husbandry ;  three
Hebrew  words   translated  yoke,   tOID    ilLOiD,   and  7^3^;  the   last  here,      Ver.  10,    "WaUs

and  battlements:"  the  old  wall  began  on  the  north  of  Jerusalem  at  the  tower  called
Hippicus,  and  terminated  at  the  west  cloister  of  the  Temple  :  its  southern  direction  was  over
the  pool  of  Siloam  to  the  eastern  cloister  of  the  Temple.  Josephus  says  there  were  sixty  towers
on  this  wall.  The  city  was  divided  into  the  High  Town  on  the  west,  and  the  Low  Town  on  the
east.  When  David  acquired  possession  of  both,  he  "  built  the  city  round  about,  even  from  Millo
round  about  "  (2  Sam.  v.  9)  ;  and  "  Joab  repaired  the  rest  of  the  city  "  (1  Chron.  xi.  8),  *.«.,  the
High  Town  ;  connecting  the  two  divisions  of  the  city  together,  and  surrounding  the  whole
with  fortifications  (Josephus  Antiq.  VII.  iii.  2).  These  walls  of  David  were  strengthened  and
elaborated  by  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  1,  xi.  27).  Josephus  says  that  Solomon  "  having  repaired
the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  made  them  much  greater  and  stronger  than  they  were  before  "  (Ant.
VIII.  ii.  1);  and  that  **  the  walls  that  encompassed  Jerusalem  might  correspond  to  the  dignity
of  the  city,  he  both  repaired  them  and  made  them  higher,  and  built  great  towers  upon  them  "
(Ant.  VIII.  vi.  1).  Ver.  16.  *'  Quiver :"  Layard's  ''Monuments  of  Nineveh  "  represent  the
enormous  and  powerful  bows  carried  by  the  Assyrian  warriors.  The  bowmen  and  cavalry
formed  the  main  strength  of  Chaldean  armies.  **  Quiver  "  was  the  case  in  which  each  soldier
packed  and  carried  his  arrows,  and  was  probably  slung  over  the  shoulder.  Ver.  17.  "  /m-
poverish  thy  cities:"  see  Lit.  Crit.  below.     Ver.  27.  **  Cage  full    of  birds :  "cage,"    ^^173^

rendered  in  Amos  viii.  1,  "basket,"  because  made  of  wickerwork  :  in  this  birds  were  secured
by  the  fowler,  and  the  door  left  open  as  a  decoy  to  birds  which  were  free,  who  no  sooner
entered  than  the  door  fell,

8.  Literary  Criticism.  Ver.  1.  **  Executeth  judgment  :**  lit.  doing  right;  no  allusion  here
to  conduct  of  public  judicial  officers,  but  to  general  behaviour  of  men,  "  Seeketh  the  truth  :**
not  verbal,  but  ^raciicai  truth  y  i.e.,  integrity,  good-faith,  truth  in  actions.  Ver.  3.  "Upon
the  truth,"  i.e.,  practical  truth  (as  in  ver.  1)  ;  fidelity  as  opposed  to  falseness  (ver.  2)  Ver.  4.
"  Therefore  :  '*  too  vigorous  a  rendering ;  then,  and,     Ver.  6.   "  Wolf  of  the  evenings: "  H*)^

evening ;  n3'^]|7    desert :  the  word  here  is  a  plural  form  /1^^*TV     The  prevailing  conclusions

T   T    :'  T    :*

of  commentators  derive  this  plural  from,  IHf^T^  •  thus,  wolf  of  the  deserts  :  but  Gesenius  gives
this  plural  from  ^'jy  evening  ;  and  De  Wett,  Hend.,  and  Noyes  retain  wolf  of  the  evenings.

Ver.  7.  *^  How  shaU  I  pardon  f*  more  correctly,  What  reason,  why  should  /,  how  can  It
^*  Though  I  fed  them  to  the  full:"  thirty-three  of  De  Rossi's  MSS.,  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  Syriac,
Arabic,  Tayum,  and  many  expositors,  ancient  and  modern,  retain  this  reading  from  the  word
^]ill£7hJJV  appealing  to  V.  28  and  Deut.  xxxii.  15;  Hos.  xiii.  6  ;  Neh,  ix.  25,  as  parallels;
where  bountifulness  of  earthly  enjoyments  issued  in  apostasy.  But  the  word  should  be
y2,Il'^^V  and  I  made  them  swear:  the  preponderance  of  existing  MSS.  supports  this  pointing,

and  most  modern  commentators  prefer  it ;  t.«,,  God  made  them  pledge  allegiance  to  Himself;
both  originally  at  Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.  7),  and  recently  during  Josiah's  reforms  (2  Kings  xxiii.  3  ;
2  Chron.  xxxiv.  7  seq.).  Ver.  8.  **  Fed  horses  in  the  morning:**  a  difficulty  with  the  word
rendered  "in  the  morning."      Thii  derives  D^Dl^D  from  DDt^   to  rise  early  in  the  morning.


CBAT.  T.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  JEREMIAH,


Hitzig  traces  the  word  to  ^U^D^  to  draw;  hence  "draught  horses."  Ewald,  altering  th«
word  to  D'^plL^O  gives  **  lustful  horses.''  But  the  safer  and  most  preferable  derivation  of  the
word  is  from  tlD^  the  Hiphil  particle ;  to  wander  (Maurer,  Keil,  Umbriet,  Speaker's  Com.),
^^they  rove  about}'  Ver.  10.  *^  Walls  and  battlemtnts : "  battlements  is  a  false  rendering:
tendrils,  i.e.,  of  the  vine  (ii.  21)  or  branches  (Isa.  xviii.  6).  The  walls  of  the  vineyard  are  to  be
scaled,  and  while  the  stock  of  the  vine  is  to  be  spared,  all  her  tendrils  are  to  be  torn  or  hewn
ofif.  Ver.  12.  '* It  is  not  he,"  i.e.,  not  God,  who  has  spoken  of  judgments;  therefore  the
menaces  were  false,  ''wind"  (ver.  13)  ;  or  "Z/c  is  not,*'  i.e.,  there  is  no  God  to  punish  as  is
predicted  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  Ver.  13.  **  Thus  shall  it  be  done  unto  them,"  or,  so  be  it  done;  may  the
calamities  they  threaten  come  upon  the  prophets  themselves.  Ver.  15.  '*  A  mighty  nation  :"
the  word  signifies  perennial,  as  of  an  ever-flowing  stream,  or  enduring,  as  rocks  ;  the  same
word  is  used  of   both.       '* An  ancient  nation:"  D^ij^D,    from    eternity,    of    immemorial


their  hands,"  i.e.,  strengthened  and  supported  the  false  prophets.      Rather,  at  or  under  their
hands;  the  priests  rule  as  the  false  prophets  direct.

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  F.

Section  1-9.  A  profligate  people  ripe  for  vengeance.

„    10-19.  Forewarning  despised,  judgment  prepared.

„    20-25.  Solemn  reasons  for  fearing  God.

„    26-31.  Spiritual  criminality  of  most  hideous  form.

Ver.  1-9.  A  Profligate  People  Ripe  for  Vengeance.

The  facts :  not  an  upright  or  godly  man  could  be  found  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  1,  2).
All  were  spiritually  incorrigible  and  defiant  (ver.  3).  Excusing  the  poor  in  part,
because  of  their  spiritual  ignorance,  it  was  yet  found  that  the  rich  and  learned
were  insolently  impious  (ver.  4,  6).  All  this  necessitated  direct  punishment  and
destruction  (ver.  6).  God  could  discover  no  ground  for  pardon  or  pity  in  their
case  (ver.  7,  8).     Vengeance  must  fall  on  them  (ver.  9).

I.  Lenient  conditions  of  pardon  (ver.  1).  Find  a  good  man,  and  I  will  pardon
the  city  I  1.  Appalling  corruption  of  society.  Either:  (1.)  Though  many  esteemed
themselves  good  and  pious,  God  saw  all  to  he  vile.  Or  :  (2.)  If  any  were  true  and
righteous  he  dare  not  openly  show  his  religion  (Isa.  lix.  14).  2.  Easy  terms  of
mercy.  God  asked  "  ten  righteous "  in  Sodom :  but  would  spare  Jerusalem
for  one  I  (1.)  How  He  loved  and  desired  to  spare  the  city.  (2.)  How  slow  to  anger
and  of  great  kindness.

II.  Blasphemous  show  of  piety.  Though  utterly  iniquitous,  the  profession  of
religion  had  not  been  abandoned  (ver.  2).  1.  It  gratified  and  quieted  their
conscience.     2.   But  it  incensed  the  God  of  truth  (Isa.  xxix.  13  ;  Prov.  xii.  22).

III.  Hardened  resistance  of  God  (ver.  3).  Their  gross  irreligion  was  not  be-
cause God  had  not  done  all  He  could  to  restrain  and  correct  them.  Yet  He  whose
"  eyes  are  upon  the  truth  "  saw  only  falsity.  1.  God  had  afflicted  them  in  mercy ;
but  the  "  stroke "  awakened  no  penitential  response.  2.  God  had  corrected  them
with  severity;  but  they  resisted  the  design  of  the  Lord  in  thus  "  consumina: "
them.  Instead  :  3.  They  fortified  themselves  against  God  and  His  judgments.
And,  4.   Deliberately  refused  to  return  to  Him.

IV.  Prevailing  social  corruption  (ver.  4,  5).  1.  From  the  lowest  grade  to  the
highest  society  was  godless.  2.  Ignorance  or  knowledge  altered  not  their  case;  "  the
poor  know  not"  &c.,  but  "  the  great  have  known  the  way  of  the  Lord  ; "  yet  from
the  least  to  the  greatest  every  one  was  evil  (chap,  vl  13).  The  poor  blindly
wander,  but  the  rich  are  blasphemously  wilful :  but  so  it  was,  "  all  flesh  had  cor-
rupted its   way."     What  a  catalogue  of  sins  is  here  given!     Ver.  1.  Total  ab-

98


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  cvlms.  t.


sence  of  integrity  in  public  life ;  ver.  2,  Hypocrisy  in  religion ;  ver.  3,  Incor-
rigible hardness  of  heart;  ver.  4,  Degradation  of  the  poor;  ver.  6,  Debauchery
of  the  rich ;  ver.  7,  8,  Shameless  idolatry  and  frightful  immorality.  Surely
these  had  sunk  to  the  "  depths  of  Satan."

V.  Righteous  punisliment  threatened  (ver.  6).  1.  Its  nature  definitely  known
to  God;  for  He  fixes  positive  consequences  to  sin  j  not  meiely  gives  the  sinner  up
to  indefinite  miseries.  2.  Its  severity  fully  determined.  For  "every  one,"  there-
fore none  shall  elude  it ;  "  torn  in  pieces,"  therefore  none  shall  outbrave  it.  3.  Its
justice  unquestionable;  *^  because  their  transgressions,"  <fec.  God's  dealings  even
with  rebels  are  not  arbitrary  or  extreme :  He  lets  each  transgressor  mete  out  his
own  misery  by  the  decision  of  merit.

VI.  An  insulted  God  avenged  (ver.  9).  1.  Can  any  challenge  the  Justice?
What  are  '*  these  things"  to  which  God  makes  appeal  ?  (1.)  God's  own  children  had
forsaken  Him  (ver.  7).  (2.)  Openly  identified  themselves  with  idols.  (3.)  Violated
His  laws.  (4.)  Utterly  polluted  the  homes  and  the  city  (ver.  7,  8).  2.  Can  any
suggest  reasons  of  mercy  ?  (1.)  Should  such  vileness  be  tolerated  ?  (ver.  7,  8).  (2.)
Ought  snch  falsity  to  be  connived  atl  (ver.  1,  2).  (3.)  Can  any  Divine  correction
avail  ?  (ver.  3).  (4.)  Are  there  any  who  merit  to  be  spared  ]  (ver.  1,  4,  5).  (5.)  Is  the
judgment  heavier  than  is  deserved  1  (ver.  6).  3.  Can  any  hope  to  evade  God's
vengeance  ?  (1.)  Not  by  subtle  devices  and  deception  (ver.  2,  3).  (2.)  Tet  by  peni-
tential pleading  for  pardon  (ver.  1).     (3.)  Calvary  is  our  sole  hope,

Ver.  10-19.  Forewarning  Despised:  Judgment  Prbpareix

Multitudes  are  ruined  by  fancying  that  God  will  not  be  so  strict  to  punish
iniquity  as  His  Word  forewarns  (ver.  12).  This  was  Satan's  first  snare  laid  for
man  (Gen.  iii.  4) ;  and  men  easily  fall  into  it  still.  Sinners  are  ready  to  deny  a
message  to  be  from  God  which  troubles  them  in,  and  would  drive  them  from,  their
sins  (ver.  13).

I.  God  disowns  them  (ver.  10).  "  They  are  not  the  Lord's"  (see  Lit.  Grit,  on
"battlements"),  i.e.,  such  vile  outgrowths  from  the  stock  of  David  God  will  not
regard  as  His  people.  1,  They  acted  deceitfully  with  God  (ver.  11).  2.  They
talked  defiantly  against  God  (ver.  12,  13),  showing — (1.)  An  absence  of  reverence  or
regard  for  God  Himself] — "  it  is  not  He,"  rather  "  He  is  not"  (see  Lit.  Grit.)  ;  (2.)
Utter  heedlessness  of  God's  Word, — mere  "wind"  (ver.  13)  ;  3.  They  wickedly  menaced
God's  messenger  (ver.  13), — "  Thus  shall  it  be  done,"  &c.  This  filled  up  the  measure
of  their  iniquity  (Matt,  xxiii.  30-33).  Thus  had  they  ruthlessly  broken  every  link
that  united  them  with  the  Lord,  and  defaced  every  feature  which  identified  them
with  Him  and  His  true  people.  "  Now,  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,
he  is  none  of  His  "  (^om.  viii.  9).  "  I  never  knew  you :  depart  from  Me,  ye  that
work  iniquity  "  (Matt.  vii.  23).

II.  God  dooms  them.  Jehovah  speaks,  and  there  is  a  dreadful  "  wherefore "
determining  His  utterance ;  it  is  a  deliverance  of  Judah  to  vrrath.  1.  The  threaten-
ings  they  derided  shall  devour  them  as  fire  (ver.  14),  burn  within  their  consciences
and  memories, — the  fire  never  to  be  quenched  :  an  inward  terror  at  the  wrath  of
God  should  consume  them  as  wood,  burning  up  their  complacency,  their  fearless-
ness, their  hopes,  their  delusions.  2.  The  foe  they  disregarded  should  waste  and
ruin  them.  (1.)  Protection  and  defences  should  fail;  "walls"  scaled  (ver.  10),
"fenced  cities"  destroyed  (ver.  17).  (2.)  A  scourging  adversary  should  desolate
them  ;  God  would  bring  it,  for  He  commands  nations  to  do  His  will  (ver.  15).
(a.)  Dreadful  in  itself  (ver.  15)  ;  (6.)  terrible  in  war  (ver.  16)  ;  (c.)  wasting  the
country  (ver.  17)  ;  {d.)  destroying  the  cities  (ver.  17) ;  (e.)  implacable  in  slaughter
(ver.  6).

III.  God  deserts  them  (ver.  19).  As  they  had  deserted  Him.  "  With  what
measure  ye  mete,"  <kc.     1.  Sinners  dare  to  challenge  the  justice  of  God  in  their

99


CHAT.  V.  n  OMlLEflG  COMM  EN  TAR  Y  :  J  En  EMI  A  H,


wer throw  (ver.  19,  comp.  Matt.  xxv.  44).  2.  God  justifies  His  dealings  tvith
transgressors  (ver.  19) ;  their  punishment  corresponds  to  their  sin :  having
"served  strange  gods"  wilfully,  they  shall  "serve  strangers"  compulsorily.  Yet,
3.  God  limits  the  severity  of  their  punishment  (ver.  18),  tor  'B^a  promises  must  be
fulfilled  to  Judah,  and  His  mercy  must  be  illustrated  before  the  world  as  well  as
His  justice  ;  and  the  enemy  whom  God  employs  to  punish  shali  see  that  God  gives
not  the  sceptre  into  his  hand.  God  is  the  Supreme  King  ;  His  sceptre  rules  over
mighty  nations  (ver.  15),  and  is  stretched  over  even  the  guiltiest  sinners  (ver.  18),
that  their  repentance  might  lead  to  their  redemption.

Ver.  20-25.  Solemn  Reasons  for  Fbarino  the  Lord.

First :  Argument  from  God's  government  of  the  sea  (ver.  22,  23).  Preliminary
remarks  :  1.  God,  the  author  and  governor  of  the  sea,  "  placed  sand  for  bound
of  the  sea"  2.  God  binds  the  sea  within  limits  of  law,  "by  perpetual  decree"
3.  God's  laws  are  permanent  in  their  control.  4.  God  is  ever  present  in  His  laws
and  contrivances :  "  Tremble  at  My  presence  which  placed  the  sand/'  &c.  5.
God's  presence  in  His  all-pervading  laws  should  have  a  restraining  and  reverencing
influence  upon  men  :   "  Fear  ye  not  me  %  saith  the  Lord,"  &c.

L  God's  government  of  the  sea.  1.  His  government  of  the  sea  is  suited  to
impress  man  with  an  idea  of  infinite  power,  2.  To  impress  man  with  the  idea  of
consummate  wisdom,  3.  Of  special  goodness.  Twofold  :  (a.)  negatively,  in  check-
ing the  threatening  invasion  of  the  sea ;  (6.)  affirmatively,  in  giving  rain,  &c.  (ver.
24).  Its  obedience  is  a  matter  of  necessity :  waves  may  "toss  themselves,"  but
God  absolutely  controls.  Its  voice  to  man  is,  "  Fear  Him,  obey  His  commands,
willingly  bend  to  His  will,  ere  He  crush  thee."

II.  Man's  revolting  tendencies.  1.  God  has  prescribed  the  bounds  of  man's
actions  and  thoughts  by  befitting  laws.  As  the  sea  has  "  bounds,"  so  there  are
limits  to  every  finite  being.  2.  To  overstep  these  limits  is  rebellion  against  the
Great  Lawgiver.  3.  Man  has  revolted  (ver.  23),  differing  in  this  from  the  sea.
(Nature  protests  and  remonstrates  against  human  lawlessness.)  4.  Man  can  do
what  the  sea  can  not :  (a.)  man  has  "a  heart,'*  the  sea  has  not ;  a  will-power ;  (6.)
this  power  in  man  has  been  prostituted  to  evil:  ^^  rebellious  \iQ2txt."  CoN.  :  1.
God  must  govern  heart  and  will  by  Heart  and  Will  influences.  2.  It  is  easier  for
God  to  rule  oceans  than  man,  because  "  he  has  a  rebellious  heart.*'  3.  Man,  as  a
rebel,  contrasts  unfavourably  with  the  material  creation,  and  God  notices  it  with
painful  emotion  :  "  Fear  ye  not  Me  1 "  <kc. — Homilist.

Second :  Argument  from  God's  bestowment  of  the  harvest  (ver.  24,  25).  The
history  of  Judah  in  Jeremiah's  time  shows  His  dealings  with  a  sinful  and  impeni-
tent nation,  and  off'ers  awful  warnings  of  the  fate  of  such  as  resist  His  grace,
despise  His  long-suffering,  and  harden  themselves  against  His  loving  correction.
1.  What  befell  the  Jews  may  befall  any  nation  whose  offences  against  God  are
equally  great  and  grievous.  2.  The  sins  which  provoked  the  indignation  of
Heaven  may  be  learned,  (a.)  Idolatry  and  worship  of  false  gods  (ver.  19).  (b.)
Habitual  and  impious  perjury  (ver.  2).  (c.)  Scandalous  uncleanness  (ver.  7).
(d.)  Covetous  and  oppressive  to  the  poor  (ver.  26).  (e.)  Destitute  of  a  habitual
sense  of  God's  presence  and  power  in  the  ordinary  and  natural  dispensations  of
His  mercy  and  Providence  (ver.  24).

I.  Until  the  Gospel  was  communicated  to  the  world,  attentive  observance  of  the
dispensation  of  Providence  was  the  principal  means  whereby  God's  Spirit  drew  the
Gentiles  to  Himself,  and  led  them  to  piety  and  obedience.  1.  It  was  the  religion
of  Nature.  Paul  attested  this  at  Lystra  (Acts  xiv.  15-17),  and  urged  it  upon  the
Romans  (Rom.  i  19,  20).  2.  From  God's  works  alon^,  His  being,  power,  mercy,
may  be  fully  and  satisfactorily  proved,  even  without  the  advantages  of  revelation :
they  show  design ;  they  attest  a  Creator,  and  an  all-wise  Authw ;  while  "  visible
100


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JERV.MIAB,  CHAt.  t.


things,"  night  and  da},  witness  of  the  Most  High,  His  greatness  and  His  goodness.
All  His  works  appeal  to  us:  "Let  ns  now  fear  the  Lord."

II.  Although  we  enjoy  the  full  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel,  we  can  never  too
closely  keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  all  tilings  we  see  and  enjoy  are  ordained  hy  God.
L  We  have  less  need  than  the  heathen  to  learn  about  God  from  His  outward  and
visible  works ;  yet,  2.  We  are  beholden  to  His  Providence  for  all  essential  natural
blessings.  3.  Nothing  in  nature  could  reach  maturity  but  for  the  fatherly  care  of
God.  Thus  learning  our  total  dependence  on  God,  three  consequences  will  follow  :
(1.)  A  perfect  resignation  to  His  Avill  and  trust  in  His  mercy.  He  who  has  not
withheld  His  own  Son  from  our  spiritual  necessity,  will  not  deny  us  anything  needful
to  us.  (2.)  We  must  not  pride  ourselves  in  our  worldly  goods  as  if  they  were  our
own,  nor  set  our  hearts  upon  them  as  if  sure  of  keeping  them  for  ever.  (3.)  As  God
gives  us  all  things,  there  is  only  one  way  of  obtaining  in  this  world  whatever  is
needful  and  good  for  us,  i.e..,  constantly  make  known  our  wants  to  Him  in  prayer.

III.  From  the  natural  events  around  us  we  may  learn  :  1.  Diligence  in  our  spiri-
tual concerns,  that  the  Word  of  Life  may  ripen  in  our  hearts.  2.  Pray  that  the
Heavenly  Sower  will  not  pass  us  by  in  barretmess.  3.  When  observing  the  tender
blade,  reflect  on  the  weakness  of  our  advance  in  piety,  and  entreat  Him  who  tem-
pers all  the  elements  to  "work  all  things  together  for  our  good."  4.  When  the
harvest  hour  is  nigh,  let  us  think  how  short  our  time  is,  and  pray  that  we  may
not  be  found  blasted  or  unfruitful. — Arranged  from  Sermon  hy  Bishop  Reginald
Ether,     Dated  a.d.  1838.

Ver.  26-3L  Spiritual  Criminality  of  most  Hideous  Form.

Guilt  has  its  climax :  sinners  see  it  not  as  a  "  wonder  and  a  horror"  (ver.  30)^
because  they  descend  by  gradual  stages  to  the  utmost  depths  of  defilement,  and
grow  accustomed  to  the  horrible  distortion  of  the  life  and  aflfections ;  moreover,  as
they  sink  into  the  loathsome  depths,  their  perception  becomes  darkened,  and  sensi-
bilities grow  sottish  (ver.  21).  Else  sinners  would  he  horrified  at  themselves.  But
the  spectacle  of  man  distorted  and  debased  is  a  "  wonderful  and  a  horrible  thing  "
to  the  good  and  to  God  ;  ^^  wonderful ^^  that  man  can  sink  to  such  depths,  considering
what  he  was  and  might  become  ;  "  horrihle^^  that  so  fair  a  creature  could  become  so
foul,  that  God's  people  can  be  rendered  so  hideously  the  children  of  the  devil.

L  The  predacious  cruelty  of  the  wicked  (ver.  '^^^  27).  Devoid  of  honourable
feeling,  they  will  wrong  any  one  so  as  to  advance  themselves.  1.  Malicious.
2.  Gunning.  3.  Treacherous.  They  who  trust  the  wicked  walk  into  swamps,  follow
a  ghastly  shadow,  tread  the  ways  to  hell.

II.  The  gains  of  guilt  and  oppression  (ver.  27,  28).  Men  of  no  conscience  or
restraints  can  prosper  and  aggrandise  themselves  more  easily  than  the  good ;  nor
wonder  :  earth  is  their  heaven  ;  '*in  life  they  have  their  good  things;"  the  god  of
this  world  feeds  their  sensual  souls;  but  woe  follows  all.  1.  Society  accords  place
and  power  to  the  successful ;  "  become  great."  2.  Wealth  is  within  the  reach  of  the
scheming  and  extortionate;  '*  waxen  rich."  3.  Self-indulgence  and  luxury  become
their  rule ;  "  waxen  fat,  and  shine."  4.  They  may  he  pitied  who  are  in  their  power
(ver.  28) ;  for  avarice  and  oppression  have  rendered  them  heartless  and  selfish,
dead  to  all  sense  of  justice,  or  compassion  for  the  sufi'ering  and  injured.

III.  The  horrifying  extremes  of  sin.  To  what  it  will  grow.  1.  The  social
leaders  surpass  all  ordinary  bounds  of  wickedness  (ver,  28)  ;  i.e.,  they  cast  off  all
restraint ;  '*'  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  men ; "  use  their  power  and  wealth  for  grossest
tyranny  and  foulest  immorality  (ver.  8).  2.  The  religious  leaders  beguile  the  people
with  impostures  ;  "  prophets  and  priests  "  combine  to  decoy  and  destroy  souls.  Awful
when  spiritual  guides  plot  their  people's  ruin  !  3.  The  godless  nation  luxuriates  in
delusions.  Enjoy  the  deceptions  ;  abandon  themselves  to  licentiousness  and  vile-
ness;  cast  off  Jehovah  and  make  gods  of  their  own  gratifications  and  lusts.  Such
a  scene  is  only  fit  for  the  "  blackness  of  darkneai."

101


CHAP.  V.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


IV.  The  feaxful  issues  of  all.  1.  There  comes  an  "  end  thereof  ^^  (ver.  31).  2.
Sinners  would  then  gladly  "  do  "  anything  to  escape.  3.  The  terrible  reckoning  ttnll
surely  come  {ver,  29).  God  Himself  will  comfort  them  :  "visit  them."  Vengeance
will  break  forth  on  such  transgressors.  There  will  be  bitterness  and  woe  at  "  ^^'-^
end,"  without  amelioration  or  redemption.


tha


HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  V.


Ver.  1.      Theme:  A  city  saved  for

ONE    GOOD    MAN.

There  were  good  men  at  this  time  in
Jerusalem :  king  Josiah,  Baruch  the
scribe,  Zephaniah  the  prophet ;  but  the
righteous  were  driven  into  seclusion  by
the  public  immorality  and  hostility,  so
that  in  *'  the  streets  and  broad  places  *'
not  one  could  be  found.  N'ote :  There
may  be  holy  men  praying  aiid  weeping
in  secret,  though  none  in  the  highways :
they  may  be  forced  to  retreat  from
places  of  power  and  publicity,  yet  **  God
kiioweth  them  that  are  His."  The  pro-
phet appeals  to  the  people  to  find  one
good  man  among  and  of  themselves.
(Addenda  on  ver.  1,  "Streets  of  Jerusa-
lem,'^ "  Seek  a  man.")

Great  truths  suggested : —

I.  Doom  suspended  while  a  Saviour
is  sought.  God  arrests  the  sword
while  the  search  is  everywhere  diligently
prosecuted.

1.  2^he  high  value  of  one  good  life  :
in  God's  esteem ;  in  a  nation's  ex-
perience. Evils  are  thereby  averted
from  many  who  neither  appreciate  nor
recognise  their  benefactor.  "  Ye  are
the  salt  of  the  earth."  (Addenda,  ver.
1,  "  One  true  man  would  avert  woe.")

2.  The  saving  mission  of  a  holy  man.
One  man  of  prayer  may  call  down
mercy  on  numbers  :  one  zealous  Chris-
tian may  snatch  hundreds  as  brands
from  the  burning.  The  lone  missionary
among  heathen.  The  earnest  preacher
of  Jesus  among  a  congregation.  The
diligent  worker  for  Christ  in  society.

3.  The  sublime  fulfilment  of  this  in
Jesus.  Then  there  was  "  One  Man"  in
the  city.  We  "can  find  a  Man,"  for
whose  sake  God  **  will  pardon."  But  as
yet  Christ  had  not  come.

II.  Doom  necessitated  because  no

Saviour  could  he  found.    There  was

not  one    good    man    to    hold   the   gap

against  the  foe.     What  a  dreadful  state

102


of  society ;  how  utterly  and  hopelessly
corrupt.  Equally  true  in  God's  sight,
**  whose  eyes  are  upon  the  truth  "  (ver.
3),  that  "  there  is  none  righteous,  no
not  one."  Nowhere  from  among  men
could  a  sinless  saviour  be  found.

1.  The  Ghristless  sinner's  peiplexity.
He  can  discover  no  Saviour.  The
agonising  devices  of  heathenism  show
this.  The  terror  of  men  who  have
sought  hope  apart  from  the  Gospel
attests  the  same  fact.  The  plaintive
lament  of  the  restless  souly  "  Oh,  that  I
knew  where  I  might  find  Him  /"  confirms
the  truth.  There  is  "no  man,"  and
therefore  **  no  pardon,"  till  Jesus  is
found.

2.  The  perilous  state  of  humanity.
The  sword  was  unsheathed  against
Jerusalem :  wrath  is  declared  against
all  mankind,  "  for  that  all  have  sinned."
The  cry  appropriate  to  all  is,  **  Lord,
save,  we  perish  / "  Dire  and  awful  is
the  nearing  doom  (ver.  15,  16  ;  comp,
Rom.  ii.  9;  Rev.  ix.  14-17).

3.  The  effectual  resources  of  God,
Not  for  Jerusalem,  but  for  humanity,
God  found  a  Saviour.  She  "  knew  not
the  day  of  her  visitation  '^  (Isa.  lix.  16,
1 7,  20  ;  Job  xxxiii  24).  The  very  depths
of  human  sin,  and  absence  of  even  one
true  man  among  men,  forms  only  the
dark  background  to  throw  out  into
greater  distinctness  and  beauty  the
perfections  of  Jesus  (Ps.  xlv.  2 ;  Heb.
vii.  26).

Comments  :  "  The  wicked  world  has
in  the  pious  and  believing  a  noble
treasure  and  defence." — Lange,

*'  See  how  ready  God  is  to  forgive,
how  swift  to  show  mercy.  So  pleasing
would  it  be  to  God  to  find  any  sucn,
that  for  their  sakes  He  would  pardon  the
city;  if  there  were  but  ten  righteous
men  in  Sodom,  if  but  one  of  a  thousand,
of  ten  thousand  in  Jerusalem,  it  should
be  spared." — M.  Henry.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  T.


Sodom  could  not  be  destroyed  while
one  righteous  man  was  in  it  (Gen.
xix.  13,  16) ;  and  Zoar  was  spared  by
the  sole  worth  of  that  same  one  man
(ver.  20-22).

Ver.     2.     Theme :     Pious     speech

CLOAKING   AN   IMPIOUS   SOUL.

Comments  :  "  Though  they  make  an
outward  and  fashionable  profession  of
the  name  of  the  Lord  in  worshipping
Him,  in  swearing  hy  Him,  yet  it  is  but
in  falsehood  and  hypocrisy." — Bishop
Hall

"Js  the  Lord  llveth;"  the  common
form  of  oath  among  the  Jews  ;  yet  this
sacred  oath  used  only  to  deceive  and
defraud.  —  Wogan.

^^  They  swear  falsely ^^^  that  is  (1.)
They  are  not  sincere  in  the  profession
they  make  to  God,  but  are  false  to  Him.
(2.)  'J'hough  they  appeal  to  no  other
God,  they  make  no  conscience  of  calling
Jehovah  to  witnss  to  a  lie.  They  do  not
swear  by  idols,  yet  they  forswear  them-
selves ;  which  is  an  affront  to  the  God
of  truth,  as  swearing  by  idols  would  have
been  an  affront  to  the  only  true  God. —
M,  Henry,

Ver.  3.  The  virtue  for  which  God's
EYES  SEARCH.  "  Eyes  upon  truth  :  "
comp.  Ps.  li.  6  ;  John  iv.  23.  Eyes  upon
an  object  denote  (i.)  diligent  inspection  ;
nothing  escapes  ;  (ii.)  delicate  percep-
tion ;  the  least  is  not  lost  to  sight,
though  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed  ;
(iii.)  desirous  expectation  ;  so  anxious  to
find  the  grace  He  loves.

Naegelshach  renders  the  words  :
**  Lord,  thine  eyes  look  for  faith  ;  "  and
remarks  (a.)  The  Lord  seeks  it,  for  He
regards  it.  (5.)  He  sought  by  manifold
chastisements  to  bring  the  people  to  it,
but  in  vain.  And  asks,  Why  does  God
impose  faith  as  the  only  condition  of
salvation?  (i.)  Because  faith  gives  the
greatest  glory  to  God.  (ii.)  Because  it  is
at  the  same  time  the  easiest  and  most
difficult  exercise  of  the  human  heart.
For  (a.)  to  believe,  ie.,  to  accept  God's
grace  as  a  free  gift,  every  one  is,  and
must  be,  able  to  do.  (b.)  He  who  can
do  it  has  vanquished  himself  at  the  ons
point,  and  won  all.


"  God  looks  to  the  faith,  the  upright
purpose  of  the  heart,  and  without  it  the
nominal  fealty  of  an  oath  is  an  abomina-
tion."— Speaker's  Com.

Ver.  3.  Theme:  God's  chastise-
ments designed  FOR  man's  CONVER-
SION.

Here  is  only  a  complaint  of  the  mis-
improvement  of  afflictions,  yet  the  right
use  is  indicated :  they  should  have
**  grieved "  for  their  undutifulness  to
God,  and  with  relen tings  for  sin  they
should  have  "  received  correction  ; "  sub-
mitted to  the  rod  as  to  the  chastisement
of  a  Father,  without  sullen  murmuring
or  fainting ;  their  "  faces  "  should  have
been  flushed  with  ingenuous  shame,  and
washed  with  penitential  tears :  they
ought  immediately  to  have  "  returned
to  God."  Hence  ingenuous  sorrow,
shame,  and  repentance,  a  submissive,
corrigible  temper,  and  a  sincere  conver-
sion to  God,  are  the  designed  ends  of
the  afflictions  He  sends  upon  impenitent
sinners.

The  Gospel  is  preached,  Holy  Spirit
communicated,  to  arouse  consciences.
When  Word  disregarded,  conscience
slighted,  Spirit  resisted,  then  our  Hea-
venly Father  uses  the  rod  ;  the  one  end
being  that  we  turn  to  the  Lord.  In-
quire, What  is  it  to  tiirn  to  the  Lord  ?

I.  Turning  to  the  Lord  presupposes  a
deep  conviction  that  you  have  gone
astray,  both  from  way  of  duty  and  of
safety.  You  will  never  leave  year  present
course  till  plainly  see  it  leads  you  down
to  chambers  of  death  ;  nor  "  turn  to  the
Lord,^^  till  realise  that  your  interests
and  duty  render  it  urgent  and  necessary.

L  If  God  should  open  the  eyes  of  the
unconverted,  what  astonishing  and  un-
suspected views  would  present  them-
selves of  your  past  course  and  present
condition  !  That  all  your  highest  inter-
ests have  been  neglected.  2.  You  would
see  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  3.
The  purity  and  strictness  of  God's  law,
the  equity  and  terror  of  its  penalty.  4.
Your  obligations  to  Him  as  your  Creator,
Preserver,  and  Redeemer.  Oh,  that  expe-
rience may  be  your  teacher  of  the  reality
of  these  things  !

II.  Turning  to  God  supposes  a  full

103


CHAT.  T.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


conviction  of  the  necessity  of  immedi-
ate response.  1.  Because  if  you  die  in
your  present  condition  you  will  certainly
be  lost.  2.  Because  you  have  no  time
for  delay.  And,  3.  It  will  wound  your
heart  to  think  this  work  has  not  been
done  long  ago.  Dying  men  bear  testi-
mony that  the  present  hour  is  the  most
fit  season  for  turning  to  God.

III.  If  afflictions  should  prove  the
means  of  turning  you  to  God,  they  will
rouse  you  to  most  earnest  persevering
endeavours  that  you  may  truly  find
Him,  Pray  without  ceasing  :  "  Behold,
he  prayeth  !  "  Accustom  yourselves  to
solemn  meditation;  hear  and  read  God's
Word.  Seek  the  society  of  those  who
know  the  Lord.  These  will  promote
your  conversion.  Also,  you  will  guard
acfainst  whatever  would  hinder  it ;  shun
wicked  courses  ;  moderate  your  pursuits
of  the  world ;  avoid  evil  company.
"With  fear  and  trembling"  the  awak-
ened sinner  would  begin  to  "  work  out
his  salvation."

IV.  If  afflictions  should  turn  you  to
Gody  you  would  he  made  deeply  sensible
of  your  inability,  that  the  Holy  Spirit's
grace  was  essential  to  your  true  con-
version. 1.  Your  endeavours  avail  to
avoid  hindrances  and  seek  helps.  2.
Yet  your  own  heart  is  against  you,  and
the  disease  of  sin  is  irrecoverable  but  by
Divine  grace.  Then  the  prayer  will
arise,  *'  Turn  me  and  I  shall  be  turned"
(Jer.  xxxi.  18).

V.  If  ever  you  turn  to  the  Lord,  you
will  realise  that  Christ  is  the  only  way
of  access  to  God.  You  will  come  as
criminals  upon  the  footing  of  grace,  not
merit ;  will  renounce  all  your  right-
eousness ;  a  broken-hearted  rebel.  Till
such,  you  have  nothing  to  do  with
Jesus.

VI.  If  you  are  turned  to  God,  you  will
experience  a  great  change  in  temper
and  conduct.  1.  Heart  and  mind  will
take  a  new  bias ;  thoughts  and  affections
towards  God  ;  aspirations  towards  hea-
ven ;  Jesus  dear  to  you  ;  "  all  things
become  new."  Turned  to  God  and  holi-
ness ;  turned  from  sin  and  its  pleasures.
Also,  2.  Tour  practices  will  follow  the
inward  impulse  and  principle  of  reli-
gion.

104


VII.  If  turned  to  the  Lord,  your
mind  will  habitually  retain  that
turn.  Your  religion  not  a  transient  fit,
but  permanent  and  persevering.

Application  :  Do  you  in  your  con-
sciences hope  you  have  been  converted
and  turned  to  God?  Does  your  case
answer  to  this  description  %  But  some
of  you  may  have  discovered  yourselves  cw
unconverted.  Are  you  willing  to  turn  to
God  with  all  your  hearts?  **Come,
and  let  us  return  to  the  Lord,  for  He
hath  torn  "  &c.  (Hos.  vi.  1). — Rev.  J.
Davies,  A.M.,  President  of  College^  New
Jersey,  A.D.  1756.

Ver.  4.  Theme :  Ignorance  mat  ex-
cuse IRRELIGION.

I.  Their  sad  disadvantages.  1.
"  Poor,*^  living  in  rudeness  and  ne-
glect, their  existence  absorbed  in  strug-
gles to  live.  2.  ^^  Foolish,"  ignorant
and  erring  from  lack  of  training  and
teaching.  Their  intellectual  life  wholly
neglected.

II.  Their  spiritual  deprivations.  1.
**  Know  not  the  way  of  the  Lord;"  un-
taught as  to  the  manner  of  life  He  re-
quires, the  true  religion  He  revealed.  2.
"  Nor  the  judgment  of  their  God  ;  "  that
which  He  had  pronounced  right:  for
false  prophets  confused  and  misled
them,  and  they  followed  as  those  who
were  "  blind."  A  pitiful  case :  spiritual
dupes.

III.  Their  excusable  deficiencies.
God  does  not  reap  where  He  has  not
sown.  To  whom  little  is  given,  of  them
He  asks  little.  He  judges  according  to
what  we  have,  not  what  we  have  not
(Numb.  xii.  11).  1.  God's  tender  con-
sideration. 2.  Discriminating  commis-
eration. (Addenda,  ver.  4,  "  Ignoraner
and  irreligion.")

Comments  :

i.  Prevailing  ignorance  is  the  lament-
able cause  of  abounding  impiety  and  ini-
quity. What  can  come  from  them  that
sit  in  darkness  but  "  works  of  darkness"  ?

ii.  This  is  commonly  a  reigning  sin
among  poor  people.  There  are  the
devil's  poor,  as  well  as  God's,  who
might  "  know  the  way  of  the  Lord "
without  book-learning ;  but  they  are
"  willingly  ignorant." — M.  Henry,


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEMMMIAH.


OHJLF.  T.


Ver.  6.  7%<jm<j.- Knowledge  SHOULD

ENSURE  PIETY.

It  is  a  dramatic  contrast.  The  pro-
phet assumes  to  imagine  and  expect
that  their  advantages  would  be  accom-
panied with  appropriate  religious  re-
sponses :  superior  socially,  superior
spiritually.  "  The  great ; ''  i.e.,  the
wealthy  and  educated,  removed  beyond
blinding  care  for  their  daily  wants ;
**  they  have  known^^  possessed  the  ad-
vantages of  education  and  religious  know-
ledge. Yet  these,  instructed  in  the  law,
and  who  ought  to  teach  their  inferiors
(Micah  iii.  1),  have  violated  every  pre-
cept and  been  defiant  of  God.  (i.)  A  buse
of  advantages,  (ii.)  Proportionate  guilt.
(iii.)  Heavier  condemnation  (Luke  xii.
47).

"  /  will  speak  unto  the  great  men.*'
Zinzendorf  remarks :  "A  preacher  has
no  more  miserable  and  ignorant  hearers
than  the  respectable.  While  they  are
spelling  their  way  back  to  the  cross,
and  are  getting  so  far  as  to  know  how  to
learn  that  we  are  saved  alone  by  the
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  till  we  get
them  so  far  as  to  understand  that  the
command  of  the  New  Testament  is  to
believe,  and  all  that  morality  can  lug
about  for  eighty  years  is  gone  with  the
word,  *  Son,  be  of  good  courage,  thy  sins
are  forgiven  thee,'  the  ignorant  would
have  been  able  to  do  it  thrice.  A  teacher
greatly  deceives  himself  if  he  seeks
among  the  respectable  that  comfort  in
his  office  which  he  does  not  meet  with
among  the  common  people." — Quoted
in  Lange,

Ver.    4,    5.    The    IGNORANCE   op

THE  POOR  AND  THE  INSOLENCE  OF  THE
GREAT.

L  The  character  of  many  of
the  poor  as  here  described.  Seeing
them  impudent  in  sin,  and  unre-
formed  by  the  judgments  of  God,
Jeremiah  says,  **  Surely  these  are  the
poor,"  &c.

1.  Their  obstinacy  in  sin  was  owing
to  their  ignorance — (1.)  Of  religion  ;
"the  way  of  the  Lord."  (2.)  Of  God's
providences;  "  the  judgments  of  our
God."  Ignorance  is  still  the  source  of
error  and  sin.     (a.)  Men  misapprehend


the  nature  of  God;  presume  upon  His
mercy,  (b.)  Form  vague  and  incorrect
views  of  the  salvation  of  Christ ;  ignore
that  it  is  a  *'  doctrine  according  to
godliness  "  (Eph.  iv.  18.)

2.  Their  ignorance  was  in  great
measure  occasioned  by  their  poverty.
(a.)  This  deprived  them  of  education;
uniiifoFmed  as  to  principles  and  religion.
(6.)  All  their  thoughts  and  cares  are
about  their  worldly  wants,  (c.)  They
absent  themselves  from  God's  house  be-
cause of  poor  attire,  (d.)  They  associate
with  persons  like- circumstanced  and  like-
minded,  who  encourage  one  another  in
neglect  of  religion ;  and,  {e.)  They
thereby  lose  all  self-respect,  sin  im-
pudently and  "  glory  in  their  shame."
Yet  their  ignorance  was  culpable ;  they
lived  in  a  land  of  light,  had  more  ad-
vantages than  the  rest  of  the  world.
So  with  the  poor  in  Britain,  who  yet
live  in  a  most  stupid  and  lamentable
ignorance  as  to  God,  their  souls,  and
eternity.

II.  The  character  of  the  great  as
here  described.  Not  only  men  of
honourable  birth,  large  fortunes  and
considerable  learning ;  but  those  of  easy
circumstances,  educated,  having  capa-
city and  leisure  to  learn  Divine  things.

1.  They  had  a  better  knowledge  of
religion  than  the  poor.  Their  minds
cultured  ]  kept  from  learning  the  man-
ners of  the  vulgar ;  attained  a  general
knowledge  of  the  world ;  had  some
knowledge  of  religion — its  theory  ;  they
could  consequently  enter  into  the  pro-
phet's reasoning  and  address.

2.  They  acted  as  bad  as  the  poor,  or
worse.  Like  headstrong,  refractory  oxen,
that  struggle  and  break  the  yoke.  Men
should  submit  to  the  restraints  of  reason
and  conscience,  to  the  authority  and  law
of  God.  But  though  light  was  in  theii
understandings,  their  wills  were  per-
verse and  affections  misplaced.  They
would  not  submit  to  prophets'  reproofs,
offered  violence  to  reason  and  conscience,
"  broke  the  bands  of  the  Lord  asunder  *
(Ps.  ii.  5).

3.  Their  conduct  was  chiefly  owing  to
their  greatness,  (a.)  Lifted  up  with
pride,  they  resented  admonition,  (b.)
They  think  religioit  is  only  to  restrain

105


CHAP.  T.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


the  vulgar,  not  to  bind  those  in  rank,
(c.)  They  shrink  from  showing  reverence
for  God  and  being  exact  in  religious
observances,  {d.)  Worldly  things  have
mischievous  influence  upon  their  hearts.
{e.)  Flattered  by  others,  they  forget  or  but
formally  pay  homage  to  the  Most  High.
(/)  They  mind  earthly  things,  neglect-
ing the  culture  and  interests  of  the  soul.

Christ  met  chief  opposition  from  the
great,  learned,  and  rich  men.

Application:  1.  Learn  what  is  the  most
important  and  profitable  knowledge.  2.
T'he  advantages  of  being  placed  in  the
middle  condition  of  life  (Pro  v.  xxx.  8).  3.
What  an  excellent  charity  it  is  to  furnish
the  poor  with  the  means  of  knowledge.
Let  "  the  poor  "  know  that  to  be  wil-
fully ignorant  is  an  inexcusable  crime.
And  "  the  great "  that  they  **  have  no
cloak  for  their  sin,"  if  they  allow  their
wealth  to  fortify  themselves  against
God's  truth  and  calls.  ''  The  rich  and
poor  meet  together "  at  death  :  "  the
small  and  great "  shall  stand  before  the
bar  of  Christ  in  judgment. — B.ev.  Job
Orion,  A«D.  1775,  Abstract.

Ver.  7.  Theme:  IMPOSSIBILITY  OF
PARDON.

Can  it  be  1  Is  it  in  accordance  with
God's  dealings  with  man  ?  (Comp.  Isa.
i.  18;  Mic.  vii.  18.)

I.  Pardon  is  possible  to  chiefest
sinners.

II.  Yet  only  on  the  terms  of  repentance
and  return  to  God.

III.  Bat,  by  ^^ forsaking  Him"  men
forsake  all  possibility  of  salvation.

"  When  I  fed  them  to  the  full,"  &c.
(See  Literary  Criticisms  on  verse;  also
Addenda  to  chap,  v.,  ver.  7.)

Ver.  9.  I'heme:  An  OUTRAGED
AND  AVENGING  GoD.  (See  Literary
Criticisms  on  ver.  7,  "  /  fed  them  to
the  full")

God  had  bound  them  in  oath  to
allegiance;  yet  they  violated  their
spiritual  relationship  by  abandoninor
themselves  to  idols ;  and,  in  following
the  defiling  indulgences  of  idolatrous
orgies,  they  had  repudiated  God's  laws
which  they  covenanted,  at  Sinai  and
under  Josiah's  reformation,  to  keep(Exod.
106


zxiv.  3,  7 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  3) ;  and  thui
violated  the  sanctity  of  social  relationship.

I.  By  evil  deeds  of  men  God  is  out-
raged.

II.  For  evil  deeds  of  men  God  will  be
avenged.  "  The  harlots'  houses "  are
preferentially  and  metaphorically,  if  not
exclusively,  idol  temples ;  but  the
charge  glides  from  this  religious  sense,
viz.,  spiritual  inconstancy  to  God,  into
the  physical  sense,  viz.,  carnal  unclean-
ness  among  themselves  ;  for  prostitution
formed  part  of  idolatrous  worship.

Ver.  10.     Theme :  A  commission  to

DESTROY.

How  alien  it  is  to  the  Divine  heart
to  destroy  is  clear  from  Ezek.  xviii.
31,  32 ;  John  iii.  16.  And  Zion  was
God's  beloved  city,  dear  to  His  eye  (Ps.
xlviii.).  Yet,  though  slow  to  anger,
averse  from  destroying,  and  tender
towards  Jerusalem,  the  edict  goes  forth.
God  summons  the  foe  to  waste  and
destroy  the  Holy  City,  and  those  who
dwelt  therein.

I.  The  scene  depicted.  A  vineyard
enclosed  by  walls  (see  Lit.  Grit,  on
verse) ;  the  enemy  scales  them  ;  his
swords  ruthlessly  cut  oflf  branches,  shoots,
down  to  the  very  root-stem,  but  there
his  destructive  work  ends.  Its  mean-
ing: Judah,  a  noble  vine  (ii.  21),  but
its  outgrowth  had  deteriorated,  yielding
now  only  sour  and  poisonous  grapes
(Dent,  xxxiv.  32,  33).  All  these  sinful
descendants  of  the  stock  of  David  should
perish,  but  the  race  must  not  become
extinct.

II.  The  destruction  commanded.
Judea  is  God's  vineyard  (Isa.  v.  1-7) ;
none  could  enter  except  He  permitted.
But  He  calls  the  invader,  and  commis-
sions him  to  use  his  weapon  freely.
What  a  lamentable  case  for  that  people  !
Not  only  had  God  withdrawn  His  care —
a  negative  calamity,  but  He  summoned
the  enemy  to  destroy — a  positive  cala-
mity.

III.  The  reservation  enjoined.  The
wilful  destroyer  was  not  free :  limits
were  imposed.  Our  enemies  are  not
omnipotent.  God's  will  rules  the  issues
of  war :  His  mercy  limits  the  ravages  of
justice.     The  Jews  must  not  be  exter-


HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  JEHEMIAH.


CHAP.  T.


nunated ;  for  the  promise  must   stand
(Lev.  xxvi.  44).
IV.    The     explanation    furnished.

This  overthrow,  this  abandonment  of
God's  people  to  an  imperious,  impious
foe,  is  startling, — requires  explanation  :
given,  "  They  are  not  the  Lord's."  Yet
they  were  outgrowths  of  the  stock  of
David.  1.  Ancestral  privileges  may  be
forfeited.  2.  Descendants  do  not  always
retain  the  same  piety  which  distinguished
their  forefathers.  3.  Consequently  the
covenant  of  promise  is  annihilated.
Every  man  stands  out  singly  responsible
to  God ;  he  cannot  escape  the  punish-
ment of  his  own  sin  by  any  ancestral
relationships.  The  children  of  best  of
parents  may  come  to  ruin.

Ver.  n.  (See  chap.  iii.  20.)  Though
Judah  and  Israel  were  at  variance  with
each  other,  they  agreed  in  wronging  the
Lord,who  had  given  them  all  the  national
blessings,  victories  and  honours  they
ever  knew.  Israel  had  reaped  the  bitter
fruits :  0  that  Judah  would  be  fore-
warned !  Otherwise,  they  would  be
united  in  misery.  Alike  faithless,  a  like
fate.

Ver.  12,  13.  Theme:  Alienation,
THE  ROAD  TO  Atheism.  "  They  have
belied  the  Lord,"  *.«.,  denied  Him,
Either  :  1.  Denied  that  God  was  such  as
Jeremiah  described, — a  punisher  of  evil-
doers ;  or,  2.  Denied  that  the  coming
disasters  were  in  any  sense  God's  doing, —
He  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  they  come
apart  from  Him ;  or,  3.  Denied  the  ex-
istence of  Jehovah  as  God,  as  their  God,
— repudiated  Him,  wanted  to  hear
nothing  of  or  from  Him.

I.  Moral  degeneracy  produces  mental
obscurity.  Sin  deadens  the  sensibility,
excludes  God  from  thought,  until  prac-
tical indifference  and  defiance  of  Him
rule  the  life.  Easy  and  natural,  when
we  dislike  God,  to  ignore  Him  and  revolt
from  Hjs  claims.

II.  Mental  ohscnrity  issues  in  spiri-
tual darkness.  Conscience  seared,  past
feeling,  desiring  not  the  knowledge  of
God's  ways,  till  "  the  fool  says  in  his
heart,  There  is  no  God."  And  "the
god  of  this  world  blinds  the  minds  of
them  that  believe  not."


Theme:  Obstinate  unbelief,  l
Its  nature.  It  denies  God,  and  there-
fore despises  (a.)  God's  Word,  (b.)  God's
messengers,  ii.  Its  punishment.  The
tables  are  turned,  (a.)  The  unbeliever,
before  fire,  now  becomes  wood.  (6.)
The  Word  of  God,  before  regarded  as
wood,  becomes  fire. — I^aeg.

*'The  Word  is  not  in  them,**  rather
speaker  is  not,  &c.  It  is  not  a  noun,
but  a  verb  with  the  article  instead  of
the  possessive  pronoun  ;  so  that  literally
it  means.  And  he  who  speaketh  is  not  in
them,  i.e.,  there  is  no  one  who  speaketh
in  them, — what  the  prophets  say  has
no  higher  authority  than  themselves. —
Speaker^s  Com.

Ver.  14.  Theme:  God's  method  op
CONFUTING  UNBELIEF.  (Addenda,  ver.
14,  ^^  My  words  shall  devour  them,**)

i.  Withering  the  intellectual  vanity  in
the  unbeliever:  giving  to  His  Word  a
fiery  penetrating  power,  consuming  his
pride,  confidence,  and  hopes.  It  may
be  as  a  "  fire  in  his  bones,"  destroying
all  peace,  ravaging  his  conscience  and
heart  with  burning  terrors.

ii.  Fulfilling  His  Word  upon  the  un-
believer :  he  finds  out  its  truth  by  ex-
periencing the  doom  it  threatened  :  the
fire  of  Divine  anger  descends  upon
him.

Note  :  Unbelief  must  and  will  be  con-
sumed with  fire.  Happy  he  in  whom  it
is  consumed  in  this  life  by  God's  Word  ;
but,  failing  this,  it  will  be  consumed  in
the  life  to  come  by  God's  wrath.  "The
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all
them  that  forget  God."

Ver.   15-17.      Them^e:    Weathful

AGENTS  OF  DESTRUCTION.

God  can  summon  them  :  historically
He  has  done  so  ;  prophetically  He  will.
This  "  day  of  salvation "  intervenes.
"For  God  has  not  appointed  us  to
wrath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Yet  2  Thess.
i.  7-10.  In  the  past  He  used  the
armies  of  earth;  in  the  future  He  will
use  the  "  armies  of  heaven."  ^^ Mighty  "
were  the  Chaldeans  (ver.  15)  :  He  will
come  with  "  mighty  angels  "  (comp.  Rev.
y.  1,  xriiL  21  j  Ps.    ciii.    20) ;  agents

107


OHAP.  ▼.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


of  Divine  wrath  (Rev.  xvi,  1 ;   2  Thess.
i  8  ;  2  Kings  xx.  35).

I.  XTmueasured  resources  of  Divine
justice.  Jews  knew  nothing  of  Chal-
deans (ver.  15) ;  we  cannot  penetrate
the  unknown  realms,  or  measure  the
might  and  terrors  of  God's  ministers
(Matt  xxvi.  53).

II.  Pitiable  insecurity  of  trans-
gressors. They  make  "  defences,"  and
trust  in  them  (ver.  17) ;  but  what  can
shut  away  affliction,  death,  the  judg-
ment 1

m  Merciful  interval  of  propitia-
tion. Why  forewarned?  That  we
may  **  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come"
(Heb.  vl  18).

Ver.  18.  Theme:  A  limit  to  just
JUDaMENTS.  Light  gleams  beyond  the
dreadful  vision.  Would  that  a  word  as
definite  could  anywhere  be  found  to
encourage  hope  after  the  great  judgment
of  the  world !  How  contrasted  with
this  promise  for  Judah  are  the  deliberate,
multiform,  and  emphasized  threatening^
of  the  New  Testament  as  to  the  eternal
fate  of  the  rebel  soul  I

Ver.  19.  Theme:  God's  explana-
tion OP  man's  spiritual  miseries.
The  bewildering  inquiry  is  ever  rising,
Why  is  humanity  spiritually  enslaved
and  banished?  Why  under  alien
tyranny?  Why  outlawed  from  the
promised  land  ?  God  answers  all  :
Man  makes  his  own  misery ;  seeks  his
own  enslavement ;  forfeits  his  rightful
inheritance.  And  this,  not  because
God  has  made  man  subject  to  sin,  but
despite  GJod's  remedies  for  man's  re-
demption from  sin.  He  forges  his
own  chains,  and  procures  his  own
banishment.

I.  Wilful  self-destruction.

1.  Desertion  of  our  only  Saviour,
For  God  was  .Tudah's  Saviour  (Isa.
xlv.  21).  Even  as  revealed  in  Jesus
and  on  Calvary,  men  '*  despise  the  Lord
that  bought  them."

2.  Deliberate  enslavement  to  alien  gods.
Admitted  *'  strange  gods"  to  Jehovah's
territory  ;  then  "  served  them."  This
is  voluntary  slavery  (Rom.  vi.  16 ;
2  Pet.  il  19).  «  Thou  has  destroyed
thyself."

108


n.  Eetribution  in  kind.  ''  Answer
them,  Like  as,"  &c.  The  penalty  cor-
responds to  the  sin.  1.  Forsaken.  They
having  "  forsaken "  God,  would  be
"  forsaken  "  by  God  ;  left  to  the  enemy
and  to  exile.  2.  Serve  strangers.  They
had  preferred  strangers,  foreign  gods,
and  voluntarily  bowed  to  them  ;  they
should  perforce  serve  strangers, /orci^/i
rulers,  and  know  the  bitterness  of  alien
tyranny.  3.  In  a  land  not  theirs.  They
had  introduced  these  strange  gods  into
a  land  which  was  not  theirs,  but
Jehovah's  ;  they  should  be  carried  into  a
land  not  theirs,  slaves  into  captivity.

Serve  the  spiritual  usurper y  rejecting
Christ,  you  shall  be  "  led  captive  at  his
will  "  into  grievous  exile,  *'  a  land  not
yours,'*  but  "  prepared  for  the  devil  and
his  angels  **  (Deut.  xxviii.  47,  48).

Ver.    21.      Them>e:    Indipferenoe.

An  evil  ruinous  to  the  soul :  indifference
to  true  and  saving  religion.  How  it
prevails  !     Text  exhibits  it.

I.  What  God  has  done  to  produce
pious  consideration.

1.  He  has  given  powers  of  mind
adapted  to  it  "  Eyes,"  to  see,  discern,
read,  <fec.  "  Ears,"  to  hearken,  messen-
gers of  truth.  "  Understanding,"  to
know,  weigh,  reflect,  <fec.

2.  He  has  given  us  the  means  to  answer
to  these  powers.  His  Word ;  His
servants ;  His  providence,  &c.  So
men  are  excuseless.

3.  His  Holy  Spirit  to  strive,  convince^

II.  The  indifference  men  often  ex-
hibit.

1.  The  indifference  of  some  is  totals
without  any  concern.  Like  stocks  and
stones.

2.  Others  are  considerate  only  of  the
externals  of  religion.  They  hear  and
see  and  attend,  <fec.,  to  the  outward,  and
that  only.

3.  The  consideration  of  some  is  only
to  the  intellectual  parts  of  the  truth.  A
mental  study;  philosophical  attention;
such  as  they  give  to  literature.

4.  The  consideration  of  others  i$
occasional.  Under  very  arousing  dis-
courses, providences,  sickness,  bereave-
ments, ^c.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


cnur.  T.


III.  The  conseoLueuces  of  this  in-
difference.

1.  It  is  extreemly  ^*  foolish.^*  Moral
insanity :  opposite  of  wisdom  and
prudence.

2.  Detrimental  to  the  soul.  Makes  it
*'  blind,"  "  deaf ;  *'  robbing  it  of  spiritual
food  and  enjoyment ;  degrading  it.

3.  Specially  offensive  to  God,  Infa-
tuated rebellion ;  ingratitude.

4.  Must  end  in  the  soul's  ruin.  Now
is  the  period  of  soul's  probation.  No
moral  fitness  without  devout  considera-
tion.

Application,  1.  Examine  and  test
yourselves.  2.  Seek  the  quickening  in-
fluences of  the  Divine  Spirit.  3.  Be
resolved  and  wise  now,  lest  perish. —
Rev,  Jabez  Burns,  D,D.

Ver.  20-24.  Theme:  Persuasives
TO  th:k  fear  op  God.  The  prophet
having  reproved  their  sin  and  threatened
God's  judgments,  is  sent  on  another
errand  which  he  must  *' publish  in
Judah," — to  persuade  them  to  fear  God.
This  would  be  an  effectual  principle  in
their  reformation,  as  its  absence  ex-
plained their  apostasy.

I.  He  complains  of  the  shameful
stupidity  of  this  people.  1.  Their
understandings  were  darkened.  They
possessed  intellectual  faculties  and
capacities,  but  did  not  employ  and  im-
prove them  (ver.  21).  Note:  We
cannot  judge  men  by  the  advantages
and  opportunities  they  enjoy  :  sit  in
darkness  in  land  of  light ;  live  in  sin  in
holy  land ;  bad  in  best  of  places.  2.
Their  wills  were  stubborn;  not  submit
to  rules  of  Divine  law  (ver.  23).  Observe:
The  revolting  heart  is  a  rebellious  one  :
those  who  withdraw  from  their  allegi-
ance to  God  do  not  stop  there,  but,  by
siding  with  Satan,  take  up  arms  against
Him.  ^

II.  He  ascribes  this  to  the  want  of
the  fear  of  God.  1.  Their  being  with-
out understanding  (ver.  21)  he  accounts
for  by  this  absence  of  fear  (ver.  22).  If
you  keep  up  awe  of  God,  you  would  be
more  observant  of  what  He  says.  2.
Their  rebellion  and  revolt  (ver.  23)  he
explains  likewise  (ver.  24).  They  did
not  encourage  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord,"
hence  apostasy.     Because  we  neglect  to


stir  up  our  hearts  to  holy  awe  of  God,
we  are  so  apt  to  rebel.

III.  He  suggests  some  things  proper
to  possess  us  with  a  holy  fear  of  God.

1.  We  must  fear  the  Lord  and  His
greatness  (ver.  22).  Shall  we  not
*'  tremble  at  His  presence,"  be  afraid  of
affronting  or  trifling  with  Him  who^  in
nature  and  providence,  gives  such  incon-
testable proofs  of  almighty  power  and
sovereign  dominion  1  He  keeps  and
manages  the  sea  !  (1.)  By  this  we  see
His  universal  sovereignty  ;  therefore  to
be  had  in  reverence.  (2.)  This  shows
how  easily  He  could  drown  the  world
again,  by  withdrawing  His  ^^  decree;''
therefore  we  lie  continually  at  His
mercy,  and  should  fear  to  make  Him
our  enemy.  (3.)  Even  the  unruly  waves
obey  Him, — neither  revolt  nor  rebel;  why
then  should  our  hearts  ]  (ver.  23).

2.  We  must  fear  the  Lord  and  His
goodness  (Hos.  iii  5).  We  must  "fear
the  Lord  our  God"  (ver.  24),  i.e.^  worship
Him,  give  Him  glory,  and  keep  our-
selves in  His  love.  (1.)  Because  He  w
always  doing  us  good.  (2.)  Because
these  blessings  are  consequent  upon  His
promise  (Gen.  viii  22).  3.  Because  we
have  such  a  necessary  dependence  upon
Him,  The  fruitful  seasons  rendered  the
heathen  inexcusable  in  their  contempt  of
Him  (Acts  xiv.  17),  yet  the  Jews  were
not  wrought  upon  to  fear  Him,  though
it  appears  how  much  it  is  our  interest  to
do  so. — M,  Henry,  (Addenda,  ver.  22,
"  Sand  for  bound  of  the  sea,")

On  the  fear  of  God.  i.  Motives  from
without.  1 .  God's  displays  of  power  (ver.
22,  24).  2.  God's  displays  of  grace.  iL
Inner  conditions.  1.  That  we  open  our
eyes  and  ears  (ver.  21.)  2.  That  we
allow  ourselves  to  be  impelled  by  what  we
see  and  hear  (ver.  23). — Naeg.  in  Lange.
(Addenda,  ver.  23,  "  Revolting  heart.")

"  Neither  does  God's  power  move  the
obdurate  people  to  the  fear  of  Him,  nor
do  the  proofs  of  His  love  make  any  im-
pression." — Keil.

"  This  is  a  glorious  discovery  of  the
omnipotence  and  majesty  of  God.  But
that  men  are  so  secure,  and  think  rot  of
Him  who  allows  them  to  live  so  se^i>^ely,
this  is  indeed  an  insane  business."-  ^-u*-
zendorf  quoted  in  Lange,

lOd


0H4P.  V.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


"  They  liad  the  power  of  perception,
and  were  responsible  for  the  exercise  of
it." — Henderson.

"  The  sea,  the  mightiest  of  God's
works,  cannot  prevail,  cannot  break
His  laws,  because  God  has  not  endowed
it  with  free-will.  Man,  physically  im-
potent, can  prevail,  because,  being  made
in  God's  image,  he  is  free." — Speaker's
Com.

*'  The  appeal  to  God's  care  for  man
(ver.  24),  offers  proof  which  addresses
itself  chiefly  to  the  thoughtful ;  hence  he
says,  *  in  their  heart.'  By  the  intelligent
study  of  God's  dealings,  men  perceive
that  they  are  not  merely  acts  of  power,
but  also  of  love." — Ibid.  (Addenda,
ver.  22,  *^  Tremble  ai  m^/  presence,  which
made  the  sea.")

Ver.  22-24.  Theme :  Adoration  op
God  in  nature.

This  the  end  of  all  the  privileges
with  which  Israel  had  been  crowned
from  one  generation  to  another  1  they
had  a  revolting  and  rebellious  heart.
And  as  was  the  heart,  so  the  life, —
revolted  and  gone  from  their  God  and
Father.  There  was  to  them  no  Lord  of
heaven  and  earth  to  fear  for  His  power
or  love  for  His  goodness.

i.  The  more  blessings  they  enjoyed^  the
more  thankful  they  should  have  been.
Yet  it  seems  that  the  more  gracious  our
Heavenly  Father,  the  more  thoughtless
are  His  children  ;  the  more  boundless
His  love,  the  more  resolute  man's  in-
gratitude.

ii.  Having  rejected  God  spiritually,
He  yet  continued  to  manifest  Himself
to  them  in  nature.  They  absolutely
refused  Him  as  the  object  of  soul-homage
and  love  ;  would  have  no  God  but  idols,
no  king  but  their  own  wild  will.  Either
He  must  altogether  hide  Himself,  or
reveal  Himself  no  longer  in  grace,  but
in  nature.

iii.  Gratitude  to  God  for  the  fruits  of
the  seasons  is  a  common  ground  on  which
to  argue  effectually  even  with  the  dark-
est heathen.  Thus  Paul  at  Lystra  (Acts
xiv.  16-17).  No  one  except  those  who
"  say  in  their  hearts  there  is  no  God,"
doubt  God's  gifts  in  nature's  bounties.

iv.  The  heathen  are  denied  excuse  for
110


their  ignorance  and  idotatrpy  because  of
the  marks  of  God's  love  and  power  in
the  world  around  them  (Rom.  L  20,
21).

V.  Yet  the  heathen^  in  outward  forms
at  least,  surpassed  Jetos  and  Christians.
Though  they  '*  felt  after  God"  rather
than  reached  Him,  the  great  multitude
of  the  heathen  never  denied  God  in  His
gifts.  They  made  offerings  and  sacri-
fices in  acknowledgment  of  harvest,  and
sang  thanksgivings  to  their  gods.  It
wanted  but  a  little  more  knowledge  for
them  to  join  in  David's  song  (Ps.  Ixv,
9-13).

vi.  There  was,  then,  great  sin  on  the
part  of  Israel  when,  even  as  natural
men,  they  ignored  the  mercies  of  God's
ordinary  providence,  and  were  not  soft-
ened and  converted  by  His  unmerited
goodness  (ver.  24).

vii.  A-  bounteous  season  ought  to
awaken  love  and  thankfulness  to  God.
Yet  this  is  not  the  feeling  of  all  who
bear  the  name  of  Christ.  Peculiar  to
Christians  to  be  ashamed  of  confessing
God  as  the  Orderer  and  Giver  of  all
things.  Where  heathen  and  Mahometans
would  have  a  manly  pleasure,  as  a  matter
of  course,  in  acknowledging  the  heavenly
Giver,  Christians  falter.

viii.  God  is  exceedingly  jealous  of  the
honour  due  unto  His  name.  He  plagued
guilty  and  thankless  nations.  He  may
do  the  same  to  us  (Deut.  xi.  13-17,
viii.  10-18).  Bethink  that  this  God
might  call  a  man  away  in  the  midst  of
his  thanklessness  and  unbelief  !  What
measureless  woe  filled  the  heart  of  the
Son  of  God  as  He  thought  of  the  curse
upon  sin  and  sinners, — self-condemned,
by  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,  to  the
dwelling-place  of  the  thankless  and
wicked !

ix.  The  eye  is  blind  to  God  in  natural
wonders,  and  the  ear  deaf  amid  His
works,  because  the  heart  has  not  embraced
Him  in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  We
refuse  to  bless  the  Creator  because  we
have  no  portion  in  the  Redeemer.  Come
to  Him  before  you  are  removed  from
the  world  of  nature  and  of  grace. —
Arranged  from  "  Sermons  by  Rev.  J,
Garbett.  (Addenda,  ver.  24,  "  God^  that
giveth  rain.")


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


CBkV,  T.


Ver.  26.  Theme :  Wicked  professors

THE  BANE  OP  THE  ChURCH.

Men  as  atrociously  wicked  might  be
found  among  the  people  of  Jehovah  as
among  the  worst  of  the  Gentiles.  They
were  guilty  of  overreaching  and  defraud-
ing one  another,  and  thus  their  houses
were  replenished  with  the  gains  of  de-
ceit.    Thus  in  every  age  :  thus  now.

The  Church  in  glory  is  pure,  unde-
filed;  not  so  on  earth.  No  society  of
Christians  is  endued  with  the  spirit  of
infallibility;  hence  tares  grow  with
wheat.

I.  God  has  a  people  on  earth.  "  My
people  "  (comp.  Isa.  Ixiii.  7-9  ;  Rom.  ix.
23-26).  1.  His  creation  (Isa.  xliii.  21).
2.  Galled  hy  Him^  "  from  darkness  to
light."  3.  Privileged  people ;  pardoned,
regenerated,  adopted.  (Comp.  also
Bom.  il  2S,  29 ;  Phil.  iii.  3 ;  1  Pet.  ii.

9).

II.  In  the  Church  there  is  an  un-
happy admixture  of  "wicked  men."
This  truth  illustrated  in  Lord's  parables
— of  ten  virgins,  tares  and  wheat,  net
cast  into  sea.

God's  people  are  not  sinless,  yet  not
allowedly  **  wicked"  (Job  x.  7,  16).  A
real  Christian  is  anxious  to  be  right  (Ps.
cxxxix.  23).  Yet  among  them  "  wicked
men*'  are  found.     Tliis  applies —

1.  To  those  religious  establishments
whose  constitution  and  discipline  offer
no  restraints  to  the  admission  of  such
characters.  The  gate  is  not  strait,  but
wide.  Baptismal  regeneration  of  infants
necessitates  a  lax  admission  to  commu-
nionf  &G,

2.  The  description  is  applicable  to
mere  hearers  of  the  Gospel.  They  are
among  God's  people  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).
Gospel  preached  to  them  in  vain ;  Holy
Ghost  resisted ;  neglect  great  salvation.
Is  not  this  wicked  ?

3.  Applicable  to  those  who  have
entered  the  Ghurch  without  real  conver-
sion. *'  Walk  according  to  the  course
of  this  world,  and  are  by  nature  children
of  wrath."  Such  in  our  religious  assem-
blages.    None  in  heaven.

(1.)  Some  professors  are  secretly  loicked
(Tit.  i.  16 ;  1  Tim.  v.  6).  As  Achan  in
camp  of  Israel,  Judas  among  the  twelve,
Ananias  at  Jerusalem,  Simon  Magus  in


Samaria,  Jezebel  at  Thyatira:  such  in
all  churches  of  saints.

(2.)  Some  professors  are  deceivers;
hypocrites  impose  on  others,  and  also
on  themselves.  Say  "  The  temple  of
the  Lord  are  we,"  but  are  of  the  syna-
gogue of  Satan  (John  viii.  54  j  Rev,  ii,
2,  9).

4.  Applicable  to  those  wilfully  in-
active in  the  Ghurch.  They  belie  their
profession.     Where  is  their  zeal  ?  &c.

5.  Applicable  to  those  who  interrupt
the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  Ghurch,

Some  have  entered  through  the  gate
of  human  excitement ,  of  creature  passioUf
of  filthy  lucre,  of  ambition.

III.  This  mixture  of  the  wicked
with  the  godly  is  a  fact.  "  Are  found,"
(fee.     By  whom  are  they  discovered  ?

1.  Frequently  by  themselves  (1  John
ii.  19).

2.  Fersecution  has,  and  so  has  tempta-
tion.

3.  By  Christians,  to  whom  their  un-
holy course,  <fec. ,  is  a  grief.

i.  They  are  found  by  God  (Rev.  iii.
18,  23).     Odious  to  Him.

5.  Some  will  not  be  found  till  the  day
of  Judgment  (Matt.  iii.   12,  xiiL  28-30)

IV.  The  injurious  influence  of  th^
conduct  of  such  professors.

1.  They  bring  reproach  upon  religion
(Rom.  ii.  24).

2.  The  hearts  of  the  godly  are  grieved
and  their  hands  weakened  (Josh.  vii.
12,  25;  1  Johnii.  7;  Phil.  iii.  18).

3.  The  Church  is  in  danger  of  being
injured  by  them  (Hos.  v.  3).  A  little
leaven  will  leaven  the  lump  (1  Cor.  v.
6-8 ;  Gal.  V.  9,  10).

4.  It  frequently  prevents  accessions  to
the  Church.

5.  The  guilt  of  such  persons  is  highly
aggravated,  and  their  punishment  will  be
awful.  *'  Many  stripes "  (Isa.  v.  5 ;
Hos.  X   1 ;  Matt.  xi.  21).

Application :  1.  Self-examination.
**Lord,  is  it  I?"  2.  That  may  be  a
true  Ghurch  though  disorderly  persons
are  found  in  it.  3.  How  little  is  a  mere
profession  of  religion  to  be  trusted  in  or
boasted  of.  The  goat,  though  folded
among  the  sheep,  is  a  goat  still,  and  must
finally  be  separated  from  the  flock  (Matt^
XXV.  32,  33).— Helps  for  the  Pulpit.

Ill


CHAP.  V.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


Ver.    26-29.      Theme :   Deceits   of

THE  WICKED.

God  retains  His  claim  :  **  My  people."
Sees  the  snaies  (ver.  26)  and  miseries
(ver.  28)  they  endure.  Estimates  the
evil  influences  to  which  they  are  ex-
posed (ver.  26),  and  the  calamities
wrought  by  the  wicked  (ver.  27).

I.  Wickedness  forces  itself  into
every  society.  Tlie  Church,  the
home.

I.  By  hypocritical  pretensions.  2.
For  predacious  ends.  The  "  wicked "
are  active^  deceptive^  plotting.

II.  Wickedness  is  intent  on  human
ruin  (John  viii.  41,  44).

1.  Angry  at  goodness.  2.  Reckless  in
mischief.  3.  Envious  of  happiness.  4.
Greedy  of  gain.  Alas  !  "  men  "  are  the
spoiler's  prey.

in.  Wickedness  can  boast  appalling
success  (ver.  27).

1.  Evil  devices  prosper.  2.  Evil-
doers aggrandise  themselves.  Fill  their
*' houses'*  with  the  gains  of  ungodliness  :
alas !  fill  the  abode  of  doom  with  de-
coyed and  destroyed  souls.

IV.  Wickedness  thrives  by  utter
heartlessness  (ver.  28 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  17).
Even  ''  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked
are  cruel."  1.  The  man  who  will  wrong
God  will  not  scruple  to  wrong  his  fel-
lows. 2.  Mouinful  when  the  wicked
are  in  great  power.  3.  How  contrasted
the  treatment  of  the  poor  and  oppressed
by  Christ  (Ps.  Ixxii.  12-14).  4.  What
need  to  pray  and  work  that  "  the  wick-
edness of  the  wicked  may  come  to  an
end."

V.  Wickedness  ensures  God's  sure
revenge  (ver.  29).  God  will :  1.  Avenge
His  insulted  honour.  2.  His  outraged
laws.  3.  The  suffering  victims.  4.
The  spoliation  of  His  heritage.  Oh,
the  doom  of  him  on  whom  lies  the  blood
of  murdered  souls  !  (Addenda,  ver.  26,
"  2%ey  set  a  trap;"  ver.  27,  ^^Eetrihution
in  kind^)

Ver.  30,  31.  A  cry  or  waeninq  in

A  PERIOD  OF  UNIVERSAL  APOSTASY.

i.  The  condition  of  the  people  is
shocking  and  abominable  :  for  (a.)  The
leaders  of  the  people  mislead  them,  {h.)
The  people  wish  to  be  misled,     ii  The


consequences  correspond  to  the  guilt
(comp.  ver.  25,  14,  16). — Naeg,

"  My  people  love  to  have  it  so»**  It  is
a  criterion  of  false  teaching  that  it
lightens  the  yoke  of  God's  law,  removes
His  fear  from  the  conscience,  and  leaves
man  to  his  own  nature  ;  and  with  this
man  is  only  too  ready  to  be  content. —
Speaker's  Com.

*'  The  credulous  confidence  of  the
ignorant  has  in  all  ages  been  at  the
command  of  an  interested  priesthood."
— Hend.

"  It  appears  clear  from  various  parts
of  the  Old  Testament,  that  a  great  num-
ber of  persons  pretending  to  prophecy
arose  among  the  Hebrews,  by  whom  the
exertions  of  the  true  prophets  were
greatly  counteracted,  and  the  ruin  of  the
nation  accelerated.'* — Ibid,

*'Like  sought,  like  found.  The
people  wish  to  have  false  preachers,  and
get  them,  and  a  blind  man  leads  the
blind,  until  both  fall  into  the  ditch
(Luke  vi.  39)." — Cramer.

The  fatal  consequences.     Consider  :

i.  What  reckoning  would  he  for  their
wickedness  (ver.  29).  Sometimes  mercy
rejoices  against  judgment ;  How  shall
I  give  thee  up  ?  Here  judgment  is
reasoning  against  mercy ;  Shall  I  not
visit  9     It  denotes  :

1.  The  certainty  and  necessity  of
God's  judgments.  Vengeance  must
come.

2.  The  Justice  and  equity  of  God's
judgments.  He  appeals  to  the  sinner's
own  conscience.  Do  not  such  guilty
abominations  merit  punishment.

ii.  What  was  the  direct  tendency  of
their  wickedness  (ver.  31),  i.e. —

1.  What  a  pitch  of  wickedness  you
will  come  to  at  last !  *'  What  will  you
do  1 "  What  will  this  grow  to  ]  Worse
and  worse.

2.  What  a  pit  of  destruction  you  will
come  to  at  last !  Nothing  can  be  ex-
pected but  a  deluge  of  wrath  from  God.

Note:  Those  who  walk  in  bad  ways
would  do  well  to  consider  the  tendency
of  them  both  to  greater  sin  and  utter
ruin. — M.  Henry.

Theme:  ThE  DISMAL  OUTLOOK.
Text :  ''  What  will  you  do  in  the  end


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAf .  T.


thereof?"  A  troublesome  question,
ghastly  in  its  subtle  snggestiveness.
Lifts  veil  of  imagination  on  dark  out-
look. Vague  horrors.  There  is  some-
thing beyond  the  immediate  present.
That  beyond  is  solemn  and  dreadful
enough  to  dwarf  the  consideration  of
the  present.  Man  has  a  future.  Life
goes  on  to  stupendous  issues.  All
things  verge  to  a  crisis.  '*  What  will
you  do  in  the  end  thereof  1 "

1.  That  wicked  courses  come  to  an
"  end."  The  book  of  human  history  will
close.  Angel  swear,  '*  Time  shall  be  no
more  ? "  The  Archangel's  trump  will
sound.     Every  life  must  be  reckoned.

L  The  interval  may  be  delusively
pleasant.

2.  Men  may  dream  away  life  in
heedlessness.

3.  The  inevitable  close  comes  on.
Death.     Judgment,

IL  The  in  "the  end"  wicked
courses  are  calamitous.  Boat  in  the
current  over  the  rapids.  Spendthrift
comes  to  penury.  Prodigality  leads  to
squandered  health  and  '^  husks."


1.  The  terror  of  a  defenceless  souL

**  What  do?"

2.  The  urgency  of  preparation.
"  Do  "  something  now,

3.  The  value  of  a  good  hope.  Need
to  do  nothing  but  hide  in  Christ.  How
blessed  to  feel  sure  (2  Tim.  i.  12).

III.  That  in  the  calamitous  ''  end  "
the  wicked  will  have  no  refuge  or
plea.  *'  What  will  you  do  % "  Having
** neglected  great  salvation;"  alienated
infinite  love;  despised  and  offended
Jesus ;  lost  your  sole  interval  of  escape  1

1.  Utter  dismay  (Isa.  iL  19 ;  Rev.
vl  16).

2.  Utterly  defenceless.  Deserted  by
all  human  comforters ;  every  false  hope
gone ;  and  the  sinner's  Friend  your
avenging  Judge.  Not  a  plea  left  you
to  excuse  or  extenuate  your  guilt.

IV.  That  without  a  refuge  or  plea
<'  the  end  "  of  all  is  irremediable  ruin
(ver.  29).  (Addenda,  ver.  31,  "  What
do  in  the  end  ?  ")

1.  Use  the  auspicious  present.  2.  For-
sake evil  and  live.  3.  Flee  for  refuge
to  the  hope  set  before  you  in  the  Gospel.


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  V,

Topic  :  Haevest  Sermon.    Text  :  "  Neither  say  they  in  their  hearty  Let  us  now  fear
the  Lord  :  He  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed  weeks  of  harvest "  (ver.  24).

Three  lamentable  habits  and  attitudes  of  thought :

1.  Readiness  to  see  the  worst  side  of  God's  natural  providences.  "  He  glveth
rain  ; "  untimely,  insufficient,  or  excessive.

2.  Bowing  the  God  of  nature  out  of  all  active  management  of  His  own  world.
A  delusion  to  suppose  weather,  rains,  and  fine  "  weeks  of  harvest "  are  regulated  by
special  providence.  God  is  above  such  afiairs :  so  say  not,  "  Let  us  fear,  Lord,"
kc.

3.  Ignoring  the  fact  that  human  conduct  affects  God's  providential  dispensations
(ver.  25).  There  is  a  continual  administration  of  judgment  going  on  in  this  life,
admonitory  of  the  final.

I.  The  benignant  order  of  natural  providences.     "  Early  rain,"  and  "  latter ;
but  rain  "  reserved  "  during  "  weeks  of  harvest."      Without  "  early,"  seed  not
germinate ;  if  "  latter  "  not  come,  grain  dried  and  withered  prematurely ;  then
ripening  suns.

1.  Each  aspect  of  nature  is  welcomed  in  its  season,  God  rolls  the  seasons  round,
and  every  change  is  beneficent  and  congenial.  So  in  the  ages  of  man :  childhood
lovely,  youth  winning,  mature  have  grace,  snowy  age  majestic.  But  these  are
only  welcomed  in  their  season.  "  Snow  in  harvest "  not  welcomed  ;  ruinous.  So
childishness  in  manhood,  <fec.     "  In  season."

2.  The  certain  revolution  of  the  seasons.  Every  year  appointed  times  coma
round.  Cannot  alter ;  cannot  hasten  spring,  nor  delay  winter.  So  seasons  of  life.
(1.)  Seasons  cannot  he  huiried.     Youth  must  bear  its  yoke,  manhood  its  toils;

a  113


CHAP.  V.  HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY  .  JEHEMIAH.

reaping  and  rest  cannot  be  forestalled.  **  Race  not  to  swift/*  Ac.  (2.)  Seauoni
cannoi  he  delayed.  Winter  refuses  to  pause.  Youth  not  long  with  the  young  •
age  comes  on ;  or,  what  is  oftener  than  age,  death.

Let  not  seasons  pass  unused,  lest  "  weeks  of  harvest "  bring  no  ingathering.

II.  An  interval  reserved  for  harvest  ingathering.  God  kept  these  "weeks"
from  intrusion  of  unseasonable  weather,  and  *'  rain."

1.  The  reaping  season  has  a  fixed  duration  ;  "  weeks."  Soon  gone.  Squander
golden  opportunity  :  '*  past !  *'  "  What  hands  do,  with  might."  All  gracious  seasons
are  brief.  Therefore  reapers  ply  with  industry.  Men,  wise  in  worldly  concerns,
take  heed  that  fine  opportunities  not  squandered.  Right ;  God  sends  favourable
times,  when,  if  equal  to  occasion,  reap  large  gains.  Make  most  of  every  good
occasion  in  life.  Special  opportunities  of  grace  :  *'  Work  while  day."  Gather  in
while  you  may,  fruits  of  Spirit,  bounties  of  Divine  love,  blessings  of  redemption.

2.  The  work  of  harvest  ingathering.  Fields  laden,  swept  with  scythe,  crops
garnered.  Some  will  complain,  dissatisfied  with  results  :  so  ever.  Fear  many
will  be  surprised  at  results  of  life,  when  '*  reap  what  sown."  None  expect  a  bad
end  or  adverse  judgment  before  God.  Strange  infatuation  !  Madness  to  "sow  to
flesh  "  and  expect  other  than  "  corruption."  Bitter  the  ingathering  of  lost  hopes
and  ruined  joys  !     But  glad  the  ingathering  of  the  Christian  ;  joyous  the  harvest.

3.  The  Divine  law  of  multiplying.  From  handfuls  come  *'  harvest."  "  Thirty,
sixty,  a  hundred."  "  Heap  up  treasures."  Sow  wind,  reap  whirlwind.  Live
benignly  and  devoutly,  "  receive  into  everlasting  habitations."  Same  in  quality,
but  increased  in  quantity.  Think  on  this  immeasurable  and  eternal  reaping  of
the  issues  of  life  1     Ingathering  will  come,  for  God  hath  '*  reserved  weeks."

III.  Man's  becoming  response  to  God's  gracious  bestowments.  "  Let  us  now
fear  the  Lord."

L  With  discerning  adoration,  let  us  receive  God^s  favours.  "Bless  the  Lord,  and
forget  not  benefits."     "  What  render  unto  the  Lord  1 "

2.  With  diligent  promptitude  let  us  use  the  auspicious  seasons  God  sends.  Turn
'*  weeks  "to  account;  waste  them  not  for  "more  convenient  season."  Wise
husbandman  works  eagerly  to  "  fill  his  barns."  Make  your  hearts  garners  of
spiritual  peace  and  joy.

3.  With  devoutest  service  let  us  show  otir  **fear  of  the  Lord,"  The  harvest-song
God  loves,  but  the  harvest-fruits  He  requires.  Lay  on  His  altar  life  and  love.
"  I  beseech  you  by  mercies  of  Lord,  present  your  bodies  living  sacrifice,"  &o, —
(Addenda,  ver.  24,  "  God  recognised  in  the  harvest.**)


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  V.    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUQOESTIYE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  1.    ^^ Streets  of  Jerusalem.*'     In  the  prophet  of  the  thoroughfares;  and

ancient  times  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  this    because    the    "broad   places   and

seemed  to  have   names.       (They    have  streets  "  were  scenes  of  idolatry,  altars

none  now.)      Several    are    mentioned  :  and  idols  being  erected  therein.
"East    Street"    (2    Chron.    xxix.    4),  '' Seek^  if  ye  can  find  a  man."     Dioge-

''  Street  of  the  house  of  God  "  (Ezra  x.  nes,  the  cynic,  having  lighted  a  lamp,

9),  "Water-gate  Street"  (Neb.  viii.  1,3),  ranged  the  streets  peering  about  as  ii

"  Ephraim-Gate  Street"  (Neh.  viii.  16),  searching  for  something.     Being  asked

"Bakers'  Street"  (Jer.  xxxvii.  21).  what  he  looked  for,    he  answered,  "A

The   number  of  the   "  streets  "  was  man  ;  "  or,  as  is  usually  recorded,  "  An

great  (Jer.  xi.    13).      Jeremiah  makes  honest  man  I"     But  the  words  in  Laer-

f requent   allusion    to    the    "  streets    of  tins  are  avQ^M'rrov  ^ijra;,  "  I  seek  a  man."

Jerusalem  "  (Jer.  v.  1;  vii.  17,  34;  ix.  He  sought  not  alone  a  man  with  honesty

21  ;    xi.  6,   13;   xiv.    16;    xxxiii.   10  ;  and  truth  in  his  character,  but  a  man  in

xliv.  6,  9,  21).       He    was   distinctively  whom  all  right  and  noble  qualities  were
114


HOMlLETtG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAf.  T.


combined.  Ho  constantly  reviled  the
society  of  Greece  with  its  lack  of  man-
hood.

"The  host  of  Nola  being  bid  to
summon  the  good  men  of  the  town  to
appear  before  the  Roman  censor,  gat  him
to  the  churchyard,  and  there  called  at
the  graves  of  the  dead ;  for  he  knew
not  where  to  call  for  a  good  man  alive."
— Trapp.

One  true  man  would  avert  the  coming
woe.  "  Ghislerus  reminds  us  of  a  story
which  Pliny  relates  of  King  Demetrius,
who  retired  from  the  city  of  Rhodium
because  he  could  not  take  it  on  its  only
accessible  side  without  destroying  some
celebrated  paintings  of  Protogenes." —
Lange.  This  one  man's  merits  saved
the  city.

**  When  the  good  man  mends  his  armour,
And  trims  his  helmet's  plume,
When  the  goodwife's  shuttle  merrily

Goes  flashing  through  the  loom,
With  weepiug  and  with  laughter

Still  is  the  story  told
How  well  Horatius  kept  the  bridge.
In  the  brave  days  of  old."

— Lays  of  Ancient  Rome.

Ver.  4.  Ignorance  and  irreligion.
Ignorance  of  the  price  of  pearls  makes
the  idiot  slight  them.  Ignorance  of  the
worth  of  diamonds  makes  the  fool  choose
a  pebble  before  them.  Ignorance  of  the
satisfaction  learning  affords  makes  the
peasant  despise  it.  So  with  religion. —
Anthony  Horneck.

Ver.  7.  "  When  I  fed  them  to  the  full**
(fee.  Fulness  in  good  men  often  breeds
forgetful ness,  and  in  bad  men  filthiness.
Gula  vestihulum  Luxurioe — gluttony  is
the  gallery  that  incontinency  walketh
through.  The  Israelites  ate  and  drank,
and  rose  up  to  play,  scil.,  with  their
Midianitish  mistresses.  Fulness  of  bread
made  way  to  Sodoni^s  sin.  Lunatics,
when  the  moon  is  declining  and  in  the
wane,  are  sober  enough  ;  but  when  full,
more  wild  and  exorbitant. — Trapp,

Ver.  14.  "  My  wcyrds  shall  devour
themJ*  "  Though  men  were  hard  as
rocks,  the  Word  is  a  hammer  which  can
break  them  ;  though  as  sharp  as  briers
and  thorns,  the  Word  is  a  fire  which
can  devour  and  torment  them." — Bishop
Reynolds.

An  infidel  said,  *'  There  is  one  thing


that  mars  all  the  pleasure  of  my  life."
"  Indeed  !  "  replied  his  friend ;  "  what
is  that  1 "  He  answered,  "/  am  afraid
the  Bible  is  true.  If  I  could  know  for
certain  that  death  is  an  eternal  sleep,  my
joy  would  be  complete.  But  here  is  the
thorn  that  stings  me,  the  sword  that
pierces  to  my  very  soul :  if  the  Bible  is
true,  I  am  lost  for  ever."

Ver.  22.  "  Tremble  at  my  presence,
which  Jiave  made  the  sea  ?  "

**  Thou  glorious  mirror,  where  the  Almighty's

form
Qlasses  itself  in  tempests  ;  in  all  time,
Calm  or  convulsed, — in  breeze,  or  gale,  or

storm,
Icing  the  pole,  or  in  the  torrid  clime
Dark     heaving,    boundless,     eternal,    and

sublime —
The  image  of  eternity,  the  throne
Of  the  Invisible."  -— Byeon.

**  In  contemplation  of  created  things

By  steps  we  may  ascend  to  God." — MiLTON.

**  fSand  for  the  bound  of  the  sea."
Modern  science  has  shown  that  the
resisting  power  of  sand  is  enormous.
By  the  mechanical  laws  which  govern
it,  the  shock  of  a  blow  is  distributed
laterally,  and  produces  little  effect.  An
egg  buried  a  few  inches  deep  in  the
sand  would  not  be  broken  by  heavy
blows  falling  upon  the  surface.  And  so
a  wave  which  would  shatter  rocks  falls
powerless  upon  sand. — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

Ver.  23.  ''Revolting  heart."  The
forcible  and  true  meaning  of  the  word
"  revolt "  has  become  obscured.  It
suggests  affections  which  had  been
drawn  back  from  God  through  dislike  of
His  claims ;  then  followed  active  resist-
ance," rebellion."

Ver.  24.  God  recognised  in  the  har-
vest. Dr.  Guthrie  tells  us,  that  as  a
traveller  in  a  lonely  district  drew  near
to  a  cottage,  he  heard  a  man  exclaiming,
*'  Thanks  be  to  God  for  this  and  Ghrist  I"
So  earnest  was  the  tone  of  the  speaker,
that  the  traveller  ventured  to  go  in  to
see  what  the  gift  was  that  called  forth
such  thanksgiving.  It  was  but  a  crust
of  bread,  on  which  the  poor  occupant  of
that  cottage  was  about  to  make  his  mid-
day meal.  To  the  devout  old  man  a
crust  and  Christ  was  something  to  thank
God  for.  How  much  more  it  behoves
us,  when  the  valleys  are  covered  with

115


CiiAF.  VI.


EOMlLJSriC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAM,


corn,  and  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth
are  safely  stored  in  the  garner,  to  lift  up
our  hands  and  our  hearts  unto  God,  and
Bay,  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  all  this
and  Christ  \" — Rev.  R.  A.  Bertram,

^^God,  that  giveth  rain."  The  vast
reservoir  of  the  ocean  provided  for  the
supply  of  vapour ;  the  laws  which  cause
these  vapours  to  rise  and  float  in  the  air ;
the  winds  which  waft  them  to  the  land ;
the  attraction  there  exercised  upon  them
by  trees,  mountains,  <fec. ;  the  currents
of  air  moving  in  different  directions,
which,  by  their  differences  of  tempera-
ture cause  the  vapour  to  condense  and
be  deposited  in  drops ;  the  laws  of  con-
gelation, which  store  up  part  of  the  win-
ter excess  in  the  shape  of  snow  and  ice
upon  the  mountains  for  summer  use;
the  diversified  strata  of  the  earth,  which
store  up  another  portion,  causing  it  in
some  places  to  break  forth  in  springs,
in  others  keeping  it  out  of  the  reach  of
evaporation,  but  available  for  man*s  use
by  the  digging  of  wells :  all  these  com-
plicated arrangements  show  such  a
thoughtful  care  for  the  supply  of  one
of  the  first  necessaries  of  human  life,
that  those  capable  of  understanding
them  ought  to  say  in  their  hearts,  "  Let
us  fear  the  Lord." — Speaker* 8  Com.

Ver.  26.  "  They  set  a  trap  ;  they  catch
men**

**  Proud  Nimrod  first  the  bloody  chaie  be-
gan,
A  mighty  hunter — and  his  prey  was  man.*'

— Pope.

Flans  adopted  for  catching  birds.  1.
Trap ;  the  usual  method  (Job  xviii.  9 ;


Eccles.  ix.  12;  Pro  v.  viL  23);  made  of

two  parts — a  net  stretched  over  a  frame,
a  stick  supporting  it,  so  placed  as  to
give  way  with  the  least  touch  (Amos  iii.
5,  "gin;"  Ps.  Ixix.  22,  "trap").  2.
Snare;  was  a  cord  (Job  xviii,  10,  of.  Ps.
xviii.  5,  cxvi.  3,  cxl.  5)  so  placed  as
to  catch  a  bird  by  the  leg.  3.  Decoy ;
(Jer.  V.  26,  27),  a  cage  filled  with  birds,
the  door  being  kept  open  by  stick  (or
cord),  which  suddenly  closed  on  the  en-
trance of  any  bird.

Hunting,  with  its  snares,  may  remind
us  of  that  mighty  hunter,  Satan,  and
his  devices.  Decoys,  snares  for  the  un-
wary. Hence  the  duty  of  watchfulness,
"  In  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  sight
of  any  bird"  (Prov.  i.  17). — J.  Comper
Grey^  *'  Topics**

Ver.  27.  ^'Retribution  in  kind.**
"They  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  a
snare**  (1  Tim.  vi.  9).  "Thou  fool!
this  night  thy  soul  is  required  of
thee ;  then  whose  shall  those  things  be
which  thou  hast  provided  ?  So  is  he  that
layeth  up  treasure  for  himself  and  is  not
rich  towards  God  '*  (Luke  xii.  20,  21).

Ver.  31.  "  What  do  in  the  end  ?  **  On
that  day,  if  all  your  unforgiven  sins  are
against  you ;  if  Jesus  Christ,  wounded
and  driven  back,  is  against  you ;  if  the
Holy  Ghost  is  against  you,  with  whom
you  have  striven  ;  if  the  offended  Lord
God  Almighty  is  against  you ;  ah !  com-
ing as  you  are,  into  that  day,  you  must
perish.  It  will  be  too  late  to  pray  then.
Even  the  granite  rocks  will  fall  the
other  way  as  you  pray  to  them,  "  Fall
on  us,"  &c. — Talma^e,


CHAPTER  VL

Critioal  and  Ezsoitioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronological  and  HlBtorical  position  of  this  chapter
the  same.     (Comp.  notes  on  iii.,  iv.,  v.)

2.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  1.  "  Tehoa  ;"  a  small  town  of  defence  in  Judah  (2  Chron.
ti.  6),  six  Roman  miles  from  Bethlehem  (Jerome),  lies  on  the  range  of  hills  which  stretch
hrom  near  Hebron  eastward ;  about  eleven  miles  due  south  of  Jerusalem.  Its  ruins  scarcely
cover  five  acres  :  they  consist  of  walls  of  houses,  broken  columns,  cisterns,  &c.  Birthplace  of
kvaoB  (vii.  14).  Tekoites  helped  in  rebuilding  walls  of  Jerusalem  after  Captivity  (Neh.
di.  5,  27).  Town  now  called  Tekua.  *'  Beth-haccartm  :  "  means  vineyard  house ;  situate  half-
way between  Tekoa  and  Jerusalem,  on  a  mountain,  probably  "  Herodium,"  the  site  of  Herod's
lastle  ;  known  now  as  Frank  Mountain.  Town  had  a  ruler  in  Nehemiah's  time  (Neh.  iii.  14).
This  verse  indicates  that  it  waa  used  as  a  beacon  station.  JtramCf  who  wrote  at  Bethlehem,
lajtf,  "  £very  one  knows  that  Jerusalem  is  situated  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  As  for  Tekoa,  we
116


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  ohaf.  ▼!.


■ee  every  day  with  our  own  eyes  that  it  is  a  little  town  upon  a  hill  about  twelve  [Roman]
miles  from  Jerusalem.  Between  these  is  ai.other  village,  called  in  the  Hebrew  and  Syriao
tongues  Bethacharma,  which  also  is  placed  vipon  a  hill."  Ver.  20.  **  Sheba:  "  the  kingdom  of
Sheba  in  Southern  Arabia,  embracing  the  greater  part  of  the  Yemen  (Dr.  W.  Smith),^  Arabia
Felix ;  or  the  chief  city  of  Yemen,  the  principal  province  of  Arabia  (Kalisch).  Arabic,  Sebk.
(Comp.  Ezek.  xxvii.  22.)  The  tribe  and  home  of  the  Sabaens  in  Southern  Arabia  (Naeg.).
^*  Afar  count7-y  :"  India.',  " cane,"  brought  thence  in  the  caravans.  Ver.  22.  ** Sides  of  the
earth;"  i.e.,  most  remote  regions  ;  the  scenes  of  their  captivity;  and  from  whence  they
would  return  (ch.  xxxi.  8) ;  Chaldea,  therefore.

3.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  *^  Children  of  Benjamin:'*  Jeremiah's  fellow-countrymen,
he  being  of  that  tribe,  Anathoth  being  one  of  the  cities  of  Benjamin.  Originally  the  tribal
territory  was  bounded  on  the  north  by  Ephraim,  and  south  by  the  hills  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  the
limits  were  soon  extended  southward  to  the  valley  of  Hinnom.

4.  Natural  History.— Ver.  20.  **  Sweet  cane:''  probably  the  Calamus  aromaticuSf  native  of
Central  India,  remarkable  for  its  fragrance  (Dr.  Royle)  ;  or  it  may  be  the  lemon  grass  of  India
and  Arabia  (Dr.  W.  Smith).  The  sweet  cane,  or  calamus  (Exod.  xxx.  23),  when  dried  and
pulverised,  is  richly  fragrant  (so  Dioscorides  informs  us)  ;  while  according  to  Strabo  its  origin
must  be  traced  to  Sheba  in  Arabia.  Pliny  says  it  was  common  to  India  and  Syria.  The  best
came  from  India.

5.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  1.  *'  Set  up  a  sign  of  firt  ;"  when  the  enemy  approached,
the  besieged  made  their  peril  known  and  summoned  assistance  by  raising  a  column  of  smoke
in  the  daytime,  or  piling  a  blazing  fire  in  the  night.  Or  a  lighted  torch  was  "lifted  up"  and
waved  violently  as  a  "sign"  of  pressing  danger.  Here  it  may  mean,  kindle  a  fire  on  the  heights,
mountain  tops.  Ver.  4.  "Go  up  at  noon:'*  the  noon  was  generally  too  hot  for  aught  but
rest ;  but  the  eagerness  of  the  Chaldean  army  is  such  that  they  are  alert  even  at  midday.  Ver.
6.  '*  Hew  trees  and  cast  a  mount :  *'  the  besiegers  in  all  ancient  sieges  ruthlessly  cut  down  the
trees  around  the  city,  and  with  them  filled  up  ditches  and  constructed  embankments.  From
these  "  mounts  *'  they  attacked  the  city  (2  Sam.  xx.  15  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  24).  The  Jews  were  em-
phatically forbidden  to  hew  down  fruit-bearing  trees  (Deut.  xx.  19,  20).  (See  Addenda  on  ver.
6.)  Ver.  9.  *'  Turn  back  thine  hand  :"  the  gleaner  is  to  bring  his  hand  back  again  along  the
branches,  and  go  carefully  once  more  over  the  tendrils,  lest  any  clusters  escape  :  thus  would
Nebuchadnezzar  repeat  his  invasions  till  the  land  was  swept  clean  of  inhabitants.  Ver.  17.
"  Watchmen:"  sentinels  (1  Sam.  xiv.  16).  The  watchmen  patrolled  the  city  during  the  night
and  called  the  hours.  In  times  of  alarm  and  danger,  watchmen  were  posted  iu  towers  over
the  city's  gates  (Isa.  xxi.  8,  Ixii.  6).  They  were  menaced  with  heaviest  punishments  if  faith-
less to  their  trust  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  2-6).  Metaphorically,  this  was  the  office  of  prophets  (see  refs.
above,  and  Hab.  ii.  1).  "Bow  and  spear: "  for  "  bow  " see  notes  on  iv.  29,  v.  16.  "  Spear:  "
A  javelin  for  hurling  at  the  enemy  ;  or  lance  (ch.  1.  42),  used  by  mounted  soldiers,  rushing  upon
the  enemy  at  full  speed  with  lances  levelled  against  their  foe.  Layard's  "  Mon.  of  Nin."  show
this  the  ordinary  weapon  of  war  used  by  the  Babylonians.  Ver.  26.  "  Wallow  thy sdf  in  ashes:'*
to  throw  ashes  upon  the  head,  the  symbol  of  intense  grief  (2  Sam.  xiii.  19)  ;  but  to  "  sit  down
in  them"  (Job  ii.  8)  is  a  more  desperate  manifestation  of  misery  and  sorrow  :  to  **  waJlow  in
ashes  "  indicates  a  grief  wholly  unbearable  ;  a  superlative  figure  of  wretchedness.  Ver.  27-30.
*' A  tower  and  fortress  to  try"  &c.  (For  correct  rendering  of  words  see  Lit.  Crit.  below.)
Metaphorical  language  taken  from  metallurgy;  smelting  and  proving  ore;  **  brass,"  "iron,"
•'  lead,"  "  silver."  In  ancient  times,  ere  the  use  of  quicksilver  was  known,  lead  was  employed
as  a  flux  to  assist  the  silver  to  melt;  its  action  being  so  penetrating  that  it  ran  through  other
metals,  dissolving  them,  and  gathering  to  itself  the  alloy,  thus  separating  the  precious  metals
from  dross.  But  in  Judah's  case  the  smelter  or  assayer  could  obtain  no  pure  silver  at  all ;  the
refiner's  art  in  their  case  failed.

6.  Literary  Citicisms. — Ver.  1.  ^^  Gather  yourselves  to  flee:**  same  word  as  in  iv.  6,
translated  "  retire  :"  see  notes  in  loc.  Hend.,  "  Flee  for  refuge;"  Keil  and  Lange,  simply
**^iie;*'  Blayney,  "Retire  in  a  body."     *' Blow  inTekoa:**  an  alliteration,   ^^^pD  ^Sph-

surely  not  a  literary  vanity,  having  no  design  beyond  producing  a  paronomasia  (as  Keil  con-
ceives), but  because  Tekoa  was  the  most  southerly  town  where  the  fugitives  would  halt  when
driven  by  alarm  of  war  from  Jerusalem.  Ver.  2.  '*  I  have  likened,*'  d:c.  In  Rosea  iv,  5,  this  word
is  rendered  **  destroy;"  i.e.,  reduced  to  silence  by  destroying.  Keil^  "  I  lay  waste."  Speaker's
Com.  retains  "likened.  *'  Comely  and  delicate  :**  Speaker*  s  Com.  takes  HI  J  as  in  Isa.    Ixv.    10

TT  *

"  fold  ; "  Jer.  xxiii.  3,  '*  folds  ;  "  i.e.,  a  pasture  on  which  "  the  shepherds  "  (ver.  3.)  have  made
a  temporary  encampment ;  so  that  the  verse  stands  in  full,  "  To  a  pasturage,  yea,  a  luxuriant,
have  I  likened  the  daught,er  of  Zion."  With  this  interpretation  ver.  3  naturally  coincides.
Lange,  "Thou  art  like  the  meadow,  the  tenderly  cared  for."  Sharpe,  "I  will  destroy  the
comely  and  delicate  daughter  of  Zion."  Ver.  3.  "in  his  place;*'  lit.  "They  shall  pasture
each  his  hand  ;  "  i.e.,  what  lies  to  hand,  close  beside  him  (2  Sam.  xiv.  30).  Ver.  4.  "  Prepare
war:"  sanctify  vrar ;  t.«.,  prepare  by  religious  inaugurations  ((?/".  Deut.  xx.  2;  Ezek.  xxi.  21-
23  ;  Isa.  xiii.  3).  "  Woe  unto  us : "  this  is  aa  outcry,  not  of  the  assailed  but  the  assailing
armieM,  which  lament  being  held  back  from  attack  till  noon  heat  subsides  (see  Manners,  4te,,  on

117


CHAP.  VI.  BOMlLETtO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


verse  above),  that  time  sped  faster  than  their  designs ;  so  eager  were  they  to  execute  the  OTer-
throw  of  Judea.  Ver.  5.  Gives  the  answer  of  the  military  commanders  to  this  impatient  out-
cry of  the  Chaldean  soldiery.  Ver.  10,  "  Word  made  unto  them  a  reproach:"  a  mockery,  the
theme  of  their  ridicule  and  contempt.  Ver.  U.  "  Slightly :  "  LXX.  ="  making  nothing  of  it;  "
triflingly,  as  but  a  frivolous  matter  ;  as  if  there  were  nothing  serious  or  dangerous.  Ver.
15.  "  Wei'c  they  ashamed,"  Jkc.  :  not  iuterrog.  They  were  put  to  shame;  nevertheless  they
are  not  ashamed.  Ver.  16.  "The  good  way:"  Keil  urges  that  ^SBH  cannot  be  acoua.
appended  to,  but  is  geuit.  dependent  on  "sl")"^;  heuce  "  way  of  the  good;"  leads  to  the  good,
to  salvation  ;  but  he  is  alone  in  suggesting  this.  Ver.  18.  "  What  u  among  them  ;  "  or,  what
happens  in  their  midst,  what  befalls  them.  Vulg.,  "  what  great  things  I  will  do  to  them."
Ver.  25.  ''Fear  on  every  side."  Magor-Missabib  (eh.  xx.  3);  an  ever-recurring  phrase  in
Jeremiah's  preaching  (xx.  10,  xlvi.  5,  xlix.  29).  This  text,  so  frequently  reiterated,  he  took
from  Ps.  xxxi.  13  ;  effectively  expounded  in  his  discourses,  and  certainly  suited  to  his  age.
Ver.    27.     **  Tower:"  Jiiljl    from  ]n2.    to  search  out,  to  prave^  especially   metala  (Qesen.)

(oomp.  ix.  7  and  Job  xxiii.  10),  whence  the  derived  noun  1^113, ^  a  trier,  assayer  of  metals.
**  Foi-tress : "  liJ^D  from  "l^^l,  to  cutoff,  cut  mt,  dig  out,  used  of  metals  (^^4.j  ^^  of  gold
and  silver  (Job  xxii.  24)  ;  the  metal  as  cut  out  or  dug  out  from  mines).  Although  ^^^^  ia  an
irregular  form  to  be  derived  from  this  root,  and  might  have  as  its  origin  "^^^^  to  fortify,  yet  the
previous  word  seems  to  determine  its  connection  with  metallurgy.  Hence  Ewald,  **a  cutter  of
ores"  i.e. ,  in  order  to  separate  bad  metal  from  good.  *  *  I  have  set  thee  an  assayer  and  tester  of  ores."
Ver.  28.  Grievous  revolters : "  Q^"l")iD  ^1D  •  paronomasia  ;  superiative  form  of  sentence ;
** rehelB  oirehela"  (Speaker* s  Com.) ;  '*  rebels  oi  the  rebellious"  (Hitzig).  Ver.  29.  "Bellows
are  burned:"  ")nj,  either  Niphil  of  "^^^H.  to  bum,  or  the  root  "^nj    to  snort  (cf.  viii.  16),

i.e.,  blow  furiously  in  the  process  of  smelting  the  ore.  Lange,  Speaker's  Com.,  and  Keil  prefer
the  former;  the  very  bellows  are  burned  with  the  intense  heat  of  the  fire.  Hend.,  Rosen.,
Umhriet,  &c.,  the  latter;  the  roaring  noise  occasioned  by  blowing  the  bellows.  "  Wicked  are
not  plucked  away;"  i.e.,  separated;  the  dross  cannot  be  removed  by  all  the  smelter's  artfl*
Nothing  satisfactory  results  ;  the  ore  is  hopelessly  and  irremediably  base.

HOMILIES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  VL

Section      1-9.  A  vision  of  retributive  war.

,,      10-17.  God's  messenger  baffled  and  repudiated*

,,      18-26.  Bitter  issues  of  impious  effrontery,

„      27-30.  A  frustrated  ministry  of  grace.

Ver.  1-9.   A  Vision  op  Retributive  Wab.

As  yet  no  invader  had  set  foot  on  the  land ;  the  city  apprehended  no  assault :
this  forewarning  cry  (ver.  1)  sounded,  therefore,  like  a  groundless  alarm.  But  the
improbable  quickly  glides  into  the  actual  in  common  life,  and  emphatically  so  in
Divine  providence.  To  ignore  a  warning  cry  is  to  invite  the  sword.  God  never
foreshadows  evil  too  soon,  never  sends  a  seer  with  message  of  terror  without  the
danger  being  imminent,  and  always  gives  forewarning  that  the  imperilled  may
escape.      (See  Addenda  to  chap.  vi.  ver.  1,  "  Set  up  a  sign  of  fire.")

I.  Vivid  portrayal  of  imminent  calamity.  Clearly  and  forcibly  delineated,
so  that  none  could  plead  ignorance  of  danger.  Nor  can  any  now  hide  themselves
under  the  excuse  that  they  knew  not  the  calamities  which  menace  sin.  1.  Zion
offers  a  choice  prize  to  the  foe  (ver.  2,  3).  2.  The  enemy  is  impatient  to  conquer
(ver.  4,  5).  3.  God  commissions  and  commands  the  assault  (ver.  4,  6),  even  as  He
did  the  attack  on  Job  (ii.  3-7),  and  on  Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  7) ;  but  in  their  case  with
h«)w  different  a  design  and  result !  4.  From  the  destroyer's  hand  none  would
escape  (ver.  9).  (See  Manners  and  Customs,  above  on  ver.  9.)  Thus  "  the  daughter
of  Zion  "  would  find  the  threatened  evil  not  imaginary,  or  easily  avoided.  When
God  commands  vengeance  on  those  who  defy  or  despise  Him,  who  shall  "  stay
His  band  1 "  Where  escape  be  found  ?  "  Behold,  yie  despisers,  and  wonder  and
perish."

118


ITOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  OHAP.  vi.


n.  Urgent  appeals  to  seek  safety  in  retreat.  Hide  ere  calamity  comes,  not
delay  until  destruction  overtakes,  (a.)  Their  defenced  city,  Zion,  though  the  strongest
fortress  in  the  land,  was  condemned  to  overthrow;  therefore  "flee!'*  (ver.  1).
Equally,  {h.)  the  strongholds  of  sinners  will  be  overthrown ;  by  afflictionf  calamity,
ruthless  dianges  which  befall  men  in  this  life,  and  certainly  by  the  final  judgment  :
forsake  them ;  "  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you."

I.  They  would  need  shelter  themselves  (ver.  1);  though  they  might  deem
Jerusalem  secure,  as  sinners  do  their  "  refuge  of  lies,"  God  forewarned  them
that  they  would  want  a  more  safe  retreat ;  and  He  knew,  2.  l^het/  should  warn
and  rally  their  neighbours  (ver.  1),  for  tJaey  were  involved  in  like  doom,  and
needed  like  salvation.  3.  Timely  wisdom  might  propitiate  God  and  obtain  mercy
(ver.  8).

in.  Pathetic  denunciations  of  their  hardened  impiety.  No  appeals,  how-
ever plaintive  and  powerful,  could  rouse  this  guilty  people  to  fear  the  evil  or
seek  defence.  1.  Delineation  of  appalling  guilt.  It  w^as  (a.)  Everywhere  prevalent ;
"  wholly  oppression  "  (ver.  6) ;  every  social  grade  lost  to  all  except  extortion  and
worldly  aggrandisement.  (6.)  Spontanecms  and  ceaseless  (ver.  7),  like  a  stream  of
foul  and  poisonous  waters  which  would  not  cease.  2.  Announcement  of  consequent
doom,  (a.)  Attendant  sufferings  (ver.  7),  "grief  and  wounds;"  yet  alas!  these  did  not
dispose  them  to  seek  the  Divine  remedy,  the  one  Physician.  (6.)  Abandonment  by
God  (ver.  8).  Pitifully  God  pleads,  and  expostulates,  and  warns  (ver.  8) ;  but  the
nation  is  unimpressionable  ;  "  desolation  "  therefore  follows.  How  lamentable  the
contrast  in  Zion's  condition  !  (ver.  3,  comp.  ver.  8).  Sinners  who  despise  God's
warnings  and  mercy  entail  on  themselves  the  saddest  desolations.

Ver.  10-17.  God's  Messenger  Baffled  and  Repudiated.

A  heavy  *'  burden  of  the  Lord  "  to  carry ;  it  wearied  the  prophet's  spirit.  Who
would  not  sorrow  to  *' prophesy  evil "  against  his  own  people?  Patriotism  and
philanthropy  alike  shrink.  Yet,  when  only  by  prophesying  evil  can  the  people  be
aroused  to  realise  their  peril  and  "  flee,"  both  patriotism  and  philanthropy  urge  to
the  sorrowful  task.  Then,  even  the  meek  and  gentle  Jesus  must  reiterate  His
"woes,"  and  the  noble-hearted  Paul  must  *'with  many  tears"  portray  his  nation's
spiritual  blindness  and  doom.

L  A  prophet  in  despair  for  an  audience  (ver.  10).  "  To  whom  shall  I  speak?"
^c.  None  who  either  could  or  would  "hear."  1.  Deaf;  "ear  uncircumcised ; "
closed  with  a  foreskin ;  a  suggestive  figure  to  Jews ;  shutting  out  the  sound.  2.
Derisive  (see  Lit.  Grit,  on  verse).  3.  Depreciating ;  "  no  delight  in  it ; "  lost  all
regard  and  desire  for  communications  from  God.  Prophet  found  none  heedful  (Isa.
liu.  1).

II.  A  prophet  irresistibly  constrained  to  preach  (ver.  11).  Silence  was  not
optional  oi  possible;  speak  he  must,  "  whether  men  would  hear  or  forbear."  1.  A
mighty  inspiration  filled  him.  2.  His  weakness  compelled  him  to  yield;  he  grew
"  weary  "  with  keeping  silence  and  restraining  the  sorrowful  message.  3.  The  whole
truth  must  be  outpoured.  4.  For  it  refers  to  all,  and  all  must  be  forewarned.  Mes-
sages for  every  one,  all  ages  included,  from  "  children  "  to  "  aged."  God's  mes-
senger must  utter  the  truths  he  brings.

in.  A  prophet  bearing  evil  tidings  (ver.  11,  12).  Bethink  1.  How  unwilling
is  the  gracious  God  to  send  them.  2.  How  dreadful  is  man^s  rebellion  which  neces-
sitates them.  3.  How  beautifully  tJie  Gospel  reverses  them,  4.  How,  in  every  case,
timely  repentance  of  sin  averts  them  {cf.  Jonah  iii.  6).

IV.  A  prophet  defeated  by  lying  messengers  (ver.  13-15).  Forgery  and  falsehood
tread  upon  the  heels  of  truth ;  the  "  enemy  "  with  "  tares"  follows  the  footsteps  of
the  "  sower"  who  carries  "  good  seed."  "  Lying  spirits"  are  ever  in  conflict  with
prophets  of  truth,  1.  Willing  dupes.  The  people  were  more  prepared  for  the
*'faUe"  than  for  the  "true"  (ver.  13).     Sordid  hearts  set  on  this  world  love  flat-

119


OBAP.  TL  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


tery,  care  not  for  Divine  communications.  2.  Plausible  teachers  (ver.  14).  They
abound;  trifle  with  human  wrong ;  "  heal  slightly; "  their  influence  is  disastrous ;  delvde
suff'erers,  but  not  deliver  them.  3.  Shameless  ungodliness  (ver.  15).  The  effect  of
resisting  Divine  messages  and  warnings  is  to  harden  sinners  in  their  iniquity.  Jere-
miah saw  that  his  ministry  was  neutralised  by  the  false  teachings  which  abounded,
and  by  the  impious  indifterence  of  the  people.

V.  A  prophet  treated  with  open  repudiation  (ver.  16,  17).  Here  is  suggested,
1.  A  preacher's  varied  modes  of  appeal,  (a.)  He  appealed  to  their  judgment:
**  Stand  in  ways  and  see  ;  '*  examine  whether  the  "  old  paths  *'  are  not  safest  and
happiest.  (6.)  To  their  self-love^  their  spiritual  advantage  :  "  Rest  to  your  souls."
(c.)  To  their  fears  and  apprehensions:  "  Hearken  to  sound  of  trumpet;"  the  threat-
enings  of  evil.  2.  The  hostile  attitude  of  sinners,  (a.)  They  will  not  stir  themselves
to  action  (ver.  16),  either  to  test  whether  their  way  is  good  or  leads  to  good,  nor  yet
to  gain  the  "  rest  of  soul"  which  God  offers  and  they  truly  need :  "  We  will  not
walk  therein."  (6.)  They  will  not  listen  to  the  voice  of  sacred  teachers  (ver.  17) ;
they  have  no  desire  to  learn  their  malady,  to  be  healed  thoroughly,  to  be  guided
into  the  "  good  way,"  to  gain  the  precious  "  rest "  which  Jesus  gives ;  and  they
fearlessly  answer  all  appeals  from  God's  servants  with  "  We  will  not  hearken."

Ver.  18-26.  Bitter  Issues  of  Impious  Epfrontert.

Rejecters  of  God's  Word  imprecate  His  wrath  (ver.  19).  Defiance  of  His  warn-
ings and  pleadings  merits  but  brief  forbearance.  Insulted  mercy  interposes  no
longer  between  the  guilty  and  their  doom.  God  has  other  resources  at  command
when  His  messages  are  despised.  He  would  persuade  to  repentance  ;  but,  that
failing,  He  can  summon  calamities  and  subdue  those  who  revolt  (ver.  22-26).
Yet  is  He  "  slow  to  anger,"  and  never  calls  for  judgment  till  defiance  is  not  alone
outspoken  (ver.  16,  17),  but  incorrigible  (ver.  28).  Even  then  God  treats  their
case,  not  vengefully  and  imperiously,  but  judicially ;  calls  them  to  trial  and  judg-
ment, and  appeals  to  the  universe  concerning  the  equity  of  His  proceedings.

I.  The  court  of  witness  (ver:  18,  19).  God  calls  upon  "  the  nations,''  Gentiles;
"  the  congregation,'  probably  counsellors  of  state  ;  "  the  earth"  i.e.,  all  humanity,
to  observe  His  procedure  with  these  Jewish  criminals.  It  foreshadows  another
judgment,  to  be  conducted  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  universe.  How  appalling  the
event !  how  solemnly  does  God  conduct  the  sinner's  trial !

n.  The  offender  arraigned.  Who  is  the  criminal^  (ver.  19),  "<Aw  people/*
God  emphasises  the  identity  :  "  this  people."  Not  a  people  without  a  history,  with-
out national  distinction,  without  a  noble  ancestry,  without  religious  advantages,
without  inducements  to  piety.  Every  item  relating  to  "  this  people  "  formed  a
reason  for  faithful,  loving  allegiance  with  their  God,  and  a  protest  against  their  sin.

m.  The  accusation  against  Judah  (ver.  19).  It  was  not  so  much  practical
irreligion,  though  practices  were  evil  and  loathsome  (ver.  13,  15)  ;  it  was  the
alienation  of  the  intelligence  and  heart,  expressed  here  as  ^^  fruit  of  their  thoughts.'*
"An  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God."  This  showed  itself
in  their  effrontery, — meeting  God's  pleadings  with  an  unblushing  refusal  (ver.  16,
17)  :  '*  Paid  no  heed  to  My  words,  and  My  law  have  they  spurned."  Insolent  in-
difference to  God.

IV.  The  mocking  pretence  of  piety  (ver.  20).  They  made  a  "fair  show"  of
religion,  though  their  heart  had  revolted.  "  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and
to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."  God  repudiates  a  religion  of  ritual^:  *'  He  looketh
at  the  heart."  This  blatant  hypocrisy,  keeping  up  a  parade  of  loyalty  to  God
while  their  "thoughts"  were  estranged  and  hostile,  made  them  more  criminal  and
offensive.  It  amounted  to  a  confession  that  they  knew  Jehovah  deserved  worship,
yet,  "  knowing  the  Lord's  will,  they  did  it  not."

V.  The  sentence  of  retribution  (ver.  21).     1.  The  Author  of  calamity  :  "  I  will

120


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  OHAF.  TU

lay."  &C.  2.  The /orm  of  calamity  :  "stumbling-blocks,"  «.«.,  incursions  of  Baby-
lonians. 3.  The  distresses  of  calamity  :  "  they  shall /a//, .  .  .  shall  perish"  4.  The
devastations  of  calamity  :  totality  is  implied  in  the  enumeration  of  "  fathers  and
sons  together,  neighbour  and  friend."

VI.  The  avenging  scourge  (ver.  22,  23).  1.  Remote:  "north,  sides  of
earth."  2.  Mighty :  "  great  nation."  3.  Warlike :  "  lay  hold  on  bow,"  (fee.  4.
BarharoiLS :  *'  cruel,  no  mercy."  5.  Ferocious :  *'  voice  roareth,"  &c.  6.  Deter-
mined :  '*  ride  on  horses,  set  in  array  as  men  for  war,"  &c.  Consider,  therefore,
that  a  messenffer  with  gracious  words  from  God  being  rejected,  emissaries  with
avenging  wrath  from  God  will  follow.

VII.  The  consternation  of  the  condemned  (ver.  24,  25).  1.  The  terror  of
anticipation  (ver.  24)  suggests  the  sinner's  anguish  of  fear,  dreading  death,  and
meeting  the  Judge,  and  enduring  the  dire  sentence  beyond.  2.  Hiding  from
destruction  (ver.  25),  even  as  in  Rev.  vi.  15  et  seq.

VIII.  The  anguish  of  punishment  (ver.  26).  1.  Abject  wretchedness:  **  wallow
in  ashes."  2.  Excruciating  grief:  "  most  bitter  lamentation."  3.  Melancholy  loss  :
"  as  for  only  son,"  for  "  spoiler  come  upon  us."  The  loss  of  God's  love,  the  sacred
inheritance,  inward  peace,  all  comfort ;  and  the  endurance  of  shame,  misery,  and
bitter  oppression.  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  Oh,  that  the
"  mourning  "  were  timely^ — not  after  the  ruin  as  a  fruitless  consequence,  but  before
the  ruin  as  a  preventative.  For  penitential  tears  might  avert  the  doom.  Weeping
for  suflfering  brings  no  remedy,  but  weeping  for  sin  ere  judgment  comes,  preparee
the  mourner  to  welcome  the  Saviour.

Ver.  27-30.   A  Frustrated  Ministry  of  Gbaob.

(See  Lit.  Crit,  on  verses.)  In  language  of  metallurgy,  God  sets  forth  the
design  of  Jeremiah's  ministry  in  the  midst  of  Judah,  and  the  hopeless  moral  con-
dition of  the  nation  ;  for  not  even  the  most  earnest  efforts  to  call  them  back  to  true
religion  could  regenerate  or  restore  a  people  so  irremediably  debased.  (See  Ad-
denda to  chap.  vi.  30,  "  Reprobate  silver.^*)

I.  A  tentative  ministry  (ver.  27).  "An  assayer  and  tester  of  metals."  God's
preachers  prove  their  hearers,  test  their  real  state,  their  thoughts  and  aims,  their
spiritual  attitude.  Even  as  with  our  Lord  (Matt.  iii.  12)  ;  and  the  Word  of  God
(Heb.  iv.  12,  13).

II.  Base  material  (ver.  28).  Either  (1.)  their  ignoble  quality;  mere  "copper
and  iron,"  not  silver  and  gold  ;  or  (2.)  their  obduracy  ;  hard  and  defiant.  Described
as  *^ revolters ;"  i.e„  they  resist  good  :  **walk  with  slanders ;"  i.e,,  they  deprecate
good  j  "aW  corrupters;"  i.e,y  they  mar  and  spoil  whatever  good  they  hear  or
find ;  communicate  their  own  badness  to  others.

III.  Unavailing  remedies.  1.  Intense  zeal  effected  nothing,  Jeremiah's
fervour,  metaphorically  suggested  in  the  "bellows"  which  became  burned  by  the  very
fierceness  of  the  heat  produced,  indicates  the  prophet's  self-consuming  earnestness
to  reform  Judah.  2.  Prolonged  endeavours  proved  impotent.  The  smelter  con-
tinued his  toils  and  kept  the  heat  at  full  glow  till  the  very  "  lead  was  consumed."
3.  Evil  was  inseparable.  The  founder's  work  could  not  effect  a  separation  of
Judah  from  her  corruptions  and  idolatries  (John  iii.  19 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37).

IV.  Hopeless  abandonment.  1.  God  despairs  of  them ;  gives  over  any  further
effort  to  restore  them  to  piety.  2.  God  surrenders  them;  as  worthless  :  no  longer
will  He  claim  them,  or  own  them.  " None  of  His"  is  the  sentence  of  their
irrevocable  doom.  They  are  "  cast  away."  All  divine  grace  and  forbearance
became  lost  upon  them ;  they  frustrated  every  effort  on  God's  part  for  their  good.
He  came  seeking  fruit,  yet  found  not.  Regenerative  aids  were  applied  (Luke
xiii.  8)  ;  opportunity  was  patiently  allowed  for  utilising  advantages ;  all  failed,  and
the  tree  was  cut  down,  for  it  "  cumbered  the  ground."  The  lesson  :  "  Except
repent,  likewise  perish  "  (Luke  riii.  6>\

121


CHAP.  VI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  VI.


Ver.  1.     Theme :  Ironical  calls  to

SALVATION.

Impossible  that  the  prophet  could
encourage  hope  that  they  would  escape
the  foe  by  quitting  Jerusalem — the  for-
tress most  capable  of  resisting  the  Chal-
dean army — and  securing  themselves  in
Tekoa  and  Bethhaccerem.  The  call  is
full  of  irony  :  Seek  a  secure  refuge  from
the  advancing  enemy,  and  evade  God's
threatened  judgments  if  any  method  of
escape  avail:  none  shall  be  found,  de-
structions will  be  great.  Let  the  soul
who  is  without  Christ,  defenceless
against  death  and  judgment,  see  well
to  his  resources  of  safety  when  "  sudden
destruction  cometh  upon  him."

L  Mocking  challenges.  Having  re-
fused God's  salvation,  save  yourselves  1
Desert  the  Rock  of  Ages  ;  shelter  your-
selves in  a  more  secure  fortress.  Re-
jecting Divine  grace,  take  care  of  your
own  spiritual  interests.  Apply  to  re-
jecters of  Christ,  self-righteous,  fatalists.

1.  Leave  your  impregnable  fortress,
on  whose  strength  you  complacently
relied  :  "  Flee  out  of  Jerusalem."  When
the  peril  and  panic  come,  men  will  see
at  once  they  must  surrender  their  old
defences,  their  cherished  delusions,
their  refuted  theories,  their  failing
hopes.

2.  Find  a  safe  retreat,  if  you  can.
Tekoa  is  the  remotest  city  of  defence,
most  distant  from  the  foe  who  advances
from  the  north  ;  flee  to  that.  Or,  if  you
deem  a  mountain  height  safer,  hasten  to
Bethhaccerem.  Is  there  no  sure  refuge
for  the  soul  which  finds  itself  suddenly
driven  forth  from  its  complacent  assur-
ances, its  falling  strongholds  1  "  Oh
where  can  rest  be  found  1  **

3.  Defend  yourselves  against  assault.
*'  Blow  a  trumpet ;"  muster  all  your
forces  of  resistance."  Struggle  with  the
foe  ere  you  yield  :  do  not  let  death
easily  vanquish  you ;  will  not  courage
serve  you  in  tliat  emergency  ?  will  not
your  righteousness  save  you  from  the
charges  of  the  foe  1  "  When  the  enemy
Cometh  in  like  a  flood,"  when  Justice
calls  the  sinner  to  Qod's  bar,  let  him
summon  to  his  aid  all  his  resources  of

122


self-sufficiency,   and   stand   in  his  own
integrity  if  he  can.

4.  Bally  others  to  resistance  of  the
foe.  '*  Set  up  sign,"  (fee.  Warn  them
of  peril,  point  them  to  safety ;  for
none  should  limit  his  efforts  to  self-
salvation.  Let  those  who  can  save
themselves  lend  aid  also  to  others.
*'  Each  is  his  brother's  keeper  j  "  owes
duties  of  help  and  deliverance  to  those
in  peril.  Will  they  who  are  secure  in
their  own  religious  theories  and  refuges
"  rescue  the  perishing,"  and  save  him
that  hath  no  helper  ?  That  is  a  poor
substitute  for  Christianity  which  leaves
a  soul  so  impotent  that  it  has  no  hope  or
help  to  spare  for  others  in  danger.  A
Christian  is  both  saved  himself  and  he
can  "  save  a  soul  from  death "  (Jas.
V.  20).

II.  Menacing  realities.  Man's  re-
sources of  salvation  are  mere  fictions,
but  the  perils  from  which  he  needs
salvation  are  appalling  facts.

1.  Insecure  defences.  Zion  would
become  a  retreat  at  the  first  (ch.  iv.  6)  ;
yet  here  the  refugees  and  residents
within  Jerusalem  are  forwarned  that  its
fortifications  would  not  protect  them.
The  stoutest  stronghold  would  fail.  No
security  in  which  the  sinner  intrenches
himself  will  prove  a  source  of  safety
when  the  "  evil  "  comes.  Our  defences
cannot  keep  out  sorrow,  nor  conscience^
nor  terror  of  an  outraged  God,  nor
death,  nor  the  punishments  of  sin.

2.  Invincible  foes.  Irresistible  in  their
force,  and  Divinely  authorised  in  their
assault,  certain  therefore  to  conquer.
Ours  is  an  unequal  war  with  powers
mightier  than  we,  a  hopeless  struggle
against  the  evils  which  God  lets  loose
upon  those  who  refuse  His  salvation.
Confront  them  not;  brave  not  rashly
the  fearful  issues.  "  A  prudent  man
foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself, ^*
"  Flee  for  refuge,"  <fcc.

3.  Inevitable  ruin,  "A  great
destruction."  **  Great  **  in  what  it
destroys:  God's  nation;  the  human
soul ;  precious  hopes.  "  Great  "  in  the
completeness  of  the  overthrow:  dire  de-
vastation; irremediable   ruin.     For  no


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  TL


ray  of  light  illumes  the  profound  gloom
of  man's  final  appalling  overthrow.
"  Seek  ye  the  Lord  ;  seek  righteousness,
seek  meekness ;  it  may  be  ye  shall  be
hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger."

Ver.  2.     Theme :  Delicacy  and  db-

BIRABLENESS  OF  ZiON.

(a.)  As  a  possession  of  God's  people.
No  spot  so  sacred,  so  restful,  so  longed
for,  so  beloved.  Type  of  the  Christian's
home.

(6.)  As  a  prize  for  the  spoiler.  Every
nation  coveted  it,  and  fought  for  it.
Even  as — if  Milton  be  right — Satan
conspired  to  grasp  the  Eternal  City  of
light,  and  as  sinners  still  crave  to
secure  it;  for  every  man  eyes  the
splendid  prize.  **  Blessed  are  they  that
have  right  to  enter  through  the  gates
into  the  city."  (cf.  Rev.  xxii.  14,  15).
Contemplate  the :

I.  Pre-eminent  graces  Divinely
lavished  upon  her.  '*  Beautiful  for
situation,"  &c.  Her  temple  the  "  per-
fection of  beauty."  The  pride  and
glory  of  God's  people.  "  Glorious
things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city  of
God."  Suggests  the  Celestial  City,
the  "  realm  and  home  "  of  Christ's  re-
deemed people  (Rev.  xxi.).

II.  Honours  and  privileges  enjoyed
within  her.

To  *'  ascend  the  hill  of  the  Lord,  and
stand  within  His  holy  place,"  was  the
rapturous  dream  of  Jewish  youths,  the
holiest  joy  of  devout  Israelites.  **  Thither
the  tribes  go  up."  With  songs  to  Zion  :
**  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,"  <kc.
There  realised  "  in  Thy  presence  fulness
of  joy."

III.  Sacred  facts  attested  by  her
history.

That  '*  God  will  in  very  deed  dwell
with  man  upon  the  earth  ; "  that  He
has  **  desired  to  dwell "  amid  His  people ;
that  propitiation  may  be  made  before
Him,  and  ofierings  presented  for  His
acceptance  ;  that  **  streams  make  glad
the  city  of  God,"

"  Streams  of  mercy  never  eeasing  ;  **

that  there  may  be  blessed  communica-
tion between  "  God  who  is  in  heaven,
and  man  upon  the  earth;"  that  "the


High  Priest  enters  into  the  holy  place  for
us,"  and  we  are  free  to  seek  God's  face.

IV.  Glorious  promises  encircling
her  future.

Nations  shall  gather  there ;  God's
light  shine  thence  ;  millennial  glories
centre  there  (Isa.  ii.  2-4).  And  when
"  the  first  earth  shall  have  passed  away  "
(Rev.  xxi.  1),  then  the  New  Jerusalem
shall  "  descend  out  of  heaven  from  God,
having  the  glory  of  God,"  and  **  the
nations  of  them  which  are  saved  shall
walk  in  the  light  of  it ; "  while  "  the
glory  and  honour  of  the  nations"  shall
be  accumulated  within  it.

Within  that  "  holy  city "  only  they
can  have  a  place  **  who  are  written
in  the  LamVs  book  of  life."

Note :  The  word  "  woman "  is  not
in  the  Hebrew  text;  some  supply  the
word  pasturage: — I  have  likened  the
daughter  of  Zion  to  an  inviting  and
luxuriant  pasturage,

1.  Where  only  the  flock  of  God  may
feed.  2.  Where  green  pastures  and  still
waters  abound.  3.  Where  the  Good
Shepherd  guards  the  sheep  He  '*  knows."
4.  Wherein  no  "  ravening  wolf  "  may  in-
trude. 5.  Where  blessed  rest  of  soul
may  be  enjoyed.

Ver.  3.     Comments :

*' Shepherds "  t.«.,  hostile  leaders;
**  with  their  flocks  "  i.e.,  armies  (cf.  i  15,
iv.  17,  xlix.  20,  1.  45)  ;  ''pitch  their
tents,"  besiege ;  ''feed  every  one  in  his
place"  consume  all  that  is  near  him;
so  abundant  is  the  pasturage,  the
treasures,  that  each  one  is  satiated  with
the  booty  he  plunders.  The  Chaldean
princes  with  their  armies  would  sack
Jerusalem,  consuming  and  appropriating
all  her  rich  possessions.

Ver.  4,  6.  Theme:  Impatience  to
POSSESS  Jerusalem.

The  sentences  arrange  themselves
thus:

I.  A  royal  proclamation  of  war.
This  emanates  from  the  palace  at
Babylon :  "  Prepare  ye  war  against
her."  Yet  it  originates  with  the  King
of  kings,  whose  will  Nebuchadnezzar
works  out.  **  Prepare  : "  properly
sanctify  war.  Religious  solemnities
always  preceded  war  in  ancient  times.

123


CHAF.  TI.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


This  royal  summons  implied  a  set  pur-
pose^ due  preparation,  and  prompt
action,

Christ  calls  His  army  to  war  against
"  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places  ; "
and  on  their  part  there  must  be  (a.)
set  purpose;  (b.)  religious  preparation ;
(c.)  prompt  action.

**  Soldiers  of  Christ,  ariie  1  '*

The  King  of  kings  calls  His  forces  to
conflict  (Eph.  Yh  11  et  seq.).

II.  The  eagerness  of  invading  armies.
No  sooner  commissioned  than  they  en-
courage each  other  to  instant  and  con-
certed action.  **  Arise,  and  let  us  go
up  at  noon/"

(a.)  Their  impatience  of  conquest;
would  make  assault  at  once.

(b.)  Their  indifference  as  to  conve-
nience or  comfort ;  **  at  noon/'  though
the  scorching  sun  usually  led  to  suspen-
sion of  hostility  until  the  fierce  heat  was
gone.

All  this  should  have  analogy  in  our
efforts  to  ufin  the  kingdom;  delaying
not  an  hour,  disregarding  all  thought  of
"  a  more  convenient  season.*^  "  The
kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,
and  the  violent  take  it  by  force."
**  Arise,  and  let  us  go  up  ! "

IIL  A  cry  of  restless  disappoint-
ment. "Woe  unto  us,  for  the  day
goeth  away,"  &c.  (See  Addenda  to
chap.  vi.  i,  '^Propitious  opportunities
lost.")

(a.)  Propitious  hours  for  acquiring
conquest  soon  end.  They  set  to  the  task
promptly,  yet  the  "  day  went  away  "  all
too  quickly  ;  *'  the  shadows  of  evening  "
fell  upon  them  with  their  designs  in-
complete. ^^  The  night  comethr^  *'What
thou  doest,  do  quickly."  Nevertheless,
the  light  fades  too  soon,  our  plans  are
not  accomplished  so  ea^ly  or  so  early  as
we  had  thought.     "  Redeem  the  time."

(6.)  Delay  in  conquest  lamented  as  a
grievous  loss.  "Alas!  for  us."  They
feel  themselves  seriously  to  be  losers  by
even  a  temporary  postponement  of  vic-
tory. And  are  we  not  sufferers,  lamen-
tably losers,  by  the  delay  of  spiritual
conquests  f  Every  hour  which  interposes
between  us  and  the  accomplishment  of
our  aims,  in  seeking  victory  over  sin
124


and  hostile  forces,  and  in  attempting  to
possess  ourselves  of  the  Divine  heritage,
is  a  painful  loss,  a  personal  calamity.
With  alacrity  let  us  besiege  the  king-
dom, losing  not  an  hour.

IV.  No  obstacle  should  defer  theii
assault.  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hy  night/**
Not  even  the  darkness  should  stay  their
zeal.

(a.)  Their  dauntless  purpose  ;  nothing
deters  or  defeats  tbem.  "  The  king's
business  requires  baste."  Determina-
tion despises  difficulties.

(6.)  The  unfavourable  season.  How
many  have  their  ^^  night  season"  ail
dark  and  bewildering :  yet  keep  on
vigorously,  not  suspending  your  etforts
to  gain  victory  over  evil,  to  seize  the
prize,  to  secure  the  precious  spoils  of
the  kingdom.  Wrestle  on,  as  did  Jacob,
through  the  night.

(c.)  Rewards  encouraged  their  persist
tence  ;  "  palaces."  These  contained  rare
treasures  and  vast  wealth  ;  hence  their
zeal.  But  who  wins  the  "  kingdom  of
heaven "  by  determined  assault  gains
"  unsearchable  riches  "  and  "  many  man-
sions." Arise  !  let  us  claim  those  pala-
ces.

Ver.  6.  Theme:  Set  apakt  foe
JUDGMENT.  "  This  is  the  city  to  be
visited."

God  points  out  Jerusalem  to  the  in-
vaders :  their  stroke  must  not  miss  its
true  mark ;  judgment  shall  not  miscarry.
He  leads  forth  the  guilty  one  to  heP
merited  doom ;  He  leads  on  His  mini-
sters of  justice  to  the  right  transgressor.
How  terrifying  this  thought :  a  soul
branded,  set  apart,  delivered  over  to
the  "  due  reward  of  sin  "  !

I.  Individuality  of  the  transgressor.
*'  This  is  the  city."  Each  stands  out
distinct  in  the  Divine  gaze.  We  are
not  massed  together  in  a  general  estimate
by  God.  "  Every  one  shall  give  account
of  himself  to  God."  Each  sinner  dwells
alone  in  God's  thoughts.  Therefore,
"  though  hand  join  in  hand,"  God  does
not  lose  sight  of  the  individuality  of
each  ]  He  discriminates.  You  are  dis-
tinctively watched  by  the  £YS  which
never  errs.

IL  Definiteness  of  human  sizL  "  She


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  W


is  wholly  oppression."  All  sin  is  not
alike,  either  in  nature  or  degree.  The
** Judge  of  all"  distinguishes;  associ-
ates the  special  iniquity  with  the  indivi-
dual transgressor.  *'  He  sets  our  secret
sin  in  the  light  of  His  countenance."
Jerusalem  is  '''"oppression;"  that  is  her
distinctive  crime  :  she  is  "  wholly  op-
pression ; "  that  marks  the  extent  of  her
criminality.  Your  sin  is  known  to  God  ;
and  "be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you
out.'*

III.  Public  presentation  of  the
criminal.  "  This  is  the  city."  God
exposes  her  to  view;  of  angels,  that
they  may  know  how  "righteous  are
His  judgments ; "  of  men,  fellow-sin-
ners, that  they  may  be  warned,  lest
they  "  come  into  like  condemnation ;  "
offoeSy  that  their  assault  may  be  directed
to  the  right  object ;  for  "  every  one  shall
hear  his  own  iniquity."  The  great  judg-
ment of  men  will  be  public,  and  the
transgressor  will  be  placed  in  the  open
gaze  of  the  universe.

IV.  Deliberate  consignment  to  pun-
ishment. "The  city  to  be  visited,'*
punished.  What  1  so  fair  a  city,  so
delicate  (ver.  2),  so  long  honoured  by
God,  "  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,"  the
*'  city  of  the  great  King "  1  Ask  you
incredulously,  Can  a  soul,  so  noble,
formed  for  God,  long  privileged  with
sacred  favours,  be  abandoned  to  foes?
Look  for  answer  on  Jerusalem,  ravaged
and  consumed  with  fire  !  Beauty  only
intensified  her  loathsomeness  when
linked  to  villany.  Nobleness  adds  to
the  horrors  of  degradation  when  it  be-
comes prostituted  to  baseness.  Shall
God  spare  Jerusalem,  or  us,  because  of
an  historic  dignity  ?  That  fact  increases
our  guilt,  for  we  abused  our  birthright,
sold  it  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  "  The
righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  not
deliver  him  in  the  day  of  his  transgres-
sion" (Ezek.  xxxiii.  12).  ''Depart from
Me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  "  If
any  man  draw  back.  My  soul  shall  have
no  pleasure  in  him  *'  (Heb.  x.  38).

Ver.  7.  Theme:  Spontaneity  and
SPOLIATIONS  OP  GUILT.  "  As  a  fountain
casteth  out  her  waters,"  <fec.

Within  ourselves  is  such  a  fountain.


From  the  fount  of  evil,  even  in  child'
hood,  flows  such  waters  as  disobedience,
passion,  falsehood,  <fec.  In  youth,  they
flow  more  abundantly,  *'  increase  unto
more  ungodliness;"  impurity,  vanity,
wilfulness,  outraging  conscience,  wrong-
ing Christ,  <fec.  In  maturity  the  streams
pour  forth  in  steady,  habitual  wrong :
"  All  the  imaginations  of  the  heart  are
only  evil  continually."  Such  the  case
of  a  depraved  heart,  into  which  no
purifying  grace  enters.  Yet,  as  the
tree  cast  into  the  bitter  waters  made
them  sweet  (Exod.  xv.25),so  Divine  love
can  make  all  the  outgoings  of  the  human
heart  pure  and  good.
I.  The  exhaustless  outflow  of  sin.

1.  As  something  which  is  natural
to  lis :  "  Casteth  out  her  waters,  her
wickedness."  Leave  ourselves  free,  and
sin  follows  naturally.

2.  As  something  which  easily  gratifies
itself:  the  waters  flow  forth  spontan-
eously, without  effort.  We  "  enjoy  the
pleasures  of  sin."  Wrong-doing  is  con-
genial, gratifying.  *'  Out  of  the  heart
proceed  (easily  and  pleasurably)  evil
thoughts,"  <fec.

3.  As  something  which  has  a  peren-
nial source.  Its  waters  never  pause.
The  more  we  sin,  the  more  copious  our
capacity  and  versatile  our  resources  of
sinning.  Guilt  never  runs  dry.  *'  As
a  fowitain,^*  whose  waters  ceaselessly
flow,  sin  will  not  be  restrained ;  it  will
find  and  force  a  way  out.

4.  As  something  which  pourf  itself
out  in  plenitude.  Good  and  gracious
thoughts  and  deeds  come  forth  even
from  the  best  of  us  in  feeble  quantities;
but  the  heart  "  casts  out  her  wickedness  "
in  full  flow  ;  '*  Out  of  the  abundance  of
the  heart."  What  copious  streams  of
evil  flow  forth  from  one  sinner !  What
magnitude  of  sins  in  one  life,  one  day !
If  they  could  be  reckoned  up  !  (See
Addenda  to  chap.  vi.  7,  "  Continuity
of  sin.")

II.  The  woful  outrages  of  sin.
"  Violence  and  spoil,"  <fec.

The  outflow  of  sin  is  pleasurable  to
the  sinner ;  it  is  gratifying  as  being
natural.  It  costs  no  effort  or  restraint.
But  it  works  direful  ravages  on  others —
e.g.,  drunkenness,  libertinism,  extortion

126


OHAP.  n.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


malice,  <fec. ,  destroys  homes,  breaks  hearts.
Like  deadly  blight  across  fair  plantation,
or  fire  over  golden  harvest  fields.  Look
on  the  disease  and  death  in  the  world,
all  the  bittei  effects  of  sin.

L  The  external  wrongs  done  hy  sin,
"  Violence  and  spoil."

2.  The  iiUernal  wounds  suffered  hy  the
sinner.     "  Grief  and  wounds."

Man  estimates  the  external  ravages  of
sin  above  the  internal  miseries  j  he  cries
out  because  of  "  violence,"  <fec.  ;  he
laments  the  misfortunes,  the  "  spoil,"
which  sin  brings  upon  his  life.

But  God  looks  toithin.  "  Before  Me
continually  is  grief  and  wounds."  What
a  spectacle  of  inward  corruption  does
the  eye  of  God  behold  !  Oh,  the  hidden
griefs  of  sinners !  How  dreadful  the
spoliations  of  conscience,  of  affections,
of  the  godlike  soul  I

There  avails  for  us  the  healing,  re-
deeming grace  of  Jesus.  He  is  '*  ac-
quainted with  grief y^  our  grief ;  and
He  can  heal  our  " wounds^'  for  "  He
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,
and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed."

Ver.    8.    Theme:   God's   unwilling

SEPARATION   FROM    JUDAH.       "  LeSt   my

6oul  depart  from  thee."

It  implies  God^s  soul  was  knit  to,  fixed
upon  His  people.  *'  Depart,"  is  a  strong-
ly expressive  word ;  he  torn  from  thee,
"  God  was  tenderly  attached  to  the  holy
city,  had  chosen  to  put  His  name  there,
and  nothing  but  the  extreme  wickedness
of  its  inhabitants  could  have  moved  Him
to  withdraw  His  affection  from  it"—
Henderson.

"  Note:  1.  The  God  of  mercy  is  loth
to  depart  even  from  a  provoking  people,
and  is  earnest  with  them  by  true  repent-
ance and  reformation  to  prevent  things
from  coming  to  that  extremity.  2.  Their
case  is  very  miserable  from  whom  God's
soul  is  disjoined ;  it  intimates  the  loss
not  only  of  outward  blessings,  but  of
those  comforts  and  favours  which  are
the  more  immediate  and  peculiar  tokens
of  His  love  and  presence.  3.  Those  who
forsake  God  are  certainly  undone  ;  when
God's  soul  departs  from  Jerusalem  she
soon  becomes  desolate  and  uninhabited
(Matt,  xxiii.  38)."— Jf.  Henry,
126


i.  The  infinite  goodness  and  patience
of  God  towards  a  sinful  people,  and  Hia
great  unwillingness  to  bring  ruin  upon
them.

ii.  The  proper  and  effectual  means  of
preventing  the  misery  and  ruin  of  a  sin-
ful people.     "  Be  thou  instructed."

iii.  The  miserable  case  and  condition
of  a  people  when  God  takes  off  His
affection  from  them. — Tillotson.  (See
Addenda  to  chap.  vi.  8,  "  God*s  with-
drawmentfrom  man.")

Ver.  9.     Comments  :

The  Jews  are  the  grapes,  too  choice
to  let  any  remain  unplucked  ;  the  Chal-
deans are  the  unsparing  gleaners,  intent
on  thoroughly  cleansing  the  vine  of  all
its  valuable  produce.

As  the  vintagers  return  again  and
again  to  the  vine  so  long  as  any  clusters
can  be  gathered,  so  would  the  Baby-
lonians renew  their  invasions  till  all
Judah  was  carried  into  captivity,  and
the  land  left  bare  ;  **  They  shall
thoroughly  glean,"  &c.

This  is  God's  address  to  the  Chal-
deans, "  Turn  hack  thine  hand,"  &c.  ;
and  they  literally  obeyed  the  Divine
bidding  (cf  Hi.  28-30).  (See  Addenda
to  chap.  vL  9,  *'  Glean  Israel  as  a
vine'^)

Ver.  10.  Theme:  Preaching  ren-
dered USELESS.

This  is  marvellous,  that  words  from
God  could  become  void  of  effect.  For
bethink  :

1.  That  preaching  is  God*s  chosen
method  of  awakening  and  conversion.

2.  That  preaching  is  the  appropriate
and  established  agency  by  which  the
Holy  Spirit  works  in  quickening  human
souls.

3.  That  there  is  a  conscience  in  man
upon  which  Divine  messages  act  with
startling  force.

4.  That  the  Word  ,of  God  is  itself
quick  and  powerful.

6.  That  manifold  Divine  promises
guarantee  the  preacher  against  failure
when  speaking  for  God.     Yet  text.

I.  A  bearer  of  tidings  from  Heaven
finds  none  to  whom  to  address  them.
He  stands  like  one  who  arrives  with  a
proclamation  on  the  borders  of  an  un-


ItOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


CHAP.  Vt


inhabited  desert,  bewildered  to  discover
no  hearers.  What  is  he  to  do  ?  The
case  is  no  better  when  a  preacher  finds
hearers,  but  they  refuse  him  a  hearing^
or  let  him  preach  on  tvithout  the  slightest
heed.     The  prophet  is :

1.  In  distress  that  none  were  prepared
to  regard  his  "  warnings  ; "  amazed  at
their  stolidity,  defiant  unconcern,  im-
movable complacency,  indifference  to
peril.  Men  still  obdurate  and  frivo-
lous.

2.  In  perplexity  as  to  what  course  to
adopt  to  enlist  their  attention.  He
could,  of  course,  **  speak  and  give
warning;"  but  he  wished  so  to  do  this
"  that  they  mag  hear."  Always  the
preacher's  perplexity,  how  to  arouse
men's  serious  heed  to  the  things  he
speaks.  Without  this  responsive  atten-
tion, the  preacher  warns  to  no  purpose,
without  hope  of  success.  Paul  tried  all
resources  (1  Cor.  ix.  20-23).  Yet
what  solemn  tidings  Jeremiah  brought  I
What  ^^ glad  tidings"  the  Christian
preacher  brings  !  (Isa.  Hi.  7-10).

II.  Men  who  need  these  tidings
from  Heaven  are  without  capacity
for  hearing  Divine  truths.  Other
sounds  can  enter  their  ears,  but  not
sounds  from  Heaven.  A  whisper  from
earth  concerning  "  earthly  things "  is
instantly  and  eagerly  heard,  but  the
thunder's  roar  from  the  skies  concerning
"  heavenly  things "  finds  them  deaf  to
sound.  Why?  ^^ Their  ear  is  un-
circumcised,**

1.  They  do  not  want  to  hear:  hearing
disquiets  them.

2.  They  do  not  intend  to  hear :  have
resolved  to  hear  nothing  from  God,
nothing  against  themselves  or  their
sins.  Thus  "  they  cannot  hearken."
Prejudice  deafens  men ;  unbelief
deafens ;  wilful  ignorance  deafens
(comp.  GaL  iii.  1).  Hence  men  hear
from  God  and  of  Christ  in  vain.  Yet
THEY  NEED  these  tidings.  Judah  did,
so  as  to  escape  destruction  which  was
imminent.  We  need  tidings  from
Heaven,  for  they  announce  the  only
salvation  available,  the  Jesus  our  souls
want.

III.  Divine  messages  repelled  by
men  with  antipathy  and  scorn.


Note  :  The  prophet's  cry  of  anrnze"
ment  and  fear.  **  Behold  the  word,**
<fec.  It  fills  him  with  alarm.  To
trifle  with  words  from  Jehovah/  To
throw  from  us  the  saving  truths  of  the
Gospel !  How  astounding  man's  con-
duct in  putting  aside  with  heedlessness
the  invaluable  messages  of  Heaven  !
(See  Addenda  to  chap.  vi.  10,  ^^  God's
Word ;  no  delight  in  it.")

1.  God's  chiding  words  are  resented  as
a  calumny,  as  an  undeserved  "  re-
proach ;  "  they  felt  themselves  aggrieved
and  affronted  by  the  remonstrances  and
condemnations  Jeremiah  brought.  What
blinding  pride^  what  besotting  vanity
this  reveals  1  They  determine  not  to
hearken  to  God's  Word  because  it
lashes  their  sins.

2.  God's  pleading  words  are  received
with  contumely  ;  depreciated  and  derided
as  being  uncalled  for.  What  had  they
to  fearl  They  saw  no  danger,  recog-
nised no  urgency  in  propitiating  God.
"They  have  no  delight  in  it,"  means
they  turn  away  with  aversion,  they
appreciate  not  the  Divine  mercy  which
sends  the  "  Word  ;"  they  believe  not  in
the  necessity  for  such  a  message.
Hence  they  scorn.  "  They  would  none
of  my  counsel ;  they  despised  all  my
reproof  "  (Prov.  i.  30).  Jerome  remarks  :
"  Inability  [*'  they  cannot  hearken  "]
which  proceeds  from  scorn  and  unbelief
is  not  exempted  from  punishment."
God  must  rebuke  such  wilful  insensi-
bility (comp.  ver.  19).

Ver.  11-13.  Preaching  made  in-
evitable.

If  men  repudiate  the  preacher's  word
(see  above  on  ver.  10),  may  he  keep
silence?  Silence  is  impossible,  he  can-
not restrain  himself;  speech  is  impera-
tive, for  God  commands  him  to  speak  :
"  Pour  it  out."  God's  communications
to  him  must  be  communicated  to  men.
"  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  we
have  seen  and  heard."  "  Woe  is  unto
me  if  I  preach  not  the  Gospel."  Thus
utterance  is  necessitated :

I.  By  the  irresistible  force  of  in-
ward Divine  impulse.  "  I  am  full  of
the  fury  of  the  Lord  ;!  am  weary  with
holding  in."

m


OHAP.  TI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


1.  How  unioilling  to  proclaim  the  evil
tidings  !  Sad  task  for  God's  messenger.
"  Tell  you  even  weeping"

2.  How  exhausting  the  burden  of  the
Lord  !  '*  Wearies  "  the  heart.  Painful
to  have  to  utter  sad  truths  ;  more  pain-
ful to  refrain.

*'  God's  anger  at  the  wickness  of  the
people  had  been,  as  it  were,  poured  into
Jeremiah's  heart,  and  he  tried  to  re-
strain it  in  vain." — Speaker's  Com.

This  ^^fury"  was  not  Jeremiah's
holy  ardour^  which  was  irrepressible  in
him,  but  burning  displeasure  Divinely
awakened  in  him  towards  the  insensate
nation.  "  The  fury  of  the  Lord"  which
did  not  refer  to  or  reflect  upon  himself,
therefore  must  not  be  kept  to  himself,
but  poured  out.

II.  By  the  necessity  of  society  to
hear  the  Divine  threatenings.  1.
Whether  they  wish  to  hear  them  or  not.
2.  Whether  they  regard  and  act  upon
them  or  not.  3.  Whether  they  profit  by
tJceir  hearing^  or,  by  abusing  warning^
increase  their  condemnation.  God  (a.)
allows  none  to  dwell  in  ignorance  ;  He
*'  sets  before  us  life  and  death ; "  (6.)
leaves  man  without  excuse;  if  he  despise
warning  and  perish,  his  blood  is  upon
his  own  head.  But,  whether  as  "  life
unto  life,  or  death  unto  death,"  men
must  hear.

III.  By  the  inclusive  application
of  the  solemn  messages.  They  relate
to  all  ages  and  sexes.  (See  Addenda  to
chap.  vi.  11.)

1.  The  inclusive  consequences  of  sin.
From  "  child "  to  "  aged,"  **  man  and
wife,"  all  had  sinned, — all  condemned.
**  So  death  passed  upon  all,  for  that  all
have  sinned."  Disease  of  sin  is  upon
all.

2.  The  comprehensive  displeasure  of
God.  "Pour  it  out"  (the  fury  of  the
Lord),  upon  the  children,  young  meuy
parentSy  of  ripe  years,  and  very  aged.
This  anger  of  God  is  justified  by  ver.
13.

IV.  By  the  terrible  character  of
the  nearing  woes  (ver.  12).

1.  The  merciless  severity   of  the  in-
vading foe.      Less    severe  than    "  our
adversary  the  devil "  (1  Pet.  ▼.  8 ;  Rev,
xii  12;  Luke  xii  5).
128


3.  The  clear  and  emphatic  prediction*
of  these  woes.  (See  Deut.  xxviii.  30.)
Possessions  greatly  prized,  "  houses  and
fields  ; "  treasures  Jealously  guarded,
"  wives."  Homes  seized,  affections  dis-
regarded, life's  dearest  ties  severed.  So
in  the  "judgment  to  come,"  sinners
will  lose  all  they  had,  and  be  sundered
from  all  they  love.  Our  woe,  if  un-
saved, is  clearly  foretold  (Heb.  x.
26-29).

3.  T/be  hand  of  God  will  accomplish
the  sinners  overthrow,  "  For  I  will
stretch  out  my  hand,"  &c.  {cf,  Heb,
X.  30,  31).

V.  By  the  appalling  corruptions
which  invoked  the  judgments  (ver.
13).  Against  such  sinfulness  the
preacher  must  protest  and  pronounce.
Amid  such  a  corrupted  society,  God's
messenger  can  only  utter  woes.  He  has
no  promise  or  pleading  for  men  sunk
in  wilful  and  defiant  iniquity.  (See
Addenda  to  chap.  vi.  13,  ^*  Covetous-
ness.")

"  Knowing  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we
persuade  men."

Ver.  14.  Therfve :  Healing  cub
WOUNDS  SLIGHTLY.  (See  Addenda
to  chap.  vi.  14,  ^^  Peace  where  no
peace.")

Accommodating  prophets,  who  taught
delusions,  because  corrupt  hearers  said,
*'  Prophesy  unto  us  smooth  things  ;  pro-
phesy deceits."  Thus  lulled  to  sleep  in
their  sins,  while  heaviest  judgments  of
God  impended.  Lament  such  delusive
ministrations  (Ezek.  xiii.  22 ;  Deut,
xxix.  19,  20).  Yet  men  love  to  deceive
themselves,  to  silence  convictions  of  con-
science.    Show  :

I.  What  need  we  all  have  of  heal-
ing. Sin  has  affected  all  the  powers  of
our  souls.  1.  Asserted  in  Scriptures.  2.
Confirmed  by  experience.  But,  as  many
think  themselves  healed  whilst  in  perish-
ing condition,  show :

II.  Who  they  are  that  heal  their
wounds  slightly.  1.  They  who  rely  on
the  uncovenanted  mercy  of  God,  fatally
deceive  their  souls  by  expecting  mercy
contrary  to  Gospel.  2.  They  wJio  take
refuge  in  a  round  of  duties ;  no  attain-
ments can  stand  in  the  place  of  Christ


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  VI.


(Phil.  iiL  9).  3.  They  ivho  rest  in  a
faith  that  is  unproductive  of  good  works  ;
but  the  faith  that  apprehends  Christ
will  "  work  by  love,"  and  "  purify  the
heart,"  and  "  overcome  the  world."

III.  How  we  may  have  them  healed
effectually.

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  provided  a
remedy  for  sin  (Isa.  liii.  5).  2.  That  re-
medy applied  hy  faith  shall  be  effectual
for  all  who  trust  in  it  (Isa.  i.  18).

Address :  i.  Those  who  feel  not  their
need  of  healing.  Christianity  is  a  remedy ^
and  presupposes  a  deep  malady^  which
nothing  finite  can  heal.  ii.  Those  whoy
after  having  derived  some  benefits  from
Christy  have  relapsed  into  sin.  If  con-
tinue thus,  "  last  end  worse  than  first "
(Jer.  iii.  12).  iii.  Those  who  are  enjoy-
ing health  in  their  souls.  A  man  under
power  of  sin  feels  spiritual  duties  irk-
some ;  but  he  whose  "  soul  prospers,
and  is  in  health,"  finds  the  ways  of  God
full  of  delight. — Simeon,

Theme  :  Evils  op  false   security.

Though  people  live  thoughtlessly  about
their  souls,  they  generally  satisfy  them-
selves with  some  maxim  of  security  :  on
the  strength  of  this  they  hush  within
them  every  alarm  of  conscience.  A  large
class  of  such  slender  and  sentimental
religionists,  who  profess  reverence,  main-
tain outward  decencies,  are  visited  with
occasional  tender  thoughts  of  its  solemni-
ties, would  be  shocked  at  infidel  opinion,
and  have  their  minds  comfortably  made
up.  Yet  in  their  tranquillity  there  is
not  a  single  ingredient  of  the  Gospel,
"joy  and  peace  in  believing."

This  deceitful  complacency  needs  saliP-
tary  alarm.  How  is  it  persons  reach
this  state  of  easy  confidence  1

1.  There  is  a  disposition  to  acknow-
ledgcy  in  a  general  way,  that  they  are
sinner Sy  though  also  to  palliate  the
enormity  of  sin,  and  to  gloss  it  over
with  the  gentle  epithet  of  an  infirmity.

2.  Then  to  make  all  right,  and  secure,
and  comfortable,  the  sentiment  is  che-
rished that  God  is  a  merciful  Gody  and
tffill  overlook  our  infirmities.

A  slight  hurt  needs  but  a  slight
remedy ;  being  but  gently  alanned,  a
gentle  application  avails  to  pacify.


I.  This  mercy,  so  slenderly  spoken  of
and  vaguely  trusted  in,  is  not  the  mercy
which  has  been  made  the  subject  of  an
actual  offer  from  God  to  man.  He  has
stepped  forth  to  relieve  us  from  the  debt
of  sin  ;  but  He  has  taken  His  own  way
of  it  (John  iii.  36).

II.  The  evils  of  such  a  false  confidence.

1.  It  casts  an  aspersion  on  the  character
of  God.  Those  who  find  their  way  to
comfort  without  any  reference  to  Christ,
ignore  God's  truth  or  His  righteousness  j
His  threatenings,  purposes,  the  everlast-
ing distinction  between  obedience  and
sin,  <tc.,  become  a  meaningless  parade.

2.  It  is  hostile  to  the  cause  of  practical
righteousness.  Though  a  man  confess  to
"  infirmities,"  he  will  smother  all  appre-
hensions, and  regale  his  fancy  with  the
smile  of  an  indulgent  God.  It  tends  to
obliterate  all  restraints,  on  the  specious
plea  of  all-availing  mercy,  and  leaves
every  man  to  sin  just  as  much  as  he
likes.  Thus  "  peace,  where  there  is  no
peace,"  spreads  its  deadly  poison  over
the  face  of  society,  and  a  sentiment  of
deep  and  fatal  tranquillity  concerning
salvation  and  God's  demands  on  the
soul  takes  up  its  firm  residence  in  a
world  which  sends  up  a  cry  of  rebellion
against  Him.  This  is  A  lore  evlL —
Chalmers,

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Shamelessnebs  in

SIN  THE  CERTAIN  FOBEBUNNEK  OF  DB-
STRUOTION.

He  who  has  thus  sinned  himself
past  feeling,  may  be  justly  supposed  to
have  sinned  himself  past  grace.

i  Extraordinary  guilt,  "They  had
committed  abomination.**

ii.  l^heir  deportment  under  their  guilt.
**  They  were  not  at  all  ashamed,  neither
could  they  blush."

iii.  God's  high  resentment  of  their
monstrous  shamelessnesSy  implied  in  the
vehement  interrogation,  "  Were  they
ashamed  ? "

iv.  2^he  Judgment  consequent  there-
upon.    "  Therefore  shall  they  fall,"  <fec.

I.  Show  what  shame  is,  and  its  in-
fluence upon  men's  manners.

II.  By  what  ways  men  come  to  cast
off  shame,  and  grow  impudent  in  sin.
1.   By  the  commission  of  great  sins.      2.

129


mAt.  n,


MOMlLkflG  COMME^fARf.  JEkMMtAS.


Custom  in  sinning.  3.  Criminal  ex-
ample of  great  persons.  4.  General  and
common  practice.  5.  To  have  been  once
greatly  and  irrecoverably  ashamed.

III.  The  several  degrees  of  shame-
lessness  in  sin.  1.  Showing  respect  to
sinful  persons.  2.  Defending  sin.  3.
Glorying  in  it.

IV.  Wliy  it  brings  down  judgment
and  destruction  upon  the  sinner.  1.
Because  shamelessness  in  sin  presupposes
a  long  course  of  sin.  2.  Because  of  its
destructive  influence  upon  the  govern-
ment of  the  world.

V.  What  those  judgments  are  by
which  it  procures  the  sinner's  destruc-
tion. Scripture  supplies  instances  of
judgment  on  shameless  sinners.  1.  A
sudden  and  disastrous  death  :  e.g.^  Zimri,
slain  by  sword  of  Phinehas.  2.  War
and  desolation  :  cg.^  Benjamites  (Judges
xix.,  XX.).  3.  Captivity:  e.g,^  Judah,
whom  the  prophet  here  denounces.

Where  there  is  no  place  for  shame,
there  can  be  "  no  place  for  repentance."
Shamelessness  means  impenitence,  and
impenitence,  destruction, — R,  South,
D.D,

Ver.  16.     Theme  :  The  Old  Paths.

I.  The  denomination  :  *'  Old  paths,"
f.tf.,  way  of  obedience,  worship,  piety.
*'01d,"  because:  1.  Ordained  from
ftemity.  2.  Herein  all  the  saints  have
walked.  3.  Tried,  and  found  pleasant
and  profitable.

II.  The  description  :  "  Good  way."
A  path  may  be  "  old,"  yet  not  "  good ;  "
this  is  both.  When  may  a  path  be
called  **good"?  1.  When  safe.  2.
Direct.  3.  Frequented,  4.  Pleasant,
5.  Firm  and  passable.

III.  The  directions  :  "Stand,  see,
ask,  walk."  None  can  find  this
path  at  random,  none  walk  in  it
ignorant  of  where  they  are.  They  who
seek  this  path  should  be :  1.  Cautious
in  their  observations.  2.  Earnest  in
their  inquiries.  3.  Prompt  in  entering
thereon.

IV.  The  destination  :  "  Ye  shall  find
rest  to  your  souls."  1.  In  the  journey
many  blessings  of  rest  will  be  enjoyed,
as  contentment,  satisfaction,  cheerful-
ness, security.     2.  Afterwards  there  will

130


be  fulness    of    rest :  the  path  leads  to
eternal  repose,  happiness,  glory.

It  is  the  path  of  faith ;  they  who
tread  it  first  journey  to  the  cross;  then,
leaning  on  arm  of  the  Beloved,  travel  to
home  of  saints.  Christ  beckons  to  all
who  inquire,  and  says,  "  I  am  the  Way,"
— "  Sermon  FrameworkJ*

Theme  :  The  good  old  way.

Whatever  bears  stamp  of  antiquity
upon  it  finds  favourable  reception ;  in-
novations are  distrusted.     Inquire :

I.  What  is  that  old  and  good  way  7
Not  holiness  alone,  but,  1.  A  penitential
affiance  in  God,  through  Christ's  media-
tion (John  xiv.  6).  2.  A  cheerful
obedience  to  Him  :  "  Take  my  yoke,"  &c.
(Matt.  xi.  29).  Both  of  these  bear  mark
of  antiquity,  from  "  righteous  Abel "
downwards.  And  they  must  be  good,
for  (a.)  Appointed  by  God  Himself.
(h.)  Approved  by  all  His  saints,  (c.)
Tend  to  the  perfecting  of  our  nature ;
and  (d.)  To  the  adornment  of  our  religion,

II.  What  is  our  duty  respecting  it  7
It  becomes  us,  1.  To  inquire  after  it;
not  presume  we  are  right,  but  "stand
and  see;"  ask  those  whom  God  has
appointed  as  guides,  search  sacred
oracles,  implore  teaching  of  Holy  Spirit,
2.  To  walk  in  it.  Knowledge  useless
without  practice.  Come  into  it,  renounc-
ing every  other  :  continue  in  it.

III.  Encouragement  given  to  us.
They  who  walk  herein  shall  find :  1.
Pest  in  their  way  (Rom.  v.  1, 2).  "  The
work  of  righteousness  is  peace,"  ifec.  2.
Pest  in  their  end.  *'  Rest  remaining  to
the  people  of  God." — Hannum.

I.  The  way.  This  cannot  be  the  way
of  the  wicked  (Ps.  xxxvi.  4).  It  is  the
way  of  scriptural  piety ;  the  course  of
faith  and  love.  Called  "  a  way,"  because
leads  to  enjoyment  of  eternal  life  (Matt,
vii.  14);  is  the  certain  way  to  it  (Rom,
il  7),  and  the  only  way  (Heb.  xii.  14).

1.  Called  the  old  way.  Moses  was
actuated  hy  faith  (Heb.  xi.  24-27)  ;  and
taught  the  way  of  love  (Deut.  vi.  4,  6).
Old  as  the  days  of  Noah  (Heb.  xi  7)
and  Enoch  (Gen.  v.  24).  Certainly  for
us  as  old  as  Christianity  (John  xiv.  1,
XV.  12).

'Z.  Called  the  good  way ;    for  those


MOMlLEflC  COMMMfAkt:  JMMMIAM.


cfiAf .  n.


walking  in  it  are  good  (Jas.  ill  17);
and  do  good — to  their  families  (Deut.
V.  29),  their  country  (Prov.  xiv.  34),  and
to  the  world  (Matt.  v.  13,  14).  And
the  way  itself  is  good ;  in  its  origin
(Ps.  cxliiL  10),  and  its  tendency  (Prov.
xix.  23).

II.  God's  command.

1.  "  Stand  ye  in  the  ways  and  see."
(1.)  Some  facts  are  here  assumed  :  that
though  but  one  good  way,  there  are
many  evil  ways;  that  all  men  are  ivalk-
ing  in  evil  ways  (Isa.  liii.  6) ;  that  we
are  naturally  ignorant  of  the  good  old
way  (Jer.  x.  23) ;  yet  we  are  capable  of
discovering  and  ivalking  in  it.  (2.)  Some
duties  are  here  enjoined  :  make  an  tw-
mediate  pause  for  purposes  of  examina-
tion ;  ^* stand"  (Hag.  i.  5);  seriously
examine  in  what  way  you  are  walking  ;
"«««"  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5);  observe  well  the
tendency  of  evil  ways  (Rom.  vi.  21).

2.  "  Ask  for  the  old  paths,  where  is
the  good  way."  Inquire  by  searching
Scriptures  (John  V.  39);  asking  direction
of  God  (Jas.  i.  5) ;  associating  with  the
pious  (Prov.  xiii.  20).

3.  ** And  walk  therein"  (1.)  Get
into  it :  not  remain  out  of  it,  by  delay
(Job  xxiL  21,  xxxvi.  18) ;  not  stop
short  of  it,  by  resting  in  deficient  at-
tainment, merely  talking  of,  thinking
about,  or  desiring  it  (Matt.  xi.  29 ;
John  xiv.  6).  (2.)  Keep  in  it:  by
resisting  temptation  (1  Pet.  v.  8,  9 ;
Luke  xxi.  36),  by  improving  in  piety
(2  Cor.  vii  1).

III.  The  promise.  "Rest  for  your
souls."

1.  The  blessing  promised.  (1.)  In
this  world :  from  anguish  of  guilt  (Isa.
xii.  6) ;  from  oppression  of  Satan  (Matt,
xi.  28) ;  from  torturing  fears  (Ps.  xxxiv.
4) ;  from  inward  defilement  (John  xv.
2 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9).  (2.)  Glorious  rest  in
heaven:  from  all  temptation  (Job  iii.  17),
suffering  (Rev.  xxi.  4),  danger  (Matt,
yi.  20).  Rest  for  your  souls;  the  con-
sciousness of  enjoyment  in  this  life  (Rom.
viii  1,  2),  and  after  death  (Rev.  vii.  1 4,
17).  "Rest"  such  as  souls  require:
eternal  (Ps.  xvi.  11).

2.  lU  certainty.  "Ye  shall  find."
Seek  it  as  God  requires  you,  and  it  is
certain.      (1.)   From  His  all-sufiSciency


(Gen.  xiv.  22) ;  His  kindness  (Isa.  xlv,
19)  ;  His  truth  (1  Thess.  v.  24).

Application  :  Falsehood  of  some  ob-
jections to  a  course  of  piety —

1.  "  That  this  strict  religion  is  a  new
way."  Nay  ;  sin  is  Satan's  novelty.  2.
"  That  it  is  an  injurious  way;  unfavour-
able to  the  interests  of  m^n."  Rather,
the  good  way,  most  beneficial  (1  Tim.
iv.  8).  3.  "  That  it  is  a  melancholy
way."  No ;  peace  through  life  (Luke
i.  78,  79),  peace  in  death  (Ps.  xxxvii.
37),  and  rest  for  ever  (Rev.  xiv.  13). —
"  Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons."

Theme:  Resolute  spieitual  inac-
tion. "Walk  therein;  but  they  said.
We  will  not  walk  tlierein."

It  is  more  than  an  invitation  from
God;  an  imperative  demand.

I.  The  summons  to  spiritual  exer-
tion. Ruin  may  ensue  from  mere  sloth:
^*  neglect  of  salvation."  Need  not  be
active  resistance,  only  inactive  indiffer-
ence. "  Therefore  he  saith.  Awake,
thou  that  sleepest,  arise  from  the  dead,"
<kc.     We  are  called  to  exertion —

1.  To  discover  the  right.  2.  To  gain
the  good.     3.  To  find  the  sacred  rest.

Indolence  is  disastrous  in  itself  and
issues,  offensive  to  God,  and  prohibited
alike  by  the  Gospel  of  Christ  and  the
cravings  of  our  soul.

n.  The  necessity  of  personal  effort.
Never  yet  did  a  soul  glide  passively  and
insensibly  into  salvation,  "from  death
unto  life."  1.  An  erroneous  and  wander-
ing life  is  one  of  activity.  "  We  have
turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  2.
Our  spiritual  return  demands  both  our
volition  and  endeavour  :  repentance  and
reformation  must  be  done  by  us,  cannot
be  done  for  us.  3.  No  force  from  toith-
out  ourselves  will  set  us  right.  God
commands,  persuades,  and  calls  ;  Christ
invites  and  pleads ;  the  Spirit  strives ;
but  no  power /orcca.  We  must  "walk."
Active,  earnest  concurrence.

III.  The  defiance  of  godless  inaction.
"We  will  not  walk!"  1.  No  disposi-
tion to  leave  the  evil :  prefer  wrong  ways.
2.  No  effort  to  find  the  good  way :  "  Men
love  darkness  rather  than  light ;  *'  "  Ye
will  not  come  unto  Me  that  ye  might
have  life."      3.  No  appreciation  of  ih4

131


CHAP.  TL


HOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY:  JEREMIAH.


offered  rest:  enjoy  rioting  and  pleasures
of  sin.  4.  No  apprehension  of  the  awful
issues:  eternal  unrest  of  soul.  "No
peace  to  wicked,"  "  tribulation  and
anguish,"  <fec.  (Rom.  ii.  9).  "  It  is
high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep."
"  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  straight  gate."
**  Let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into
that  rest "  (Heb.  iv.  1 1).  (See  Addenda
to  chap.  vi.  16,  ''^  Rest  for  your  souls")

Ver.  17.  Theme:  Reckless  inat-
tention TO  WARNING.

*'  Watchmen,"  used  of  sentinels  (1  Sam.
xiv.  16),  but  metaphorically  of  prophets
(Isa.  liL  8;  Ezek.  iii.  17;  Hab.  ii.  1).
**  Sound  of  trumpet "  was  the  signal  for
flight  (see  ver.  1 ;  cf.  Amos  iii.  6).

I.  Approaching  calamity  (ver  19).

I.  Merited.  2.  Devastating.  3.  Long-
delayed.  4.  Unrecognised,  5.  Imminent.
Compare  the  nearing  invasion  by  Baby-
lonish foes  to  the  subtle  yet  terrible
spiritual  disasters  approaching  the  sinner.

II.  Reiterated  forewarnings.  Not
one  watchman,  but  many,  through  the
successive  years  of  Judah's  {and  our)
decline.  1.  God's  reluctance.  2.  Mans
opportunities.  3.  None  left  unwarned.
4.  All  called  to  escape.

III.  Rousing  alarms.  *^  Sound  of
trumpet."  The  case  is  too  urgent  for
gentle  means,  the  peril  too  appalling  1
1.  Clearly  heard  by  all.  2.  Uasy  to
understand.  3.  Startling  calls  from  God.
4.  Offers  of  propitious  interval.  Escape
possible,  if  men  will  but  listen  and  hide.

IV.  Deliberate  inattention.  *'We
will  not  hearken.  1.  Incredulity:
"  Surely  a  false  alarm."  2.  Insensibility  :
**  We  have  nothing  to  fear  ;  deserve  no
judgments."  3.  Wilful  delusion  :  '*  Have
no  desire  or  intention  to  be  disturbed  in
our  sins."  4.  Huinotis  infatuation :
meanwhile  the  northern  foe  speeds  to-
wards his  unsuspecting  prey  (ver.  22).
So  likewise  do  death  and  doom  hasten
to  the  Christless  :  and  "  how  shall  ye
escape  if  ye  neglect  so  great  salvation  f  "

Ver.  18.  Comments.

"  Hear,  ye  natioTis."  As  the  Jewish
Church  refuses  to  hear  God's  voice
Bpeaking  by  the  prophets.  He  now  sum-
mons the  Gentiles  to  witness  its  con-
demnation.— Speaher^t  Com.
132


**  And  know,  0  congregation^^  »,«.,
the  few  godly  souls  in  the  midst  of
apostate  Judah  forming  the  "  congre-
gation of  My  people  ;  "  or  else  the  states-
men and  counsellors  of  surrounding
nations,  who  are  called  to  observe  in
Judah's  overthrow  that  "  verily  therb  is
a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."

"  What  is  among  them"  i.e.,  what
deeds  are  committed  by  Judah,  and  what
punishments  (righteous  and  inevitable)
are  to  be  inflicted  upon  them.

Ver.  18-21.  Theme:  The  right-
eous JUDGMENTS  OF  GOD.

i.  They  do  not  shun  publicity,  but
rather  appeal  to  the  moral  sense  of  the
whole  world,  ii.  They  bring  upon  men
their  merited  recompense,  iii.  They  can
be  averted,  not  by  outward  worship,  but
by  honest  submission  to  God's  Word  (ver,
19,  20).—Lange.

Ver.  19.     Comments,

"  Hear,  0  earth."  A  decree  so  so-
lemnly proclaimed  can  be  of  no  light
importance  ;  and,  therefore,  the  Fathers,
not  without  reason,  understood  it  of  the
rejection  of  the  Jews  from  being  tJie
Church. — Speaker's  Com.

God  appeals  to  the  whole  world  as  to
the  equity  of  His  proceedings.  Observe
what  is  doing  among  those  of  Judah  and
Jerusalem ;  you  hear  of  the  desolations
brought  upon  them  ;  the  earth  rings  with
it,  trembles  under  it ;  you  all  wonder
that  I  should  "  bring  evil  upon  this
people  "  that  are  in  covenant  with  Me,
profess  relation  to  Me,  have  worshipped
Me,  and  been  highly  favoured  by  Me.
"  Know,"  then  :

L  That  it  is  the  natural  product  of
their  devices.  The  "  evil  "  is  "  the  fruit
of  their  thoughts."  They  thought  to
strengthen  themselves  by  alliance  with
foreigners,  and  by  these  forbiden  alli-
ances shall  they  be  overthrown.

ii.  That  it  is  the  just  punishment  of
their  disobedience  and  rebellion:  "because
they  have  not  hearkened,"  &c.  They
would  never  have  been  ruined  thus  by
the  judgments  of  God's  hand  if  they  had
not  refused  to  be  ruled  by  the  judg-
ments of  His  mouth. — M.  Henry.

Ver.  20.     Theme:  Substitutes  rom

PIETY  REPUDIATED.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  VI.


The  text  reads  literally,  "  To  what
purpose  is  this  to  me  that  incense  com-
eth  from  Sheba/'  <fec.  God  wanted  what
was  nearer  home,  their  faithful  allegiance
and  their  heart's  love ;  and  what  was  of
greater  valuCy  "truth  in  the  inward  parts."

Note  that  God  repudiated  this  ritual
homage  at  a  time  when  Josiah  was  en-
gaged on  temple  restoration  ;  thus  em-
phatically refusing  the  most  elaborate
and  devoutly  arranged  ceremonialism  as
a  substitute  for  personal  holiness  and
practical  piety.

I.  The  resources  of  religious  insin-
cerity. '*  Incense  from  Sheba  ;  sweet
cane  from  a  far  country."

I.  Costly  substitutes.  2.  Foreign  imr
portations.  3.  Fragrant  offerings.  So
the  modern  innovations  in  Christian
sanctuaries :  ritualism  is  costly,  foreign
in  its  origin,  and  not  a  little  fragrance
mingles  with  its  sensational  services.  So
the  theological  vagaries  of  our  age,  the-
ories which  cost  the  sacrifice  of  precious
truths,  foreign  speculations  which  in-
trude upon  the  simple  Word  of  God,
fragrant  to  many  who  have  lost  all  en-
joyment of  the  *'  things  of  Christ."  Men
take  great  trouble  to  substitute  the
true.

II.  The  performance  of  superficial
worship.

1.  The  outward  forms  of  religion  may
he  continued  where  inward  homage  hcLS
perished ;  *'  burnt-offerings  and  sacri-
fices.*' 2.  Externals  are  frequently  mulr
tiplied  as  an  extenuation  of  conscious
inward  defalcations.  3.  Outward  ham-
Qjge  is  proper  and  pleasing  to  God  as  an
expression  of  heart  allegiance :  *'  show
faith  by  works."  4.  Mere  external  piety
is  a  solemn  mochery  and  a  hollow  pre-
tence :  their  altar  offerings  and  personal
sacrifices  were  both  a  "  lie  unto  God."

III.  The  rejection  of  heartless  piety.
"  Not  acceptable,  nor  sweet  unto  Me."
Sacrifice  and  incense  were  asked  by  God
as  suggestive  of  repentance,  and  an  in-
centive to  their  faith  in  a  Mediator  ;
but  they  became  an  abomination  and
outrage  when  used  to  <^)ver  and  excuse
sin.  1.  "  Acceptable"  offerings  necessi-
tate truth  in  the  offerer.  *'  To  obey  is
better  than  sacrifice."  2.  Sacrifices  are
only  **  sweet "  as  they  express  the  kiarfs


true  love  of  God,  "  The  sacrifices  of
God  are  a  broken  spirit,"  &c.  He  prizes
the  oblations  of  contrition,  affection,  and
faith ;  these  are  "  in  the  sight  of  God
of  great  price."  Let  all  our  sacrifices
bear  to  God  "  the  sweet  savour  of  Christ/*
being  offered  in  dependence  on  His
merits  and  mediation  ;  for  "  with  such
sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased.*'

Ver.  21.  Comments.

**  Stumbling-blocks."  The  Babylonian
invaders  (so  Keil,  Hend.),  who  would  be
instruments  of  Judah's  utter  overthrow,
eventuating  in  indiscriminate  ruin.  But
another  meaning  may  be  given :  The
Jews  having  established  themselves  in
courses  of  insincerity  towards  God,  would
sink  into  such  general  habits  of  insin-
cerity among  themselves  (for  the  step  is
natural  from  falsity  with  God  to  falsity
one  with  another),  as  to  lead  to  utter
social  hypocrisy,  anarchy,  recrimination,
antagonism,  ruin.  Every  tie  of  family
&nd  friendship  severed  by  the  prevailing
deceitfulness  which  ivrecked  all  honour
and  alienated  all  affection.  This  is
indeed  but  the  fulfilment  of  a  natural
and  moral  law  ;  the  ultimate  overthrow
of  deceivers,  taken  in  their  own  nets;
Haman  hanged  on  the  gallows  he  made
for  Mordecai.

"  /  will  lay  stumbling-blocks ;  "  for  it
is  God^s  punitive  law  which  works  this
infliction  on  the  sinner  of  his  own  sin.
**  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall
be  measured  to  you  again."

Ver.  22-26.  See  Homily  on  section,
supra.

1.  How  furious  the  foe  (ver.  22,  23).
2.  How  terrifying  their  attitude  (ver.
23).  "  Set  in  array,"  <kc.  3.  How  in-
defensible and  weak  the  assailed.  "  Against
thee,  0  daughter  of  Zion.*'     "  Hide  me,

0  my  Saviour,  hide  ! "  4.  How  para-
lysed with  apprehension  (ver.  24).  5.
How  encompassed  by  the  merciless  adver-
sary (ver.  25).  To  *'flee"  (ver.  1)  is
now  impossible.  What  a  literal  fore-
shadowing and  exposition  is  here  of
events  at  the  "  day  of  the  Lord  " !  (comp.

1  Thess.  V.  2,  3).  "  Then  sudden  de-
struction Cometh  upon  them,  as  travail
upon  a  woman  with  child ;  and  thep
shall  not  escape,"

133


OfiAt.  Vt.


HOMtLEflC  COMMmfAkY:  JEREMIAH,


Ver.    %.     Theme  ;  A   woful  speo-

TACLB  OP  RUIN.

On  the  coming  disasters  the  prophet's
eye  now  gazed ;  he  foresaw  it  in  all  its
virid  details,  and  from  his  pallid  lips
rose  a  wail  of  consternation,  a  cry  of
anguish  over  Zion.

L  A  sight  for  patriotic  anguish.
"  O  daughter  of  my  people  !  "  He  loved
his  nation,  felt  her  woes,  pitied  her  very
weakness,  lamented  the  dreadful  spolia-
tion at  hand  ;  yet  could  not  interpose  or
save.  How  distressing  this  helpless
pity  !  A  father  watches  his  dearest
daughter  agonise  and  die  ;  but  can  do
nothing — only  writhe  and  weep.  A
patriot  sees  his  nation  wounded,
wronged ;  yet  is  powerless  to  rescue  or
avenge.  A  pastor  beholds  the  tender
ones  of  his  flock  fall  a  prey  to  the  de-
spoiler  ;  cannot  deliver,  only  deplore.
But  Jesus  saw  humanity  perishing;  with
infinite  pity  He  sorrowed^  and  with  in-
finite power  He  saved.

II.  Judah  abandoned  to  misery.
"  Gird  with  sackcloth,  and  wallow  in
ashes."  Yet  this  was  not  repentant
anguish ;  for  she  still  loved  the  sins  which
wrought  her  woe.  Nor  was  it  remedial
anguish ;  for  now  rescue  and  redemption
were  for  ever  gone  ;  her  day  of  hope  had
passed.  "The  spoiler  is  come/"  1.  It
was  permanent  abandonment  to  misery.
"  Gird  thee  with  sackcloth  ; "  not  merely
clothe  thee  with  it  as  if  for  a  day  only,
but  fasten  it  to  thee  as  thine  unchange-
able attire  ;  for  the  woe  will  not  be
transient.

2.  It  was  extreme  abandonment.
"Wallow  thyself  in  ashes."  To  cast
ashes  upon  the  head  showed  deep  grief ;
to  sit  down  in  ashes,  yet  deeper  distress  ;
but  to  "  wallow  '*  in  them  expresses
unbearable  anguish  and  intense  self-
abhorrence.  Oh,  how  dreadful  this  con-
dition for  the  tender  and  "delicate
daughter  of  Zion"  !  (ver.  2) ;  how  fearful
the  degradation  and  misery  with  which
a  sinful  career  closes !

m  The  woful  grief  of  despair.
"  Make  thee  mourning,  as  for  an  only
son ;  most  bitter  lamentation.''  Lit.  "  a
lamentation  of  bitternesses^*  (plural):  sug-
gesting the  many  and  aggravated
occasions  for  her  grief.  1.  For  her
134


wilful  career  of  rebellion  against  her
patient  God.  2.  For  the  depths  and
intensity  of  her  iniquities.  3.  For  the
repudiation  of  her  many  opportunities
of  escape.  4.  For  the  shameful  and
excruciating  ruin  into  which  she  hcu
fallen.  5.  For  the  utter  loss  of  all  her
honour  and  happiness.  6.  For  the  dis-
honours which  her  conduct  and  ruin  cast
upon  Jehovah's  name.  7.  For  the  most
bitter  thought  that  hope  and  redemption
were  finally  and  irretrievably  forfeited,
"  Oh,  that  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,
in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong
unto  thy  peace  !  but  now  they  are  hid
from  thine  eyes"  (Luke  xix.  41-44).

IV.  Merciless  spoliation  of  the  foe.
"  The  spoiler  shall  suddenly  come  upon
thee."  Contrast  Zion — "  the  perfection
of  beauty  "  before  Nebuchadnezzar  laid
hand  upon  her ;  and  the  wild  waste —
blackened  with  fire,  temple  and  walls
demolished,  and  all  her  people  carried
away — to  which  she  was  reduced.  How
rightly  called  "  t/ie  spoiler  "  /  Contrast
man — "  in  image  of  God,*'  redeemed  by
Jesus,  visited  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  with
what  he  becomes  when  *'  earthly,  sensual,
devilish  ;  "  and  when  the  soul  is  finally
surrendered  to  the  arch -spoiler's  ruin.

Is  there  no  hope  ?  None  was  left  for
Judah  ;  but  for  us  it  is  written,  "  God
hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but  to
obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  ! "

Ver.  27.     Comments*

"  /  have  set  thee  for  a  tower;  "  rather  for
a  prover  or  refiner  of  metals.  (Comp.  ix,
7.)  "I  will  melt  them  and  try  them  "
(same  verb).  The  prophet  was  set  by  God
to  be  a  touchstone  to  try  the  people,  and
prove  what  manner  of  spirit  they  were
of.  If  they  received  his  word,  they  were
sterling  ore ;  if  not,  they  were  reprobate
silver,  mere  drosa  In  a  larger  sense,
the  Written  Word,  and  also  the  Incar-
nate Word,  are  set  for  the  trial  of  the
world,  "that  the  thoughts  of  many
hearts  may  be  revealed." — Wordsworth,

"  The  power  dwells  in  Christ's  word
generally  to  compel  men  to  separation
and  decision ;  for  no  one  can  remain
neutral  towards  Him  long.  He  makes
manifest  the  real  condition  of  the  heart.**


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  n.


Ver.  28.  This  gives  the  issue  of  the
testing ;  the  moral  character  of  the
people  is  hopelessly,  irremediably  bad ;
Jeremiah's  ministry  had  made  that  evi-
dent ;  they  were  like  hrass  and  iron,
base  and  obdurate.

Ver.  29.  " Bellows"  the  prophets  :
** are  humed"  consumed,  worn  out  by
continual  blowing.  Prophecy  has  ex-
hausted all  its  fervour  upon  Judah.
Jeremiah's  heart,  consumed  by  the  in-
tensity and  heat  of  divine  inspiration,
can  labour  no  longer.

"  As  the  bellows  of  the  refiner  are
burnt  in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  so  the  voice
of  the  prophet  is  silenced  which  said,
Turn  ye  to  My  law  !  And  as  the  lead
which  melts  in  the  fire,  so  the  words  of
the  prophets  who  prophesy  to  them  are
made  of  none  efi'ect,  and  the  people  are
not  profited  by  the  teaching  of  their
preacher,  and  do  not  repent  of  their
sins." — Targum,

"  The  lead  is  consumed  of  the  fire,"
Anciently,  instead  of  quicksilver,  lead
was  used  for  the  liquefaction  of  silver,
ao  as  to  separate  the  base  ingredients
from  the  precious  metal.  "  When  gold-
smiths wish  to  purify  the  silver,  they
add  lead  to  it.  When  preachers  would
try  their  hearers,  they  must  apply  the
law.  The  fire  is  God's  Word  (Jer.
xxiiL  29) ;  the  bellows,  the  Holy  Spirit
in  the  mouth  of  the  teacher ;  the  metal,
the  hearers." — Cramer,

**  The  wicked  are  not  plttcked  away,"
"  The  had  are  not  separated,"  i.«.,  the
base  ingredients,  the  bad  principles  and
habits  which  prevail  so  much,  and  adhere
BO  closely,  that  all  the  endeavours  and
pains  of  the  refiner  prove  ineffectual,  so
that  nothing  remains  but  to  throw  them
aside  as  a  metal  disallowed  and  cried
down  (ver.  30)  by  authority,  as  counter-
feiting silver,  but  not  capable  of  being
brought  to  the  sterling  standard. — Br,
Blayney.  (See  Addenda  to  chap.  vi.
27-30.)

1.  God's  dealings  and  messages  are
designed  to  separate  sinners  from  their
tins.  ii.  He  uses  all  means  to  qualify  sin-
ners for  salvation  ere  He  consigns  them
to  destruction,  iii.  God  proclaims  them
*^  reprobate"  and  *^castaway"  upon  wnom
the  energies  of  His  grace  are  spent  in  vain.


Ver.    29.       Theme  x    The    bellows

BURNED.

Prophets  spoke  in  parables  to  excite
attention,  to  illuminate  a  doctrine,  to
fix  truth  on  the  memory.  **  The  bellows
are  burned."     Words  apply  :

I.  To  the  prophet  himself.  He  com-
plains that  he  spake  with  such  pathos,
energy,  force  of  heart,  that  he  exhausted
himself  without  being  able  to  melt  the
people's  hearts  ;  so  hard  was  the  ore
that  the  bellows  were  burned  before  the
metal  was  melted ;  the  prophet  was  ex-
hausted before  the  people  were  impressed.
So  also  with  Noah,  Isaiah,  John  the
Baptist,  Jesus  Himself,  though  "  never
man  spake  like  that  Man."  Nor  since,
by  apostles,  confessors,  zeal-consuming
preachers  has  the  iron-hearted  world
become  melted ;  but  they  themselves
have  suffered  and  perished  amid  their
work.     "  Bellows  burned."

I.  It  is  the  preacher's  business  to
continue  labouring  till  he  is  worn  out.
2.  The  Gospel  he  preaches  is  the  in-
fallible test  between  the  precious  and
the  vile.

II.  To  the  afflictions  which  God
sends  upon  ungodly  men.  Sent  to  see  if
they  will  melt  in  the  furnace  or  not.  But
where  there  is  no  grace  in  affliction  the
afflictions  are  sooner  exhausted  than  the
sinner's  heart  is  made  to  melt  under  the
heat  caused  thereby — e.g.,  Pharaoh,  not
softened  by  all  the  plagues.  Ahaz,
"  when  he  was  afflicted,  he  sinned  yet
more  and  more."  Jerusalem,  often
chastised,  yet  incorrigible.  Sinners,  upon
whom  God's  judgments  exert  no  melting
power.

III.  To  the  chastisements  which
God  sends  upon  His  own  people.  The
Great  Refiner  will  have  His  gold  pure,
and  will  utterly  remove  our  tin.  There
are  unloving  children,  who  will  even
rebel  till  they  draw  down  blows  upon
themselves.  Do  not  let  it  be  said  that
the  bellows  are  used  till  they  are  worn
out  before  our  afflictions  melt  us  to  re-
pentatice  and  cause  us  to  let  go  our  sins.

IV.  The  time  is  coming  when  the
excitement  of  ungodly  men  will  fail
them.  Many  activities  are  kept  up
by  outward  energies  inciting  men.  1.
ExdtemeiU  in  pursuit  of  wealth,     Tel

136


OHAf .  VI.  EOMILETW  COMMENT  A  R  T :  JEREMIA  H.

how  little  will  the  joys  of  wealth  stimu-  pends  on  such  special  ministrations.    7»
late   you   in    your   last   moments  !     2.  the  fire  in  our  soul  burning  less  vehemently
Excitement   in  pursuing  fame.     Alas  !  than  in  years  past  ?     Our  obligations  to
men  burn  away  their  lives  for  the  ap-  live  for  Christ  are   the  same  ;  our  Mas-
probation  of  fellow-creatures ;  and  these  ter's  claims  on  our  love  are  as  strong ;
fires  will  die  down  into  darkness.     3.  the  objects  for  which  we  served  God  in
Living  for  pleasure  ;  but  satiety  follows,  the  past  are  as  important.     Should  we
and    the   flame   of  joy   goes    out.     4.  grow  less  heavenly  the  nearer  we  come
^y/>omsy  is  with  some  their  "  bellows;"  to  the   New  Jerusalem?    Of   the    true
but  this  feigned  zeal  and  pretended  piety  excitements  of  a  Christian's  zeal  it  can
will  end  in  black  despair.  never  be  said  "  the  bellows  are  burned  ;"
V.  To  those  excitements  which  keep  but  if  zeal  is  flagging,  some  other  motive
alive  the  Christian's  zeal.     In  certain  than   a   heavenly  must   have    acted   at
Churches  we  have  seen  great  blazings  of  the  first.   "  Examine  yourselves  whether
enthusiasm,  misnamed  "  revivals,"  mere  ye  be  in  the  faith ;  "  if  not,  no  wonder
agitations.       Genuine  revivals  I   love  ;  your  piety  declines,
but  these  spurious  things  are  fanaticism.  „  ^^^           ^y.^^  1^^^^  ^^^^^^^
Why  was  it  the  fire  soon  went  out  ?    The  We  bring  Thy  Gospel  fresh  renown ;
man  who  blew  the  bellows  left  the  scene  And  when  our  lives  and  labours  cease
of  excitement,    and     darkness    ensued.  ^^y  we  possess  the  promised  crown."
Our  earnestness  is  worthless  which  de-  — (7.  R.  Sjpurgeon,

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER   VL

Topic  :  Difficulties  of  Old  Age  without  Religion.    Text :  **  Woe  unto  us  /  for
the  day  goeth  away ;  for  the  shadows  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out  '*  (ver.  4).

A  painful  subject,  but  one  to  which  it  is  necessary  to  call  the  attention  of
procrastinating  man  :  the  difficu  ties  and  sorrows  of  old  age  without  a  vital
union  with  Christ  and  the  comforts  of  His  love.

I.  That  period  of  life  during  which  the  Saviour  grants  to  men  the  privileges  of
the  Gospel  is  known  under  the  appellation  of  a  day  of  grace  ;  a  day  in  which  He
waits  for  the  sinner's  repentance,  and  is  peculiarly  ready  to  aid  his  efforts.

The  great  object  to  attain  during  continuance  of  this  "  day  "  is  reconciliation  to
God.  They  who  "  seek  Him  early  "  are  promised  they  "  shall  find  Hiai."  If  man  be
wise  in  the  morning  of  that  day  of  privilege,  the  way  of  return  to  God  is  filled  with
encouragement.  In  old  age  this  reconciliation  is  rendered  painful  and  embarrassing
by  this  difficulty,  "  Tlie  day  goeth  away."  Period  of  grace  almost  come  to  a  close.
The  aged  sinner  must  necessarily  reflect  on  long  duration  of  mercy  passed  unim-
proved. Every  privilege  of  the  Gospel  brought  individual  responsibility ;  render
account  therefor  to  holy  God.

"  Day  goeth  away : "  it  has  been  enjoyed  in  the  fulness  of  its  privileges ;  but  since
unimproved,  tended  only  to  increase  the  guilt  and  danger  of  the  soul.  For  fifty  years
the  Redeemer  has  called  you,  angels  of  mercy  have  watched  for  conversion,  Divine
Providence  crowned  your  way  with  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy.  How  hard
and  difficult  now  to  arouse  your  soul ;  or,  if  aroused,  how  difficult  to  combat  your
fears  of  being  too  late,  of  hope  being  lost  through  long  delay  !

IL  Second  difficulty  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  aged  sinner  to  Christ  is,  the  short
period  of  grace  now  left  to  him.     *'  The  shadows  of  evening  are  stretched  out."

Many  wasted  years  gone  ;  very  few  noto  remain  for  the  soul's  salvation.  As  life
passes  away,  the  work  to  be  done  increases,  yet  time  is  diminished.  Death  now
stands  at  the  door.  Aged  sinner  is  tempted  to  despair  of  escaping  the  ruin  so  close
upon  him.  Satan  uses  this  difficulty  which  his  own  heart  presents,  and  allures  him
to  quiet  himself  under  the  load  of  his  sins  :  there  is  now  no  opportunity  for  any  slow
work  of  grace.
136


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap,  tl

III.  Third  difficulty  in  the  way  of  aged  sinners  arises  from  the  increased  hardness
of  their  hearts.

Wlien  young,  conviction  agitated  their  minds:  solemn  proclamation  of  Divine
truth  awoke  attention ;  their  eyes  could  weep  under  gospel  preaching  ;  affections
could  be  attracted  by  hopes  and  promises  ;  often  felt  excited  towards  a  life  of  holi-
ness and  peace.  Now,  no  such  feelings.  Unmoved.  This  hardness  of  heart,  the
necessary  accompaniment  of  age,  and  of  a  long  continuance  in  an  unconverted  state,
forme  a  serious  difficulty  to  returning  to  God.

IV.  Fourth  difficulty,  as  hedging  up  the  aged  sinner's  return,  is  the  pride  of
character  which  attends  the  advanced  periods  of  life.

Heart  may  be  moved,  conscience  awakened,  desire  roused  to  lay  down  burden  and
find  peace ;  but  an  assumed  dignity  and  coldness  of  manner,  are  drawn  over  a  broken
and  bleeding  spirit,  because  the  acknowledgment  would  he  humiliating  to  the  age  and
station  of  the  individual.  Yet  soul  must  humble  himself,  if  find  rest.  Age  furnishes
no  exception  ;  rather  requires  deeper  abasement.  This  acknowledgment  of  sin  and
misery,  to  children,  domestics,  and  friends — confession  that  all  these  years  he  has  been
wrong,  is  painful  and  repulsive.

Your  time  is  short,  difficulties  are  many.  Yet  "  nothing  impossible  with  God,"
Immediately  turn  to  Christ.    Flee  for  refuge  ! — Rev,  Stephen  U.  Tyng,  Philadelphia,

Topic:  The  Good  Way.     Children* s  Sermon,     Text:  ''Ask for  the

good  way"  (ver.  16).

A  dream  of  children  who  went  through  gate,  regardless  of  placard  warning  of
danger,  because  bright  and  smiling  flowers  grew  among  the  tall  grass.  Went  on
picking  them ;  merry  voices  rang  with  glee ;  unconsciously  went  further  into  the
tangled  wood,  lost  all  knowledge  of  way  out,  and  terrified  to  find  among  the  thick
grass  loathsome  and  poisonous  snakes ;  hurrying  from  them  they  slipped  down  over
hidden  rocks  into  deep  stagnant  water,  and  lost.  "  Turn  ye  from  evil  ways,  for
why  will  ye  die?"  (See  Isa.  xxx.  31.)  Keep  in  "the  old  paths,"  where  taught  to
tread,  though  others  invite.

I.  Wrong  ways  are  not  so  happy  as  they  promise  to  be.

We  do  not  deny  that  ways  look  inviting  and  "  seem  right,"  even  promise  to  prove
"good,"  but  are  evil  and  "  end  in  deatb."  "  Pleasures  of  sin,"  although  **  wages  of
sin  is  death."  Very  inviting,  or  not  so  many  go.  Excursion  train  dashed  off  gaily ;
but  line  insecure,  and  dreadful  disaster  ensued  :  would  so  many  have  gone  had  they
known  the  way  was  dangerous  1  If  you  leave  "  old  paths  "  because  you  think  new
ways  not  disastrous  and  more  enjoyable.

1.  Inviting  ways  do  not  always  prove  *'  good."  Do  not  judge  that  to  be  best
which  looks  most  attractive.  Flowers  not  sweetest  which  are  gayest.  Nor  fruit.
You  find  out  the  delusion  by  trying  them.  Yes  ;  you  say,  "  We  should  like  to  try
for  ourselves  the  different  ways,  even  those  forbidden  ! "  Rather  prove  for  your-
selves than  take  the  word  of  others.  But  on  a  bottle  at  home  is  a  label  ''Poison:"
will  you  take  the  word  of  others,  or  try  for  yourselves  ?  On  rocks  a  lighthouse,
warning  ships  of  ruin  :  will  any  captain  be  so  rash  as  try  for  himself,  and  steer  ship
to  death  1  (Pro v.  xiv.  12.)  Scenes  of  amusement,  self-indulgences,  courses  of  irreligion,
neglect  of  sanctuary  and  prayer :  these  invite  you  from  "  old  paths  j "  but  remember
the  degradation  and  misery  of  the  prodigal  son  !

2.  Your  own  way  is  not  always  happiest  or  best  (Pro v.  xiii.  15).  We  all  like  to
have  "  our  own  way."  Many  of  us  did  for  years,  but  heard  Voice  of  Mercy  call
*'  Repent  I "  Remember  that  having  their  own  way  is  just  what  the  world  of  sinners
is  doing /{laa,.  liii.  6.)  As  silly  sheep.  Will  you  do  as  the  doomed  world  ?  Why,
all  home  and  Sabbath  teaching  is  to  warn  you  from  that !  (Comp.  text  with  ver.  7.)
By  doing  this  you  "  grieve  the  Spirit,"  set  yourself  against  Christ,  allow  yourself  to
be  led  captive  by  devil,  and  court  doom.     In  Pilgrim's  Progress^  Christian  got  out  ol

137


CHAP.  TI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


"  Slough,"  but,  instead  of  going  to  "  Wicket  Gate,"  turned  aside  and  wandered
into  terrors  and  troubles.  But  "  Evangelist "  met  him,  and  put  him  in  right  way
again.  Who  is  Evangelist  ?  Read  Bible ;  obey  text  j  hear  Jesus,  "  I  am  the  Way  1 "
"  Follow  Me !  "

II.  The  good  way  is  happier  far  than  it  looks.

False  thought  that  Christian  life  means  sadness,  **  all  joy  darkened."  Yet  true
that  Jesus  says,  "  Take  up  cross  and  come  after  Me."

1.  Why  is  not  the  Christian  way  all  ea^y  f  Bird  teaching  young  to  fly,  how  dis-
tressed the  young  seem  !  She  might  have  spared  them.  Would  it  have  been
kindest  1  No  ;  better  they  should  learn  to  soar,  though  not  easy.  So  child  learns
to  walk ;  youth  to  breast  the  stream  ;  boy  brave  the  ordeals  and  trials  of  schooL
Nobler  men.  Boy  with  every  fancy  gratified,  no  hardships  or  self-denials,  becomes
selfish,  self-willed,  ruined.      Crosses  are  rugged  blessings.

2.  T/wuffh  not  so  attractive  as  other  patlis,  the  Christian  way  is  really  best  Two
heaps  of  coins :  new  bright  copper,  old  dull  gold :  yet  the  gold,  though  smaller  and
duller,  the  best.

3.  The  Christian  way  brings  rest  to  those  who  tread  it.  Walking  through  open
country,  became  lost  amid  different  paths ;  worried  and  wearied ;  at  length  rights
and  soon  at  "  rest ; "  for  knew  it  was  the  one  right  way,  and  led  safe  home.  Not
wait  till  home  (heaven)  before  have  "  rest."     Peace  within  now  (Prov.  xii.  28).

Think  how  many  have  gone  that  **  good  way  "  to  heaven  !  B.O.  612  Jeremiah
called  it  "old,*'  Now  nearly  A.D.  1900.  Yet  millions  tread  therein  (Matt.  viL
13,  14).  Take  your  place  with  the  Christian  folio wera.  "  Ways  of  pleasantness,
and  paths  all  peace."

Topic :  The  Ancient  Paths.     Text :  **  Ask  for  the  old  paths  "  (ver.  16).

In  Palestine  paths  are  the  only  thoroughfares  ;  through  indolence  or  selfishness
even  these  became  obliterated  ;  then  men  who  went  from  tribe  to  tribe  were  obliged
to  thread  their  way  through  thickets  and  over  rocks  in  the  most  inconvenient  way.
Transition  is  easy  from  an  outward  physical  path  to  a  moral  meaning :  roads  men  walk
with  their  feet  suggest  the  road  men's  thoughts  habitually  walk  in,  the  path  in  which
their  feelings  are  accustomed  to  move,  the  way  in  which  their  conduct  naturally
flows.

In  this  secondary  sense  use  text  to  point  out  the  necessity,  in  all  who  would
go  light,  of  keeping  upon  the  old  ways,  the  ascertained  ways,  which,  in  the  experi-
ence of  mankind,  have  been  proved  beneficial.  We  are  not  to  hold  on  to  anything
as  if  it  were  the  perfect  form  of  thought,  or  the  final  form  of  principle  ;  but  we  are
to  hold  on  to  all  those  things  which  long  and  ripe  experience  had  shown  to  be
beneficial  until  something  more  beneficial  can  be  put  in  their  place,

L  Our  boast  of  novelty,  our  glorying  in  our  newness,  as  if  we  were  in  advance
of  everybody  and  everything  else,  is  a  fanciful  mistake.  Our  thoughts,  and  all  the
channels  of  our  thoughts,  are  the  result  of  the  thought  and  experience  of  thousands
of  years  that  are  gone  by.  Political  habits  and  customs,  knowledge  of  right  and
equity — these  have  been  gradually  unfolded  through  ages  past.  Combinations  are
new,  elements  are  old.  We  did  not  first  dig  up  the  precious  gold,  nor  first  unlock
the  secrets  of  philosophy.  Yet  we  congratulate  ourselves  that  we  do  not  belong  to
the  old,  slowly-moving  ages  ;  are  proud  of  our  progressiveness,  and  it  is  fashionable
to  make  it  a  matter  of  boasting.

n.  The  present  time  is  noticeable  for  an  extraordinary  outbreak  of  activity
along  new  lines  of  thought  and  belief.  Historic  researches,  disclosures  of  truths
uf  the  past,  scientific  discoveries  and  prophecies,  have  set  imagination  on  fire  ;  and
men  feel  as  though  old  things  were  passing  away,  and  all  becoming  new.  The
consequences  are

(a.)  Men  are  inclined  0  4<y¥iht  generally  the  social  and  moral  retuUi  of  paH
138


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohaf.  tL


experiencey  to  repudiate  long  accepted  social  maxims  and  customs.  (6.)  General
distrust  is  being  thrown  upon  religious  teachings  :  not  positive  unbelief,  but  uncer-
tainty. And  by  shaking  confidence  in  religion  its  real  power  is  destroyed.  Thus
thousands  are  abandoning  old  paths — old  thoughts,  usages,  customs,  habits,  con-
victions, virtues.  Tendency  developed  in  this  direction  in  art  and  literature.
Leading  men  in  history  and  science  are  tending  away  from  the  old  grounds  of
Christianity.  This  is  a  fact  of  profound  importance,  and  should  command  the
attention  of  those  who  believe  Christianity  to  be  of  God.

Ill  Consider  that  there  are  certain  great  permanencies  of  thought,  character,
and  custom,  especially  necessary  in  our  time.  Note  :  (a.)  That  moral  and  social
progress  can  never  he  so  rapid  as  physical  developments.  Men  cannot  be  changed
in  their  principles,  feelings,  and  inner  life  in  the  same  ratio  as  external  changes  go
on.  Progress  is  always  fastest  in  the  lowest  stages.  You  can  teach  men  to
accomplish  great  physical  results,  as  in  steam,  telegraphy,  <kc.  ;  but  if  you  go
higher  and  teach  them  to  be  more  just,  merciful,  and  pure,  the  process  is  slower.
There  is  no  proportion  between  the  rapidity  with  which  we  develop  in  physical  things
and  the  rapidity  with  which  we  develop  in  that  part  of  our  manhood  which  is
highest  and  divinest.  (6.)  There  is  danger  in  giving  up  any  belief  or  custom  which
has  been  entwined  in  our  moral  sense.  Regard  as  sacred  the  first  principles  of  truth.
What  would  be  thought  of  a  man  who  considered  it  necessary  to  perfection  in
literature  that  he  should  despise  the  alphabet  1  It  was  as  necessary  to  Isaac  Newton
when  he  was  fifty  as  when  he  was  five  years  of  age.  It  goes  on  with  a  man  all  his  life
long.  It  is  not  safe  to  remove  even  the  imperfect  things  of  man's  earlier  life  until
they  are  superseded  by  something  higher.  Better  the  Parsee  should  worship  light
than  by  astronomical  proofs  to  destroy  his  delusions,  and  so  leave  him  with  no
God.  So  with  heathenism  ;  with  those  who  slavishly  bow  their  souls  to  authority
of  the  Church  ;  with  votaries  of  Romish  error, — it  is  not  safe  to  take  away  a  man's
view  because  it  is  inaccurate,  unless  you  give  him  a  more  accurate  view.  You
thereby  destroy  his  faith,  however  faulty,  and  thus  have  destroyed  the  life  that
was  in  him,  and  left  him  a  desert,  (c.)  In  the  transition  from  a  lower  to  a  higher
form  of  belief  there  is  peril.  Dangerous  to  pass  from  one  religion  espoused  in
youth,  to  another  espoused  in  manhood.  Many  have  sailed  out  of  the  harbour  of
Popery,  and  been  wrecked  ere  they  reached  the  harbour  of  Protestantism.  Thou-
sands have  deserted  the  orthodoxy  in  which  early  taught,  and  never  got  into  any
other  religion  at  all.  Hence,  we  are  not  to  think  it  our  duty  in  a  headlong  way
to  change  men's  belief  simply  because  they  are  erroneous.  As  if  changing  from
one  mode  of  belief  to  another  was  going  to  change  the  conscience,  reason,  moral
susceptibility,  and  character.

IV.  The  relinquishment  of  trust  or  of  practice  should  always  be  from  worse
to  better.  If  a  man  has  a  poor  way  of  looking  at  religion,  care  less  to  convince
him  of  his  poverty  than  quietly  to  convince  him  of  a  better  way.  If  you  want  a
traveller  to  have  a  better  road,  make  that  better  road,  and  then  he  will  need  no  argu-
ment to  persuade  him  to  walk  in  it.  If  you  are  teaching  that  one  intellectual  system
is  better  than  another,  and  that  one  religious  organisation,  church,  or  creed,  is  better,
prove  it  by  presenting  better  fruit  than  the  other,  and  men  will  need  little  argument
beyond.  The  first  proof  that  a  man  holds  a  better  system  of  religion  than  his
neighbour,  should  be  in  himself  :  the  life  will  be  the  evidence.  If  a  Church  breeds
meekness,  fortitude,  love,  courage,  disinterestedness  ;  if  it  makes  noble  men —
uncrowned  but  undoubted  princes — then  it  is  a  Church,  a  living  epistle  which  will
convince  men.     What  we  \\ant  is  not  change,  except  for  betterment.

V.  All  new  truths,  like  new  wines,  must  have  a  period  of  fermentation.
Daring  leaders  in  science — I  believe  them  to  be  men  who  are  throwing  out  ore  which,
when  it  is  smelted  and  purified,  is  to  be  precious  indeed.  Germs  of  truth  are  in  their
moral  teaching.  But,  shall  men  abandon  old  beliefs,  and  take  these  germs  of
truth  that  lie  in  the  heavens  like  mere  nebulous  clouds  %

139


CHAP.TL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,

(a.)  All  truths  are  at  first  on  probation  ;  must  be  scrutinised,  persecuted,  ran-
sacked, vindicated.  We  are  not  wise  if  we  follow  these  new  lights  before  knowing
what  they  are,  their  extent  and  practical  application.

(6.)  Guard  against  wild  and  unreasonable  urgency  in  throwing  off  traditional
faiths  and  truths^  for  those  you  can  discover  for  yourselves.  Accept  what  other  men
construct  for  you.  This  is  a  factor  in  civilisation.  Yet  when  men  come  to
questions  of  religious  belief  they  deem  it  unmanly  that  others  should  think  for
them  !  We  are  so  related,  by  the  laws  of  God,  one  to  another,  that  no  man  can
think  out  everything  for  himself.  Is  it  then  wiser  to  plunge  into  the  realm  of
nothingness  or  the  unknown,  to  give  up  your  belief  at  once  when  its  validity  ia
questioned  ?  or  is  it  not  wiser  to  hold  on  to  the  faith  of  your  father  and  mother  till
you  can  see  something  better  still  1  It  is  wiser  for  man  to  abide  by  the  truths
and  laws  of  God  till  better  ones  can  be  substituted.

VI.  We  do  well  to  look  cautiously  at  new  truths  and  those  who  advocate
them.  There  is  a  tendency  to  praise  scientific  men  as  though  they  were  the  only
persons  who  applied  themselves  to  find  out  facets.  But  remember  scientific  men
are  no  better  than  other  men  ;  no  more  likely  to  be  right  in  spirit,  just  as  likely  to
be  vain  and  arrogant.  They  are  all  human  ;  are  to  be  absolute  authorities  for  no-
body. There  is  a  conceit,  a  dogmatism,  a  bigotry  of  science,  as  really  as  there  is  of
religion.     Application  :

1.  That  clLI  the  tendencies  which  narrow  the  moral  sense  and  enlarge  the  liberty  of
the  passions  are  dangerous.  2.  All  tendencies  which  increase  self-conceit  are  to  be
suspected  and  disowned.  **  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit  1  There  ia
more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him."  3.  Those  tendencies  which  extinguish  in  a  man  all
spiritual  elements,  such  as  arise  from  faith  in  God,  in  our  spirituality  and  immor-
tality, must  inevitably  degrade  our  manhood.  No  heroism  ever  grows  out  of
abnegation  of  these  great  truths.  4.  All  tendencies  which  take  away  your  hope  of
and  belief  in  another  world,  take  away  your  motive  for  striving  to  reach  a  higher
life.     Without  this  hope  men  will  have  a  weary  pilgrimage  in  a  world  of  unbelief.

Make  better  paths  if  you  will,  but  abandon  not  the  old  ;  and  least  of  all  abandon
that  one  which  leads  straight  to  Jerusalem.  For  along  that  way  the  ransomed  of
the  Lord  shall  return  with  songs  unto  Zion. — E[.  Ward  Beecher,

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VI,    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUQQESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  1.  " Set  up  a  sign  of  fire"  Propitious  opportunities  lost.
Fire  signs  are  used  as  a  telegraph  in  "  Opportunities  are  the  golden  spots  of
some  parts  of  the  South  Seas.  A  native  time,  like  the  pearl  in  the  oyster-shell,
at  Tanna,  in  giving  me  the  news  one  of  much  more  value  than  the  shell  that
morning,  said,  "  There  will  be  a  party  contains  it.  There  is  much  time  in  a
over  from  the  island  of  Aneiteum  to-  short  opportunity." — Flavel.
day  or  to-morrow."  *'  How  do  you  The  proverb,  "  Take  time  by  the  fore-
know?" "Because  we  saw  a  great  lock,"  had  its  origin  in  the  old  pictures
bonfire  rising  there  last  night."  The  of  Father  Time,  who  appeared  as  bald-
natives  of  heathen  islands  are  also  in  the  headed,  excepting  a  lock  of  hair  upon
habit  of  kindling  fires  as  a  smoke  signal  his  forehead.  Our  fathers  were  accus-
to  attract  the  notice  of  a  vessel  which  tomed  to  bury  an  hour-glass  with  the
may  be  off  their  shore.  Sometimes,  dead,  as  a  symbol  of  time  and  oppor-
when  we  are  wondering  whether  there  tunity  utterly  past  away, — J,  0,  FiU
are  any  natives  among  the  dense  bush  kington,

which  we  see  from  the  ship,  up  goes  a  Grotius,  the  laborious  scholar,  had  fo«

column  of  smoke  and  removes  all  doubt."  his  motto,  "  Hora  ruit,"     Seneca  taught

— Turner^s  " Polynesia"  that  time  was  the  only  thing  of  which

Ver.  4.     "  Woe  unto  us,  for  the  day  it  is  a  virtue  to  be  covetous.

goeth  away,'*  "  In  the  city  of  Basle,  Switzerland,  it
140


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  TL


«ira8  the  custom  to  have  all  the  clocks  of
the  city  an  hour  a-head  of  time,  for
the  following  reason  :  Once  an  enemy
was  moving  upon  the  city,  and  their
stratagem  was  to  take  the  city  at  12
o'clock ;  but  the  cathedral  clock,  by  mis-
take, struck  1  instead  of  12,  and  so  the
enemy  thought  that  they  were  too  late
to  carry  out  the  stratagem,  and  gave  up
the  assault,  and  the  city  was  saved." —
Talmage.

Ver.  6.  "  Hew  ye  down  trees.**  The
importance  of  preserving  fruit-bearing
trees  from  destruction  in  sieges  [cf.  Deut.
XX.  19,  20]  is  evident,  when  we  remem-
ber how  much  larger  a  proportion  of
man's  subsistence  than  in  our  climates
is,  in  the  East,  derived  from  fruit-bearing
trees.  Among  the  Syro- Arabian  nations,
their  destruction  is  regarded  as  a  sacri-
lege. It  is  related  that  in  one  of  his
wars,  Mohammed  cut  down  the  date-
trees  of  the  Ben  Nadi  (a  tribe  of  Jews
in  Arabia) ;  and,  in  order  to  justify  this
act  to  his  own  indignant  followers,  he
had  to  produce  a  pretended  revelation
sanctioning  the  deed  :  "  This  revelation
came  down  :  What  palm-trees  ye  cut
down,  or  left  standing  on  their  roots,
were  so  cut  down  or  left  by  the  will  of
God,  that  He  might  disgrace  the  evil-
doers." Plutarch  says  that  similar  regu-
lations restrained  the  Egyptians  from
destroying  fruit-trees.  Other  nations
were  less  scrupulous,  as  among  them
the  Assyrians  (and,  doubtless,  the  Baby-
lonians also) ;  for,  in  at  least  one  in-
stance, we  have  noticed  a  palm-tree
being  cut  down  outside  a  besieged  city.
Josephus  expressly  records  the  destruc-
tion of  trees  by  the  Romans.  So  com-
pletely has  this  prophecy  been  fulfilled,
that  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem
has  become  entirely  divested  of  trees  in
the  course  of  the  successive  sieges  to
which  the  city  has  been  exposed.  When
the  Crusaders  under  Godfrey  commenced
their  siege,  no  timber  could  be  found  for
the  construction  of  their  engines.—
Kitto,

Ver.  7.  Continuity  of  sin.  **  If  you
commit  one  sin,  it  is  like  the  melting  of
the  lower  glacier  upon  the  Alps,  the
others  must  follow  in  time.  Set  the
coral  insect  at  work,  you  cannot  decree


where  it  shall  stay  its  work.  It  will  not
build  its  rock  just  as  high  as  you  please,
it  will  not  stay  until  an  island  be
created. " — Spurgeon.

Ver.  8.  "  Lest  my  soul  depart  from
thee:'

God's  withdrawment  from  man.
**  Think  of  God  sending  a  famine  upon
the  soul,  of  minds  pining  and  dying
because  Divine  messages  have  been  with-
drawn !  We  know  what  the  effect
would  be  if  God  were  to  withdraw  the
dew,  or  to  trouble  the  air  with  a  plague,
or  to  avert  the  beams  of  the  sun ;  the
garden  would  be  a  desert,  the  fruitful
field  a  sandy  plain,  the  wind  a  bearer  of
death,  summer  a  stormy  night,  and  life
itself  a  cruel  variation  of  death :  so
penetrating,  so  boundless  is  the  influence
of  God  in  nature.  Is  it  conceivable
that  the  withdrawment  of  God's  influ-
ence would  be  less  disastrous  upon  the
spirit  of  man  %  " — Joseph  Parker,

Ver.  9.  "  Glean  Israel  as  a  vine.**
"  God  has  two  kinds  of  vintage  :  one  is
in  grace,  when  He  plucks  His  glorious
grapes,  the  fruit  of  good  works,  and
says,  *  Destroy  it  not,  for  there  is  a  bless-
ing with  it  *  (Isa.  Ixv.  8).  But  where  He
finds  only  poisonous  berries  (Isa.  v,  2),
He  employs  other  vintagers  with  iron
gloves,  and  presses  them  out  in  His
anger  (Rev.  xiv.  20),  till  neither  stem
nor  stalk  is  left." — Cramer,

Ver.  10.  "  God's  Word :  no  delight
in  it."  A  wealthy  gentleman  invited
his  servants,  on  a  festive  occasion,  into
his  house  to  receive  presents.  **  What
will  you  have  ]"  said  he,  addressing  the
groom,  '*  this  Bible,  or  a  twenty-dollar
note  V  "I  would  take  the  Bible,  sir,
but  I  cannot  read ;  so  I  think  the  money
will  do  me  more  good."  "  And  you  V*
he  asked  the  gardener.  "There  is  ill-
ness at  home,  sir,  and  I  sadly  want  the
money."  '*  You  can  read,"  said  the  old
man,  turning  to  the  cook,  *'  will  you
have  this  Bible ] "  "I  can  read,"  was
her  reply,  "but  I  never  have  time  to
look  into  a  book,  and  I  need  fresh  gar-
ments most."  Last  came  the  errand-
boy.  *'  My  lad,"  said  his  kind  benefac-
tor, "will  you  take  these  twenty  dollars,
for  you  surely  want  new  clothes,  or
would  you  like  the  Bible  ? "     "  Thank

HI


CHAP.  VL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


you,  sir,  my  mother  has  taught  me  that
the  law  of  the  Lord  is  better  than  thou-
sands of  gold  and  silver,  I  will  have  the
good  book,  if  you  please."  As  the  boy
received  the  Bible  and  unclasped  its
covers,  a  bright  gold  piece  rolled  on  the
floor.  Quickly  turning  its  pages,  he
found  them  interleaved  with  bank  notes,
while  his  fellow-servants,  discovering
the  mistake  of  their  worldly  covetous-
ness,  hastily  departed  in  chagrin. —
Dictionary  of  Illustrations,

Ver.  11.  **  A  classification  of  society"
"  Children,  young  men,"  <fec.  Five
stages  of  human  life  are  successively
marked  out.  The  children,  with  no
higher  object  in  life  than  a  game  of  play
in  the  streets  (Zech,  viii.  6).  The  youths,
in  what  in  modern  phrase  we  should  call
their  clubs,  for  such  is  the  meaning  of
the  word  rendered  "  assembly,"  whether
they  meet  there  for  friendly  converse
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  7),  for  merriment  (Jer.  xv.
17),  or  for  that  love  of  secret  combina-
tion so  natural  at  their  age  (Prov.  xv.
22,  of.  Ps,  Iv.  14).  Next  comes  middle
age,  represented  by  the  "  husband  with
his  wife."  Then  the  elder,  the  man  who
has  grown-up  children  (here  called  "  the
aged "),  but  is  strong  and  vigorous.
Lastly,  the  man  whose  "  days  are  full,**
whose  work  is  done,  and  who  has  but
one  thing  left — to  die. — Speaker's  Com,
Ver.  13.  ^^  Every  one  given  to  covet-
ousness"  As  the  dog  in  iEsop's  fable
lost  the  real  flesh  for  the  shadow  of  it,
so  the  covetous  man  casts  away  the  true
riches  for  the  love  of  the  shadowy. —
Adams.

Ver.  14.  **  Peace,  where  there  is  no
peace,**  It  is  a  lamentable  fact  that,
without  any  hireling  shepherd  to  cry
"Peace,"  men  will  cry  that  for  them-
selves. They  need  not  the  syren  song
to  entice  them  to  the  rocks  of  presump-
tion and  rash  confidence.  There  is  a
tendency  in  their  own  hearts  to  put  sweet
for  bitter, — to  think  well  of  their  evil
estate  and  foster  themselves  in  proud  con-
ceit. Let  men  alone,  let  no  deluder  seek
to  deceive  them,  hush  for  ever  every
false  and  tempting  voice,  they  will  them-
selves, impelled  by  their  own  pride,  run
(o  an  evil  conceit,  and  make  themselves
at  ease,  though  Qod  Himself  is  in  arms


against  them.  To  be  tormented  on
account  of  sin  is  the  path  to  peace,  and
happy  shall  I  be  if  1  can  hurl  a  firebrand
into  your  hearts. — Spurgeon.

Ver.  16.  ^^  Old  path:  good  way,**
The  case  assumed  is  that  of  a  traveller,
who,  on  his  journey,  finds  himself  at  the
opening  of  many  ways,  and  knows  not
with  any  assurance  which  of  them  leads
by  the  safest  and  most  direct  road  to
his  resting-place.  He  seeks  a  most
ancient  city,  the  way  to  which  men  have
traversed  in  all  ages.  That  fresh  foot-
path, through  the  flowery  meadows^
that  bridle-path  round  by  the  marshes —
this  fresh  cutting  through  the  hills,—
these  will  not  do  for  him  :  he  must  ask
for  the  old  path.  But  there  may  be
more  old  paths  than  one.  The  broad
and  pleasant  way  that  leadeth  to  de-
struction is  as  old  as  the  straight  road
that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  far  better
frequented.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary
to  seek  not  only  "  the  old  path,"  but  the
good  way,"  Although  every  old  way
may  not  be  good,  the  good  way  is  cer-
tainly old;  if,  therefore,  the  traveller
finds  and  follows  the  way  that  is  both
old  and  good,  he  is  safe — he  shall  with-
out fail  reach  his  home  at  last,  and
*'  find  rest  for  his  soul." — Kitto,

Ver.  16.  *^  Best  for  your  souls.**  St.
Augustine,  after  having  given  himself
to  every  form  of  pleasure  and  gratifi-
cation which  the  world  provided,  was
at  length  brought  to  repose  in  the
faith,  and  began  his  "Confessions"  with
the  words,  "  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  created
us  for  Thyself,  and  restless  is  our  heart
until  it  finds  rest  in  Thee,"  Dryden
used  to  avow  himself  contented  when
sitting  under  the  statue  of  Shakespeare ;
and  BuflFon,  the  naturalist,  spoke  of  the
happiness  he  felt  when  sitting  at  the
feet  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  ;  but  we  know
Him  who  invites  us  to  sit  at  His  feet,
thus  choosing,  as  Mary  did,  "  the  good
part,"  and  says,  "  Learn  of  me,  and  ye
shall  find  rest  to  your  souls."

Ver.  27-30.  The  prophet,  in  the
first  figure^  represents  himself  as  a  trier
of  metals,  who  first  takes  the  rough  ore
in  hand  in  order  mineralogically  to  dis-
tinguish its  constituent  parts.  In  the
second  figure,  the  ore  is  exposed  to  fir«|


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  cttAP.  Vii.


in  order  in  that  way  to  test  its  metallic  spiration ;  the  flux,  his  earnestness  in

value  (ver.  29).     In  what   follows,    he  preaching.     But  in  vain  does  the  fervour

makes  use  of  a  third  figure  :  Israel  is  of  prophecy  essay  to  melt  the  hearts  of

here  definitely  presented  as  silver  ore  ;  the  people.     They  are  so  utterly  corrupt

but  in  the  smelting,  it  appears  that  the  that  no  particle  even  of  pure  metal  can

silver  is  so  mingled  with  the  stone  that  be  found  in  them.     All  the  refiner's  art

the  production  of  clear,  pure  silver  is  is  in  vain.     They  have  rejected  all  God's

impossible. — Naeg.  gifts  and  motives  for  their  repentance,

Ver.  30.     **  Reprobate  silver"     This,  and,    therefore,  Jehovah    has    rejected

then,    is    the   end  :    "  The    Lord    hath  them  as  an  alloy  too  utterly  adulterate

rejected  them."     The  smelter  is  God's  to   repay  the   refiner's  toils. — Speaker*t

prophet,  the  bellows  the  breath  of  in-  Com,


CHAPTER  VIL

Critical  and  Exeoetioal  Notes.  1.  Chronolo|j^  of  the  chapter.  KeU  regards  chaps,  vii.
to  X.  as  later  addreBses,  delivered  during  Josiah's  reign.  Bagster  places  an  interval  of  merely
two  years  between  chaps,  vi.  and  vii.,  dating  this  B.C.  610,  two  years  before  Josiah's  death.
The  A.V.  places  it  ten  years  after  Jehoiakim  became  king.  But  Dahler,  Graf,  Naeg.,  Lange,
Hend,,  and  Dr.  Payne  Smith  identify  this  chapter  with  chap.  xxvi.  (c/.  the  corresponding
verses,  vii.  2,  13,  14,  with  xxvi.  2,  5,  6  respectively),  and,  therefore,  date  chap.  vii.  "m  the
beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim"  Yet  identity  of  verses  is  not  itself  conclusive  of  chapters
being  synchronous,  for  the  book  abounds  in  repetitions  of  theme  and  language^  Besides  (as
Keil  points  out)  there  is  no  trace  in  this  discourse,  chap,  vii.-x.,  of  the  hostility  towards  Jere-
miah which  became  so  impetuous  and  implacable  in  Jehoiakim's  days  (contrast  this  address
with  chap.  xxvi.  14,  15,  «g.).  However,  this  chapter  depicts  such  idolatrous  degradations  as
ai^ree  more  with  tlie  relapse  under  Jehoiakim  than  with  the  reforms  of  Josiah's  reign  (see  viii.
9,  18,  31).

Jehoiakim  came  to  the  throne  B.C.  608.     Assyrian  chronology  changes  that  date  to  B.C.  689.

2.  Cotemporary  Scriptures :  2  Kings  xxiii.  34-37  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  4,  6 ;  cf.  Habak.  i.
Ezekiel  lived  through  the  epoch  of  Josiah's  death,  the  abject  dethronisation  of  Jehoahaz,  and
Jehoiakim's  installation  as  king  ;  but  his  prophecies  date  after  the  first  group  of  captives  had
been  carried  into  Babylon.

8.  National  History,  b.c.  605  [Assyrian  date,  586].  Josiah  had  fallen  in  battle  with
Pharaoh  Necho  at  Megiddo  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29,  30).  Jehoahaz  had  reigned  three  months,  and
now  Jehoiiikim  was  king — Pharaoh  Necho  having  placed  him  on  the  throne  of  Judah  as  vassal
king,  and  laid  the  land  under  tribute  to  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxiii.  33,  35).  During  his  wicked
and  abject  reign  the  nation  hastened  back  to  idolatry  and  vice.

4.  Cotemporaneous  History.  Two  years  before  Josiah's  death  Nineveh  was  wrested  from
Egypt  by  the  combined  assault  of  the  Medea  (under  Cyaxares)  and  Babylonians  (under  Nabo-
polassar) — these  two  rising  empires  l)eing  intent  on  crushing  the  despotism  of  the  Pharaohs,
Against  this  Babylonian  usurper  Pharaoh  Necho  marched  B.C.  608  ;  and  by  successful  war  at  Char-
chemish,  recovered  a  temporary  E<;yptian  ascendancy.  This  ascendancy  terminated  finally
in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  when  Nebuchadnezzar  led  his  father's  forces  against  Necho,
vanquished  Esrypt,  and  inaugurated  the  Chaldean  dominion.     Cf.  Critical  Notes  on  chap.  i.

6.  Geographical  References.  Ver.  12.  **  ShUoh,"  situate  north  of  Bethel,  in  tribe  of  Ben-
jamin (Judges  xxi.  19),  distinguished  as  being  the  first  sacred  resting-place  of  the  ark,  and
therefore  the  centre  of  the  nation's  worship.  Ark  abode  there  for  a  period  of  dr.  300  years
(Josh,  xviii.  1 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  3,  4).  Scene  of  Samuel's  call,  and  Eli's  judgeship.  Must  have
been  a  populous  town  then  ;  still  existed  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  I.  (1  Kings  xiv.  2) ;  but  in
Jeremiah's  time  it  had  sunk  to  a  mean  village.  Divine  displeasure  over  idolatry  led  to  its
degradation  from  historic  eminence.  Dr  Robinson  traced  its  site  in  the  Arabic  Seiltin.  Jerome
wrote,  **  At  Silo,  where  once  was  the  tabernacle  and  ark  of  the  Lord,  there  can  scarcely  be
pointed  out  the  foundation  of  an  altar."  Ver.  31.  **  Valley  of  the  Son  of  JJinnom,*'  skirting  the
western  base  of  Mount  Zion,  and  meeting  the  valley  of  Jehosaphat ;  a  most  picturesque  scene,
with  gardens,  jrroves,  and  cool  refrcishing  shade ;  regarded  as  the  temple  of  Palestine.
Jerome  says,  **  The  valley  of  Hinnom  was  watered  by  the  springs  of  Siloam,  and  was  pleasant
and  well  wooded  ;  and  at  this  day  delightful  gardens  are  situate  there  "  {cf.  Personal  Reference*
below).  **  The  high  places  of  Tophet "  were  artificial  mounts  on  which  sacrificial  altars  were
reared,  on  the  heights  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley,  and  facing  Mount  Zion.

6.  Personal  References.  Ver.  15.  **  Ephraim,"  put  for  Israel,  the  ten  tribes  God  had
"east  out."    Their  having  had  the  ark  so  long  did  not  protect  them  from  banishment:  nor

143


CHAP.  vn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMTAB.


irould  Judah  escape,  though  possessing  the  Temple  (ver.  4).  Ver.  18.  Queen  of  Heaven — 1.«.,
the  moon.     She  was  revered  as  a  deity  by  Persians  and  Syrians.     Her  name  /IDpD^  was  a

fern,  form  of  ^ /Q   Molech,  or  '^')J2  Mdech.     In  Babylonia  her  name  was  Molatta.     She  wai

regarded  as  the  wife  of  Molech  or  Baal,  the  king  of  heaven.  The  sun  and  moon  were  wor-
shipped tlius  as  being  the  generative  powers  of  nature.  Ver.  31.  "  Tophet,"  perhaps  a  contemptu-
ous name  given  by  Jeremiah  to  their  god,  Baal  [see  Literary  Criticism  on  chap.  iii.  24]  ;  or
else  not  a  proper  name  at  all,  the  word  "  Tophet"  meaning  merely  a  thing  or  place  of  abhor-
rence ;  an(l  any  place  where  human  sacrifices  were  offered  was  stigmatised  as  a  Tophet,  or  place
of  horror  (See  Addenda  to  chap.  v.  31,  "  High  Places  of  Tophet ").  Ver  31.  "  Son  of  Hinnom**
a  name  without  traceable  personal  identification.  Mentioned  in  connection  with  the  "  valley  *'
80  early  as  in  Josh.  xv.  8.  Possibly  he  was  some  ancient  or  fabulous  hero.  The  valley
called  Vale  Ben-Hinnom  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  sometimes  in  Heb.  shortened  into  Oe-
Hinnom,  D'iin*J  ;  is  rendered  by  the  LXX.  ralevva ;   and  hence  the  New  Testament  name

Oehenna.  To  end  the  idolatrous  abominations  practised  there,  Josiah  had  poured  into  the
valley  the  city's  refuse  and  corruption,  to  consume  which  -perpetual  fires  were  kept  burning.
From  the  torturous  fires  of  Molech,  and  the  ever-burning  fires  to  consume  the  loathsome
refuse  cast  into  it,  Gehenna  became  suggestive  and  figurative  of  the  place  of  eternal  torment.

7.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  18.  "  Make  cakes  to  queen  of  heaven  :  probably  specially
prepared  for  her  worship,  made  round  and  flat  like  the  disc  of  the  moon,  and  burnt  to  her
honour,  with  added  libations.  Ver.  21.  "  ^Mrni  ojfenn^ra"  were  wholly  consumed  upon  the
altar  fire ;  "  sacrifices  "  were  in  part  eaten  by  the  offerers.  This  "  Eating  the  flesh  "  was  regarded
as  a  reconciliation  meal,  God  and  the  offerer  dividing  and  sharing  the  sacrifice.  Ver.  29.  Cut
off  thine  hair : "  the  ancient  sign  of  mourning  (c/.  Job  i.  20  ;  Mic.  i.  16).  **  Lamentation  on  high
places "  (c/.  Isa.  xv.  2 ;  Judges  xi.  37,  38).  Ver.  30.  "  Abominations  in  the  house .  "  this
refers  to  what  Manasseh  had  done  (2  Kings  xxi.  3-5),  and  of  which  sacrifice  the  people  had
never  repented,  notwithstanding  Josiah's  external  reforms.  Ver.  31.  "  Bum  sons  and
daughters  in  the  fire:*'  probably  not  burnt  alive,  but  first  slain  (see  Ezek.  xvi.  21).  Ver.  34.
*'  Voice  (or  sound)  of  the  bridegroom  and  bride:  "  an  allusion  to  the  musical  procession  with
which  the  bridal  pair  were  accompanied  througb  the  streets  ;  a  custom  still,  in  many  parts  of
the  East,  among  the  Jews.

8  Literary  Criticisms.  Yer.  3.  "/  mil  cause  you  to  dwelU*  Hend.  would  give  to  the  Piel
form  of  the  verb  a  continuative  force,  **  I  will  still  cause  you  to  dwell  :^^  for  they  were  already
there  ;  and  this  is  no  promise  of  re-occupancy.  Blayney  and  the  Vulgate  adopt,  "  I  will  dwell
with  you."  Speaker's  Com.,**  I  will  let  you  dwell."  Ver.  4.  "Temple  of  the  Lord  are
these"  i.e.,  the  sacred  buildings  of  the  Temple  (Hend.)  Or,  as  the  pronoun  is  masc,  some
think  the  Jews  themselves.  But  the  Jews  boasted  in  their  material  edifices,  and  were  not
sufficiently  spiritual  to  claim  for  themselves  a  personally  indwelling  God.  Ver.  7.  '*  For  ever
and  ever,"  lit.  "  to  from  eternity  and  unto  eternity  : "  the  strongest  Heb.  formula  for  perpetuity.
The  antecedent  may  be  either,  I  gave  the  land,  or  I  will  cause  you  to  dwell.  Ver.  9.  "  Will  ye
steal,"  tbc,  a  succession  of  infinitives.  *'  What!  to  steal,  to  murder,"  &c.  Ver.  lOt  **  We  are
delivered  to  do  all,"  ikc,  i.e.,  by  Temple  attendances  and  observances  "  We  are  secured  "  against
evil  consequences  while  we  continue  to  sin;  no  harm  will  come  to  us.  It  expresses  daring
self-justification,  and  blasphemous  self-assurance.  (Comp.  Noticeable  Topics,  end  of  chap.
Sermon  by  Horton).  Ver.  12.  **Set  My  name  at  the  first,"  i.e.,  in  the  first  period  of  the
Jewish  commonwealth.  (See  above.  Geographical  References.  "  Shiloh  ").  Ver.  18.  **  Queen
of  heaven,"  margin  o(  A.  V.  "frame,  or  workmanship  of  heaven."  The  Syriac  and  LXX  so
translate  ;  although  in  corresponding  verses  (chap  xliv.  17,  18,  19),  the  LXX  render  the  word
"queen  "  ri  pafflXia-aa  rOtv  oitpavdv.  The  Vulgate  has  **  regina  coeli  "  in  every  instance.  Ver.
22.  **For  I  spake  not,"  dec,  if  this  be  taken  as  a  denial  of  their  Divine  institution,  it  must  be
understood  as  stating  that  God  imposed  moral  duties  (ver.  23)  at  an  earlier  date  than  He
instituted  the  sacrificial  code  (c/.  Exod  xv.  26,  xix.  6,  with  Dent.  v.  and  vi).  Or  as  a  repudiation
of  their  sacrifices  it  suggests  their  repulsiveness  to  God  when  alone,  unattended  with  perfor-
mance of  the  higher  obligations  :  **  I  spake  not  "  that  sacrifices  might  be  presented,  while  moral
duties  were  at  the  same  time  refused.  The  words  may  be  rendered,  **  I  spake  not  to  your  fathers
for  the  sake  of  (A.V.  'concerning')  burnt  offerings,"  &c.,  they  were  not  the  primary  results
God  sought ;  He  desired  not  sacrifices,  but  spiritual  obedience.  Ver.  24.  "  Went  backwards,^*
lit.  "  tpere  backwards,"  i.e.,  their  faces  turned  from  Me  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  57).  Ver.  28.  ''Truth"
(see  criticisms  on  the  word,  chap.  v.  3).     Ver.  29.     •'  Cut  hair,''  "lO     a  diad&n  (2  Sam.  i.  10).

The  Nazarii^t  hair  so  called  (Numb.  vi.  7,  rendered  ** consecration")  as  being  the  symbol  of
his  consecration  to  God,  ergo  of  his  royalty  and  dignity  :  and  hence,  leaving  the  primary  mean-
ing, the  long,  unshorn  liair  of  a  woman.  This  **  diadem  "  she  must  **  cast  away,"  for  she  is  no
longer  consecrate  to  God  :  she  has  violated  her  sanctity  and  forfeited  her  alliance  with
Jehovah.

144


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  vn.


HOMILETIO  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  VII.

Tenea      1-7.  Righteous  requirements  and  gracious  promise.

9,        8-15.  Demoralising  trust  placed  in  external  piety.

9,       16-20.  Indignity  done  to  God  in  uniting  His  worship  with  idolatrj.

f,       21-28.  Reliance  on  the  value  of  outward  religious  service  refuted*

9,       29-34.  Retribution  for  idolatrous  abominations.

Ver.  1-7.  Righteous  Requirements  and  Gracious  Promise.

Jehoiakim,  an  irreligious  king ;  consequently  the  maintenance  of  divine  worship
was  not  now,  as  when  Josiah  reigned,  an  object  of  public  care  and  royal  encourage-
ment. Probably  this  concourse  in  the  temple  assembled  on  a  public  fast-day.
Jeremiah  commissioned  to  use  the  opportunity  for  making  known  God*s  revulsion
from  "a  form  of  godliness,  not  having  the  power  thereof."

1.  Express  communication fr^om  Jehovah:  "word  which  came  to  Jeremiah  from
the  Lord."  2.  Proclaimed  in  a  solemn  scene :  "  stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Lord's
house."  3.  Addressed  to  a  vast  audience :  "  hear,  all  Judah."  4.  Relating  to
professedly  godly  persons  :  "  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to  worship  the  Lord."  5.
Spoken  with  the  weight  and  sanction  of  Highest  A  uthority  :  not  the  outcome  of  his
own  patriotic  fervour,  or  pious  solicitude,  but  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the
God  of  Israel."  6.  Summoning  to  thorough  reformation:  "amend,"  <fec.  (ver.  4).
7.  Granting  gracious  permission  and  opportunity  :  the  door  of  hope  not  closed,  the
day  of  grace  prolonged.

L  In  what  Divinely  approved  piety  consists.  God  leaves  them  in  no  uncer-
tainty as  to  what  He  demands  of  man  :  we  do  not  grope  in  darkness  towards  truth  ;
are  not  left  to  conjectures  and  adventures.  **  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it."
"  The  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein,"  Here  is  urged  both  a
refusal  and  a  requirement.

1.  Repudiation  of  superfidcd  piety  (ver.  2,4).  Mere  "entering"  sanctuary,
formal  "  worship,"  pride  in  religious  externals.  "  Not  they  who  say  unto  Me,
Lord,  Lord,"  tfec.     (Addenda  to  chap,  vii.  4,  "  Ecclesiastidsm")

2.  Delineation  of  essential  righteousness  (ver.  5,  6).  Personal  goodness,  justice
and  mercy  to  others,  fidelity  to  God.  Compare  our  Lord's  reply  to  question,
**  What  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  %  "  (Luke  x.  27).

II.  To  what  extent  true  reformation  must  be  carried.  "  Thoroughly  .  .  .
thoroughly  "  (ver.  5).  With  resolution,  with  sincerity,  with  completeness.  Note
what  it  embraces ;  self,  "  amend,"  <fea  ;  others,  "  execute  judgment,"  <fec. ;  God,  no
"  other  gods."

1.  Perscmal  renewal:  "ways" — i.e.,  general  principles  and  methods  of  life:
"  doings  *' — i.e.,  separate  and  minute  deeds.  Entire  change  of  self.  "  Neither
circumcision,  <fec.,  but  a  new  creature."

2.  Uprightness  of  conduct:  specially  acting  justly  and  mercifully.  We  are
"created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."

3.  Cessation  from  wrong  :  and  this  wrong  is  of  three  forms — harming  the  weak,
"hurting"  ourselves,  and  dishonouring  God  (ver.  6).

in.  With  what  rewards  godliness  is  encouraged.  Civil  and  sacred  privileges
(ver.  7).

1.  Present  advantages.  "  In  this  place ; "  Jerusalem  or  temple ;  where  holy
comforts  and  favours  cluster,  the  meeting-place  of  God.  "  Godliness  hath  the
promise  of  the  life  which  now  is."

2.  Imperishable  prospects.  "  This  land  for  ever,"  "  Begotten  to  a  lively  hope,
io  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  fadeth  not  away,"

IV.  To  what  disasters  irreligion  tends.  The  conditional  promise  implies  a
possible  reverse,  dark  and  sad.

E  14(^


CfiAP.  vlL  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.

1.  Loss  of  boasted  heritages.  Not  "dwell  in  this  place  ;"  the  temple  and  city,
with  all  civil  and  religious  advantages  forfeited ;  exiles.

2.  Banishment  from  God  Himself.  "  Removed  from  land  "  into  captivity.  To
be  cast  out  from  where  God  dwelt,  "  Zion,"  equivalent  to  a  Jew  to  being  banished
from  Him  who  dwelt  in  Zion.  "  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed."  "  Punished  with
everlasting  destruction,  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  the  glory  of  His  power."

Ver.  8-15.  Demoralising  Trust  placed  in  External  Piety.

A  startling  truism  that  evil  simulates  good.  Satan  himself  takes  the  form  of
"  angel  of  light "  in  order  to  cover  his  own  hideousness  and  deceive  others.  Sinners
hide  conscious  wrong  by  pretentious  righteousness.     Two  results :

1.  Self-decej)ti<m.  A  dangerous  device  to  assume  a  mock  piety.  Deceivers  come
to  "deceive  themselves."  Reflex  action  of  insincerity:  "believe  a  lie,"  and  thus
ignore  danger  while  courting  and  hastening  to  destruction.  Wicked  taken  in  their
own  net,  fall  into  pit  digged  for  others,  are  hung  on  gallows  themselves  prepared
for  different  use.

2.  Self  degradation.  Pretence  of  goodness  blinds  sinners  to  the  revulsion  and
awfulness  of  iniquity :  "  conscience  seared."  Evil  looks  less  heinous  to  sinners
themselves  when  clothed  with  the  garb  of  pietism.  Licence  is  thus  given  to
iniquity,  and  sin  grows  at  once  bolder,  self-excusing,  shameless,  and  runs  un-
checked to  vile  excesses.  Christ  pronounced  those  men  worst  and  most  hopeless
who  robed  villainy  with  piety  (Matt,  xxiii.  25-33).

I.  The  attitude  of  devotional  sincerity  (ver.  10).  1.  In  right  place:  "this
house."  2.  In  right  posture :  "  stand  before  Me."  "  Ye  outwardly  appear
righteous  unto  men"  (Matt,  xxiii.  28).  Judged  of  at  that  moment,  all  seemed
well.  But  what  manner  of  men  were  they  when  away  from  God's  house  ?  Life
has  two  sides  :  most  men  seem  good  when  in  holy  scenes  and  on  sacred  occasions ;
what  is  their  conduct  elsewhere  %  Moreover,  there  may  be  vast  difference  in  a
man's  outer  and  inner  life ;  and  God  looks  within ;  so  that  even  when  stand-
ing piously  before  Him  they  may  be  loathsome  in  His  sight.  Attitude  is  not
everything.

II.  The  subtlety  of  religious  delusions.  1.  False  trusts:  "in  lying  words'*
(ver.  9),  and  "  this  house  wherein  ye  trust "  (ver.  14).  Ready  to  believe  in  smooth
words  of  lying  prophets  (v.  31^,  or  to  rest  upon  mere  cant  phrases  (vii.  4),  or  to
repose  on  religious  externals  (ver.  14).  2.  Presumptuous  assurance:  "We  are
delivered"  (ver.  10) — i.e.,  having  performed  our  religious  observances  in  the
temple,  we  have  atoned  for  past  sins,  and  are  free  to  start  afresh.  Romanists
assume  the  same  licence :  attend  "  mass,"  and  so  leave  all  burdens  behind,  and
gain  liberty  for  indulgences  in  sin.  Protestants,  too,  who  "  attend  the  Sacrament "
and  return  to  worldliness.  They  also  who  trust  in  penitent  prayers,  and  excuse
themselves  in  wrong :  "  sin  that  grace  may  abound."     God  hates  every  false  way.

III.  The  degradations  of  spiritual  falsity.  The  delusion  that  sin  may  be  con-
tinued  with  impunity  or  easily  escaped  acts  as  an  encouragement  to  every  form  of
wrong.  Hypocrites,  who  make  external  ceremonies  a  kind  of  expiation,  readily
fall  into  the  seductions  of  sin,  and  follow  the  enticements  of  their  own  evil  hearts.
To  what  depths  did  these  sink  I  1.  Glaring  immoralities  (ver.  9).  2.  Revolting
idolatries  (\er.  9).     3.  Ecclesiastical  profanities  (vbt.  11).

IV.  The  futility  of  sacred  messages.  "  I  spake  unto  you,  rising  up  early,"
&C.  (ver.  13).  1.  Instructions  and  admonitions  were  not  withheld:  thus  God  did
His  part  to  restrain  and  rectify  them.  2.  Invitations  to  true  religion  were  sent  :
"  I  called  you  : "  thus  they  were  allured  and  entreated  as  well  as  warned.  3.
Indifference  and  insensibility  marked  their  conduct :  they  were  without  disposition
to  repent,  without  desire  for  holiness ;  so  they  trifled  still  by  offering  to  God  a
ceremonial  piety,  but  refusing  practical  godliness.     Note :  The  most  potent  and

U6


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  ni.


urgent  messages  from  God  are  neutralised  by  the  carnal  security  in  which  hypocrites
entrench  themselves.

V.  The  overthrow  of  sinners  and  their  subterfuges  (ver.  14,  15).  1.  Zion
seemed  a  secure  possession.  They  *'  trusted  '*  in  it ;  relied  upon  the  fact  that  God
had  given  it  in  covenant  with  their  fathers;  they  deemed  it  inalienable  and
imperishable  (Ps.  cxxxii  14).  Yet,  being  used  for  evil  ends  (ver.  11),  and  made
a  delusive  trust  (ver.  4,  14),  it  had  lost  its  worth  in  God's  sight,  and  should  come
to  ruin  as  Shiloh  had  done.  Nothing  retains  its  sacredness  or  its  security  when
prostituted  to  purposes  of  falsehood  and  impiety.  2.  Judah  believed  herself  safe
from  banishment.  David  was  of  Judah ;  God  had  made  special  promises  to  this
royal  tribe.  Messiah  was  to  come  of  it.  Judah  arrogated  to  herself  a  safety
Israel  did  not  possess.  But  no  privileges  or  promises  screen  the  guilty  from  judg-
ment. God's  special  plans  never  interfere  with  His  common  laws.  Sinners  are
condemned,  wicked  shall  not  escape ;  and  these  laws  will  not  be  suspended,  even
though  we  seek  to  hide  ourselves  behind  covenants  and  decrees.

Application :  Delusion  works  demoralisation.     Demoralisation  ensures  destruction,

Ver.  1 6-20.  Indignity  to  Jehovah  in  uniting  His  Worship  with  Idolatry.

"  Seest  thou  what  they  do  ?  "  (ver.  17).  The  sight  was  abhorrent  to  God.  They
had  professed  to  accept  Him  as  their  Lord,  by  standing  before  Him  in  His  house
(ver.  10) ;  but  their  conduct  outside  the  temple,  in  the  very  *' streets  of  Jerusalem/'
as  well  as  throughout  the  "  cities  of  Judah,"  was  flauiitingly  audacious  and  provoking.
Such  hypocrisy  was  loathsome  to  God.

Compromises^  combining  God's  worship  with  idolatrous  practises,  incense  Jehovah,
They  dishonour  Him,  rob  worship  of  all  worth,  render  religion  a  mockery  and
homage  a  vanity.     By  their  compromises  they  wronged  and  provoked  God  ;  ipr

1.  ThcT/  divided  His  gloryj  by  raising  idols  to  equality  with  Him.  2.  They
degraded  His  glory ^  by  lowering  Him  to  equality  with  them.  For  by  sharing
worship  between  God  and  "  other  gods,"  they  treated  Him  as  worthy  no  more  homage
than  they.

I.  Man's  astounding  insolence  towards  Jehovah.  Their  idolatrous  conduct
had  as  its  motive  malice ;  and  as  its  end,  "  that  they  might  provoke  God  to  anger"
(ver.  18).  They  aimed  at  that  result.  But,  in  so  doing,  men  may  ignite  a  fire  they
would  fain  yet  cannot  quench.  1.  The  Divine  anger  is  a  solemn  reality.  2.  Man's
conduct  is  capable  of  provokiitg  the  anger  of  the  Almighty  !  3.  Indignity  to
God  evokes  indignation  from  God.  Wonderful  man's  power !  Terrible  this  dire
abuse  of  it !

II.  Outrages  done  to  God  revert  on  the  sinner  (ver.  19).  Which  means.  Is  it
Me  they  provoke ;  or  will  they  not  rather  provoke  themselves  to  wrath  against
themselves,  and  to  confusion  and  shame  ?  1.  They  injure  themselves  more  than  they
incense  God.  2.  They  will  bear  the  heavier  consequences  of  their  wickedness.  God
is  dishonoured  and  provoked  thereby,  but  they  ensure  destruction  to  themselves  and
"  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Sinners  will  then  be  wrathful  with
themselves  ;  "  gnashing  of  teeth  : "  and  reap  **  shame  "  for  every  dishonour  they  have
done  to  the  Lord.

m.  Pitiful  intercession  refused  on  their  behalf  (ver.  16).  Jeremiah  was  com-
passionate, and  ready  to  interpose  with  prayers  :  but,  1.  God  corrects  the  prophet* t
mistaken  charity.  Piety  before  patriotism  ;  what  is  due  to  God  before  unthinking
intervention  on  the  behalf  of  wrongdoers.  Pity  must  not  blindly  interpose  to
prevent  justice.  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  *'  2.  God  directs
attention  to  their  guilty  deeds,  "  Seest  thou,"  <kc.  (ver.  17).  Jehovah  sees ;  and  He
fathoms  the  depths  of  malice  which  prompt  men's  hostile  actions.

IV.  Anger  provoked  in  Qod  will  he  assuredly  poured  out  (ver.  20).  I.  Asa
deluge,  in  fulness  and  fur jf :  "poured  out."     2.   FaUing  upon  the  whole  people:

147


CHAP.  vn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.

on  the  offenders  themselves  ("  man  "),  and  their  treasures  ('*  this  place,  on  beasts^
trees,  fruits  ").  3.  Unquenchable  in  its  ravaging  work :  for  it  will  be  a  deluge  of
"  fire,"  and  will  '*  burn  "  inextinguishably.  "Who  will  dwell  with  the  everlasting
burnings  1 "     "  Flee  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  consumed."

Ver.  21-28.  Reliance  on  the  Value  of  Outward  Religtous  Service  Reputed.

Jeremiah  swept  this  false  security  utterly  from  beneath  them :  their  ceremonial
observances  were  worthless  in  themselves,  except  as  an  expression  of  spiritual  homage
and  loyalty,  and  were  without  Divine  sanction,  except  as  they  were  accompanied  by
practical  godliness.  He  appeals  to  the  original  covenant  of  God  with  them,  and
affirms  :  i.  That  the  moral  code  was  primarily  given  ;  the  ceremonial  laws  followed
at  a  later  date,  and  as  a  concession  to  their  weakness,  when,  by  the  worship  of  the
golden  calf,  they  had  proved  themselves  unworthy  of,  and  unfitted  for,  a  purely
spiritual  dispensation,  ii.  That  the  moral  code  was  of  primary  importance,  God
could  readily  dispense  with  sacrificial  olBferings  if  their  practical  obedience  were
maintained  ;  but  however  lavish  their  sacrifices,  all  were  repulsive  if  obedience  was
withheld.

Henry — "  See  with  what  contempt  God  here  speaks  of  their  ceremonial  service
(ver.  21).  Go  on  in,  and  add  to,  your  sacrifices,  and  *  eat  flesh,*  for  that  is  all
the  good  you  will  obtain  from  them ;  no  other  benefit  while  you  live  in  dis-
obedience I

*'I.  He  shows  them  that  obedience  was  the  only  thing  He  reauired  of  them
(ver.  22,  23).  He  appeals  to  the  original  contract  when  they  were  first  formed
into  a  people  (Exod.  xv.  26).  The  condition  of  their  being  God's  people  was,  *  If
you  will  obey  my  voice  indeed '  (Exod.  xix.  5).  Afterwards  He  gave  them  cere-
monial institutions,  as  trials  of  their  obedience,  and  assistances  to  their  repentance
and  faith.  The  Levitical  law  begins  thus,  '  If  any  man  of  you  will  bring  an  off'er-
ing*  (Lev.  i.  2.  ii.  1),  as  if  intended  rather  to  regulate  sacrifice  than  to  require  it.

'*  II.  He  shows  them  that  disobedience  was  the  only  thing  which  offended
Him.  They  broke  God's  commandments  in  their  conversation,  while  observing
them,  in  some  instances,  in  their  devotion  (ver.  24,  -25).  1.  They  set  up  their  own
will  in  competition  with  God's.  *  Hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear  '  to  God*$
laws  j  and  made  iheir  oivn  counsels  their  guide,  and  evil  imaginations  became  their
law.  2.  If  they  began  well,  they  did  not  proceed,  but  soon  flew  oflf :  *  went  back-
ward.* 3.  When  God  sent  messages  to  them  by  His  prophets,  they  were  still  dis-
obedient (ver.  25).  As  deaf  to  the  prophets  as  they  were  to  the  law  (ver.  26).  4.
Their  practice  and  character  were  still  the  same  :  worse,  and  not  better,  than  their
fathers,  (a.)  Jeremiah  can  himself  witness  to  their  disobedience  (ver.  27).  (6.)
He  must  therefore  own  they  deserved  God's  displeasure  and  abandonment  to  de-
struction (ver.  28).  Notorious  for  their  obstinacy,  incapable  of  receiving  or  uttering
*  truth  : '  false  both  to  God  and  man."

Ver.  29-34.  Retribution  for  Idolatrous  Abominations,

*'Cut  oflf  thine  hair,"  &c.  (see  Lit.  Crit  supra  on  ver.  29) :  both  as  a  token  of
extreme  woe,  and  also  of  the  loss  of  the  consecrated  character.

L  A  mournful  occasion  for  bitterest  grief  (ver.  29).  1.  Loss  of  holiness
entails  loss  of  happiness.  2.  Rejection  by  God  and  abandonment  to  His  wrath
suggest  alarming  calamities.  /Spiritual^  in  that  the  soul  loses  her  light,  her
security,  her  comfort,  her  hope ;  and  temporal,  in  that  protection,  promises,  bene-
factions, are  all  forfeited  and  alienated.  A  desolate  case !  Yet  not  loss  of  God
alone,  but  the  positive  woes  of  " His  wrath"  All  good  things  withdrawn,  all  eiii
things  threatened.

n.  A  revolting  spectad*  of  Impious  desecration  (ver.  30,  31)  1.  Insulted
148


BOM  I  LET  IC  COMMENT  A  R  Y  :  JEREMIAH,


OHAT.  m.


Qod  to  His  face  in  His  own  housf  hy  their  abominations.  A  loathsome  intrusion  upon
and  pollution  of  sacred  scenes.  Equally  so  when  sin  is  cherished  in  our  hearts
(Ezek.  xiv.  4).  2.  Practised  the  most  heinous  atrocities  in  their  idolatrous  homage
(ver.  31).  Deeds  so  dreadful  as  never  to  have  "coiue  into  the  mind"  of  God.
2uHirs  fertility  in  wicked  inventions.

III.  A  terrible  visitation  of  righteous  judgments  (ver.  32,  33).  1.  Slaughterers
(of  their  own  children)  shall  be  visited  with  slaughter  (from  the  Chaldeans)  2.  TJie
scene  of  cruel  death  (of  helpless  infants)  shall  be  burdened  with  the  dead  ;  the  victims
of  the  avenging  sword  should  be  more  than  graves  could  inter.  3.  Ravaging
beasts  of  prey  would  usurp  the  very  spot  where  now  living  men  assembled  for  idolatrous
ceremonies  ;  so  complete  would  be  the  devastation  of  human  life.  "  Ge-Hinnom,"
a  figure  oi  hell.     (See  Personal  Allusions,  ver.  31,  above.)

IV.  A  woful  desolation  of  happy  scenes  (ver.  34).  I,  All  Joy  silenced  in
the  now  cheerful  streets.  2.  All  Hfe  departed  from  now  crowded  cities,  3.  All
beauty  and  fertility  swept  from  the  now  luxuriant  soil ;  "  the  land  desolate."  Music,
life,  and  fertility  :  these  symbolise  the  sum  of  Divine  favours:  God's  choicest
benefactions.  Their  loss  portrays  illimitable  woe.  So  utterly  does  sin  reverse  all
the  blessedness  of  life  and  the  hopes  of  religion.


EOMILETIC  OUTLINES  ON  SUCCESSIVE  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  VIL


Ver.  1,  2.  Preliminary  Notes.

Though  the  people  were  rioting  in
idolatry  they  yet  visited  God's  temple  ;
and  even  came  thither  from  "  all  Judah  "

iver.    2):     **all    the    cities    of  Judah"
xxvi.    2).     This  discourse  must    have
been  delivered  on  a  public  feast-day  or
fast-day,  for   on    no   ordinary  occasion
would  so  representative  an  assembly  be
convened.     Probably  it  was  an  assembly
specially  summoned  ;    the    apathy   and
alienation  of  the  people  being  too  settled
to  allow  of  their  coming  together  in  such
vast  numbers  from  distant  "  cities,"  un-
less called  to  Jerusalem  by  royal  edict,
or  impelled   to  come  in  consequence  of
national    calamities.     The  occasion  was
well  suited  for  a  searching  and  solemn
appeal  to  the  national  conscience.    Jere-
miah seems  to  have  stood  in  the  inner
gate,    and    faced    the    crowds    as   they
thronged  in  at  the  outer  gates  into  the
open  court.       He   detained   them    there
with    his    faithful    discourse    ere    they
passed  through   "  the  gate,"  where    he
him-elf    stood,    into    the    inner    court,
where  worship  was  performed  and  sac-
rifice  offered.     He   thus  stood  between
them   and   further    religious  mockeries,
calling   them    to    pause,     reflect,    and
repent.


Ver.  2.

PKSAOH.


Theme*  A  commission  to


Certainly,  this  is  not  running  without
being  sent.  Some  mistake  their  avoca-
tion,— rush  to  a  "  charge "  which  God
has  not  committed  to  them.  The  result:
*'  Things  without  life,  giving  sound."
Nothing  higher  than  that;  words,  but
no  "  word," — no  definite  message  for
men  from  God.  How  different  when
the  speaker  must  testify  the  truth
Divinely  intrusted  to  him  !  (Rom.  x.
15).  Jeremiah's  case  is  identical  with
that  of  every  true  preacher  (ver.  1).

I.  The  Divine  regulation  of  the
preacher's  work.  1.  The  scene  of  the
preacher's  labour  :  "  stand  in  the  gate,"
<fec.,  definitely  localised  by  God.  2.  The
opportunity  :  **  ye  that  enter"  the  very
hour  fixed  by  God,  as  they  were  enter-
ing ;  an  auspicious  and  appropriate
moment.  3.  The  audience  :  "  all  ye  of
Judah,"  and  ye  of  Judah  "  that  enter;*'
extensive,  yet  limited  ;  for  the  Gospel
and  truth  are  for  all,  yet  only  for  those
who  will  hear.  4.  Tlie  topic:  "this
word,"  definite  and  direct.  Many
themes  might  fill  our  thoughts  and  our
speech,  but  God  has  something  to  say,
and  "we  cannot  but  speak  the  things,"<fec
Note  its  origin  (ver.  1).  (Addenda  to
chap.  vii..  <*  7%e  Preacher.  )

II.  The  preacher's  performance  of
his  Divine  commission.  Like  Jere-
miah, who  subordinated  himself  and  his
powers  to  God's  requirements,  he  fulfill

U9


OBAF.  VII.


BOMlLETiC  COMMENTAUr :  JEREMIAB,


his  "charge."  1.  In  literal  obedience,
"  Stands  "  where  he  is  directed,  speaks
what  he  is  commanded.  2.  With  fear-
hss  ardour.  "  Proclaimed ; "  not
cowardlily  whispered  it,  nor  humbly
apologised  for  it.  3.  ^s  JehovaNs  wit-
ness (ver.  3) :  an  ambassador,  a  spokes-
man for  God  and  in  His  name.  It
makes  obedience  easy,  though  the  duty
be  onerous  and  dangerous,  to  realise
that  there  is  a  solemn  Authority  behind
us  and  our  words.

III.  The  practical  lessons  of  this
prophetic  incident.  (See  Preliminary
Notes  on  ver.  1,  above.)  1.  Large
audiences  present  special  opportunities;
and  a  preacher,  like  **  Wisdom,  cries  in
the  chief  places  of  concourse."  2.  Pro-
fessedly religious  persons  need  the
preacher's  word.  Simply  because  they
**  enter  gates  to  worship  "  does  not  show
them  beyond  error  and  without  need  of
earnest  ministrations.  3.  Before  men
worship^  they  require  solemn  and  special
warning  ;  need  be  summoned  to  pause
and  know  what  worship  God  accepts
and  demands  (Phil.  iii.  3).  4.  God  dis-
cerns the  spirit,  as  well  as  the  attitude,
of  those  who  enter  His  temple  for  out-
ward worship.  5.  He  sends  messages
according  to  the  condition  of  the  people :
warning  for  those  in  error,  consolation*
for  the  sad,  calls  for  the  weary,  <kc.
Hence,  hearers  should  seriously  take  heed
to  what  they  hear  :  for  the  message  sug-
gests God's  estimate  of  them  and  their
needs.

Ver.  3.  (See  on  ver.  6-7.)  "  Tour
ways"  =  general  lines  of  conduct,  com-
mon habits,  prevailing  laws  of  feeling,
thought,  and  practice.  "  Tour  doings"
=  the  separate  and  individual  acts  which,
by  frequency  and  repetition,  form  habits.
"  /  will  cause  you  to  dwell,"  i.e.  peace-
ably, protected  from  the  spoiler  and
from  captivity.  It  promises  nothing
new,  but  pledges  the  continuance  of  the
blessings  long  enjoyed  (ver.  7).  "  In
this  place"  primarily,  the  temple,  as
the  central  joy  and  privilege  of  Israel ;
and,  secondarily,  "the  land,"  of  which
the  temple  is  the  ornament  and
glory.

Theme :  Sinnkbs  summoned  to  self-
150


IMPROVEMENT.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,
Amend  your  ways  /"

Faulty  conduct  is  to  be  rectified,
God  asks  practical  righteousness  ;  cor-
recting the  wrong  of  our  life,  culturing
the  good  and  the  godly.

Unwarrantable  to  teach  that  human
virtue  and  goodness  are  nothing  to  God,
are,  indeed,  repulsive  to  Him.  "  He
hath  shown  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  : "
and  both  summons  to  attempt  it,  and
approves  its  attainment.

Equally  unscriptural  to  teach  that
God  bids  men  desist  from  effort  to  rise
out  of  evil  into  a  good  and  godly  life
(Isa.  Iv.  6,  7  ;  Rom.  viii.  13).  True,
no  self-improvement  can  save  a  soul.
Jesus  alone  saves.  But  there  is  room
for  the  free  action  of  a  man  to  "  cease
from  evil  and  do  good  "  both  before  and
after  his  conversion  to  Christ.

This  Divine  call

I.  Marks  out  the  prevailing  faulti-
ness  of  an  irreligious  life.  Both  your
"  ways  and  doings,"  in  large  and  small
matters,  in  principles  and  practices.
Yet,  observe,  here  is  no  call  to  abandon
altogether  their  course  of  life,  but  to
alter  it ;  remedy  the  errors  and  mistakes
and  blemishes.  Ceremonialism  not  it-
self wrong  and  forbidden,  but  it  should
be  accompanied  by  practical  righteous-
ness. 1.  The  direction  of  the  life  may
not  be  wholly  wron^g :  not  required  to
reverse  or  abandon  their  ways,  but
"  amend  them."  2.  Yet  good  deeds  may
he  performed  in  an  evil  manner :  life,  a
series  of  faults,  in  spirit  and  method.
3.  So  a  life  ostensibly  good  may  he  repul-
sive to  God  :  so  much  so,  as  to  threaten
the  loss  of  God  and  the  "holy  city.**

II.  Sanctions  man's  resolute  efforts
to  rectify  his  faults.  "  Amend."  So
far  from  repudiating  man's  endeavour  to
reform  his  wrongs,  and  acquire  virtue
and  goodness,  God  here  calls  to  it.
Hence  it  is  :  1.  Possible  to  man.  2.  Ap-
proved by  God.  3.  Incumbent  on  each.
(Mark  X.  20,  21.)

in.  Fledges  God's  beneficent  recog-
nition of  man's  diligent  reform.  1.
This  implies  a  terrifying  alternative :
that,  neglecting  the  duty  of  rectifying
existing  evils,  God  would  outlaw  them.
2.  This  eovinanU  a  graeioui  recomperue:


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  vn.


that,  "  redeeming  the  time,"  and  living
"soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this
present  world,"  He  would  retain  them
in  His  merciful  favour,  and  give  them  a
perpetual  heritage  in  Canaan.  For  this
end,  "  the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared  "
(Titus  ii.  11-15);  and  Christ  **  gave
Himself  for  us ; "  and  to  such  rectitude
of  life  men  are  to  be  '*  exhorted  with
all  authority,"

Ver.  4.  Theme:  Sanctimonious  self-
delusions.

When  religious  sincerity  is  absent
from  the  heart,  all  religious  words  upon
the  lips,  whether  pious  talk  or  sanctuary
exercises,  are  "  lying  words."  Gene-
rally, too,  when  the  heart's  religion  is
false,  the  lip  religion  is  more  emphatic  :
it  utters  itself  with  a  threefold  fervour.
Hollow  things  emit  most  sound.  So
"  The  temple  of  the  Lord,"  thrice  over  :
words  must  speak  out  lustily  when  the
consciousness  bears  no  witness.  Mighty
rivers  flow  in  silence  ;  shallow  streams
compensate  for  their  poverty  by  making
more  noise.

First,  Concerning  lying  words.

L  They  falsify  God's  character :
implying  that  God  would  not  destroy
His  temple,  though  profaned ;  that  He
connived  at  their  criminality  :  their  sins
would  not  lead  the  glory  to  depart,  or
the  sanctuary  to  be  destroyed.

II.  They  delude  men's  souls :  allure
to  false  trusts,  import  a  vain  hope  be-
tween a  sinner  and  the  punishment  of
sin.  "  The  temple"  promised  them  a
guarantee  against  and  an  asylum  from
ruin,  thus  encouraging  presumption  and
iniquity.

III.  They  pervert  sacred  things :
God's  house  was  abused, — became  a
rendezvous  of  villainy,  evil  felt  itself
secure  there.  God^s  altar  was  perverted  ;
instead  of  its  sacrifices  being  regarded
as  a  surrender  of  sin,  they  were  offered
to  condone  and  license  sin.  God's  cove-
nants were  misused.  He  had,  indeed,
promised  to  dwell  for  ever  in  Zion,  and
to  give  His  people  a  lasting  heritage  and
resting-place  there ;  but  they  ignored
the  conditions  of  this  promise,  that  they
should  be  a  "  holy  people,"  and  keep  un-
stained His  "  holy  sanctuary."


Thus  sinners  allow  themselves  to
"continue  in  sin  that  grace  may
abound  ;"  silence,  rebukes  of  conscience
by  boasting  the  cleansing  blood  of
Christ ;  make  the  cross  an  asylum  for
sin  rather  than  a  resting-place  from
sin.

Secondf  Concerning  trusting  in  lying
words.

The  triple  repetition  of  "  the  temple
of  the  Lord"  may  express  the  intense
feeling,  the  vigorous  assurance,  with
which  this  confidence  in  their  safety,
because  they  had  the  sanctuary  among
them,  was  cherished.  The  triple  utter-
ance seems  to  denote  intensity.  (Comp.
also  Isa.  vi  3 ;  Jer.  xxii.  29.)  Or,  the
repetition  may  suggest  the  frequency
with  which  this  boast  of  possess-
ing God's  temple  was  heard  among
them.  Henry  says,  "  It  was  the  cant  of
the  times.  If  they  heard  an  awakening
sermon,  they  lulled  themselves  asleep
again  with  this,  *  We  cannot  but  do
well,  for  we  have  the  temple  of  the  Lord
among  us.'  It  is  common  for  those  who
are  farthest  from  God  to  boast  them-
selves most  of  their  being  near  to  the
church."

Jeremiah's  remonstrance  against  this
delusive  and  sanctimonious  cry  suggests,
concerning  the  Jews —

I.  A  preference  for  peaceftil  pro-
phesyings.  Most  probably  this  illusory
boast  in  having  the  temple  was  the
theme  of  false  prophetSj  who  prophesied
smooth  things  among  them  (comp.  Mic.
iil  11).  The  sentence  looks  like  a  quo-
tation from  the  teachings  of  one  of  these
deceitful  leaders ;  which  was  speedily
caught  up  into  popular  currency,  and
become  the  answering  retort  whenever
Jeremiah  denounced  the  people  or  fore-
told the  coming  woes.  They  sought  to
drown  his  serious  words  with  this  mock-
ing boast.  They  desired  only  to  hear
what  flattered  them,  even  though  it  be-
guiled them.

II.  A  repose  on  false  securities.
Tills  audacious  appeal  to  the  temple
may  be  thus  interpreted  :  "  The  temple
of  the  Lord"  in  Jerusalem  has  been
consecrated  as  His  abode;  therefore,
enemies  shall  not  conquer  and  capture
the  city  ;  we  are,  therefore,  safe  within

101


CHAP.  VIL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


its  shelter.  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord  "
is  the  throne  of  II  is  glory  ;  and  He  will
not  vacate  His  throne  for  heathen  to
possess  it ;  an  invincible  stronghold  have
we ;  we  are,  therefore,  safe  under  its
strong  protection.  "  The  temple  of  the
Lord  "  has  been  given  in  covenant  to  His
people  ;  it  cannot  therefore  be  alienated.
God's  word  may  not  fail ;  we,  therefore,
are  safe  in  enjoyment  of  covenanted
blessings.  Thus  men  say  still,  "  We  are
in  tlie  church  ! "  "  We  have  been  bap-
tized !  "  "  We  are  the  elect  !'*  Refuges
of  lies.

III.  A  vaunting  over  external
sanctities.  "  Men  in  all  ages  have
evinced  a  proneness  to  attribute  to
external  and  ceremonial  circumstances  a
virtue  which  does  not  inhere  in  them  "
{Hend.).  Because,  forsooth,  these  Jews
presented  themselves  thrice  a  year  in  this
temple,  they  imagined  they  had  done  all
Jehovah  required  of  them  :  He  could
not  withdraw  His  favour  from  such  a
pious  nation  !  Or,  because  within  the
temple  the  sacrifices  and  ceremonies  went
on  continually,  they  were  dcung  all
that  was  required  by  Him,  and  were
entitled  to  His  gracious  regard.  Or,
because  as  a  nation  they  maintained  by
their  contributions  the  temple  fabrics
and  ministries,  they  had  purchased  a
right  to  Divine  care  and  blessings :
*'  These  temple  edifices  were  only  kept
up  at  great  cost ;  how  generous  have  we
been  for  God*s  cause,  how  deserving
therefore  are  we"  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  11).
God  accepts  no  substitute  for  personal
holiness.  Punctilious  outward  observ-
ance, lavish  and  ceaseless  sacrifices,  free
bestowment  of  wealth,  all  are  repudiated
when  they  are  made  the  boast  of  the
proud  and  the  excuse  of  impiety.  (Ad-
denda to  chap,  vii  4,  **  Ecclesiasti-
cism,*')

Ver.  5.  Theme :  Thoroughness.  "  If
ye  will  thoroughly  amend,  and  thoroughly
execute  judgment."

Over  against  their  self-delusive  words
(ver.  4),  Jeremiah  places  the  indispens-
able requirements  of  Jehovah  :  not  an
outward  ceremonial  piety,  but  a  personal
religious  life  ;  not  a  partial  and  evasive
obedience,  but  a  righteousness  all-in-
152


elusive  and  practical, — **  thoroughly*'
(Luke  xi.  42).  Only  when  temple-
worship  (ver.  2)  is  the  expression  of
sincere  and  sanctified  hearts,  and  is
attended  and  attested  by  works  of  right-
eousness, is  it  accepted  of  God.  He
asks  that  our  whole  life,  equally  in
sacred  and  secular  scenes,  "  towards
God  and  towards  men,"  be  holiness  unto
the  Lord.

I.  The  largeness  of  the  Divine  out-
goings toward  men  justifies  His  demand
for  thoroughness.  He  who  asks  *'  tho-
roughness "  should  himself  so  act,  or
there  is  inconsistency  in  the  demand.
But  certainly  in  the  lavishmentof  God's
gifts,  the  beneficence  of  His  dealings,
the  wealth  of  His  covenanted  promises,
and  His  faultless  fidelity  in  fulfilling
His  word,  He  had  done  all  things
"  thoroughly  "  for  Judah.

In  general,  and  with  universal  appli-
cation, it  stands  that :  1.  There  is  no
incompleteness  in  Go£s  works,  or  paucity
in  His  provisions  for  human  good.
Look  out  on  nature,  look  into  revela-
tion, ponder  redemption,  and  all  show
God's  works  and  wa3's  for  man  to  be
lavish,  perfect,  "  thorough."  2.  There  is
no  neglect  by  God  of  one  side  of  human
need  while  attending  to  the  other.  He  did
not  overlook  their  temporal  good  while
working  for  their  spiritual,  nor  vice
versa.  Judah  had  been  thus  one-sided  ;
but  not  God.  Ergo,  as  God's  ways
with  men  are  characterised  by  thorough-
ness. He  is  justified  in  asking  and  en-
titled to  receive  thoroughness  in  man's
response  of  obedience  and  love.  (Ad-
denda to  chap.  vii.  5,  "  Thoroughness.^^)

II.  The  sphere  and  action  of
religion  compasses  our  whole  life
with  thoroughness.  There  is  no  part
or  phase  of  our  life  which  escapes  the
control  of  religion ;  so  that  he  who  is
truly  religious,  responsive  to  the  dictates
and  demands  of  religion,  is  thoroughly
religious.     Thus :

1.  It  claims  and  controls  the  whole  of
our  nature  and  faculties,

2.  It  asserts  an  empire  over  every  act
of  our  lifCf  ^^  whatsoever  we  do."

3.  It  extends  its  sway  to,  and  utters
its  counsels  upon,  all  the  relationships
and  duties  of  society.     (See  ver.  5,  6.)


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP,  vn.


4.  It  reaches  all  along  the  path  of  our
life,  from  birth  into  eternity.  Religion
is  thorough  in  its  comprehensive  rule
over,  and  directions  for,  the  life  of
man.

III.  The  response  which  God  re-
ceives from  man  should  be  dis-
tinguished by  thoroughness.  Where-
ever  else  man  practises  reservation,  here
he  should  hold  back  no  part  of  the
price.  Our  godliness  should  be  thorough
if  it  is  to  be  happy  to  ourselves  or
honouring  to  God.

1.  It  is  the  natural  issv^  of  honest
acceptance  of  religion.  The  heart  that
finds  and  resolves  for  Christ,  and  obeys
its  own  instinctive  promptings,  cannot
yield  a  mere  partial  response.

2.  It  is  the  inevitable  return  of  filial
gratitude,  "  How  much  owe  I  unto
my  Lord  ] "  "Ye  are  not  your  own  ;
body,  soul  and  spirit  are  the  Lord's."

3.  It  is  the  essential  law  of  piety.
God  deserves  all.  "  Love  the  Lord  thy
God  with  all  thine  heart,  <fec.,  and
neighbour  as  thyself."  He  who  re-
sponds rightly  yields  himself  fully  to
all  the  claims  of  God  (Rom.  xii.  1).

IV.  The  piety  which  refuses  full
obedience  to  God  is  a  lamentable  vio-
lation of  the  sacred  law  of  thorough-
ness. Christ  says,  "  I  would  thou  wert
cold  or  hot."  He  loathes  the  "luke-
warm." He  Himself  held  nothing  back
from  us;  gave  Himself,  His  life.  His
redemption,  His  perfect  virtue,  all
for  us  ;  "  what  shall  we  render  unto  the
Lord  1 "  Less  than  "  all  for  Christ "  is
wholly  undeserving.

1.  It  is  a  mean  return  for  the  grace  we
have  received.

2.  It  is  a  worthless  fulfilment  of
religious  obligations.  God  abhors  a  com-
promising piety,  a  divided  heart.

3.  It  is  a  discreditable  exhibition  of
godliness.  Degrades  piety  in  the  eyes
of  scoffers,  and  evokes  swift  rebuke.
(Comp.  Acts  v.  1-11.)

•*  Thine  am  I  by  all  ties ;
But  chiefly  Thine,
That  through  Thy  sacrifice,
Thou,  Lord,  art  mine  :
By  Thine  own  cords  of  love,  so  sweetly  wound
Around  me,  I  to  Thee  am  closely  bound.*'

Only  in  full  dedication  of  our  love  to


God  and  life  for  men  in  Christ's  name,
can  we  approach  the  standard  of  godly
thoroughness.

Ver.  5,  6.   Comments.

In  thus  particularising  the  evils  they
must  discard,  the  prophet  (1.)  implies
that  justice  and  equity  were  violated,
that  cruelty  and  perfidiousness,  fraud
and  rapine,  prevailed  amongst  them;  and
(2.)  enjoins  upon  them  the  observance  of
the  moral  law  as  evidence  of  their
sincere  repentance  and  loyalty  to  God.
He  thus  demanded  "  fruits  meet  for
repentance,"  which  would  make  their
religion  a  practical  reality,  not  a  mere
lofty  sentiment.

"  Shedding  innocent  blood"  refers  (1.)
To  judicial  murders  (condemnation  of
innocent  [)ersons).  (2.)  To  violent
attacks  on  prophets  and  godly  men,  as
in  Manasseh's  case  (2  Kings  xxi.  16)." —
Keil.     (Comp.  chap.  xxvi.  15,  23.)

"  Innocent  blood  "  probably  points
with  indignant  emphasis  to  the  murder
and  sacrifice  of  infants  to  Molech
(ver.  31.)

Ver.  7.  Theme  :  The  everlasting
INHERITANCE.  "  I  gave  to  your  fathers
for  ever  and  ever."

I.  Its  duration  conditional.  God
covenants  with  men  for  an  inalienable
heritage ;  but  the  terms  require  that
they  do  not  themselves  alienate  it  by
unfaithfulness  and  apostasy.

IL  Its  forfeiture  possible.  Men's
sins  neutralise  sacred  covenants.  No
standing  in  grace  but  our  sin  may  over-
throw. We  may  lose  our  securest  and
most  boasted  possessions.

III.  Itscontinual  enjoyment  desired.
(1.)  By  God ;  for  He  gave  the  inheritance
to  them,  and  pleads  with  them  to  retain
it.  (2.)  By  man  ;  for  as  the  Jews  valued
and  hoped  to  keep  their  land,  so  we
desire  to  preserve  for  ourselves  a  place
in  grace,  and  obtain  an  eternal  home  in
the  promised  land.  But  desire  is  not
sufficient ;  obligations  must  be  fulfilled.
**  If  ye  amend,  &c.,  then  will  I  cause
you  to  dwell  in  this  land,"  <tc.  (Addenda
to  chap,  vii,,  "  Covenant,*^)

Note  the  terms  of  their  *'  everlasting
possession  "  of  Canaan,  in  the  original

153


OHAP.  vn


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.  JEREMIAH.


covenant  (Gen.  xvii  8)  :  "I  will  be  their
God/'  But  instead,  "  they  walk  after
other  gods "  (see  ver.  6) ;  hence  the
covenant  was  broken,  and  the  gift
reverted  to  its  Donor.

Ver.  8.     Theme:  Injubiousnebs   of

FALSE  THEORIES.

These  "lying  words"  were  either  teach-
ings of  delusive  prophets,  or  their  own
unwarantable  arguments.  (See  on  ver.
4,  above.)  They  "  cannot  profit,"  i.e.f
they  tend  to  mischief.

Calvin  remarks  that  their  words  of
falsehood  turned  to  a  contrary  end  what
God  had  instituted.  Services  performed
in  the  temple  were  designed  to  preserve
unity  of  faith  among  the  whole  people.
Sacrifices  were  intended  to  show  the
people  :  1.  They  deserved  the  death
which  victims  endured.  2.  Expiation
was  only  hy  bloody  typical  of  the  blood
of  Jesus  Christ.  But  there  was  no  re-
pentance for  sin,  no  true  appropriation
of  sacrificial  merit  —  for  they  were
not  led  to  holy  faith  ;  nay,  their  cere-
monies licensed  them  to  freer  sin.  Thus
they  were  "  lying  words,"  when  the
signs  were  separated  from  their  end.

Dealing  dishonestly  with  God  brings
delusions  upon  ourselves  ;  and  the
three  steps  are  :  1.  Wilful  dishonesty.
2.  ^QM-delusion.  3.  Inevitable  destruc-
tion.

Ver.    9,    10.      Theme:    Detestable

GUILT  UNDER  SANCTION  OF  RELIGION.

"  Will  ye  steal,  murder,  ^c,  and  come
and  stand  before  Me,  and  say,  We  are
delivered  to  do  all  these  abominations  f  "

An  outcry  of  Divine  revulsion  and
indignation.  In  the  presence  of  such
profanity  even  God  stands  appalled;
and  utters  Himself  in  exclamations  of
horror  :  "  What  1  to  steal  ?  to  murder  ?
dec.  And  yet  come  and  stand  before
Me  in  this  house  ! "

1.  What  appalling  criminality  is  here  !
Surely  such  sins  could  only  have  been
perpetrated  in  some  "  dark  place  of  the
earth,  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty."
But  lo  !  in  Jerusalem  I — in  the  very
centre  of  sacred  revelations  and  holy
privileges.

2.  What   treachery  against  Jehovah

154


is  here  !  Surely  the  result  of  ignorance ;
"  they  knew  not  what  they  did  ; "  for
had  they  known  the  right,  they  never
could  have  done  such  wrongs  (ver.  10),
insulted  God  and  polluted  His  house.
Alaa  !  they  knew  the  right ;  but  sinned
thus  foully  amid  fullest  light,  and  not-
withstanding the  persuasions  and  pro-
tests of  God's  prophet  Consider,  with
amaze :

I.  Into  what  revolting  iniquities
godly  men  may  relapse  (ver.  9).  Yes,
*'  godly  men  \ "  for  they  believed,  and
boasted  themselves  such  (ver.  10).

1.  The  glaring  enormity  of  their  fins.
Set  forth  in  two  trios:  (a.)  Violation  of
civil  laws  and  domestic  decencies  :
**  steal,  murder,  commit  adultery  ;  "
outraged  the  security  of  property,  sacred-
ness  of  life,  sanctity  of  homes.  (6.)
Violation  of  sacred  laws  and  Divine
obligations  :  "  swear  falsely,  incense  to
Baal,  walk  after  other  gods."  "  Swear
falsely "  may  mean  perjury,  or  be  an
allusion  to  former  charges  (comp.  iv.  2,
V.  2),  of  swearing  by  false  gods.  Then
this  second  trio  of  crimes  points  to  their
idolatrous  oaths,  idolatrous  homage,
idolatrous  service :  "  swear,  burn  in-
cense, walk  after."

2.  The  special  aggravation  of  their
guilt.  They  knew  better;  their  guilt  was
wilful,  habitual,  and  persistent ;  their
sins  were  manifold  ;  they  committed
themselves  to  evil  fearlessly,  without
restraint,  in  open  shamelessness ;  they
did  not  even  shun  the  worst  and  most
horrible  forms  of  sin — violence  to  pro-
perty, life,  and  virtue ;  they  wronged
each  other  and  then  insulted  God,  (a.)
Rejection  of  God's  laws.  (6.)  Outrage
of  social  rights  and  happiness.  (c.)
Adoration  presented  to  that  abominable
thing,  Baal,  {d.)  Substitution  of  un-
known deities  in  God's  stead  :  thus  they
deserted  Jehovah  notwithstanding  all
they  "  knew "  of  His  grace,  miraculous
favours,  and  resplendent  glories,  and
sought  out  idols  of  whom  they  knew
nothing.  Thereby  they  injured  their
own  selves,  their  happiness,  peace,  and
safety ;  "  to  your  own  hurt "  (ver.  6).
Wrong  always  avenges  itself  upon  wrong-
doers.    (Comp.  Heb.  x.  26,  sq.).

II.  Unto  what  audacious  effronteries


HOMILETIU  COMMENTARY :  JMEMIAB,


CHAP.  ttU


and  excuses    hypocrisy  may  attain.
(Ver.  10;  cf.  Ezek.  xxiii.  39.)

1.  Their  detestMe  attitude  of  piety.
There  was  no  piety  in  their  hearts,  yet
there  they  ''stand"  in  their  brazen
hypocrisy  "  before  Me/'  as  though  hav-
ing done  nothing  offensive,  and  having
no  cause  for  contusion  of  face.

2.  Their  insolent  pollution  of  holy
scenes.  "In  this  house,"  where  such  godly
kings  and  worshippers  have  done  true
homage  ;  where  your  pious  king  Josiah
so  recently  restored  religious  services.
**  Which  is  called  by  My  name," — which
bears  My  name  (Hitzig)  ;  on  which  my
glory  rests  (Keil).  In  the  holy  place
of  the  tabernacles  of  the  Most  High
these  polluted  hypocrites  dared  to
come  !

3.  Their  blasphemous  language  of  self-
extenuation,  *'  We  are  delivered,"  &c.  ;
i.e.f  by  our  temple  sacrifices  we  have
atoned  for  our  sins,  and  therefore  are
free  to  start  afresh  upon  new  courses  of
wickedness  {Speaker^ s  Com.)  We  are
discharged  from  our  guilt ;  now  it  shall
do  us  no  hurt  {llenry).  We  have
appeased  God's  wrath  by  our  offerings,
and  turned  aside  all  punishment  for  our
sins,  now  we  may  go  on  again  in  *'  doing
abominations."  Their  standing  before
God  and  service  in  the  temple,  were
fmt  in  substitution  for  the  holy  living
God  required,  and  used  as  an  excuse  for
continuance  in  sin,  and  as  a  guarantee
against  threatened  punishment.  (Addenda
to  chap,  vii.,  ''^  Insolent  profanity P^

["  They  thought  themselves  freed
from  guilt  when  they  had  offered  their
sacrifices,  and  at  liberty  again  to  be
immoral  and  idolatrous.  We  might
think  such  a  state  of  infatuation  im-
possible, but  it  has  existed  among
those  calling  themselves  Christians,  and
exists  now.  Gataker  mentions  a  com-
mon saying  among  ignorant  Papists,
*  We  must  sin  to  be  shriven,  and
shriven  to  sin.'  The  turning  of  the
grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness  is  the
same  thing." — Ed.  of  Calvin.']

Ver.  11.     Theme:  Robbery  in  the

SANCTUARY.

It  was  no  mere  conjecture,  an  ex-
aggerated supposition.     *'  Behold,  even  I


have  seen  it,   saith   the  Lord."      The
charge  points  to  :

I.  The  robbery  of  the  temple  ser-
vices of  their  cleansing  design.  By
such  miscreants  as  you  are  (ver.  9),  con-
sorting here  and  coming  here  with  the
design  to  secure  immunity  to  sin  and
impunity  from  punishment,  ye  rob  My
temple  of  its  true  end,  its  services  of
their  significance  and  intention,  and
make  this  house  an  asylum  for  malefac-
tors,— a  robbers'  retreat.  There  they
comforted  themselves  in  their  iniquities,
acquired  fresh  assurance  in  sinning,  and
used  the  place  designed  to  terminate
sin,  by  expiating  it  on  the  altar  and
extinguishing  it  in  the  heart,  as  a  shelter
for  encouraging,  licensing,  and  fortify-
ing themselves  in  iniquity.

II.  The  spoliation  of  its  services
of  their  acceptableness  to  God.  They
were  fragrant  and  well-pleasing  to  Him
as  expressions  of  penitence  for  sin  and
the  return  of  the  soul  in  humility  and
faith  to  Him  ;  but  abhorrent  when,  as
now,  they  were  used  superstitiously  as
convenient  external  methods  for  quieting
the  conscience  and  licensing  crime.
Better  that  there  be  no  temple  and  no
sacrifices,  than  that  men  should  use
them  so  perversely.  Thus  they  robbed
the  services  of  all  worth  to  God,  and
made  them  an  evil  savour  to  Him.

III.  The  discredit  cast  upon  Jeho-
vah's holiness  and  glory.  These  vile
worshippers,  encouraging  their  pro-
fanity in  God's  very  house,  virtually
made  God  the  patron  of  their  enormi-
ties. So  all  who  use  Christianity  as  a
cloak  for  their  sins,  or  as  a  convenient
expiation  of  daily  evils,  which  are
neither  repented  of  nor  abandoned,  make
Christ  a  minister  of  sin.  Religion  is
thereby  travestied,  and  the  holy  Lord
degraded,  —  His  character  is  contami-
nated. It  was  charged  upon  Christ,
**  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinnerSy^  as
implying  He  Himself  was  no  better
than  those  who  gathered  around  Him,
ignoring  the  fact  that  Christ  only  be-
friended sinners  in  order  to  save  them
from  further  sinning.

IV.  The  withholding  from  God  of
His  true  deserts.  *'  He  desired  not
sacrifice ;    the   sacrifices  of  God   are  a

155


(^AP.  ttL


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


broken  heart  and  contrite  spirit."  He
asked  not  ceremonial  homage,  but  the
adoration  of  the  reverent  soul ;  not
altar-services,  but  life  obedience.  *'  Will
a  man  rob  God  % "  Yes  :  see  Malachi
i.  7,  10,  13,  14,  iii.  8.  So  do  all  who
offer  Him  the  mere  "form  of  godliness  ;'*
hymns  sung  without  heart,  prayers  of-
fered with  spiritless  routine,  service
rendered  without  joyous  love,  gifts  be-
stown  without  grace  in  the  heart,  pro-
fession made  where  there  is  no  true
piety  behind;  the  flippant  cry,  Lord,
Lord  !  but  not  doing  the  things  that  He
commands ;  the  Olivet  '*  Hosannah  ! "
followed  by  the  Pretorium  "  Crucify
Him  ! "  the  impulsive  testimony,  "  I
will  go  with  Thee  to  prison  and  judg-
ment," ending  in,  "  I  know  not  the  man."
Heartless  piety  is  a  robbery  of  the  best
and  most  prized  offerings  which  the  holy
God  can  receive.

V.  The  grief  and  indignation  of
God  over  such  profanity.  "Behold,
even  I  have  seen  it."  His  eyes  behold,
and  His  eyelids  try  the  children  of  men.
The  fair  show  in  the  flesh  carries  well
with  men,  but  Jesus,  when  He  found  the
leafy  tree  fruitless,  cursed  it/  "I  hate
robbery  for  a  burnt- offering."  (Ad-
denda to  chap,  vii.,  " Sacrilege*^)

Note  :  The  limestone  ranges  of  Pales-
tine were  full  of  inaccessible  caves,
whither  robbers  sheltered  themselves
securely  from  the  penalties  of  their
violent  deeds.  In  like  manner,  these
"  robbers  "  sought  refuge  in  the  sanc-
tuary from  the  consequences  of  guilt,  but
were  in  no  disposition  to  abandon  their
evil  wayt  ;  for  they  "  loved  the  gains "
and  indulgences  "  of  unrighteousness,"
the  "  pleasures  of  sin."

"  Den  of  robbers  ;  "  words  adopted  by
Christ  in  upbraiding  the  defilers  of  the
temple  (Matt.  xxi.  13),  and  suggesting
the  parallel  in  the  spiritual  prostitution
and  moral  degradation  of  Jerusalem  in
Jeremiah's  days  and  our  Lord's  time.
The  like  evil  state  merited  like  condem-
nation, and  led  on  to  like  disasters  and
overthrow.

Ver.  12-14.  ^Aeme.*  Violated  sanc-
tuaries DOOMED.

No  place,  however  sacred,  Shiloh  or
156


Jerusalem,  will  be  spared  from  over-
throw, when  wickedness  has  desecrated
its  sanctity.  Jehovah  Himself  will
"  overturn  and  overturn "  where  His
reign  is  impeded  and  His  holiness  im-
pugned by  profanity.  Nothing  evil
shall  escape,  because,  forsooth,  it  once
bore  a  better  character.  Shiloh^  God's
first  resting-place,  falls  into  disrepute
because  of  iniquity.  Even  "  angels,  who
kept  not  their  first  estate,"  were  outcast
from  their  former  dignity  and  blessed-
ness. Israel,  though  once  "  holiness  to
the  Lord  "  (ii.  3),  was  banished  into  cap-
tivity. "  The  righteousness  of  the  righte-
ous man  shall  not  deliver  him  in  the  day
of  his  transgression"  (Ezek.  xxxiii  12).
Violated  sanctuaries  are  overthrown.

L  A  historic  fact  (ver.  12).  1.
Easily  verified :  "Go  to  Shiloh  and  see.**
2.  Fully  accounted  for  :  "  On  account  of
the  wickedness,"  <kc.  3.  God^s  own  work  :
"  See  what  /  did  to  it."  Where  "  I  set
My  name  at  the  first,"  there  see  My  work
of  desolation.  For  God  will  let  no  pro-
faned thing  stand.

IL  A  present  peril  (ver.  13,  14).

1.  ^0  exemption  because  of  special
favour.  Shiloh  was  God's  "first"
resting-place;  it  had,  therefore,  the
tender  charm  of  being  His  earliest  abode,
and  the  Jwnour  of  antiquity.

2.  Like  provocations  evoke  like  conse-
quences (ver.  13).  The  evils  which  came
upon  "my  people  Israel"  will  not  be
evaded  by  Judah  if  Jerusalem  is  dese-
crated by  "  abominations  "  as  Shiloh
was  by  "  wickedness."

3.  No  self-assurance  of  immunity  will
avert  the  result,  "This  house  wherein  ye
trust "  (ver.  14),  and  of  whose  security
ye  boast  (ver.  4),  will  perish  notwith-
standing. Our  confidence  will  be  of  no
avail.

III.  A  symbolic  truth.  Pass  from
material  fabrics  to  the  larger  application,
and — 1.  There  are  temples  still  which
bear  God*8  holy  name, — not  only  sanc-
tuaries, but  ecclesiastical  systems  and
sectSy  on  which  Christians  pride  them-
selves, and  of  which  they  boast  (ver.  4).
And  there  are  personal  shrines,  believing
hearts,  where  Christ  has  rested  ;  and
many,  many  are  the  Christian  hearts
wherein  His  Spirit  still  dwells,  as  truly


BOM  I  LET W  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  Ml AB,


OfiAJ^.  VtL


as  in  the  "  house  at  Sbiloh  "  and  "  temple
at  Jerusalem"  (2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Eph.  ii.
21,  22).  2.  GoiTs  indwelling  presence
may  he  alienated  and  lost.  Not  a  safe
theory  that  "  once  a  Christian  always  a
Christian."  3.  To  retain  the  Divine
presence  we  must  maintain  the  '■^holiness
which  hecometh  His  house."  4.  There
are  souls  which  have  known  the  light  and
love  of  God  now  desolated.  Like  ancient
Sbiloh  and  beautiful  Jerusalem,  and  the
graceful  churches  of  Asia — forsaken  :  so
Judas  and  DemaSy  and  those  who  have
"made  shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good
conscience."  (See  Heb.  x.  38.)  And
"  if  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,
him  shall  God  destroy ;  for  the  temple  of
God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are"  (1
Cor.  iii.  16,  17).

Ver.  13.  Theme:  God's  earnestness

IN  DEALING  WITH  SINNERS.

The  earnestness  and  activity  which
prophets  exhibited  in  seeking  to  rouse
the  nation  to  realise  and  avert  the  near-
ing  destruction,  God  appropriates  to
Himself  :  it  was  Jehovah  Himself  earnest
and  active.  His  prophets  were  but
channels  along  which  the  Divine  fervour
flowed.  It  was  God  who  "rose  early
and  spake."     Shows

I.  Deep  solicitude.  "Rising  up
early,  I  spake,  I  called."  1.  Appre-
hensive of  Judah's  danger.  2.  Anxious
for  Judah's  salvation.  3.  Awake  to
Judah's  help.  God  did  not,  does  not,
wait  till  entreated  to  act  for  imperilled
sinners'  good  :  He  **  rises  early,"  ere
men  realise  peril,  and  *'  seeks  to  save."

II.  Zealous  effort.  Solicitude  does
not  remain  passive:  rises  2a\^  calls.  1.
God  is  astir  when  efforts  are  made  for
human,  weal:  "Rising  up."  2.  God  works
at  most  auspicious  hours:  "Early;"
while  opportunity  is  yet  before  the
sinner,  and  when  his  heart  is  most  open
to  sacred  influences.  3.  God  Himself
speaks  to  man  by  those  He  sends :  "I
spake."  He  is  too  concerned  individu-
ally in  man's  welfare  to  stand  apart  from
endeavouring  to  rescue  and  help.

III.  Incessant  ministries.  "  Rising
up  early  and  speaking,"  a  metaphor
for  ceaseless  vigilance  and  endeavour.
(Comp.    XXV.   4,   xxvL   6,     xxix.    19.)


1.  Abundantly.   2.  Assiduously.    3.  Con-
tinuously,

IV.  Pleading  appeals.  God's  m^-
sages  were  characterised  by  the  same
qualities  as  His  efforts;  they  were
earnest  and  fervent  also.  1.  Direct  in
their  aim  :  "  Spake  to  you."  2.  Diverse
in  their  tone  :  "  I  spake^^  with  quiet
solemnity ;  "  I  called,  with  urgent  im-
portunity.

V.  Barren  results.  "  Ye  heard  not,
ye  answered  not."  1.  Heedlessness  of
the  heavenly  word,  2.  Resistance  of
Divine  importunity.  3.  Abuse  of '^  the
abundant  grace."  4.  Provocative  of
merited  wrath  (ver.  14).  When  speak-
ing is  fruitless,  God  acts  :  "  Therefore
will  I  do;'  &c.

**  God  is  earnest,  do  not  stay  :
Thou  may'st  perish  e'en  to-day."

Ver.  15.  Theme :  Ruined  nation-
alities.

How  do  Jehovah's  majesty  and  might
stand  out  upon  our  thought  when
we  see  Him  dealing  thus  with  whole
nations  !  Wliat  magnitude  !  To  Him
the  "  nations  are  but  as  a  drop  in  the
bucket  : "  it  awes  and  solemnises  us  to
see  God  lifting  up  an  entire  kingdom,
"  Ephraim,"  and  "  casting  it  out  of
sight,"  from  their  land  and  their  God;  and
now  declaring  He  will  do  similarly  with
Judah.     Who  will  not  fear  before  Him  ?

"  All  your  brethren:"  whose  were  the
covenants,  and  promises,  and  fathers,  as
much  as  they  are  yours  ;  yet  their  sacred
ancestry  and  privileges  afforded  them  no
protection.

"TAe  whole  seed  of  Ephraim:"  i.e.,  the
ten  tribes ;  superior,  therefore,  in  num-
bers, resources  for  defence,  and  power  of
resistance.  Yet  all  proved  worthless
when  God's  disfavour  was  incurred.
Profaned  places  and  profane  people  God
abhors  and  will  reject.

L  There  is  comprehensive  breadth
in  God's  proceedings.  Moves  with
majestic  tread,  controls  great  nations
with  His  will,  determines  the  fate  of
empires  with  a  word.  Greater  still  :
He  "loved  the  world"  mid  will  judge
**  all  peoples  and  nations."

II.  There  is  appalling  magnitude  in
God's  overthrows.    The  whole  ten  tribep

157


<nur.  m.


BOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY:  JEUEMJAB,


outcast  from  Him  :  now  Judah  to  be
swept  away  in  contempt !  For  "  casting
out''  is  an  act  of  contempt  as  well  as
violence.  What  mighty  empires  are
wrecks  !  Great  Babylon,  Nineveh,
Rome,  God  stamped  them  into  dust.

III.  There  is  solemn  forewarning  in
God's  judgments.  God  proceeds  uni-
formly in  the  administrations  of  His
justice.  What  He  did  to  Israel  for  her
"  wickedness,"  He  will  do  also  for  Judah
if  her  cause  of  condemnation  be  equal
(ver.  14).  The  experiences  of  others
stand  as  an  admonition  and  a  warning.
Like  sins  incur  like  sentences  (Luke  xiii
2-5).

Ver.    16.      Theme:     Intercessory

PRAYER  FORBIDDEN.

Jeremiah  did  sometimes  check  himself
in  uttering  direful  prophecies,  and  be-
take himself  to  passionate  and  mournful
prayer  ;  stopped  short,  as  it  were,  God's
word  of  doom  to  man,  and  interposed
man's  word  of  pleading  to  God.  (Gomp.
xiv.  7-9,  19-22,  xviii.  20.)  What
preacher  has  not  likewise  interrupted
proclamation  with  invocation  %  Who,
that  carries  dark  tidings,  has  not  paused
first  near  God  in  the  anguish  of  prayer?
Pity,  patriotism,  piety ,  all  conspire  often
to  drive  the  prophet  from  his  feet  to  his
knees  (comp.  1  Sam.  xii.  23.)  (Addenda
to  chap,  vii.,  ^^  Inteixessory  prayer")

I.  A  specification  of  the  varied  as-
pects of  prayer.

General  petitions:  "Pray."  Suppli-
catory entreaty  (with  loud  voice  and
pathos)  :  '*  Lift  up  cry."  Importunate
pleading  :  "  Make  intercession."

[There  are  three  things  forbidden.  Be
not  an  intercessor  (i.g.,  undertake  not
their  cause  as  one  who  mediates  between
a  judge  and  a  criminal);  nor  a  depreca-
tor  of  evils  {i.e.,  lamenting  their  woes,
and  crying  suppliantly  for  mercy)  ;  nor
a  solicitor  of  favours  (i.e.,  entreating  Me
to  deal  graciously  with  them).  Inter-
ceding mercy,  lamenting  evils,  entreat-
ing favours. — Ed,  of  Calvin.^

II.  The  power  of  earnest  prayer
Divinely  acknowledged.  He  bids
Jeremiah  restrain  it,  refrain  from  it.  It
would  stand  in  God's  way  as  a  barrier,  a
hindrance.       Thus   with   Moses  (Exod.

158


xxxii.  10).  "Let  Me  alone!"  pleads
God.  The  Almighty  is  both  restrained
and  constrained  by  "  the  effectual  fer-
vent prayer  of  a  righteous  man  "  (Num.
xi.  2,  xiv.  13-20,  xvi.  22).

ni.  Prevailing  intercessory  prayer
is  dependent  on  conditions.

1.  The  slate  of  the  people  must  he  re-
mediable, 2.  The  hour  of  hope  must  not
have  been  lost.  Wijen  Moses  prevailed
the  people  were  but  stepping  into  the
Theocracy;  they  sinned,  but  it  was
through  lack  of  training  and  knowledge.
Now  they  had  known  all  inducements
to  godliness,  nothing  more  could  be
done  to  keep  them  right ;  God  had  ex-
hausted His  resources  of  persuasion  upon
them.  In  this  condition  neither  the  in-
tercession of  Moses,  Samuel,  or  Jere-
miah could  avail  for  them  (see  chap.  xv.
1).  Their  day  of  grace  was  gone.  (See
also  John  v.  16.)

IV.  No  prayerful  outcry  may  inter-
pose to  stay  God's  imperative  justice.
And  now  their  case  demanded  retribu-
tion, for  every  persuasive  had  been
abused.  The  Intercessor  could  plead,
"  Let  be  this  year  also  I  "  and  was  heard,
because  there  were  yet  other  remediable
processes  availing  ;  *'  Till  I  dig  about  it,"
<fec.  But  if  after  that  it  continued  fruit-
less, **  Cut  it  down  1 "  This  was  Judah's
case.

"  God  here  forbids  prayer  for  them,
for  they  have  sinned  unto  death,  there-
fore, pray  not  for  their  life,  the  life  of
their  souls  (1   John  v.  16).     See  here:

1.  That  God^ 8  prophets  are  praying  men,

2.  That  God's  praying  prophets  have  a
great  interest  in  heaven,  how  little  soever
they  have  on  earth.  3.  It  is  an  ill  omen
to  a  people  when  God  restrains  the
spirits  of  His  ministers  and  people  from
praying  for  those  condemned,  i.  Those
that  will  not  regard  good  ministers*
preaching  cannot  expect  any  benefit  by
their  praying.  If  you  will  not  hear  us
when  we  speak  from  God  to  you,  God  will
not  hear  us  when  we  speak  to  Him  for
you.*' — Henry,

Ver.  17,  18.     Theme:    Unabashed

APOSTASY.

Not  hidden  from  gaze,  but  in  open
streets,  shameless  !     Though  Jehovah's


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  vn.


temple  rose  in  dignity  before  their  eyes,
and  even  threw  its  colossal  shadow
across  the  streets  where  they  practised
their  idolatries,  they  were  not  restrained,
"  neither  could  they  blush."

I.  Religious  devotion  the  secret  of
general  and  tireless  activities.  Though
erroneous,  nevertheless  it  impels  to  ser-
vice and  sacrifice  as  nothing  else  can  do.
Much  more  should  it  inspire  diligence
when  true.  All  hands  to  the  work.
And  "  both  hands  earnestly,"  for  much
to  be  done.

I.  Enlists  all  ages  and  sexes.  2.
Incites  each  to  appropriate  effort.  3.
Combination  in  service  effects  speedy  re-
sults and  sure  success.

II.  Noble  energies  lavished  upon
ignoble  superstitions.

For  what  end  was  all  this  ?  Alas !
look  out  upon  heathen  scenes,  where  de-
votees squander  years,  treasures,  life;
and  for  what  %  Look  also  on  votaries
of  pleasure,  pursuers  of  wealthy  <&c.  ;
the  eager  lives  with  which  modern
civilised  society  is  full ;  for  what  end  do
men  live  and  labour  ?

III.  Prostituted  homage  awakens
the  indignation  of  God.  For  here  it
w  as  not  done  in  ignorance,  but  wantonly
and  wilfully.

1.  Perversion  of  the  true  aim  and  de-
sign of  manHs  being.  God  made  man  for
Himself — a  jealous  God.  2.  Ignores
God's  claim  on  human  service,  loyalty,
and  love.  He  merited  their  trust  and
devotion.  3.  Enslaves  men's  soul  in
ruinous  vices.  *'  O  Israel !  destroyed
thyself.*'  4.  Provoking  Heaven's  wrath
by  despising  His  love.  Deliberate  design,
"that  they  may  provoke,"  <fec.  What
a  reversion  of  our  true  relation  to  God,
and  our  experience  at  His  hand ;  for
"  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,
but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ ! "

Ver.  19.  Theme:  Reflex  conse-
quences OF  SIN.

They  harmed  themselves  more  than
God  {cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  16,  21  ;  Job
XXXV.  6,  8 ;  Prov.  viii.  23)  :  for

i.  They  forfeited  present  consolation
and  assurance.  "  There  is  no  place  to
the  wicked.*'


ii.  They  entailed  future  confusion  and
calamity.  Shame  would  come,  and  with
it  ruin.

Ver.  21.  Theme:  Sacrifices  con-
temned AND  COUNTERMANDED.

"  Put  your  burnt-offerings"  &c.  /
will  not  accept  them.  Take  away  your
burnt-offerings  which  ye  are  about  to
lay  upon  Mine  altar  as  a  whole  burnt-
sacrifice  to  Me.  I  will  have  none  of
them  (comp.  vi.  20) ;  put  them  on  your
own  tables,  and  eat  them  yourselves.
They  are  not  burnt-offerings,  holy  to
God,  but  are  mere  flesh,  to  be  eaten  by
men.  So  our  Lord  said  to  the  Jews
concerning  the  temple,  "Towr  house"  (it
is  no  longer  God's,  for  ye  have  profaned
it  by  your  sins,  and  therefore  He  has
forsaken  it)  "  is  left  unto  you  desolate."
—  Wordsworth,

Ver.  22.  "I  SPAKE  NOT  CONCERNING
SACRIFICES."

The  apparent  contradiction  between
this  statement  and  the  fact  that  the
Mosaic  institutes  abound  in  sacrificial
enactments  may  be  removed  in  two
ways :

i.  That  moral  obligation  was  incul-
cated upon  the  Hebrews  before  the  sacri-
ficial code  (cf  Exod.  xv.  26,  xix.  5).
Then  follows  the  proclamation  of  the
moral  code,  amidst  all  the  solemnities  of
Sinai.  Not  till  afterwards  were  regula-
tions given  respecting  sacrifices,  which
properly  belonged  to  the  Levitical  law.
Hence  God  reminds  them  here,  *'  I  spake
not  in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  out
of  Egypt."

ii.  It  is  not  unusual  for  the  Hebrews
to  express  in  absolute  terms  what  is  to  be
understood  relatively  and  comparatively.
Thus  "  to  hate,"  =  to  love  less  (Gen.  xxix.
30,  31  ;  Mai.  i.  2,  3).  According  to
this  idiom  the  meaning  will  be  :  That
ritual  observances  were  regarded  by  God
as  matters  of  secondary  importance
(see  Luke  xiv.  26  ;  Matt.  x.  37  ;  Hos.
vi.  6 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  22) ;  and  that  when
these  are  substituted  for  moral  duties
and  supreme  love  to  Himself,  God  re-
torts with  merited  reprobation  (comp.
Hend.).  Similarly  our  Lord  states
negatively   what  was  of  inferior  import-


CfHAP.  Til*


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


ance  :  "  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which
perisheth  ;  but  for  that  which  endur-
eth^'(John  vi.  27).

Calvin  thinks  "Jeremiah  seems  to
speak  too  contemptibly  of  sacrifices ;
for  they  were  seals  of  God's  grace,  and
had  been  instituted  to  lead  men  to  re-
pentance of  sin,  and  to  realise  they
merited  the  death  which  the  victim  en-
dured. But  it  is  true  that' God  com-
manded nothing  respecting  mere  sacri-
fices for  their  own  sake ;  it  was  never
His  will  to  be  served  with  mere  external
rites;  His  design  in  instituting  them
was  to  remind  the  Jews  of  their  sin,  and
also  to  show  to  them  the  way  of  recon-
ciliation."

Ventma  suggests  that  there  is  a  re-
pudiation of  sacrifices  as  the  hasis  of
God's  covenant  tuith  His  people.  Obedi-
ence and  not  sacrifice  was  the  condition
of  this  sacred  relationship.  God  did  not
say,  "  If  you  sacrifice  to  Me,  I  will  be
your  God  ; "  but,  "  If  you  obey  My
voice,  I  will  be  your  God  and  you  shall
be  My  people."

Evidently  the  antithesis,  *'  Not  con-
cerning sacrifice.  .  .  .  But  this  thing,
Obey  I " — points  to  the  basis  and  terms
of  the  Sinaitic  covenant;  and  what  is
here  affirmed  is,  that  when  that  covenant
was  made  and  entered  into,  obedience
was  the  supreme  and  essential  factor  in
that  covenant.  To  withhold  obedience,
therefore,  and  to  substitute  mere  sacrifice,
was  to  withhold  that  on  which  the  con-
tinuance of  God's  covenant  relationship
absolutely  depended.  In  Amos  v.  25,
God  reminds  them  that  for  forty  years
He  dispensed  altogether  with  sacrifices,
ergOf  they  could  not  be  of  primary
importance.

Note  :  Hitzig,  Graf  and  others  find
in  this  passage  proof  that  Jeremiah  was
ignorant  of  that  part  of  the  Pentateuch
which  contains  sacrifx^ial  enactments;
"  that  at  his  time  nothing  was  known  of
the  legislation  on  sacrifice  given  by  God
on  Sinai."  This  gives  them  an  argu-
ment for  denying  that  Moses  was  the
author  of  the  middle  books  of  the  Pen-
tateuch, and  for  ascribing  their  author-
ship to  Ezra.  But  this  is  manifestly  a
"  wresting  the  Scriptures."  No  canon
of  criticism  can  sustain  such  an  inter-
160


pretation  of  these  words.  They  do  not
deny  the  Divine  authority  of  sacrifices,
but  assign  to  them  a  subservient  place.
(Addenda  to  chap,  vii.,  **  Sacrifices^*)

Ver.    22,    23.     Theme :     Saorifioes

SUBSTITUTED  FOR  OBEDIENCE.

An  external  piety  offered  to  God,
while  righteousness  and  true  holiness
are  withheld.

I.  Men  are  constantly  adopting
expedients  by  which  to  evade  obedi-
ence. Obedience  entails  self -con  quest,
and  daily  service,  and  a  surrendered  life ;
sacrifice,  on  the  contrary,  is  soon  offered,
and  costs  less.  1.  An  easier  offering,
2.  A  shorter  process.  3.  A  smaller  sur-
render.

II.  God  prefers  an  obedient  life  to
any  sacrificial  oblation.

Obedience  is  preferable  to  sacrifice  :
1.  As  denoting  a  better  spirit.  2.
As  involving  a  fuller  compliance.  3.
As  containing  a  gentler  law — not  suffer-
ing, but  service.  "  For  I  desired  mercy,
not  sacrifice,  and  the  knowledge  of
God  more  than  burnt-offerings."  "  And
to  love  Him  with  all  the  understanding,
<fec.,  is  more  than  all  whole  burnt-offer-
ing and  saci'ifice.  Jesus  saw  that  he
answered  discreetly y  and  said,  Thou  art
not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  I "

Ver.  24.  God  had  commanded  them
(ver.  23),  "  Walk  ye  in  all  the  way,"
&c.  ;  but  instead,  they  "  walked  in  the
counsels  and  in  the  imaginations  (pro-
perly, stubbornness)  of  their  evil  heart."
(See  on  chap.  iii.  17.)  The  result  was  :
they  moved  in  a  totally  opposite  direction
from  that  in  which  God  designed.  Note  :
God's  way  ioT  us  is  not  merely  desertedf
but  positively  reversed,  when  we  follow
our  own  way.  (Comp.  Isa.  liii.  6  ;  Heb.
iii.  12.)  To  pursue  our  "counsels"  we
have  to  turn  our  back  upon  both  God
and  His  commands.

Theme:  Backward.

On  going  backward  in  regard  to  the
great  matter  of  practical  religion.

I.  Illustrations  of  going  backward
in  regard  to  religion.

An  advanced  state  of  religious  know-
ledge, of  moral  purity,  of  spiritual  power
may  be  attained,  from  which  men  may  go
backward.    Illustrationt;


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  TIL


1.  From  the  history  of  the  Jewish
nation.  Compare  best  days  of  Solomon,
when  temple  was  dedicated,  with  these
when  Jeremiah  preached  at  gate.  Na-
tional mind  darkened,  conscience  en-
feehledf  heart  hardened.  People  gone
backward  in  Divine  knowledge,  moral
rectitude,  devout  feeling  (Isa.  i.  3,  4,
21-23).

2.  Churches  may  go  backward — e»g.,
Galatia  (Gal.  iii.  1-3,  v.  7,  8),  Ephesus
(Rev.  ii.  4),  Sardis  (Rev.  iii.  1).

3.  Individual  life  furnishes  saddest
illustrations,  (a.)  Brought  up  in  Chris-
tian home;  go  back  into  thoughtless-
ness, dissipation,  and  infidelity.  (5.)
Awakened  by  the  power  of  truth,  and
gained  a  place  in  the  household  of  faith ;
go  backward  and  "  make  shipwreck  of
faith  and  good  conscience.  (c.)  Trod
noblest  heights  of  Christian  service ;  go
backward  to  stagnation  and  ease.  "  Demas
hath  forsaken,"  <kc,  (2.  Tim.  iv.  10).

II.  Consider,  for  conviction  and  warn-
ing, some  of  the  causes  of  this  going
backward.  Negatively  :  (1.)  God  never
causes  a  human  being  to  go  backward
from  what  is  pure  and  good  and  true.
(2.)  Nor  must  the  charge  be  laid  at  the
door  of  men  or  of  Satan,  1.  The  pri-
mary cause  of  retrogression  must  be
sought  in  man  himself,  in  his  inclina-
tion to  the  things  which  are  behind ;  in
spiritual  feebleness.  2.  The  secondary
causes  are  temptations ;  the  lusts,  plea-
sures, and  gains  he  desires  to  enjoy.  3.
His  weakness  in  yielding  results  from
neglect  of  the  means  of  strength,  the
Word  of  God,  prayer,  means  of  instruc-
tion and  grace.

III.  Contemplate  some  consequences
of  going  backward  in  regard  to  religion.
Jewish  history  full  of  records  of  misery,
affliction,  desolation,  conquest,  captivity,
which  resulted  from  apostasy.  But  what
are  the  consequences  of  apostasy  from
Christian  profession  and  life?  I.  7%e
displeasure  of  the  great  God(H.eh.  x.  38).
2.  Such  as  turn  back  are  liable  to  sink
into  the  very  lowest  depths  of  irreligion
(2  Pet.  ii.  20-22).  3.  Experience  of
deepest  remorse  and  reproach  of  conscience,

(1.)  Stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  (2.)
Despair  not,  but  return. — ICev.  R,  Ann,
"  Christian  World  Pulpit."


Ver.  24-29.  Theme:  Disobedienob
TO  God's  Word.

I.  Its  cause.  1.  Not  neglect  on  God*s
part  to  make  known  His  Word  to  men
(ver.  25).  2.  '^ott\iQ  imperfect  perform-
ance by  the  preacher  of  his  duties  (ver.
27) ;  but,  3.  The  hardness  of  merCs
hearts;  who  (a.)  walk  after  their  evil
imaginations  and  counsels  (ver.  24) ;
(6.)  do  not  hear  or  believe  (ver.  28),
and  do  not  wish  to  improve  (ver.  26).

II.  Its  consequences.  1.  Increasing
moral  corruption  (ver.  24,  26).  2.
Rejection  on  the  part  of  God  (ver.  29).
— Naeg.

Ver.  25-28.  Theme;  Sad  cha&acteb-

ISTICS  OP  AN  UNBELIEVING  EPOCH.

i.  Contempt  of  the  preaching  of  the
Divine  Word.

ii.  Slif-neckedness  in  respect  to  the
visitations  of  Divine  chastisements.

iii.  Increase  of  wickedness  in  spite  of
all  the  warnings  of  the  past. — From
Lange,

Theme :  A  people  ripe  for  destruc-
tion.    When?

i.  When  it  despises  the  visitations  of
Divine  grace  (ver.  25).

ii.  When  it  hardens  itself  in  unbelief
against  God's  Word  and  voice  (ver.  26,
27).

iii.  When  in  spite  of  Divine  judg-
ments it  departs  the  more  into  sin  (ver.
26,  2S),— Idem.

Theme :  Israel  a  warning  example

OF  PREVAILING  UNBELIEF.

Their  example  is  admonitory  to  us  in
our  own  times.

i.  With  respect  to  their  ingratitude
for  God*s  gracious  visitations.

ii.  With  respect  to  their  opposition  to
the  true  friends  of  the  nation.

iii.  With  respect  to  their  frivolity  in
view  of  inevitable  destruction. — Idem.

Ver.  27.  Theme  :  GoD*8  foreknow-
ledge OF  THE  sinner's  REFUSAL  OF  HiS

Word.

The  infinitely  perfect  God  knows  all
things.  Ignorance  incompatible  with
His  originating  and  governing  power.
This  true  not  only  of  material  things,
but  of  mind,  thoughts,  and  actions  of
all  His  intelligent  and  moral  creatures.

161


CHAP.   VII.


H0M1LET1C  COMMEXTART:  JEREMIAH.


So  that  all  we  freely  do  is  known  to
Him.  juid  His  government  is  adapted  to
all  such  creatures.  Jeremiah  is  to  tell
Judah  God's  will,  make  known  His
Word ;  yet  it  is  added,  **  They  will  not
hearken."  We  understand  their  condi-
tion as  described  ver.  23,  24 ;  Ezek.
ii.  7.  But  there  is  a  peculiarity  in
telling  them,  and  yet  knowing  they  will
not  regard.

I.  Seek  for  instances  illustrative  of
text,  where  God  knew  His  Word  would
not  be  regarded,  nor  His  messages
answered.

1.  TJie  original  transgression  of  onr
first  parents.  God's  Word  clear,  easy,
distinct  ]  yet  He  knew  how  they  would
act ;  saw  hearts.

2.  The  old  world.  He  saw  rise  of
evil  and  progress ;  yet  Noah  preached
120  years,  built  ark  ]  Spirit  strove.

3.  Pharaoh.  Moses  and  Aaron  are
sent,  miracles  wrought,  God's  messages
proclaimed,  demands  enforced;  yet  He
knew  Pharaoh  would  harden  his  heart
and  sin  to  his  destruction.

4.  Jews  as  a  nation.  How  prophets
and  holy  men  went  to  them.  John
also  and  Christ  Yet  God  knew  their
unbelief  and  cruelty.  Christ  referred  to
this  in  His  own  ministry ;  He  declared
their  obstinacy  and  ruin.  So  that  text  is
but  one  of  many  cases  in  Word  of  God.

II.  How  can  this  be  explained  and
defended?  Unless  God  did  know  re-
sults such  as  described :

1.  He  would  he  imperfect;  not  the
all-wise,  infallible  God,  and  He  could
not  govern  His  world.  But  His  perfect
knowledge  of  the  future

2.  Does  not  make  Him  the  cause  of
the  rebellion  He  foretells.  He  does  not
predestinate  it,  but  foreknows  it.  Just
as  He  foreknew  Noah's  sin,  yet  did  not
make  him  drunk ;  murder  of  Abel,  yet
did  not  impel  Cain  to  the  deed,  &c.
The  astronomer  by  calculation  foreknows
every  visible  and  invisible  eclipse  of  the
year,  but  does  not  produce  them.

3  IJe  never  influences  men  to  do  wrong
because  He  foresees  it  (Acts  ii.  23).
Though  God  designed  His  Son  to  be
a  Saviour,  and  hence  a  sacrifice,  and
foresaw  the  conduct  of  the  Jews,  they
freely  and  wickedly  crucified  Uim.
103


4.  There  are  many  ends  to  he  attained
by  God.  By  His  speaking,  though  He
knows  men  will  not  hearken  ;

(a.)  God  exhibits  His  true  desire  for
their  salvation.  He  truly,  earnestly
calls.  (6.)  He  thereby  treats  men  as
reasonable  and  responsible  beings,  (c)
He  thus  leaves  them  without  excuse.
"  I  called,  but  ye  refused,"  <fec.

Conclusion :  (1.)  Man's  free  agency  is
his  glory.  (2.)  God's  infinite  goodness
is  undoubted.  (3.)  Our  duty  is  most
manifest ;  to  hear,  obey,  believe.  (4.)
Thus  men  will  be  finally  inexcusable,
having  had  means  employed  for  their
restoration  to  holiness  and  God. — J,
BurneSy  D.D.

Comments.

"  But  they  will  not  hearken  unto  thee.**
Howbeit,  speak — "  whether  they  will
hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear" —
for  a  testimony  against  them. — Trapp.

"  It  was  a  most  grievous  trial  to  the
prophet  to  know  that  his  words  would
pass  away  with  the  air  and  produce  no
good.  His  mind  must  have  been  greatly
depressed ;  for  he  doubtless  laboured  for
the  good  of  his  own  nation.  Yet  his
sympathy  and  sorrow  (for  he  loved  his
nation  and  felt  great  grief  in  declaring
God's  coming  judgments)  did  not  pre-
vent him  from  executing  in  a  bold  man-
ner and  with  unshaken  zeal  what  God
had  committed  to  him.  .  .  .  God  then
declares  to  his  servant  what  would  be
the  issue,  in  order  that  he  might  not
cease  to  execute  his  office  with  in-
vincible courage,  even  if  no  fruit  ap-
peared."— Calvin,

Ver.  28.  "  This  is  a  nation  that  oheyeth
not,'*  (fee.  Rather,  This  is  the  nation.
*'  Israel  occupies  so  unique  a  position
among  all  nations  that  for  it  to  disobey
God  is  marvellous.  (See  Isa,  i.  3 ;  Jer.
ii.  11.)" — Speaker^s  Com,

The  prophet  is  not  here  bidden  to
address  the  Jews,  but  to  pronounce  on
them  a  sentence,  that  the  whole  world
might  know  how  base  and  detestable
had  been  their  contumacy,  and  how
abominable  their  impiety. — Calvin.

"  Truth  is  perished."  The  ancient
versions  and  the  Targum  render  njIDJ^

T  V»

(truth)  by  ^r/Vr/f,  fides,  faith  or  fidelity.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  vn.


(See  on  chap.  v.  3.)     Their  conduct  was  2.   The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  ao-

utterly  perfidious  toward  man  as  well  as  pears  here  veri/  terrible.     General  misery

God.  (ver.  29).     Sin  makes  those  the  "  gene-

**Is  cut  oS  from  their  motUh" — 1.«.,  ration  of  God's  wrath  "  who  had  been

their  language  has  become  wholly  in-  the  generation  of  His  love.     He  disowns

sincere,  mere  mockery,  profession  with-  them.     And  He  will  give  them  up  to

out  intention ;  their  lips  flippantly  used  the   terrors   of  their   own   guilt.      (a.)

Jehovah's  name,  and  could  *'  swear  by  Death  shall  triumph  over  them  (ver.  32,

Him "    (chap.    v.    2) ;     but   duplicity,  33).     So  great  shall   be  the  slaughter

falsity,  was  their  settled  habit  in  speech  that  even  the  spacious  valley  of  Tophet

as  in  practice.     No  "  truth "  remained  shall  not  be  able  to  contain   the  slain.

in  either  their  word  or  deed.  (b.)  Joy  shall  depart  from  them  (ver.  34).

Ver.  29.     Comments,  God   can   soon    mar    the   mirth  of  the

"  Cut  of  thine  hair."     The  word  ren-  most  jovial,  and  make  it  to  cease  ;  which

dered   "  hair "  is  nizery  and  signifies  a  is   a   reason    why   we   should    "  rejoice

crown.     From  it  the  Nazarites  obtained  with     trembling "    (with    reverence).  —

their  name,  for  their  hair  was  the  badge  Henry.

of  their  consecration  to  God,  their  crown  Ver.  30.  **  They  have  set  their  abomi-

(Num.  vi.  5.  7).     Cutting  off  this  hair  nations  in  the  house."     So  do  those  now

was  equivalent  to  abandonment  of  the  that  broach  heresies  in  the  Church. —

consecrated  character.     Her  profanation  Trapp.
entailed  the  loss  of  her  crown  (comp.

Lam.  V.   16);   her  dignity,  as  well  as         Ver.    31.     Theme:     Sinfulness  of

her  adornment  and  beauty  ( 1   Cor.  xi.  will- worship.     **  Which  I  commanded

15)  were  forfeit.  them  not!^

Neumann  would  retain  the  literal  in-  Hence   it   is  justly    concluded   that

terpretation  of  the  word,  and  regard  the  i.  To  add  anything  to  God's  Word  (as

command  as  implying  the  abandonment  of  necessity  to  salvation),  and  to  enforce

by  Judah  of  national  dignity,  the  total  it  as   an  article  of  saving  faith;   and

forfeiture  of  the  crovm;  for  her  royalty,  ii.  To  propose  anything  as  an  object  of

the  kingly  oflfice,  was  lost  entirely  to  the  worship  which  God  has  not  authorised,

nation  in  the  Babylonish  captivity,  never  is  hateful  in  His  sight.     Here,  therefore,

again  restored.  is  a  solemn   protest  against  the  worship

Ver.  29-34.     Here  is  of  the   Virgin  Mary,  the  invocation  of

L  A    loud    call   to    weeping    and  saints  and  angelsy  and  other  like  acts  of

mourning   (ver.    29).      Jerusalem    had  "  will- worship  "  (Col.  ii.  23),  as  prayers

been — 1.  A  joyous  dty ;  now  she  must  for    the    dead.      What    is   not    *' com-

**take   up  lamentation."      2.  A   conse-  manded  "    in    Scripture    is,  therefore,

crated  city ;  now  she  must  "  cut  off  her  forbidden   as   an  object  of   worship. —

hair,"  in    token    both    of   sorrow   and  Wordsworth.

slavery  ;  she  must  be  degraded,  separa-  "  The  purpose  of  God  was  to  teach

ted  from  God,  as  she  had  been  separated  His  people  both  unto  whom  they  should

to  Him.     It  is  time  for  those  who  have  offer  sacrifice,  and  what  sacrifice  was  to

lost  their  holiness  to  lay  aside  their  joy.  be  offered.     To  burn  their  sons  in  fire

II.  Just  cause  given  for  this  great  unto  Baal  He  did  not  command  them ;

lamentation.  He  spake  no  such  thing,  neither  came  ii

1.   The  sin  of  Jerusalem  appears  here  into    His   mind;    therefore    this    they

very  heinous    (ver.    30).       Two    things  ought  not  to  have  done.     The  prophet

charged   upon  them  in   their  idolatry :  chooses  rather  to  charge  them  with  the

(a.)  They   were  very    impudent    in    it  fault  of  making  a  law  unto  themselves,

towards  God,  and  set   Him  at  defiance  than  with  the  crime  of  transgressing  a

(ver.  30).     (6.)  They  were  very  barbar-  law    which  God  made.     For  when  the

ous  in  it  towards  their  own  children  (ver.  Lord  hath    once  Himself    precisely  set

31).     (Addenda  to  chap.  viL  31,  ^^  High  down  a  form  of  executing  that  wherein

plaoss  of  Tophet.")  we  are  to  serve  Him,  the  fault  appeal  eth

163


CHAP.  vn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  .  JEREMIAB,


greater  to  do  that  which  we  are  not,  than  ciple  were  adopted  by  the  Papista,  all

not  to  do  that  which  we  are, comwa7ic?ec/."  those    fictitious   modes   of    worship   in

—  Hooker,     ^^Eccles.    Pol."    quoted   in  which  they  absurdly  exercise  themselves

Wordsworth,  would  fall  to  the  ground.     When  God

On  creating  objects  of  superstitious  says  that  '  it  never  came  into  His  mind'

homage.  He  suggests  that  men  assume  too  much

"  God  here  cuts  off  from  men  every  wisdom    when    they    devise    what    He

occasion  for  evasions,  since  He  condemns  never   required — nay,    what   He   never

by  this  one  phrase,  *  I  have  not  com-  knew." — Calvin.
nianded  them,'  whatever  the  Jews  de-  Ver.  30-3 i.

vised.  There  is,  then,  no  other  argument  i.  Sacrilege  (ver.  30),  and  ii.  Super-
needed  to  condemn  superstitions  than  stitions  (ver.  31),  would  entail  iii.
that  they  are  not  commanded  by  God;  Slaughter  (ver.  32,  33)  and  iv.  Sorrow
for  when  men  allow  themselves  to  wor-  (ver.  34)  ;  joy  silenced,  homes  solitary,
ship  God  according  to  their  own  fancies,  and  the  land  spoiled.  "  The  wages  of
and  attend  not  to  His  commands,  they  sin  is  death."  (Addenda  to  chap.  vii.
pervert  true  religion.     And  if  this  prin-  32,  *'  FunishmenU")

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER   VIL
Topic :  The  Doctrine  op  the  Church  (ver.  3-7).

I.  The  Church  externally.  Fulfils  beneficent  purposes,  administers  external
benefits.  1.  What  are  her  ministries  ?  The  Word,  sacrament,  &c.  2.  How  far
are  her  external  ministries  essential  1  Romanism  and  Protestantism  reply  differently.
3.  What  reasons  have  we  for  guarding  against  danger  %  The  Church  may  be  over-
estimated (ver.  4).

II.  The  Church  internally.  Her  true  constitution  and  character  are  indicated.
1.  It  is  essentially  a  community  of  saints  and  true  believers  (ver.  5-7).  2.  Its
existence  is  manifested — (a.)  In  the  holy  walk  of  its  members  (ver.  3,  5,  6).  (6.)
In  the  blessings  of  the  Divine  presence  (ver.  3,  7). — I^aeg.

Topic  :  External  Ecclesiastioism  (ver.  8-15).

An  earnest  warning  against  mere  outward  adherence  to,  and  trust  in,  church
ordinances  and  services,  unaccompanied  by  practical  piety  and  heart  religion.

I.  Its  essence.  1.  False  confidence  in  church  testimony  (ver.  8).  2.  Delusive
trust  in  the  unconditional  saving  efficacy  of  sanctuary  rites  (ver.  10).

II.  Its  conseoLuences.  1.  Demoralisation  (ver.  9,  10).  2.  Desecration  of  the
holy  (ver.  11).     3.   Destruction  of  the  offenders  (ver.  12-15). — Idem.

Topic :  Abuse  of  Religion  :  Immorality  Justified  by  Temple  Obskrvances

(ver.  9,  10).

Nothing  more  usual  among  hypocrites  than  to  mingle  and  confound  in  their
lives  what  is  commendable  and  what  is  sinful — virtue  and  vice — palliuting  their
wickedness  with  some  pretences  and  appearance  of  goodness.  Here  they  attended
upon  the  ordinances  of  the  temple,  and  from  them  drew  a  licence  to  sinful  courses,
crying,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,"  <kc.  (ver.  4).

I.  Their  abominable  hypocrisy.  Consisting  in  their  profaneness,  in  "theft,
murder,"  &c.  (ver.  9) ;  and  their  formality,  in  "  coming  and  standing  before  God
in  His  house."     These  words  may  be  taken  in  a  sense

i.  Absolutely  and  positively.     This  question,  Will  ye  steal,  <kc.,  has  included  in

it  an  assertion,  ye  do  so ;    and  an  accusation,  for    by  God's  direction    Jeremiah

charged  upon  this  people  their  guilt  in  these  respects.     Regard  this  profaneness  and

formality  as  meeting  in  the  same  persons.     1.  Their  consistency;  they  may  go

164


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  ohaf.  vil

together,  it  is  possible.  Men  may  "steal,"  <fec.,  and  yet  "come  before  God  in  His
house;*'  and  men  may  "stand  before  God,"  <fec.,  and  yet  be  guilty  of  such  crimes.
The  reason  is,  that  bare  external  works  of  religion  have  no  changing  or  improving
influence  upon  the  heart.  On  the  other  side,  corrupt  affections^  which  tend  to  such
wicked  practices,  do  not  restrain  men  from  external  performance  of  religious  duties.
It  is  no  impediment  to  wrong-doing  now  and  then  to  go  to  church ;  yea,  frequent-
ing ordinances  may  give  licence  to  lust.  2.  Their  concomitancy ;  they  do  go
together.  No  rare  business  for  profane  men  to  be  at  the  duties  of  religion.  There
y,  double  ground  iov  it.  (a.)  To  blind  the  eyes  of  men.  (6.)  To  stop  the  mouth  of
conscience.  All  this  shows  a  sad  and  miserable  condition.  Its  relevancy  to  Popery,
which  encourages  outward  attendance  upon  ordinances,  yet  lets  loose  "the  lusts
which  war  against  the  soul.'*

ii.  Interrogatively  and  expostulatory,  "Will  ye  steal,  ,  .  .  and  come  and
stand,"  &c.  1  The  Lord  calls  this  people  to  an  account  for  this  admixture  of  pro-
faneness  and  formality.     This  expostulation  has  a  double  emphasis  with  it.

1.  How  can  ye  do  so  in  regard  of  yourselves  t  How  satisfy  your  minds  and
consciences  with  such  kind  of  doings  1  God  appeals  to  their  own  judgment,  can
ye  think  it  fitting  %  This  is  the  great  unhappiness  of  hypocrites  and  formalists,
they  are  condemned  of  themselves.     Their  actions  were  incongruous  and  repugnant.

2.  How  can  ye  do  so  in  regard  of  Me  ?  Can  ye  think  to  please  Me  by  such
waysl  The  Lord  thus  not  only  argues  with  them,  but  reproves  them,  (a.)  He
taxes  them  for  their  formality  in  that  they  thought  to  propitiate  Him  by  their  bare
external  performances.  He  requires  external  duties  of  religion  ;  their  actions  in
this  respect  were  good,  but  their  affections  were  bad  (comp.  Isa.  xxix.  13 ;  Matt.
XV.  8  ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  This  was  odious  in  God's  sight,  as  a  piece  of  sacrilege
— robbing  God  of  His  due  ;  of  dissimulation — pretends  to  worship,  but  denies  God
the  frame  of  his  heart,  although  "  He  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts  ; "  and  it
is  unprojitable — neither  bettering  the  heart,  nor  restraining  from  evil  practices.
(6.)  He  taxes  them  for  their  presumption,  in  that  they  durst  approach  Him  in  their
sinful  indulgence  (comp.  Isa.  i.  11,  12,  Ivi.  3;  Ps.  1.  16,  17;  Lev.  x.  3).  Here
is  an  aggravation  of  their  sinfulness ;  for  there  is  a  trespassing  upon  God  in  His
majesty — to  come  before  Him  in  such  vile  habits  showed  they  did  not  much  regard
Him  ;  and  there  is  a  suspicion  of  God  in  His  wisdom — they  think  He  will  not  see
or  take  notice  of  their  vileness,  and  assay  to  flatter  Him  by  some  fair  pretences.
Also,  here  is  an  intimation  of  their  greater  danger.  Will  ye  do  it  ?  Dare  ye  be
so  bold  1  Do  ye  consider  the  hazard  ye  run  ?  There  are  three  sorts  of  Judgments
which  are  commonly  consequent  upon  such  daringly  guilty  conduct :  Spiritual —
become  more  hardened  and  confirmed,  increase  their  corruptions  ;  Temporal — He
inflicts  grievous  calamity  on  such,  of  which  Scripture  supplies  instances :  Eternal
— the  vengeance  of  everlasting  destruction ;  "  hypocrites  have  their  portion  in  the
lake,"  <fec.     The  greater  sin  has  always  the  greater  danger.

II.  Their  notorious  stupidity.  "  And  say,  We  are  delivered  to  do  all  these
abominations  !  "  Different  translations.  The  Septuagint  (and  Arabic)  read  the
words  thus  :  We  have  withdrawn  or  abstained  from  all,  &c.,  i.e.,  they  impudently
deny  their  manifest  wickedness.  The  Syriac  thus :  Deliver  us,  because  we  have
abstained,  <fcc.;  more  impudent  still,  not  only  to  deny  their  notorious  guilt,  but  also
plead  innocency  as  meritorious  of  preservation.  But  there  are  other  translations
specially  to  attend  to.  The  Chaldee  paraphrase  (with  which  agrees  the  Geneva  and
Old  English  translation)  :  *'  TFe  aie  delivered,  though,"  <fec.  The  rendering  of  St.
Jerome  and  the  Vulgate  :  "  We  are  delivered,  because,"  <fec.  The  authorised  English
version  :  "  We  are  delivei-ed,  that  we  may,'^  &c.,  i.e.,  it  is  lawful  to  commit,  <fec.

1.  Their  security  and  insensibleness  of  their  present  condition  in  regard  of  sin  :
"  We  are  delivered,  though  we  commit,  <fec.  ;  making  their  iniquities  no  hindrance
to  their  preservation,  as  in  Isa.  xxviii.  15.  There  is  a  various  ground  for  this
carnal  security  :  (a.)  A  false  conceit  in  them  of  the  mercy  and  indulgency  of  God

165


CHAP.  yn.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIA  R.


(Ps.  ix.  7).  (b.)  A  freedom  and  preservation  from  judgment  and  punishment  of
the  present.  "We  are  delivered,  and  therefore  shall  be"  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  (c.)
Carnal  refuges  and  reliances :  they  think  it  impossible  they  will  be  punished  ;  and
the  Lord  in  this  expostulation,  Do  ye  say  so  ?  implies,  Ye  are  mistaken  in
saying  so.

2.  Their  stupidity ;  according  to  the  reading,  "  We  are  delivered,  because y"  &c.
Thinking  that  not  only  shall  they  receive  no  hurt  in  their  sins,  but  that  they  shall
have  good  for  them  ;  that  the  more  tbey  abound  in  abominations,  the  more  they
shall  abound  in  deliverances  (comp.  Jer.  xliv.  17).  Our  iniquities  are  advantageous
to  us !

3.  Their  incorrigibleness  and  persistency,  or  their  ingratitude  and  perverse  im-
provement of  God's  deliverances  and  preservations  of  them  :  *'  We  are  delivered  to
commit  them,"  i.e.,  as  an  opportunity  for  the  more  free  commission  of  them.  As  if
God  had  delivered  them  on  purpose  that  tliey  might  "  continue  in  sin."  This  is
met  by  the  remonstrance  of  the  text :  "  Will  ye  say  sol  "  What  a  fearful  thing  is
this !  Such  a  mood  calls  for  heaviest  judgments,  for  they  are  the  worst  of  sinners:
means  are  perverted  and  mercy  is  abused;  they  are  not  bettered  by  God's  spiritual
physic,  and  His  "  goodness,"  which  should  *'  lead  to  repentance,"  is  turned  into  an
occasion  of  wantonness.  God  will  surely  bring  His  dire  woes  on  such,  and  make
them  at  last  and  effectually  to  know  that  they  are  not  "  delivered  to  commit  all
these  abominations." — Th.  Horton,  D.D.y  A.D.  1678.

Topic :  What  can  Children  do  for  God  ?    {Children^ t  Sermon) :  "  The  children

gathered  wood**  (ver.  18).

A  description  here  of  honours  which  heathen  pay  to  their  gods.  Though  these
idols  were  such  stupid  things,  every  one  works  for  them.  Should  not,  therefore,
every  one  do  work  for  our  God  ?  He  is  better  than  idols  ;  and  had  done  for  us
great  things ;  and  for  such  a  God  you  ought  to  work.

L  God  is  setting  up  a  kingdom  in  this  world.  A  very  glorious  and  gracious
kingdom:  "righteousness,  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Righteousness' — teaches
us  to  do  justice  ;  peace — to  love  peace  and  pursue  it ;  joy — God  makes  all  happy
who  come  into  His  kingdom.

II.  God  expects  us  all  to  work  to  set  up  this  kingdom.  Christ  came  to  set  it
up ;  ministers  preach  and  labour  for  it ;  missionaries  go  to  heathen  ;  all  God*8
people  aid.     Every  one  has  something  to  do  ;  and  God  expects  each  should  do  it.

III.  Children  can  do  something  to  set  up  this  kingdom.  The  children  did
something  when  Christ  rode  into  Jerusalem  ;  "  spread  garments "  and  cried
"  Hosanna  ! "  1.  You  can  pray;  that  God  would  make  you  subjects  of  this
kingdom.  2.  You  can  talk;  speak  to  others  about  Jesus,  pardon,  God,  heaven.
3.  You  can  work ;  give  to  missionary  society,  deny  yourselves  to  send  Bibles  to
heatlien.

IV.  Children  are  always  happy  when  trying  to  set  up  this  kingdom.  Why  f
Because  make  others  happy.  Angels  are  happy  because  they  are  employed  in
making  others  happy.  God  is  happy,  for  He  blesses  every  one.  And,  when  we
act  like  God,  we  ourselves  are  happy.

V.  God  will  never  forget  the  labours  of  little  children  for  Him.  When
children  wanted  to  come  to  Jesus,  He  noticed  their  disposition,  and  said,
**  Never  prevent  a  child  from  coming  to  Me !  '*  then  took  in  arms  and  blessed.
When  they  sang  in  temple.  He  noticed  their  song,  and  said,  "  Hearest  thou  what
these  say  1 "  Josiah  was  only  eight  years  old  when  he  became  king  ;  and,  because
he  was  a  good  boy,  it  is  put  down  in  the  Book  of  God  that  he  gave  money  to  the
priests  to  build  God's  house,  and  did  everything  in  his  power  to  serve  God.  God
loves  everything  done  for  Him  by  children,  because  it  is  a  proof  of  their  obedience
and  love.     May  He  give  you  His  Holy  Spirit  i^nd  bless  you,  make  you  willing  to

1^6


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  MI AB,  chap.  ym.

labour  for  Christ  now,  that  have  His  approval  when  you  die,  and  dwell  with  Him
in  heaven. — James  Slierman,  a.d.  1844.

Topic :  Sacked  Overthrows  ;  Monumental  Warnings.     "  See  what  I  did  to

Shiloh'' {vti,  12).

The  world  is  full  of  historic  overthrows :  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Rome,  Herculaneum ;
each  with  an  admonitory  lesson — that  its  peculiar  guiltiness  evokes  Heaven's  curse.
But  even  holy  edifices  are  among  the  ruins ;  though  sanctioned  both  by  antiquity
and  Divine  authority.  Sin  shakes  the  strongest  foundation,  and  the  structure  falls.
Confidence  in  the  inalienable  sacredness  and  therefore  security  of  a  place  is  a  delu-
sion against  which  the  ruins  of  holy  scenes  admonish  us.  Sacredness  does  give
security  ;  but  if  the  former  is  lost,  the  latter  is  forfeit.     Henry  remarks  :

I.  Shiloh  was  ruined,  though  it  had  God's  sanctuary  in  it,  when  by  wicked-
ness it  profaned  that  sanctuary.  There  God  "  set  His  name  at  the  first "  (Josh,
xviii.  1);  but  sin  arose.  Was  it  protected  by  its  having  the  tabernacle?  God
forsook  it  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  60) ;  and  we  read  of  the  city  afterwards  only  as  a  monument
of  Divine  vengeance  upon  holy  places  when  they  harbour  wicked  people.  It  is  good
to  consult  precedents  and  make  use  of  them.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife ;  "  remember
Shiloh,  and  seven  Churches  of  Asia ;  and  know  that  the  ark  and  candlestick  are
movable  things  (Rev.  ii.  5  ;  Matt.  xxi.  43).

II.  Shiloh's  fate  would  be  Jerusalem's  doom,  unless  speedy  and  sincere  repen-
tance prevent  it  not.  1.  Jerusalem  was  as  sinful  as  ever  Shiloh  was  (ver.  13).  2.
Jerusalem  should  be  as  miserable  as  ever  Shiloh  was  (ver.  14).

**  The  tabernacle  and  the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh  have  disappeared  ;  so  also  the  temple
built  by  Solomon,  and  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  itself ;  and  even  the  temple  re-erected
without  the  ark  by  Zerubbabel ;  so  too  the  temple  of  Herod.  All  the  places  con-
secrated by  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  ministry  of  His  apostles
have  been  destroyed,  and  given  up  to  the  abomination  of  desolation  :  Jerusalem,
with  the  Mount  of  Olives  and  Golgotha,  Bethlehem,  Nazareth,  the  whole  of
Palestine,  Asia  Minor  and  Greece,  became  Christian,  and  yet  fell  a  prey  to  the
Crescent.  All  the  less  may  Rome  count  on  perpetuity,  since  the  chair  of  Peter
rests  not  on  Divine,  but  on  arbitrary  human  institution." — Naeg,

ADDENDA  TO  CHAP,   VII. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  4.    "  Proclaim  tliere  this  word»*  fanatics,  the  very  name  of  the  temple  of

The  preacher.  Jehovah  as  an  all-sufficing  talisman." —

"  He  that  negotiates  between  God  and  man.  Stanley,  "  Jewish  Church."

As  God's  ambassador,  the  grand  concerns  "  It  is  much  easier  to  give  oneself  to

Of  judgment  and  of  mercy,  should  beware  a  church  or  a  sect  than  to  God." — Top-

Of  lightness  in  his  speech.     'Tis  pitiful  lady.

To  court  a  grin  when  you  should  woo  a  /<*-.«■  .      ai  •    i      /-k  i_    i  i.

g^yj .  "^  Men  seem  to  think.  Only  let   me

To  break  a  jest  when  pity  should  inspire  get  into  the  Church  that  has  apostolicity.

Pathetic  exhortation  ;  and  address  and  catholicity,  and  orthodoxy  !  .  .  .  An

The  skittish  fancies  with  facetious  tales  organised  institution  I  believe  in  ;  but

When  sent  with  Gods  commission  to  the  ^.u    xt       t     *.           ^  -j         r     rtu       L

heart."                              — Cowper  -New  lestament  idea  of  a  Church  was

a  moral  society  of  those  who  had  a  com-
Ver.  4.  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord  /"  mon  faith,  hope  and  love.  That  Church
Ecclesiasticism.  "  They  clung  with  a  which  is  most  positive  about  its  apos-
desperate  tenacity  to  the  hope  that  the  tolicity,  that  thinks  there  is  no  other
local  sanctity  of  Jerusalem  was  a  suffi-  Church  but  itself  in  the  world,  is  a  mere
cient  safeguard  against  all  calamities;  crustaceous,  not  a  spiritual.  Church.  And
and  repeated,  with  that  energy  of  itera-  that  Church  which  has  the  most  altars,
tion    which    only    belongs   to   Eastern      the  most  vestments,  the  most  externali-

167


CBA.F.  VII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


ties,  the  most  things  that  appeal  to  the
lower  nature  of  men,  which  has  the  most
physical  embodiment,  and  therefore
occupies  the  largest  space  in  men's
sight,  is  farthest  from  the  true  spiritual
Church." — Beecher.

Ver.  6.  Thoroughness.  "  I  have
tried  for  twenty  years  to  be  a  half-way
Christian,*'  said  a  business  man  on  whom
life's  cares  pressed  heavily,  and  over
whom  worldly  allurements  were  very
powerful,  "  and  find  it  is  impossible  ;
we  must  be  at  one  or  the  other  extreme.
And  as  for  myself,  I  am  determined  to
do  my  whole  duty,  and  be  a  complete
Christian."

A  proud  Indian  chief  became  deeply
convicted  of  sin,  and,  trembling  under  a
sense  of  guilt,  sought  the  missionary,
and  proffered  his  belt  of  wampum  to  be
freed  from  his  anguish  of  fear.  **  No,"
said  the  missionary,  "  Christ  cannot
accept  such  a  sacrifice."  The  Indian
departed,  but  soon  returned  offering  his
rifle  and  the  skins  he  had  taken  in  hunt-
ing. "  No,"  was  the  reply,  "  Christ  can-
not accept  such  a  sacrifice."  Again  the
Indian  went  away,  but  with  a  troubled
conscience  once  more  returned,  and
offered  his  wigwam,  wife,  child,  every-
thing, for  peace  and  pardon.  **  No,"
was  still  the  reply,  "  Christ  cannot  ac-
cept such  a  sacrifice."  The  chief  seemed
oppressed  with  surprise  for  a  moment ;
then,  lifting  up  tearful  eyes  to  heaven,
he  feelingly  cried  out,  "  Here,  Lord,  take
poor  Indian  too  !" — Dictimiary  of  Illus-
trations.

"  Place  not  thy  amendment  only  in
increasing  thy  devotion,  but  in  bettering
thy  life.  This  is  the  damning  hypocrisy
of  this  age,  that  it  slights  all  good
morality  and  spends  its  zeal  in  matters
of  ceremony,  and  a  form  of  godliness
without  the  power  of  it." — Fuller.

Ver.  7.  Covenant.  "  God's  promises
are  with  a  condition,  which  is  as  an  oar
in  a  boat  or  stern  of  a  ship,  and  turns
the  promise  another  way." — Trapp.

The  two  Rabbis.  A  little  while  after
the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  destroyed,
two  Jewish  rabbis  were  walking  over
its  ruins.  Both  seemed  affected  at  the
mournful  sight,  but  one  wept,  the
other  smiled.  Turning  to  his  companion,
168


the  one  asked,  "  How  can  you  smile  now,
when  you  see  our  holy  city  laid  low  in
ruins  V  "  Nay,"  replied  the  other,  "  let
me  rather  ask  you.  Why  do  you  weep  V*
"  I  weep,"  said  the  first,  **  because  I  be-
hold around  me  the  fearful  judgments  of
the  Almighty.  Our  beautiful  city  is  no
more — our  holy  temple  is  laid  waste —
our  brethren,  where  are  they  now  1 "
"  All  that,"  replied  the  other,  "  is  the
reason  why  I  smile.  I  see,  like  you,
how  sure  God's  judgments  are ;  but  I
can  learn  how  true  must  be  His  promises.
God  hath  said,  '  I  will  destroy  Jerusa-
lem.' I  see  He  has ;  but  He  has  also
said,  *  I  will  rebuild  Jerusalem.'  Shall
I  not  believe  His  word  V*

Ver.  10.  Insolent  profanity.  The
very  heathen  refused  to  admit  any
polluted  person  to  their  religious
services.  That  saying  of  Mut9A  to
his  father,  when  he  came  from  the
war,  is  a  clear  proof:  Tu  genitor,  &c.,
**  Father,  do  you  meddle  with  the
sacrifices ;  but  as  for  me,  it  is  a  sinful
thing  to  touch  them  till  I  have  washed
myself  in  the  fountain."  This  was  an
outward  external  rite  amongst  them  for
cleansing  themselves.  These  heathen
cried  out  to  the  people  that  came  to
sacrifice,  ^*  All  you  that  are  unclean  and
profane,  go  far  from  these  sacrifices."
Not  only  the  Word  of  God,  but  the  very
light  of  nature  taught  them  not  to
meddle  with  holy  things  till  they  were
sanctified. — GaryL

In  the  mystical  sacrifices  of  Ceres,
profane  persons  were  excluded,  the
priest  calling  out,  ixa;  Sxa;  Zeri^  c^Xir^o^

*'  I  venerate  the  man  whose  heart  is  warm,
Whose  hands  are  pure,  whose  doctrines  and

whose  life,
Coincident,  exhibit  lucid  proof
That  he  is  honest  in  the  sacred  cause."

— COWPKB.

Ver.  11.  Sacrilege.  The  spirit  of
God  will  not  have  holy  things  profaned.
Belshazzar  converted  the  consecrated
vessels  of  the  temple  into  instruments  of
luxury  and  intemperance.  Herod  pol-
luted the  sepulchres  of  saints  by  a  sacri-
legious search  for  treasures  presumed  to
be  hidden  there,  and  God  made  fire  to
rise  out  of  the  earth  and  consume  the
searchers.      Antiochus    ransacked    the


BOM  I  LET  IC  COMM£NTAiiy :  JeREMIaB.


otui.nL


temple  of  the  Lord.  Heliodorus  emp-
tied the  treasures  of  their  consecrated
monies.  Pompey  defiled  the  Sabbath
and  the  sanctuary.  Crassus  robbed  the
house  of  God  of  10,000  talents.  But
inquire  into  the  event  of  these  inso-
lences, and  we  shall  find  that  true  then
of  which  later  ages  give  many  examples,
that  ruin  is  the  child  of  sacrilege,  that
mischief  setteth  a  period  to  the  lives
and  designs  of  profane  men. — Bishop
Reynolds.

Ver.      16.       Intercessory     prayer.

Luther  had  boundless  confidence  in  the
power  and  prevalency  of  prayer.  "At
the  time  the  Diet  of  Nuremberg  was
held,"  says  Tholuck,  *' Luther  was
earnestly  praying  in  his  own  dwelling ;
and  at  the  very  hour  when  the  edict
granting  free  toleration  to  all  Protestants
was  issued,  he  ran  out  of  his  house,  cry-
ing out,  *  We  have  gained  the  victory  !
Do  you  understand  that  V  "  On  another
occasion,  Melancthon  was  sinking  into
death  through  severe  illness,  and  Luther
entered  his  chamber.  *'  We  cannot  spare
you  yet ! "  was  Luther's  exclamation  to
his  dying  friend  ;  and  then  he  threw
himself  upon  his  knees  in  wrestling
prayer.  Then,  seizing  Melancthon's
hand,  he  said,  "  Be  of  good  courage,
Philip  :  thou  shalt  not  die  ! "  After  his
recovery,  Melancthon  wrote  to  Camera-
rius,  *'  If  Luther  had  not  come  to  me,  I
should  certainly  have  died  ;  he  recalled
me  from  the  gates  of  the  grave."

*'  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer
Than  this  world  dreams  of.     Wherefore,  let

thy  voice
Rise  like  a  fountain  for  me  night  and  day,"

&c.    — Tennyson's  "  Morte  d* Arthur,**

Ver.  22.  Sacrifices.  Christ  never
despised  sacrifice,  but  relatively  He
undervalued  it.  The  idea  of  sacrifice
among  the  Jews  had  taken  precedence
of  humanity,  justice,  and  right.  (See
Matt.  V.  23,  24.)  What  does  it  mean
but  this.  Do  not  think  that  sacrifice  to
God  is  the  highest  religious  duty.  Sacri-
fice depends  for  its  value  on  preceding
moral  qualities.  A  principle  is  higher
than  the  ordinance  which  you  take  to
exhibit  that  principle.  The  life  of
religion  in  the  soul  is  first  in  import-
ance:  the   instruments   by  which  you


develop  that  life  are  of  secondary  con-
sideration.— H.  W.  Beechcr.

Ver.  23.  Obedience.  Some  persons
would  make  religion  to  consist  of  little
else  than  a  self-denying  course  of  the
practice  of  virtue  and  obedience.  They
make  it  a  kind  of  house-of-correction
work.  But  no  !  I  love  the  service  of
my  God ;  like  the  bird,  I  fly  on  the
wings  of  obedience  to  His  holy  will. —
Ghalmer$.

Ver.  3L  ''High  places  of  Tophef'
In  the  parallel  passages  (xix.  5,  xxxii.
35),  Jeremiah  substitutes  the  word
"  Baal,"  thus  identifying  the  two  names.
Probably  "  Tophet"  was  a  contemptuous
name  for  **  Baal,"  derived  from  ^M^,  to
spit  out,  an  object,  therefore,  of  loathing.
The  word  occurs  in  Job  xvii.  6,  and  is
rendered  "  tabret,"  i.e.,  **  I  was  as  a  con-
temptuous thing."  And  it  is  to  be
noticed  that  in  the  consecutive  verses
(Isa.  XXX.  32,  33)  the  word  occurs  twice,
and  is  rendered  "  tabret "  and  "  Tophet  "
respectively.  Dr.  W.  Smith  aflfirms
that  "  the  Hebrew  words  are  nearly
identical,"  and  hence  concludes  that
**  Tophet  was  probably  the  king's  *  music-
grove  '  or  garden,  denoting  originally
nothing  evil  or  hateful"  But  Ewald,
Hitzig,  Gesenius,  and  others,  appeal  to
Isa.  XXX.  33,  ''Fire  and  much  wood;  the
breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of
brimstone,  doth  kindle  it,"  in  favour  of
the  meaning,  place  of  humingy  from
C]/)     to   hum.      This   beautiful   valley

Josiah  ''defiled"  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10),
pouring  into  it  all  the  filth  of  the  city,
till  it  became  a  foul  and  revolting  scene.
Others  suggest  its  significance  to  be  "  a
drum,"  because  that  instrument  was  em
ployed  to  drown  the  cries  of  victims  who
were  *'  caused  to  pass  through  the  fire."
"To  the  worship  of  Molech  a  temple
was  dedicated  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,
and  infants  sacrificed,  to  drown  whose
cries,  when  the  little  innocents  were
locked  in  the  burning  embraces  of  the
brazen  image,  a  loud  flourish  of  trum
pets  and  cymbals  was  constantly  kept
up,  whence  the  place  was  called  Tophet.
Hezekiah  and  Manasseh,  both  slaves  to
this  revolting  superstition,  immolated
their  sons  to  the  savage  divinity."—
Paxtmi,


c»AP.  Vlii.  nOMllETlC  COMMEi\TAkY :  JEREMIAB,


Ver.   32.      Punishment.      The  seed  reflect  in  intensity  their  origin.     What-

holds  in  embryo  the  form  into  which,  soever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also

by  an  inviolable  law,  it  will  develop ;  reap."

the    full   development   will  be   but   an  "  Punishment  is  the  recoil  of  crime ;

enlargement  and   likeness  of  the  germ.  and  the  strength  of  the  back-stroke  is

Sin  is  thus  embryonic  ;  our  guilty  deeds  in  proportion  to  the  original  blow.'*—

will   expand    into    results    which   will  French,


CHAPTER  VIIL

Critical  and  Exeqotioal  Notes. — Chronology  and  History,  as  in  chap.  rii.  Obserre,  how-
ever, thai  a  new  section  in  this  extended  prophetic  address  commenced  with  ver.  4,  which
continues  to  chap.  ix.  22.

1.  Geographical  Eeference,  Ver.  22.  ^^QiUad:"  a  mountaiuous  region,  bounded  on  the
west  i>y  Jordan,  east  by  high  plateau  of  Arabia,  north  by  Bashan,  south  by  valley  of  Heshbon;
covering  an  area  of  cir.  60  miles  by  20.  The  mountains  of  Gilead  have  an  elevation  of  between
2000  aM<i  3000  feet.  The  valleys  of  Gilead  are  richly  wooded,  presenting  all  the  noble  features
of  forest  scenery.  The  torrent-beds  are  filled  with  oleanders.  The  district  so  charmed  the
Keuheiiites  and  Qadites  that  they  asked  it  for  their  inheritance  rather  than  pass  ''over
Jonlan  "  (Num.  xxxii.  1-5).

2.  Personal  Allusions.  Ver.  8.  ***Sm6e«  ;"  the  Sopherim,  students  and  interpreters  of  the
written  law,  who  probably  owed  their  elevation  into  a  distinctly-recognised  order  to  Shaphan
(2  Chron.  xxxiv.  13,  15) ;  their  employ  was  to  write  out  the  law,  classify  its  contents,  enume-
rate its  clauses  and  letters,  with  "  every  jot  and  tittle  '*  (c/".  ii.  8).  Ver.  9.  "  The  wise  men:**
specified  also  in  chap,  xviii.  18  as  a  distinct  class  ;  but  probably  here  used  of  those  who  prided
themselves  on  their  knowledge,  learned  men  of  all  orders  of  society  (c/.  ix.  23).

3.  Natural  History.  Ver.  7.  "  Stwh  :  "  Chasidah,  a  name  suggestive  of  piety  and  benevolence,
from  *Tpn   zeal,  benignity  ;  specially  careful  for  her  young  and  her  aged  parents,  makes  her

nest  on  high  (Ps.  civ.  17),  soars  very  loftily  (**  in  the  heaven"),  far  above  the  range  of  human
vision,  annually  migrates  as  soon  as  cold  warns  her  of  winter's  approach  ;  arrives  in  Palestine
about  the  middle  of  March,  where  it  rests  for  about  six  weeks.  '*  TuiM^^*  ».«.,  turtle-dove,
Thor :  heralds  the  spring  (Cant.  ii.  12)  with  sweet  voice  (Cant.  ii.  14),  yet  mournful  tones
(Nah.  ii.  9)  ;  its  plumage  rich  (Ps.  Ixviii.  13),  nestles  in  rocks  (Jer.  xliii.  28),  has  eyes  of
peculiar  softness  and  lustre  (Cant.  i.  15,  v.  12),  migratory.  "Crane:"  /S^w*,  means  the  amft,
also  a  bird  of  passage,  very  noisy,  with  a  harsh  note ;  in  appearance  resembling  the  stork.
*^Swalloiv:"  here  A gUr  [the  words  Sus  and  Agur  are  used  interchangeably  in  Scripture  for
swallow  and  crane  ;  diflGlcult,  therefore,  to  fix  the  name  on  either]  ;  the  swallow  prefers  popu-
lous scenes,  and  builds  her  nest  in  dwellings  of  mankind  ;  her  note  is  quick  and  querulous
(Isa.  xxxviii.  14),  her  migration  is  annual.  Ver.  13.  **  Grapes  on  the  vine:"  Anabim,  cluster
of  grapes  (Gen.  xl.  10).  (See  notes  on  chap.  ii.  21,  vi.  9.)  **Figa:"  Tenim,  three  kinds  in
Palestine — the  early,  the  summery  and  the  winter  fig  ;  tree  grows  to  vast  dimensions,  and
abounds  throughout  the  land  (Deut.  viii.  8).  (See  notes  on  chap.  v.  17.)  Ver.  14.  '*  Water  of
gaily"  i.e.,  poisonous  water  ;  lit.  water  of  the  poisonous  plant,  I£^J^")"^D.     Oesenivs  pronounces

it  the  poppy  ;  but  Speaker*s  Com.  refers  to  the  same  word  in  Deut.  xxxii.  32,  where  the  further
description,  "their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,"  necessitates  the  abandonment  of  the  poppy,
which  has  no  berries  ("  grapes  ") ;  and  concludes,  "  probably  it  was  the  belladonna  or  night-
shade, to  the  berries  of  which  the  grapes  of  Israel  were  compared."  In  Hos.  x.  4,  rSsh  is  ren-
dered "  hemlock,"  and  in  Job  xx.  16,  *'  poison  "  of  asps.  The  Targum  renders  it  "  the  cup  of
malediction."  Ver.  17.  "Serpents,  cockatrices,"  i.e.,  serpents,  even  cockatrices,  or  vipers:
Tsiphoni,  small  but  very  venomous  vipers,  basilisks  which  cannot  be  charmed.  Its  name,
Tsiphoni,  given  to  it  on  account  of  its  remarkable  hissing  ;  its  sting  deadly  (Prov.  xxiii.  32,
where  rendered  "  adder  ").  So  fatal  is  its  wound,  that  natural  historians  assert  that  all  other
serpents  hurry  away  and  hide  themselves  at  its  hiss,  and  that  its  very  breath  will  blast  plants
and  poison  the  air.  "  This  dreadful  snake  is  not  a  native  of  Canaan,  but  abounds  in  the  miry
fields  of  Egypt  "  (Dr.  Porter).  Ver.  22.  *'  Balm  in  Gilead : "  this  balsam  early  mentioned  in
Scripture  (Gen.  xxxvii.  25)  as  an  article  of  commerce  with  Midianitish  merchants,  who  carried
it  to  Egypt ;  sufficiently  valued  as  to  be  among  the  presents  sent  by  Jacob  to  Joseph  (Gen.
xliii.  11),  and  possessed  of  acknowledged  medicinal  properties.  It  cannot  be  identified  with
any  particular  tree.  Pliny  and  Strabo  attest  the  celebrated  virtue  of  the  opobalsamum  or  myro-
balanus ;  but  Bochart  selects  the  resin  drawn  from  the  terebinth  as  the  '*  balm  "  here  alluded
to.  There  is  now  no  tree  in  Gilead  which  yields  such  balsam,  but  it  may  be  found  in  Arabia  and
170


HOMILEVW  COM  ME  NT  A  k  Y .  JJ^kJSMlAH,  chap.  viti.


figypt.  A  fragrant  and  medicinal  balsam  is  used  and  sold  among  Tarks  which  is  obtained
from  Mecca.

4.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  1.  '■*  They  thall  bring  out  the  bones,*'  &c.  :  ornaments  and
treasures  were  buried  with  the  dead ;  the  enemies,  knowing  this,  would  ransack  the
sepulchres,  and  plunder  the  dead  of  their  insignia  and  valuables.  Refer  to  Josephus,
Antiq.  vii.  ch.  15,  §  3,  for  account  of  Hyreanus  rifling  the  sepulchre  of  David,  robbing  it  of
3000  talents  ;  and  to  Heredotus  i.  187,  for  statement  of  like  act  of  Darius  with  grave  of  Nito-
cris.  A  customary  arrangement  for  crown,  sceptre,  and  royal  insignia  to  be  interred  with
kings  ;  nobles  and  the  wealthy  imitated  this  by  burying  other  treasures  and  valuables.  Ver.  8,
**  Pen  of  the  sa'ihes  :  "  the  pen  or  style  was  of  iron,  pointed  (c/.  vii.  1),  tiiough  this  "  iron  pen,'*
or  graver  of  steel,  was  probably  used  only  for  tracing  letters  upon  stone  or  metallic  plates.
When  tablets  of  wood  covered  with  wax,  skins,  and  parchments  received  the  writing,  a  metal
stylus  or  a  reed  formed  the  **pen."  Ver.  22.  *'  Is  there  no  physician  there  f"  The  inquiry
suggests  that  practitioners  in  the  medical  art  had  established  themselves  in  Gilead,  who  both
collected  the  "  balm,"  and  applied  it  to  the  suffering  who  resorted  thither  for  healing.

6,  Literary  Criticism.  Ver.  1.  **  At  that  time  : "  points  back  to  chap.  vii.  32,  "  the  days  come.'*
Ver.  4.  **  Shall  they /all  .  .  .  shall  he  turn?"  More  correctly.  Shall  men  fall  and  not  arise?
shall  one  turn,  &c.  ?  An  appeal  to  the  general  experience  and  conduct  of  men — viz.,  that  it  is
customary  for  men  to  arise  after  having  fallen,  &c.  Ver.  6.  **  No  man  repented  htm,"  &c. :  lit.
No  man  has  pity  upon  his  wickedness;  the  sinner  would  compassionate  and  commiserate  him-
self did  he  fully  realise  his  sin  and  its  consequences.  Ver.  8.  **  Certainly  in  vain  made  he  it,"
&c.  Margin,  "The  false  pen  of  the  scribes  worketh  for  falsehood."  Lange  also,  taking  the
verb  TvD^  as  emphatically  to  work,  translates  thus  :  **  Behold  he  has  worked  for  a  lie,  i.e.,  has

T     T

done  lying  work  ;  the  pen  of  the  scribes  has  produced  lies.'*  KeU  and  Speaker's  Com.  render  the
words  ;  **  Lo  1  the  lying  pen  of  the  scribes  hath  made  it  (the  law  of  the  Lord)  into  a  lie."  The
VvZgate  has,  "Verily,  falsehood  has  the  false  pen  of  the  scribe  wrought."  Ver.  10-12.  The
LXX.  omits  from  the  words,  '*  for  every  one  from  the  least,"  &c.,to  the  end  of  ver.  12.  They
are  a  repetition  of  words  from  chap.  vi.  12-15.  Jeremiah  frequently  quotes  his  former  utter-
ances ;  hence  Hitzig's  suggestion  that  they  are  an  interpolation  is  without  force.  Ver.  13.  "And
the  things  that  I  have  given  them  shall  pass  away  from  them :  "  the  old  translators  (Chald.,  Syr.,
Vulg.)  render  the  passage,  "  What  I  have  given  them  they  have  trangressed."  Ewald  sustains
this.  The  A.V.  translation  suggests  the  meaning,  they  should  lose  God's  beneficent  gifts.
Umbriet,  Venema,  KeU,  and  Speaker's  Com.  render  the  words,  *^  So  I  appoint  unto  them  those
that  shall  pass  over  them:  "  ]r\2  to  appoint ;  and  ")3^,  ^  oveirun  {cf.  Isa.  viii.  8).     Hitzig  and

Oraf.f  "  I  deliver  them  up  to  mem  who  pass  over  them."    Ver,  14.   *' J5e  silent,"  from  riDT,

the  Niphil  form  (HDI^)^  meaning  to  perish  ;  then  *'put  to  silence,"  from  DDIj  Hiphil  form

(DinV  meaning  to  destroy  :  hence,  Jehovah  hath  decreed  our  ruin.     Ver.  18.  "When  /  would

comfort  myself,"  &c.  :  lit.,  "  Oh,  my  comfort  in  the  sorrow  !  my  heart  within  me  is  faint ;  "  ao
outcry  of  anguish.  Noyes  renders  it,  *'  Oh,  where  is  consolation  for  my  sorrow  I "  Ver.  19.
** Behold  the  voice  .  .  .  because  of  them  in  a  far  country."  More  correctly,  "Behold!  the
sound  of  the  cry  of  the  daughter  of  my  people/rom  a  distant  land ;  "  her  cry  being,  "Is  not  the
Lord  in  Zion  ?"  &c.,  from  which  she  is  now  an  exile.  To  this  question  God  returns  the  counter-
question,  "Why  have  they  provoked  Me  ? "  &c.  Ver.  21.  *^  I  am  hurt"  am  broken,  i.e.,  in
heart,  '*I  am  black,"  am  in  mourning  (^ceZ)  ;  I  go  mourning  {Speaker's  Com.).  Ver.  22.  "The
health,"  &c.  Why,  then,  has  no  bandage  (of  balsam)  been  laid  upon  my  people  ?  (So  KeU,
Speakei-*s  Com.)  But  "  health"  is  the  more  uniform  rendering  of  the  word  (cf.  xxx.  17,  xxxiii.  6).
Mend,  remarks,  "  nD^'n^!!^,  health,  properly  means  length,  from  the  circumstances  of  long  linen
bandages  being  employed  in  binding  up  wounds."

MOMILJES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  VIII.

Section    1-3 .  The  dead  :  their  graves  dishonoured.

„         4-12.  The  living  :  their  unabashed  iniquity.

ff      13-17.  Maledictions:  God's  messages  of  doom.

fP      18-22.  Lamentations  :  the  prophet's  dismay.

Ver.  1-3.  Thk  Dead  :  Theib  Gbayes  Dishonouresu

Thia  would  be  done  by  the  Chaldean  hordes  in  search  for  booty.  Jeremiah,
however,  suggests  not  the  motive  of  this  sacrilegious  disturbance  of  the  dead  ;  he
regards  only  the  fact  as  the  punitive  judgment  of  an  offended  God.  Even  plunderers
may  cany  into  eflFect  the  righteous  displeasure  and  retribution  of  the  Most  High.

171


CHAP.  nn.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMUB,


"  At  the  time  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  not  only  will  they  bury  in  Tophet  (viL
32-34)  till  there  be  no  more  room,  such  will  be  the  carnage ;  but  they  who  bury
there  will  also  open  the  graves  of  those  who  are  buried,  the  kings  and  princes  of
Judah,  and  expose  them  to  public  contumely  and  shame.  Perhaps  the  corpse  of
King  Jehoiachim  was  then  disinterred  (xxii.  19)." — Wordsworth.

"  Their  dead  bodies  should  lie  unburied  in  the  sight  of  these  their  deities  (ver.  2),
whom  these  idolaters  had  worshipped  while  they  were  alive,  and  thought  they  could
never  do  enough  for,  but  who  could  do  them  no  good  either  alive  or  dead." — Trapp.

"  In  their  reckless  search,  the  barbarians  would  never  think  of  replacing  the  bones
which  they  had  disturbed,  but  would  leave  them  exposed  to  open  gaze.  The  objects
of  idolatrous  worship  are  here  introduced  with  admirable  effect,  as  unconcerned
spectators  of  the  indignity  offered  to  their  former  worshippers.  The  condition  of
survivors  (ver.  3)  would  be  more  pitiable  than  that  of  the  dead." — Henderson.

L  The  sanetuaxies  of  the  dead  profaned  (ver  1).  What  a  conception  does  this
fact  supply  of  the  barbarity  of  the  Chaldean  hordes !  Nothing  sacred  in  their
esteem.  War  lets  loose  the  worst  passions  of  the  best  armies,  but  never  did  an
army  equal  in  lawless  badness  this  Babylonian  host.  Lust  and  greed  drove  them
on  to  ruthless  violation  of  everything  they  met.  (See  Addenda  to  chap.  viii.  1,
"  Graves  disturbed")

II.  The  pitiless  indifference  of  idol  deities  (ver.  2).  How  does  this  statement
set  before  these  idolaters  the  worthlessness  of  their  gods !  In  their  most  evil  hour
their  chosen  deities  will  neither  commiserate  or  help  them.  Suggestive  of  man's
treatment  from  those  he  substitutes  for  the  true  and  gracious  Lord ;  contemptuous
unconcern  in  his  day  of  calamity.

III.  The  horror  and  anguish  of  survivors  (ver.  3).  There  is  something  worse
than  death ;  yea,  than  a  dishonoured  burial :  lifey  when  itself  "  evil ; "  when
^^ driven"  away  by  God;  when  abandoned  to  ^^ places"  of  exile,  among  foes  and
scoffers  and  cruel  despots.  To  live  experiencing  and  enduring  God's  vengeance  is
the  direst  calamity  man  can  bear  (comp.  Job  iii.  21,  22 ;  Rev.  ix.  6).  (Addenda  to
chap.  viiL  3,  " Death  desired")

Ver.  4-12.  The  Living:  Their  Unabashed  Iniquity.

I.  They  would  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  reason  (ver.  4,  5).     The  most

careful  traveller  may  miss  his  way ;  but  then,  as  soon  as  he  is  aware  of  it,  "  will  he
not  return  ? "  No  man  in  his  wits  will  go  on  in  a  way  that  he  knows  will  never
bring  him  to  his  journey's  end  :  *'  why  then  has  this  people  slidden  back  with  a
perpetual  blacksliding  9"  The  nature  of  sin  :  it  is — (1.)  backsliding  ;  (2.)  perpetual,
unless  Divine  grace  prevent  it;  (3.)  a  cherished  deceit;  (4.)  of  which  its  dupes
refuse  to  be  undeceived.

II.  They  would  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  conscience  (ver  6).  Observe :
1.  What  expectations  there  were  from  them^  that  they  would  bethink  themselves  :  "I
hearkened  and  heard.  (Comp.  Job.  xxxiii.  27.)  2.  How  these  expectations  were
disappointed:  "They  spake  not  aright;"  and  the  only  speaking  "aright"  would
have  been  in  words  of  "  repentance  of  wickedness ; "  but  this  was  refused,  (a.)
They  did  not  take  even  the  tirst  step  towards  repentance :  "  None  said.  What  have
I  done?"  (6.)  They  were  so  far  from  repenting  that  they  went  on  resolutely  in
their  sins  :   "  Every  one  turned  to  his  course,"  <fec.

III.  They  would  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  Providence  (ver.  7).  Though
they  are  '*  my  people,"  yet,  1.  They  were  heedless  of  God's  dealings  tvith  them:
"  Know  not  tbe  judgments  of  the  Lord."  2.  The  inferior  creatures  around  them
showed  more  sagacity.     (Addenda  on  ver.  7,  "  Stork,"  "  Turtle,*^  <fec.)

IV.  They  would  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  the  written  Word  (ver.  8,  9).
Many  enjoy  abundance  of  the  niean.s  of  grace,  but  they  do  not  answer  the  end  of
their  having  them.    Those  who  are  "  wise  "  yet  do  no  better  for  their  souls  with  their

172


HOMILETW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  vtti  .


wisdom  than  they  who  pretended  to  none,  will  have  reason  to  be  "ashamed/*  and
will  be  taken  in  their  own  snare.  1.  He  threatens  the  judgments  of  God  against
them  (ver.  10).  2.  He  gives  a  reason  for  those  judgments :  they  were  greedy  of
wealth,  "  given  to  covetousness ; "  they  made  no  conscience  of  speaking  truthy  "  every
one  dealeth  falsely  ;"  iYiQj  flattered  people  in  their  sins  (ver.  11)  ;  they  were  lost  to
all  sense  of  virtue  and  honour  (ver.  12),  "they  could  not  blush."  Such  as  these
were  ripe  for  ruin. — Henry,

Ver.  13-17.  Maledictions:  God*s  Messaoks  op  Doom.

A  succession  of  varied  images  and  ideas ;  vine,  stronghold,  trouble,  invasion,
serpents  :  Jeremiah's  quick  transitions  from  figure  to  fact  is  characteristic.  Also
observe  the  frequent  change  of  speakers  in  this  section  :  God  speaks  in  ver.  13,
the  people  in  ver.  14,  15  ;  Jeremiah  himself,  ver.  16  ;  Jehovah  again,  ver.  17 ;  a
style  indicative  of  the  passion  and  intensity  of  the  prophet.  Both  the  varied
imagery  and  the  interchange  of  speakers  denotes  the  deep  emotion  under  which
Jeremiah  now  speaks :  the  dreadful  theme  harrows  his  own  spirit.  Behind  his
impetuous  thoughts  and  words  lay  this  great  grief:  "  How  can  I  endure  to  see  the
destruction  of  my  people  ?"  To  announce  "  glad  tidings  of  good  things  '*  is  a  far
easier  and  happier  task  than  to  bear  messages  of  wrath.  Yet  we  must  not  say,
*'  Peace,  peace,  where  there  is  no  peace"  (ver.  11);  but  tell  fully  what  God  bids.
A  series  of  maledictions  under  varied  images.

I.  The  vine:  Fruitless  things  God  will  consume  (ver.  13).  **  There  are  no
grapes,"  <fec.  (not,  theie  shall  be).  Fruitlessness  is  the  reason  why  God  will
"consume."  Keil  translates  ver.  13:  "Away,  away  will  I  sweep  them,  saith
Jehovah  :  no  grapes  on  the  vine,  and  no  figs  on  the  fig-tree,  and  the  leaf  is
withered ;  so  I  appoint  unto  them  those  that  shall  pass  over  them."  And  the
Speaker's  Com.  thus  comments :  "  These  intermediate  clauses  describe  the
present  state  of  the  JewSy  and  not,  as  in  the  Authorised  Version,  the  result  of
God's  judgment.  Judah  is  a  vine  which  bears  no  fruit,  a  tree  which  makes  even
no  profession  of  life,  for  her  leaf  is  dry."  Others  regard  the  words  as  threatening
the  Jews  with  the  deprivation  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  but  the  former  interpreta-
tion has  fuller  authority  and  significance.

II.  Strongholds:  Defences  cannot  exclude  the  penalties  of  sin  (ver.  14).  The
people  awake  at  length  to  the  urgency  of  the  case :  would  shelter  themselves  in
fortified  cities;  yet  withal  they  realise  their  sure  destruction:  ** Let  us  perish  (be
silent)  there."  Strong  walls  cannot  exclude  God's  judgments :  "  The  Lord  our
God  hath  decreed  ot'r  destruction."  (See  Literary  Criticisms  on  ver.  supra.)  Sin
must  eventuate  in  overthrow  :  "  Because  we  have  sinned,"  <fec.  Though  they  rally
one  another  to  flee,  yet  they  are  conscious  they  cannot  escape  ;  they  are  irremediably
lost.     It  is  mournful  abandonment  to  despair.

III.  Trouble:  Sinners'  false  hopes  assuredly  shattered  (ver.  15).  False
prophets  had  beguiled  them  to  "look  for  peace;"  now  they  experience  the  utter
reverse:  "no  good,"  for  where  can  "good"  be  found  when  God  is  lost]  "and
behold  trouble,"  properly  "terror;"  so  overwhelming  would  the  calamity  prove.
Suggestive  of  the  sinner's  anguish  of  dread — in  death,  in  judgment.

IV.  Invasion:  Terrible  forces  of  retributive  justice  (ver.  16).  (See  on  chap,
iv.  15.)  The  border-line  crossed  by  the  foe.  Health  may  be  our  border-line,  or  a
carnal  confidence  ;  the  enemy  will  pass  that  line,  and  then,  oh  our  dismay  !  There
are  "  strong  ones,"  rushing  cavalry,  which  scour  the  land ;  no  resisting  their  fury  or
checking  their  impetuous  speed.     The  residt :  "devoured."

V.  Serpents:  Alleviation  and  avoidance  of  misery  impossible  (ver.  17):  "not
be  charmed,"  and  "  they  will  bite  you."  No  incantation,  devices,  or  persuasives
will  disarm  the  attack  of  the  foe  ;  the  venomous  bite  will  inevitably  bring  death.
Such  is  the  issue  of  the  "  Serpent's  "  bite.    No  crafty  measures  will  avert  the  miseries

173


OMAt.  vm.  SOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMlA  tt.


which  follow  upon  sin:  "At  last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,   and  stingeth  like  an
adder."

Ver.  18-22.  Lamentations  :  The  Prophet's  Dismay.

As  Jeremiah  regards  his  people's  ruin,  his  heart  is  sorely  oppressed  with  grief  and
horror.  (Addenda  to  chap.  viii.  18,  *^  Bitter  lamentations^)  He  was  whollj
unlike  those  fastidious  philanthropists

"  Who  sigh  for  wretchedness,  yet  shun  the  wretched,
Nursing  in  some  delicious  solitude
Their  dainty  loves  and  slothful  sympathies."

— Coleridge,  **  Rdi^ioui  Muaingi,"

L  A  disastrons  event  (ver.  19).  The  invaders  have  carried  the  people  into  a
**  far  country."  (See  Lit.  Crit.  supra.)  From  the  scene  of  their  exile  their  bitter
laments  come  ringing  upon  the  prophet's  troubled  ear.  Yet  their  complaining  cry,
"  Is  not  the  Lord  in  Zion  ? "  is  answered  by  God's  accusing  inquiry  concerning  their
prolonged  and  provoking  apostasy.

n.  A  grievous  reflection  (ver.  20).  The  day  of  hope  and  remedy  is  irretrievably
gone !  This  is  the  bitter  outcry  of  the  wretched  exiles  themselves.  Sinners  will
one  day  see  and  bewail  their  impiety  and  folly.  (Addenda,  chap.  viiL  20,  "  Oppor-
tunity lost.*^)

III.  A  stricken  mourner  (ver.  18,  21).  He  can  lay  hold  on  no  comfort  in  his
sorrow ;  calls  after  it  as  lost,  and  his  burdened  heart  is  sick  within  him ;  while  also
he  himself  suflfers  (ver.  21)  the  agonies  which  he  witnesses  his  people  bear.  In
this  Jeremiah  was  a  type  of  Him  who  was  "  stricken  and  afflicted ; "  for  "  surely
ffe  hath  borne  our  griefs,''

IV.  A  bewildered  inquiry  (ver.  22),  (1.)  A  remedy  existed:  "balm."  (2.)
Skilled  administrators  of  the  remedy  could  be  found :  "  physicians  there "  (these
physicians  were  her  priests  and  prophets,  scribes  and  wise  men ;  comp.  ver.  8-11);
yet  she  had  suffered  many  things  of  many  physicians,  without  being  healed  of  any.
For  there  is  but  one  True  Physician  for  the  maladies  of  sin,  and  to  Him  she  had
not  applied.  **  WhyV*  The  prophet  is  staggered  at  Judah's  neglect  of  Him:
what  is  her  reason  1  "  Neglect  of  the  great  salvation  "  is  therefore  unreasonable,
unjustifiable,  astounding.  For  because  of  such  neglect  unutterable  miseries  and
grievous  wounds  remain,  and  must  continually  be  borne.  Verily,  man's  wilful
repudiation  of  the  Divine  remedy  is  appalling,  and  he  thereby  "  wrongs  his  own
soul."

HOMILBTIC  TREATMENT  OP  SELECTED  VERSES  IN  CHAPTER  VIIL

Ver.  1-3.      Theme :  The  dead  dis-  that  slain  should  be  unburied,  but  here

HONOURED,  YET  DEATH  DESIRED.     (Ad-  the  graves  of  the  buried  are  to  be  mali-

denda  to  chap.  viii.   1,  .3,  "  Dead  mo-  ciously  opened.
U^ted ;  Death  desired.'')  ''  II.  Death  shall  now  be,  what   it

Note :  Burial  is  an  expression  of  our  never  used  to   be,  the   choice  of  the

hope  of  resurrection  ;  hence  our  common  living.     And   this,  not  in   a  believing

reverence  for  places   of  sepulture,  and  hope  of  happiness  in  the  other  life,  but

our  horror  at  sacrilegious  violation   of  in  an  utter  despair  of  any  ease  in  this

the  grave.  life." — Henry.

"  The  dreadful  desolation  which  the
Chaldean  army  would  make  in  the  land  Ver.  2.     Thenie :   Phases  of  idola-

would   strangely  alter  the    property  of  trous  homage.
death  itself,  and  for  the  worse  too  :  "  There  is  great  force  in  the  piled-up

'*  I.  Death  shall  not  now  be,  as  it  verbs  by  which   their  worship  of   the

always  used    to  be,  the  repose  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  described.
dead.       Threatened    in  former   chapter  "1.    With  their  hearts  they  'loved'

174


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  VIEL


them.  2.  With  costly  offeririgs  tbey
*  served '  them.  3.  With  suhmisdve  fol-
lowing they  *  walked  after '  them.  4.
Frequenting  their  temples,  in  order  to
gain  their  favour,  they  '  sought  *  them.
5.  Bowing  down  before  them  and  pub-
licly honouring  them,  they  *  worshipped '
them.

"  Yet  these  gods,  thus  served  with
heart  and  hand,  do  nothing  whatever
for  their  worshippers,  except  to  aid  their
hones  to  decay.  Hitzig  well  points  out
how  the  prophet,  beginning  with  the
heart  ('  loved  *),  describes  their  worship
in  the  various  stages  of  development,  and
then  contrasts  its  fulness  with  the
miserable  reward  which  ensues," —
Speaker's  Com.

I.  Progressive  stages  of  idolatrous
service.

II.  Absolute  entirety  of  idolatrous
self-subjection.

III.  Pitiless  abandonment  by  idols
of  their  votaries.

IV.  Melancholy  doom  of  idolatrous
victims.

Ver.  4.  TJieme  :  That  men  habitu-
ally TEY  TO  RIGHT  THEMSELVES.

When  they  fall,  they  are  not  so  sense-
less as  to  lie  there ;  they  can  and  they
do  get  up.  When  they  err  and  lose
their  way,  they  do  not  madly  resolve  to
accept  their  mistake  and  continue  to  go
wrong ;  they  refuse  to  proceed  along  a
road  which  leads  they  know  not  where,
but  certainly  where  they  do  not  wish  to
go  ;  and  they  retrace  their  steps.

Basil  uses  the  text  as  a  m>otive  for  re-
pentance.

Chrysostom  finds  in  it  an  argument
that  no  sinner  need  despair  of  repentance.

It  suggests  :  i.  The  sinner's  power  to
help  himself,  ii.  7'he  stupidity  of  doing
nothing  to  better  his  case.  iii.  2^he
extent  to  which  his  sdf-help  can  attain.
iv.  The  common  pr oneness  of  man  to  fall
and  eiT.  v.  The  necessity  for  direction,
that  he  may  not  continue  to  tvander  and
so  be  lost.  vi.  That  God  apjyroves  man^s
efforts  to  retrace  his  errors,  vii.  Grace
will  certainly  avail  for  those  who  desire
to  tread  the  right  way.

Ver.  /).  Theme  :  Perpetual  back-
sliding,    (Addenda  to  chap.    viii.    5.)


I.  The  causes  of  backsliding.

I.  Fear  of  man.  2.  Intercourse  with
worldly  society.  3.  Presumption.  4.
Secret  sin.     5.   Neglect  of  prayer.

II.  The  symptoms  of  backsliding.

1.  Absence  of  pleasure  in  attending
to  the  secret  exercises  of  religion.  2.
Irregular  and  unprofitable  attendance  on
public  ordinances.  3.  Unwillingness  to
act  or  suffer  for  the  honour  of  Christ.

4.  Uncharitable  feelings  toward  fellow-
Christians.  5.  Indulgence  in  sins  once
abandoned.

III.  The  forms  of  backsliding.

1.  Declension  into  error.  2.  Into
unbelief.  3.  Into  lukewarmness  or
want  of  love.      4.  Into  pray erlessn ess.

5.  Into  immorality.     6.  Into  open  re
jection  of  a  Christian  profession.

IV.  The  evils  of  backsliding.

1.  Its  evils  to  the  backslider:  (1.)  It
diminishes  his  happiness.  (2.)  It  arrests
his  progress.  (3.)  It  destroys  his  use-
fulness.

2.  Its  evils  to  others  :  (1.)  It  staggers
the  anxious  inquirer.  (2.)  Seduces  the
weak  Christian.  (3.)  Embarrasses  all
the  friends  of  religion.  (4.)  Supplies
materials  to  the  mocker.

V.  The  cure  of  backsliding.

1.  Let  the  backslider  remember  from
whence  he  has  fallen,  2.  Let  him  re-
flect on  his  guilt  and  danger.  3.  Let
him  return  to  God,  from  whom  he  has
wandered.  4.  Let  him  live  near  Christ.
5.  Let  him  forsake  the  sin  into  which
he  has  fallen.  6.  Let  him  learn  to  de-
pend on  the  promised  aid  of  the  Holy
Spirit. — Brooks,  "  Plans."

Ver.  6.  "  What  have  I  done  ? "
(Addenda  to  chap.  viii.  6,  ^^Self-
interrogation")

1.  In  reference  to  God.  2.  To  my-
self.  3.  To  Christ.  4.  To  Christians,
5.   To  the  unconverted. — Brooks.

"  The  thought  expressed  here  is
best  explained  by  what  St.  Paul  says  in
1  Cor.  xi.  31  :  'For  if  we  would  judge
ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged. '" —
Speaker's  Com.

Ver.  6,  7.     Tlieme  :  Man  on  earth.
Text  leads  us  to  look  upon  man  on
earth  in  three  aspects  :
I.  As  the  special  object  of  Divine

175


oBAP.  vm.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


attention.  "  I  hearkened  and  heard,"
says  God ;  expressing  deep  interest.  Two
things  show  His  special  interest  in  man
on  earth  :

(a. )  The  language  He  employs  in  the
Bible,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,"  kc
**  Lo,  these  three  years  I  came  seeking
fruit,"  &c.

(6.)  The  provision  He  has  made  in  the
Bible.     Why  this  special  attention  I

i.  We  may  imagine  that  mun^s spiritual
infirmities  on  earth  would  draw  towards
him  the  special  notice  of  his  Maker.
The  diseased  child  attracts  most  parental
sympathy  and  attention.  This  world  is
the  invalid  member  of  God's  family.

ii.  We  may  imagine  that  marCs
critical  position  on  earth  would  draw
towards  liim,  <fec.  Here,  he  has  practi-
cally to  decide  his  destiny.

iii.  We  may  imagine  that  m^n^s
social  influence  on  earth  would  draw,  <fec.
Who  can  tell  the  influence,  for  good  or
evil,  of  one  man  on  this  earth  1  One
may  send  thousands  to  hell,  or  "  turn
many  to  righteousness."

II.  As  the  probationary  subject  of
redemptive  discipline.

Under  this  system  three  things  are
required  of  him  :

1.  Rectitude  of  language.  "They
spake  not  aright,"  i.e.,  in  accordance
with  moral  truth.

2.  Contrition  of  heart.  *'  No  man
repented  of  his  wickedness."  Repen-
tance is  essential  to  his  recovery.

3.  Sef- searching  thought.  "  What
have  I  done  1 "  in  relation  to  my  soul,
the  universe,  God  1  When  prodigal
began  to  think  he  came  to  himself.

III.  As  the  wicked  abuser  of  the
system  under  which  he  lives.

In  two  ways,  as  here  specified  :

1.  Reckless  obstinacy.  "Every  one
turned  to  his  course."  And  the  way
of  each  was  from  God ;  as  infidel ;
drunkard,  (fee.  **  As  the  horse  rusheth  "
(Job  xxix.)

2.  Unnatural  ignorance.  "  Yea,  the
stork  in  the  heaven  knoweth,"  &c.  (1.)
These  creatures  have  remarkable  instincts,
suitable  to  the  external  circumstances  of
their  nature.  So  have  you.  They  have
instincts  of  perceiving  coming  changes,
ftnd    of   adjust ing  themselves   to    those

i76


changes.  (2.)  These  creatures  invari-
ably render  obedience  to  their  instincts.
You  do  not.  How  unnatural/ — Homilist.
(Addenda   to    chap.    viii.    7,    *^  Stork,**

Ver.  8.  "  Lying  pen  of  the  scribes.**
(cf.  *^Fe?'sonal  Allusions,"  on  ver.
supra,  and  Addenda.)

Ver.   8,   9.     Theme:   Intellectual

VANITY  FBRVERTING  REVELATION.

"  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  with  us ;  **
that  was  the  state  of  their  case ;  but
what  did  they  do  with  it,  and  what  did
it  do  for  them  ?  What  we  have  is  of
subordinate  importance  to  the  use  we
make  of  it  and  the  advantage  it  secures
to  us.  Men  now  have  the  Word  of
God  ;  how  do  they  treat  it,  what  does
it  profit  them  ?

I.  Sources  of  sacred  wisdom.  "Law
of  Lord  is  with  us."  They  '*  knew  the
Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make
wise  unto  salvation."  The  Jews,  having
in  there  possession  these  sacred  oracles,
might  have  attained  to  the  "wisdom
which  is  from  above,"  and  consequently
been  the  wisest  people  on  earth.  We
possess  a  revelation  which  "makes  the
simple  wise,"  and  teaches  holiest  and
most  precious  truth  to  man.

II.  Perversion  of  the  sources  of
sacred  wisdom.  "  Pen  of  scribes  made
it  a  lie."  (See  Lit.  Crit.  supra,  on
ver.).  By  false  interpretation,  and
delusive  application  of  the  law.  This
is  the  constant  result  of  :

1.  Wilful  trifling  with  the  Scriptures.
2.  Intellectual  conceit,  which  reverses
and  mutilates  Scripture  language.  3.
Narrow  bigotry,  which  will  bend  revela-
tion to  its  own  shibboleth.  4.  Blind
hostility^  which  rebels  against  the  plain
Word,  and  hence  explains  away  literal
teachings.  5.  Dainty  sentimentalism,
which  softens  and  practically  neutralises
distasteful  teachings,  strong  anathemas,
and  bold  declarations.

III.  Arrogant  pretension  to  the
possession  of  sacred  wisdom.  "We
are  wise  ; "  for  no  other  reason  than
that  they  had  the  Scriptures,  and  knew
the  letter.  "The  law  of  the  Law  is  with
us"  is  a  boast  of  more  than  outward
possession  of  it,  but  also  of  inward  ac


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  Via.


quaintance  with  it,  mastery  of  its  con-
tents. Such  a  familiarity  did  not,  does
not,  always  engender  reverence,  or  lead  to
obedience.  It  fostered  vanity  of  mind,
intellectual  conceit,  and  became  a  snare.
These  scribes  rose,  indeed,  to  be  "  wise
above  what  is  within."

IV.  Delusion  resulting  from  the
arrogance  of  wisdom  (ver.  9).  Thus,
"  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  crafti-
ness." God  will  refute  such  irreverent
and  merely  literary  wisdom.  Christ
thanked  the  Father  that  "  from  the  wise
and  prudent"  He  had  "  hid^'  the  pre-
cious truth.  God  denies  real  light  to
the  intellectually  proud,  as  they  exclude
themselves  from  a  saving  knowledge  of
the  truth.  Lowliness  and  submissiveness
are  qualifications  for  Divine  enlighten-
ment,— "  revealed  them  unto  babes."

V.  Refutation  of  man's  vaunted
wisdom.  God  asks,  ''  What  wisdom  is
in  them  1 "  With  all  their  knowledge
and  their  satisfied  vanity,  they  bad  prac-
tically '*  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord."
It  is  *'  he  that  doeth  His  will  shall  know
of  the  doctrine  : "  hence  God  repudiates
their  boast, — denounces  them  as  inflated
fools,  "  wise  (only)  in  their  own  con-
ceits," and  predicts  their  coming  shame.
Intellectual  vanity  easily  leads  to  tam-
pering with  and  perverting  God's  Word  ;
and  then  the  condemnation  is  inherited
with  which  the  volume  of  the  book
closes  (Rev.  xxii.  18,  19).

Comments  :

Ver.  10-12.  Almost  identical  with
chap.  vi.  12—15;  yet  some  distinctive
dissimilarities  exist  sufficient  to  refute
Hitzig^s  suggestion  that  they  are  an  in-
terpolation. The  LXX.  omit  them.
Jeremiah,  however,  frequently  repro-
duces his  figures  and  phrases :  e.g.
(comp.  V.  15  with  xiv.  19).

**  To  those  that  shall  inherit  them "
(ver.  10).  "  Rather  to  those  that  shall
take  possession  of  them,  i.e.,  to  conquer-
ors who  shall  take  them  by  force.  To
"  inherit "  is  to  obtain  legally,  but  the
verb  here  used  is  that  applied  to  Ahab's
seizure  of  Naboth's  vineyard  (1  Kings
xxL  15),  to  the  subjugation  of  Palestine
by  the  Israelites  (Lev.  xx.  24),  to  the
Babylonian  conquests  (Isa,  xiv.  21).'* —
Speaker's  Com,


Ver.  13.  Theme.  Threatening  op
COMING  PUNISHMENT,  i.  Severity  of  the
visitation.  (a.)  Certain :  "  surely."
(6.)  Desolating :  '*  consume."  (c.)  Agonis-
ing :  "  consume."  ii.  Reason  of  the  visi-
tation, (a.)  Fruitlessness :  "no  grapes,
no  figs : "  i.e.y  there  are  none.  (6.)  Decay  :
"  leaf  is  withered."  In  consequence  of
barrenness  Christ  cursed  the  fig-tree.
iii.  Selected  agency  of  the  visitation.
Read,  '*  I  appoint  those  who  will  pass
over  them."  (a.)  God  regulates  punish-
ment :  *'  I  appoint."  (b.)  Unconscious
agents  fulfilling  His  word  :  "  them  that
shall  pass  over  them."  Note  :  1.  God
has  fixed  and  serious  designs  concerning
men.  2.  He  has  His  agents  ready  and
able  to  carry  them  out.  3.  When  we  talk
of  peace  and  safety,  see  no  invader,  sus-
pect no  foe  j  yea,  while  the  enemy  him-
self is  without  plan  of  attack,  the  design
for  our  overthrow  stands  complete.  4.
Hence,  the  certainty  that  '*  the  wicked
shall  not  go  unpunished,"  and  the
urgency  of  our  forsaking  evil,  and  seek-
ing reconciliation  with  God,

Ver.    14,    15.      Theme :    Defiance

REDUCED  TO  DESPAIR.

Until  now,  Judah  had  resented  God's
warning  and  messages  :  had  carried  on
the  war  of  resistance  against  His  Word  ;
entrenched  in  her  carnal  security  and
insolent  indifi'erence,  had  refused  to
repent  or  yield.  This  verse  shows  her
vsiunted  confidence  gone  ;  she  must  "flee
to  defenced  cities :"  and  her  proud  spirit
broken;  she  must  "be  silent  there."
Yet  the  opening  sentence,  "  Why  sit
still  1 "  may  be,  not  a  panic  cry,  that  her
peril  is  imminent,  but  a  summons  of  her
dejected  soul  to  self-help :  one  more
eff'ort  to  keep  above  surrender  and
despair.

I.  A  rallying- call  to  action  and  self-
defence.  *'  Why  sit  still  1  Let  us  go
to  defenced  cities."  (See  Homily  on
iv.  5.)

Calvin  remarks  that  these  words  show
"  that  they  (as  hypocrites  are  wont  to
do)  had  recourse  to  expedients,  by  which
they  thought  to  protect  themselves
against  God's  wrath.  They  (hypocrites)
indeed  feel  their  evils,  and  seek  to  apply
remedies;  but  they  stoj)  at  the  nearest

177


CHAP.  Tin.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J  EH  EMI  AH.


relief Sy  without  seeking  to  pacify  God,
and  to  return  into  favour  with  Him;
and  think  themselves  to  be  safe  if  they
betake  themselves  to  this  or  that  hiding-
place."

1.  Self -chiding :  "  Why  do  we  sit
still  r'  2.  Self-reliance:  **  Assemble
yourselves,  and  let  us  enter."  3.  Self-
delusion  :  **  enter  into  the  defenced  cities,
and  let  us  be  silent  there."  Silent  there:
some  render  the  words,  rest  there  :  r\D^

T      T  >

to  rest  or  be  silent.  Merely  defend  our-
selves in  quiet,  until  the  storm  blow
over.

II.  A  despairing  recognition  of  their
woful  case.  "  Let  us  be  silent  there  ;
for  the  Lord  our  God  hath  put  us  to
silence,  and  given  us  water  of  gall  to
drink."  Authority  determines  the  word
"silent"  to  mean  *^ perish,"  lit.  be
put  to  silence,  from  DD'7,      AH  tLat

T      T

they  can  promise  themselves,  in  fleeing
to  fortified  cities,  is  a  little  respite.  1,
Salvation  is  beyond  hope  :  the  "  defenced
cities "  will  fall ;  they  cannot  expect,
therefore,  to  be  saved,  but  only  to  put
off  a  little  longer  the  inevitable  ruin.
2.  Destruction  is  determined  for  them  :
"  Jehovah  hath  put  us  to  silence,"  *'.«.,
hath  decreed  our  destruction,  and  there
is  now  no  escape.  And  "  hath  given  us
water  of  gall;"  i.e.,  of  poison.  (See
"  Natural  History "  on  verse.)  This
simile  suggests  the  bitter  suffering  in-
cident to  their  nearing  ruin.  Horsley
renders  the  words,  "  And  let  us  sit  there
in  despair,  since  the  Lord  our  God  hath
brought  us  to  despair^^  <kc.  For  God
had  at  last  reduced  their  defiance  of
Him,  and  their  self-confident  indiffer-
ence, to  utter  despair.  (Addenda,  chap,
viii.  14,  "  Defiance  issuing  in  despair.^')

III.  A  paralysing  acknowledgment
of  sin's  merited  judgment.  "The
Lord  hath  put  us  to  silence,  (fee,  because
we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord**
Suggests

\.  God  is  against  sin:  He  will  not
condone  it.

2.  Sin  hath  entailed  death.  God
decrees  destruction,  and  gives  the  poison-
ous cup  to  the  sinner, — which  is  the
decree  brought  home  to  the  transgressor
ft^ainst  whose  siii  th*vt  decree  has  gone

178


forth.  Flee  where  they  might,  they
would  carry  their  impiety  with  them,
and,  therefore,  God's  decree  against  ini-
quity would  follow  them  into  their  forti-
fications, and  wrath  Divine  would  fall
upon  them  there.  There  is  no  escaping
the  sentence  and  doom  which  sin  entails,
for  there  is  no  evading  God,  nor  shutting
off  from  us  the  operation  of  His  omnipre-
sent laws.  Men  will  realise  this  at  last.
IV.  A  melancholy  confutation  of
the  sinner's  vain  hopes  (ver.  15).

1.  Flattering  exjjectations  are  easily
cherished.  By  (1.)  The  sinner's  own
foolish  vanity.  (2.)  By  the  false  coun-
sellors to  whom  he  listens.  (See  Notes
on  chap.  iv.  10,  and  also  viii.  11.)

2.  Experience  scatters  our  false  expec-
tations. Man  has  the  making  of  his
expectations;  God  of  his  experiences.
Our  expectations  are  what  we  desire;
our  experiences  what  we  deserve.

Ver.  18.  Theme:  Comfort  in  sor-
row. I.  Need  of  comfort.  II.  Attempt
to  comfort  ourselves.  III.  Su4ih  attempt
vicious  and  vain. — ./.  Farren,  (Ad-
denda to  chap.  viii.  18,  *'  Bitter  lamen-
tations.^')

Ver.  19,  20.     Theme:  A  bitter  ceT

FROM  SCENES  OP  EXILE.

*'  This  verse  should  be  translated
thus  : — *  Behold  the  voice  of  the  cry  for
help  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  from
a  distant  land  !  Is  not  Jehovah  in
Zion  1  Is  not  her  King  there  ?  Why
have  they  provoked  Me  to  anger  with  their
carved  images,  with  foreign  vanities  ?  *
The  invaders  have  not  merely  wasted
the  land  (ver.  16),  but  carried  the  rem-
nant into  captivity.  The  prophet  seems
to  hear  their  loud  cry  for  help,  but  their
complaint,  Is  there  no  Jehovah  in  Zion  ?
is  met  by  God  demanding  of  them  the
reason  why,  instead  of  worshipping
Him,  they  have  set  up  idols." — Speaker's
Com.

"  Because  they  have  chosen  the  empty
idols  from  abroad  {^^  strange,"  foreign
"  vanities  ")^  Jehovah,  the  Almighty
God  of  Zion,  has  cast  them  out  into  a
far  country  amidst  strange  people." —
Knl

*'The  common   cant  was,  Js  not  tU$


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  Til!.


Lord  in  Zicm  f  And  will  not  Zion*8
God  protect  Zion's  king  and  kingdom  1
This  outcry  of  theirs  reflects  upon  God,
as  if  His  power  and  promise  were
broken  or  weakened;  and,  therefore.
He  returns  an  answer  to  it  immediately,
Why  have  they  provoked  Me  ?  &c.  They
have  withdrawn  from  their  allegiance  to
Him,  and  so  have  thrown  themselves
out  of  His  protection." — Henry,

In  the  midst  of  their  bitterness  and
woe,  they  remember  the  God  whom  they
had  forgotten  in  their  prosperity  ;  but
this  remembrance  is  not  a  gracious  one,
— they  do  not  remember  Him  to  hum-
ble themselves  before  Him,  but  to  bring
accusations  against  Him.

I.  We  have  a  cry :  That  is  how  the
prayer  is  described.  1.  It  had  in  it  a
meaning :  "  the  voice  of  their  cry."
2.  The  matter  of  the  voice  :  "  for  them
that  dwell  in  a  far  country  "  [interpreting
the  words  as  Zion's  agonising  appeal  to
God  for  those  "  afar-oflf,"  like  the  pro-
digal "in  a  far  country"].  3.  Their
settled  estrangement  from  God  is  implied,
*'  them  that  dwell  in  a  far  country.'*
4.  This  prayer  for  those  long  estranged
is  from  God^s  own  people :  "  the  cry  of
the  daughter  of  my  people."

IL  The  question  :  "  Is  not  the  Lord
in  Zion)  is  not  her  king  in  her]"
Surely,  yes.  Then  if  the  Lord  be  in  the
midst  of  Zion,  I.  Why  do  we  pray  as  if
He  were  not  ?  Rather  pray,  knowing
Him  near  to  answer  as  by  fire.  2.  Why
do  you  despond  because  of  your  weakness  ?
God  is  all-sufficient.  3.  Why  those
great  fears  about  the  prosperity  of  tJie
Church  t  The  battle  is  the  Lord's  :  let
us  go  on  and  conquer.

in.  Another  question  :  "  Why  have
they  provoked  Me  % "  &c.  1.  Here  is  a
question  for  the  Lord's  people.  It  is  a
very  solemn  thing  when  God  is  in  His
Church,  how  that  Church  behaves
herself.  2.  This  text  has  a  particular
voice  to  sinners.  You  have  been  saying,
God  is  amid  His  people  ;  how  is  it  I
remain  unblessed,  unsaved  ?  Because
of  your  "vanities,"  your  idols,  your
Bins.

rV.  Another  cry  ;  "  The  harvest  is
past,"  <fec.  (ver.  20).  We  thought  God
would  keep  us  in  the  days  of  harvest  -,


but  the  harvest  is  past.  We  dreamed  lie
would  chase  away  our  enemies  when  the
summer  months  had  come ;  but  the
summer  is  ended,  and  .still  Chaldea  has
her  foot  upon  Judah's  neck — still  we
drink  the  wormwood  and  the  gall :  we
are  not  saved.

What  harvest,  what  summers  (spiritu-
ally) we  have  had :  ingathering  of  souls  ;
yet  you  are  not  saved!  Some  in  your
home  converted,  ckc,  but  you  not  saved.
The  day  is  near  when  you  will  have  to
cry  in  the  sight  of  the  apjyroach  of  death,
"The  harvest  is  past,  &c.,  and  I  not
taved/"  Yes,  a  day  comes  when,  being
in  torments,  you  will  cry  those  words  !
We  are  looking  for  Christ's  coming  :  and
theuy  seeing  Him  gather  His  harvest  into
the  sky,  the  cry  again  will  rise,  "  Harvest
past:  we  not  saved/" — Spurgeon,

Ver.  20.  Theme:  The  lost  haevest.
"  Harvest  is  past,^*  (fee.

Language  descriptive  of  the  awful
position  of  those  who,  having  trifled
away  gracious  opportunities,  are  found
at  close  of  life  unforgiven  and  unre-
newed.    Consider  :

I.  That  the  means  and  oppor-
tunities of  securing  salvation  are
graciously  afforded  to  men.

II.  That  these  means  and  oppor-
tunities will  soon  pass  away.

III.  That  when  once  past,  they  will
have  disappeared  for  ever.  Irretriev-
able despair  ! — Sunday  at  Home,

Theme:  The  unavailing  lamenta-
tion.    Bethink :

I.  That  God  has  given  you  the  gra-
cious seasons  of  summer  and  harvest.

1.  The  summer  (a.)  of  life ;  (6.)  of  rea-
son ;  (c.)  of  opportunities.  2.  The
harvest  (a.)  of  knowledge  ;  (6.)  of  privi-
leges;   (c.)  of  blessings.

II.  That  these  may  pass  away  un-
improved.      1.    Many   do    not    think.

2.  Will  not  forsake  their  sins.  3.  Will
not  believe.     4.    Will  procrastinate.

III.  That  the  regrets  of  such  will
be  awful  and  unavailing.  1.  Some-
times their  regrets  are  expressed  in  this
world.  2.  They  will  surely  be  uttered  in
eternity.  Regrets  (I.)  of  intense  agony,
of   recollection,   of    8elf-<iondemnatiou :

179


CHAF.  ym.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


(2.)  regrets  will  he  unavailing , — no  space
for  repentance,  no  ear  for  prayer,  no
fountain,  no  cross  !  (3.)  of  black  despair,
"  harvest  past,"  <fec.

1.  None  would  choose  this  portion.
2.  Who  would  risk  it?  3.  Who  will
flee  from  it  ?  Now  is  the  "  harvest,"
Ac — Jahez  Bwms,

Theme:  Life's  solemn  opportunity.

I.  What    considerations   involved.

1.  The  object:  "harvest."  2.  Theopj^or-
tunity  :  "  summer."  3.  The  limitation  :
"  past,"  "  ended."  4.  The  neglect  irre-
parable :  *'  We  not  saved."

II.  To  what  circumstances  applic-
able.    1.  Neglect  of  decision  for  God.

2.  Neglect  of  spiritual  culture,  3.
Neglect  of  Christian  service,

III.  What  lessons  enforced.  Im-
portance of — 1.  Present  opportunity.
2.  Present  dedication. — J,  Farren,

Theme :  Cautions  and  consola-
tions.

Text  may  be  accommodated  so  as  to
admit  of  a  general  application,  and  be
interpreted  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Then
this  lamentation  may  be  understood  as
the

I.  Language  of  final  and  absolute
despair.  That,  having  neglected  means,
wasted  opportunity,  resisted  Spirit,
"  hated  knowledge,  and  did  not  choose
the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  now  they  have
no  longer  hope  of  mercy  :  nothing  to
expect  but  judgment  and  misery  /  Let
us  dread  the  doom  of  the  foolish
virgins.

II.  Language  of  deep  and  humbling
conviction.  That,  having  abused  their
only  opportunity  for  seeking  salvation,
for  attending  to  "  the  one  thing  need-
ful," for  fulfilling  the  solemn  object  of
life,  it  is  gone  for  ever;  their  day  of
grace  is  over,  they  must  therefore  perish
without  remedy  !  Awakened  at  last  to
the  interests  of  tlieir  souls,  but  awakened
too  late.     "  Redeem  the  time."

III.  Language  of  distressing  and
gloomy  despondency.  Such  despond-
ency as  the  afflicted  and  tempted  servants
of  Jesus  Christ  sometimes  experience  :
their  minds  clouded,  peace  gone,  hope
j^rished,  they   take   up   unrighteously

180


the  melancholy  cry  of  text :  "  After  all
we  have  thought  and  felt,  we  find  we
have  been  deceiving  ourselves,  we  have
not  really  known  and  loved  the  Lord,
our  present  gloom  is  proof  against  our
being  His;  we  are  undone;  harvest  is
past ! "  <fec.  They  are  "  in  heaviness
through  manifold  temptations."

Some  have  a  well-assured  hope  that
their  harvest  is  nx)t  passed,  that  they
are  saved !  For  they  have  fled  to  Christ
for  refuge,  have  in  themselves  the  wit-
ness of  the  Spirit.  Remember,  that  for
these  who  have  reasons  for  hope  and  joy,
the  term  of  life  is  the  "  summer "  in
which  they  must  labour  in  the  service,
and  for  the  glory,  of  their  Lord.  —-Rev.
Ed.  Cooper,  A.D.  1816.

Theme:  Neglected  opportunities.

I.  There  are  certain  seasons  which
may  be  called  the  soul's    harvests.

1.  Times  of  religious  privilege.  2.  Time«
of  special  religious  action.  3.  In  a  sense,
the  whole  of  life  is  a  harvest  time.  4.
Now  is  emphatically  a  season  of  harvest,

II.  These  seasons  have  their  period
of  close.      1.  By  national  judgments.

2.  By  providential  removal.  3.  By  the
withdrawing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  By
death.

III.  That  these  seasons  may  pass
without  due  impression.  1.  Proved
from  the  fact  that  many  take  no  heed
concerning  their  souls  at  all.  2.  Many
are  convicted,  but  never  converted.  3.
Exhort  all  to  seek  the  Lord  without
delay,  for

IV.  The  remorse  of  those  who  allow
such  seasons  to  pass  without  due  im-
pression, will  be — 1.  Fearful.  2.  Un-
availing.— A,  F.  Barfield,  "  Christian
World  Pulpit:'

Theme:  Seasons  op  graob  unim-
proved AND  lost.

Summer  and  harvest  are  proper  seasons
of  action;  opportunities  for  armies  to
take  the  field,  subdue  enemies,  and  bring
about  deliverance  of  an  oppressed  people.
The  winter  that  follows  is  not  a  fit  season
for  action.  An  awful  thing  when  favour-
able seasons  for  saving  a  people  from
temporal  enemies  and  calamities  are  lost ;
but   iufinit^ly   more   alarming    to  lose


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  Tin.


favourable  seasons  of  saving  their  souls.
This  is  ground  for  deepest  lamentation
when  forced  to  say,  "  Harvest  is  past,"
&c.     Consider :

I.  Favourable  seasons,  which  we
should  be  careful  to  improve  to  the
salvation  of  our  souls.

1.  The  shimmer  days  of  youth.  Hope-
ful season  :  God  loves  "  first  ripe  fruits :"
young  prayers,  young  tears,  young  faith,
love,  (fee.  (Eccles.  xii.  1).

2.  WJien  persons  enjoy  lively  means
and  ordinances;  when  Christ  crucified
is  set  before  them  with  holy  fervour  and
feeling.

3.  When  there  is  a  noise  and  shaking
among  the  dry  hones :  work  of  convic-
tion and  conversion  is  going  forward,  <kc.

4.  When  Satan's  power  is  restrained^
and  churches  have  rest  from  evil :  this  is
a  calm  summer  day.

5.  When  God  is  visiting  mankind  with
alarming  providences:  then  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth  should  learn  righteous-
ness.

IL  Who  vnxiy  he  said  to  have  lost  their
summer  days  and  favourable  seasons  of
grace  ?  We  cannot  be  positive  as  to  any
while  life  remains,  yet  of  some,  sad
grounds  to  fear.

1.  Those  who  have  had  the  Spirit  long
striving  with  them,  but  have  resisted  His
striving  and  repelled  Him  (Ezek.xxiv.  13).

2.  Those  who  persist  in  sinful  courses
and  harden  themselves  against  the  re-
proofs of  the  Almighty  (Prov.  xxix.  1).

3.  Those  who  sin  presumptuously,  sin
in  the  face  of  light,  in  hopes  of  repent-
ance and  pardon  (Num.  xv.  30).

4.  Those  who  are  so  determinateiy  hent
on  sin  that  God,  their  own  consciences,
and  God's  ministers  cease  to  reprove
them  (Ezek.  iii.  27,  Hos.  iv.  17).

5.  Those  who  deiiherately  relapse  into
sin  after  having  been  Divinely  corrected
and  aroused  to  resolutions  (Isa.  i.  6).

6.  Those  who  give  themselves  up  to
commit  sin  with  greediness,  and  glory  in
it  (Ephes.  iv.  19,  Phil.  iii.  19).

7.  Those  who  mock  the  offers  of  the
Gospel,  and  despise  those  who  bring
them  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16).  "Harvest
is  past,"  (fee.

III.  The  causes  why  men  lose  their
bopeful  seasons.


1.  Unhelief ;  did  men  believe  God's
Word,  threatenings,  and  wrath  to  come,
they  would  improve  their  seasons  of
grace,  and  flee  to  Christ.

2.  Promise  themselves  time;  leisure
to  attend  to  work  of  salvation ;  regard
death  and  eternity  as  distant.

3.  Indulge  sloth ;  do  not  "  give  all
diligence"  to  the  duties  of  religion,
public  and  private.

4.  Love  of  carnal  company  and  sensual
delights  :  amid  sinful  pleasures  they  trifle
away  their  summer  days.

Application  :

(1.)  How  dreadful  will  he  the  end  of
those  who  have  lost  all  their  opportunities
of  salvation  !  Remembrance  of  them
will  not  ameliorate  but  embitter  their
case.

(2.)  Such  characters  act  as  if  devoid
of  reason  (Jer.  viii.  7,  Prov.  vi  8) ;  worse
than  the  brutes  that  perish.

(3.)  Let  us  endeavour  to  improve
Gospel  seasons,  the  summer  and  har-
vest for  our  souls,  with  greatest  care.
— Hannum.

There  is  in  this  text

I.  The  acknowledgment  of  oppor-
tunity.

II.  The  confession  of  neglect.

III.  The  anticipation  of  doom.

J,  W,  W,,from  Lange.  (Addenda  to
chap.  viii.  ver.  20,  "  Opportunity  Lost")

Ver.  21.  Comments :

"  For  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my
people  I  am  hurt."  The  hopeless  case
of  the  people  and  kingdom  moves  the
seer  so  dee])ly  that  he  bursts  forth  with
the  cry,  *'  For  the  breaking  of  my  people
I  am  broken  "  (the  Hophil  form  =  the
breaking  of  the  heart).  "/  am  hlack:**
used  of  wearing  mourning — in  other
words,  to  be  in  mourning  (c/".  Ps.  xxxv.
14,  xxxviii.  7).  ^^Astonishment  hath
taken  hold : "  horror  hath  taken  hold
on  me  (vi.  24,  Mic.  iv.  9).  Help  is
nowhere  to  be  found. — Kiel.

"  Because  of  the  breaking  ...  I  am
broken:"  the  words  of  the  prophet,
whose  heart  is  crushed  by  the  sad  cry
of  his  countrymen. — Speaker's  Com.

"  Astonished : "  the  astonishment  with
which  he  was  seized  he  no  doubt  sets
down    ao    being    the    opposite    of    the

181


OBLiiP.  YIIL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMTAIT.


people's  torpor  and  insensibility;  for
they  had  no  fear  for  themselves. —
Calvin.

"  I  am  contemned  for  bewailing  my
people's  misery,  who  neither  feel  nor
/ear  hurt." — Trapp.

"  Observe  here :

i.  How  great  his  griefs  were  (ver.  21).
For  their  sin,  and  the  miseries  incurred
by  it.  It  becomes  us  to  lament  the
miseries  of  our  fellow-creatures,  much
more  to  lay  to  heart  the  calamities  of
our  country,  and  especially  of  the  Church
of  God.  Jeremiah  had  prophesied  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  yet  he  did  not
rejoice  in  the  proof  of  the  truth  of  it  by
its  accomplishment,  preferring  the  wel-
fare of  his  country  before  his  own  repu-
tation. If  Jerusalem  had  repented  and
been  spared,  he  would  have  been  far
from  fretting,  as  Jonah  did.  Jeremiah
had  many  enemies  in  Judah  and  Jerusa-
lem, that  hated,  reproached,  and  perse-
cuted him;  and  in  the  judgments  brought
upon  them  God  reckoned  with  them  for
it,  and  pleaded  His  prophet's  cause ;  yet
he  was  far  from  rejoicing  in  it,  so  truly
did  he  forgive  his  enemies  and  desire  that
God  would  forgive  them.

ii.  How  small  Ids  hopes  were  (ver.  22).
No  medicine  proper  for  a  sick  and  dying
kingdom;  no  skilful,  faithful  hand  to
apply  the  balm.  He  looks  upon  the
case  to  be  deplorable  and  beyond  relief.
The  desolations  made  are  irreparable,
and  the  disease  has  come  to  such  a
height  that  there  is  no  checking  it." —
Henry.

"  Our  connection  with  those  who
hear  us  continually  is  so  full,  so  intimate,
80  tender,  no  one  can  understand  it  who
has  not  experienced  it.  We  get  love,
we  get  somewhat  from  the  heart  which
was  broken  for  its  enemies,  and  which
could  cry  on  the  cross  :  Father,  forgive
them,  they  know  not  what  they  do." —
Zimendorf.

Ver.     22.       Theme  :    A    CURE    FOB

DISEASED  SOULS.

I.  That  mankind  universally  are  in
a  diseased  state.

The  soul  of  man  is  meant,  hence  the
diseases  are  those  of  the  souk  That
the  distempers  of  the  mind  are  com-
pared to  wounds,  disease,  and  sickness,
182


will  appear  from  Ps.  xxxviii.  5,  ciii.  3;
Ezek.  xxxiv.  4 ;  Matt.  ix.  12.  Point
out  some  of  these  diseases  :

1.  Atheism,  infidelity,  or  unbelief  of
Divine  truths.

2.  Ignorance  of  God  and  Gospel
truths,  even  among  those  who  pn^tess  lo
know  Him  (Hos.  iv.  6).  They  may  be
cured  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18).

3.  Hardness  of  heart.  (Ezek.  xxxvi,
26  ;  Phil.  i.  6).

4.  Earthly  mindedness.  Other  plagues
kill  their  thousands,  this  kills  its  tens  of
thousands.  Pharaoh's  words  are  true  of
them  (Exod.  xiv.  3).  Yet  there  is  help
for  this  (Col.  iii.  12).

5.  Aversion  to  spiritual  duties.  Many
would  rather  toil  their  bodies  a  whole
day  than  spend  a  quarter  of  an  hour  on
their  knees  in  secret  with  God.  (MaL
i.  13).  Relief  for  this  (Ps.  ex.  3;  Isa.
xl.  31  ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  27).

6.  Hypocrisy  and  formality  in  God's
service  (Isa.  xxix.  13).  This  also  may
be  healed  (Jer.  xxxi.  33;  Prov.  iy.  18;
2  Cor.  iv.  16).

7.  Trusting  to  our  ovm  righteousness
(Rom.  X.  10).

8.  Indwelling  corruption  (Ps.  Ixv.  3  ;
Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  Yet  there  is  help  for  this
(Mic.  vii.  19  ;  Rom.  vii.  24,  2b).

9.  Backsliding.  This  is  a  spiritual
consumption,  yet  may  be  cured  (Deut.
XXX.  6  ;  Hos.  xiv.  4-6).

There  are  several  symptoms  which
seem  to  render  our  diseases  almost
desperate  and  incurable.

a.  When  the  body  is  universally
aflfected,  and  with  a  complication  of
diseases,  the  case  is  truly  alarming  :  and
this  is  the  state  of  the  soul  (Isa.  i.  5,  6).
Still  we  may  be  recovered ;  David  was
(Ps.  ciii  2,  3).

fi.  When  diseases  are  of  long  continu-
ance (Ps.  li.  5  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  59).  Yet
the  Lord  can  make  dry  bones  live  (Ezek,
xxxvii).

y.  When  all  around  consider  their
case  desperate.  Often  the  case  with
sinners  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  3,  11).  Yet  see
the  promise  (Jer.  xxx.  17).

d.  When  its  threatening  symptoms  are
not  observed,  so  as  to  provide  timelj
remedies.  Our  case  not  unlike  Xsrael't
(Isa.  Iva  17),


aOMlLETtC  COMMENTAkX :  JLiiEMlAJS.


CiiAt-.  viil.


f.  When  the  patient  becomes  lethargic,
loses  his  senses,  and  cannot  be  awakened
(Isa.  xxvL  11  ;  zxix.  10).  Still  there
is  hope  (Jer.  xxxiii.  6).

II.  That  there  is  a  physician  who
can  cure  all  diseases.

God  Himself  (Exod.  xv.  26).  Our
cure  is  the  work  of  the  whole  Trinity,
but  especially  of  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  iv.
18  ;  Matt.  ix.  12,  13).  In  this  office  of
Healer,  He  was  typified  by  the  brazen
serpent  (John  iiL  14) ;  by  the  Sun  of
Righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2)  ;  by  the  Tree
of  Life  (Rev.  xxii.  2).  Being  God-man,
He  is  nobly  qualified  :  for

1.  He  is  infinite  in  knowledge,  and
understands  all  diseases,  with  the  proper
remedies,  so  that  He  never  can  err  (John
xxi.  17).

2.  He  lias  sovereign  authority,  and
almighty  power,  so  that  He  can  com-
mand diseases  to  obey  (Matt.  ix.  2).

3.  He  has  infinite  pity,  ready  to  help
the  distressed,  even  unasked,  hence
represented  as  Qood  Samaritan  (Luke
X.  33).

4.  He  has  wonderful  patience  towards
the  distressed  ;  bears  with  their  ingrati-
tude, and  works  their  perfect  cure.

III.  The  remedy  which  He  applies
to  effect  the  cure.

It  is  His  own  blood.  This  is  the  true
"  Balm  of  Gilead  "  (Isa.  liii  6).  Scrip-
ture speaks  of  other  means  of  healing,
subservient  to  the  blood  :

1 .  The  Spirit  of  God,  with  His  gracious
operations  on  the  soul  (Gal.  iii.  13,  14).

2.  The  word  and  ordinances  of  Christ ;
these  are  the  "leaves  of  the  Tree  of  Life,"
ko,  (Rev.  xxi.  2 ;  comp.  Ps.  cvii.  20).

3.  Afflictions:  making  us  mourn  our
wounds,  and  apply  for  remedy  (Isa.  xxii.

4.  Faithful  ministers.  The  Great
Physician  sends  them  to  dispense  whole-
some doctrines  (1  Tim.  vi.  3 ;  Tit.  ii.  1).

5.  jPiaus  Christians  help  by  their
prayers  (Jas.  v.  15).

The  Physician's  method  of  apply-
ing the  remedy.    He

a»  Makes  sinners  sensible  that  they  are
$iek  (Matt.  ix.  12).  This  implies  dis-
covery of  the  nature  of  sin,  grief  over
it  (Ps.  zxxviii  6,  18),  despair  of  healing
ourselves  (Hos.  xiv.  3),  and  willingness


to  submit  to  the  Physician's  prescrip-
tions (Acts  ix.  6).

P,  Works  faith  in  the  soul,  by  His
Holy  Spirit  :  i.e.,  persuades  and  en-
ables him  to  embrace  Christ  as  his
Saviour,  and  apply  the  balm  to  his
wounded  soul.  Then  danger  is  over
(John  V.  24).

y.  Accomplishes  and  perfects  the  cure
by  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the
Spirit  (Matt.  v.  8).

IV.  The  reasons  why  so  few  are
healed,  notwithstanding  there  is  balm
in  Gilead,  and  a  physician  there.  Cause
in  us :  for

1.  Many  are  ignorant  of  their  disease,
and  wilfully  so.

2.  Many  are  in  love  tvith  their  disease,
more  than  with  their  physician.  God
may  say  of  them  (Ps.  Iii.  3).

3.  Many  neglect  the  season  of  healing
(Jer.  viil  20)

4.  Many  will  not  trust  Christ  wholly
for  healing.

5.  Many  ivill  not  submit  to  the  pre-
scriptions of  Christ ;  to  self-examination,
repentance,  godly  sorrow,  mortification ;
therefore  are  unhealed.     To  conclude  :

a.  Let  those  in  a  diseased  state  see
their  danger,  for  it  is  great ;  if  they
do  not  apply  to  this  Physician,  they
cannot  be  healed.

j8.  Balm  of  Gilead  is  freely  offered  in
the  Gospel  (Isa.  xlv.  22  ;  Ezek.  xviii.
32).

y.  Consider  how  long  you  have  slighted
this  balm  already.  Now  improve  your
day,  like  the  people  of  Capernaum  (Luke
iv.  40 ;  2  Cor.  vi  2).

b.  Those  whom  Christ  has  healed,
manifest  their  gratitude  by  living  to  His
glory.  — Hannum.

(Addenda  to  chap,  viii  22.  "  Balm
of  GiUad.")

Ver.  22.    Theme  :  Reasons  for  the

IRRELIOION  OF  THE  MASSES.

"  Why  health  of  my  people  not  re-
covered ?  "

Prophet  referring  to  degeneracy  and
misery  of  Jews.  Ask  same  question
respecting  the  moral  state  of  the  masses
of  our  own  nation.      Necessary  to  look

I.  At  our  moral  and  evangelical
resources.

183


OttAP.  vm.  BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JEREMIA  H.


1.  No  country  in  the  world  in  all  (iv.)  Want  of  spiritual  self-deniaL  (v.)
respects  equal  in  privileges.  Coldness  in  prayer.     No  sense  of  the

2.  No  age  comparable  to  this:  (a.)  ruin  of  souls,  (vi.)  Feeble  faith;  not
Plenitude    of   God's  Word.     (6.)  Good  proving  God.

books,     (c.)  Evangelical  ministry,     {d.)  2.   Reasons  in  the  persons  themselves.

Rich  variety  of  social   institutions ;  for  Feel    they   are    separated    from   other

Young      Men  ;       Temperance  ;      City  classes;     neglected ;     despised    on    ac-

Misgions  ;  Open  Air  Services,  <fec.  count  of  their  poverty,  <kc.

II.  The  fearful  evils  which  still  3.  Reasons  in  the  world.  Seductive
exist.     Of  these  :  temptations,  dissipating  scenes,  especially

1.  Avowed  infidelity.  Every  form  of  on  Lord's  day.  So  Gospel  is  not  heard
scepticism.  and    believed.       Souls    lost.       Sin  un-

2.  General  neglect  of  Divine  worship.  cured.     Crowds  perishing.

3.  Prevailing  crime.  Application  :

4.  Juvenile  precocity  and  profligacy.  1.   We  appeal  to  Church  of  Christ.

5.  Overwhelming  intemperance.  Great  responsibility.

III.  The  affecting  inquiry  pre-  2.  Sinners  are  inexcusable.  Every
sented.     '*  Why  then,"  <kc.  man  must  give  account.

'J'hree  classes  of  reasons  :  3.  God*s   mercy    and    grace   are   all-

1.  In  the  Church:  (i.)  Prevalence  of  sufficient,

spiritual    indiflference.       (ii.)    Sectarian  4.  The  provisions  of  the  Gospel  are

contentions,     (iii.)  Fewness  of  workers,  freely  published. — Rev.  Jabez  Burns.

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  VIII,
Topic  :  Interrogating  our  conduct.     Text :  "  What  have  I  done  f  *'  (ver  6.)

How  attentive  God  is  to  us  and  our  actions  !  He  sees  His  prodigals  when  yet
a  great  way  off  ;  to  Him  there  is  music  in  our  sigh,  and  beauty  in  a  tear.  In  this
verse  He  represents  Himself  as  looking  upon  man's  heart,  and  listening — if  possibly
He  may  hear  something  good.  And  how  amiable  God  is,  that  turns  aside,  with
grief  in  His  heart,  exclaiming,  "  I  did  listen,  but  no  man  spake  aright,"  (fee.  Never
do  we  have  a  desire  towards  God,  or  breathe  a  prayer  to  heaven,  but  God  has  been
watching  and  hearkening  for  it  :  it  was  but  one  tear  on  the  cheek,  yet  the  Father
noticed  it  as  a  hopeful  sign  ;  but  one  throb  went  through  the  heart,  yet  He  heeded
it  as  an  omen  that  not  quite  hardened  by  sin.     Text^  "  What  have  I  done  1 "  calls  for

I.  Words  of  earnest  persuasion,  urging  all,  and  especially  the  unconverted,  to
ask  this  question,  each  for  himself,  and  solemnly  answer  it.  Few  men  like  to  take
the  trouble  to  review  their  own  lives.  Like  silly  ostrich,  when  hard  pressed  by
hunters,  bury  their  sight  from  real  evils  and  danger.     But  remember

I.  Searching  yourself  can  do  you  no  hurt.  Little  can  be  lost  by  taking  stock.
You  cannot  be  any  worse  for  a  little  self-examination.  2.  You  may  he  a  great  deal
better  for  the  process  :  for,  if  your  affairs  are  all  right  with  God,  you  may  cheer  and
comfort  yourself  ;  but  there  are  many  probabilities  that  they  are  wrong  ;  so  many
are  deceived,  and  anything  rather  than  self-delusion.  3.  The  time  for  self-exami-
nation is  short:  soon  you  will  know  the  secret,  death  will  rend  off  the  mask.
4.  Though  you  muy  deceive  yourself,  you  cannot  God.  The  everlasting  Jehovah  will
grasp  the  balances  of  justice,  put  His  law  in  one  scale  and  the  sinner  in  the  other :
"  Weighed  and  found  wanting  I "

Various  excuses  will  arise  to  check  this  inquiry  :  you  will  plead  you  are  members
of  churches,  have  often  received  the  sacramental  bread  and  wine.  Easy  thing  in
this  age  to  make  profession  of  religion.  Christ  had  one  hypocrite  in  His  twelve  !
Rest  on  no  profession.  Neither  put  off  this  question  because  too  busy  to  attend  to
spiritual  concerns.  Know  not  how  near  death  is  to  thee.  May  the  Lord  prepare
each  for  death  and  judgment  by  leading  all  to  ask,  "  What  have  I  done  ?"

II.  Words  of  assistance  in  trying  to  answer  the  question.

184


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  vili.


1.  To  Christians  :  "  What  hast  thou  done  ? "  You  reply,  **'  Nothing  to  save
myself;  that  was  done  for  me.  Nothing  to  make  a  righteousness  for  myself ;  Christ
said,  It  is  finished  !  Nothing  to  merit  heaven;  Jesus  did  that  for  me  before  I  was
born  !  "  Yes  ;  but  say,  What  hast  thou  done  for  Him  ?  for  His  Church  ?  for  the
salvation  of  the  world  ?  to  promote  thine  own  spiritual  growth  in  grace  ?

2.  To  moralists:  "  What  hast  thou  done  ]"  You  answer,  "  All  I  ought  to  have
done  !  You  may  tell  me  of  sins,  but  I  have  done  my  duty  :  observed  Sabbath,
said  prayers,  given  to  poor,  &c. ;  and  if  good  works  have  any  merit,  I  have  done
a  great  deal !  "  True,  if  any  merit ;  but  very  unfortunate  that  they  have  not,  for
our  good  works,  if  we  do  them  to  save  ourselves  by  them,  are  no  better  than  our
sins.  Christ  will  never  go  shares  with  you  in  the  work  of  salvation.  Your
morality  is  no  help  to  you  whatever  as  to  eternal  things.

3.  To  the  worldly  :  **  What  done  1 "  "  It  is  very  little  I  do  amiss  ;  now  and  then
just  a  little  mirth."  Stop ;  let  us  have  the  right  name  for  that  mirth.  What  do
you  call  it  in  any  one  else?  "  Drunkenness.*'  "  I  have  been  a  little  loose  in  talk
sometimes  !*'  Write  it  down,  ^^  Lascivious  conversation."  Sometimes  you  have
been  out  on  the  Sabbath  ?  "  Sahhath-hr caking."  You  may  have  quoted  texts  of
Scripture  to  make  jokes  of  them,  and  used  God's  name  in  foolish  talk  ?  '*  Swearing,"
Did  you  ever  adulterate  in  your  trade  1  "  Stealing."  Wished  you  could  get  your
neighbour's  prosperity  ?  **  GovetovsnesSy  which  is  idolatry."  Ever  really  prayed  %
"  Prayerlessness."  Neglected  God  and  Bible  1  "  Despising  Him."  Few  but  will
feel  these  sins  lie  at  their  door.  May  the  Spirit  touch  your  consciences,  and  convince
you  of  your  sins  !

4.  To  the  unconverted:  "  What  done  1 "  By  your  sins  you  have  destroyed  your
soul,  resisted  the  gospel,  spurned  Christ.  Yes  ;  and  think  what  you  have  done  to
your  children  :  taught  them  the  ways  of  spiritual  ruin.  To  your  companions :
tempted  some  to  take  the  first  stray  step  into  folly,  indulgence,  iniquity.  Doth  not
your  heart  quail  within  you  because  of  self-ruin  and  ruin  of  others  f

IIL  Words  of  affectionate  admonition  to  those  who  have  had  to  answer  the
question  against  themselves.

1.  Solemn  that  the  years  roll  on  and  yet  you  are  unsaved.  You,  not  altogether
hardened,  yet  "  done  "  nothing  to  determine  for  Christ,  and  lay  hold  on  eternity.
2.  There  will  be  a  time  when  you  will  ask  the  question,  but  it  will  be  too  late.
*'  On  the  death-hed  1 "  No,  not  too  late  there ;  but  when  breath  has  gone  out  of
your  body.  After  the  suicide  has  taken  the  fatal  leap,  he  may  cry,  "  What  have  I
done  1 "  but  too  late  !  Some  mocking  spirit  in  mid-air  echoes,  '*  Lost,  lost,  lost !  "
In  the  dreadful  Judgment,  too,  the  soul  will  ask  that  question,  as  the  eye  of  the
Judge  fixes  itself  upon  him  :  He  turns  to  your  page  in  the  book,  but  it  has  never
been  blotted  with  His  blood.  If  you  only  knew  what  they  feel,  and  could  see
what  they  endure,  who  have  lost  opportunity  and  lost  themselves,  you  would,  ere
too  late,  pause  and  ask,  "  What  have  I  done  1 "  As  immortal  spirits,  bound  for
endless  weal  or  woe,  fly  ye  to  Christ,  seek  for  mercy  at  His  hand,  trust  in  Him,  and
be  saved. — Spurgeon.     (Comp,  Addenda  to  chap.  viii.  6,  "  Self -interrogation,")

Topic:  Thb  Ravages  op  Sin:  A  Pathetic  Remonstrance.  Text:  ^^Is  there  no
halm  in  Gilead  f  is  there  no  physician  there  ?  Why,  then,  is  not  the  health
of  the  daughter  of  my  people  recovered  ?  "  (ver.  22). — (Addenda,  "  Balm  of
Gilead,'^

"  Astonishment "  (ver.  21)  over  "  health  not  recovered "  (ver.  22)  is  followed
by  lament  for  "  the  slain "  (ix.  1).  (1.)  Between  the  two  there  is  a  distinction :
**  health  *'  lacking,  the  soul  diseased,  impotent,  suffering,  prostrate,  perishing,  but
not  "  slain,"  (2.)  Between  the  two  there  is  a  connexion ;  let  the  disease  go  un-
checked, unhealed,  the  plague  not  stayed,  and  the  issue  will  be — the  suffering
Tictim  of  sin  "  slain."     That  sad  word  "  slain  "  suggests  the  destroyer's  work  done;

185


eStAJt.  nn.  JSOMllEfiC  COMMl:NTAltY:  JEkEMtAM.


the  ruin  of  the  **  daughter  of  my  people  "  is  complete.  Therefore,  the  prophet
lifts  his  voice  in  the  cry  of  anguish  in  which  there  sounds  no  stFain  of  hope  (ix.  li
But,  in  this  text,  the  case  is  less  severe  ;  the  malady  rages,  but  recovery  is  possible,
"  health  may  be  restored."  To  such  as  have  lost  spiritual  health,  and  all  as  yet
unsaved,  come  the  hopeful  tidings  of  "balm  in  Gilead  and  a  physician  there."
Four  topics :

L  A  malady.     "Health  not  recovered  :"  needed  "balm  and  physician."
The  malady  which  has  devastated  the  health  of  humanity  is  sin.     What  is  sin
but  a  disease  of  soul  %     Analogy  :

1.  In  the  manner  of  its  development.  Disease  lies  concealed  in  blood  before
it  assumes  visible  signs.  Began  in  thought,  grew  into  a  desire^  advanced  into  an
intention,  issued  in  act.

2.  In  the  rapidity  of  its  progress.  Bursts  forth  into  fierce  forms,  whole  system
inflamed.  Malady  quickly  spreads  through  the  whole  nature,  vitiating  mind,  cor-
rupting character,  consuming  goodness,  till  "  yield  members  to  uncleanness,  and
from  iniquity  unto  iniquity."

3.  In  its  contagioiLs  influence.  Springs  from  one  to  another,  speeding  and
spreading  misery  and  death.  Plague  of  London  started  from  one  person.  So,
*'  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  world,"  &c.  Broke  out  in  Eden,  pervaded  earth,
&c.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  "  One  sinner  destroy eth  much
good."

4.  In  its  fatal  termination.  Unless  arrested,  disease  soon  completes  its  ravages,
and  victim  sinks  to  the  dead.  And  what  the  termination  of  sin  ?  "  Wages  of  sin
is  death."  '*  Every  man  is  tempted  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and
enticed.  Then  when  lust  hath  conceived  it  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is
finished,  bringeth  forth  death."

II.  A  remedy.  "  Balm  in  Gilead."  Remedy  equal  to  the  disease,  for  "  health  "
might  have  been  "recovered."

Gilead  a  mountain  ;  balsam  trees  flourished  ;  gum  had  medicinal  properties,
highly  valued  and  widely  celebrated.  Thus  extracted  :  Incision  with  axe  or  spear;
issues  a  glutinous  sap.  Concerning  its  virtues,  ancient  botanists  and  physicians
eloquent  in  praise.

Led  by  analogy  from  Gilead  to  Calvary;  from  balsam-tree  to  Cross  ;  from  issuing
sap  to  Blood  ;  from  incision  by  axe  to  "  with  spear  pierced  His  side."  Concerning
its  healing  virtues,  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  tongues  eloquent.  "  Health
restored  :  "  in  heaven,  never  more  sick  !

L  It  was  highly  precious.  So  valued  that  Pompey  and  Titus  carried  some  back
with  them  to  Rome.     "  Precious  blood  of  Christ."

2.  It  had  peculiar  properties.  Healing  virtues  in  "balm"  special  to  it.
"Makes  wounded  spirit  whole,  calms  troubled  breast."

3.  It  was  easily  obtained.  Readily  flowed  forth.  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."
"  Whosoever  call  on  name  of  Lord  shall  be  saved."

4.  It  was  effectual  in  its  operation.  "  Whole  head  may  be  sick,"  &c.  Yet  heal-
ing virtue  therein.     "  Though  sins  be  as  scarlet,"  &c.

"  Dear  dying  Lamb,  Thy  precious  blood
Shall  never  lose  its  power."

in.  A  healer.  There  is  "a  physician  there."  This  a  name  which  Jesus
assumed  :  "  They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick.  I
came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."

\.  He  is  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  disease.  Knows  the  cause  of  its  com-
mencement, mode  of  development,  phases  it  assumes,  issues  to  which  it  leads.
Knows  seat  of  disease,  and  how  to  assail  it :  *'  Out  of  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,"
<kc.     Familiar  with  the  malady  and  mode  of  treatment.

2.  Ue  is  skilful  in  administeri7ig  the  remedy.  Has  had  long  experience  and
186


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  viii.


extensive  practice.  Every  land,  every  age.  "  He  went  about  doing  good,  and
healing  all  manner  of  diseases  and  sickness  among  the  people.  (Comp.  Rom.  vii.
24,25.)

3.  He  is  willing  to  a  ford  relief.  Never  wearied,  "  waits  to  be  gracious ; "
"  desires  not  death  of  sinner,  but  that  all  come  to  repentance  ;  '  chides  with  the
dying,  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life  ; "  assures,  *'  I  will  in
n.0  wise  cast  out.'*

4.  His  ability  to  heal  is  vndely  attested.  In  our  midst :  "  Ye  are  washed,"  <fec.
In  heaven  :  "  Great  multitudes;  made  white  in  blood  of  Lamb."

IV.  A  remonstrance.  "  Why  their  health  not  recovered  ? "  Many  unhealed ;
what  the  explanation  ?

1.  Some  urge  that  they  are  not  suferin^  from  any  malady.  Not  deny  existence
and  ravages  of  sin  as  general  truth,  but  repudiate  charge  of  personal  corruption,
infection,  and  peril.  Thus  put  "  balm  "  and  "  physician  "  from  them.  For  that
is  the  issue  ;  if  men  are  not  fatally  diseased,  Christ  came  not  for  them ;  they  have
no  place  in  His  redemptive  mission.  Because  of  this  folly — ignoring  their  need  of
the  Divine  remedy — "health  is  not  recovered."

2.  Others  urge  that  they  are  not  in  a  condition  of  serious  danger.  Admit  per-
sonal sin,  need  remedy,  but  no  occasion  for  alarm  ;  they  "  know  not  that  they  are
wretched,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  and  blind,  and  naked."  Delusion  is  a  symptom
of  this  malady  of  sin.  **  They  hold  fast  deceit "  (ver.  6).  And  because  of  this
self-flattery  "  health  is  not  recovered."

3.  Others  urge  that  they  can  secure  healing  at  any  time.  Dreadful  procrastina-
tion !  Deliberate  trifling  with  grace.  Surely  there  is  no  certainty  of  finding
salvation  just  when  men  determine.  Death  waits  not  upon  our  convenience.
Melancholy  presumption.     Yet  because  of  it  *'  health  is  not  recovered."

4.  Others  urge  t^iat  they  are  too  near  perishing  for  recovery.  Write  hard  things
against  themselves.  (See  ver.  20.)  But  what  state  surpasses  the  Almighty
Physician  ?  Have  any  proved  Him  unable  1  "  Able  to  save  to  uttermost."
Yet  because  of  despair  "  health  is  not  recovered."

Sorrow  for  misery,  surprise  at  hesitancy,  indignation  over  trifling,  remonstrance
with  despair — -all  are  expressed  in  this  plaintive  interrogation,  "  Why^  then^  is
not  health  recovered  ? "  There  is  "  balm,"  a  "  physician,"  and,  therefore,  '*  health  "
for  all,  for  *'  sinners,  even  the  chief.''  **  He  healed  all  them  that  had  need  of
healing."

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  VIII.  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.   1.    Qeaves  disturbed  :    dead  afterwards,    Hyrcanus,  the  high   priest,

MOLESTED.       Dr.    Pusey  writes  of  this  when  he  was  besieged  by  Antiochus,  and

fiacrilege,  that  it  was  *'  a  hatred  carried  was  desirous  of  giving  him  money  to  get

beyond  the  grave,  a  hatred  which  is  a  him  to  raise  the  siege,  and  draw  oflf  his

sort  of  impotent    grasping    at   eternal  army,  and  having  no  other  method  of

vengeance,    hatred    which,    having    no  compassing  the  money,  opened  one  room

power  to  work  any  real  vengeance,  has  of  David's  sepulchre,  and  took  out  3000

no  object  but  to  show  its  hatred."    (Note  talents,  and  gave  part  of  that  sum  to

on  Amos  ii.  1.)  Antiochus,  and  by  this  means  caused  the

"  He  (David)  was  buried  by  his  son  siege  to  be  raised.     Nay,  after  him,  and

Solomon  in  Jerusalem,  with  great  mag-  that  many  years,  Herod,  the  king,  opened

nificence,  and  with  all  the  other  funeral  another  room,  and  took  away  a   great

pomp  which  kings   used  to   be   buried  deal  of  money." — Josephus,  Antiq,  bk.

with ;  moreover,  he  had  great  and  im-  vii.  chap.  xv.  §  3.

mense  wealth  buried  with  him,  the  vast-  "  For  extremity  of  despite  also,  dead

Bess  of  which  may  be  easily  conjectured  men's  bones  have  been  digged  up.    Pope

at  by  wl^at  I  now  say  :  for  1300  years  Formosas  was  so  dealt  with  by  his  suo-

157


CHAP.  rm.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


cessor,  Stephanus  VT. ;  and  many  of  the
holy  martyrs  by  their  barbarous  persecu-
tors."— Trapp,
Ver.  3.  Death  desired.

"To  die, — to  sleep,
Kg  more  ;  and,  by  a  sleep,  to  say  we  end
The  heart-ache,   and   the    thousand   natural

shocks
That  flesh  is  heir  to, — 'tis  a  consummation
Devoutly  to  be  wished."         — Shakespeare.

"  Death  1  to  the  happy  thou  art  terrible,
But  how  the  wretched  love  to  think  of  thee  I
0  thou  true  comforter,  the  friend  of  all
Who  have  no  friend  beside ! "

— Souihe^,

**  A  sleep  withont  dreams,  after  a  rough  day
Of  toil,  is  what  we  covet  most ;  and  yet
How  clay  shrinks  back  from  more  quiescent
clay!"  — Byron.

**  Soon  may  this  woe- worn  spirit  seek  the
bourne
Where,  lulled  to  slumber,  grief  forgets  to
mourn."  — CampheU,

Ver.  5.  Perpetual  backsliding*
"They  fall  deepest  into  hell  who  fall
backwards  into  hell." — Bunyan.

**  Errare  humanum  est ;  perseverare
diabolicum.*' — Trapp.

Ver.  6.  Selp-intekrogation.  "  What
have  I  done  % "  The  Pythagoreans  once
a  day  put  this  question  to  themselves.
It  is  reported  of  Sextus  that  every  night
before  he  slept,  he  asked  of  his  own
heart,  "  What  evil  hast  thou  this  day
amended  f  what  vice  hast  thou  shunned  ?
what  good  hast  thou  done  1  in  what  part
art  thou  bettered  ] "

"As  it  is  an  evidence  that  those
tradesmen  are  embarrassed  in  their
estates  who  are  afraid  to  look  into  their
books ;  so  it  is  plain  that  there  is  some-
thing wrong  within,  among  all  those
who  are  afraid  to  look  within." — Seeker.

Thales,  the  Milesian  philosopher,
flourished  about  a.m.  3330,  and  was  co-
temporary  with  Josiah,  king  of  Judah,
and  Jeremiah,  our  prophet ;  and  he  it
was  who  gave  birth  to  the  wise  admoni-
tion which  was  the  basis  of  his  philoso-
phic teaching,  "  Knoto  thyself.^*  Cicero,
however,  ascribes  the  maxim  to  Apollo
himself,  "  because,"  he  says,  "  it  hath
Buch  weight  of  sense  and  wisdom  in  it
as  appear  too  great  to  be  attributed  to
any  man."  It  was  emblazoned  in  golden
letters  over  the  door  of  the  temple  of
Apollo  at  Delphoa.
J88


Ver.  7.  "Stork"  The  same  indivi-
duals return  to  the  same  place  year  after
year.

"  The  stork-assembly  meets  ;  for  many  a  day

Consulting  deep  and  various,  ere  they  take
Their  arduous  voyage  through  the  liquid  sky.
And  now,  their  route  designed,  their  leaden

chose,
Their  tribes  adjusted,  cleaned  their  vigorous

wings,

.     .     .     .     in  congregation  full
The  figured  flight  ascends,  and  riding  high
The  serial  billows,  mixes  with  the  clouds."

**  Turtle.''

**  The  dove  let  loose  in  eastern  skies.
Returning  fondly  home.
Ne'er  stoops  to  earth  her  wing,  nor  flies

Where  idle  warblers  roam.
But  high  she  shoots,  through  air  and  light,

Above  all  low  dela}'.
Where  nothing  earthly  bounds  her  flight,
Nor  shadow  dims  her  way.''

— Moore,

''Crane."  Homer  (Iliad,  iii.  2,  3)
alludes  to  the  harsh  sound  of  the  crane
in  her  flight :

**  The   Trojans  indeed  advanced,  with  both
clang  and  shout  like  bitds,
Just  in  fact  as  is  the  noise  of  cranes  in  front
of  the  sky."

"  Swallow."  Its  instinct  is  more  true
than  man*s  reason  or  faith.

**  Bright  bird  of  summer,  what  joys  are  thine  f
Voice  of  the  spring,  if  thy  wings  were  mine,
My  merry  course  should  be  with  thee
To  the  orange  grove  and  the  banyan  tree;
For  who  would  dwell  in  the  wintry  chill.
And  the  gloom  and  cares  of  this  world  of  ill,
If  he  could  borrow  thy  wings,  and  stray
In  chase  of  the  summer,  with  thee  away  f  **
■—Anon  (See  Oray^s  **  Topics.")

"  Crane  and  swallow."  It  is  agreed
by  all  philologists  that  our  translators  in-
terchanged the  words,  and  that  in  each
case  it  should  be  **  swallow  and  crane,'*
not  **  crane  and  swallow."  Soos,  or  sts^
rendered  "  swallow,"  scarcely  can  mean
the  swallow,  for  though  a  migrant  it  is
hardly  so  in  Palestine  as  to  justify  these
words,  "  the  swallow  observes  the  time  of
its  coming y  But  the  difficulty  wa3
solved,  says  Dr.  Tristram,  when  we  found
that  soos  is  to  the  present  day  the  ver-
nacular or  provincial,  though  not  the
classical,  Arabic  name  of  the  swift;  and
when  we  noted  that,  unlike  the  swallows,
the  swifts  return  to  Palestine  on  i^  sud-


HO  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  vni.


den  in  one  day,  and  cover  the  land  in
countless  myriads. — Sunday  at  Home,

Ver.  8.  Sacred  wisdom.  Needed,
Varro,  a  Roman  writer  of  the  first  cen-
tury B.C.,  states  that  in  his  day  he  had
been  at  the  pains  to  collect  the  various
opinions  on  the  question,  **  What  is  the
true  object  of  human  lifel" — in  other
words,  "  What  is  the  supreme  good  1 "
He  had  reckoned  up  as  many  as  three
hundred  and  twenty  different  answers !
How  needful  is  Divine  revelation ! —
Biblical  Treasury.

"  Lying  pen  of  the  Scribes."  The
mention  of  Scribes  in  this  place  is  a
crucial  point  in  the  argument  whether
or  not  the  Pentateuch  or  Torah  is  the
old  law-book  of  the  Jews,  or  a  fabrica-
tion which  gradually  grew  up,  but  was
not  received  as  authoritative  until  after
the  return  from  captivity.  It  is  not
until  the  time  of  Josiah  that  we  find
Scribes  mentioned,  except  as  political
officers  ;  here  they  are  students  of  the
Torah.  But  the  Torah  must  have  existed
in  writing  before  there  could  have  been
an  order  of  men  whose  especial  business
it  was  to  study  it ;  and  therefore  Ewald,
Hitzig,  Graf,  and  others  explain  the
verse  away  by  saying  that  perhaps  the
Scribes  were  writers  of  books,  and  had
published  collections  of  false  prophecies
written  in  imitation  of  the  true.  But
the  Torah  of  Jehovah  is  mentioned  in
this  very  verse,  and  the  whole  gist  of
the  passage  is  lost  if  what  the  Scribes
turned  into  a  lie  was  anything  except
that  law,  of  which  they  had  just  boasted
that  they  were  the  possessors.  .  .  .
Jeremiah's  whole  argument  depends
upon  the  fact  that  there  were  in  his  days
men  who  claimed  to  be  "  wise"  or  rather
learned  men,  because  of  their  study  of
the  Pentateuch,  and  is  certainly  incon-
sistent with  the  assumptions  of  the  new
critics,  that  Jeremiah  wrote  the  book  of
Deuteronomy,  and  that  Ezra  wrote  parts
of  Exodus  and  the  whole  of  Leviticus. —
Speaker^a  Commentary.

Ver.  14.  Defiance  issuing  in  des-
pair. Francis  Spira,  an  Italian  apostate,
exclaimed  on  his  deathbed,  "  My  sin  is
greater  than  the  mercy  of  God  !  I  have
denied  Christ  voluntarily.  I  feel  now  that
He  hardens  me,  and  allows  me  no  hope  /  **


Hohhes,  the  infidel,  before  death,  "I
am  taking  a  fearful  leap  into  the  dark,"

Ver.  18.  Bitter  lamentations  for
others'  ruin.  When  our  Redeemer
wept  over  the  city  that  was  to  perish,
He  considered  it  the  more  to  be  deplored
as  it  knew  not  itself  its  deplorable  con-
dition. As  many,  therefore,  as  are  set
on  fire  by  the  torch  of  love  weep  over
other  men's  sins  as  if  they  were  their
own.  St.  Augustine  says,  "  We  mourn
over  the  sins  of  others,  we  suffer  violence,
we  are  tormented  in  our  minds."  St.
Chrysostom  says  that  Moses  was  raised
above  the  people  because  he  habitually
deplored  the  sins  of  others.  "  He,"  says
the  same  holy  doctor,  "  who  sorrows
for  other  men's  sins,  has  the  tenderness
of  an  apostle,  and  is  an  imitator  of  that
blessed  One  who  said,  *  Who  is  weak,
and  I  am  not  weak?  Who  is  offended,
and  I  burn  not  1 '  " — F.  W.  Faber.

Ver.  20.  ^^  Harvest  is  past."  Oppor-
tunity LOST.  "  The  mill  can't  grind
with  the  water  that  is  lost."  Opportu-
nities are  importunities.  Col.  iv.  3,  is
literally  "  buying  up  the  opportunity."

One  of  the  most  ingenious  tortures  of
the  Hohenslaufen  family,  in  the  height
of  their  despotic  control,  was  that  of  a
cell  which,  at  the  prisoner  s  first  entrance,
presented  an  air  of  comfort  and  ease ;
so  that  it  was  not  till  he  had  been  a  few
days  confined  that  he  observed  the  di-
mensions of  his  chamber  beginning  to
contract.  But  the  discovery  once  made,
the  fact  became  more  appalling  every
day.  Slowly  but  terribly,  the  sides
drew  closer,  and  the  unhappy  victim  was
crushed  to  death.  What  an  emblem
does  this  suggest  of  the  sinner's  contract-
ing day  of  grace  !  Oh,  what  would  the
poor  victim  in  such  a  cell  have  given  to
see  the  door  open,  and  hear  a  voice,
"  Escape  for  thy  life  !  "  Would  that
sinners  would  escape  as  eagerly  by  the
door  of  grace  ! — Bowes^  "  Ulustrative
Gatherings."

"  Many  do  with  opportunities  as
children  do  at  the  seashore  ;  they  fill
their  little  hands  with  sand,  and  then
let  the  grains  fall  through  one  by  one
till  all  are  srone." — T.  Jones.

Ver.  22.  Balm  op  Qilead.  Qilead,
where  the  balm  was  found,  was  on  the

189


OBAF.  DL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  J E  REM  I  AS.


wilderness  side  of  promised  land  ;  the
true  Balm  of  Gilead — Jesus  Christ — is
for  our  healing  here,  before  we  pass  over
Jordan.  Men  travelled  far  to  get  it,
bought  it  at  great  price  ;  but  Jesus  is
nigh  to  heal  us,  and  restores  us  "  without
money  and  without  price."  Merchants
conveyed  the  halm  far  and  wide ;  mission-
aries travel  far  to  make  the  free  gift.
The  balsam  tree  had  to  be  cut,  pressed,
&c.,  to  yield  the  balm;  Christ  was
*'  wounded  "  and  "  bruised  "  (Isa.  liii.
5).  The  supply  of  balm  almost  ex-
hausted :  Christ  the  same  for  ever. —
"  Topics."

Alexander  the  Great  was  dying  of  a
wound,  which  did  not  seem  very  dan-
gerous at  first,  but  it  baffled  his  physi-
cians, and  was  rapidly  becoming  mortal.
One  night,  however,  it  is  said,  he
dreamed  that  some  one  had  brought  him
a  peculiar-looking  plant,  which,  when
applied  to  the  festering  sore,  had  cleansed
and  closed  it.  In  the  morning,  when  he
awoke,  he  described  the  plant ;  and  the
historian  informs  us  that  it  was  sought
for  and  found,  and  when  applied  to  the
wound,  the  fier5'^  pain  subsided,  and  he
was  speedily  healed.  Now  your  soul  has
received  a  deadly  hurt ;  it  has  been
stung  by  the  old  serpent,  the  devil.
The  wound  gets  worse.  There  is  a  ten-
der plant  which  is  able  to  heal  you — it
is  the  Balm  of  Gilead. — Dr.  James
Hamilton.

Compared  with  the  virture  and  pre-
ciousness  of  the  redeeming  grace  of
Jesus,  whose  blood  cleanses  us  from  all
sin.

"  Not  balm,  new  bleeding  from  the  wounded
tree,
Nor  bless'd  Arabia  with  his  spicy  grove,
Such  fragrance  yields."  — Bowe.

So  highly  prized  was  the  balsam  that,


during  the  war  of  Titus  against  the  Jews,
two  fierce  contests  took  place  for  the
balsam  orchards  of  Jericho,  the  last  of
which  was  to  prevent  the  Jews  from  de-
stroying the  trees,  which  they  would
have  done,  in  order  that  the  trade  might
not  fall  into  the  enemy's  hand.

Not  a  root  nor  a  branch  of  the  balsam-
tree  is  now  to  be  found  in  all  Palestine.

Twice  was  a  balsam-tree  exhibited  in
triumph  to  the  Romans  in  their  streets.
The  first  time  was  b.o.  C5,  when  Pom-
pey  returned  from  his  conquest,  and
Judea  became  a  Jloman  province  ;  and
the  last  time  was  after  a  lapse  of  144
years,  when  the  spoils  of  the  temple  of
Jerusalem  were  borne  in  triumph  through
the  imperial  city,  and,  as  a  sign  of  the
subjection  of  the  whole  country,  the
precious  balm-tree  was  exhibited  with
pride  by  Vespasian.

Bruce  saw  the  balsam-tree  in  Arabian
valleys.  The  most  considerable  gardens
of  them  is  in  a  recess  of  the  mountains,
between  Mecca  and  Medina.

The  balm  of  Gilead  is  a  small  ever-
green ;  at  five  feet  from  the  ground  it
branches  out  something  like  an  old
hawthorn  ;  bark  is  smooth,  shining,  of
a  whitish  grey  colour,  with  brown
blotches  ;  leaves  are  of  a  bright  green,
foliage  is  scanty  and  rugged.  The
greatest  quantity  of  balsam  flows  from
the  wounded  bark  ;  but  there  are  three
kinds  procured  by  art ;  best  is  the  opo-
balsam^  expressed  from  the  green  berry  ;
second,  from  the  ripe  nut  or  berry  ;  the
last  is  obtained  by  bruising  and  boiling
the  young  wood. — Scripture  Herbal.

The  balm  of  the  soul  is  prayer,  saith
the  Chaldee  paraphrast ;  is  repentance,
saith  Jerome  ;  is  Christ  applied  by  faith,
say  we.  Sanguis  medici  est  curaiio
phreneticu — Trapp,


CHAPTER  IX.

Cbitioal  and  Exeqetioal  Notes.     For  Chronology  and  History,  see  chap.  Tii.

1.  GeograpMcal  References.  Ver.  26.  '*  Egypt:"  sit  on  N.E.  angle  of  Africa;  a  vast
plain  ;  in  general  features  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  by  which  river  it  is
nourished  ;  the  country  anciently  divided  into  two  great  divisions,  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt;
subdivided  into  smaller  sections  called  Nomes,  or  provinces;  x\ow  dixided  into  Lotoer  Egypt,
called  Delta  (because  enclosed  within  the  arms  of  the  Nile,  resembling  a  Greek  A) ;  stretching
about  80  miles  inland  from  Mediterranean  .CetUral  Egypt,  extending  cir.  160  miles  further
south  :  Upper  Egypt,  which  reaches  cir.  250  mQea  still  further  from  the  Mediterranean,  where
190


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap  ix.


the  Pirgt  Cataract  forms  its  natural  boundary.  Common  Bible  name  of  the  land  is  Mieraim;
ancient  Egyptian  name,  inscribed  in  hieros,^l.v!)liic3,  is  KEM.  Contains  115,200  square  geological
miles.  "  £dom,"  or  Idumea  :  a  district  north  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  itself  bounded  on  the
north  by  Moab,  "a  narrow,  mountainous  tract  (about  100  miles  long  by  20  broad),  extending
along  the  eastern  side  of  the  Arahah." — Dr.  W.  Smith.  *^Ammon:"  originally  the  "children
of  Ammon"  located  themselves,  together  with  MoaUites,  west  of  the  Jordan,  the  Jabbok  (mid-
way between  Sea  of  Galilee  and  ])ead  Sea)  was  anciently  the  northern  border-line  of  their
territory,  and  the  Arnon(wliich  flows  into  the  Dead  Sea  nearly  opposite  to  Engedi)  the  southern
limit.  In  Jeremiah's  time  they  were  in  possession  of  the  cities  of  Gad  (south  of  the  Arnon),
from  which  Tiglath-Pilesar  had  removed  the  Jews  (Jer.  xlix.  1-6).  •' il/oa&,"  occupied  the
plain  of  the  Jordan-valley  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea;  afterwards  spread  themselves
south  of  Judea  towards  Idumea.  But  the  boundary  lines  of  Ammon  and  Moab  were  continu-
ally shifting;  hence  their  localisation  can  only  be  indicated,  not  determined.  "All  that  are
in  the  utmost  camergf  that  dwell  in  the  vyildemess.^'  (See  Lit.  Crit.  on  these  words,  "utmost
corners,"  below).     Arabian  tribes  who  resided  in  the  desert  S.E.  of  Palestine.

2.  Natural  History.  Ver.  11.  "Dragons,"  D^ili!)  j  evidently  "  dragons  "  is  a  wrong  inter-
pretation, for  serpents  do  not  invade  ruined  cities,  and  make  "  dens  "  amid  the  "  heaps;"  the
jackal  is  meant,  whose  habit  is  to  prowl  amid  rocky  places  and  ruins;  size  about  that  of  a  fox,
but  legs  longer;  colour,  yellowish  grey,  with  dark  shades  about  the  back;  voice^  hideous,  a
mingled  bark  and  howl;  generally  jackals  go  in  great  troops  (Maunder).  Ver  15.  **  Worm-
wood,'*   njJ7/  (Laan&h) ;  several  species  in  Palestine;  Kitto  specifies  four:  Artemisia  nilotica,

judaica,  fruticosa,  and  cinarea;  all  distinguished  for  intense  bitterness,  and  probably  not  only
nauseous  but  hurtful  (Deut.  xxix.  18  ;  Prov.  v.  4;  Amos  v.  7,  vi.  12).  **  Water  of  gall."  See
Nat.  Hist,  on  viii.  14,  supra.

3.  Manners  and  Customis.  Ver.  2.  "In  the  wilderness  a  lodging  place."  A  caravanserai,
usually  a  large,  square  building  (khan),  erected  in  deserts  and  regions  tar  removed  from  towns,
on  the  route  of  caravans,  either  at  the  public  expense  or  by  private  charity;  they  are  mere
shelters  for  the  night,  without  furniture,  comfort,  or  supplies,  and  generally  filthy  and  abound
in  vermin.  Ver.  3.  ** Bend  their  tongues  like  their  bows,"  properly,  they  tread  their  bow,  i.e.,
to  string  it — the  bow  being  held  by  tlie  foot  while  it  is  strung.  Ver.  7.  **I  will  melt  and  try
them  : "  (See  notes  on  vi.  27).  Simile  of  metal  refining  :  "  smelting,  in  order  to  separate  the
pure  metal  from  the  ore,  testing,  to  see  if  the  metal  is  pure,  or  still  mixed  with  alloy  " — Speaker^s
Com.  Ver.  17.  ** Mourning  women:"  hired  mourners,  who,  by  frantic  gestures,  dreadful  wail-
ings,  and  doleful  ditties,  both  professed  grief  and  incited  it  in  beholders.  It  demanded  some
skill  to  learn  these  shrieks,  and  gestures,  and  dirges,  hence  here  described  as  '*  cunning
women."  Jerome  says  the  custom  continued  in  Judea  down  to  his  days  {Ohit.  a.d.  420).  Lane
states  that  it  still  exists  in  Egypt  (''Modern  Egyptians");  and  Calmet,  that  the  practice  prevails
in  most  of  the  provinces  of  the  Levant.  Ver.  20.  '*  Teach  your  daughters  wailing  ;  "  see  above,
ver.  17  :  the  dead  would  be  so  numerous  as  to  call  for  a  much  larger  number  of  "mourning
women  "  than  at  present  were  available  ;  hence,  train  others  in  readiness  for  the  appalling
crisis^  Ver.  22.  "  The  handful  after  the  husbandman ; "  i.e.,  the  bundle  of  corn  which  the  reaper
cuts  into  his  arm  with  a  few  strokes  of  his  sickle,  and  which  another  who  follows  him  "gathers,"
to  bind  with  several  other  such  "  haiidfuls"  into  a  sheaf.  Ver.  25.  "  Circumcised  with  the  un-
circumcised:"  considerable  difficulty  among  commentators  as  to  whether  the  prophet  asserted
that  circumcision  was  practised  among  the  nations  specified  in  ver.  26  ;  among  which  "  Judah  "
is  classed  in  this  respect.  Lange  contends  this  is  meant,  and  appeals  to  authority  of  Herodotus,
who  affirms  that  the  practice  existed  both  among  the  higher  castes  of  Egyptians,  and  the  Arabian
tribes — probably  Kedarenes  descended  from  Ishmael,  who  was  circumcised  by  Abraham  (Gen.
xvii.  23),  and  among  whose  descendants  the  rite  still  obtains,  although  the  Koran  nowhere
enjoins  the  rite  :  the  Edomites  accepted  circumcision  at  the  dictation  of  John  Hyrcanus,  as  the
alternative  of  vacating  their  country  (Josephus^  Antiq.  xiii.  9.  §1).  Lange  urges  that  we  must
accept  the  prophet's  words  as  affirming  that  these  people  specified  did  practise  circumcision.
Yet  he  seems  alone  in  this  position,  excepting  that  Jerome  asserts  that  the  rite  did  exist  among
these  nations.  It  seems  simple  to  accept  the  general  verdict  that  these  people  are  not  all
affirme<l  as  circumcised,  but  that  "  circumcised  "  and  "  uncircumcised  "  indiscriminately  are
grouped  together  as  forming  the  list  of  nations  on  whom  God's  judgments  would  soon  descend.

Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  1.  should  be  joined  to  chap,  viii.,  it  is  so  in  Heb.  Bibles.  Ver.  3.
**  Not  valiant  for  truth  :"  Lange,  *'not  by  truth  do  they  prevail  in  the  land."  Keil,  "  not
according  to  faithfulness  do  they  manage  in  the  land."  'Speaker's  Com.,  "neither  do  they  rule
faithfully  in  the  land."  Maurer,  **  they  do  not  prevail  by  truth  "  (Ps.  xii.  4).  Ver.  8.  "  As  an
arrow  shot  out :"  l^n')]^}  \n^  a  slaughtering  arrow.      "In  heart  he  layeth  his  wait :"  properly

inwardly  he  layeth  his  ambush:  Hl^i  =  insidious  scheming.     Ver.  10.  "  habitatums  of  the

wilderness.'  "  t.«.,  prairie,  pasturage,  encampment  of  the  shepherds  :  the  reference  being  probably
to  the  wilderness  of  Judea,  where  cattle  were  pastured  (c/.  1  Sam.  xvii.  28).  Ver.  19.  "  Our
dwellings  have  cast  ut0Ut:**  "dwellings  "  is  not  the  nominative,  but  "  they,"  the  enemieSp  who

191


HAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JBREMIAB,


have  thrown  down  our  dwellings  {cf.  2  Kings  xxv.  9).  Ver.  26.  **  All  in  the  utmost  comers:*'
Margin^  **  Heb.  cut  off  into  corners^  or,  having  the  corners  (of  their  \\2^t)  polled.**  Speaker^s
Com.f  all  who  have  the  corners  oi  their  hair  shorn.  Hend.,  Cut  as  to  the  corner  of  the  beard
{cf.  Lev.  xix.  27,  xxi.  5),  a  custom  the  Jews  were  proiiibited  to  imitate.  The  descriptioa
points  to  the  Arabs,  who  "dwell  in  the  wilderness."

HOMILETIC  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  ENTIRE  CHAPTER  IX.

%*  Sectional  divisions  of  the  chapter  does  violence  to  its  structure  and  disorder;  for  its  very
confusion  of  topics,  the  intermingling  of  solemn  messages  with  passionate  exclamations,  is
characteristic  of  vivid  dread  and  poignant  grief ;  of  these  the  chapter  is  full.  Sections  might,
however,  arranged  thus :

Verses      1-8.  Plaintive  lamentations  over  sin.
„         9-16.  God's  vindications  of  His  jadgmenti
„       17-22.  Vivid  realisation  of  calamities.
„       23-26.  Vainglorious  confidences  corrected.

The  scope  and  significance  of  the  entire  chapter  may  be  thus  stated  :  Jeremiah
presents  to  Judah :

1.  A  vivid  portrayal  of  the  direful  disasters  impending.

2.  A  justification  of  God's  judgments  against  sin.

By  showing  them  how  alarming  would  be  the  punishment,  he  would  have  them
see  how  appalling  was  their  sin.  Their  condition  and  conduct  imprecated  the
retribution.  Noticeable  that  appeal  is  made  to  the  wisdom^  the  serious  thought  of
his  hearers,  that  they  may  "  understand  "  (ver.  12)  the  equity  of  God's  proceedings
against  them.  Sinners  would  justify  God's  punishments  if  they  wisely  considered
their  case,  demerits,  and  the  provocations  of  their  sins  :  *'  We  indeed  justly,  for  we
receive  the  due  reward  of  our  sins."

I.  Sorrowful  consternation  over  calamities.  Both  the  revolting  cause  of  these
calamities  (vers.  2-6)  and  their  poignant  severity  (vers.  20-22)  are  carefully  speci-
fied :  thus  the  bemoaning  is  intelligently  and  adequately  justified.

1.  The  prophet's  agony  of  grief  (vers.  1,  2).  Note  the  pathos  of  the  reiteration,
"my  people!"  Humanity,  philanthropy,  patriotism,  and  religious  feeling,  all
summon  us  to  bitter  sorrow  over — (1)  the  sufferings  of  our  people  ;  (2)  the  slaughter
wrought  by  tyranny  (especially  the  tyranny  of  Satan  over  the  lives  and  souls  of  men  ;
and  tne  slaughter  of  virtue,  happiness,  and  hope)  ;  (3)  the  sinfulness  which  under-
lies and  explains  all  man's  woes.  Characters  wasted,  lives  degraded,  hearts
pierced  with  anguish,  souls  ruined  :  a  sad  world ;  the  gentle,  generous  heart
shudders  amid  these  devastations,  "  weeps  for  the  slain."

2.  The  people's  realisation  of  their  ruin  (vers.  17-19).  It  came  late,  yet  it
came  :  they  awoke  at  last.  God  arrests  the  insensate  nation  with  the  appeal,
'*  Consider  ye  ! "  The  verses  delineate  the  people's  (1)  sudden  consternation  ;  (2)
overwhelming  distress,  i.  Professional  mourners  would  have  abundant  occasion  for
wailing  (ver.  17).  ii.  The  people  would  themselves  be  plunged  into  the  agony  of
sorrow  (ver.  18).  We  cannot  leave  to  others  the  bitter  mourning,  the  pang  in  our
hearts  will  be  too  keen.  iii.  Zion  w  ould  resound  with  cries  of  anguish  and  des-
peration (ver.  19).  Sinners,  though  slow  to  recognise  their  dreadful  state  and
prospects,  are  sure  to  realise  them  (ver  25).  Because  doom  now  tarries  they  make
merry  while  godly  men  weep ;  but  they  will  join  the  lamentations,  though  (alas  !
if  as  here)  only  when  too  late,  when  ruin  is  upon  them  (ver.  19).

3.  God  summons  the  nation  to  grievous  sorrow  (ver.  20-22).  1.  He  supplies  the
mourners  with  the  national  dirge  (ver.  21),  than  which  no  more  piteous  a  refrain
could  be  conceived.  2.  He  then  portrays  the  awful  disasters  (ver.  22) :  death  in
every  home, — the  slain  covering  the  lands,  childhood  and  youth  perishing  with  the
"  men."  Judgment  comes  on  all,  "  for  that  all  have  sinned."  When  God  bids  us
Borrow,  it  is  time  to  '* consider"  and  humble  ourselves  penitently  before  Him.
"  Now  He  hath  commanded  men  everywhere  to  repent."     A  wide  difference  be-

192


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  J EREMIAB.  chap,  nt


tweeii  this  "  godly  sorrow  "  and  the  grief  of  despair  and  doom.  Timely  penitence
may  avert  ultimate  desperation.  Predictions  of  disaster  are  intended  as  persua-
sives to  the  sorrow  which  averts  woe.

II.  Appalling  corruption  of  the  nation  (ver.  2-6,  8).

1.  ^5  viewed  by  the  prophet  (ver,  2-6).  He  would  fain  hide  himself  from  the
sickening  and  revolting  spectacle  of  his  people's  guiltiness  (ver.  2).  (a.)  They  were
foul  and  false  (ver.  2)  ;  (6.)  maliciously  deceptive,  "  tongues  like  bows  "  (ver.  3)  ;
(c.)  careless  of  public  honour  and  faith^  *'  not  valiant  for  truth"  (see  Lit.  Crit,  on
ver.  supra)  ;  (d.)  abandoned  to  iniquitous  practices^  "  proceed  from  evil  to  evil ;  **
(e.)  ignore  God  in  His  own  land,  "know  not  Me,  saith  the  Lord;"  (/.)  social
confidence  and  integrity  violated  (ver.  4),  utterly  insincere,  treacherous,  and  unjust
in  their  domestic  and  neighbourly  intercourse  ;  [g.)  their  falsity  was  deliberate  and
resolute  (ver.  5),  they  actually  trained  themselves  to  lying,  and  defiantly  refused  to
speak  or  act  truthfully;  {h.)  evil-doing  exhausted  all  their  powers^  '*they  weary
themselves,"  (fee,  leaving  them  incapable  of  anything  else.

2.  As  estimated  by  the  Lord  (ver.  6,  8).  For  His  eyes  are  upon,  and  His  eyelids
try,  the  children  of  men.  Note  :  God  marks  what  are  the  surroundings  of  His
servants  :  *'Iknow  where  thou  dwellest "  (Rev.  ii.  13).  "Thine  habitation  is  in
the  midst  of  deceit.'*  Their  case  before  God  showed  (1.)  criminal  falsity ;  (2.)  de-
termined repudiation  of  God  in  order  to  practise  "  deceit "  (ver.  7) ;  (3.)  cruel
treachery  (ver.  8).  Observe  :  How  severely  God  regards  the  violation  of  sodal
laws ;  wrong  done  by  man  to  man,  sins  of  the  tongue,  faithless  conduct,  scheming
selfishness.  Yet,  further,  men  fall  away  from  God  as  their  first  stage  of  decline  :
it  therefore  argues  their  complete  degradation  when  they  become  avowedly /a/s«  to
their  fellow-men, — indicates  utter  moral  corruption,  loss  of  every  virtue  and  of  all
worth.

3.  Yet  condoned  by  themselves  (ver.  23-26).  They  neglected  "  loving-kindness,
judgment,  and  righteousness  "  (ver.  24),  despised  what  God  "  delighted  in,"  and
then  gloried  in  their  "  wisdom,  might,  and  riches  "  (ver.  23).  More  :  they  relied
upon  the  value  of  a  rite,  "  circumcision  "  (ver.  25,  26),  as  a  guarantee  against
being  abandoned  by  God  and  consigned  to  heathen  conquest.  1 .  Our  otvn  resources
("  wisdom,  might,  riches  ")  will  not  protect  us  from  hostile  invasion.  God  menaced
Judah  with  the  Chaldean  scourge  because  of  their  perfidious  impiety,  their  neglect
of  "  loving-kindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness ; "  Judah  instantly  comforted
herself  with  looking  at  her  resources  of  wisdom,  might,  and  wealth.  2.  Our
religious  professions  (reliance  on  the  covenant  of  circumcision)  afford  no  answer  to
the  denunciation  against  our  sins,  nor  any  excuse  for  them.  Having  violated
practical  piety — "loving-kindness,  judgment,  righteousness,  and  knowing  God  " —
their  vaunted  circumcision  would  not  protect  them  from  the  doom:  they  were
**  uncircumcised  in  heart."

III.  God's  vindication  of  His  judgments.  He  does  not  leave  it  to  His  prophet
to  "justify  the  ways  of  God  with  men :"  Himself  expounds  the  righteousness  of
His  proceedings.

1.  The  judgments  delineated.  The  country  devastated  (ver.  10).  Jerusalem
destroyed  (ver.  11).  Cities  desolated  (ver.  11).  Life  embittered  (ver.  15).  The
people  banished  and  consumed  in  exile  (ver.  16).  Zion  a  scene  of  spoliation  and
slaughter  (ver.  19,  21).  Fields  strewn  with  the  unburied  slain  (ver.  22).  God
will  not  respect  their  covenant  distinction  (ver.  25,  26)  in  the  impartial  visitation
of  retribution.  (1.)  (j(odi9>  punishments  9.xq  far-reaching,  vast,  majestic,  even  as  are
His  mercy  and  His  grace.  All  His  doings  are  on  a  scale  of  stupendous,  awful
magnitude.  "  Marvellous  are  Thy  works,  0  Lord."  "  Glorious  in  holiness,  fearful
in  praises,  doing  wonders.^*  (2.)  God's  punishments  are  all-inclusive,  beyond
evasion  or  escape, — leaving  for  those  condemned  no  refuge.

2.  The  judgments  imperative.  Note  :  (1.)  His  searching  purpose  (ver.  7) ;  (2.)  His
necessary  severity  (ver.  9).     Judgments  have  a  twofold  purpose  :  (a.)  Corrective  :

V  193


OHAF.  IX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


"  melt  and  try  them/'  purify  some  in  the  fires  of  affliction :  "  when  Thy  judg-
ments are  abroad  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  will  learn  righteousness."  This  end
must  be  sought,  for  nothing  milder  than  severe  punishments  aflfected  them  for
good.  God  asks,  as  if  in  perplexity,  "  How  shall  I  do  ?  "  <fec.  Solicitous  to  secure
their  spiritual  improvement  even  by  the  calamities  which  impended.  (6.)  Aveng-
ing :  for  they  who  will  not  be  reformed  must  be  ruined.

3.  The  judgments  vindicated.  Jehovah  calls  upon  the  thoughtful  to  ponder  and
declare  ^^for  what  the  land  perishetb,"  <kc.  (ver.  12).  Then  follows  (1.)  The
DWvuQ  indictment  (ver.  13,  14):  revolt  against  God's  law  and  service,  abandonment
to  self-indulgence  and  idolatry.  (2.)  The  Divine  sentence  (ver.  15,  16).  Observe  :
Severity  is  wholly  foreign  to  God's  designs  and  delight  (ver.  24).  He  desires  not
the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  delights  in  mercy ;  nevertheless,  when  all  His  "  loving-
kindness  "  avails  nothing  with  sinners,  when  they  resist  His  grace  and  repudiate
salvation,  there  remains  only  this,  "  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and
fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries."  Yet  "  God  hath  not  appointed
us  to  torath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."


HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  SUCCESSIVE  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  IX,


Ver.  1.   Theme:  Anouish  of  grief

OVER  sinners'  ruin.

I.  His  vivid  anticipation  of  coming
woes.  Times  were  now  tranquil  j  no
cry  of  grief  rang  through  the  land.  He
the  sole  weeper  I  Like  to  a  Greater,  who
also  was  a  Lone  Weeper  ;  "  Hosanas  "
around  Him,  revelry  in  Jerusalem,  none
dreamt  of  doom  nearing  :  yet  Jesus
"  beheld  the  city  and  wept  over  it."
(1.)  Doom  is  not  less  real  or  near  because
ignored  by  those  who  are  doomed.  (2.)
Eyes  divinely  opened  foresee  what  is
hid  from  the  godless.

n.  His  passionate  distress  over
coming  woes.  This  is  natural  to  the
Christian  patriot^  the  Christian  pastor  :
"  I  tell  you  even  weeping  "  (Rom.  ix.  2).
(1.)  Sinners  ought  to  be  concerned  for
themselves.  (2.)  Godliness  creates  true
generosity,  —  the  peril  of  others  em-
bitters the  soul.

III.  His  baffling  helplessness  before
coming  woes.  He  can  bemoan  them:
would  readily  weep  and  ceaselessly  weep
over  His  people's  ruin,  but  what  could
avail  1  He  could  do  nothing  to  avert
the  terrible  fate.  (1.)  None  can  by  any
means  redeem  a  brother.  (2.)  Sinners
thwart  the  agonising  solicitude  of  the
godly  by  their  own  hardened  indiffer-
ence. (3.)  Each  must  deliver  his  own
soul  by  going  himself  to  the  Saviour;
pastors  and  prophets  cannot  deliver
them.  They  can  **  weep,"  but  cannot
•ave.  Reflection  :  What  a  luxury  of
194


joy  there  must  be  in  possessing  the  power
to  save  I  Jesus  has  this  joy — He  only.
He  obtained  it  on  Calvary.  In  order  to
possess  it,  "  He  endured  the  cross,
despising  the  shame."  Yet  earnest
servants  of  Christ  will  "  enter  into  the
joy  of  their  Lord,'*  inasmuch  as  they
have  entered  into  His  distress  over
sinners,  and  longing  to  rescue  them.

Comments :  "  It  becomes  us,  while,
we  are  here  in  this  vale  of  tears,  to
conform  to  the  temper  of  the  climate,
and  to  sow  in  tears.  .  .  .  While  we  find
our  hearts  such  fountains  of  sin,  it  is  fit
that  our  eyes  should  be  fountains  of
tears." — Henry,  **  The  meaning  is,  that
the  destruction  of  the  people  would  be
so  monstrous  and  dreadful,  that  it  could
not  be  sufficiently  bewailed.  ...  As  he
saw  that  their  hearts  were  inflexible,
and  that  a  common  way  of  speaking
would  be  despised,  he  was  constrained
to  use  such  similes.  Learn  what  vehe-
mence they  ought  to  use  whom  God  calls
to  the  same  office  of  teaching." — Calvin,
"  From  the  wish  to  be  utterly  dissolved
in  tears  because  of  the  misfortunes  of
his  countrymen,  the  prophet  passes
naturally  to  the  wish  to  flee  away  from
the  daily  sight  of  those  sins,  which  were
the  real  cause  of  their  sufFeringa." —
Speaker^ s  Com,

Ver.  1,  2.  Theme:  Genuine  philaw-

THROPy.

Jeremiah  a  devout  saint,  true  patriot,


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.   IX.


faithful  prophet,  model  philanthropist.
Early  Church  entertained  so  exalted  an
idea  of  him,  that  they  pictured  him  as
the  very  type  of  Him  who  was  the  most
perfect  incarnation  of  Heaven's  tender-
ness and  love.  Many  in  this  age  who
are  philanthropists  for  trade;  impose  on
the  credulous ;  they  are  an  offence  to
genuine  souls,  and  their  lives  a  calumny
on  the  holy  cause.  Two  aspects  of
genuine  philanthropy  :

I.  Genuine  philanthropy  melting
with  earnestness.  *'  Oh,  that  head
waters/'  (fee.  He  had  wept  copiously,  but
would  weep  more — "Rivers  of  water"
— if  thereby  serve  God  and  country.

1.  Heart  intensely  earnest  concerning
the  temporal  condition  of  men.  Chaldean
army  among  them,  sword  staining  the
country  with  blood,  groans  of  the  dying
and  wails  of  the  bereaved  :  "  The  slain
of  the  daughter  of  my  people."  This
distresses  him ;  weeps  as  patriot  over
grief  of  his  country.  "  O  Jerusalem,
Jerusalem ! "

2.  Heart  intensely  earnest  concerning
the  moral  condition  of  men.  Their  car-
nalities, idolatries,  and  crimes  affect  his
pious  spirit  more  than  physical  sufferings
and  political  disasters.  He  knew  sin
was  the  cause  of  all,  that  no  salvation
without  removal  of  sin.  No  true  philan-
thropists who  not  chiefly  concerned  with
souls.  *'My  heart's  desire,"  &c.  :  see
Paul  (Rom.  x.  1).  '*  Rivers  of  water
.  .  .  because  keep  not  Thy  law  :  "  see
David  (Ps.  cxix.  136,  xlii.  3).  Why  all
this  earnestness  about  the  soul?  (1.)
Think  of  the  soul  in  relation  to  its  capa-
city/ of  suffering  and  happiness.  (2.)  In
relation  to  the  influences  for  good  or  evil
it  is  capable  of  exerting.  (3.)  In  relation
to  its  power  of  being  a  delight  or  a  grief
to  the  heart  of  Infinite  Love.

II.  Genuine  philanthropy  sighing  for
isolation.    "  Oh,  that  in  wilderness,"  (fee.

1.  This  is  the  sigh  of  a  spiritually
vexed  soul.  Like  Lot  in  Sodom,  the
hideous  forms  of  sin  every  day  *'  vexed
his  righteous  soul."  Like  David,  when
"  saw  transgressors  and  was  grieved."
Like  Paul  at  Athens,  *'  spirit  stirred  "  at
revolting  iniquities  which  met  him  at
every  turn.  Natures  spiritually  refined
and  ennobled  recoil  with  inexpressible


disgust  from  vanities  and  crimes  of  theii
age.

"  Far  from  the  world,  0  Lord,  I  flee,
From  strife  and  tumult  far ;
From  scenes  where  Satan  wages  still
His  most  successful  war."

—COWPBB.

2.  This  sigh  for  isolation  is  the  sigh
of  disappointed  love.  He  had  worked
earnestly  and  with  self-denial  to  improve
the  spiritual  condition  of  his  country,
yet  it  grew  worse,  sank  deeper  in  ini-
quities. Nothing  is  more  saddening
to  generous  souls  than  the  discovery  of
indifference,  ingratitude,  and  growing
vice  in  the  very  men  they  seek  to  bless.
Elijah  felt  it,  and  betook  himself  to  a
cave ;  David,  and  cried,  "  Oh,  that  I  had
wings  as  of  a  dove,"  (fee. ;  Christ,  and
said,  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain."

There  is  danger  of  a  corrupt  age  ex-
hausting the  love  of  genuine  philanthro-
pists. Instances  of  loving  souls  becoming
misanthropic  through  the  ill-treatment  of
those  whom  they  endeavoured  to  serve.
A  sublime  fact  that  Christ's  philanthropy
survived  the  fiendish  cruelty  of  the  cross,
rose  with  Him  from  the  sepulchre,  and
despatched  a  message  of  mercy  to  His
most  malignant  enemies  at  Jerusalem.

Conclusion  :

(1.)  The  vicariousness  of  genuine
philanthropy.  It  inspires  the  possessor
with  the  spirit  that  will  prompt  him  to
sacrifice  his  very  being  for  the  good  of
others,  to  weep  himself  away.  "  I
would  that  accursed  from  Christ  for  my
brethren."  All  genuine  philanthropy
bears  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  others.

(2.)  The  abuse  of  genuine  philan-
thropy. How  shamefully  was  the  love
of  Jeremiah  requited  by  countrymen  I
The  greatest  sin  in  universe  is  sin
against  love.

(3.)  The  imperfection  of  genuine
philanthropy.  Like  the  best  of  every-
thing human,  love  is  not  perfect  here.
Disheartened,  Jeremiah  sought  isolation.
At  one  time  we  hear  him  exclaim,  *'  I  will
not  make  mention  of  Him,  nor  speak
any  more  in  His  name." — Homilist.

N.B. — C  H.  Spurgeon  used  ver.  1  as
text  for  sermon  on  "  India's  Ills  and
England's  Sorrows,"  at  the  time  of
the  Sepoy  mutiny,  September  1857.

195


CBAP.il.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


**  Some  men  sent  into  this  world  for
the  purpose  of  being  the  world's  weepers.
Mankind  must  have  their  heroes  to  ex-
press their  courage,  their  philanthro-
pists to  live  out  mankind's  philanthropy,
their  weepers  to  weep  from  cradle  to
grave  for  the  woes  of  others.  If  you
have  tears,  these  hard  times  will  compel
you  to  shed  them  now  :

"  I.  For  persons  actually  slain  :  with
murder  and  bloodshed.  Our  spirits,
harrowed  by  the  most  fearful  and  unex-
pected cruelty,  have  felt  the  ties  of  kin-
dred very  strongly  when  found  our  race
butchered  in  the  East.  England's  sol-
diers tortured  j  England's  daughters  dis-
honoured. Who  can  read  the  tale  of
infamy  without  tears  ?  Betake  ourselves
in  agonies  of  prayer  to  God  that  He  will
interpose.

'^11.  For  those  morally  slain.  Sin
aboundeth,  and  iniquity  is  still  mighty.
Worse  deaths  than  those  inflicted  by  the
sword.

"  1.  Weep  for  the  drunkenness  of  this
land.  Thousands  every  year  murdered
thereby.  My  soul  might  be  an  everlast-
ing Niob^,  perpetually  dropping  showers
of  tears,  if  it  might  know  the  doom  and
destruction  wrought  by  the  demon  of
drunkenness.

"  2.  Weep  for  the  crime  of  debauch-
ery. *  A  shame  even  to  speak  of  the
things  done  in  secret.'  Harlots  and
seducers.

"  3.  Men  are  falling  by  every  sin^  dis-
guised under  the  shape  of  pleasure.
Ominous  theatre  notice — 'To  the  pit  !  *

"  In  Jeremiah's  day  Jerusalem  was  all
mirth.  They  laughed  him  to  scorn.
So  ye  marvel  I  should  weep  for  you/
But  I  foresee  the  future  ;  see  you  before
the  Judge  ;  and  the  thought  of  your
destruction  bids  us  yield  to  tears.
'  Wages  of  sin  is  death.'  We  weep  for
those  who  have  had  great  privileges^  but
have  neglected  them  ;  and  who,  having
had  great  privileges,  if  lost,  must  expect
greater  punishment.  *  More  tolerable
for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.'  Christians  !
cease  not  weeping  amid  prayerful  plead-
ings for  those  in  your  families^  for  your
neighbours,  who  are  yet  in  the  power  of
•in. " — Spurgeon,

I.  He  abandons  himself  to  sorrow,
196


in  consideration  of  the  calamitous  con-
dition of  his  people.

II.  He  abandons  himself  to  solitude,
in  consideration  of  the  scandalous  char-
acter and  conduct  of  his  people. — Henry,
(Addenda  to  chap.  ix.  1,  ^^  Fountain  of
tears  ;  "  ver.  2,  "  Solitude.'')

Ver.    3.       Theme:      Falsity:    its

CRUELTY  AND  COWARDICE.

It  has  been  wisely  said  that  "  every
violation  of  truth  is  not  only  a  sort  of
suicide  in  the  liar,  but  is  a  stab  at  the
health  of  human  society."  Certainly
falsity  is  a  two-edged  sword  ;  it  wounds
the  deceiver  equally  with  the  deceived.
Heaven's  imprecations  are  upon,  and
heaven's  gates  exclude,  **  all  liars."

Text  contains  :

I.  Two  affirmations :  the  positive
side  of  a  sinner's  life.

Charges  upon  these  people :

1.  Perfidious  words :  speech  prosti-
tuted to  falsity.  A  grievous  crime  to
use  words  foully,  to  pervert  speech.
Like  poisoning  a  public  spring.  It  is
the  devil's  work  ;  **  for  he  is  a  liar,  and
the  father  of  lies."  False  words  are
crafty  (ver.  4),  malicious  (ver.  5),  ruin-
ous (ver.  8).

"  Curse  on  the  coward  or  perfidious  tongue  !  **

— Thomson.

"  A  lie  should  be  trampled  on  and
extinguished  wherever  found.  I  am  for
fumigating  the  atmosphere  when  I
suspect  that  falsehood,  like  pestilence,
breathes  around  me." — Carlyle,

"  Dare  to  be  true,  nothing  can  need  a  lie  ;
A  fault  which  needs    it  most  grows  two
thereby."  — Herbert.

2.  Iniquitous  deeds.  A  transgressor
may  begin  with  abusing  language,  mis-
using words,  speaking  deceitfully,  cover-
ing over  his  sins  by  fair  speech  ;  but  he
will  soon  advance  from  words  to  deeds.
Evil-speakers  are  always  evil-doers.  A
man  who  can  speak  foully  can  act  basely.
George  Whitfield  would  fasten  his  pockets
when  he  heard  any  one  speak  ill;  because
he  who  could  speak  wrong  could  act  so  ;
a  liar  can  steal.  As  progression  from
words  to  deeds  is  natural,  so  progression
from  evil  deeds  to  greater  evils  is  inevi-
table.    "  From  iniquity  unto  iniquity.*'


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  IS.


In  the  case  of  these  people  their  ini-
quitous deeds  were  (a.)  A  violation  of
mutual  obligations  between  man  and
man;  each  wronged  the  other,  in  the
home,  in  neighbourly  intercourse,  in
commerce,  <fec.  (6.)  A  violation  of
Divine  obligations  ;  each  revolted  from
the  control  and  claims  of  God.  These
two  affirmations  give  the  positive  and
practical  side  of  a  sinner's  life.

II.  Two  negations :  the  desolate
side  of  a  sinner's  life.

There  is  much  in  a  sinner  which  we
should  desire  to  be  tuithout,  viz.,  a  lying
tongue,  an  evil  life.  But  he  lacks  much
we  should  desire  to  have,  "  valour  for
truth,"  and  "  knowledge  of  God.''

1.  Faithless  towards  men.  Social  and
civil  responsibilities  contemned  :  "  Not
valiant  for  the  truth,"  i.e,,  not  energetic
to  maintain  righteousness  and  fairness.
They  let  order,  law,  and  duty  fall  into
neglect.  "  Not  faithful  to  their  convic-
tions" (Hitzig).  "Not  faithful  in  their
behaviour  towards  their  fellow-men "
(Kiel).  Those  who  had  power  in  their
hands  did  not  use  it  faithfully  for  right-
eous ends.  "  Not  fidelity  in  their
engagements  with  their  fellow-men  *'
{Speaker^ s  Com.).  Christ's  parable  of
unjust  judge.  "  It  is  indeed  proof  of
impiety  when  men,  trampling  upon
faithfulness  and  equity,  allow  themselves
every  kind  of  licentiousness '*  (Calvin).
Iniquitous  persons  are  scarcely  likely  to
respect  social  and  civil  duties ;  right-
eousness may  have  "  fallen  among
thieves,"  but  they  are  content  to  "  pass
by  on  the  other  side,"  intent  on  **  pro-
ceeding from  evil  to  evil."

2.  Indifferent  towards  God.  Sacred
realities  and  Divine  claims  ignored,
**  They  know  not  Me,  saith  the  Lord."
They  are  willingly  ignorant  of  Him,  and
they  are  necessarily  ignorant  of  Him  ;
for  while  they  "  desire  not  the  know-
ledge of  God's  ways,"  they  are  also
**  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world,"
"  walk  in  darkness,"  benighted  by  their
sins.  For  guilt  darkens  the  soul,  dead-
ens the  conscience,  disables  the  mind,
degrades  the  life  ;  hence,  "  they  know
not  Me."

Terrible  negation  I  it  means  doom  :
"Whom  to  know  is  life  eternal."     He


as  a

"the


who  shuts  from  himself  the  light  of
God  shuts  against  himself  the  gates  of
light  and  life.  "  The  pure  in  heart  see
God."

"  This  above  all,  to  thine  own  self  be  true ;
And  it  must  follow,  as  the  night  the  day,
Thou  canst  uot  then  be  false  to  any  man."

— Shakespeare.

See  Scripture  illustrations  of  falsity
and  its  issues :  e.g.,  Jacob,  Gehazi,
Ananias.  Truthfulness,  like  the  light,
moves  in  direct  lines  ;  and,  like  the  sun's
rays,  which  start  from  and  return  to  their
source,  so  truthfulness  is  Divine  in  its
origin  and  essence,  and  returns  home  to
Him  at  last.  But  falsehood  is
"wandering  star,"  destined  to
blackness  of  darkness  for  ever."

Ver.  4.  Comments  :  "  Take  ye  heed,'^
<kc.  In  a  state  of  such  utter  lawless-
ness, the  bonds  of  mutual  confidence  are
necessarily  relaxed,  and  suspicion  takes
its  place.  The  parallel  passage  in  Micah
vii.  6,  6,  shows  that  Jerendah's  com-
plaint was  not  occasioned  by  his  soreness
at  personal  ill-treatment,  but  was  too
true  a  picture  of  the  general  faithlessness
which  existed  at  Jerusalem.  "  Every
brother  will  utterly  supplant ;  "  an  allu-
sion to  the  name  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxv.
26,  XX vii.  36  ;  Hos.  xii.  3).  It  might
be  rendered.  Every  brother  is  a  thor-
ough Jacob. — Speakers  Com.

"  Fratrum  quoque  gratia  rara  est."— OviD.
The  words  are  very  noticeable  :   lip^^
2^py.     The  verb  2.\yy  is  derived  from

T  ■•■

the  heel  of  the  foot,  and  suggests  the
effort  to  trip  up  another.

"  Since  this  verb  in  Kal  occurs  be-
sides only  in  Gen.  xxvii.  36  and  Hos.
xii.  4,  both  times  of  Jacob,  it  is  certainly
probable  that  the  prophet,  speaking  here
of  the  deceit  practised  by  one  brother  to
another,  had  this  early  instance  in  view."
— Lange,

Ver.  4.  Theme:  Slandering.  ^'^ Every
neighbour  will  walk  with  slanders.**
(Comp.  Notes  on  vi.  28.)  (Addenda  to
chap.  ix.  4,  '^Slander.")

I.  Unanimity  in  sowing  mischief :
"  Every  neighbour."    Virulent  treachery.

II.  Activity  in  spreading  calumny :

197


CHAP.  UL


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


**  Will  walk,"  travel  about  on  this
nefarious  business  ;  "  feet  run  to  evil "
(Prov.  i.  16).

III.  Malignity  in  neighbourly  inter-
course. This  is  to  use  familiarity  to
murder  happiness.  **  Poison  of  aaps
under  their  lips."  '*  Madmen,  casting
firebrands,  arrows,  and  death."  Such
society  intolerable,  perilous,  destructive
of  all  honour  and  peace.

**  The  world  with  calumny  abounds,
The  whitest  virtue  slander  wounds ;
There  are  whose  joy  is,  night  and  day,
To  talk  a  character  away.

"  Eager,  from  rout  to  rout,  they  haste.
To  blast  the  generous  and  the  chaste,
And,  hunting  reputation  down.
Proclaim  their  triumphs  through  the  town.'*

— PoPB.

Ver.    5.      Theme:    Sin   a  violent

OUTRAGE  ON  SELF.

**  They  have  taught  their  tongues  to
speak  lies:*'  they  are  artists  at  it
(Trapp)  ;  make  a  study  of  it.  i.  They
are  ingenious  to  sin,  "  have  taught  their
tongues :"  implying  that  through  the
reluctances  of  natural  conscience  they
found  it  difficult  to  bring  themselves  to
it,  but  by  degrees  they  have  made
themselves  masters  of  the  art  of  lying,
ii.  They  are  industrious  to  sin,  "  weary
themselves  to  commit  iniquity :  '*  put  a
force  upon  their  conscience  to  bring
themselves  to  it,  to  tire  out  their  con-
victions by  offering  them  continual  vio-
lence ;  are  wearied  with  their  sinful
pursuits,  and  yet  not  weary  of  them.
The  service  of  sin  is  a  perfect  drudgery.
— Henry,

**  Weary  themselves : "  are  at  labori-
ous pains  to  act  perversely. — Maurer,

Take  the  utmost  pains  to  go  crook-
edly.— Speakers  Com,

Wrong-doing  is  an  abuse  of  our
nature.  A  chemist  finds  it  a  vexing  and
thankless  attempt  to  fuse  mutually
repellant  substances,  or  to  mix  antago-
nistic gases.  Sin  never  thoroughly
naturalises  itself  to  man's  conscience  and
aptitudes ;  all  along  there  is  a  strife
within  as  of  conflicting  forces.  Hence
**the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard ;"  and
"  the  wicked  are  like  a  troubled  sea ;  no
peace  to  the  wicked."  This  a  benign
fftct,  testifies  of  man's  nobler  calling
198


and  destiny,  and  is  an  incentive  within
us  to  *'  cease  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do
well ; "  it  is,  moreover,  the  preparation
in  man  for  Christ's  redeeming  and
reforming  grace.

Ver.  6.     Them^e :  Our  localisation

MARKED  BY  THE  OMNISCIENT  EYE."

I.  That  our  dwelling-place  is  recog-
nised by  God.

II.  That  our  social  surroundings
attract  the  Divine  observance.

III.  That  the  peril  and  painfulness
of  our  situation  is  fully  estimated  by
Him.

IV.  That  the  struggle  it  costs  us  to
live  righteously  is  measured  by  God  in
the  light  of  the  antagonism  and  snares
which  endanger  us.

V.  That  maintenance  of  a  holy  life
»7*  unlikely  scenes  is  the  triumph  of
godly  heroism.

VI.  That  He  who  recognises  our
danger  will  send  adequate  grace  to  help,
and  proportion  ultimate  rewards  to  our
courageous  fidelity  (Rev.  il  13).

*•  Where  duty  calls  or  danger.
Be  never  wanting  there."

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Punishment  cor-
rective RATHER  THAN  RETRIBUTIVE.

I.  God's  gracious  design  in  our
calamities.  "  I  will  melt  and  try
them."  Even  with  a  people  so  defi-
antly impious  and  utterly  corrupt,  and
even  in  such  calamities  as  Chaldean
overthrow  and  captivity,  God  intends
good  issues,  seeks  their  reform  rather
than  their  ruin.  Blank  punishment  for
its  own  sake,  justice  merely  avenging
itself  on  sinners,  this  is  not  God-like,  not
possible.  This,  a  sublime  truth  in  all
ages,  leads  some  to  cherish  the  "  larger
hope  '*  of  the  purifying  issues  of  punish-
ment even  upon  "  the  lost," — those  who
enter  eternity  doomed  !  A  dark  and
solemn  mystery.

II.  God's  distress  over  the  infatua-
tion of  sinners.  "  How  shall  I  do  for,"
<kc.  1.  That  infatuation  frustrates  His
mercy.  2.  It  compels  Him  to  harsh
dealings.  3.  It  moves  Him  to  reluctant
anger.  Milder  processes  were  fruitless  ;
tribulation  must  now  be  tried;  in. their
anguish  they  may  repent   and    return.


HO  Ml  LET  10  OOMMENTART :  JEREMIAH,


OHAF.  IZ.


He  will  melt  the  hardness  of  His  people
in  the  fire  of  affliction.  Yes,  and  will
consume  the  evil  thereby.  The  exclama-
tion, *' How  shall  I  doT*  is  not  (as
Hitzig  and  Graf),  What  dreadful  forms  of
judgment  shall  1  summon  in  vengeance  f
Note :  *'  How  shall  I  do  for  the
daughter]"  God  still  would  find  some
way  of  blessing  her  even  when  He
smites.

III.  God's  necessary  use  of  severe
judgments.  "  How  shall  I  do  for  my
people  ]  "  i.e  f  "  What  else  can  I  do  V
(Maurer).  How  otherwise  can  I  deal
with  her  than  to  try  her  in  the  crucible
of  suffering  ?  "A  corruption  so  deeply
rooted  and  so  widely  extended  can  be
removed  only  by  a  process  of  entire  melt-
ing, which  will  certainly  be  grievous,  but
will  also  refine.  The  Lord  here  asks  how
He  should  act  if  not  as  here  indicated  1
There  is  nothing  else  remaining  but  to
do  this"  (Naeg.).  1.  Calamity  is  God's
last  resort.  2.  Sin  must  be  severely
punished.  "  I  will  cast  them  into  the
fiery  crucible  of  sharp  affliction.  What
can  I  do  less  to  them,  though  they  are
*  My  people,'  since  they  are  so  shame-
lessly, lawlessly  wicked  1  An  unruly
patient  maketh  a  cruel  physician ;  a
desperate  disease  must  have  a  desper-
ate remedy'*  (Trapp).  Verily,  it  is
right  to  ask,  "  If  judgment  begin  at  the
house  of  God  (as  here,  *  My  people '),
what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey
not  the  gospel  of  Christ  1 "  In  the
melting  process,  their  "  deceit  *'  (ver.  6)
would  soon  be  consumed,  and  woful
the  issue ;  nothing  to  resist  the  *'  fiery
trial  which  is  to  try  "  them  !  Yet,  may-
hap, '*  they  themselves  might  be  saved,
yet  so  ashyfire*^  (1  Cor.  iii.  15).

Ver.  8,  9.  Kuinous  conduct  ("tongue,
a  deadly  arrow,"  <fec.),  followed  by
avenging  judgment.  "  With  what
measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured
to  you  again."  (See  notes  on  chap.  v.
9,  29.)  (Addenda  to  chap.  ii.  8,
"  Sedtictive  speech.**)

Ver.  10.  An  interruption  by  Jere-
miah of  Jehovah's  address,  for  ver.  11
continues  the  Divine  utterance  of  male-
dictions against  this  guilty  people.
Amid  God's  threats  of  coming  woe,  the
prophet  interposes  a  piteous  and   em-


bittered wail  over  the  threatened  deso-
lations of  his  country.  (See  Homily
on  chap.  iv.  23-26.)  The  verse  is  a
frightful  yet  truthful  picture  of  an
invaded  country  wasted  by  hostile
forces.

" Mountains"  not  barren  eminences,
but  fruitful  hills,  with  which  Judea
abounded.

*'  Habitations  of  the  wilderness,"
pasture-lands  lately  occupied  by  nume-
rous herds,  restful  and  bountiful  scenes
where  flocks  fed  in  luxuriance  and
peace  ;  now  "  burned  up."  The  Chal-
deans would,  as  is  usual  in  war,  burn
up  the  forage  and  carry  off  the  cattle.
And  so  utterly  devastated  would  these
fair  and  flourishing  scenes  become,  that
even  the  birds  would  take  their  flight  from
a  land  so  parched  as  no  longer  to  furnish
them  food.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  E-uined  Jekusalem.
(Addenda  on  ver.  11,  "Jerusalem  in
ruins.")  God  proceeds  with  His  decree
of  desolating  judgment.  Not  only  shall
the  country  be  burned,  but  the  cities ;
yea,  Jerusalem  specially  shall  be  over-
thrown and  become  "  heaps."     Note  :

i.  The  prophecy,  how  apparently
incredible !  Jerusalem  was  at  that
very  time  a  well-fortified  city,  and  filled
with  valorous  people  ready  to  defend
it  as  well  as  to  boast  of  it.  Predicted
crises  always  seem  incredible  ;  e.g.,  the
flood,  the  doom  of  mighty  nations,  the
coming  judgment  and  overthrow  of  the
world.

ii.  The  prophet,  how  courageously
invincible !  Standing  there  in  Jerusal  em
(vii.  2),  he  proclaimed  what  looked  im-
possible, was  certainly  exasperating  to  his
hearers,  was  equally  shocking  to  his  own
patriotic  soul,  and  exposed  him  to  no
small  animosity  and  danger.

(a.)  Improbable  events  very  commonly
occur ;  foolish,  therefore,  to  screen  our-
selves from  danger  by  that  futile  de-
lusion.

(6.)  Despising  God^s  threatenings  does
not  defeat  them:  they  come  upon  mockers,
"  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and
perish  !  "

(c.)  Divine  heralds  may  convey  tidings
which  evoke  incredulity.     Yet  their  part

199


OHAF.  n.


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMEr^TARY:  JEREMIAH.


is  to    proclaim,   let  men  act  as   they
will.

(d.)  Intrepidity  is  a  seal  and  creden-
tial to  a  religious  preaxiher.  It  asserts
his  own  assurance  of  High  Authority  for
his  words.  But  for  this,  Jeremiah  had
grown  disheartened  by  indifference  and
terrified  by  hostility.  But,  knowing  in
Whose  name  he  spake,  he  '*  feared  not
the  wrath  of  the  king"  nor  his  malevo-
lent counsellors,  but  *'with  all  boldness"
delivered  the  tidings  of  doom.

Ver.  12-16.  ^Aewie  .•  Human  vindi-
cation OF  Divine  vengeance.

Words  imply  that  the  "  wise  "  would
''understand^'  both  the  reason  and  the
justice  of  the  coming  judgments,  *' for
what  the  land  perished,"  i.e..,  on  account
of  what  provocations,  and  that  the  punish-
ment was  equitable  and  merited.

I.  Providence  acts  on  manifestly
righteous  principles.  Fools  may  not
recognise  or  receive  this  fact,  but  very
little  *'  wisdom  "  will  avail  to  vindicate
this.

1.  Invariable  laws  regulate  the  Divine
dispensations  in  every  age.  As  with
Israel  (vii.  12),  so  would  it  be  with
Judah  (vii.  15) ;  and  similarly  with  all
who  act  their  course.

2.  The  issues  of  human  conduct  are  not
obscured  from  men.  They  stand  out
vividly  in  the  careers  of  men  around  us;
while  history  is  also  full  of  illustrations  :
"Well  with  the  righteous;  ill  with  the
wicked."  There  is  no  equivocation,  no
uncertainty,  no  chance  respecting  these
things  :  every  age  shows  the  same.

II.  Human  intelligence  can  recognise
the  justice  of  God's  ways.

1.  By  natural  wisdom.  "  Who  is  the
wise  man  that  may  understand  this  ? "
Needed  no  supernatural  revelation  to
teach  that  desecration  of  holy  scenes  and
defiance  of  holy  laws  must  entail  disaster;
for  unless  so,  there  could  be  no  God
judging  righteously  in  the  earth.  No
one  but  can  recognise  that  sin  merits
and  must  bring  punishment.

2.  By  enlightened  wisdom.  For  in
their  case  they  had  "  wisdom  which  is
from  above,"  and  boasted  themselves
*'  wise,  for  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  with
us "  (viii.  8).     We  can  open  the  Bible

200


and  read  the  curses  against  and  the  con-
sequences of  iniquity.  Examine  "  My
LAW,  which  I  have  set  before  them  "  (ver.
13).

III.  Ample  justification  is  furnished
for  severest  judgments.  God  Himself
gives  the  explanation  (ver.  13,  14).  He
will  allow  to  none  the  plea  of  ignorance.
"  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from
heaven  against  all  unrighteousness  and
ungodliness  of  men."

1.  How  vividly  our  sins  are  arrayed
before  the  Lord.  Minutely  specified
by  God  :  "  forsaken  law,"  "  not  obeyed
voice,"  "neither  walked  therein,"  "walked
afterimagination,"'"walked  after  Baalim.*
Our  sins  are  "set  in  the  light  of  His
countenance."

2.  How  repugnant  our  sins  are  to  the
holiness  of  God.  The  "  land  perished,"
and  "  none  to  pass  through  it"  (ver.  12),
shows  how  He  will  overthrow  His
chosen  habitation  rather  than  connive
at  guilt.

3.  How  provoking  our  sins  are  to  the
mind  of  God.  He  is  ^^  angry  with  the
wicked."  Bead  that  terrifying  fact  in
ver.  15,  16.  "  Of  how  much  sorer
punishment  worthy  who  trampled  under
foot  the  Son  of  God?"

IV.  Direful  maledictions  forewarn
the  guilty  of  their  future.

1.  This,  forewarning  is  a  merciful  fact.
It  offers  time  of  escape.  "  Kiss  the  Sdn,
lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish."  "  Flee
for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you."

2.  This  forewarning  is  an  appalling
fact.     "  God  hath  spoken,  and  He  will

perform  His  word."  (1.)  Bitter  experi-
ences ;  "wormwood."  (2.)  Destructive
calamities;  "  water  of  gall."  (See  Literary
Notes  and  Homilies  on  viii.  14.)  (3.)
Banished  to  their  adversaries  (com  p.
Matt.  XXV.  41).  (4.)  Escape  impossible,
either  by  flight  or  in  far  distance ;  "  I
will  send  a  sword  after  them,"  <fec.  When
the  Lord  God,  whose  eyes  are  in  every
place,  pursues,  He  will  surely  discover
and  overtake.

Conclusion:  The  "?me"  should  use
their  wisdom  to  find  redemption  from
evidently  nearing  disasters.  "  The  pru-
dent man  foreseeth  the  evil  and  hideth
himself."  2.  The  wise  should  use  their
wisdom  toforwarn  others  to  escape ^  "that


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  i  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  IX.


he  may  declare  it "  (ver.  12).  "  Know-
ing the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade
men."  Heedlessness  is  suicidal  (Heb.  ii.
3)  ;  silence  is  criminal  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  8).

Ver.  17-22.  Theme  :  The  bitteeness

AND  BEMOANINGS  OF  DEATH.      (Addenda

to  chap.  ix.  17,  ^^ Mourning  women;**
ver.  21,  '*  Death.")

"  The  citizens  of  Zion  are  called  upon
to  give  heed  to  the  state  of  affairs  now
in  prospect,  i.e.,  the  judgment  preparing,
and  are  to  assemble  mourning  women
that  they  may  strike  up  a  dirge  for  the
dead."— ^«i7.

Although  the  nation  was  now  in  no
dirge-like  mood,  but  made  light  of  the
woful  predictions,  yet  God  directs  them
to  arrange  their  doleful  obsequies  as
though  death  had  already  transpired.

I.  The  certainty  of  death's  approacli.
Though  they  as  yet  saw  not  the  grim
form,  the  spectre  neared :  the  *'  mourning
women "  would  have  their  melancholy
task  (ver,  17).

II.  The  speed  of  death's  advance  (ver.
18).  No  time  to  waste  in  making  pre-
parations :  quick,  ornot ready.  This  ever
true:  the  interval  is  brief;  therefore  "  ma^tf
haste  ;  "  for  death  treads  upon  our  heels.
"  TTeep,"  also,  for  there  is  cause.

III.  The  ravages  of  death's  desola-
tions (ver.  19).  "Spoiled,"  '*  con-
founded;" enforced  desertion  of  cherished
scenes  ["  forsaken "  implies  voluntary
abandonment,  but  this  was  involuntary],
driven  from  dwellings  into  homeless  de-
spair. Analogy  of  death's  work  on  the
ungodly :  their  resources  in  which  boasted
"  spoiled  ;  "  false  hopes  "  confounded;  '*
scenes  where  they  fain  would  have  tarried
*'  forsaken,"  the  "  tabernacle  "  they  had
occupied  left.  For  what  ?  for  where  ?
Alas  !  *'  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  "  over
desolations,  and  despair  attendant  upon
death.

IV.  The  vastness  of  death's  spolia-
tion. "  The  harvest  of  death  would  be
80  large  that  the  number  of  trained
women  would  not  suffice." — Speaker's
Com.  Therefore  ver.  20.  The  mothers
must  therefore  teach  their  daughters  the
melancholy  refrain.  Note :  young  voices
(** daughters ")  as  well  as  old  ("ye
women  ")  will  join  in  the  dirge  for  the


dead ;  for  no  age  is  sacred  or  screened
from  death.  Evidently  from  ver.  21
this  is  the  reason  why  the  daughters
should  be  taught  the  wailing  cry  ;  they
would  soon  have  to  lament  the  loss  of
"  children  and  young  men."  None,  old  or
young,  would  be  exempted  from  mourning.

V.  The  variety  of  death's  victims
(ver.  21,  22).

1.  Enters  all  scenes :  *'  palaces,"
"streets"  (ver.  21),  "open  fields"  (ver.
22).

2.  Desolates  all  social  ranks:  those
who  dwell  in  "palaces"  equally  with
labourers  in  "  streets,"  and  shepherds  in
"  open  field."

3.  Strikes  down  all  ages  ;  "  children,"
"  young  men,"  "  men."

VI.  The  irresistibleness  of  death's
invasions.

1.  Bolted  doors  cannot  exclude  him
from  our  dwellings:  he  "comes  up  into
our  window."

2.  Fortified  palaces  are  no  defence
from  his  assaults  :  "  enters  palaces."

3.  The  highways  in  the  city  he  invades :
where  children  play,  and  young  men
resort.

4.  Lands  groan  vdth  the  burden  of
the  slain  (ver.  22).  So  dreadful  would
be  the  slaughter  that  the  carcases  would
be  left  unburied.  But  what  a  great
sepulchre  earth  is !

Note  1.  It  was  the  custom  anciently
to  give  a  fanciful  interpretation  to  the
words  "  death  is  come  up  into  our
windows  " — viz.,  the  windows  are  the  five
senses;  and  death  "comes  in"  with  the
pleasures  admitted  by  these  "  windows."

Note  2.  The  degradation  to  which  the
body  is  reduced  is  suggested  in  ver.  22.
Just  as  the  Chaldeans  would  lay  all
their  glory  in  the  dust,  and  make  their
beauty  loathsome  "as  dung,"  so  does
death  turn  our  comeliness  into  corruption.

Ver.  21.  Theme:  Death  an  invading

ENEMY.

As  an  enemy :

L  He  is  cruel.  1.  He  strikes  at  the
dearest  objects  of  our  affection.  2.  He
robs  us  of  our  most  useful  men  :  patriots,
philanthropists,  preachers,  <kc.  3.  He
drags  us  from  the  dearest  things  of
the  heart:    occupation,    social    circles,

201


CHAP   IZ.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


cherished  plans,  &c.  4.  He  reduces  our
bodies  to  the  dust.  Cruel  death !  Deaf
to  the  strongest  and  most  piercing  cries
of  social  life.

II.  He  is  unremitting.  Never
sheathes  his  sword  ;  never  pauses  in
march;  not  an  hour  that  he  does  not
strike  a  thousand  fatal  strokes ;  as  rest-
less as  the  sea ;  whoever  idle,  he  is
active — in  every  maUj  in  every  family^
in  every  community y  in  every  nation;
busy  with  all.

III.  He  is  subtle.  Fights  in  ambush,
steals  into  the  house,  touches  the  food  and
it  becomes  poison,  breathes  into  the  air
and  it  becomes  pestiferous,  lays  his  hand
on  the  heart  and  it  is  still.  While
his  victims  speak  of  health,  he  instils
mortal  disease ;  works  through  the
delicate  dish  and  the  sparkling  wines.

IV.  He  is  resistless.  Men  through
ages  have  tried  to  resist  him ;  every
effort  and  expedient  has  failed.  All
that  science,  art,  wealth,  and  caution
could  do  failed.  Granite  castles  and
royal  bodyguards  are  powerless  before
him.  The  mighty  warrior  drops  his
sword  and  becomes  dust  in  his  presence.

V.  He  is  ubiauitous.  No  spot  on
earth  where  he  is  not  at  work.  He  is
in  the  waves  of  air,  on  billows  of  deep,
in  valleys,  on  mountain,  river,  and
brook,  forest  and  flowers ;  whole  earth
is  his  dominion.

VI.  He  is  conquerable.  "The  last
•nemy  shall  be  destroyed."  There
is  One  who  will  swallow  up  death  in
victory :  Christ  has  conquered  death.
1.  In  His  own  resurrection.  2.  In  His
power  upon  the  minds  of  His  disciples,
"O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?" —
Homilist.

Ver.  20,  21.  "To  be  used  in  times
when  death  snatches  many  away.  i.
Who  sends  Him  %  ii  Wherefore  He  is
sent  ?  iii.  How  we  may  protect  our-
selves against  Him  ? " — Naeg.  in  Lange,

Ver.  22,23.  Theme;  Human  glory-
ing CORRECTED.  (Addenda  on  ver.  23,
**  Spurious  glorying.*')

The  prophet  concludes  his  discourse
with  a  general  moral  reflection,  the  ob-
ject of  which  is  to  present  the  only  means
of  escape  from  such  fearfully  threatening
202


dangers — viz.,  a  living  and  truly  produc-
tive knowledge  of  the  Lord.

I.  The  things  in  which  they  are  not
to  glory.

1.  Those  which  to  the  natural  man
seem  most  desirable,  viz.,  wisdom,
strength  (power),  riches.  (Comp.  1
Kings  i.  13,  with  2  Chron.  ix.  22  ;  Job
xii.  13.

2.  Those  in  which  these  Jews  in-
clined presumptuously  to  boast.  Jere-
miah had  censured  their  boast  of  external
carnal  advantages.  (Comp.  vii.  4,  8,
10,  14,  24,  26,  28).  They  gloried  in
their  wisdom  (viii.  8,  9) ;  in  their
strength  ;  yet  lo  !  (ix.  1)  "  slain  "  in  their
riches  (ver.  26-28).

The  "  wisdom  "  in  which  they  are  not
to  glory  is  not  that  called  "  better  than
strength"  (Eccles.  ix.  16),  and  which  is
identical  with  that  recommended  in  ver.
23,  but  worldly  wisdom  (Pro v.  iii.  5).
"  Strength,'*  is  both  physical  strength
(Ps.  cxlvii.  10;  Job  xxxix.  19),  and
power  (2  Kings  x.  34,  xx.  20).

II.  Every  man  must  have  some-
thing in  which  to  glory.

1.  That  which  he  esteems  as  his  highest
blessing  and  honour.  (Comp.  Isa.  li.  16  ;
1  Cor.  i.  31 ;  2  Cor.  x.  17).

2.  God  sets  before  us  the  best  objects  of
glorying.  1.  *'Me;"  both  "under-
stood," and  "  known  : "  God  is  to  be
known  as  'Uhe  only  true  God."  2.  The
qualities  in  which  God  delights;  mercy,
or  "  loving-kindness,'*  as  opposed  to  their
vaunted  "  strength  ; "  Judgment  and
righteousness,**  as  in  distinction  from
their  oppression  of  the  weak  and  dis-
tressed (vii.  5,  6j  Ps.  cxlv.  17). — Ar-
ranged from  Lange.

Theme:   The  Christian's  highest

AND  TRUE  GLORY.

It  consists  in :  i.  Believing  in  the  Lord.
ii.  Living  in  the  Lord.  iii.  Working
for  the  Lord.  iv.  Suffering  for  the
Lord* 8  sake. — Luther,  quoted  in  Lange.

Theme:  The  true  knowledge  of
God.

i.  Its  nature  :  not  dead  science,  but
living  experience.

ii.  Its  fruit',  (a.)  The  highest  6/fS5in^
(mercy,  justice,   and    righteousness   ici


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  IZ.


Jesus  Christ);  (6.)  The  highest  honour
(he  who  has  it  will  not  be  put  to  shame,
as  he  who  glories  in  the  flesh). — ^aeg.

i.  The  wisest  and  surest  reasonings
in  religion  are  grounded  on  the  unques-
tionable perfections  of  the  Divine  nature
{e.g.y  belief  in  Divine  Providence  and
veracity).

ii.  The  nature  of  God  is  the  true  idea
and  pattern  of  perfection  and  happiness.
— Ahp.  Tillotson,  quoted  in  Lange,

"  Paul  says,  '  He  that  glorietb,  let  him
glory  in  the  L<yrd^  (2  Cor.  x.  17),  and
Jesus,  *  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they
might  know  Thee,  and  Jesus  Christ,*  (fee.
(John  xvii.  3).  This  is  to  glory,  as
though  one  should  say,  '  God  be  praised,
I  am  right  well  and  sound  ! '  To  be
sound  in  the  faith  is  to  have  the  know-
ledge of  Jesus  Christ,  to  maintain  it,  to
grow  in  it.  To  make  a  great  noise  of
good  works  as  our  own,  is  ridiculous.
For  grace  produces  them,  the  power  of
God  dwelling  in  us.  We  do  nothing,
and  should  do  nothing  if  it  were  left  to
us ;  but  the  work  of  God  in  us,  that  we
believe,  is  not  to  be  passed  over  in
silence,  moroseness,  and  ingratitude.
What  a  noise  do  humble  saints  in  the
Revelation  make  of  their  grace,  freedom,
priesthood,  royal  dignity,  victory,  re-
demption (chaps,  iv.,  v.,  vii.,  xii.,  xiv.,
xvii.,  xix.).  Oh,  that  the  whole  earth
were  full  of  our  glorying  in  the  Lord !

'  Oh,  that  we  were  able,  our  songs  so  high  to
raise,
That  all  the  country  round  might  echo  with
His  praise.'

Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,
that  they  may  see  your  good  works  and
glorify  the  Father  in  heaven," — Zimenr
dorf,

"  Examples  of  the  folly  of  glorying
(or  trusting)  in  wisdom  (Solomon),  might
(Samson),  riches  (Ahab)." — Bp.  Bull.

(Comp.  Addenda  on  ver.  33,  ^^  Spuri-
ous glorying,^')

Theme :  A  prohibited  and  a  sanc-
tioned OLORYINO.

When  Divine  punishment  for  wrong-
doing comes  upon  a  people,  there  is
proof  made  of  the  powerlessness  of
wisdom,  might,  and  wealth  to  do  their
possessors  any  good.       God  refuses  to


tolerate  the  conceit  of  knowledge,
strength,  or  wealth — His  gifts  ;  instead
of  glorying  in  the  knowledge  of  His
being  and  character,  in  what  "  He  de-
lights,

I.  The  glorjdng  which  is  prohibited
by  God.

The  tendency  and  temptation  to  self-
glorification  over  these  things.  For
'*  wisdom "  is  a  great  good,  so  also
"  strength,"  and  *'  wealth  ; "  but  each
being  the  gift  of  God,  the  Giver  is  to  be
gloried  in,  not  the  gifts ;  otherwise  the
glorying  becomes  the  glorification  of
self.

1.  Glorying  in  wisdom  is  the  glorijica-
tion  of  self;  therefore  forbidden.  The
mind  that  knows  and  the  subjects
known  are  both  from  God.  "  Know-
ledge," possessed  or  contemplated  apart
from  God,  *'pu£feth  up;"  and  so  en-
dangers. Scripture  commends  **  wis-
dom," which  glories  not  in  itself,  but  in
God  our  Saviour.  "  Christ  is  the  wis-
dom of  God."  The  law  of  Christian
submission  and  adoration  is  that  which
we  are  called  to  follow.

2.  Glorying  in  strength  is  forbidden  as
self-glorification.  Many  animals  far  sur-
pass man  in  strength.  The  early  his-
tory of  man  exhibits  the  consequences
of  glorying  in  mere  physical  strength.
Giants  performed  astonishing  feats  of
valour  ;  but  the  ungigantic  David  made
manifest  the  weakness  of  mere  bodily
bulk  and  strength.  Need  to  be  '*streijgth-
ened  with  might  by  God's  Spirit  in  the
inner  man."  Sickness  corrects  our  glory-
ing in  the  forces  of  the  flesh.  History
shows  God's  repudiations  of  this  boast :
in  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army,
decline  and  fall  of  empires  founded  on
mere  force,  <fec.  Not  self,  but  "  Christ
the  power  of  God  "  must  be  our  glory.

3.  Glorying  in  wealth  is  forbidden  as
self-glorification.  The  lust  of  posses-
sion strong  in  man.  Sad  to  be  behold
a  spirit  entombed  in  a  mausoleum  of  gold
and  silver.

II.  The  glorying  which  is  Divinely
sanctioned.  To  glory  is  an  instinct  in
man ;  is  right,  therefore,  where  the  ob-
ject is  worthy  of  him.  God  here  pre-
sents Himself.  There  is  a  gradation  set
before  us  :  God  as  the  object  of  under-

203


OHAP.  IZ.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


Handing;  God  as  the  object  of  hnow-
ledge;  God  as  the  object  oi  glorying.

1.  Understanding  God.  "  There  is  a
spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty  giveth  him  understanding/'
This  commoii  human  faculty  is  a  gracious
gift  of  God.  Early  education  calls  it
into  exercise;  events  of  life  afford  it
discipline;  profound  spiritual  verities
may  be  by  it  examined.  Man  may  under-
stand God  !  By  Divine  inspiration  even
the  uncultivated  mind  may  be  in  com-
munion with  Eternal  Love.

2.  Knowing  God.  This  is  more  than
"understanding"  Him.  "Life  eternal
to  know  Him  and  Jesus  Christ  whom
He  has  sent."  Our  filial  relation  to
God  in  Christ  is  the  true  ground  of  our
knowledge  of  Him.  Deeply  blessed  is
the  knowledge  of  Christ,  for  it  is  the
knowledge  of  God  incarnate.  Eternity
will  reveal  new  deeps  of  God's  eternal
love  and  being.

3.  In  the  understanding  and  know-
ledge of  God,  the  spirit  of  man  glories y
and  may  glory  for  ever.  God  glories  in
our  glorying  in  Him.  That  which  a
man  glories  in  truly  intimates  his  char-
acter. He  who  glories  in  music  or  art
continually  occupies  himself  in  it.  Thus
day  and  night  the  soul  delights  in  Christ
Jesus.

Conclusion  :  Let  us  rightly  estimate
our  being  and  our  possessions  in  Christ.
Because  we  are  what  we  are,  we  are
forbidden  to  glory  in  anything  beneath
our  God. — Rev.  W.  R.  Percivaly  from
''Homilistr

Comments  :  "  Wisdom  "  — political
sagacity ;  as  if  it  could  rescue  from  the
impending  calamities.  "  Might " — mili-
tary prowess.  "  Riches  " — accumulated
wealth  ;  none  of  which  boasted  resources,
nor  all  combined,  would  prove  a  means
of  defence,  and  their  confidence  in  them
would  be  a  snare.  Well  would  it  be  /or
them  to  abandon  hope  in  these  futile
gloryings,  and  seek  refuge  and  protec-
tion in  God,  which  they  might  do  by
obedient  and  reverent  regard  to  those
duties  in  which  He  "delights."

"  Understandeth  me" — theoretically ;
"knoweth  me" — personally,  experimen-
tally, and  practically.

"Loving-kindness" — God's  mercy  is
204


put  in  the  forefront,  since  that  alon<8
can  save  us  from  fleeing  in  fear  from
His  presence;  "Judgment"  towards
the  rebellious  who  will  not  submit ;
"Righteousness,"  His  faithfulness  to
His  gracious  promises,  to  all  who  take
refuge  in  His  goodness  and  care.  "  In
the  earth  :"  which  contradicts  the  heart-
less philosophy  which  teaches  that  God
does  not  interest  Himself  or  interfere  in
terrestrial  affairs.  (See  Critical  Com-
mentary.)

"  This  then  is  the  prophet's  remedy
for  the  healing  of  the  nation.  It  is  the
true  understanding  and  knowledge  of
God,  of  which  the  first,  "  understand'
ingj^  means  the  spiritual  enlightenment  of
the  mind  (1  Cor.  ii.  13,  14)  ;  the  other,
^''knowledge"  the  training  of  the  heart
unto  obedience  (John  viii.  31,  32).  This
knowledge  of  God  is  further  said  to  find
in  Him  three  chief  attributes  :  (1.)
^^loving-kindness  "  i.e.,  readiness  to  show
grace  and  mercy;  (2.)  ^^ judgment"  a
belief  in  which  is  declared  (Heb.  xi.  6)
to  be  essenticd  to  faith;  (3.)  ^^righteous-
ness," which  is  essential  to  religion  abso-
lutely. Unless  men  believe  that  God's
dealings  with  them  in  life  and  death  are
right  and  just,  they  can  neither  love  nor
reverence  Him." — Speaker's  Com.

*^  In  these  things  I  delight,  saith  the
Lord;"  i.e.,  both  in  doing  them  myself,
and  in  seeing  them  done  by  others  (Mic.
vi.  8,  vii.  18).

Ver.  25,  26.  Theme:  True  and
FALSE  CIRCUMCISION.  "/  wHl  punish
all  [omit  words  in  italics  here] — circum-
cised with  the  uncircumcised."

"  The  Jews  gloried  in  their  circum-
cision, ignoring  the  true  circumcision  of
the  heart.  (See  Rom.  ii.  25-29 ;  Gal.
V.  6;  Col.  ii.  11,  which  are  the  best
comments  on  the  passage.)  Therefore
they  are  regarded  as  uncircumcised,  and
will  be  punished  with  the  enemies  of
Israel  and  of  God — Ammon  and  Moab.
Jeremiah  does  not  raise  the  question  as
to  whether  the  Egyptians,  (fee,  were  also
circumcised  in  the  flesh,  but  combinet
Judah  iviih  Egypt j  Edom,  <kc.,  the  bitter-
est enemies  of  God  and  His  Church;
and  tells  them  that  they  have  made
themselves  to  be  as  the  uncircumcised


BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  Ji  Y :  JEREMIA  H,  ohap.  I Z.


among   the   nations  by  their  apostasy  be  a  sign  to  them  of  righteousness,  that

from  God.     Here  is  a  solemn  warning  they  should    be  spiritually  circumcised

to  all  that  a  mere  formal  observance  of  in  faith  and   good   works.     But   since

religious  ceremonies^    without   spiritual  such    spiritual    circumcision    did     not

holiness  and  dutiful  obedience,  is  rejected  follow,   and   they   remained    uncircum-

and  loathed  by  God,  as  no  better  than  cised  at  heart,  the  other  fleshly  circum-

the  abominations  of  idolatry  ;  and  apos-  cision  helped  them  not,  but  redounded

tates  are  reckoned  as  on  a  level  with  instead  to  their  sin." — Cramer.
heathen    votaries    of    false    deities." —  Circumcision  as  a  figure  of  the  rela-

Wordsworih.  lion  of  man  to  God,    i.  The  three  stages  of

*'  Egypt  is  put  first  to  degrade  Judah,  circumcision — M7icircum  cised,  outwardly

who,   though   in    privileges   above   the  circumcised,    truly   circumcised,    corre-

Gentiles,  by  unfaithfulness  sank  below  spond  to  the  three  stages  of  our  being

them.     Egypt,  too,  was  the  power  in  without    God,  serving   God  outwardly ^

which  the  Jews  were  so  prone  to  trust,  serving  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,     ii.

and  by  whose  instigation  they,  as  well  As  external   circumcision,  without  that

as  the  other  peoples  specified,  revolted  of  the  heart,  is  equivalent  to  uncircum-

from  Babylon." — Critical  Com,  cision,    so  the  outward  service  of  God

"It  is  a  common  thing  with   Moses  without  the  inward  is  equivalent  to  no

and  the  prophets  to  call  an  unrenewed  service  at  all. — Naeg.
heart  *  uncircumcision/  and  to  say  that

the  people  are  * uncircumcised  in  heart : *  Theme:  Superficial  piety  a  delu-

for   circumcision,  while  an  evidence  of  siON.

free   salvation   in  Christ,  initiated  the         I.  External  religious  observances  are

Jeivs  into  the  worship  and  service  of  God,  not  necessarily  accompanied  by  inter-

and  proved  the  necessity  of  a  new  life  ;  nal  spiritual  elevation.     They  do  not

it  was  a  sign  of   repentance  and  faith,  prove    nor  produ^ce   inward  purity  and

When,    tlierefore,    the    Jews    presented  piety.

only  the  sign,  they  were  justly  derided         II.  Without  inward  spiritual  ele-

by  Moses   and  the  prophets ;  for  they  vation  our  external  advantages  aggra-

seemed  as  though  they  sought  to  pacify  vate    our   impiety.       They   ought   to

God   with  a  thing  of  nought,  without  promote   piety ;    they    offer   a    pretence

regarding   the    end.     The   same  is  the  of  piety ;    they  continually   pronounce

case  when  we  boast  of  baptism,  and  are  against  our  impiety,
destitute  of  repentance  and  faith;  our  III.      Aggravating    our     impiety,

boasting  is  absurd  and  ridiculous ;  for  our    abuse    of    external    advantages

the  interior  power  is  renovation,  when  will    ensure    heavier    condemnation,

our  old  man  is  crucified  in  us,  and  we  "Punished  with   the    uncircumcised  ;"

rise  again  with  Christ  into  newness  of  classed  with  the  godless)  guiltier  than

life." — Calvin.  the  godless ;  condemned  to  the  keener  woe

"A   clear   testimony   that   the   holy  which  such  must  feel,  even  though  the

sacraments    procure    nothing    for    the  punishment  itself  be  the  same  as  that

work's  sake.     For  the  Jews  were  indeed  borne  by  the  godless  (Luke  xiiL  26-

circumcised  in  the  flesh,  but  this  was  to  28).

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  AND  TEXTS  IN  CHAPTER  IX.

Topic:  Lament  for  the  slain  daughters  op  society.  Text:  **0h,  that  my  head
were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night
for  the  slain  of  the  daughters  of  my  people  "  (ver.  1 ).

It  is  a  fastidious  morality  which  leads  the  virtuous  to  banish  the  wretched  crea-
tures of  vice  from  thought,  pity,  effort.  Wretchedness  in  any  form  should  evoke
commiseration.  Physical  suffering  summons  our  ameliorating  arts ;  surely  moral
degradation  should  not  be  i)assed  by  with  stolidity  or  scorn !  Guilty  ones  oft  shed
tears  for  themselves  "for  the  misery  which  has  come  upon  them,"  and  have  shown

205


CHAT.  OL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  JEREMIAH.


themselves  grateful  for  the  tears  of  the  virtuous  who  have  "  wept  with  them  that
weep."  There  is  a  winning  force  in  tears,  a  saving  force.  A  word  of  scorn,  a
look  of  wrath,  cast  at  a  fallen  being,  drives  the  guilty  one,  maddened  to  shame,
agony,  and  indignation,  into  deeper  crime.

I.  A  sight  for  tears.  "  Weep /or  the  slain"  <fec.  Over  the  moral  and  spiritual
prostitution  of  his  people,  the  prophet  bewailed.  The  fair  comeliness,  the  sweet,
virginity,  the  chaste  piety  of  the  "  daughter  of  Zion  "  was  destroyed.

1.  It  displayed  the  ravages  of  cruelty,  "  The  slain,^*  A  strong  figure  :  God's
fair  daughters  murdered !

(a.)  Cruelty  perpetrated  :  the  *' slain  "  speaks  of  slayers:  and  no  language  is  too
strong  with  which  to  denounce  those  who  devastate  virtue,  assassinate  happiness,
ravage  purity,  and  destroy  character.  The  blood  of  victims  cries  out  against  them
to  heaven.  (6.)  Cruelty  suffered:  the  "slain" — the  word  implies  agonies.  He
mourns  not  the  dead,  who  died  in  peace,  but  the  murdered  who  perislied  by  vio-
lence. Kead  the  miserable  case  of  the  daughters  of  iniquity  in  the  records  of  desperate
deeds,  who,  "  mad  from  life's  history,  glad  to  death's  mystery,"  rush  "  out  of  the
world."

2.  It  shocked  the  feelings  of  patriotism,  "Weep  for  the  slain  of  the  daughters  of
my  people,'*  He  lacks  true  nobleness  who  lacks  patriotism  ;  and  patriotism  will
urge  him  in  whom  it  lives  to  alleviate  all  wretchedness  under  which  his  own  people
groan.  We  need  more  to  feel  that  a  brother's  or  sister's  misery  is  our  own  misery.
Thus  Jesus  "  bore  our  griefs,"  (kc.

II.  A  cry  of  lament.  "  Oh,  that  my  head  were  waters,"  <fcc.  A  bitter  wail
bursting  from  an  aching  heart.  Insensibility  to  the  piteous  condition  of  the  fallen
declares  against  our  own  moral  consciousness.  Think  of  :  1.  Homes  which  mourn
for  daughters  worse  than  dead,  a  silent  shame  breaking  every  tender  heart !  Think
of :  2.  Hopes  which  are  destroyed;  children,  which  promised  to  be  the  light  of  age,
**  slain."  And  Christian  hopes  destroyed  also, — souls  slain,  "twice  dead," — dead  to
happiness  on  earth,  dead  to  happiness  beyond.

Yet  the  cry  of  lament  need  not  be  a  cry  of  despair,  "  Can  these  slain  live  1 "
Yes;  for  them  Jesus  atoned  on  Calvary,  for  them  there  is  a  quickening  Spirit,  for  them
room  in  heaven  ;  J^sus  spoke  to  a  "  woman  who  was  a  sinner  ;"  saved  her,  loved
her,  severely  rebuked  those  who  repelled  her ;  said  tenderly  to  her,  *'  Thy  sins,
which  are  many,  are  forgiven ;  faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace.*'  (a.)  Banish  not
the  degraded  from  purposes  of  mercy.  From  Mary  the  Magdalene  Jesus  "cast  out
seven  devils."  (b.)  Banish  them  not  from  hope,  "  Jesus  saves  to  the  uttermost;"
and  tells  the  self-righteous  that  "  publicans  and  harlots  shall  go  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven  before  them,"

III.  An  appeal  to  pity.     Oh,  for  tears,  "  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night."

1.  Our  pity  need  not  be  dried  up  by  the  consideration  that  the  guilty  and  fallen
merit  censure.  "Let  him  that  is  without  sin  first  cast  a  stone."  "If  Christ  so
loved  us — while  we  were  yet  sinners — we  ought  also  to  love  one  another."  Being
ourselves  "  forgiven  ten  thousand  talents," — our  delinquencies  against  Heaven,  let
us  not  seize  on  a  fellow-creature  cruelly  because  society  has  been  wronged  to  the  ex-
tent of  "five  hundred  pence."  None  can  wrong  society  as  humanity  has  wronged
God.     "  Be  merciful,  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  merciful*

"  Touch  her  not  scornfully,  Think  of  her  mournfully,  Tenderly,  humanely,"

Let  tears  flow  for  "the  slain,"  as  Jesus  "wept  over"  Jerusalem,  though  it
merited  curses,  and  soon  would  clamour  for  His  blood.  "  Begin  at  Jerusalem  "
—take  to  the  worst  sinners,  and  take  first  to  them,  the  blessed  message  of  love.

2.  Nor  should  our  pity  be  transient.  "  Day  and  night "  let  us  "  weep  for  the
slain."  Our  pity  will  soon  be  too  late  for  many.  Redeem  the  time,  that  "  the
blessing  of  those  ready  to  perish  "  may  be  won.  "  On  some  have  compassion,
making  a  difference;    and  others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,

206


ROM  I  LET  10  COMMENT  A  R  7 :  JEREMIAH.  ohaF.  I X.

hating  even  the  garments  spotted  by  the  flesh."     The  "  Fountain  opened  for  sin
and  all  uncleanness  **  is  open  still.

Topic:  Jeremiah:  A  lesson  for  the  disappointed.  Text:  **  0  that  I  had  in
the  mlderness  a  lodging  place,  that  I  might  leave  my  people,  for  they  he  all
treacherous  men  "  (ver.  2).

The  prophets  were  ever  ungratefully  treated  by  the  Israelites,  themselves  re-
sisted, their  warnings  neglected,  their  good  services  forgotten.  Yet  the  earlier
prophets  fared  better  than  the  later ;  for  outward  honour  was  paid  them,  as  with
Moses  and  Samuel ;  while  those  who  came  in  after  times  suflfered  maltreatment,
as  Elijah,  Micaiah,  and  Zechariah  (Matt,  xxiii.  35).

No  prophet  commenced  labours  with  greater  encouragements  than  Jeremiah.  A
king  reigned  who  was  bringing  back  the  times  of  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.
This  devout  and  zealous  king  was,  moreover,  young.  What  might  not  therefore
be  effected  in  the  course  of  years  1    Bright  fortunes  seemed  in  store  for  the  Church.

Schism,  too,  was  at  an  end  since  Israel's  captivity.  Kings  of  the  house  of
David  again  ruled  over  the  whole  land.  Idolatry  was  destroyed  by  Josiah  in  all
the  cities.  Thus,  at  first  sight,  it  seemed  reasonable  to  anticipate  further  and  per-
manent improvements.

I.  Every  one  begins  with  being  sanguine.

Jeremiah  did.  God's  servants  entered  on  their  office  with  more  lively  hopes
than  their  after  fortunes  warranted.  Very  soon  the  cheerful  prospect  was  overcast
for  Jeremiah,  and  he  was  left  to  labour  in  the  dark

HuldalUs  message  fixed  the  coming  fortunes  of  Judah :  she  foretold  the  early
death  of  the  good  Icings  and  a  fierce  destruction  to  the  unworthy  nation.  This  pro-
phecy came  five  years  after  Jeremiah  entered  office ;  so  early  in  his  course  were
his  hopes  cut  away.

Or  the  expi^ess  word  of  God  came  to  and  undeceived  him.  Or  the  hardened  state
of  sin  in  which  the  nation  lay  destroyed  his  hopes.  But  so  it  was  that  his  mind
sobered  into  the  more  blessed  and  noble  temper,  resignation.

II.  Resignation  a  more  blessed  state  of  mind  than  sanguine  hope — i.e.,  hope
of  present  success.     Because :

1.  It  is  a  truer  state  of  mind.  2.  More  consistent  with  our  fallen  state  of  being.
3.  More  improving  to  our  hearts.  4.  The  grace  for  which  the  most  eminent  ser-
vants of  God  have  been  conspicuous.

a.  To  expect  great  effects  from  our  religious  exertions  is  natural  and  innocent,
but  arises  from  iriexperience  of  the  kind  of  work  we  have  to  do — to  change  the
heart  and  will  of  men.

b.  Far  nobler  frame  of  mind  to  labour,  not  with  hope  of  seeing  fruit,  but  for
conscience'  sake,  as  matter  of  duty,  and  in  faith,  trusting  good  will  be  done  though
we  see  it  not.

c.  The  Bible  shows  that  though  God's  servants  began  with  success,  they  ended
with  disappointment.  Not  that  God's  purposes  or  instruments  fail,  but  because
the  time  for  reaping  is  not  here,  but  hereafter.  Thus  :  Moses  began  with  leading
forth  Israel  in  triumph;  ended  before  journey  finished  and  Canaan  gained.
Samuel's  ministry  wrought  reformations ;  ended  in  the  people  wilfully  choosing  a
king.  Elijah,  after  his  successes,  fled  from  Jezebel  into  the  wilderness  to  mourn
his  disappointments.  Isaiah,  after  Hezekiah's  religious  reign  and  miraculous
defeat  of  Sennacherib's  army,  fell  upon  the  evil  days  of  Manasseh.  Apostles  show
the  same  order  of  experience ;  for  after  all  the  great  works  God  enabled  them  to
do,  see  2  Tim.  iii.  13.

III.  The  vicissitude  of  feeling  which  this  transition  from  hope  to  disap-
pointment produces.

Jeremiah's  trials  during  Josiah's  reign  were  considerable,  but  afterwards  ex-

207


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


perienced  persecution  from  every  class  of  men  :  from  the  people  (xviii.  18),  men
of  Anathoth  (xi.  21),  priests  and  prophets  (xxvi.  16  sq.),  chief  governor  (xx.  2),
Zedekiah  (xxxii.  3),  conspirators  (xxxvii.  14).  Nebuchadnezzar  (xxxix.  14)  and  an
Ethiopian  were  of  the  few  persons  who  showed  him  any  kindness.  Such  were  his
trials.

And  their  effect  upon  his  spirit  ?  Affliction,  fear,  despondency,  sometimes  rest-
lessness, even  impatience  under  his  trials,  find  frequent  expression  in  his  writings
(v.  3,  30,  31;  xii.  1-3;  xv,  10-18;  xx.  7-14).  Such  is  the  suecession  and
tide  of  feelings  which  most  persons  undergo  before  their  minds  settle  into  the  calm
of  resignation.

IV.  The  issue  of  these  changes  and  conflicts  of  feeling  was  resignation.

He  comes  to  use  language  which  expresses  that  chastened  spirit  and  weaned  heart
which  is  the  termination  of  all  agitation  and  anxiety  in  religious  minds.

He  who  at  one  time  could  not  comfort  himself,  was  sent  to  comfort  a  brother;
and  in  comforting  Baruch  he  speaks  in  that  nobler  temper  of  resignation  which
takes  the  place  of  sanguine  hope  and  harassing  fear^  and  betokens  catm  and
clear-sighted  faith  and  inwar^d  peace  (chap,  xlv.)  : — Seek  not  success;  be  not  im-
patient; fret  not  thyself;  be  content  if,  after  all  thy  labours,  thou  dost  but  save
thyself,  without  seeing  other  fruit  of  them.

V.  These  truths  apply  not  to  the  prophets  only,  but  to  all.

All  live  in  a  world  which  promises  well  but  does  not  fulfil.  All  begin  with
hope,  and  (apart  from  religious  prospects)  end  with  disappointment.  Much  dif-
ference in  our  respective  trials,  arising  from  difference  of  tempers  and  fortune.

1.  Still  it  is  in  our  nature  to  hope:  to  begin  life  thoughtlessly  and  joyously;  to
seek  great  things  in  one  way  or  other ;  to  have  vague  notions  of  good  to  come ;  to
love  the  world,  believe  its  promises,  and  expect  satisfaction  and  happiness  from  it.

2.  And  it  is  our  loty  as  life  proceeds,  to  encounter  disappointment.  Exceptions
may  seem  to  show  themselves  in  the  retired  ranks  of  society  and  settled  wealth.
Still  all  begin  life  with  health  and  end  it  amid  sickness.  Youth  leaves  even  those
most  favoured  with  fortunes,  and  they  lament  the  days  gone,  remember  them  with
pleasure  mingled  with  pain.  For  they  have  lost  something  they  once  had  ;  whereas
at  the  outset  they  anticipated  something  they  had  not.

VI.  It  is  not  religion  which  suggests  this  sad  view  of  things,  hut  ex-
perience.

It  is  the  world's  doing.  Though  the  Bible  said  nothing  about  the  perishing
nature  of  all  earthly  pleasures,  it  is  a  fact  from  which  we  cannot  escape.

1.  Here  it  is  that  God  Himself  offers  us  His  aid:  by  His  Word  and  His  Church.
Left  to  ourselves  we  seek  good  from  the  world  and  cannot  find  it :  in  youth  look
forward,  and  in  age  look  back.  Well  that  we  be  persuaded  of  these  things  be-
times, to  gain  wisdom  and  provide  for  evil  days.

2.  Seek  we  great  things  ?  We  must  seek  them  where  and  in  the  way  they  are
to  be  found,  as  He  who  came  into  the  world  to  enable  us  to  gain  them  has  set
them  before  us.  We  must  be  willing  to  give  up  present  hope  for  future  enjoy-
ment.

3.  We  must  he  changed  before  we  can  receive  our  greatest  good.  Our  nature  is
not  in  a  state  to  enjoy  happiness,  even  if  offered  to  us.  We  seek  it,  feel  we  need
it,  but  are  not  fitted  for  It.  If  we  would  gain  true  bliss,  cease  to  seek  it  as  an
end,  postpone  the  prospect  of  enjoying  it.

4.  Learn  to  know  ourselves,  and  have  thoughts  becoming  ourselves.  Impetuous
hope  and  undisciplined  mirth  ill  become  a  sinner.  Our  guilt  brought  down  the
Son  of  God  from  heaven  to  die  upon  the  cross  for  us.  Should  we  live  in  pleasure
here  when  the  Gospel  tells  us  of  the  Saviour's  life-long  affliction  and  disappoint-
ment 1

5.  Prepare  for  suffering  and  disappointment,  which  befit  us  as  sinners  and  are
necessary  for  us  as  saints.     Accent  affliction  as  a  means  of  improvinsj  our  hearts.

208


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAf .  IX.


Look  disappointment  in  the  face ;  "  taking  the  prophets  as  examples  of  suffering
and  patience."

Give  not  over  your  attempts  to  serve  God,  though  you  see  nothing  come  of  them.
Watch  and  pray,  and  obey  your  conscience,  though  you  cannot  perceive  your  progress
in  holiness.  Do  the  duties  of  your  calling,  though  they  are  distasteful.  Persevere
in  the  narrow  way.

Mourn  that  you  may  rejoice  (Matt.  v.  4).  Take  up  the  cross  of  Christ  that  you
may  wear  the  crown.  Give  your  hearts  to  Him,  and  you  will  solve  the  difficulty
how  Christians  can  be  "sorrowful  yet  alway  rejoicing."

6.  ^nt  yovi  YdM&i  begin  in  faith.  "Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."
You  cannot  at  first  see  where  Christ  is  leading  you,  or  how  light  will  arise  out  of
darkness.  Must  begin  with  pain,  self-denial,  refusing  sin,  mastering  evil  impulses,
enduring  irreligious  sneers  for  Christ's  sake,  forcing  your  minds  to  prayer,  keeping
thought  of  God  before  you  daily.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  enable  you  to  do  this  ;
then  "shall  your  light  rise  in  obscurity,"  &c.  (Isa.  Iviii.  10,  11). — Abridged  and
arranged  from  '^  Plain  Sermons,"  by  contributors  to  the  "  Tracts  for  the  Times."


ADDENDA   TO  CHAPTER  IX.:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  1.   ^^  Fountain  of  tears"

**  Like  a  pent-up  flood,  Bwoln  to  the  height,
He  poured  hia  griefs  into  my  breast  with

tears,
Such  as  the  manliest  men  in  their  crossed

lives
Are  sometimes  forced  to  shed."

— Joanna  Baillib.

"Every  one  can  master  a  grief  but  he  that
has  it. " — Shakespeare.

Ver.  2.  Solitude:  **A  lodging-place,
that  I  might  leave  my  people."  "There
is  no  flight  for  him  into  quiet  religious
contemplation;  he  cannot  withdraw  from
the  circle  of  interests  in  which  his  country-
men are  dwelling.  He  may  pass  hours
or  months  in  solitude,  but  he  will  not  be
away  from  the  events  which  are  befalling
them ;  he  will  be  more  deeply  occupied
with  them ;  he  will  be  contemplating
them  with  a  closeness  and  intensity  to
which  the  mere  actors  in  them  are
strangers.  The  poor  young  priest  of
Anathoth  can  in  no  way  sever  himself
from  the  policy  of  nations  and  rulers:
Judea,  Egypt,  Chaldea,  every  tribe  and
power  of  the  earth  must  be  about  him
in  his  closet,  must  enter  into  his  most
inward  personal  experiences  and  suflPer-
ings." — Maurice,  "  Prophets  and  Kings.**

"  It  is  this  childlike  tenderness  (Jer.
i.  6)  which  adds  force  to  the  severity  of
his  denunciations,  to  the  bitterness  of
his  grief.  He  was  not  one  of  those
Btern  characters  which  bear  without  re-
pining the  necessary  evils  of  life.     He


who  was  to  be  hard  as  brass  and  strong
as  iron,  who  had  to  look  with  unmoved
countenance  on  the  downward  descent
of  his  country,  yet  longed  that  his  ^  head
were  waters,  and  his  eyes  a  fountain  of
tears,  that  he  might  weep  day  and  night
for  the  daughter  of  his  people.'  He
whose  task  it  was  to  run  to  and  fro
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  like
the  Grecian  sage  (v.  1,  2),  to  see  if  he
could  find  a  single  honest  man — to  live,
as  it  were,  in  the  market-place  as  a
butt  of  scorn,  alike  from  the  religious
and  the  irreligious  world — he  was,  by
his  own  nature  and  inclination,  the
prophet  of  the  desert,  longing  for  a
'  lodge '  in  some  vast  wilderness,  that
he  '  might  leave  his  people,'  and  avoid
the  sight  of  their  crimes."  —  Stanley,
"Jeivish  Church,"  ii.  442.

"  Oh,  for  a  lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness,
Some  boundless  contiguity  of  shade,
Wliere  rumour  of  oppression  and  deceit,
Of  unsuccessful  or  successful  war,
Might  never  reach  me  more !     My  ear  is

pained,
My  soul  is  sick,  with  every  day's  report
Of  wrong  and  outrage  witli  which  earth  is

filled."— Co WPER,  "  Slavery."

"  Far  hid  from  the  pitiless  plunderer's  view,
In  the  pathless  depths  of  the  parched  Karroo;
And  here,  while  the  night-winds  around  me

sigh,
And  the  stars  burn  bright  in  the  midnight

sky,
As  I  sit  apart  by  the  desert  stone.
Like  Elijah  at  Horeb's  cave  alone,
'A  still  small  voice*  comes  through   th«

wild—

209


OBAT.  IX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH


Like  a  father  consoling  his  fretful  child —
Which  banishes  bitterness,  wrath,  and  fear,
Saying — 'Man   is   distant,  but  Qod  is

NKAB  1 '  " — PrINGLB.

Yer.  4.  Slander.

**  Malicious  slander  never  would  have  leisure
To  search,  with  prying  eyes,  for  faults  abroad,
If  all,  like  me,  considered  their  own  hearts.
And  wept  the  sorrows  which  they  find  at
home." — RowE.

"  Slander,  the  foulest  whelp  of  sin  !    The  man
In  whom  this  spirit  entered  was  undone;
His  tongue  was  set  on  fire  of  hell ;  his  heart
Was  black  as  death  ;  his  legs  were  faint  with

haste
To  propagate  the  lie  his  soul  had  framed ;
His  pillow  was  the  peace  of  families
Destroyed,  the  sigh  of  innocence  reproached,
Broken  friendships,  and  the  strife  of  brother-
hoods."— POLLOK.

"  Against  slander  there  is  no  defence.
Hell  cannot  boast  so  foul  a  fiend,  nor
men  deplore  so  foul  a  foe.  It  stabs
with  a  smile.  It  is  a  pestilence  walking
in  darkness,  spreading  contagion  far  and
wide,  which  the  most  wary  traveller  can-
not avoid.  It  is  the  heart-searching
dagger  of  the  assassin.  It  is  the  poisoned
arrow  whose  wound  is  incurable.  It  is
as  fatal  as  the  sting  of  the  most  deadly
asp;  murder  is  its  employment,  inno-
cence its  prey,  and  ruin  its  sport." —
Gray's  "  Topics"

Ver.  8.  Seductive  speech :  like  a  poi-
soned arrow.

'*  The  devil  hath  not,  in  all  his  quiver's  choice,
An  arrow  for  the  heart  like  a  sweet  voice."

— Byron.

Ver.  11.  Jerusalem  in  ruins.

"  Every  stone  is  a  witness  of  God's
revelation,  and  every  ruin  a  monument
of  his  wrath." — Pierotti,

**  Alas !  we  were  warned,  but  we  recked  not
the  warning.
Till  our  warriors  grew  weak  in  the  day
of  despair ;
And  our  glory  was  fled  as  the  light  cloud  of
morning,
That  gleams  for  a  moment,  and  melts
into  air." — Dalb.

••  Her  outcast  tribes  no  longer  come
To  greet  her  as  their  hallowed  home^
But  sadly  joy  to  lay  their  head
Beneath  their  foes'  insulting  tread  ;
To  fall  by  her  they  could  not  save,
Their  glory  once,  and  now  their  grave."
— Charlot^k  Elizabeth.

Ver.  17.  ** Mourning  ivomen."   African
210


incident — "  The  mother  of  poor  Touda,
who  heard  that  I  wished  to  see  him
once  more,  led  me  to  the  house  where
the  body  was  laid.  The  narrow  space
of  the  room  was  crowded;  about  ttvo
hundred  women  were  sitting  and  stand-
ing aroundf  singing  mourning  songs  to
doleful  and  monotonous  airs.  As  I
stood  looking,  the  mother  of  Touda  ap-
proached. She  threw  herself  at  the  foot
of  her  dead  son,  and  begged  him  to  speak
to  her  once  more.  And  then,  when  the
corpse  did  not  answer,  she  uttered  a
shriek,  so  long,  so  piercing,  such  a  wail
of  love  and  grief,  that  tears  came  into
my  eyes.  Poor  African  mother !  she
was  literally  as  one  sorrowing  without
hope ;  for  with  them  there  is  no  hope
beyond  the  grave.  *  All  is  done,'  they
say,  with  inexpressible  sadness  of  con-
viction that  sometimes  gave  me  the
heartache.  As  I  left  the  but,  thinking
these  things,  the  wailing  recommenced.
It  would  be  kept  up  by  the  women,  who
are  the  official  mourners  on  these  occa-
sions, till  the  corpse  was  buried." — Du
Chaillu.

Ver.  21.  Death,

"  What  disarrays  like  death  1  It  de-
faces the  fascination  of  the  beautiful.
It  breaks  the  lamp  of  the  wise.  It
withers  the  strength  of  the  mighty.  It
snatches  the  store  of  the  rich.  Kings
are  stripped  of  trapping,  trophy,  trea-
sure :  *  their  glory  shall  not  descend  after
them.'"— i>r.  R.  W.  Hamilton.

**  The  glories  of  our  blood  and  state

Are  shadows,  not  substantial  thing!  ;
There  is  no  armour  against  fate;
Death  lays  his  icy  hand  on  kingi.
Sceptre  and  crown
Must  tumble  down.
And  in  the  dust  be  equal  made
With  the  poor  crooked  scythe  and  spadeu

"  Some  men  with  swords  may  reap  the  field,
And  plant  fresh  laurels  where  they  kill ;
But  their  strong  nerves  at  last  must  yield ;
They  tame  but  one  another  still.
Early  or  late,
They  stoop  to  fate,
And  must  give  up  their  murmuring  breath,
When  they,  pale  captives,  creep  to  death.

"  The  garlands  wither  on  your  brow  :

Then  boast  no  more  your  mighty  deeds  1
Upon  Death's  purple  altar  now
See  where  the  victor- victim  bleeds  I
Your  heads  must  come
To  the  cold  tomb  :


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMTAS.


OSAF.  n.


Only  the  actions  of  the  just
Smell  Bweet  and  blossom  in  the  dnst."

— Shiblst.

"  Death  comes  on  with  equal  footstep
To  the  hall  and  hut :
Think  you  Death  will  tarrj  knocking

Where  the  door  is  shut  ?
Jesui  waiteth,  waiteth,  waiteth;

But  thy  door  is  fast :
Grieved,  away  the  Saviour  turneth  I
Death  breaki  through  at  last.  **

— Unknown.

"  I  congratulate  you  and  myself  that
life  is  passing  fast  away.  What  a
superlatively  grand  and  consoling  idea
is  that  of  death  1  Without  this  radiant
idea,  this  delightful  morning  star,  indi-
cating that  the  luminary  of  eternity  is
going  to  rise,  life  would,  to  my  view,
darken  into  midnight  melancholy.  Oh,
the  expectation  of  living  here  and  living
thus  always  would  be  indeed  a  prospect
of  overwhelming  despair.  But  thanks
be  to  that  fatal  decree  that  dooms  us
to  die !  thanks  to  that  Gospel  which
opens  the  vision  of  an  endless  life  !  and
thanks,  above  all,  to  that  Saviour  Friend
who  has  promised  to  conduct  all  the
faithful  through  the  sacred  trance  of
death  into  scenes  of  Paradise  and  ever-
lasting delight." — John  Foster,

Ver,  23.  Spurious  glorying.  Wisdom  :
a  bane  or  a  blessing,  according  as  it  is
used.  Water  well  directed  will  turn  the
mighty  mill,  and  thus  spare  wearisome
toils ;  but  if  it  break  through  its  banks,
it  is  a  desolating  and  destructive  thing.
Sails  are  an  advantage  to  a  ship  which
steers  aright;  but  if  wrongly  directed,
the  more  sail  she  carries  the  worse  for
her,  since  they  hasten  her  to  the  ominous
rocks.

*'  Knowledge  and  Wisdom,  far  from  being
one,
Have  ofttimes  no  connection.    Knowledge

dwells
In  heads  replete  with  thoughts  of  other

men  ;
Wisdom,  in  minds  attentive  to  their  own.*'

— CowrsB.


Might:  '*What  illustration  have  we
of  such  glorying  in  the  history  of
Napoleon  !  At  the  head  of  his  con-
gregated legions  he  made  the  world
stand  in  awe  of  him ;  but  the  scene
changes,  till  we  see  him  gnawing  his
heart  away  on  a  barren  rock  under  the
equator.'* — Pilkington.

"  Our  mightiest  endeavours  show  us
that,  after  all,  we  are  only  beating  our-
selves against  the  bars  of  a  great  cage.
Can  your  feet  stand  upon  the  flowing
river?  Can  you  lay  your  finger  upon
the  lowest  of  all  the  stars  that  shine  in
heaven.  We  are  hemmed  in  by  the  im-
passable. " — Parker.

Riches:  Croesus,  whose  name  is  a
synonym  for  great  wealth,  was  him-
self taken  captive,  stripped  of  all  his
treasures,  and  in  old  age  was  supported
by  the  charity  of  Cyrus.

**  If  thou  art  rich,  thou  art  poor  ;
For,  like  an  ass  whose  back  with  ingots  bows,
Thou  bear'st  thy  heavy  riches  but  a  journey,
And  Death  unloads  thee." — Shakespeare.

**  To  purchase  heaven  has  gold  the  power  f
Can  gold  remove  the  mortal  hour?
In  life,  can  love  be  bought  with  gold?
Are  friendship's  pleasures  to  be  sold  f
Cease  then  on  trash  thy  hopes  to  bind,
Let  nobler  views  engage  thy  mind."

— Johnson.

"  I  have  read  of  a  man  who  had  a
suit,  and  when  his  case  was  to  be  heard,
he  applied  himself  to  three  friends  to
see  what  they  would  do.  One  answered
he  would  bring  him  as  far  on  his  Journey
as  he  could ;  the  second  promised  to  go
with  him  to  his  Journey's  end ;  the  third
engaged  to  go  with  him  before  the  Judge
and  speak  for  him,  nor  leave  him  till  his
cause  was  determined.  These  three  are
a  man's  riches  his  friends  and  his  graces.
His  riches  may  not  very  long  stay  with
him  ;  his,  friends  can  go  with  him  to  the
grave,  but  must  there  leave  him  ;  but  his
graces  will  go  with  him  before  God,
never  forsake  him,  but  accompany  him
to  the  grave  and  to  glory." — Brook*,


Sll


(aUP.  JL  HOMILETJC  COM  MEN  TAR  Y .  JEREMIAH.


CHAPTER  X.

Critical  and  Bxkoetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronolo^  of  the  chapter.  Section  1-1  (J  has  been
declared  spurious  (by  De  Wette,  Movers,  and  Hitzig),  its  authenticity  disputed,  a  late  inter-
polation by  either  the  pseudo-Isaiah  (Movers)  or  by  a  Babylonian  exile.  Even  Naegelsbach
affirms,  *'  Who  was  the  author,  and  when  and  by  whom  "  the  section  was  written,  **  cannot  be
ascertained."  Two  difficulties  lead  to  this  severance  of  the  section  from  the  book  :  1.  The
continuity  of  thought  is  abruptly  broken  by  these  verses  ;  2.  The  topics  treated  therein  belong
to  the  time  of  the  exile.  Graf,  Keil,  Henderson,  and  Speaker's  Com.  contend  for  the
genuineness  and  authenticity  of  the  section  ;  and  affirm  that  Jeremiah  here  views  his  people
"  proleptically  as  in  captivity,"  that  he  addresses  tliem  in  exile,  and  places  himself  among  them
merely  for  the  sake  of  argument  (Hend.)  ;  that  the  train  of  thought  in  these  sixteen  verses
is  but  an  enlargement  of  the  truth  in  ix.  23,  24,  and  that  the  fragmentary  disconnected  form
of  this  chapter  is,  probably,  owing  to  the  fact,  "that  only  portions  of  the  concluding  part  of
Jeremiah's  temple  sermon  were  embodied  in  Baruch's  roll"  (Speaker's  Com.).  Thus  Dr.  Payne
Smith  and  Keil  date  this  chapter  as  synchronous  with  chap,  ix.,  a  part  of  the  same  discourse.
Henderson  isolates  the  chapter,  but  suggests  no  date.  Dr.  Dahler  supposes  it  to  be  a  separate
discourse,  delivered  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  after  the  first  capture  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
when  the  chiefs  among  the  Jews  were  borjie  into  Babylon — B.C.  605  ;  Assyrian  chronology,  B.C.
686.  Tliis  seems  satisfactory  :  so  we  may  venture  with  Bagster  to  separate  this  chapter  from
the  foregoing  by  an  interval  of  three  years.  The  section  17-25  is  by  some  referred  to  the
eleventh  year  of  Jehoiakim,  the  year  of  the  king's  death  at  the  hand  of  the  Chaldean
monarch,  Nebuchadnezzar.

2.  National  History  ;  see  chap.  vii.  in  loc.  Judah's  experience  of  captivity  began  in  the  fourth
year  of  Jehoiakim,  when  Nebuchadnezzar,  acting  as  Nabopolassar's  lieutenant,  besieged
Jerusalem,  and  carried  away,  together  with  the  spoils  of  the  Temple,  the  youths  of  highest
rank  in  the  land,  "the  principal  persons  in  dignity,  3000  in  number"  (Josephus),  among
whom  were  Daniel,  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego — cousins  of  Jehoiakim.  A  mournful
erent;  for  in  their  loss  the  nation  was  deprived  of  well-nigh  all  the  persons  of  piety  and  virtue
whose  influence  in  court  tended  to  restrain  the  reckless,  godless  king,  and  to  befriend  Jeremiah
in  his  sacred  ministry  of  witness  for  righteousness  and  Jehovah.  The  solitary  flower  was
plucked  ;  the  hope  of  Judah  was  now  gone.

3.  Contemporary  History.  Egypt  retained  international  supremacy,  and  Judah  was  a  vassal
kingdom  under  Necho,  until  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim.  In  that  year  Nebuchadnezzar  de-
feated Necho  at  Charchemish,  and  Judea,  wrested  from  the  Egyptian  empire,  became  subject
to  the  now  Babylonian  domination.

4.  Geographical  References.  Ver.  9.  **  Tarshish,"  probably  Tarsessus,  in  south  of  Spain,
emporium  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  mart  for  trade  (c/.  Ezek.  xxvii.  12).  Heereen  says  that
Spain  "was  once  the  richest  country  in  the  world  for  silver,"  and  that  "the  silver  mountains
were  in  those  parts  which  the  Phoenicians  comprised  under  the  name  of  Tarsessusor  Tarsliish."
"  Uphaz,"  thouirht  to  mean  Ojfhir.     Henderson  suggests  that  a  copyist  may  have  changed  the

original  word  1S)1N,  Ophir,  into  »3^»>»  Uphaz.  But  Dr.  Payne  Smith  contends  that  "the
word  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  error  for  Ophir  upon  the  authority  of  the  Syriac ;  probably
Uphaz  was  a  place  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  river  Hyphasis,  the  Sanscrit  name  for  which  is
Vip&9&."

5.  Natural  History.  Ver.  2.  *'2%e  signs  of  heaven,"  ChsLide&n  astrology,  which  professedly
gathered  from  the  position  of  stars  and  celestial  signs  predictions  as  to  the  career  and  destinies
of  nations  and  individuals.  Ver.  6.  ** Palm-tree"  formerly  abundant  in  Judea  (re-Jericho,
Deut.  xxxiv.  3) ;  grew  to  great  height,  often  60  to  100  feet ;  always  "  upright ; "  winde  had  no
power  over  its  erect  growth  ;  threw  out  from  its  crown  feathery  leaves,  each  from  4  to  8  feet
long,  and  from  40  to  80  in  number;  it  lives  about  200  years;  yields  dates,  Ver.  9.  *'  Blue
and  purple."  Both  colours  were  purple,  but  the  *'blue"  had  a  dark  violet  tinge,  the
*'  purple  "  a  light  reddish  hue  ;  both  were  obtained  from  a  secretion  of  shell-fish  found  on  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean.     Ver.  22.  **  Den  of  dragons.'*    See  on  ix.  11.

6.  Manners  and  Customs.  Ver.  2.  "  Dismayed  at  signs  of  heaven.  .  .  .  heathen  are  dismayed
at  them."  Astrologers  read  the  Startling  celestial  phenomena,  eclipses,  comets,  meteors,  un-
usual conjunctions  of  the  stars,  as  precursors  of  nearing  calamities,  and  used  them  for  working
upon  the  superstitious  fears  of  the  people.  Ver.  9.  "Silver  spread  into  plates."  Silver  is  so
malleable  that  it  may  be  beaten  out  into  100,000th  part  of  an  inch  thick;  gold  into  200,000th
part  of  an  inch.  Images  for  idolatrous  worship  were  overlaid  with  the  precious  metal  (Hab.
ii.  19).  These  '*  plates"  brought  from  Tarshish  were  "like  those  on  which  the  sacred  books  of
the  Singhalese  are  written  to  this  day  "  (Dr.  W.  Smith).  **  Blue  and  purple  is  their  clothing."
Robes  of  these  colours  were  worn  by  kings  (Judges  viii.  26 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  28),  by  the  highest
civil  and  religious  officers,  and  by  the  wealthy  and  luxurious  (Luke  xvi.  19).  Ver.  20.
**  Tabernacle  is  spoUed,  cords  broken."  Tents  were  still  largely  in  use,  emphatically  so  in  the
pastoral  districts,  where  the  nomadic  life  was  retained.

212


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap,  t,


7.  Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  2.  "i)ismayfc?  at  signs  of  heaven."  The  verb expresaet  appre-
hension, dread  ;  not  homage.     Ver.  6.  "There  is  none  like  unto  Thee,"  i.<9.,  no  one^  a  double

negative,  intensifying  the  denial ;  I  ^^,  no  nothing  ;  the  strongest  form  of  negation.     Ver.  7.

"To  Thee  dotli  it  a;>j9gr<am;  ''^V^^?  from  ''»7^j  to  be  beautiful,  decorous,  suitable.  "Unto
Thee  is  it  (fear)  due''  (Naeg.),  Ver.  8.  **  The  stock  is  a  doctrine  of  vanities,'*  i.e.,  their  doctrine^
that  in  which  they  are  taught  to  trust,  is  wood.  Keil:  "  The  teaching  of  the  vanities  is  wood,"
Speaker's  Com.:  "The  instruction  of  idols  is  a  piece  of  wood."  Lange :  *'VaiM  instruc-
tion! It  is  wood!"  Noyes:  "Most  vain  is  their  confidence;  it  is  wood."  Blayney  :  "The
very  wood  itself  being  a  rebuker  of  vanities."  Henderson:  "The  tree  itself  is  a  reproof
of    vanities."     EwaJd.    "The   wood   is  mere   vain    teaching."     Ver.   10.    "  TAe   true    God."

^9- J  truth,\n  contrast  with  ''^'Jj  vanity  (ver.  3).  "Jeliovah,  Ood  in  truth."  Ver.  11.
"  llius  shall  ye  say"  &c.  This  verse  is  in  Chaldee,  on  which  account  some  critics  reject  it  as
a  gloss  (Venema,  Ewald,  Henderson) ;  hut  Seb.  Schmidt  suggests  tiiat  Jeremiah  gave  to  the
Jews  this  retort  to  tiie  Chaldeans,  for  use  when  exiled  and  taunted  in  Chahlea — "  Ut  Judaeis
suggerat,  quomodo  Chaldaeis  {ad  quos  non  nisi  Chaldaice  loqui  poterant)  paucis  verbis  responden-
dum sit."  Dr.  Payne  Smith  thinks  tlie  verse  "a  proverl)ial  saying,  which  Jeremiah  inserts  in
its  popular  form."  Ver.  14.  "  Every  man  is  brutish  in  his  knowl&ige"  i.e.,  without  knowledge
every  man  is  brutish  (Keil.  Henderson,  Lange)  ;  or,  as  others  render  the  words,  every  man  is
rendered  brutish  by  his  skill,  i.e.,  in  idol-making  (Jamieson,  Fausset,  &c.).  Ver,  15.  "The
work  of  errors,"  i.e.,  of  mockeries  ;  the  idols  themselves  deserving  only  derision  and  contempt,
or  inflictinir  on  their  worshippers  only  delusion  and  ridicule.  Ver.  17.  **  Thy  wares,"  i.e.,  thy
bundle,  packages;  not  goods  for  trading,  but  articles  for  use.  ^*  Inhabitant  of  the  fortress,"
inhabitress  of  the  siege.  Ver.  18.  "That  they  may  find  it  so."  Find  what?  Tiie  Syriac
supplies  the  word,  "  Me  " — *'  that  they  may  find  Me."  But  the  Targum  renders  the  word  find,
"feel" — *' I  will  distress  them  with  the  rigours  of  a  siege  that  they  may  feel  it."  (So  Hitr,
Umbr.,  Naeg.,  Hend.).

EOMILETIC  TREATMENT  OP  SECTIONS  OP  CHAPTER  X.

Section  1-16.  Jehovah,  the  true  and  eternal  God,  contrasted  with  idols.

,,     17-25.  Judah*g  mournful  distress;  prayer  for  Jehovah's  mitigating  mercy.

Section  1-1 7. — Jehovah,  the  True  and  Eternal  God,  Contrasted  with  Idols.

This  appeal,  addressed  to  *'  house  of  Israel,"  the  whole  covenant  race.  It  may,
however,  be  (as  in  chap.  ill.  12)  a  distinct  address  to  the  then  scattered  Israelites,
in  exile  already  among  '*  the  heathen  ;  "  or  an  inclusive  appeal  to  the  entire  nation  ;
Judah  soon  to  go  into  exile,  and  Israel  already  there.

I.  Superstitions  and  idolatries  censured  and  contemned.  ''Learn  not  the
way  of  the  heathen  "  (ver.  2)  ;  "  for  the  customs  of  the  people  are  vain  "  (ver.  3).

1.  The  casuistries  of  astrology  censured  (ver.  2).  The  creation  of  "  the  heavens  "
is  Jehovah's  handiwork  (ver.  12),  and  His  "signs"  there  must  not  be  regarded
superstitiously,  nor  be  associated  with  false  deities,  as  is  **  the  way  of  the  heathen  ;"
but  be  regarded  with  intelligent  admiration,  with  adoring  homage  of  Him  whose
glory  and  goodness  they  reveal.     (Addenda  on  ver.  2,  "  Signs  of  heaven.")

2.  The  vanities  of  idolatry  contemned.  Observe  (1.)  how  these  idols  originate
(ver.  3,  4) ;  (2.)  how  senseless  and  helpless  they  are  when  made  (ver.  4,  5)  ;  (3.)  hoiv
little  power  they  possess  over  men,  either  for  **evil"  or  *'good"  (ver.  5);  (4.)  how
ridiculous  (ver.  8)  they  are,  notwithstanding  their  gorgeous  decoration  (ver.  9) ;  (5.)
how  certainly  they  who  make  and  trust  in  them  will  be  put  to  derision  (ver.  14) ;  (6.)
how  prophecy  foredooms  them  all  (ver.  11,  15).

II.  Sublime  representations  of  Jehovah's  glory  and  Israel's  resources  in
Him.      "  Who  would  not  fear  Thee,  O  King  of  nations  ?  "  (ver.  7).

1.  The  majesty  of  JehovaNs  attributes.  (1.)  His  incomparable  greatness  appeals
to  universal  reverence  (ver.  6,  7).  {2.)  His  eternal  glory  and  sway  admonish
those  who  provoke  Him  (ver.  10).  (3.)  All  creation  asserts  His  grandeur  and
illustrates  His  power  (ver.  12,  13).  Thus  He  is  God  of  ^*  the  nations  "  (ver.  7),  and
men  of  every  nationality  and  in  every  land  should  own  and  revere  Him.  More-
over, false  deities  shall  '*  perish"  (ver.  11),  but  Jehovah  ever  liveth,  *'  the  true  and

213


OHAF.  X.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


living  God,  the  everlasting  King  "  (ver.  10)  ;  hence  there  is  no  hope  of  evading
Him.  Yea,  and  the  tvide  universe  testifies  of  Him  (ver.  12,  13),  therefore  He  every-
where commands  man's  recognition,  even  as  everywhere  He  extends  to  man  Hia
providential  care.     (Addenda  on  ver.  6,  10.)

2.  The  grandeur  of  Israel's  heritage  in  God.  To  His  chosen  people  the  double
blessing  avails:  (1.)  God  is  their  portion  (ver.  16);  "the  portion  of  Jacob"  is
**  the  Former  of  all  things."  What  wealth,  therefore,  they  have  in  Jehovah  !
"  My  God  shall  supply  all  need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory."  (2.)  Israel  is
God^s  inheritance,  chosen  by  Him  as  His  peculiar  treasure  ;  therefore,  "  all  things
were  theirs  " — covenants,  promises,  adoption  !  What  could  they  want  with  other
and  vain  gods,  having  Him  who  was  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  universe  as
their  own  God,  who  claimed  and  loved  them  as  **  the  rod  of  His  inheritance  ]  "  Had
they  been  satisiied  with  God,  He  would  have  satisfied  their  souls  with  His  infinite
fulnesa

Section  17-25.  Judah's  Mournful  Distress:  Prayer  for  Jehovah's

Mitigating  Mercy.

It  would  soon  be  Judah's  melancholy  fate  to  go  after  Israel  into  captivity  and
degradation.  **  Gather  up  ^%  wares  out  of  the  land"  (ver.  17).  This  had  become
a  stern  necessity  in  consequence  of  Judah's  spiritual  revolt,  and  God  Himself  would
secure  its  accomplishment  :  "  Behold  I  will  sling  out  the  inhabitants,"  <fec.  (ver.  18).

I.  The  anguish  of  exiled  Judah.  "Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt,"  &c.  (ver.  19).
Language  either  of  pathetic  bemoaning  or  of  sullen  repining.  Suggests  1.  Terrified
realisation  of  punishment :  '*  Woe  is  me  !  "  She  had  "  looked  for  peace,"  thought  to
sin  on  with  impunity,  dreamed  not  that  "sudden  destruction"  would  come,
imagined  herself  secure  in  her  ungodliness ;  but  "  behold  bitterness  !  "  Note  the
aspect  of  her  suffering:  **hurt*'  something  real,  injurious,  painful;  not  a  mere
terror,  but  a  keen  pang.  Such  are  God's  chastisements  and  punishments.  2.
Poignant  experience  of  distress  :  "  wound  grievous."  And  a  grievous  wound  is
both  a  pain  and  a  peril,  dreadful  to  bear  and  threatening  fatal  issues.  3.  Sullen
submission  to  calamity  :  '*  But  I  said,"  when  about  to  lament  my  lot,  what  good
will  come  of  making  ado  1  "  Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it !  "  Stoical
hardness :  "  I  cannot  remedy  it,  so  I  must  bear  it.  Fretting  will  not  alleviate  it,
so  I  will  keep  silence  ! "  How  different  this  from  penitence  for  the  cause  of  the
misery,  and  patient  submission  to  consequences,  which  find  solemn  expression  in,
"  It  is  the  Lord  ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good  1  *'  4.  Hopeless  reconciliation
to  misery  :  "  I  must  bear  it  !  "  Not,  "  Come  and  let  us  return  to  the  Lord,  for  He
hath  smitten  and  He  will  heal  us  ! "  She  will  not  seek  Divine  healing  for  her
"  wounds"  (chap,  viii  21,  22),  therefore  she  sees  no  hope  in  her  anguish  ;  for  being
"  without  God,"  she  is  "  without  hope  in  the  world."

IL  The  devastations  of  the  Holy  Land.  The  figure,  *•  eiabernacle  "  (ver.  20),
suggests  the  idea  of  (1.)  weakness  and  insecurity  ;  for  though  the  Jews  prided  them-
selves in  Jerusalem  as  a  strong  and  fortified  city,  it  would  prove  as  defenceless  as
a  tent.  The  "  tabernacle  spoiled  and  cords  broken "  suggest  (2.)  the  total
dissolution  and  destruction  of  the  Jewish  state  :  the  government  had  broken  up,  the
nationality  had  collapsed.  Thus  the  lament  declares,  1.  The  overthrow  of  the
theocracy  :  "  Tabernacle  spoiled."  2.  The  banishment  of  the  people :  *'  Children
gone  forth,"  <fec.,  either  exiled  or  slain  :  "  they  are  not."  3.  The  rulers  are  defeated:
"  pastors  become  brutish ;  not  prosper ;  flocks  scattered  (ver.  21) ;  they  were  impotent
to  repair  the  ruined  state:  the  explanation  being,  "they  have  not  sought  the
Lord  ; "  they  ignored  the  fact  that  His  hand  was  in  this  overthrow,  and  hence  they
ignored  the  fact  that  to  Him  must  they  look  for  deliverance  and  redress.  4.
T/ie  enemy  was  triumphant:  "To  make  the  cities  desolate,  a  den  of  dragons"
(ver.  22)  :  the  Chaldean  avarice  would  spare  nothing.  What  direful  ravages  follow
in  the  train  of  sin  I  ^

214


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.  chap.  X.


in.  The  prayer  for  Jehovah's  intervention.  Though  the  suffering  nation
repudiated  God,  there  was  one  intercessor — Jeremiah — who  cried  to  Jehovah  for
mercy.  Yes  ;  and  though  the  world  ignores  God  now,  still  there  m  "  One  Mediator
between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus ; "  whose  pleading  voice  goes  up  even
for  the  fruitless  thing — '*  Let  be  this  year  also  !  "  Preaching  had  done  little  good,
80  the  pro|)het  turns  to  prayer.  Words  addressed  to  God  may  be  powerful  when
words  addressed  to  men  are  powerless.  He  will  hear  though  they  forbear.  1.
Acknowledgment  of  GocV 8  supreme  providerice.  Man's  designs  are  subordinate  to
God's  purposes  (ver.  23).  We  cannot  have  everything  according  to  our  own  mind,
and  here  Jeremiah  surrendered  his  desires  to  God's  will ;  he  will  not  ask  God  to  do
other  than  He  deems  best,  sad  though  he  is  for  his  nation's  nearing  ruin.  Yet
also  the  prophet  seems  to  imply  that  the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar  will  not  be
allowed  by  God  to  do  other  than  as  He  wills  :  enemies  are  not  unrestrained ;  God
worketh  according  to  His  will  among  armies  and  over  men.  2.  Appeal  to  Divine
pitifulness.  The  prophet  identifies  himself  with  his  nation,  and  entreats  that  the
necessary  punishment  may  be  mercifully  tempered  and  restrained.  We  deserve
"correction,"  need  chastisement,  but  could  not  survive  "anger."  3.  Imprecation
of  God's  wrath  upon  Judah's  oppressors  ;  for  the  Chaldeans,  though  used  by  God,
were  malevolent,  implacable,  and  impious,  and  merited  punishment  even  while
carrying  out  God's  designs.  God  may  permit  oppression  of  His  people,  may  even
use  it  to  chasten  them  ;  but  oppressors,  who  deny  God  and  work  malicious  projects,
shall  in  their  turn  feel  the  crushing  rebukes  of  a  mightier  Power  (Ps.  Lxxv.  8).

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  SUCCESSIVE  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  X

Ver.  2.     Theme  :  Inflexible  godli-  wealth  fosters.     Do  "not  learn  "  it  even:

NESS.     "  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  hea-  have  nought  to  do  with  it.     There  are

then"  different  forms  of  religion  abroad  ,  and

Cast  among  "  the  heathen  "  by  exile,  more,  there  are  antagonistic  forms  of  re-
Israel  was  not  to  accommodate  herself  ligion.  Are  we  to  conform  to  any  "  way  "
to  the  religious  or  irreligious  aspects  which  favour  and  fortune  patronises
which  there  environed  her.  simply  because  in  that  locality  or  country

"The  way"  means  either  their  mode  we  find  it  dominant?     1.  Religion  asks

of   life    or   their   customs   in    worship.  unswerving  allegiance  of  the  soul.       If

The  phrase  is  used  in  the  New  Testa-  we   are   unstable,  God's   covenant   and

ment   as   descriptive    of  the    Christian  promises  will  not  stand  good    for   us.

discipleship.     'H  6dh( — comp.  Acts  ix.  2,  2.  God   asks   us   to   witness  for    Him

xix.  9.  against    false    religions    in    irreligious

Suggested  that —  scenes  and  in   irreligious  times.      The

I.  Concession  to  the  order  of  things  dominant  religion  may  be  plausible,  it
surrounding  us  is  a  specious  tempta-  may  be  imperious ;  but  whether  baited
tion.  Among  "  the  heathen"  do  as  they  with  seductions,  or  armed  with  persecu-
do.  1.  Convenient :  for  saves  us  from  tions,  if  it  be  not  righty  refuse  compli-
the  annoyances  which  self-assertion  and  ance.  "  Learn  not  the  way."
individuality  provoke.  2.  Advantage-  III.  Fidelity  to  conscience  and  to
ous :  for  it  appeases  and  gratifies  others,  God  must  be  uncompromising.  In  all
and  lays  some  worldly  gains  within  our  scenes,  under  all  circumstances,  at  all
reach.  3.  Pleasant  ;  there  is  a  novelty  times.  A  pliant  godliness  is  :  1.  Cow-
and  a  relaxation  and  an  enjoyment  in  arc?/y  .•  contrast  with  it  Daniel,  Shadrach,
this  self-adaptation ;  good  for  us  to  bend  Meshach,  and  Abednego.  2.  Contemp-
8  little.  tible:  the  "man  of  God"  sinks  down

II.  Conformity  to  the  dominant  re-  into  a  mere  time-serving  hypocrite.
ligion  is  not  to  be  oar  ruling  habit.  •  3.  Condemned :  for  it  not  only  degrades
It  may  be  needful  to  stand  apart  from  the  man  himself,  and  dishonours  God,
^  the  way  "  which  the  Atate  supports  and  for    horn  he  should  be  valiant  and-bold,

215


OHAF.  1.


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


but  it  denies  to  Jehovah  His  due ;  for
He  has  rights  in  His  people ;  they  are
*'  not  their  own,  but  bought  with  a  price,
and  heTice  should  glorify  Him  in  body
and  spirit,  which  are  His ; "  and  His
people  owe  obligations  to  Him  in  return
for  the  revelation  and  the  grace  He  has
bestowed  on  them.  Hide  not  "  light
under  bushel ; "  "  Even  in  Sardis  defile
not  your  garments;  "  "  Have  no  fellow-
ship with  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,
but  rather  reprove  them."  (Comp.  2  Cor.
vi.  14-18.)

Illustrations  of  unyielding  constancy  :
Moses  refused  to  be  called  son  of  Pha-
raoh's daughter,  and  joined  himself
valiantly  with  the  despised  Hebrews.
Daniel,  who  prayed,  despite  the  royal
edict.  Our  Lord  Himself^  who  repudi-
ated the  religious  habits  and  ideas  which
prevailed.  Paul^  who  "approved  him-
self to  God  in  much  patience,  in  afflic-
tion, in  distress,  in  stripes,"  (kc.  (2  Cor.
vi.  4,  sq.).  Indeed,  godliness  has  pro-
duced martyrs  in  every  age  whose  sole
crime,  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  was,  that
they  would  "  not  learn  the  way  "  which
those  in  power  would  have  enforced.
(Comp.  Heb.  xi.  32.  sq.)  "  Quit  you
like  men,  be  strong  ! "

Ver.  2.     Theme:  Superstitious  ter
ROR   at   the    marvels    of    nature  :
"  Be   not   dismayed   at    the    signs    of
heaven."

Eichom  supposes  a  reference  to  some
astronomical  portent  which  was  then
causing  "  dismay."  Hitzig  thinks  these
"signs"  were  some  alarming  celestial
appearances  intended  as  heralds  of  im-
pending judgment.  Naegelshach,  how-
ever, believes  the  reference  to  the  perma-
nent constellations  and  usual  signs  of  the
firmament ;  nothing  extraordinary  or
portentous.  But  Kiel  and  Dr.  P.  Smith
well  argue  that  the  word  "  dismay  "  sug-
gests, not  adoration  such  as  the  heathen
might  yield  to  ordinary  celestial  ap[)ear-
ances,  but  alarm  and  consternation,  conse-
quent upon  iome  unwonted  phenomena.

Before  such  "  signs,"  wonder  but  not
worship  ;  admire  the  heavens,  but  do  not
adore  ;  ponder  them  intelligently,  but  do
not  prostrate  yourself  before  them  idola-
troualy.

210


I.  Ignorance  and  idolatry  are  alike
in  this:  they  fall  into  superiLfcltious
terror  of  natural  things.

The  crude  and  uninformed  mind  is
startled,  bewildered,  and  appalled  by
celestial  phenom^.na.  Nor  by  these  alone ;
terrestrial  marvels  equally  awaken  super-
stitious dismay.  They  drive  the  igno-
rant to  terror,  the  idolatrous  to  worship.
Eclipses  or  earthquakes,  comets  or  tem-
pests, unusual  constellations  or  calami-
ties, fill  with  consternation.  This  in-
dicates that :

1.  The  wonders  of  nature  are  very
majestic  and  solemn.  Sufficient  to  im-
press men  everywhere  with  the  stiper-
natural ;  speaking  to  them  of  vast  and
hidden  realities.

2.  The  benighted  mind  of  man  is
fruitful  of  fears.  Sees  terrors  and  por-
tents everywhere.  And  "fear  hath
torment."  How  much  better  the  "  per-
fect love  which  casteth  out  fear,"  which
assured  reliance  on  God  secures !  Be-
ligion  is  the  antidote  of  the  miseries  of
superstition.

II.  Sacred  enlightenment  reveals
God  as  above  all  nature's  wonders.
"  The  heathen  are  dismayed  j "  but  a
people  knowing  God  should  not  be
dismayed.  They  adored  celestial  appear-
ances, bowed  in  terror  before  nature's
marvels,  because  they  knew  not  the
Great  First  Cause.  Astrologers  taught
that  events  depended  on  the  stars  which
were  possessed  with  power ;  and  Plato
thought  them  endued  with  spirit  and
reason.  (Addenda  on  ver.  2,  "  Signs  of
heaven.")

1.  The  benefit  of  natural  knowledge,
of  physics,  science,  <fec.,  which  reveal  to
us  that  nature  is  not  a  fitful,  capricious
omnipotence,  but  is  obedient  to  law,
regulated  in  all  occurrences;  that  a
Supernatural  Ruler  controls  and  directs
all  events.

2.  The  blessings  of  sacred  revelation,
which  opens  the  hidden  world  to  us,
makes  clear  to  us  this  fact  that  a  Father
governs  the  universe,  who  love.\  man,
who  asks  man's  loving  trust,  not  slavish
terror.

3.  The  joyfidness  of  spiritual  (nlight-
enment,  which  goes  beyond  a  sacred
knowledge,  and  dwells  in  personal  enjoy


HOMILETIC  COMMhNTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  X.


ment  of  God ;  not  only  as  the  Lord  of
the  universe,  who  "works  all  things
together  for  good,"  but  as  the  Father  of
Jesus,  who  claims  and  cherishes  us  as
His  children,  which  enables  us  to  say,

"This  awful  God  ia  oursT'

which  sees  His  love  in  Christ,  and  by  that
light  interprets  all  that  occurs.

III.  Possession  of  God's  favour  en-
ables man  intelligently  to  enjoy  His
works.  "  The  Lord  speaketh  unto  you,
0  house  of  Israel  (ver.  1),  Be  not  dis-
mayed," Jec.  And  theirs  were  the
covenants  and  promises,  <kc.  They  were
a  people  "  whose  God  is  the  Lord."

L  God^s  works  call  forth  amazement
and  admiration,  even  where  intelli-
gence alone  is  possessed  ;  yet  this  is  not
equal  to  the  childlike  gladness  of  the
Christian  which  revels  amid  the  wealth
and  loveliness  of  the  "  Father's  house."

2.  In  God's  works  the  Christian  finds
sublime  illustrations  of  God  Himself.
Scientific  men  pause  at  the  works ;  the
Christian  passes  on  to  the  Worker:
**  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God."
"  When  I  consider  the  heavens,  the  work
of  Thy  hands,  the  moon  and  stars,  which
Thou  hast  ordained,"  <kc.  They  alone
truly  enjoy  nature  who  "  also  joy  in  God
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Kom.
V.  11).  What  beautiful  and  inspiring
aspects  of  God's  attributes  do  the  glories
of  nature  supply  to  us  I  (Comp.  Isa.
xl.  25-3L)

Ver.  3-5.  Theme:  Idol  manufac-
ture.    (Addenda  on  ver.  3.)

I.  The  original  mMerials  to  which  the
idol  owes  its  existence,  "A  tree  out  of
the  forest"  (ver.  3).  Only  like  other
trees,  which  still  remain  trees  !

II.  The  industrious  toils  to  which  the
idol  owes  its  formation.  '*  The  work  of
the  workman  "  (ver.  3).  Not  divine  in
its  structure.

III.  The  formative  instrument  to
which  the  idol  owes  its  dignity.  **  The
axe."  No  supernatural  appliances  or
aids  came  to  its  help  ;  merely  a  hatchet.

IV.  The  process  of  adornment  to  which
the  idol  oives  its  attractiveness.  "  They
deck  it  with  silver,"  <fec.  (ver.  4).

V.  The  ingenious  arrangement  by  which


the  idol  is  invested  with  a  decent  posture,
*'  They  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  ham-
mers, that  it  move  not"  (ver.  4).

VI.  The  clumsy  workmanship  which
denies  to  the  idol  becoming  stateliness.
A  god  ought  to  be  of  fair  and  graceful
form,  but  it  is  "  upright  as  a  palm-tree"
(ver.  5)  ;  stiff,  inelegant  pillars.  Many
commentators  render  the  words  thus  :
''They  are  like  pillars  in  a  cucumber
garden ;"  i.e.,  the  shapeless  blocks  set
up  to  scare  away  birds.

VII.  The  generous  attentions  to  which
the  idol  owes  its  movements.  '*  They
must  needs  be  borne,  for  they  cannot  go."
(Addenda  on  ver.  5.)  So  that  all  an
idol  is  and  does,  it  owes  to  man !  It
could  not  make  itself,  it  cannot  help
itself.

Hence,  1.  How  degrading  this  for  a
god  I  2.  How  degrading  this  for  a
worshipper  /  Surely  (ver.  3)  "  the  cus-
toms of  the  people  are  vain."  What
need  to  lead  the  people  to  "turn  from
dead  idols  to  serve  the  living  God !  "
For  as  the  idols  cannot  help  themselves,
neither  can  they  help  their  worshippers ,
unable  to  sipeak  or  stir,  to  render  them
any  service.     Without  life  or  power.

VI IT.  The  natural  treatment  which
the  idol  merits.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  ;
for  they  cannot  do  evil  nor  good.**
(Comp.  isa.  xl.  and  xli.,  from  which
doubtless  Jeremiah  drew  his  illustrations,
he  being  familiar  with  Isaiah's  writings.)

Ver  6.  Comments  :

There  cannot  be  two  highest  Beings,
or  there  would  be  none.  In  the  idea  of
the  Absolute  there  is  involved  that  of
uniqueness.  Polytheism  has  therefore
no  highest  Being  in  the  absolute  sense.
Where,  however,  traces  of  such  are
found,  polytheism  is  about  either  to  rise
to  monotheism  or  to  dissolve  into  pan-
theism.— Lange.    (Addenda  on  ver.  10.)

^^None  like  unto  Thee,  0  Lord  ;  "  none
of  all  the  heroes  which  the  heathen  have
deified,  the  dead  men  of  whom  they
made  dead  images,  and  whom  they
worshipped.  Some  were  deified  and
adored  for  their  wisdom,  but  "  among
all  the  wise  men  of  the  nations" (ver.  7),
the  greatest  philosophers  or  statesmen,
as  Apollo  or  Hermes,  there  is  none  like
Thee.     Others  were  deified  and  adored

217


OHAP.  Z.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


for  their  dominion^  but  "in  all  their
royalty  "  (so  ver.  7  may  read),  amoDg
all  their  kings,  as  Saturn  and  Jupiter,
there  is  none  like  unto  Thee.  What  is
the  glory  of  a  man  who  invented  a
useful  art  or  founded  a  flourishing
kingdom,  what  the  glory  of  the  greatest
prince  or  potentate  (and  on  such  grounds
did  the  heathen  deify  men),  compared
with  the  glory  of  the  Creator  of  the
world  ? — Henry.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Jehovah's  unchal-
lengeable OLAIM  ON  HUMAN  REVEB-
ENCE.

To  worship  any  other  than  Him  is  an
infringement  of  His  inalienable  prero-
gative.

I.  The  universal  scope  of  God's
dominion.  *'  King  of  nations ;  "  not  only
**  King  of  the  Jews"  nor  only  "  King  of
saints"  but  all  nations  are  within  His
domain.  Hence,  therefore,  not  Israel
alone  should  yieldHim  fealty  and  homage,
for  the  Lord  of  all  should  be  worship-
ped and  obeyed  by  all.  He  reigns  over
all  mankind  (Ps.  xxii.  28) ;  all  man-
kind should  render  loyal  reverence  to
Him.  God's  sway  is  over  eachy  as  well
as  all ;  over  m^,  as  well  as  over  nations ;
and  each  must  therefore  for  himself  Own
Him  King.

II.  The  impressive  manifestations  of
Divine  power.  As  "  King  of  nations,"
God's  "  name  is  great "  (ver.  6) ;  it  is  a
lofty  and  imposing  title.  Does  Jehovah
hustain  by  deeds  this  universal  dominion  %
"  Thy  name  is  great  in  might  "  (ver.  6):
the  King  rules  royally  as  far  as  His
name  and  domain  extend.  "  Name
great  in  might,"  means  displaying  itself
in  acts  of  might.  Great  in  renown,
God  justifies  His  title  by  manifestations
of  majesty  and  power.  His  footsteps
are  on  every  scene.  His  hand  doeth
wondrous  things  in  every  man's  experi-
ence and  career :  "  Marvellous  are  Thy
works,  and  that  my  soul  knoweth  right
well."      Therefore  /  should  revere  Him.

III.  The  incomparable  perfections
of  God  Himself.  The  possession  of
glory  and  power  does  not  always  coin-
cide with  personal  worth  and  goodness.
But  with  Jehovah,  "  among  all  the  wise
men,   Ac.     (ver.   7),    none  like   Thee."

2)8


Omit  "  men  ; "  for  "  wise  **  includes  god$
also,  the  authors  of  heathen  oracles.
"  In  all  their  kingdoms,  "  properly,  their
royalty  or  kingship,  none  so  royal  as
Jehovah.  (1.)  Unapproachable  wisdom.
(2.)  Incomparable  royalty.  Contrast
the  "  wisdom "  of  pagan  gods,  even
their  most  clever  oracles  ;  and  what  are
they  when  set  over  against  the  benignant
wisdom  of  the  Creator  evident  in  all
His  works,  and  the  redeeming  wisdom,
the  wondrous  graciousness  of  God's
plan,  shown  in  the  Gospel,  in  "  Christ
the  wisdom  of  God."  Contrast  the
royal  dignity  and  nobleness  of  idols
with  Him  whose  '*  glory  the  heavens
declare,"  and  whose  highest  manifesta-
tion of  "glory  is  in  the  face  of  Jesus
Christ."  How  blessed  are  we,  having
Him  as  "our  Lord  and  our  God  ! "

IV.  The  solemn  appropriateness  of
human  homage.  "To  Thee  doth  it
appertain."  (See  Crit.  Notes,  supra.)
"  Fear, "  i.e.  trustful  reverence,  the
lowly  homage  of  love.  Not  (1.)  Terror  ;
that  is  for  the  vanquished,  for  slaves.
(2.)  Nor  worship  alone,  rendering  Him
the  adoration,  devotedness,  and  love
which  the  eminence  of  His  perfections
demands.  But  (3.)  Restful  and  happy
trust ;  a  "  fear  "  which  finds  in  Him  all
occasions  for  our  own  happiness  if  we
do  His  will  and  please  Him,  yet  which
recognises  His  power  to  consume  the
disobedient — realising  that  life  and
death  are  with  Him.  It  is  a  happy
^^fear  "  with  those  who  are  "  hid  with
Christ  in  God  ; "  but  a  deep  dread  of
His  disfavour  if  by  guilt  we  incur  His
frown.     (See  ver.  10.)

There  is  an  appropriateness  and  a
rightness  in  our  loving  reverence  of
God  ;  it  is  the  dutiful  child  resting  in  the
Father's  embrace,  reverently  contem-
plating His  graciousness,  and  gratefully
adoring  him  in  return.  (Addenda  on
ver.  6,  " None  like  Thee^  0  Lord"  and
"  Thy  Name  is  great")

Ver.  8,  9.  Comments:

"  They  are  altogether  brutish.  Brutish-
ness  here  does  not  refer  to  a  vicious
state,  but  to  the  senseless  stupidity  of
savages,  who  know  no  better  than  to
adore  a  "  tree."  "  Altogether  brutish  ;  **
rather  all  alike:  the  "wise"   (ver.    7)


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  X.


and  the  "  heathen  "  (ver.  2)  equally  on
a  level  with  "brutes."  Note  that  in
Daniel  and  Revelations  how  often  the
power  which  opposes  and  ignores  God
is  personified  in  a  "  beast."  Man  for-
feits his  dignity,  and  even  his  humanity,
and  sinks  to  the  level  of  a  "  brute,"
when  he  severs  himself  from  God  (Ps.
cxv.  8).

'*  Their  stock  is  a  doctrine  of  vanity.*^
(Cf.  Lit.  Crit.,  supra,)  The  idols  are
vanity  ;  hence,  also,  their  doctrine  is
vanity.  From  such  senseless  gods  what
could  their  worshippers  learn?  Ex
nihilo  nihil  fit  Thus  Keil  remarks,
"  The  heathen,  with  all  their  wise  men,
are  brutish,  since  their  gods,  from  which
they  should  receive  instruction,  are
wood."

"  Silver  spread  into  plates"  &c.  {Cf,
Geographical  References,  and  Manners
and  Customs,  supra.)

**  However  much  the  wood  ("  stock  ")
be  decked  out  with  silver,  gold,  and
purple  raiment,  it  remains  but  the  pro-
duct of  men's  hands ;  by  no  such  process
does  the  wood  become  a  god." — KeiL

Ver.  10.  Theme:  The  only  true  God.

Observe  with  what  unity  of  assertion
the  Scriptures,  Old  and  New,  affirm
this  of  Jehovah  :  He  is  "  the  true  God  "
(text) ;  "  That  they  might  know  Thee,
the  only  true  God  "  (John  xvii.  3),  (fee.
(Addenda  on  ver.  10,  "  The  true  God.")

I.  In  contract  with  the  '*  vanity "  of
idols  (ver.  3,  8,  15)  Jehovah  is
Truth.  Not  merely  *'  true "  in  word
and  deed,  veracious  and  faithful^  but
truth  in  essence,  in  Himself,  as  a  quality
of  His  being.  And  also  a  God  who  is
no  mere  imaginary  Being,  but  a  sublime
reality.  God  is  a  fact.  And  being
real.  He  is  essentially  true.  And  because
in  Himself  true,  He  will  deceive  and  dis-
appoint none  who  trust  in  and  seek  Him.
As  He  has  revealed  Himself,  so  He  is ;
no  insincerity  in  Him,  no  misrepre-
sentation of  Himself.  That  being  so,
how  cheering  to  turn  to  the  revelation
He  has  made — to  Moses  as  "  merciful
and  gracious,"  <fec.,  and  in  Jesus  as  the
Friend  and  Father  of  man — and  to  know
all  this  is  really  so  :  "The  Lord  is  the
true  God."


II.  In  contrast  with  lifeless  idols  (ver.
5)  Jehovah  lives.  He  is  "  the  liv-
ing God."  Not  a  mere  impersonal  all-
pervading  Force;  not  a  self-evolving
Law;  but  a  Being.  And  because  He
lives.  He  has  life  in  Himself  underived,
and  is  Himself  the  Fount  of  Life,  dis-
pensing vitality  to  humanity.  "  Who
only  hath  immortality."  "  In  whom  we
live,"  (fee.  "As  the  Father  hath  life
in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  the  Son
to  have  life  in  Himself."  "In  Him
was  life."     "  Christ  is  our  life."

III.  In  contrast  vfith  the  temporary
duration  of  idols  and  idolatry  (ver.  11,
15)  Jehovah  is  eternal.  Idols  are
but  of  yesterday,  and  they  shall  perish ;
but  the  Lord  is  "  everlasting,"  and
therefore  they  who  are  His  have  an  im-
perishable Hope,  a  never-failing  Refuge^
a  deathless  Friend.  And  the  human  soul
wants  more  than  the  transient.  "  When
heart  and  flesh  faileth,  God  is  the
strength  of  my  heart  and  my  portion
for  ever."  Here  is  the  confidence  of  the
righteous :  God  will  never  fail  them.
Here,  too,  is  the  terror  of  the  dis-
obedient :  they  will  never  evade  the
"  everlasting  God."  The  like  attribute
is  assigned  to  Jesus  (Heb.  i.  12),  and
He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and
for  ever."

IV.  In  contrast  with  the  impotence  of
idols  (ver.  5,  '*  Cannot  go ;  cannot  do
evil  nor  good")  God  is  King.  A
monarch  so  mighty  that  his  wrath  fills
"  earth  "  with  trembling  ;  so  terrible  that
"  nations "  fail  at  His  anger.  Men  do
well  to  *\fear"  Him  (ver.  7),  and  by
reverent  homage  to  abide  in  His  favour.
Alarming  as  is  such  a  presentation  of
God's  monarchical  majesty,  it  is  only
the  manifestation  suited  to  defiant  sin-
ners. There  is  a  gentler  side  of  the
character  of  God :  view  it  revealed  in
"  the  Son,  who  was  in  the  bosom  of  the
Father,  and  hath  declared  Him."  "  God
is  love."  (Addenda  on  ver.  10,  "  The
true  God.")

Ver.  11-13.  Theme:  An  appeal  to
God's  works.

A  challenge  seems  suggested :  judge
of  the  idols  by  their  works.  What  have
they  done  1  (ver.  11,  '*  Not  made  ]iea.YGii%

219


OHAP.  X.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTART:  JEREMIAB,


and  earth  *').  But  estimate  Jehovali  by
His  creative  power  (ver.  12),  and  by
His  providential  operations  in  nature
(ver.  1 3).  It  was  in  effect  the  like  chal-
lenge to  that  of  Elijah,  "  He  who
answers  by  fire,  let  Him  be  God  " — de-
cide by  the  works.  So  Jesus  asks,
**  Believe  Me  for  the  very  work's
sake."  It  was  an  old  Greek  saying,
"Whoever  thinks  himself  a  god  besides
the  One  God,  let  him  make  another
world."  (See  Ps.  xcvi.  6.)  Contem-
plate—

I.  God  as  manifested  in  His  original
work  of  creation.  Three  distinct  acts
recorded  (ver.  12) — *^  made,^*  *^  estab-
lished" ^*  stretched  out;"  and  three
distinct  attributes  marked — "  power/*
"  wisdom,"  "  discretion."

1.  God's  formative  power  :  "  Made  the
earth  by  His  power."  And  consider
the  size,  the  materials,  the  wealth  and
beauty  stored  within  the  earth,  and  the
loveliness  and  variety  with  which  He
has  clothed  it,  setting  man  thereon
*'  over  the  works  of  His  hands."  What
a  conception  of  God  is  supplied  !  What
have  idols  '*  made  "  ]

2.  God's  ordering  and  controlling
wisdom:  **  Established  the  world  by  His
wisdom."  Separating  the  waters  from
the  land,  regulating  the  seasons,  making
the  habitable  parts  suitable  for  the  living
creatures  and  serviceable  for  man,  and,
amid  all  natural  changes,  securing  the
world  from  convulsions  which  would
destroy  life  from  the  surface  of  the
world,  or  overthrow  the  healthful  and
happy  order  which  prevails.  What  have
the  idols  arranged  for  man's  daily  good,
and  enjoyment  of  unmolested  safety  in
the  world  1

3.  God's  benignant  discretion:  "Stretch-
ed out  the  heavens  by  His  discretion."
The  "  heavens "  are  full  of  proof  of
intelligent  design  in  themselves,  and  of
gracious  consideration  for  God's  crea-
tures (Gen.  i.  18;  Jer.  xxxi.  35).  But
"  the  gods  have  not  made  the  heavens,"
Ac.  (ver.  11).

II.  God  as  manifesting  Himself  in
His  perpetual  work  of  providence ;
controlling  and  caring  for  the  world
He  made  (ver.  13).

1.  All  parts  of  tlie  universe  yield  their
220


stores  at  His  command,  "  The  heavens  "
their  waters  ;  "  the  ends  of  the  earth  '
their  vapours ;  the  chambers  of  "  light-
ning "  and  the  caves  of  the  "  wind "
their  "  treasures."  So  that  there
is  no  recess  of  nature,  celestial  or  ter-
restrial, whereinto  His  controlling  will
does  not  penetrate.  Hence  God's  pro-
vidence pervades  all  scenes,  and  He  has
the  universe  under  His  control.  But
idols  are  "  fastened  with  nails "  (ver.
4)  to  one  spot,  and  have  no  power  to
move  from  it,  nor  wield  a  sceptre  over
any  scene.

2.  All  forces  of  nature  implicitly  obey
His  bidding.  The  thunder  utters  His
command  :  "  uttereth  His  voice."  The
"  waters  in  the  heavens  "  hear,  and  ac-
cumulate in  "  a  multitude."  The  clouds,
"  vapours,"  ascend  in  recognition  of  His
sway,  for  He  "  causeth  "  them  to  rise  in
clouds  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  the
seas  and  rivers  responding  to  His  laws.
"  Lightnings  "  are  His  "  making,"  and
also  "  rain.'*  And  as  for  the  "  winds,"
they  only  escape  from  their  recesses  as
"  He  bringeth  them  forth."  All  forces
of  nature  are  within  His  sway,  and  they
serve  His  will.  (See  Ps.  cxlvii.  8,  15-
18).  But  what  resources  can  idols  com-
mand 1

This  is  the  argument  of  Natural
Religion — God's  pervading  power  and
goodness,  manifest  in  His  works,  and
those  works  manifesting  Him  to  man
(Rom.  i.  19,  20),  making  an  appeal  to
man's  reverence,  gratitude,  and  love
(Rom.  i.  21,  ii.  4).

But  what  are  these  utterances  in  the
heavens,  and  these  voiceless  wonders  of
nature,  and  these  startling  accompani-
ments of  storms  as  heralds  and  witnesses
of  God,  compared  with  the  tenderer  and
more  solemn  revelations  of  Him  in
Christ  ?  Not  in  the  earthquake,  tem-
pest, or  fire  did  Elijah  discern  God,  but
in  "  the  still  small  voice."  And  God's
highest  argument.  His  unchallengeable
claim  to  human  reverence  and  love,
bases  itself  less  on  the  wonders  of  His
works  in  the  world  around  jnan  than  on
the  wonders  of  His  grace  within  the
human  soul.  There  He  asserts  His
supreme  worth  to  man  ;  it  is  His  undis-
puted empire,  His  rightful  throne.


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  X-


Ver.  14,  15.  Theme:  Reflex  in-
fluence OF  THE  OBJECT  OF  WORSHIP
UPON  THE  WORSHIPPER.

Text  means :  His  skill  in  making
idols,  or  his  acquaintance  with  idols,
debases  and  brutalises  him,  deadens
the  sensibilities  of  his  iiatuie,  and
degrades  the  dignity  of  his  manhood.
Thus  :—

I.  AccLuaintance  with  false  gods
debases  men.  '*  Knowledge "  in  this
region  renders  men  "  brutish."  Such  is
the  universal  consequence  of  idolatry.
Heathenism  shows  how  damaging  to  the
finest  instincts  and  noblest  virtues  of
hum.anity  idol-worship  becomes.  (Ad-
denda on  ver.  14.)

This  applies  not  alone  to  material
idols,  graven  and  fashioned  by  the
heathen,  but  to  those  heart  idols  which
the  irreligious  man,  and  even  the  worldly
Christian  man,  makes  to  himself.  The
thing  which  he  allows  to  usurp  God's
place  in  his  soul,  that  is  his  idol,  and
it  will  give  a  tone  to  his  character  and
career.  Worship  acts  reflectively  on  the
X^'orshipper.

II.  Confldence  in  false  gods  deludes
men.  The  "  founder  is  confounded  by
the  graven  image."  Why  1  "  His  molten
image  is  falsehood  " — a  deception,  with-
out spirit  or  "  breath."  Idols  are  de-
lusions; they  fulfil  not  our  hopes  ;  they
embitter  our  hearts  by  their  "  falsehood."
They  are  themselves  '''vanity''  (ver.  15).
Their  creation  ivas  a  "  work  of  errors!^
a  profound  and  hollow  mockery,  and
covering  with  ridicule  their  votaries  and
worshippers.

God  prophesies  their  doom.  "In  the
time  of  their  visitation  they  shall
perish;"  *.<?.,  when  God  visits  the  idol-
worshippers,  the  idols  shall  be  destroyed.
It  was  so  when  God  visited  these
idolatrous  Jews  in  Babylon ;  He  de-
stroyed their  idols  by  Cyrus.  So  have
they  perished  everywhere  when  God  has
'*  visited "  the  deluded  with  better
knowledge.  And  as  the  Gospel  spreads,
idols  shall  be  cast  down,  and  the  en-
slaved soul  find  emancipation  and
illumination  in  Christ.

Ver.   16.    Theme:   God's    covenant

HERITAGE  IN  IsRAEL.


Notwithstanding  Israel's  desertion  ol
Jehovah  for  idols,  observe  how  they
are  here  spoken  of  as  if  still  united  and
inseparable.  God  continues  to  be  *'  the
portion  of  Jacob,"  and  "  Israel  the  in-
heritance "  of  the  Lord.  This  relation-
ship is  not  to  be  easily  or  lightly  severed
or  ignored.  More  ;  as  Jehovah  is  "  not
like "  idols,  so  neither  is  Israel  like
idolaters;  for  they  have  this  glorious
God  as  their  portion — a  crowning  dis-
tinction that !

I.  What  a  lavish  estimate  God
forms  of  Israel's  worth.

1.  He  prized  Israel  as  His  peculiar
possession;  calls  them  His  "  inheritance,"
something  upon  which  He  sets  His
heart,  cherishes  jealously,  prizes  greatly.
(Comp.  Eph.  i.  17,  18,  "  What  the  riches
of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the
saints.")  It  amazes  us  that  God  should
so  value  His  people.

2.  He  bestows  Himself  on  Israel  in
exchange  for  this  ^^inheritance ;"  be-
comes in  return  "the  portion  of  Jacob."
This  expresses  how  highly  He  esteems
His  people;  He  holds  back  nothing  in
order  to  secure  their  love  and  allegiance.
See  this  bestowing  Himself  fully  illus-
trated and  enacted  in  Christ,  "  who
loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us."

II.  What  a  glorious  supremacy
distinguishes  Israel's  God.

1.  By  emphatic  dissimilarity  ivith
false  gods:  '*  Not  like  thetn."  They  are
themselves  "  vanity  "  (ver.  15),  and  they
delude  their  votaries  (ver.  14).

2.  By  the  sublimity  of  His  works:
"  The  Former  of  all  things."  Creation
reflects  Him ;  the  boundless  universe
shows  who  God  is.

3.  By  the  dignity  of  His  name :
**  The  Lord  of  Hosts  ;"  i.e.,  the  hosts  of
heaven,  the  nations  of  earth  (ver.  7).
He  is  TJie  Higliest  therefore;  and  the
highest  is  God,  God  alone.

Israel's  honour  and  happiness  in  pos-
sessing the  one  true  God  as  a  "  portion."
With  whom  sliould  this  God  be  ex-
changed ?  "  Tlie  Lord  is  the  true  God,
living  God,  everlasting  King  "  (ver.  10).
What  dignity  the  possession  of  such  a
Deity  imparts  to  Israel ;  what  a  firm
haxi*  for  faith  is  supplied  in  having  such
%  God  as  He  1

221


CHAP.  X.


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


III.  What  an  infinite  inheritance
Israel  has  in  Jehovah.

1.  Consider  the  resources  God  has  in
Himself:  "He  is  the  Former  of  all
things.^'  The  firmament  shows  His
glor}^  the  earth  is  full  of  His  riches ;
all  these  things  His  hand  made.  What
cannot  He  do  1  What  is  beyond  Him  ?
Is  there  anything  He  cannot  perform  or
produce,  or  procure  for  Israel,  if  necessity
demands  if?  Yet  this  outgoing  of
Power  in  Creation  is  less  an  assurance
to  us  than  the  outgoing  of  Love  in  Re-
demption ;  and  "  He  that  spared  not  His
own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  Him  up
for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  also  with
Him  freely  give  us  all  things  %  "

2.  Consider  the  forces  God  has  at  His
command :  *'  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  His
name."  (See  Ps.  ciii.  19-21.)  "Thinkest
thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to  My
Father,  and  He  shall  presently  give  Me
more  than  twelve  legion  of  angels "
(Matt.  xxvi.  53).  No  man  can  number
the  hosts  of  God.  In  part  they  were
shown  to  Elisha's  attendant  (2  Kings
vi.  17);  Daniel  saw  something  of  the
host  (Dan.  vii.  12);  the  Apocalypse
revealed  the  "  armies  of  heaven  "  more
fully  (Rev.  v.  11).  And  "  are  they  not  all
ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister
for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salva-
tion ? "  (Heb.  i.  14).

God  is  Israel's  treasure,  and  all  His
wealth  is  theirs  :  we  are  "  heirs  of  God,
and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ."
"  All  things  are  yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's,
and  Christ  is  God's."

Ver.  17, 18.  Theme:  Imminent  exile.

A  new  section  :  discourse  addressed
(not  to  Israel,  as  the  foregoing,  but)  to
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Be  in  readi-
ness to  start  for  captivity.

I.  The  situation  of  the  people.  She
is  an  "  inhabitress  of  the  fortress  "  he-
sieged.  The  time  of  this  prophecy  is
probably  at  the  end  of  Jehoiakim's
reign.  Nebuchadnezzar  is  at  the  gates
of  Jerusalem,  the  city  assailed  by  Baby-
lonian forces  ;  but  a  brief  interval  and
the  foe  will  be  occupant  of  the  citadel.

II.  The  issue  of  the  siege.  The
**  fortress"  will  be  vanquished.  The
people  are  urged  to  use  the  short  oppor-

222


tunity  remaining  for  "gathering  up  their
packages"  ready,  thereby  making  what
preparation  they  can  for  their  migration
as  captives  into  "the  north."  All  resist-
ance is  now  impotent.

III.  The  sentence  of  Jehovah.  *'  I
will  sling  out  the  inhabitants."  God's
hand  was  in  their  defeat  and  misfortunes.
It  would  be  effected  with  violence:
"sling  out,"  properly  "hurl  out."  It
would  be  thorough:  "at  this  time" —
hitherto  hostile  invasions  had  ended  with
plundering  and  imposition  of  tribute.
It  would  be  painful:  "distress  them."
It  would  have  a  definite  purpose  :  "that
they  may  find,"  i.e.,  feel,  e\\AiQV  their  sin,
or  "  feel "  after  Me.  (See  Lit.  Crit.  on
verse.)

Ver.  19.  (See  ''Noticeable  Topics'')

Theme :  Great  affliction  and  sor-
row OF  HEART.

We  may  learn  what  it  is  to  bow  under
the  mighty  hand  of  God.     It  is

i.  That  a  man  recognise  the  suff'ering
as  his  suffering ;  i.e.,  (a.)  as  that  which
he  has  himself  prepared ;  (b.)  as  that
which  is  right  for  him,  not  too  heavy
and  not  too  light,  but  exactly  corre-
sponding to  its  beneficent  purpose.

ii.  That  a  man  accept  his  suffering
willingly ;  (a.)  in  patience  ;  (6.)  in  hope.
— Lange.

(Addenda  on  ver.  19,  *' Sore  afflic-
tion:')

"  Some  make  this  the  lamentation  of
the  prophet  for  the  calamities  and
desolations  of  his  country.  In  mourn-
ful times  it  becomes  us  to  be  of  a
mournful  spirit :  "  Woe  is  me  I"  But  it
may  be  taken  as  the  language  of  the
people  speaking  as  a  single  person.
Some  among  them  would  thus  bemoan
themselves,  and  all  of  them,  at  last,
would  be  forced  to  do  it,

i.  They  lament  that  the  affliction  is
very  great,  very  hard  for  them  to  bear
it,  and  more  so  because  they  had  not
been  used  to  trouble,  and  now  did  not
expect  it.  "  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt;"
not  for  what  I  fear,  but  what  I  feel.
Not  a  slight  hurt,  but  a  "  wound,"  and
a  wound  that  is  "  grievous."

ii.  That  tliere  is  no  remedy  but
patience.     They  cannot  help  themselvei.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


014P.  Z.


but  mast  sit  still  and  abide  it.  Theirs
is  the  language  of  sullen  rather  than  of
gracious  submission.  It  argues  a  want
of  those  good  thoughts  of  God  which  we
should  have  even  under  our  afflictions ;
saying  not,  God  can  do  what  He  wills,
but  "  Let  Him  do  as  seemeth  Him
good." — M.  Henry.
(Addenda  on  ver.  20.)

Ver.  20.  Comments :

The  Targum  paraphrases  the  verse
thus :  "  My  land  is  desolate,  and  all  my
cities  are  plundered ;  my  people  are
gone  into  captivity,  and  are  no  longer
here."

"  The  suffering  was  unmerited  in  so
far  as  the  prophet  and  the  godly  amongst
tbe  people  were  concerned,  but  it  was
inevitable  that  he  and  they  should  take
it  upon  their  shoulders  along  with  the
rest." — Graf,

"  Jerusalem  laments  that  her  tent  is
plundered,  the  cords  which  kept  it  erect
rent  asunder,  and  her  children  carried
into  exile,  and  so  are  not — are  dead
(Matt.  ii.  18),  either  absolutely,  or  dead
to  her  in  the  remote  land  of  their
captivity.  They  can  aid  the  widowed
mother  no  longer  in  pitching  her  tent,
or  in  hanging  up  the  curtains  round
about  it." — Speakers  Com,

*'My  children  are  gone  forth
from  me."  "  The  jealousy  of  the
Saviour  is  so  strict,  that  He  will  have
His  children  directed  to  Him  (Isa.  xlv.
11);  and  the  idea  of  ilnQ  pastoral  office
(see  ver.  21)  with  which  some  good
teachers  are  infected — of  regarding  and
treating  souls  as  their  souls,  sheep  as
<Aeir  sheep,  "children"  as  their  children
— is  in  the  highest  degree  opposed  to  His
will.  Hence  He  often,  for  a  just  judg-
ment, does  not  allow  their  joy  in  souls  to
last,  but  lets  them  see  and  conelude
more  of  their  decline  and  less  of  their
success  than  there  really  is.  For  He
will  not  give  His  glory  to  another,  and
the  teachers  are  not  Christ,  but  sent  by
Him  before  Him." — Zinzendorf.

Ver.  21.  "The  pastors  are  become
brutish,"  <fec.  "  As  sheep  must  either
starve  or  be  led  to  filthy  and  poisonous
pasture,  if  their  shepherds  are  fools,  who
do  not  know  how  to  manage  sheep;  so


is   this   much    more    the  case  in   the

spiritual  pastorate." — Cramer,

"  The  cause  of  this  calamity  is  that
the  shepherds,  t.«.,  the  princes  and
leaders  of  the  people,  are  become
*^ brutish,"  have  *'not  sought  Jehovah"
i.e.f  have  not  sought  wisdom  and
guidance  from  the  Lord.  And  so  they
could  not  ^^ deal  wisely ^^  i.e.,  rule  the
people  with  wisdom.  "  Prosper "  is
not  here,  have  prosperity,  but  show  wis-
dom, deal  wisely,  securing  thus  the
blessed  results  of  wisdom." — Keil.

"  Therefore  they  shall  not  pros-
per." Rather,  have  not  governed  wisely.
The  verb  has  the  sense  of  (1)  acting
prudently,  (2)  being  prosperous  as  the
necessary  consequence.  Here  all  the
versions  take  in  the  first  sense.  The
kings  and  rulers,  having  sunk  to  the
condition  of  barbarous  and  untutored
men,  could  not  govern  wisely,  and  so
"  all  their  flocks,"  literally,  their
pasturing,  that  which  they  governed,
"are  scattered." — Speaker^ s  Com.

Ver.  22.  "  Behold,  a  voice  is  heard  I
it  comes!"  &c.  "A  last  watch-call
and  signal,  which  denotes  that  the  enemy
so  frequently  announced  is  present." —
Lange.

"  Already  is  heard  the  tremendous
din  of  a  mighty  host  which  approaches
from  the  north.  The  great  commotion
is  that  of  an  army  on  the  march,  the
clattering  of  the  weapons,  the  stamping
and  neighing  of  the  war-horses." — Keil,

"Bruit,"  rumour  of  invasion.  The
antithesis  is  between  the  voice  of  God  in
His  prophets,  to  which  they  paid  no
heed,  and  the  cry  of  the  enemy,  to  which
they  must  attend.

"  There  is  a  contrast  to  be  understood
between  the  voice  of  God,  which  had
constantly  resounded  in  Judea,  and  the
tumultuous  clamours  of  enemies.  The
prophet  declares  that  new  teachers  were
now  come,  who  would  address  them  in
another  and  unusual  manner.  *  I  have
spent  my  labour  many  years  in  vain.
I  now  turn  you  over  to  the  Chaldeans  j
they  shall  teach  you.'" — Calvin,

Ver.  23.  TViewc;  Man's  oareee  under
God's  control.

The  Jews  regarded  this  as  asserting

223


CHAP.  X.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


that  Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  do  as  he
listed.  God's  will  ruled  his  action  and
restrained  his  fury  ;  he  came  to  the  land
by  Divine  leading,  he  could  deal  with
the  people  only  as  God  permitted.  More
properly  this  declares  that  the  Jews  them-
selves had  been  relying  on  their  oivii
counsels  and  devices  for  the  national
safety  and  welfare,  negotiating  with
Assyria  when  danger  was  apprehended
from  Egypt,  and  with  Egypt  or  Babylon
when  Assyria  was  dreaded  ;  but  the
national  policy  was  futile,  their  hopes
and  designs  were  of  no  avail.  True  of
us ;  our  life  and  career  are  not  wholly
in  our  keeping;  our  planning  is  often
frustrated ;  a  Divine  direction  and  de-
termination overrule  our  movements.

I.  Conscious  liberty.  "  The  way  of
man;"  his  own  w&y.  He  obeys  only  (so
far  as  he  feels  and  knows)  the  impulses
of  his  own  nature,  the  determinations  of
his  own  judgment,  the  resolutions  of  his
own  will.

II.  Unconscious  control  "The  way
of  man  is  not  in  himself. ^^  His  way  is
in  God's  power  and  God's  purpose.

III.  Unsurrendered  volition.  "Man
that  walketh."  As  these  Jews  were  doing,
in  defiance  of  the  prophet's  appeals  and
God's  warnings.  As  Nebuchadnezzar
would  walk  in  obedience  to  his  lust  of
empire.  As  we  walk,  "  turning  every
one  of  us  to  his  own  way."  Man  in-
sists on  his  right  of  self-government.

IV.  Insuf5.cient  discernment.  "  Not
in  man  to  direct  his  steps,"  i.e.^  he  is  (1)
bewildered  in  judgment,  so  that  he  often
does  not  know  how  to  walk,  what  to  do —
can  act,  but  not  foresee  issues ;  (2)  in-
constant in  willy  so  that  he  changes  his
course  frequently  in  life,  influenced  by
his  own  caprice  or  by  altered  circum-
stances ;  (3)  incapable  in  self-govern-
ment, for  he  finds  a  warfare  raging
within  him,  "  so  that  he  cannot  do  the
things  he  would;"  he  cannot  carry  out
his  own  resolutions — weakness  arrests
him ;  he  is  not  the  master  of  his  own
nature — evil  is  there,  passion  vanquishes
his  purposes,  fear  makes  him  cowardly,
indolence  holds  him  in  the  snare  of  in-
difference or  inaction.

V.  Involuntary  submission.  "  O
Lord,    it  is  not  in  man,**    In  whom

224


then  ?  God  holds  the  impulses  of  our
nature  in  His  control.  He  has  free
entrance  into  the  secret  chambers  of  our
affections  and  thoughts.  His  Spirit  can
"  witness  within  us  "  and  "  work  withm
us  to  ivill  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."
He  can  alter  the  circumstances  around  us
which  lead  us  to  modify  our  plans.  He
can  lay  inducements  in  our  path.  He  can
cJtech  our  course  by  affliction,  <fec.  He  can
help  us  to  do  otherwise  impossible  things.

Believers  bow  their  wills  to  God  as  an
act  of  filial  submission,  but  the  grace
to  do  it  was  God-given.  Sinners  yield
their  love  and  faith  to  Christ,  but  the
persuasives  thereto  were  Divine.  Rebels
rise  in  defiance  against  Him,  but  He
curbs  their  fury,  uses  their  rage,  and
**  restrains  the  remainder  of  their
wrath."  "  Hitherto  shall  thou  come  and
no  farther.^*

(Addenda  on  ver.  23,  "  God*s  control
of  mans  career.")

Notes  :  Blayney,  following  the  Syriac,
renders  the  verse,  "  I  know  Jehovah,
that  His  way  is  not  like  that  of  men  ;
nor  like  a  human  being  doth  He  proceed
to  order  His  going."  It  is  inadmis-
sible :  J^^J  should  have  preceded  *'  Jeho-
vah," marking  the  objective  case.

"  He  first  acknowledges  that  man
cannot  direct  "  His  way,"  his  path  in
life,  himself ;  dependent  as  it  is  only  in
part  upon  his  own  will,  and  in  part
upon  the  conduct  of  others,  and  every-
where upon  God.  There  is  an  antithesis
between  ^^  man,"  i.e.,  any  man,  in  the
first  clause,  and  the  word  "  man  "  in  the
second  clause,  i.e.,  man  in  his  strength.
The  strong  man  may  fancy  that  at  least
each  single  "  step  "  is  under  his  own
control,  even  if  his  whole  path,  or  "  way,"
be  not ;  but  God  declares  otherwise.
(Prov.  xvi.  9). — Speakers  Com.

** Theme.  Man  proposes,  God  dis-
poses. This  is — i.  A  humbling  of  our
pride,  ii.  A  strong  support  of  our
hope." — Na^g.

Ver.  24.  Theme:  Merciful  chas-
tisement. "  Correct  me  not  in  anger,
lest  Thou  bring  me  to  nothing."

Israel  had  wished  in  his  own  strength
to  walk  in  his  own  way,  contrary  to  the


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  Z.


#ill  of  God  (ver.  23).  He  now  recog-
nises the  sinfulness  of  this  wilful  rejec-
tion of  God's  control,  and  submits  to
the  merited  chastisement — be  it  even
national  humiliation  and  exile ;  but,
while  bowing  to  this,  pleads  for  the
utmost  possible  mildness  and  forbear-
ance. This  prophetic  language  sets
forth  Israel's  future  repentance  and
restoration.

I.  Surrender  to  gracious  chastise-
ment. The  soul  recognises  it  as  need'
ful,  and  bows  resigned ;  and  there  is
no  agony  of  dismay  in  the  thought,
"  Let  me  fall  into  the  hands  of  the
Lord."     "  0  Lord,  correct  me."

II.  Shrinking  from  full  retribution.
"  Correct  me,  hut  with  judgment."  With
mildness,  in  opposition  with  "  anger."
The  transgressor  cannot  bear  the  treat-
ment he  deserves,  and  for  which  his
sins  make  demand.  It  would  issue  in
destruction.  No  soul  could  survive.
Hence  the  plea,  " with  jiidgmeni"  as
"  knowing  our  frame  and  remembering
we  are  dust ; "  with  moderation  and
leniency.

III.  Terror  of  God's  wrath.  ''Not
in  anger."  For  *'  we  are  consumed  in
Thy  wrath."  The  soul  of  man  stands
in  dismay  before  the  thought  of  Omni-
potence wielding  itself  in  anger  !  The
child  of  God  trembles  in  the  anticipation
of  His  displeasure.  Suflfering  and  even
calamity  can  be  borne,  but  not  a  Father's
wrath.  That  would  give  the  keenest
pang  to  heaviest  aflSiction  ;  but  the
stroke  will  not  crush  the  heart  if  God
only  corrects  in  mercy.  Who  will  dare
provoke  and  brave  the  "  wrath  of  Al-
mighty God  "  1

IV.  Consequences  of  Divine  severity.
"  Bring  me  to  nothing."  Surely  so  ;  if
the  rocks  tremble  and  the  earth  smokes
at  His  **  look"  if  angels  must  veil  them-
selves from  His  glory,  how  can  frail  man
other  than  perish  at  His  rebuke^  how
survive  His  anger  f  Is  this  annihilation  1
Not  in  text ;  but  only  "  diminish  me,"
make  me  little  (margin) :  «Ltf.,  reduce


Judah  to  an  insignificant  people.  Cal-
vin, however,  says,  *'  The  prophet  takes
diminution  here  for  demolition."  But
the  history  of  the  nation  shows  the
people  not  destroyed,  but  only  diminished
and  dishonoured.  Such  is  the  issue  of
Divine  displeasure.

Happy  they  who  by  prayer  and  pro-
pitiation (in  Christ)  avert  the  *' anger"
and  find  mercy.  (Addenda  on  ver.  24,
"  Lenient  correction.")

Ver.  25.  Theme :  Fury  for  the
IMPIOUS  OPPRESSOR.  (Addenda  on
ver.  25.)

i.  Guilty  of  cruelty  to  God's  people.
"  Eaten  up  Jacob,  devoured  and  con-
sumed him."

iL  Gratifying  thus  their  hatred  to
true  religion.  Not  acting  reverently,
as  agents  of  God's  purpose,  but  im-
piously. '*  Know  Thee  not  j  call  not
on  Thy  name."

iii.  Meriting  therefore  the  fury  they
have  poured  out  on  others.  "  With
what  measure  ye  mete,"  <kc.  "  He
that  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple
of  Mine  eye."  "  Pour  out  Thy  fury
upon  the  heathen."

iv.  Suffering  the  doom  of  enemits  of
God.  For  the  malicious  deeds  of  the
Babylonians  showed  them  impious,  im-
placable, foes  of  Jehovah  as  well  as  His
people.  They  treated  His  holy  Temple
and  its  sacred  treasures  with  ruthless
scorn,  and  blasphemed  His  great  name.
Hence,  having  insulted  God,  they
should  suffer  ''His  fury."  "So  let
Thine  enemies  perish,  O  God."

Note : — This  verse  is  reproduced  in  Pg.
Ixxix.  6,  7,  which  was  written  during  the
exile,  or  at  least  after  the  Chaldeans  had
destroyed  Jerusalem.

"Theme:  How  we  should  behave
under  the  chastisements  of  God.  i.
Humbly  submit  to  them  as  necessary  and
.tUolesome  means  of  improvement,
ii.  Be  certain  that  they  will  not  then
transgress  those  bounds,  nor  proceed  to
our  destruction." — Langc,


OHA*.  3L  EOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y .  JEREMIAH,


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  X

Topic:  Bekeaved  op  Children.     Text :  '*  My  children  are  gone  forth  ofmCy  and
they  are  not ;  there  is  none  to  stretch  forth  my  tent  any  more  "  (ver.  20).

The  cry  of  dread  from  aged  Jacob,  *'  If  I  be  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am
bereaved  ; "  the  anguish  of  Kachel's  lament,  "  weeping  for  her  children,  refusing
to  be  comforted,  because  they  were  not ; "  and  this  pathetic  dirge  of  Zion,  "  Woe
is  me  for  my  hurt !  my  wound  is  grievous  :  my  children  are  not  ! " — all  denote
this  loss  of  children  to  be  one  of  life's  heaviest  yet  commonest  sorrows.

Danger  when  in  trouble  of  thinking  our  case  wholly  and  hopelessly  dark  :  "All
things  against  me  !  "  But  see  :  "  Truly  this  a  grief  f'  Terrible  indeed,  yet  only
one,  standing  alone  amid  ten  thousand  kindneses,  and  after  long  years  of  for-
bearance and  grace.  Bright  days,  sunny  and  happy,  go  on  multiplying  without
our  heeding  them  ;  suddenly  one  day  of  gloom  and  storm  breaks  the  order ;  then
we  properly  say,  "This  is  a  dreary  day,  but  we  must  not  murmur."  And  so  the
years  of  life  go  by  in  peace  and  prosperity  ;  suddenly  a  grievous  sorrow  interrupts
the  course  of  enjoyment ;  shall  we  not  say,  "  Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear
it  " — not  sullenly  but  submissively, — "  remembering  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of
the  Most  High  "  1

I.  Desolating  bereavement.  "  Children  gone  forth  from  me,  and  they  are  not,**
Then  it  is  so  that —

1.  "  Children "  may  be  taken  away.  They  seem  to  belong  to  us ;  we
entwine  our  love  around  them,  and  rest  hopes  on  them,  as  though  none
could  or  should  touch  them.  But  they  are  not  ours  ;  "  no  power  over  spirit  to
retain  it."  Jjet  parents  heed  it,  and  hold  them  from  God,  for  God.  They  may  not
live  to  inherit  our  worldly  substance  ;  lead  them  early  to  know  Christ,  and  "lay
hold  on  eternal  life."  Let  the  young  heed  it  :  children  may  die  :  early  seek  and
serve  the  Lord  !

2.  Home  is  desolated  by  their  loss.  "  Tabernacle  spoiled,  cords  broken."  Seema
now  that  light  of  home  is  all  darkened,  flowers  all  withered,  music  all  silenced.
Suggests  for  children  and  the  young — your  power  to  make  home  beautiful  and
glad.      Let  your  life  there  be  a  joy  and  perpetual  blessing.

3.  Hopes  built  upon  our  **  children"  may  fail  us.  "There  is  none  to  stretch
tent,"  (fee.  Naturally  we  look  to  them  for  our  earthly  future,  to  surround  us  with
comfort,  "  set  up  curtains;  "  to  minister  to  and  solace  us  in  hoar  years.  This  makes
their  loss  so  sad :  destroys  our  hopes,  and  leaves  us  helpless  against  years  and
infirmities.  Oh,  how  often  warned  against  "  making  flesh  our  arm."  "  Put  not
trust  in  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils,"  <fec.  God  is  needful  to  us  all,  and
He  not  fail.  Christ  essential,  and  He  "same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."
Rest  not  on  what  is  so  fleeting  :  "  They  are  gone  forth,  and  are  not,"  Our  sweetest
earthly  hopes  may  perish.

IL  Bitterest  grief.     "  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt !  my  wound  is  grievous."

1.  The  distress  over  bereavement  finds  outlet  in  lamentations.  Natural  to  mourn:
"Jesus wept."  Let  the  stricken  spirit  raise  its  bitter  outcry,  even  as  Rachel.
God  does  not  forbid  or  despise  tears.  "  In  all  your  afflictions  He  is  afflicted."
Remember  "  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  acquainted  with  grief."  He  would  bear  your
sorrow,  and  open  to  you  the  sympathy  and  solace  of  His  tender  heart.

2.  There  was  sore  occasion  for  such  grief.  Calamity  had  befallen  Zion.  Look  at
those  words,  "  ■m;o(?,"  and  "my  hurt.'^  They  tell  that  a  sudden  blow  had  fallen
heavily  on  her.  All  disastrous  events  fall  suddenly ;  we  never  prepared  for  them  ;
strike  us  to  the  earth  alarmed,  "  hurt ;  "  and  we  cry,  "  Woe  is  me  for  my  hurt ! "
In  such  sudden  sorrow  we  want  the  Saviour's  instant  succour :  "  Brother  born  for
adversity."  More  :  "  My  wound  ia  grievous."  The  stroke  makes  a  "  wound  "  not
to  be  quickly  healed:  "  grievous,"  indicating  the  severity  of  the  hurt,  the  depths  of
the  pang.     "  My  children  are  not " — it  means  a  lifelong  wound.     "  My  tabernacle

226


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  x.


is  spoiled  " — ^the  joy  of  earth  can  never  be  complete  again.  Not  mock  the  stricken
with  the  assurance  **  Time  will  heal."  No,  *'  the  wound  is  grievous  :  ''  rather  speak
of  the  restoration ;  tell  Zion  of  exiles*  return  to  her ;  tell  bereaved  of  nearing  day,
when  "  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  nor  pain,  but  former  things  are
passed  away."

III.  Patient  resignation.  "  But  I  said,  Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear
it."  First  comes  the  wild  outcry  of  *'Woe!"  succeeded  by  the  hushed  sob  of
submission.

1.  It  was  felt  that  the  loss  would  not  he  alleviated  by  abandonment  to  grief.  To
nurse  our  sorrow  only  leads  to  repining  j  then  life  becomes  "  a  waste,  howling
wilderness."  Not  yield  to  fruitless  anguish,  but  seek  grace  to  bear  it  with  com-
posure, and  to  turn  ourselves  with  all  possible  courage  and  heartiness  to  what
duties  are  around  us,  and  to  what  comforts  Heaven  has  preserved.

2.  It  was  recognised  as  from  the  Lordy  and  therefore  bowed  to  voith  submission.
Sudden,  desolating,  terrifying  the  calamity,  but  the  hand  of  God  was  in  the  event.
Not  easy  to  say,  "Thy  will  be  done !"  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  Him  do,"  <kc.  Yet
make  the  endeavour  and  say,  "Truly  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it !"  "God  cannot
afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men."  Doubt  not  His  love,  His  wisdom,
His  grace.  "  Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord."  Draw  near  Him  for  comfort,  and  cast  on
Him  the  burden  of  your  loneliness  and  grief.  "  He  hath  torn,  and  He  will  heal
us;  He  hath  smitten,  and  He  will  bind  us  up."  (Addenda  on  ver.  20,  ^^ Bereaved
of  children.**)

Topic:  Pbogbession  Ain>  Direction.     Text:  ^^Itia  not  in  man  that  walketh  to

direct  his  steps  "  (ver.  23).

Self-distrust  the  teaching  of  long  discipline :  the  more  tried  and  advanced  the
believer,  the  more  unreservedly  will  he  say,  with  Solomon,  1  Kings  iii.  7 ;  and  that
Baying,  as  then,  will  "  please  the  Lord."

I.  Naiural  action.  "  Man  that  walketh."  Man's  action  in  life  complex,  in-
volying  two  distinct  parts,  of  which  he  has  only  one  in  himself — the  power  of
natural  action.

1.  Its  ease.  It  is  just  the  simple  putting  forth  of  the  power  of  life ;  going  on,
without  thinking  if  right  or  wrong.  Danger  of  forgetting  a  deficiency  in  this
part-progression :  mistake  a  part  for  the  whole.  We  think  we  can  act  aright,
simply  because  we  have  the  power  of  action  at  all.  It  is  as  if  ship  could  reach
the  port  just  because  she  has  undoubted  capacities  for  sailing,  though  no  helms-
man or  compass.

2.  This  mere  power  of  natural  action  has  a  tendency  to  mislead.  It  makes  a
man  unreflective.  Proneness  to  slight  the  invisible,  because  it  does  not  intrude
itself  upon  us,  although  the  things  of  this  life  have  inseparable  association  with
those  hidden  from  sight  in  another  woi  Id.  Thus  man's  "  walk  "  may  do  much  as
regards  this  life,  but  alas  !  how  little  effect  for  the  world  beyond  !  Leads  to  a  waste
of  strength;  for  toil  where  nothing  can  be  taken,  and  inaction  where  much  might
be  won.  We  often  wonder  there  is  so  much  failure  where  there  is  so  much  energy.
The  value  of  pausing  amid  the  bustle  of  action.

II.  Needful  direction.  Direction  is  often  the  remedy  for  all  this  failure  (Ps.
cxix.  133  and  105).  Once  let  us  be  persuaded  we  cannot  guide  ourselves,  and  we
would  never  willingly  lose  all  the  results  of  our  labour  by  working  at  random.

1.  Take  care  to  go  out  of  ourselves  for  direction.  Shall  not  remedy  the  matter
by  taking  more  thought.  When  we  have  done  much  in  that  way,  it  will  only  be
**  man  that  walketh "  directing  his  own  steps ;  doing  it  more  carefully,  but  still
doing  it  himself.     This  going  out  of  self  may  be  humiliating.

2.  The  advantages  of  this  going  out  of  self.     There  will  flow  in  upon  us  "  the

227


CBAt.  X,  BOM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


wisdom  from  above  ; "  from  the  Father  of  lights.     He  will  show  us  things  in  new
lights  altogether,  that  see  them  in  their  entirety.

3.  But  we  must  yield  ourselves  to  God  to  he  ordered.  Content  to  be  led  "  by
ways  we  know  not."  Not  troubling  ourselves  with  continual  questionings  on  the
subject.  Trust  Him  to  choose  the  road  ;  even  though  it  seem  to  lead  away  from
the  desired  end.  St.  Augustine  said,  "  I  am  a  little  child,  but  my  Father  is  my
sufficient  guardian."

4.  Ways  are  not  really  open  because  apparently  so.  Not  because  we  can  do  this
thing  or  that,  is  it  therefore  right.  Because  of  this  error,  we  have  often  gone  into
spheres  where  God  is  not,  and  where  we  should  not  have  been.

5.  Success  before  the  world  is  not,  therefore^  a  proof  of  our  being  rigld^  nor  of
success  in  our  relationship  towards  God.  Faihire  here,  leaves  our  work  but  as
"  wood,  hay,  stubble."  Danger  of  being  too  eager  for  success.  So  that  what
appears  success  to  us  may  not  be  so  at  all,  and  may  be  a  prelude  to  heavy  loss.

6.  Learn  not  to  put  implicit  confidence  in  energy  or  action.  It  is  likely  to  mis-
lead ;  it  may  make  the  "  man  "  prominent  in  us,  and  not  God.  And  a  very  little
thing  may  put  a  sudden  stop  to  it.

Conclusion :  Bind  together  the  two  ideas  of  our  own  foolishness  and  God^t
wisdom.  We  never  learn  a  depressing  truth  concerning  ourselves  without  an
encouraging  one  concerning  God.  We  are  to  be  emptied  out  of  ourselves  to  be
filled  with  Him.  Under  His  guidance,  our  calm  progress  in  "  ordered  ways  "  will
lead  in  God's  own  time  to  happy  ends. — Abstract  of  ^* Breviates,**  by  P,  B,
Power,  M.A.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  X. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,

Ver.  2.  "  The  signs  of  heaven."  it  is  computed,  there  are  30,000,000  of
Which  the  blind  heathens  feared  and  idols.  British  Christians  should  re-
deified,  and  none  did  more  than  the  member  the  idolatry  of  their  ancestors.
Syrians,  the  Jews'  next  neighbours.  "  In  Scotland  there  was  a  temple  of
Experience  frequently  confuteth  those  Mars ;  in  Cornwall,  of  Mercury ;  in
vain  astrologers  that  pretend  to  read  Bangor,  of  Minerva ;  in  Bath,  of  Apollo ;
men's  fates  and  fortunes  in  the  heavens,  in  Leicester,  of  Janus  ;  in  York,  where
as  it  did  Abraham  the  Jew,  who  foretold  St.  Peter's  now  stands,  the  temple  of
by  the  stars  the  coming  of  their  Messiah  Bellona  ;  in  London,  on  the  site  of  St.
A.D.  1464  ;  and  Albumazar,  a  Moham-  Paul's  Cathedral,  the  temple  of  Diana  ;
medan  wizard,  who  predicted  an  end  of  and  at  Westminster,  where  the  Abbey
the  Christian  religion  a.d.  1460  at  ut-  rears  its  venerable  pile,  a  temple  of
most.  A  great  flood  was  foretold  by  Apollo." — Dr.  Plaifere.
these  diviners  to  fall  out  in  the  year  Ver.  6.  Idols  "  must  needs  be
1524,  cum  planetce  comita  in  piscibus  borne."  Missionaries  in  India  were
celebrarent.  This  caused  the  Prior  of  once  proclaiming  the  glorious  Gospel  of
St.  Bartholomew,  in  London,  wise-man-  Jesus  Christ,  when  one  of  the  audience
like,  to  go  and  build  him  a  house  at  cried,  "Jesus  is  the  true  God!"  Others
Harrow-on-the-Hill,  for  his  better  caught  the  cry  and  reiterated  it,  till  the
security.  Mulcasses,  king  of  Tunis,  a  whole  group  burst  into  response.  Then
great  star-gazer,  foreseeing  by  them,  as  they  shouted  "  Come  with  us,  and
he  said,  the  loss  of  his  kingdom  and  life  pull  down  our  temples,  and  cast  our
together,  left  Africa  that  he  might  shun  gods  down  the  hills."  They  led  the
that  mischief ;  but  thereby  he  hastened  way,  and  soon  the  helpless  idol  was
it,  A.D.  1544.  God  suffereth  sometimes  carried  along — for  though  it  had  legs  it
such  fond  predictions  to  fall  out  right  could  not  walk — to  the  brow  of  a  neigh-
upon  men  for  a  just  punishment  of  thair  bouriug  hill,  and  flung  contemptuouslj
curiosity. — Trapp.  over.

Ver.  3.  Idol  manufactnre.     in  India,         It  is  a  fact  and  a  sight  to  be  mel
228


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAr.  X.


with  any  day  in  Madras  and  other  large
European  cities  :  a  set  of  hired  hearers
will  carry  one  day  on  their  shoulders  a
hideoiis  idol,  ornamented  with  gold  and
gems,  and  the  next  day  the  same  hired
bearers  will  carry  forth  in  state  the
Virgin  Mary. — Biblical  Treasury.

Ver.  6.  "  None  like  Thee,  O  Lord."
All  things  in  the  natural  world  symbolise
God,  yet  none  of  them  speak  of  Him
but  in  broken  and  imperfect  words.
High  above  all  He  sits,  sublimer
than  mountains,  grander  than  storms,
sweeter  than  blossoms  and  tender  fruits,
nobler  than  lords,  truer  than  parents,
more  loving  than  lovers.  His  feet  tread
the  lowest  places  of  the  earth,  but  His
head  is  above  all  glory,  and  everywhere
He  is  supreme. — Beecher.

"Thy  name  is  great  in  might."
A  Jew  entered  a  Persian  temple,  and
saw  there  the  sacred  fire.  He  said  to
the  priest,  "  How  do  you  worship  firel" —
'*  Not  the  fire :  it  is  to  us  an  emblem  of
the  sun  and  of  his  animating  light,''
said  the  priest.  The  Israelite  continued,
*'You  dazzle  the  eye  of  the  body,  but
darken  that  of  the  mind  ;  in  presenting
the  terrestrial  light  you  take  away  the
celestial."  The  Persian  asked,  "  How  do
you  name  the  Supreme  Being  ? " — "  We
call  Him  Jehovah  Adonai;  that  is,
the  Lord  who  was,  who  is,  and  shall  be."
— "  Your  word  is  great  and  glorious,
but  it  is  terrible,"  said  the  Persian.  A
Christian  approaching,  said,  "  We  call
Him,  "  Ahha,  Father."  Then  the  Per-
sian and  the  Jew  regarded  each  other
with  surprise,  and  said,  "  Your  word  is
the  nearest  and  the  highest;  but  who
gives  you  courage  to  call  the  Eternal
thus]"— "The  Father  Himself,"  said
the  Christian,  who  then  expounded  to
them  the  plan  of  redemption. — Krum-
macher.

Ver.  10.  "The  true  God."  "How
many  Gods  are  there?"  was  once  asked
of  a  boy.  "  One." — "  How  do  you  know
there  is  only  one  1 " — "  Because  there  is
no  room  for  more,  for  He  fills  heaven
and  earth."

The  Egyptian  hieroglyphic,  represent-
ing God,  was  a  winged  globe  and  a
serpent  coming  out  of  it :  the  globe  to


signify  God's  eternity,  the  wings  His
active  power,  and  the  serpent  His
wisdom, — Bowes.

Two  gentlemen  were  once  disputing
on  the  divinity  of  Christ :  one  of  them,
who  argued  against  it,  said,  "  If  it  were
true,  certainly  it  would  have  been  ex-
pressed in  more  clear  and  unequivocal
terms."  "Well,"  said  the  other,  "ad
mitting  that  you  believed  it,  were  you
authorised  to  teach  it,  and  allowed  to
use  your  own  language,  how  would  you
express  the  doctrine  to  make  it  indubit-
able 1  " — "  I  would  say,"  replied  he,
"that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  God.** —
"  You  are  very  happy,"  replied  the
other,  "  in  the  choice  of  your  words,  for
you  have  happened  to  hit  upon  the  very
words  of  inspiration ;  for  John,  speaking
of  the  Son,  says,  '  This  is  the  true  God,
and  eternal  life.'  " — Wilson.

Ver.   11-13.  An   appeal  to   God's

WORKS.

"  Who  guides  below  and  rules  above,

The  irreat  Disposer  and  the  mighty  King  ;
Than  He  none  greater,  next  Him  none
That  can  be,  is,  or  was  :
Supreme,  He  singly  fills  the  throne."

HOKAOE.

An  Arab,  when  one  day  asked,  "  How
do  you  know  there  is  a  God  1 "  turned
indignantly  upon  the  questioner,  and
replied,  "  How  do  I  know  whether  a
man  or  a  camel  passed  my  tent  last
night?  "  His  own  footprints  in  creation
and  providence  testify  of  Him.

Ver.  14.  Worship  of  idols  debases
the  worshipper.  The  gods  of  Greece
and  Rome  had  at  least  human  features,
and  modelled  after  the  likeness  of  men ;
but  among  the  millions  of  the  gods  of
India  affecting  the  character  of  their
worshippers,  there  is  not  one  which
represents  a  virtue,  not  one  which  is
not  a  monster  of  iniquity.  Brahma  is
acknowledged  by  the  Hindoos  them-
selves as  too  bad  to  be  worshipped.
Their  god,  Shiva,  is  distinguished  for
his  revenge  and  malignity  ;  Krishna
bears  a  character  of  a  notorious  licentious
profligate  ;  Juggernaut  is  represented  by
an  old  idol  without  legs  and  arms,  be-
cause the  legs  and  arms  of  the  god  were
cut  off  by  a  sentence  of  the  gods  for  his

229


CHAP.  Z.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


incurable  iniquity.  What  but  impurity
and  cruelty  can  be  the  result  of  a  religion
which  has  such  patrons  in  its  god? —
Dictionary  of  Illustrations.

"Any  opinion  which  tends  to  keep
out  of  sight  the  living  and  loving  God,
whether  it  be  to  substitute  for  Him  an
idol,  or  any  occult  agency,  or  a  formal
creed,  can  be  nothing  better  than  the
portentous  shadow  projected  from  the
slavish  darkness  of  an  ignorant  heart."
— Hallam.

Ver.  19.   Sore  affliction.

As  they  lay  copper  in  aquafortis  be-
fore they  begin  to  engrave  it,  so  the
Lord  usually  prepares  us  by  searching,
softening  discipline  of  affliction  for
making  a  deep,  lasting  impression  upon
our  hearts. — Nottidge.

There  is  as  much  difference  between
the  sufferings  of  the  saints  and  those  of
the  ungodly  as  between  the  bandages
wherewith  the  tender  surgeon  binds  his
patients  and  the  cords  with  which  an
executioner  pinions  a  condemned  male-
factor. — A  rro  w  smith.

One  in  affliction,  when  asked  how  he
bore  it  so  well,  replied,  *'  It  lightens  the
stroke  to  draw  near  to  Him  who  handles
the  rod."

Ver.  20.  Bereaved  op  children.

**  Death  lies  on  her,  like  an  untimely  frost
Upon  the  sweetest  flower  of  all  the  field."

Shaksfeabb.

Bengel  had  twelve  children,  of  whom
half  died  in  infancy.  He  said,  when
speaking  of  his  loss,  "  As  little  children
give  their  sweetmeats  to  their  parents
to  keep  for  them,  so  my  pleasant  things
are  safer  in  God's  keeping  than  in  that
of  my  own  treacherous  heart." — Bowes.

Elliot  said  of  the  death  of  his  chil-
dren, "  I  have  had  six  children,  and  I
bless  God  they  are  all  either  in  Christ
or  vnth  Christ,  and  my  mind  is  now  at
rest  concerning  them." — Ibid.

**  I  cried,  '  Lord,  spare  my  child  1  *
He  did ;  but  not  as  I  meant.  He
snatched  it  from  danger,  and  took  it  to
His  own  home." — Cecil.

*'  See,  father,"  said  a  lad,  "  they  are

knocking  away  the   i)rops  from  under

the  bridge.     What  are  they  doing  that

for  1     Won't  the  bridge  fall  %  "—  "  They

230


are  knocking  them  away,"  said  the
father,  "  tliat  the  timbers  may  rest  more
firmly  upon  the  stone  piers,  which  are
now  finished."  God  only  takes  away
our  earthly  helps  that  we  may  rest
firmly  upon  Him.

A  lady  in  one  day,  during  her  hus-
band's absence  from  home,  lost  both  her
children  by  cholera.  With  a  mother's
anguish  of  heart  she  covered  a  sheet  over
them,  and  awaited  her  husband's  return,
"  A  Person  lent  me  some  jewels,"  she
said  when  she  met  him,  "  and  now  he
wishes  them  again  %  What  shall  I  do  ? "
— "  Return  them,  by  all  means,"  said
her  husband.  Then  she  led  the  way,
and  silently  uncovered  to  him  the  forms
of  his  dear  children. — Dictionary  of
Illustrations.

Ver.  23.    God's  control  of  man's

CAREER.

**  The  wish,  which  ages  have  not  yet  subdued
In  man,  to  have  no  other  mafiter  but  hii
mood." — Btron.

**  Our  indiscretion  sometimes  serves  us  well
When   our  deep  plots  do  pall :    and   that

should  teach  us
There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,
Rough  hew  them  how  we  will." — Shake-
speare.

"  A  wheel   within   a  wheel's  the   Scripture

notion,
And  all  those  wheels  traverse  and  cross  in

motion.
All  creatures  serve  it  in  their  place ;  yet  so
As  thousands  of  them  know  not  what  they  do:
At  this  or  that  their  aim  they  do  direct.
But  neither  this  nor  that  is  the  effect.
Men  are,  like  horses,  set  at  every  stage,
For  Providence  to  ride  from  age  to  age ;
Which,  like  a  post,  spurs  on,  and  makes

them  run
From  stage  to  stage,  until  their  journey's

done ;
Then  takes  a  fresh  :  but  they  the  business

know
No  more  than  horses  the  post-letters  do.
Yet  though  its  work  be  now  concealed  from

sight,
'Twill  be  a  glorious  piece  when  brought  to

light." — Flavbl.

"  Certum  est,  nos  velle,  cum  volumua,
sed  ille  facit,  ut  velimus  bonum,  de  quo
dictum  est,  quod  prseparatur  voluntas  a
Domino  (Prov.  viii.  35).  Certum  est,
non  facere,  cum  facimus,  sed  ille  facit,
ut  faciamus  prsebendo  vires  efficacissiraaa
voluntati,  qui  dixit ;  faciam  ut  in  justi-


mOMILETIC  COMMBNTART:  JEREMIAH,  otap.  1L


ficationibus  meis  ambuletis  et  judicia  better  disposed  and  affectioned  towards

mea  observetis  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27)."  God." — Trapp.

— Augustine.  „       ^^     •,

Ver.   2o.    Fury  for  the  oppressor.

Ver.  24.  Lenient  correction.     "  Cor-  This  is  not  a  New  Testament  aspect  of

rection  is  not  simply  to  be  deprecated.  God  ;  gracious  towards  Israel,  tempering

The  prophet  here  cries,  *  Correct  me  ; '  affliction  with    mercy,  but  severe    and

David  saith,  *  It  was  good  for  me  ; '  Job  wrathful,  with  no  restraining  of  anger,

calleth  God's  afflicting  of  us  His  magni-  towards  the  heathen.     Rather,  "  Go  ye

fying  of  us  (chap.  viii.  17).     Feri  Bom-  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel

ine,  feri  clementer ;  ipse  paratus  sum,  to   every    creature.'*     '*  Pray    for   them

saith  Luther, — Smite,  Lord,  smite  me,  that  despitefuUy  use  you."     Hence  the

but  gently,  and  I  am  ready  to  bear  it  true  piety  of  the  Prayer-Book  petition  :

patiently.     King  Alfred  prayed  God  to  **  That  it  may  please  Thee  to  forgive  our

send  him  always  some  sickness,  whereby  enemies,  persecutors,  and  slanderers  ;  and

his  body  might  be  tamed,  and  he  the  turn  their  hearts,"


CHAPTER  XL

Cbitioal  and  Exkoetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Th«  "covenant"  Bum-
marised  in  ver.  2-6  refers  to  the  nation's  renewal  of  vows  with  Jehovah  upon  the  Book  of  the
Law  being  discovered  during  Josiah's  reign.  The  prevalency  of  idolatry  (ver,  13)  eeems  to
point  back  to  the  public  establishment  of  idol-worship  under  Manasseh.  Both  these  allusions
favour  an  early  date  for  this  and  chap.  xii. — 1.«.,  during  Josiah^s  reign,  dr.  B.C.  620.  (So  Keil
and  Dr.  Payne  Smith.)  Others  (Maurer,  Hitzig,  Umbriet,  and  Graff)  find  in  chap.  xii.  14
(which  is  a  continuation  of  this  chap.)  a  reference  to  the  **  neighbours  "  spoken  of  in  2  Kings
xxiv.  2.  If  this  be  so,  the  chapter  must  date  at  the  end  of  Jehoiahim*s  reign,  cir.  B.C.  600.
But  the  absence  of  all  explicit  mention  of  the  Chaldeans  (Lange),  shows  this  prophecy  to  have
been  delivered  before  Nebuchadnezzar  came  against  Jerusalem  ;  for,  after  the  battle  at  Char-
chemisb,  Jeremiah  invariably  specifies  the  Chaldeans  by  name.  Hence  the  chapter  is  assigned
to  ihe  first  or  second  year  of  Jehoiakiniy  cir.  B.C.  610.  Probably  Bleek  is  correct  in  assigning
ver.  1-17  to  Josiah's  reign,  and  ver.  18-xii.  17  to  Jehoiakim's  reign.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures.— 2  Kings  xxiii.  34-37;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  4,  6.

3.  National  Affairs. — Jehoiakim  on  tlie  throne.  Quick  development  of  the  nation's  apos-
tasy from  Jehovah,  and  revulsion  from  Josiah's  reforms,  led  on  by  the  impiety  of  the  king.

4.  Cotemporary  History. — Egypt  at  this  time  (first  or  second  year  of  Jehoiakim)  enjoying
a  short-lived  ascendancy  over  the  Bab\  Ionian  domination.  This  international  supremacy,
however,  was  speedily  wrested  from  Pharaoh-Necho  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  fourth  year
of  Jehoiakim.

5.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  5.  **A  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  ;"  the  euphemism
for  the  fertile  and  beautiful  Land  of  Promise,  cf.  Exod.  iii.  8,  17;  Deut.  vi.  3,  &c.  Ver.  23.
*'  Anathoth."    See  Crit.  Notes  and  Oeog.  References  on  chap.  i.  1,  in  lac.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  21.  *'  Men  of  Anathoth  ;"  these  would  be  the  acquaintances  of
Jeremiah  in  his  youth,  and  even  his  relatives  (xii.  6).  It  is  on  record  that  the  "  men  of  Ana-
thoth," 128  in  number,  returned  from  exile  with  Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  23;  Neh.  vii.  27;
1  Esdras  v.  18).

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  16.  "  Oxeen  olive-tree,  and  of  goodly  fruit :''  olive  very  common  in
Judea  ;  of  two  kinds,  the  cultivated  and  the  wild  ;  the  latter  a  mere  bush,  the  former  grows  to
the  average  height  of  25  feet.  Its  leaves  are  of  a  refreshing  green  hue,  conspicuous  in  contrast
with  the  foliage  of  darker  trees.  An  object  of  "beauty"  (Hos.  xiv.  6);  an  evergreen.  Its
"fruit"  is  at  first  green;  in  its  early  stage  almost  white,  tinged  with  yellow;  in  its  maturity,
a  rich  purple,  almost  black  :  rich  to  the  taste.  Particularly  famed  for  the  oil  it  so  abundantly
yields.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  4.  **  The  iron  furnace:"  metaphorical  reference  to  Egypt ;
a  figure  used  by  Moses  (Deut.  iv.  20).  Ver.  19.  "  As  a  lamb  (see  Lit.  Crit.  below)  led  to
the  slaughter :  "  a  tamed  pet  lamb,  which  afterwards  had  to  be  killed.

9.  Literary  Criticisms.— Ver.  2.  "  Utar  ye,  and  speak  ye:"  the  plurals  ^J^Dt£^  and  DiT13.'^,

indicate  that  not  Jeremiah  alone,  but  others  in  the  nation,  were,  if  not  commissioned,  yet  urged
to  publish  the  **  covenant "  (comp.  2  Kingi  xxiii.  2  ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  30).      Ver.  6.  *^  So  he  it,

231


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,

0  Lord*'  T^TV  TD^^;  \\i.'^Amenf  Jehovah:"  it  was  the  precise  response  which  was  required
by  the  law  (Deut.  xxvii.  14-27),  and  was  Jeremiah's  solema  assent.  Ver.  6.  *^  Proclaim  :*'
J^"np    read  aloud  (Hitzig,  Graff,  Lange),  as  in  2  Kings  xxii.  8,  10,  16  ;  but  it  means  declare  as

T     T    '  ....

used  by  Jeremiah,  chap,  ii.  2,  iii.  12  (Keil).  Ver.  8.  "  The  imagination,"  i.e.,  stubbornness  (c/.  iii.
17).  Ver.  13.  "  That  shameful  thing  .  .  .  Baal."  See  Lit.  Crit.  on  chap.  iii.  24.  Ver.  15.  "  What
hath  my  beloved  todof"&c.  The  text  is  corrupt  and  obscure.  The  words,  "with  many"
D''^'n|n    is  better  disconnected  from  the  words,  "wrought  lewdness."     The  LXX.  read  the

word  as  D^II^H,  or  (as  Maurer,  Graff,  &c.,  suggest)  D^iJIH  ;  i.e.,  vows  or  prayers,  an d  read,

•      T     T    '

Will  vows  and  holy  Jlesh  (i.e.,  sacrifices)  take  away  ihy  sins?  Retaining  the  word  in  the  text  as
it  is,  by  D''2"irT  must  be  understood,  thy  great  ones,  princes;  and  then  read:  tJiy  great  ones,  in

which  thy  earthly  sirength  consists  ;  and  thy  sacrifices,  on  which  depends  thy  religious  sanctity,
shall  pass  away  from  ^^ee  (Speaker's  Com.).  Keil  renders  the  verse,  "  What  v.ould  My  beloved
in  My  house  ?  tiiey  who  practise  guile?  Shall  vows  and  holy  flesh  remove  thy  calamity  from
thee  ?  then  mayest  thou  exult."  Blayney  :  "  Shall  vows  and  holy  flesh  be  allowed  to  come  from
thee?  When  thou  art  malignant,  shalt  tliou  then  rejoice?"  Dr.  Payne  Smith  :  "  What  hath
My  beloved  in  My  house,  to  practise  guile  there  ?  The  chiefs  and  the  holy  flesh  shall  pass  away
from  thee.     When  thy  evil  (is  done)  then  thou  rejoicest."     Ver.  19.   *'  Like  a  lamb  or  an  ox  :  "

^n?K  \i^^3  i.e.  a  lamb  domesticated,  ^^yi^  is  an  adjective,  familiar^  intimute,  **  a  tame
lamb"  (Gesenius).  The  substantive  ^7N  is  "  ox"  so  called  as  being  tamed  by  familiar  use.  **  Let
us  destroy  the  tree  with  the  fruit :  DH?  fruit  ;  prop,  food,  especially  bread.     The  LXX.  rendei

it  ifi^aXwfiev  ^6\ov  eh  rbv  dprov  avrov,  let  us  cast  wood  into  his  bread,  i.e.,  poisonous  wood.
Targum  ;  "  Let  us  cast  deadly  poison  into  his  food,"  Ver.  20.  "  Let  me  see  Thy  vengeance  upon
them:"  TWX^t^  is  future,  **  J  shall  see,"  anticipating  God's  vindication  and  interposition.

HOMILETICS  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XL

Section    1-8.  Jehovah's  covenant.
,,       9-13.  Idolatrous  conspiracy.
„     14-17.  Mediation  and  sacrifice  unacceptablo.
f,     18-23.  Murderers  in  ambush.

Ver.  1-8.  Jehovah's  Covenant.

It  was  the  one  solemn  compact  which  God  made  with  Israel ;  never  altered,
never  superseded.  By  it  this  nation  first  became  the  Lord's,  and  Jehovah  pledged
Himself  to  be  their  God.  On  its  being  faithfully  observed,  Israel's  very  existence
and  distinction  as  a  theocracy  depended.  Wonderful  :  it  had  for  many  years  been
lost ;  only  found  as  by  accident,  during  Josiah's  renovation  of  the  temple.  (See
Addenda,  ver.  2,  "  The  lost  book  of  the  covenant  found.")  Worse  :  it  had  been  ignored
by  the  whole  nation  ;  they  regarded  not  the  sacred  charter  given  on  Sinai,  and
revolted  from  Jehovah  with  indifference  as  to  results.  Yet  has  not  humanity
equally  "broken  the  covenant,"  apostatised  from  God,  and  virtually  cancelled  the
solemn  compact  which  united  God  in  gracious  relationship  1  *'  O  Israel !  thou  hast
destroyed  thyself."

I.  The  terms  of  this  Divine  covenant.  "  Obey  My  voice,"  &c.  (ver.  4,  5).
1.  It  proposed  a  gracious  relationship.  "  So  shall  ye  be  My  people,  and  I  will  be
your  God."  2.  It  pledged  a  glorious  inheritance.  **  To  give  a  land  flowing  with
milk  and  honey."  3.  It  depended  on  absolute  conditions.  "  Obey,  and  do  accord-
ing to  aK  which  I  command  you."  (a.)  Tlie  terms  were  unambiguous ;  "  obey,  and
do."  (6.)  The  response  must  be  unhesitating  and  uncompromising;  "a//  I  com-
mand." (c.)  Jehovah  alone  was  to  be  their  Lawgiver  and  God  ;  "/  will  be  your
God  " — "  do  according  to  all  /  command."

II.  The  circumstances  which  emphasised  this  covenant.  **  Which  I  com-
manded your  fathers  in  the  day,"  <kc.  (ver.  4).  1.  The  national  crisis  when  it  was
made.  This  is  noteworthy  ;  "  in  the  day!'  &c.  When  Israel  was  just  escaping
from  the  oppressions  and  degradations  which  well-nigh  denationalised  the  people.
This  covenant  was  made  "  in  the  day  "  of  their  emancipation.     2.   Tlie  miraculous

232


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xi.


experience  which  immediately  preceded  it.  This  is  equally  remarkable,  "  I  brought
them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  3.  The  miseries  from  which  they  were  freed
lent  special  significance  to  this  Divine  act ;  "  the  iron  furnace."  In  return  for  all
this,  which  should  have  ensured  unfaltering  loyalty  and  devoted  gratitude,  God
asked,   ''  Obey  My  voice."

III.  The  importunity  with  which  God  instituted  the  covenant.  '*For  I
earnestly  protested,"  (fee.  (ver.  7).  It  denotes — 1.  The  Divine  earnestness  and  anxiety.
(a.)  God  fervently  desired  this  relationship  ;  (6.)  He  ratified  the  covenant  amid  the
most  solemn  asseverations,  "earnestly  protested;''  (c.)  He  recognised  the  perils
which  menaced  it,  for  it  was  made  with  "  your  fathers  " — fickle,  wavering  men.
2.  The  fervent  reiteration  of  the  compact.  **  Even  unto  this  day;  rising  up  early
and  protesting,  saying,  Obey  my  voice."  So  that  with  "  line  upon  line,  precept
upon  precept/'  God  encouraged  them  to  fidelity  and  protested  against  disloyalty.

IV.  The  penalty  attached  to  a  breach  of  the  covenant.  It  was  made  a  con-
dition of  blessings  ;  God  should  be  their  God,  and  Canaan  their  possession  (ver.  5)  :
but  there  was  also  appended  a  "  curse  "  if  it  were  violated  (ver.  3).  1.  There  is  a
black  alternative  of  every  promise.  2.  By  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  men  are  to  be
urged  to  fidelity.  Not  alone  allured  by  promises,  but  menaced  by  curses  ;  for
Jehovah  may  not  be  trifled  with  by  men.  3.  The  individual  responsibility  is
enforced.  "  Every  man  ; "  not  the  nation,  but  the  person,  he  who  sins,  shall  suffer.
4.  T//e7'e  are  ruinous  penalties  threatening  the  disobedient.  The  **  curse "  of  the
Almighty,

V.  The  lengthened  period  through  which  God  had  urged  this  covenant.  He
had  not  grown  dissatisfied  with  it,  nor  had  He  allowed  it  to  pass  from  His  thoughts,
nor  from  Israel's  attention.  From  *'  the  day  that  I  brought  your  fathers  out  of
Egypt  even  unto  this  day"  (ver.  7).  1.  God  reckons  the  years  of  our  opportunity.
2.  He  follows  man  during  those  years  with  persuasions  and  protests.  "Rising
early,"  (fee.  3.  Our  criminality  and  responsibility  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  time
and  the  persuasives.

VI.  The  persistent  violation  of  this  covenant.  "  Yet  they  obeyed  not,"  (fee.
(ver.  8).  1.  Practical  defiance;  "they  obeyed  not."  2.  Habitual  indifference;
"nor  inclined  their  ear."  3.  Wilful  disloyalty;  "walked  every  one  in  the
imagination  of  their  evil  heart."

VII.  The  Divine  vindication  of  the  violated  covenant.  "  Therefore  I  will
bring  upon  them  all  the  words  of  this  covenant."  1.  Blessings  promised  for
obedience  withdrawn.  2.  Curses  threatened  for  disloyalty  performed.  3.  God
Himself  administers  judgment,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the
living  God,"

Ver.  9-13.  Idolatrous  Conspiracy.

"  Jeremiah  saw  that  many  lived  in  open  disobedience  to  God,  but  the  Lord  told
him  the  matter  was  worse  than  he  thought  of  :  ^  A  conspiracy  is  found  among
them,''  by  Him  whose  eye  is  upon  the  hidden  things  of  darkness.  There  is  a  com-
bination against  God  and  religion,  a  dangerous  design  formed  to  overthrow  God's
government  and  bring  in  the  counterfeit  deities.  A  cursed  conspiracy !  Oh,  that
there  were  not  the  like  in  our  day  !

"I.  Observe,  what  the  conspiracy  was.  They  designed  to  overthrow  Divine
revelation,  and  persuade  the  people  not  to  heed  the  words  of  God  :  did  all  they
could  to  derogate  from  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  to  draw  people  to  consult
other  gods  as  their  oracles  and  court  them  as  their  benefactors.  Human  reason
shall  be  their  god,  the  light  loithin  their  god,  saints  and  angels  their  gods,  deities
of  other  nations  shall  be  theirs;  thus,  under  several  disguises,  the  confederacy
exists  'against  the  Lord  and  against  His  Anointed.*

"IL  Who  were  in  the  conspiracy.    Not  foreigners ;  but  I.  *The  inhabitants  of

233


«HAP.  XI.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JBRBMIAH,


Jerusalem  with  the  men  of  Jndah ; '  city  and  country  agree  in  this,  however  they
may  differ  in  other  things.  2.  This  generation  with  the  foregoing  generation;
*they  are  turned  back  to  the  iniquity  of  their  forefathers/  <kc.  (ver.  10);  a  con-
spiracy to  carry  on  the  war  from  age  to  age  against  religion.  The  house  of  Israel
began  the  revolt,  but  Judah  soon  came  into  the  conspiracy.  In  Josiah's  time  there
had  been  a  reformation,  but  after  his  death  the  people  returned  to  the  idolatries
they  had  then  renounced.

"  III.  The  chastening  of  the  conspirators  and  the  crushing  of  this  conspiracy.
God  would  take  severe  methods  for  this ;  for  none  ever  hardened  his  heart  thus
against  God  and  prospered.  He  that  rolls  this  stone  will  find  it  return  upon  him.
*  Therefore  I  will  bring  evil  upon  them'  (ver.  11);  the  evil  of  punishment  for  the
evil  of  sin ;  and  there  is  no  remedy,  no  relief.  1.  They  cannot  help  themselves
(ver.  11).  There  is  no  fleeing  from  God's  justice.  Evil  pursues  sinners  and
entangles  them  in  snares  from  which  they  cannot  extricate  themselves.  2.  Their
God  will  not  help  them ;  *  they  shall  cry  unto  Me/  <fec.  (ver.  11).  3.  Their  idoU
shall  not  help  them  (ver.  12).  If  the  idols  could  have  done  any  real  kindness  to
their  worsliippers,  they  would  have  done  it  for  this  people,  who  had  renounced  the
true  God  to  embrace  them,  and  had  multiplied  them  'according  to  the  number  of
the  cities  of  Judah  and  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.'  But  in  their  distress  their  manj
gods  and  many  altars  should  stand  them  in  no  stead." — Henry,

Ver.  14-17.  Mbdiation  and  Sacrifice  Uwacceptablk.

These  are  and  ever  have  been  the  sole  resources  of  the  sinful  in  seeking  God.  If
He  will  not  permit  mediation  (ver.  14)  for  transgressors,  nor  accept  sacrifices,
("holy  flesh,"  ver.  15;  see  Lit.  Grit,  on  ver.),  then  nought  remains.

I.  Offerings  beautiful  in  themselves :  mediatorial  prayer  and  holy  sacrifices.

II.  Offerers  who  might  expect  acceptance.  1.  Jeremiah,  who  as  a  prophet
was  also  an  acknowledged  intercessor  with  God  for  the  people,  and  withal  a  man
Divinely  chosen  and  approved  ;  he  would  have  offered  prayers.  2.  Judah,  cherished
by  GodsLB  "His  beloved"  (ver.  15);  once  admired  by  God,  "called  (alas  !  not  calls)
thy  name,  a  green  olive-tree,  fair,  and  of  goodly  fruit"  (ver.  16);  enstated  by
God  in  sacred  possessions  and  privileges,  "planted  thee"  (ver.  17);  she  would  have
offered  ^^  holy  flesh"

III.  Offerings  must  represent  those  for  whom  they  are  made.

1.  Prayer  for  others,  that  they  may  be  spared  and  pardoned,  avails  only  when
they  also  pray  for  themselves.  But  Judah  would  not  kneel  before  God  for  deliver-
ance from  her  sins  ;  she  was  prayerless,  would  continue  so,  until  calamity  befell  her,
and  would  then  only  "cry  in  her  trouble,"  not  bemoan  her  guilt.

2.  Sacrifices  to  God  require  that  the  offerers  are  themselves  dedicated  to  Him.  To
give  Him  "  holy  flesh  "  while  they  lived  in  "  lewdness  "  (ver.  15)  was  a  flagrant
mockery.  Public  worship  is  an  insolence  to  Heaven  when  it  covers  private  immo-
rality.

IV.  Incongruous  offerings  refused  hy  God.  "  Pray  not  thou  for  this  people  "
(ver.  14).  "What  hath  My  beloved  to  do  in  Mine  house? "(ver.  15).  1.  For
those  who  love  sin  no  prayer  can  be  heard.  Even  the  Divine  Intercessor  could  not
pray  for  the  soul  determined  in  guilt.  2.  Those  who  live  in  sin  defile  God's  house
by  their  presence  and  His  altar  with  their  sacrifices.  For  such  persons,  who,  "  when
doing  evil,  rejoice,"  to  offer  aught  to  God  is  impious  effrontery.

V.  Mocking  hypocrites  doomed.

1.  There  will  come  to  such  p7'etenders  a  "  time  of  trouble  "  (ver.  14)  ;  wrong  will
not  prove  always  pleasant.

2.  Their  former  goodness  will  not  protect  them  from  the  doom  of  apostates.
"  Fair  and  goodly  "  they  may  have  been  ;  and  so  really  so  as  to  be  called  by  God
"His  beloved  ;"  but  the  goodness  of  former  years  will  not  atone  for  the  guilt  of

234


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  xi.

the  present,  nor  their  experience  of  Divine  love  save  them  from  the  wrath  their
perfidy  has  provoked  (ver.  16).

3.  Their  enstatement  in  Divine  favour  can  he  reversed.  "  Planted "  in  Canaan,
intrusted  with  "  Mine  house,"  Judah's  condition  suggests  the  case  of  those  vrithin
the  Church  of  Christy  once  ostensibly  (perhaps  sincerely)  God^s  people.  But  "if
any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  will  God  destroy.'*

Ver.  18-23.  Murderers  in  Ambush.

How  many  dangers  beset  us  which  we  fail  to  recognise  !  Jeremiah  had  no  per-
ception of  his  peril  until  **  the  Lord  gave  him  knowledge  of  it"  (ver.  18).  An  eye
more  discerning  than  our  own  is  upon  the  righteous;  and  it  *' neither  slumbers
nor  sleeps."     (Addenda  on  ver.  19.)

I.  Malevolent  designs  against  a  witness  for  God.  A  life  of  godliness  rebukes
the  guilty  ;  and  thus  holy  men  incur  their  hate.  Jeremiah  incensed  the  men  of
Anathoth  unwittingly,  unwillingly  ;  but  "  a  good  deed  in  a  naughty  world  "  dis-
turbs and  distresses  and  provokes  the  wicked.

I.  A  concerted  plot :  "  They  devised  devices  against  me."  2.  A  merciless  pur-
pose :  "  Let  us  destroy,  .  .  .  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  living,"  <fec.
3.  An  unsuspecting  victim:  "I  was  like  a  tame  lamb"  (see  Lit,  Grit).  4.  A  vigi-
lant Watcher  :  "  Thou  showedst  me  their  doings  "  (ver.  18).

II.  A  holy  man's  secure  defence  amid  foes  (ver.  20).

1.  Goodness  rejoices  in  the  consciousness  of  God^s  discernment.  Though  evil-doers
malign  and  plot,  God  *' judgest  righteously,"  recognises  the  unsullied  virtue  of  His
faithful  servants  (ver.  19).  2.  Integrity  relies  confidently  on  Divine  vindication.
"  I  shall  see  Thy  vengeance  "  (see  Lit.  Grit,  on  verse).  God  would  defeat  their
designs.  3.  Faith  finds  calm  shelter  in  JehovaKs  protection.  "  Unto  Thee  have  I
revealed  (confided)  my  cause."     (See  1  Pet.  ii.  23.)

III.  Divine  indignation  towards  the  persecutors  of  His  servants.  He  knows
them  and  marks  them  out;  "the  men  of  Anathoth."  1.  The  form  in  which  their
hostility  expressed  itself  (ver.  21)  :  he  must  keep  silence  or  be  slain  ;  be  faithless  to
his  mission  or  die  at  their  hands.  It  showed  hatred  of  God,  from  whose  word  they
recoiled.  2.  The  sentence  of  destruction  which  this  evoked  (ver.  22,  23).  They
meant  Jeremiah's  death;  they  themselves  should  cruelly  perish.  "With  what
measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again,"

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XI,

Ver.     2-5.    Theme  :     Covenanted  xxvii.).  (Addenda,  ver.  2,  "Hook  of  the

ALLIANCE.    (Comp.  Homily  on  section,  covenant  found.")    This  discovery  of  the

supra.)  law  occurred  five  years  after  Jeremiah

The  word  came  from  the  Lord   "  to  was    called     to    the    prophetic    office.

Jeremiah"  (ver.  1),  but  to  be  imparted  Observe:   Though  the    book    was   lost,

to  and  reiterated  by  others — *'  hear  ye^  the    covenant    should   not   have    been

and  speak  ye  "  (ver.  2).     Some    think  ignored.     Their  past  history,  their  pre

these  were  other  prophets  ;  some  suggest  sent  occupancy  of  Canaan,  appealed  to

thepriestsof  Anathoth, which  might  have  them   concerning  their  sacred  relation-

so  exasperated  them  that  they  plotted  ship  and  Jehovah's  claims,

his  destruction  (ver.  19,  21),  as  the  Po-  I.  God  allies  Himself  with  His  people

pish  priests  sought  the  life  of  Savonarola  by  a  method  peculiarly  solemn  and

because  he  incited  them  to  do  their  duty.  imposing.  "  A  covenant."   1.  The  terms

This  '*  covenant  :  "  alluding  to  the  defined.  2.  Mutually  binding.  3.  In-
Book  of  the  Law,  found  by  Hilkiah  tended  to  endure.  4.  The  method  most
during  Josiah's  restoration  of  the  Temple  impressive.  5.  The  responsibilities  great
(2  Kings  xxil  8.-xxiiL  25  ;  comp.  Deut.  — great  as  are  the  benefits  and  privileges.

23P


CHAP.  XI.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


n.  To  this  sacred  compact  God
exacts  from  His  people  unfaltering  ad-
herence. They  must  "  obey  the  words  "
(ver.  3)  as  the  condition  on  which
Jehovah  "  may  perform  His  oath "
(ver.  5).  1.  God  looks  for  their  part  to
be  performed ;  desires  it,  watches  for  it,
eagerly,  paternally.  2.  He  claims  that
their  fidelity  should  be  as  full  as  His
own  ;  no  vacillation,  no  compromise,  no
departure.  3.  Is  wronged  by  their
perfidy ;  wounded  also.

III.  Violation  of  the  covenant  for-
feits its  blessings  and  ensures  its
penalties.  Cancels  the  agreement  for
Divine  benefactions,  invokes  instead
the  Divine  displeasure.  The  faithless
soul  puts  God's  favours  aside  and
invites  the  *'  curse."  So  by  repudiating
the  salvation  of  Christ,  the  sinner  im-
precates judgment.  1.  God  earnestly
desires  to  bless  us :  "  So  shall  ye  be  my
people  "  (ver.  4),  "  that  I  may  perform
the  oath,"  <kc.  (ver.  5).  2.  Man's  con-
science recognises  the  righteousness  of
the  covenant :  "  So  be  it,  O  Lord."  In
the  human  heart  there  is  a  response  to
th«  justice  of  God  in  punishing  the
faithless  soul,  as  truly  as  in  blessing  the
obedient.  Even  in  the  last  judgment
there  will  be  heard  the  human  acknow-
ledgment that  "  the  Judge  of  all  the
earth  doeth  right."

Notes :  The  obedience  here  agreed  for
is  not  performance  of  the  stern  legal
statutes  of  the  law,  but  fulfilment  of  the
benignant  terms  of  a  "  covenant " — a
gracious  and  reciprocal  covenant.  The
"  covenant "  more  naturally  expresses
itself  in  **  Thou  shalt  love :  "  the  law,
in.  Thou  shalt  do.

The  crime  of  slighting  the  alliance  of
love  is  the  greatest  in  itself  and  in  its
consequences.  "  If  any  man  love  not
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be
anathema  maranatha  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22).
(Addenda,  ver.  4,  "  Covenant  alliance
of  love**)

The  Jews  still  occupied  this  goodly
land,  and  it  was  still  affluent  in  natural
wealth  :  God  had  thus  fulfilled  His  part
of  the  covenant.  It  remained  now  with
His  people,  by  keeping  the  terms,  to
decide  whether  thia  inheritance  should
remain  theirs.
336


Ver.  6.  Theme:  Jehovah's  messagb

WIDELY  published.

Most  probably  (so  Hend.,  Naeg.,  and
Speaker's  Com.)  Jeremiah,  obeying  this
Divine  command,  journeyed  with  Josiah
in  his  reforming  tour  through  the  land
(2  Kings  xxiii.  15-20),  everywhere  read-
ing to  the  people  the  words  of  the
newly-found  book.  The  word  '*  pro-
claim "  has  the  meaning  of  read  aloud.
(See  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse.)

All  through  the  land  the  covenant  is
to  be  heard.  All  over  the  earth  the
Gospel  is  to  be  published  :  not  in  *'  cities
of  Judah  and  streets  of  Jerusalem "
alone,  but  to  "  all  people."  "  Go  ye
into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature."

I.  That  none  may  remain  in  sorrow-
ful ignorance,  or  have  excuse  for
neglect.  The  Light  must  shine  into
darkness.

II.  That  all  may  feel  the  persna-
siveness  of  the  earnest  call.  *'  Faith
Cometh  by  hearing  :  "  hearts  are  moved
by  the  heavenly  appeal.

III.  That  every  hearer  may  clearly
know  the  full  plan  of  safety.  "  Heat
the  words  and  do  them."  (Comp.  Rom.
ii.  13;  James  L  22.)  "Do  them:"
Trapp  remarks,  *'  Else  ye  hear  to  no
purpose ;  as  the  salamander  liveth  in
the  fire,  and  is  not  made  hot  by  the  fire  ;
as  the  Ethiopian  goeth  black  into  the
bath,  and  as  black  he  cometh  forth.'*
(Addenda,  ver.  6,  Poem  by  Trench.)

Ver.  7,  8.  Theme:  Earnest  per-
suasion RECKLESSLY  DEFIED.

Observe  1.  God  Himself  earnestly
pleads;  "I."  2.  God  persistently
pleads;  "in  the  day  I  brought  them
out   of  Egypt,    even   unto   this    day."

3.  God  fervently  pleads,  vehemently,
with  pathos  and  power ;  "  protesting."

4.  God  anxiously  pleads ;  "  rising  up
early,"  <fec.,  as  one  too  concerned  and
troubled  to  rest.  (See  on  chap.  vii.  13.
Addenda,  ver.  7,  **  Rising  early.")

Yet,  (1)  Men  oppose  God  in  practice;
"  obeyed  not."  (2)  Refuse  God  their
attention;  "nor  incline  their  ear."  (3)
Pursue  their  own  defiant  course;  "walked
every  one  in  the  imagination  ("stubborn-
oeas/'  see  on  chap.  iii.  17)  of  their  evil


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XI.


heart."  (4)  Turn  GodSi  goodness  into
inevitable  anger;  "  therefore  will  I  bring
upon  them/'  ike     (See  2  Kings  xvii  13,

//)

Ver.     9,    10.     Theme:    Delibebatb

COMBINATION  AGAINST  GoD.

The  decisive  course  being  now  pur-
sued by  king  Josiah  in  exterminating
idolatry  had  led  the  opponents  of  the
king's  purpose  into  determined  league
against  his  reformatory  schemes ;  or
the  general  dislike  which  prevailed
among  the  people  for  this  overthrow  of
their  cherished  idolatry  may  be  meant.
The  consentaneous  disapproval  of  the
nation  is  spoken  of  as  being  a  precon-
certed opposition,  a  "  conspiracy."

Note,  that  opposition  to  religiotis  work^
and  workers  for  Jehovah  (Josiah  the
king  and  Jeremiah  the  prophet),  is  in
truth  a  conspiracy  against  God  Himself.
So  when  Christ  arrested  Saul  of  Tarsus
with  the  challenge  "  Why  persecutest
thou  MeV  (Addenda,  ver.  9,  ^'Con-
spiracy against  God.')

I.  The  darkness  ofthe  human  heart.
Rebelled  against  the  reformation ;  rose
in  resistance  of  the  king's  work  of  puri-
fying the  land.  "  Love  darkness  rather
than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil."
"  Heart  desperately  wicked."

II.  The  antagonism  of  man  towards
God.  Any  idol,  any  number  of  idols,
will  men  rear  and  serve,  but  not
Jehovah.  *'  We  will  not  have  Thee,"
&c.  "  My  people  love  to  have  it  so "
(chap.  V.  31).

III.  The  deliberate  purpose  to  defeat
God's  work.  Men  combine  to  frustrate
the  designs  of  the  Almighty.  They
determine  to  oppose  those  who  would
evangelise  the  world.  They  meet  the
progress  of  religion  with  combined  and
deliberate  assaults.  Guilt  is  implacable^
defiant^  restless.  It  hates  God  and  godli-
ness. They  had  "taken  counsel  together
against  the  Lord,  and  against  His
Anointed"  (Ps.  il  2,  3).  Note,  that
their  idolatry  was  not  the  issue  of
ignorance — they  would  not  exchange  it
for  Jehovah ;  nor  was  it  th<i  result  of  a
hasty  impulse.,  but  deliberate  design
(Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5) ;  nor  was  the  national
relapse  into  idolatry  after  Josiah's  death


the  consequence  of  indifference^  but  of
a  set  purpose,  a  "  conspiracy "  (ver.
10).

IV.  The  confederacy  for  sin  suffices
to  prevail  over  mutual  estrangement.
To  oppose  God  and  His  kingdom  men —
mutually  antagonistic — will  ally  them-
selves. (See  ver.  10.)  "  The  house  of
Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah,"  the  two
kingdoms  which  were  in  fierce  hostility
one  to  another  politically,  became  con-
spirators against  the  God  whose  good-
ness gave  them  national  existence  and
political  power.  Men  can  forswear  their
own  antagonisms,  when  impiety  is  in
the  ascendant,  in  order  to  trample  God's
claims  beneath  their  feet  in  scorn.  But
"  though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked
shall  not  go  unpunished."  "  These  (ten
kings)  have  one  mind,  and  shall  give
their  power  and  strength  unto  the
beast ;  these  shall  make  war  with  the
Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall  overcome
them,"  <kc.  (Rev.  xvil  12-14).

Ver.  1 1-13.  Th^me  ;  The  cry  op  the
GODLESS  IN  CALAMITY.  (See  Homily,
and  Notes  on  chap.  ii.  28,  also  on  sec-
tions, chap.  ii.  14-28.)

"  Cry  unto  Me,"  contrasted  with  "cry
unto  the  gods."  "  I  will  not  hearken
unto  them;"  set  over  against  "  they  shall
not  save  them  at  all."  God  also  places
in  juxtaposition  His  own  power  to  afflict
— "  I  will  bring  evil " — with  the  idols
powerlessness  to  help  them.  Note,  too,
that  the  *' thing"  for  which  the  people
deserted  God  is  "  a  shameful  thing;"  in
itself  a  degraded  object,  in  its  rites  and
orgies  loathsome,  and  certain  to  cover
with  shame  those  who  worship  and  trust
in  it.  With  the  one  true  God  alienated,
and  all  false  gods,  however  numerous
(ver.  13),  proved  to  be  worthless  and
impotent,  none  to  "hearken"  or  "save"
though  they  "  cry  " — how  desolate  the
outlook  of  the  impious  when  the  day  of
sore  trouble  and  dismay  arrives  !  "  Seek
the  Lord,  seek  righteousness,  seek  meek-
ness ;  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the
day  of  the  Lord's  anger."

Ver.  14.     Theme:    The  pbayeb  of

MEDIATION  SILENCED  BY  GoD.

For  there   is   a   climax   of  iniquity

337


OHAF.  XI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMJAE,


which  renders  pity  misplaced,  and
prayer  a  mockery ;  these  must  not
then  intervene.  (See  on  chap.  vii.  16.)
Praying  men  are  arrested  in  their  very
prayers  by  the  dreadful  fact  that  the
guilty  scorn  to  pray  for  themselves  until
doom  is  upon  them.

I.  A  bound  is  here  set  to  prayer;
because  there  is  a  bound  to  possibility.

II.  A  warning  is  here  given  to  the
prayerless  :  they  must  not  reckon  on
the  successful  prayers  of  others  for  them
so  long  as  they  refuse  to  pray  for  them-
selves.

III.  A  correction  is  here  suggested
to  the  prayerful ;  when  God's  purposes
are  evidently  fixed,  do  not  attempt  to
interpose;  nor,  when  you  have  prayed
unwisely,  and  He  therefore  does  not
answer,  conclude  that  He  is  not  the
Hearer  of  prayer.  There  is  a  time  for
solemn  silence  and  submission.  (See
on  chap.  vii.  16.)

Ver.  15.  Theme:  The  unwelcome
SACRIFICE.     (Addenda  on  verse.)

I.  Offered  by  one  whom  God  held
dear  :  "  my  beloved."  For  God  tenderly
cherishes  even  His  sinning  people.

II.  Presented  amid  solemn  sur-
roundings :  **  in  Mine  house."  The
scene  was  good,  where  God  was  ready
to  meet  the  worshipper,  and  where
sacrifices  were  pleasant  to  Him.

III.  Itself  a  proper  and  approved
offering  to  God  :  "  holy  flesh."  Beauti-
ful and  holy  things  God  desires  from  us.

IV.  Rendered  abhorrent  by  the  wor-
shipper's guilt  :  "  she  hath  wrought
lewdness;"  and  "when  doing  evil,
exulted."  God  can  have  no  pleasure  in
pure  things  offered  with  defiled  hands.
**  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,  put  away
the  evil  of  your  doings,"  (kc.  (Isa.  L  11-
16).     (See  LU.  Crit,  on  verse.)

Ver.  16,  17.    Theme:  Destruction

OF  THE  FAIR  OLIVE-TREE.

A  favourite  and  frequent  figure  for
God's  ancient  people.  Observe:  1.  How
carefully  Jehovah  cherishes  the  reiriem-
hrance  of  our  early  fidelity  and  spiritual
beauty  :  He  had  not  lost  the  vision  of
Judah's  former  piety.  2.  How  clearly
238


God  delineates  the  mournful  difference;
fully  recognises  the  degeneracy  and  decay
of  that  early  goodliness.  He  is  watch-
ful over  our  careers,  and  notes  our  pre-
sent state  as  compared  or  contrasted
with  our  former  years.

I.  The  beautiful  tree  of  God's  fos-
tering.

1.  Its  fair  proportions  were  Gods
own  work.  To  His  grace  Judah  owed
all  her  beauty.  "The  Lord  called  thy
name,  A  green  olive,"  (fee.  (ver.  16),
i.e.,  He  made  her  what  she  was.

2.  Its  localisation  in  fruitful  soil  was
an  act  of  Divine  planting.  "The  Lord
planted  thee"  (ver.  17).  Observe:  To
God's  grace,  which  made  us  what  we
are,  we  must  trace  all  our  spiritual  ad-
vantages :  He  hath  wrought  all  our
works  in  us.

II.  Goodly  fruit  grossly  misused.
All  that  this  fair  tree  yielded  was  carried
away  from  Him  who  planted  it,  and
offered  to  Baal  (ver.  17).  1.  He  who
planted  the  tree  should  gather  the  fruit ;
an  unnatural  alienation  of  human  life.
2.  A  tree  whose  fruits  are  deteriorated
must  be  removed  :  evil  growths  must  not
remain  in  God's  fair  garden.  Wicked-
ness forfeits  privileges.  "  Pronounced  evil
against  thee,  for  the  evil  done^*  (ver.  17).

III.  Destruction  by  fire  of  the  de-
generate tree.

1.  Calamity  threatened:  "The  Lord
hath  pronounced  evil."  2.  Complete  de-
vastation  effected :  "  with  the  noise  of  a
great  tumult,"  <fec.  (ver.  16),  i.e.^  by  the
fury  of  a  thunderstorm  and  the  fiery  light-
ning, by  which  "  fire  is  kindled  upon  it,
and  the  branches  are  broken,"

Ver.  17.  Theme:  The  sinner's  sin
HURTS  HIMSELF.  Text :  "  The  evil  which
they  have  done  against  themselves.^*

i.  Intentionally  against  God :  "  To
provoke  Me  to  anger."

ii.  Practically  to  their  own  injury.
Guilt  rebound,  returns  upon  the  guilty.
(See  Outlines  on  chap,  vii.  19.)

Ver.  18-23.  Theme:  Persecution
OP  God's  prophet.  (See  Homily  on
section,  supra.  Addenda  on  ver,  19,
"  Murderers  in  ambush.")

i.  Secret  counsels  revealed  by  Jehovah


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


OHAP.  U.


(ver.  19).  The  general  "conspiracy"
(aee  ver.  9)  of  the  nation  against  Je-
hovah was  accompanied  by  a  family
conspiracy  against  Jeremiah,  his  own
brethren  being  determined  to  take  his
life.  This  cruel  plot  was  revealed  to
His  unsuspecting  servant  by  God  Him-
self.

"Althousrh  the  human  heart  cannot
be  fathomed  (chap.  xvii.  9),  yet  no-
thing can  be  hidden  from  God,  and  He
frequently  reveals  hidden  counsels,  so
that  they  are  known  and  manifest,  as  in
the  case  of  Absalom  and  Ahithophel
(Isa.  viil  10).  Therefore  do  nothing
in  secret,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  remain
hidden,  for  the  birds  of  the  heaven  carry
the  voice,  and  the  winged  repeat  it.
(Eccles.  X.  20y'— Cramer.

ii.  Cruel  treachery  against  a  harmless
prophet  (ver.  19).  It  was  not  that  Jere-
miah wronged  them,  but  the  truth
troubled  them.  Criminals  are  wroth
against  their  captors.  So  Ahab  against
Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii).  Note :  how
defenceless  the  godly  leave  themselves :
"  as  a  lamb,"  with  no  protection  against
guile  or  malevolence ;  even  as  Christ
Himself :  "As  a  Lamb  before  His
shearers."  God  keeps  His  own  while
they  serve  His  will.  Mark,  also,  how
typical  was  Jeremiah's  case :  "  like  a
lamb  brought  to  the  slaughter;"  not
violent,  as  angry  men  are  wont  to  be,
but  gentle  and  submissive,  free  from
vindictiveness ;  and  also  fulfilling  his
work  at  the  peril  (in  Christ's  case,  at
the  expense)  of  his  life.

"  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  ivith  the
fruit; "  that  is,  the  man,  who  is  the
tree,  and  his  teaching,  which  is  the
fruit ;  thus  ridding  ourselves  at  once  of
both  causes  of  disturbance,  the  living  pre-
sence of  this  witness  against  our  sins,
and  his  incisive  words  of  condemnation
and  reproach.

"  Let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of
the  living"  Wordsworth  remarks,  "  So
of  Christ  it  is  said  by  Isaiah  (liii.  8).
All  that  happened  to  the  prophet  Jere-
miah, who  was  specially  the  suffering
prophet,  was  a  foreshadowing  of  what
would  happen  to  the  Great  Prophet  of
whom  Moses  spoke,  '  the  Man  of  Sor-
rows ;  *  and    we   read  these    narratives


concerning  Jeremiah  with  comparatively
little  advantage  unless  we  see  here  a
prophetic  adumbration  of  Christ."
Jerome  says,  "  Almost  all  things  that
the  prophets  did  and  suffered  were  figu-
rative of  Christ ;  and  whatever  was  ful-
filled in  Jeremiah  was  a  prophecy  con-
cerning the  Lord  Himself.

iiL  Vengeance  imprecated  on  foes  (ver.
20).  This  wish  for  vengeance  was  not
personal,  but  ministerial ;  not  because  of
wrong  done  him,  but  because  they  were
the  determined  and  unscrupulous  adver-
saries of  God  and  His  word.  The  note-
able  difference  between  this  appeal  to
God  against  His  foes  and  Christ^s
prayer  for  those  who  crucified  Him,
"  Father,  forgive  them,"  and  Stephen's
"  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge,"
marks  the  wide  distinction  between  the
old  and  new  covenants ;  the  former  was
grounded  on  righteousness ^  the  latter  on
love.  Zinzendorf  remarks,  "The  first
New  Testament  vengeance  was  executed
on  the  Cross,  when  an  evil-doer,  who
had  mocked  at  Jesus,  cringed  on  the  cross
and  asked  for  a  gracious  remembrance."
Wordsworth:  "Jeremiah,  the  human
type,/a*7s  in  some  things  where  Christ,
the  Divine  Antitype,  excels!*

"  Unto  Thee  have  I  revealed  my
cause."  A  teacher  is  advised  to  say
this  if  he  can,  *'  I  have  ceased  to  con-
cern myself  about  myself."  Luthei
says  ; —

**  Once  I  grasped  too  many  things  ;—
None  stayed  j  they  all  had  wings.
But  since  I've  weary  grown,
And  all  away  have  thrown,
Not  one  from  me  has  flown.
And  do  you  ask,  How  can  it  be  thus?
Because  I've  cast  my  all  on  Jesus."

Messengers  and  servants  who  concern
themselves  about  their  own  injuries
must  have  bad  masters. — Zinzendorf.

iv.  The  implacable  malice  of  familiars
(ver.  21).  "Where  shall  a  man  find
worse  friends  than  at  home  1  A  prophet
is  nowhere  so  little  set  by  as  in  his  own
country  (Matt.  xiii.  57)."  —  Trapp.
None  were  so  bitter  to  Christ  as  His
fellow-townsmen  (Luke  iv.  24-29).
"That  which  the  people  of  Anathoth
say  here  to  Jeremiah,  the  people  of  this
world  say  everywhere  and  at  all  times

239


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


to  the  preachers  of  the  truth.     (Comp.  their  crime.     God  says,  /  loill  punish

2  Tim.  iv.  3,  4.)     It  is  important,  then,  them;  let  Me  alone  to  deal  with  them,

to  preach  the  word ;  to  be  instant  in  1  will   visit   this   upon   them :    so  the

season  and  out  of  season  ;  to  reprove,  word  is :  will  inquire  into  it  and  reckon

rebuke,    exhort,  with  all  long-suffering  for    it.  .  .  .  They    sought    Jeremiah's

and  doctrine.'' — Naeg.  in  Lange.     "  It  life,    therefore     they    shall   die.     They

appears  from  this  passage  that  the  holy  would  destroy  him,  that  his  name  he  no

man  had  not  only  to  contend  with  the  more  remembered  ;  therefore  shall  there

king  and  his  courtiers,  and  the  priests  be  no  remnant  of  them.     And  herein  the

who  were  at  Jerusalem,  but  that  when  Lord  is  righteous."     Cramer ;  "When

he  betook  himself  to  a  corner  to  live  the  people  will   not  endure  the  rod  of

quietly  with  his  own  people,  he  had  even  Christ's  mouth,  with  which  He  smites

there  no  friend,  but  that  all  persecuted  the  earth  (Isa.   xi.   4),   item^   His  rods

him  as  an  enemy." — Calvin.  Beauty  and  Bands  (Zech.  xi.  7),  God

v.  God*s  visitation  on  His  people  s  foes  sends  one  with  the  sword  to  preach,  and

(ver.  22,  23).     Henry  comments  thus  :  then  we  see  what  the  smooth  preachers

"  The  sentence  passed  upon  them  for  have  effected  (Isa.  xxx.  10)."

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XL

Topic:  JosiAH*s  Discovery  op  the  Law.  Text :  "  Hear  ye  the  words  of  thi$

covenant "  (ver.  2).

Josiah,  the  last  sovereign  of  David's  house  (for  his  sons  had  not  independent
rule),  showed  the  zeal  and  prompt  obedience  of  the  son  of  Jesse.  Character:
"  heart  was  tender"  (2  Kings  xxii.  19).  Discovery  of  Moses's  law  the  great  event
of  his  reign.  1.  It  shows  that  the  Holy  Scripture  had  for  a  long  time  been
neglected^  and  was  practically  lost.  This  Book  of  the  Law  was  the  five  "  books  of
Moses,"  containing  the  original  covenant  between  God  and  His  people.  Moses  had
enforced  the  domestic  study  of  these  Scriptures  (Deut.  xi.  18-20),  enjoined  upon
each  king  that  they  be  constantly  read  and  recited  (xvii.  19,  20),  ordered  that  at
feast  of  tabernacles  they  be  publicly  read  to  the  whole  nation  (xxxi.  7-13).  2.  The
loss  of  the  book  and  this  negligence  of  God's  word  resulted  from  the  diversities
and  depths  of  national  apostasy.  The  nation  did  not  want  to  liear  the  law  which
testified  against  their  multiplied  transgressions,  nor  to  listen  to  a  condemnation  of
the  idols  they  had  chosen.  Nor  would  the  kings  copy  out  the  law  for  themselves
when  finding  that  it  was  against  the  will  of  God  that  the  nation  should  have
a  king.

I.  Josiah's  evil  parentage  explains  his  total  ignorance  of  the  law.

1.  His  parental  alienation  from  God  and  His  word.  The  last  good  king  before
him  was  Hezekiah,  who  had  been  dead  sixty  or  seventy  years.  His  son  Manasseh,
who  succeeded  him,  was  the  most  profane  of  all  the  line  of  David;  he  it  was  who
committed  the  inexpiable  sins  which  sealed  the  sentence  of  Judah's  destruction.
He  had  set  up  idols  in  the  temple,  made  his  sons  pass  through  the  fire,  dealt  with
spirits  and  wizards,  shed  much  innocent  blood  in  Jerusalem,  done  wickedly  above
all  before  him.  On  his  return  from  Babylonian  captivity,  Manasseh  attempted
reformation,  but  found  it  easier  to  se  luce  than  to  reclaim  the  people  (2  Chron.
xxxiii.  15-25).  Amon,  who  succeeded  him,  followed  during  his  short  reign  the
first  ways  of  his  father,  and  "  trespassed  more  and  more,"  till  slain  by  his  subjects.
Josiah  was  the  son  of  this  wicked  king.

2.  His  own  irreligious  education.  Brought  up  among  very  wicked  men,  in  a
corrupt  court,  after  an  apostasy  of  more  than  half  a  century,  far  from  God's  pro-
pliets,  ill  the  midst  of  idols.

II.  Religion  is  not  determined  wholly  by  outward  circumstances.     Like
Manasseh,  Josiah  came  to  the  throne  in  his  boyhood.     But  Manasseh  was  the  son
of  pious  Hezekiah  ;  Josiah,  the  son  of  wicked  Amon.     Thus  religious  life  is  not
240


BOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.  oHAt.  ti.

dependent  on  parentage,  but,  under  God,  who  gires  grace,  on  the  state  of  the
heart.

1.  His  early  life  of  piety.  Boyhood  is  not  revealed  to  us,  except  that  he  came
to  the  throne  when  only  eight.  But  scarcely  was  he  old  enough  to  think  for  him-
self and  profess  himself  a  servant  of  the  true  God,  ere  he  chose  that  good  part
which  could  not  be  taken  from  him.  When  but  sixteen  he  began  to  seek  after
the  God  of  David  his  father  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3).  Blessed  they  who  so  seek,  for
they  shall  find.

2.  His  disadvantages.  He  had  not  the  aid  of  the  revealed  volume ;  was
surrounded  by  diversities  of  idol-worship,  sophistries  of  unbelief,  seductions  of
sinful  pleasure.  Every  temptation  to  go  wrong.  Had  he  gone  into  a  life  of  sin,
we  might  have  made  allowance  ;  not  so  bad  as  other  kings,  for  be  had  not  sin  ned
against  light,  as  they  had  done.  Yet  he  had  enough  light  to  show  him  how  to  go
right ;  if,  therefore,  he  had  gone  wrong,  he  would  have  sinned  against  what  light
he  had;  not  light  so  clear  as  Solomon  or  Joash  had,  yet  still  against  his  better
knowledge.

ni.  Every  one  has  knowledge  enough  to  be  religious.  Even  the  most  un-
favoured, poorest,  and  most  ignorant.  Education  does  not  make  a  man  religious  ;
nor  is  it  an  excuse  for  irreligion  that  he  has  not  been  educated  to  his  duty.  It
only  makes  him  less  guilty  than  those  taught ;  but  still  he  is  guilty,

1.  Scarcely  any  one  in  a  Christian  land  can  he  in  more  disadvantageous  circum-
stances than  Josiah  ;  nay,  scarcely  in  a  heathen  country ;  for  idolatry  was  around
him,  and  his  mind  was  unformed.

2.  But  he  had  that,  which  all  men  have,  a  natural  sense  of  right  and  vrrong  ;
and  he  did  not  blunt  it.  He  heard  and  obeyed  a  constraining  Divine  voice.
Though  all  the  world  had  told  him  other,  he  would  not  believe  he  could  sin  without
offence  or  with  impunity.

3.  The  same  inward  sense  led  him  to  choose,  amid  all  the  various  worships
offered  to  his  acceptance,  the  true  one — the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel  (Ps.
cxi.  10,  cxix.  100.

4.  His  religious  life  was  spontaneous.  At  sixteen  he  began  to  seek  the  God  of
his  fathers ;  at  twenty  commenced  liis  reformation — began  of  himself.  Jeremiah
did  not  begin  to  prophecy  till  after  Josiah  commenced  his  work.  So  that  the  king
set  about  his  pious  task  unaided  by  others.

IV.  Thus  following  the  biddings  of  his  natural  conscience,  God  gave  him
clear  light.  He  set  out  in  his  work  of  reformation  not  knowing  whither  he  went.
But  it  is  a  rule  of  God's  providence,  that  those  who  act  up  to  their  light  shall  have
clearer.  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  While  engaged  in  his  work  of
restoring  the  temple,  the  Book  of  the  Law  was  found.

1.  His  character  here  reveals  itself  in  his  conduct.  Not  inflated  ;  as  some  who,
though  beginning  humbly,  become  self-confident  and  proud.  He  still  had  "a
heart  tender,  and  humbled  himself  before  God."  Felt  his  own  blindness  and
weakness,  and  earnestly  sought  to  know  his  duty  better  and  practise  it  more
entirely.  "Rent  his  clothes"  (2  Kings  xxii.  11),  for  he  saw  how  incomplete  his
reformation  had  been,  how  far  more  guilty  the  nation  was  than  he  had  supposed,
and  the  fearful  punishments  overhanging  them  (Deut.  xxx.  15,  19,  xi.  26-28).
And  there  had  been  in  part  a  fulfilment  of  those  threats.  Samaria,  the  ten
revolting  tribes,  Israel,  had  been  carried  away.  Though  he  knew  their  sins  had
wrought  this,  yet  here  he  finds  it  threatened  beforehand,  and  discovered  that  the
same  punishment  awaited  his  own  people  should  they  persist  in  sin.

2.  He  sought  guidance  of  a  Divine  teacher.  Sent  to  Huldah  for  counsel  (2
Chron.  xxxiv.  21,  &c.).

V.  His  zealous  and  solicitous  course  of  action  in  consequence  of  the  Divine
message.  Assembled  all  Judah  at  Jerusalem,  publicly  read  the  Book  of  Law,  then
made  all  the  people  renew  the  covenant  with  the  God  of  their  fathers.    Then,  more

Q  241


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.

exactly  following  the  directions  of  the  Lord,  he  carried  on  further  reformations,
and  after  that  celebrated  the  Passover.

1.  Greater  knowledge  was  followed  hy  stricter  obedience  (2  Kings  xxiiL  22).

2.  What  he  did  he  did  with  all  his  might  (ibid.  ver.  25).
Conclusion :

(a.)  Observance  ofGod*s  will,  however  we  learn  it,  ensures  Ood*8  favour.  Learning
it  from  His  Word  in  Scripture,  as  Christians  do,  or  from  His  Word  in  our  con-
sciences, as  the  heathen  do  ;  it  is  by  following  it,  in  spite  of  seductions  of  the  world
around  us,  that  we  please  God  (Acts  x.  25).

(b,)  If  such  is  God's  mercy  on  all  men  who  seek  Him,  what  will  be  His  grace  to
Christians  ?  Far  greater  and  more  wonderful.  Elected  out  of  the  world  in  Jesus
Christ  our  Saviour  to  a  glory  incomprehensible  and  eternal. — Abridged  and
arranged  from  *^  Plain  Sermons"  by  authors  of  *^  Tracts  for  the  Times"

Topic  :    Sins   of  Omission.     Text  :  "  Yet  they  obeyed  not,  nor  inclined  their  ear  *'

(ver.  8).

God  commisioned  Jeremiah  to  bring  solemn  accusation  against  Judah  ;  he  gives
the  first  place  to  their  shortcomings  in  positive  service,  reminds  them  of  what  they
had  not  done,  but  ought  to  have  done — constantly  and  persistently  refused  active
obedience  to  the  righteous  will  of  the  Most  High.

I.  The  great  commonness  of  sins  of  omission :  in  the  world,  in  our  circle  of
society,  in  our  own  hearts.

1.  In  a  certain  sense  all  offences  against  the  law  of  God  come  under  the  head  of
sins  of  omission.  Every  sin  is  a  breach  of  the  all-comprehensive  law,  "  Thou  shalt
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  How
multitudinous  our  omissions  in  respect  to  this  command  of  Christ !  Too  often  we
have  had  other  gods  beside  Him.  He  deserved,  having  bought  us  with  the  blood
of  His  dear  Son,  to  be  served  with  all-consuming  earnestness.  He  rightly  claims
our  best  thoughts  and  utmost  love ;  yet  "  unprofitable  servants."  So  too  in  regard
to  our  "  neighbour."  What  sins  of  omission  daily  occur  in  our  various  relation-
ships— our  neighbours,  our  children,  our  household.

2.  Sins  of  omission  are  seen  in  all  who  neglect  to  perform  the  first  and  all-essential
Gospel  command:  "  Repent  and  be  converted;"  "  Repent  and  be  baptised ;"  "  Believe
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Yet,  though  urged  to  repentance  and  to  faith  in  Christ,
sin  is  not  sorrowed  for,  faith  in  Christ  not  exercised.  This  true  of  dense  masses
everywhere,  and  of  many  in  God's  house  who  hear  but  not  obey.

3.  Sins  of  omission  in  religious  duties.  Multitudes  neglect  the  outward  worship
of  God.  But  others  show  religious  regard  ;  yet  what  omissions  as  to  prayer  ;  how
lax  in  devotion  are  the  most  of  us  !  As  to  the  Bible:  left  unread  !  As  to  service:
talents  wrapped  up  in  napkin  !  Our  omissions  lie  upon  the  horizon  of  memory
like  masses  of  storm-clouds  accumulating  for  a  horrible  tempest.

II.  The  cause  of  this  excessive  multiplicity  of  sins  of  omission.

1.  The  great  cause  lies  in  our  evil  hearts.  Absence  of  clean  heart  and  right
spirit  is  at  the  root :  '*  Ye  must  be  born  again."

2.  7^he  conscience  of  man  is  not  well  alive  to  sins  of  omission.  While  conscience
will  chastise  men  for  direct  acts  of  wrong,  not  awake  to  sins  of  neglect.

3.  These  sins  are  multiplied  through  indolence.  Men  sleep  on,  awake  not  to
righteousness  and  the  service  of  God.  In  the  face  of  eternity,  life,  death,  heaven,
and  hell,  multitudes  are  simply  ruined  because  they  neglect  the  great  salvation,  and
are  absolutely  too  idle  to  concern  themselves.

4.  Ignorance.  With  many  ignorance  is  wilful ;  have  Bible,  conscience ;  yet
sin  against  light  and  knowledge.

5.  Men  excuse  themselves  so  readily  about  these  sins  of  omission.  A  more  con-
venient season  is  anticipated  for  repentance,  faith,  prayer.  This  postponement  of
service  is  the  perpetuation  of  rebellion.

242


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JERSMIAB,  oflAt.  XL


6.  Many  neglect  because  of  the  prevalence  of  the  like  conduct.  To  omit  to  love
and  serve  the  Lord  is  the  custom.  But  enlightened  conscience  warns  us  that
custom  is  no  excuse  for  sin  :  it  will  be  no  plea  at  the  bar  of  God.

III.  The  sinfulness  of  sins  of  omission.     They  cannot  be  trivial,  for

1.  Consider  what  would  be  the  consequences  if  God  were  to  omit  His  mercies  to
us  for  one  moment !  Suppose  He  should  omit  to  supply  breath  or  life  for  one
minute,  or  omit  to  restrain  the  axe  of  judgment  for  an  hour  !  Suppose  for  a  day
He  should  omit  His  natural  blessings  to  the  world  ;  the  sun  would  forbear  to  shine,
life  would  forget  to  be,  world  perish.  Suppose  Jesus  had  left  an  omission  in  His  plan
of  salvation;  the  whole  would  have  failed,  and  humanity  left  without  remedy  or  hope.

2.  Reflect  what  an  influence  they  would  have  upon  an  ordinary  commonwealth.
If  one  person  has  a  right  to  omit  his  duty,  another  has,  and  all  have — watchman,
judge,  merchant,  husbandman  ;  society  soon  collapse,  kingdom  break  to  pieces.

3.  Think  how  you  would  judge  of  omissions  towards  yourselves.  In  the  case  of
your  servant,  you  instantly  resent  it.  So  in  a  soldier.  Even  in  your  child  :  to
neglect  your  command  is  regarded  as  equally  criminal  as  to  commit  oflFence.  Per-
haps you  have  given  God  all  except  loving  Him ;  outward  worship  and  profession,
but  not  love.  Consider  this  to  be  the  case  in  your  home,  in  your  wife  :  omission  of
love  is  a  fatal  lack,  and  so  i?  your  love  of  God.

4.  Consider  what  God  thinks  of  omissions.  Saul  was  ordered  to  kill  the  Amale-
kites — not  one  to  escape :  he  saved  Agag  and  best  of  the  cattle ;  therefore  the
Lord  said,  "  I  have  put  thee  away  from  being  king  over  Israel !  "  Ahab  was  com-
manded to  kill  Benhadad  on  account  of  great  criminality  :  Ahab  only  captured  him ;
therefore,  "  Because  thou  hast  let  this  man  go,  thy  life  shall  be  for  his  life  ! "  Our
Lord  cursed  the  fig-tree  because  no  fruit!  The  man  with  one  talent  was  condemned
because  he  neglected  to  use  it.  The  Holy  Spirit  convinces  of  sins  of  omission, —
"  of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me."

IV.  The  result  and  punishment  of  sins  of  omission.

1,  They  will  condemn  us.  "  The  king  shall  say,  I  was  hungered  and  ye  gave  me
no  meat,"  <fec.  The  absence  of  virtue  rather  than  the  presence  of  vice  condemned
them.  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Though  we  know  nothing
of  salvation  by  works,  yet  the  Baptist's  words  echo  loud,  ''  Now  also  the  axe  is
laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees ;  therefore,  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good
fruit  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire."

2.  If  persevered  in,  they  will  effectually  shut  against  us  the  possibilities  of  pardon.
"He  that  believeth  not" — is  there  pardon,  rescue  for  him?  No;  he  "is  con-
demned already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God."  Will  the
mercy  of  God  blot  out  sins  unrepented  of  1  Nay  ;  sins  will  cling  to  us  as  the
leprosy  to  the  house  of  Gehazi.  In  the  marriage  feast  in  Gospel,  many  would  not
come,  and  they  perished  because  they  would  not  come  ;  and  one  came  but  **  had
not  on  the  wedding-garment,"  and  because  of  that  omission,  "  Bind  him  hand  and
foot,  and  deliver  him  to  the  tormentors."  So  if  you  have  not — mark  that  point —
put  on  the  righteousness  of  Christ  by  a  living  faith  in  Him,  salvation  will  be
forfeit  for  ever. —  C.  H.  Spurgeon,

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XI.    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  2.   The  lost  book  of  the  cove-  entire  harmony.     Suddenly,  under  the

nant  found.     "  The  Temple  during  the  accumulated    rubbish    or    ruins  of   the

previous  reign  had  fallen  into  a  state  of  Temple   (as   it   would  seem),  the  High

neglect,  such    that,  as    in    the   time  of  Priest  discovered  a  roll  containing  the

Joash,  a  complete  restoration  had  become  *  Book  of  th^  Law.'
necessary.     On  this  occasion,  however,  Whatever  may  have  been   the   exact

the    king  and  the  priesthood  acted  iu  nature    of  this   document,  two    points,

243


CfiAf .  XI.


HO  MI  LET tC  COMMENTARY :  J  ERE Mt AH.


and  two  alone,  are  clear.  First,  it  was
as  complete  a  surprise  as  if  the  book
had  never  been  known  before.  During
the  troubles  of  the  reign  of  Manasseh
there  is  no  proof  of  its  destruction,
while  during  the  previous  reigns  there
is  no  proof  of  its  existence.  David,
Solomon,  Asa,  and  Jehoshaphat  had
lived  in  constant,  and  apparently  uncon-
scious, violation  of  the  ordinances  which
came  home  with  such  force  to  Josiah.
It  is  possible  that  the  book  may  have
now  been  first  composed.  It  is  possible
that  it  may  have  been  a  mere  redis-
covery. .  .  .  But,  in  either  case,  this
sudden  appearance  of  the  law  amounted
almost  to  a  new  revelation.

"  Secondly,  whatever  other  portions  of
the  Pentateuch  may  have  been  included
in  the  roll,  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  the  remarkable  work  to  which  the
Greek  translators  gave  the  name  of  *  the
Second  Law  *(Deuteronomy)occupied  the
chief  place." — Stanley's  ^^JewishChurchy

Yer.  4.  The  covenant  an  alliance
of  love.  *'  So  shall  ye  be  My  people,"
<kc.  "  Now,  for  the  first  time,  the  love
of  God,  as  the  chief  ground  of  His
dealings  with  His  people — the  love  to-
wards God  as  the  ground  of  their  service
to  Him — the  spiritual  character  and  free
choice  of  that  service  (Deut.  vi.  4—9,
vii.  6-11,  &c.),  were  urged  on  the
nation  with  all  the  force  of  Divine  and
human  authority." — Stanley,  ihid.

Ver.  6.  Jehovah's  message  widely
published.     *'  Proclaim  all  these  words."

"  I  Bay  to  thee,  Do  thou  repeat
To  the  first  man  thou  mayest  meet,
In  lane,  highway,  or  open  street,

That  he  and  we  and  all  men  move

Under  a  canopy  of  love,

As  broad  as  the  blue  sky  above.

•  •••..•

And  ere  thou  leave  him,  say  thou  this
Yet  one  word  more  :  They  only  miss
The  winning  of  that  final  bliss

Who  will  not  count  it  true  that  Love,
Blessing,  not  cursing,  rules  above,
And  that  in  it  we  live  and  move.

And  one  thing  further  make  him  know :
That,  to  believe  these  things  are  so,
This  firm  faith  never  to  forego,

Despite  of  all  that  seems  at  strife
With  blessing — all  with  curses  rite; —
That  this  is  blessing,  this  \&  life."

R.  C.  Trench.
244


Ver.  7.  "  Rising  early  and  protett-
ing ; "  as  Plutarch  reporteth  of  the  Per-
sian kings,  that  they  had  an  officer  to
call  them  up  betimes,  and  to  mind  them
of  their  business. — Trapp.  Yet  God
rose  unsolicited,  so  eager  and  earnest  was
He  on  His  people's  behalf.

Ver.  9.  Conspiracy  against  God.
Did  you  ever,  on  a  hot  afternoon,  witness
the  contest  of  innumerable  worms  over
a  carrion  carcass  ?  Did  you  ever  notice
the  greediness,  selfishness,  and  quarrel-
someness displayed  by  the  actors  in  a
scene  like  that  ]  And  yet  such  a  contest
is  decent  compared  with  the  gigantic
contest  that  has  been  carried  on  for
thousands  of  years  by  the  vermicular
human  race ;  and  God  has  looked  upon
it,  pondered  over  it,  and  carried  it  in
His  heart ;  and  all  this  time  He  has  not
ceased  to  pour  out  upon  the  world,  in
rich  abundance,  the  blessings  of  His
never-failing  love. — Beecher,

Ver.  15.  The  unwelcome  sacrifice.
He  that  ofl'ers  in  sacrifice,  0  Pamphilus  !
a  multitude  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  of
golden  vestments  or  purple  garments,  of
figures  of  ivory  or  precious  gems,  and
imagines  by  this  to  conciliate  the  favour
of  God,  is  grossly  mistaken,  and  has  no
solid  understanding  ;  for  he  that  would
sacrifice  with  success  ought  to  be  chaste
and  charitable,  no  corrupter  of  virgins,
no  adulterer,  no  robber  or  murderer  for
the  sake  of  lucre.  God,  who  is  near
thee,  perpetually  beholds  thy  actions. —
From  the  Greek.

Ver.  19.  Murderers  in  ambush.
Between  the  priesthood  and  the  prophets
there  had  hitherto  been  more  or  less  of  a
conflict ;  but  now  that  conflict  was  ex-
changed for  a  fatal  union.  "  A  wonder-
ful and  horrible  thing  was  committed
in  the  land  :  the  prophets  prophesied
falsely,  and  the  priests  bore  rule  by  their
means ;"  and  he  (Jeremiah)  who  by  each
of  his  callings  [Stanley  regards  Jere-
miah as  having  been  a  priest  before  he
was  called  to  become  a  prophet]  was
naturally  led  to  sympathise  with  both,
was  the  doomed  antagonist  of  both —
victim  of  one  of  the  strongest  passions,
the  hatred  of  priests  against  a  priest
who  attacks  his  own  order, — the  hatred
of  prophets  against  a  prophet  who  ven-


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  HL

tures  to  have  a  voice  and  a  will  of  his  sacred  history  was  the  saying  literally

own.     His  own  village  of  Anathoth,  oc-  fulfilled,  "  A  prophet  hath  no  honour  in

cupied  by  members  of  the  sacred  tribe,  his  own    birthplace "   ('Evrjf    aurou  va-

was    for   him   a   nest    of    conspirators  rg/3/,  Luko  iv.  24). — Stanley.
against  his  life.      Of  him  first  in  the


CHAPTER  XII.

Cbitioal  and  Exeobtical  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  chapter.     See  on  chap,  xi.,

Bleek's  theory  ;  for  which  there  is  a  weight  of  argument.  All  commentators  agree  to  connect
vers.  1-6  with  the  conclusion  of  the  previous  chapter.  The  following  vers.  7-17,  fall  into
two  strophes,  7-13,  and  14-17.  Hitzig  and  Graf  regard  vers.  7-13  as  a  lament  over  Judah'a
devastation  consequent  upon  Jehoiakim's  defection  from  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  eighth  year
of  his  reign.  And  Eichhorn,  Dahler,  and  others  hold  section  14-17  to  be  a  distinct  oracle,
belonging  to  the  time  of  Zedekiah,  or  to  the  seventh  or  eighth  year  of  Jehoiakim  (c/.
Keil).  The  "evil  neighbours"  mentioned  in  ver.  14  are  taken  by  many  to  be  hordes  of
Syrians,  Moabites,  Ammonites,  Idumeans,  and  Philistines,  by  which  the  land  was  overrun,
and  who,  in  their  alliance  to  Chaldean  supremacy,  undertook  a  war  of  spoliation  against
insurgent  Judah  in  eighth  year  of  Jehoiakim.  Dr.  Payne  Smith  and  Keil  preserve  the  chrono-
logical unity  of  the  entire  chapter,  and  contend  that  ver.  7-17  contain  Jehovah's  answer  to
Jeremiah's  complaint,  1-6.  2.  Cotemporary  Scriptures,  3.  National  Affairs.  4.  Cotemporary
History  :  as  in  notes  on  chap.  xi.     See  above,  on  "evil  neighbours."

5.  C^eographical  Beferences. — Ver.  5.  "Siodling  of  Jordan:*'  lit.  the  pride  of  Jordan.
Ewald,  Umbreit,  and  A.V,  interpret  it  as  the  rise  and  overflow  of  the  river;  but  Keil,  Payne
Smith,  and  Hend.  as  "the  luxuriant  thickets  along  its  banks."  The  river  did  overflow  its
lower  banks  in  April  and  May,  and  fill  the  Ghor  valley  :  this  resulted  from  the  melting  of  the
winter's  snow  on  Hermon  and  Lebanon.  The  expression  is  not  inappropriate  to  such  an  in-
undation (c/.  Job  xxxviii.  11) ;  but,  as  nothing  is  known  of  dangerous  overflows  of  the
river,  the  comparison  of  the  text,  implying  serious  peril,  is  void  of  force  or  significance.  On
the  other  hand,  taking  the  reference  to  the  marshy  banks,  overgrown  with  shrubs,  trees,  and
reeds,  which  were  the  natural  haunts  of  lions,  the  comparison  is  most  striking.  Just  as  in  the
reedy  thickets  of  the  Euphrates  lions  hid  themselves,  lo  in  the  rank  vegetation  which  abounded
on  the  banks  of  Jordan,  especially  between  tiie  Sea  of  Tiberias  and  the  Lake  Merom,
afibrding  shelter  for  wild  boars,  tigers,  bears,  and  lions.  Maundrell  says  the  banks  are  in  some
parts  so  wooded  that  the  traveller  cannot  see  the  river  at  all  until  he  has  fought  his  way
through  the  tangled  and  lofty  growths.  How  would  the  prophet  do  in  the  wooded  haunts  of
wild  beasts?  Ver.  14.  *^ Evil  neighbours :**  in  2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  are  mentioned  the  Syrians,
Moabites,  and  Ammonites ;  and  in  Ps.  cxxxvii.  the  Edomites  also.  The  Idumeans  and
Philistines  likewise  joined  themselves  to  the  Chaldean  power;  and  all  these  nations,  being  in
the  vicinity  of  the  Jews,  made  use  of  their  opportunity  for  molesting  Judah.

6.  Natural  History.— Ver.  9.  " Speckled  Urd:"  the  interpretation  of  )^^2)i  lO'^^il  is  dis-
puted.  Gesenius  and  the  LXX.  render  it  hycena;  thus  "a  ravenous  beast,  the  hysena."  But
ZO^^  always  elsewhere  means  bird  of  prey  (c/.  Isa.  xlvi.  11,  xviii.  6,  &c.).     The  word  ]J^-")Il2i

as  an  adjective  is  naturally  derived  from  J/^i{    to   tinge  or  dye.     By  this  parti-coloured  or

speckled  bird  is  probably  meant  a  vulture.  It  is  a  familiar  fact  in  natural  history  that  birds,
and  especially  birds  of  prey,  will  unite  in  attacking  an  intruder  whose  appearance  is  distinctive
and  peculiar.  But  birds  of  prey  are  not  known  thus  to  attack  hyaenas.  Ver.  12.  ^' High
places  through  the  wilderness  "  (see  notes  on  chap.  iii.  2),  i.e,,  "  the  bare-topped  hills  of  the
desert."    "IBID    is  the  name  for  such  parts  of  the  country  as  were  suited  only  for  rearing  and

pasturing  cattle,  like  the  so-called  wilderness  of  Judah  to  the  west  of  the  Dead  Sea  "  (Keil).

7.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  1.  "Let  metalkvnth  Thee  of  judgments :"  rather,  Yet  will  I  speak
with  Thee  on  a  matter  of  right. — {Speaker's  Com.).  "  Wherefore  are  all  they  happy  that  deal
very  treacherously f"  Rather,  secure,  tranquil,  at  ease;  who  "deal  faithlessly"  (Keil);
"  practise  knavery"  (Lange);  "  prevaricate  prevarications"  (Septuagint) — which  is  truer  to  the
Heb.  1^2  ^13^.     Ver.  3.     ''Pull  them  out  like  sheep s"'  p/)J.    to  tear,    pull  away  with

violence :  although,  in  Judges  xx.  32,  the  gentler  significAnce  of  to  draw  or  lead  is  given.
Properly  the  word  implies  force  and  violence.  Ver.  4.  **  He  shall  not  see  our  last  end  :"  the
LXX.  refer  the  seeing  to  God,  thus  :  oiK  Siperai  6  Qebt  65oi>$  rjfiQv;  and  Rosen.,  Ewald,  and  others
interpret  the  meaning  as,  God  will  pay  no  heed  to  our  fate,  so  that  we  may  act  as  we  choose
unpunished  !  Graf  refers  "  he  shall  not  see  "  to  Jeremiah  ;  beca.nse  **  they  "  {the  wicked,  ver.  1)
intended  to  destroy  him  (Hitzig)  ;  or  because  his  threatenings  against  us  will  not  come  to  pass
(Keil).     Henderson  takes  ihe  word  as  impersonal,  and  renders  them,  ''no  one  shall  see  ouf

245


ofiAP.  xn.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JMREMIAB.


end ; "  i.e.,  it  shall  not  be  realised,  we  shall  not  be  destroyed.  Ver.  5.  "  Contend  with  horses :  *
from  the  root  mn    to  hum  ;  Hith.,  to  he  eager,  be  hot.     The  Vulgate  h&s  given  "contend.*

Ver.  6.  "  They  have  called  a  multitude  after  thee  : "  N7D  (here  rendered  **  multitude")  has  been

given  as  "  in  a  troop,"  "  in  a  mass,"  **  with  a  full  voice  :"  the  last  is  most  correct  (as  in  ch.  iv,
6;  see  notes) ;  loudly,  lustily,  vehemently:  as  beiiiL,^  an  adverb.  "After  thee:"  i.e.,  behind
thee.  The  sentence  suggests  that  they  would  follow  the  prophet  with  a  clamorous  hue  and
cry.  Ver.  9.  **  Come  to  devour:^*  i.e.,  Cause  them  to  come,  bring  them.  Ver.  11.  "They  have
made  it  desolate:**  the  Heb.  word  is  impersonal :  One  has  set  it  for  a  desolation;  or  set  it
is  an  utter  desolation.     Ver.  14.  **  That  touch  the  inheritance:"  V^^  to  touch  an  enemy,  to

attack  {cf.  Zech.  ii.  12).  "  /  will  pluck  them  out,  .  .  .  and  pluck  out  the  house  of  Judah  :**  a  pro-
mise of  two  removals ;  the  heathen  from  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  the  Jews  from  the  land  of
the  heathen.

HOMILIES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XII.

Section    1-6.  Complaint  that  treachery  prospers;  admonitory  warnings  gireB.
„       7-13.  God's  faithless  people  abandoned  to  desolation.
„     14-17.  Penalty  for  oppressors,  mercy  for  penitents,

Ver.  1-6.  Complaint  that  Treachery  prospers  ;  Admonitoet

Warnings  given.

Affairs  seemed  to  Jeremiah  all  discordant  with  God*s  righteousness :  he  must
plead  with  Him  respecting  them.  He  speaks  to  God  humbly  yet  honestly  about
the  difficulty  he  finds  in  interpreting  God's  ways  with  men ;  letting  the  treacherous
prosper,  allowing  the  godly  to  suffer.  Learn  how  to  go  "  boldly  to  the  throne  of
grace : "  take  all  burdens,  and  open  all  our  thoughts  fully  to  God  :  '*  casting  all  our
cares  upon  Him."

L  A  bewildered  soul  making  complaint  of  wrong.  For  it  seemed  wrong  to
the  prophet.  1.  Impiety  enjoyed  every  luxury  and  advantage:  "the  wicked
prosper  ;  "  the  treacherous  are  "  happy "  or  at  ease  (ver.  1).  2.  God  Himself
appeared  to  favour  them.  That  was  the  blinding  mystery  :  "  Thou  hast  planted
them  ; "  and  they  continue  to  "  grow  "  and  "  bring  forth  fruit "  (ver.  2),  as  if  God
would  allow  nothing  to  harm  them.  It  would  have  been  different  had  there  been
no  God  to  execute  justice  and  judgment  in  the  earth.  3.  Hypocrisy  was  employed
OS  a  disguise.  God  was  "  near  in  their  mouth,  but  far  from  their  reins ; "  yet
surely  the  All-seeing  One  could  detect  the  blasphemous  fraud ;  He  would  not  be
deceived,  and  reward  this  religious  pretence  with  prosperity  as  if  it  were  sincere  I
4.  Godliness  seemed  left  unvindicated,  Jeremiah  could  not  attempt  to  exalt  his  own
loyalty  to  God  and  love  of  truth  against  this  prevalent  hypocrisy ;  yet  "  Thou,
O  Lord,  knowest  me,"  <fec.  (ver.  3.)  Nevertheless,  while  God  appeared  to  favour
the  wicked,  he,  His  servant,  was  left  to  suffer !  5.  Indignation  against  transgressors
utters  itself.  "  Pull  them  out  like  sheep,"  (fee.  (ver.  3) :  the  prophet's  incensed  soul
rises  into  impatience,  he  adventures  to  appeal  to  Jehovah  as  to  what  should  be
done  to  them.  This  seems  daring,  but  observe  that :  6.  Holy  patriotism  impelled
his  remonstrance  udth  God.  "  How  long  shall  the  land  mourn  1 "  <fec.  (ver.  4) :  the
**  wickedness"  of  these  men  was  working  havoc  and  ruin  on  his  loved  country;
and  while  they  revelled  in  iniquity  they  arrogated  to  themselves  safety — "  He
shall  not  see  our  last  end  "  (see  Literary  Criticism  on  words).  All  this  "  vexed
his  righteous  soul."

II.  A  wearied  sufferer  admonished  of  heavier  trials.  No  word  of  comfort
or  explanation  from  God  in  return  to  this  complaint :  only  prophecy  of  greater
ills.  It  indicates  :  1.  That  evil  must  be  allowed  to  reach  maturity  ere  God  will
interpose.  These  men  would  go  on  "  from  iniquity  unto  iniquity."  They
may  enjoy  immunity  for  awhile,  but  their  measure  is  being  filled  up.  Malignity
against  God's  prophet  was  reaching  more  and  more  to  the  very  heart  of  the  nation
(ver.  6)  ;  then  no  word  from  God  through  him  would  receive  the  faintest  regard;
not  a  willing  listener  would  be  left  :  God  held  back  the  vindication  of  His  prophet,
and  His  own  righteousness,  till  the  last  hour  of  hope  had  been  abused.
246


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohap.  hi.

2.  Go^$  witnesses  must  not  expect  immunity  from  hardships.  Fidelity  entails
hostility.  In  every  calling  it  is  so.  The  more  virulent  the  evil  around,  the  more
fidelity  is  needed,  yet  the  more  will  the  faithful  have  to  endure.  Jeremiah's  trials
would  enlarge  (ver.  5),  for  the  people*s  wickedness  was  becoming  more  daring
(ver.  6).  We  must  expect  the  penalties  of  godliness,  must  not  shrink  from
ordeals.     "  Endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ."

3.  Darker  days  are  foretold  so  that  preparation  may  be  sought.  That  is  the
leMon  of  verse  5.  The  evils  from  which  you  suffer,  and  of  which  you  now  com-
plain, will  grow  more  appalling:  "how  wilt  thou  do?**  Is  there  in  you  a  timid
heart,  a  shrinking  from  the  stern  experiences  incident  to  your  holy  work  1  More
need  of  grasping  God  firmly,  trusting  Him  implicitly,  leaving  all  issues  with
Him,  and  drawing  from  Him  "  strength  to  be  made  perfect  in  your  weakness.*'
**  We  may  boldly  say.  The  Lord  is  my  helper,  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do
unto  me."

Ver.  7-13.  God's  Faithless  People  Abandoned  to  Desolatiok.

Note  here,  that  Jeremiah  had  complained  to  God  of  having  suffered  from  the
hostility  of  his  people  and  even  his  own  family ;  now,  in  turn,  Jehovah  tells  His
prophet  that  the  nation  had  turned  upon  Him  with  an  appalling  malignity,  as  a
"  lion  roaring  against  Him  "  (ver.  8).  God  had  suffered  more  griefs  and  wrongs
from  His  people  than  had  Jeremiah.  The  enmity  showed  by  his  *'  house  "  (ver.  6)
to  Jeremiah  was  only  a  symbol  of  the  enmity  of  God*8  "  house  **  (ver.  7)  to  Him.
The  sore  penalty  is,  "I  have  given  over  the  dearly  beloved  of  my  soul  to  her
enemies."

L  The  downfall  of  the  nation  was  occasioned  by  no  want  of  love  on  God's
part  for  Judah.  He  may  cherish  a  people  still,  may  "  love  the  world,"  may
yearn  towards  the  sinner,  and  yet  God's  love  may  not  avail  to  shield  the  wicked
from  the  consequences  of  guilt.     Right  cannot  abdicate  even  to  Love.

IL  The  abandonment  of  Judah  to  her  foes  was  necessitated  by  her  having
become  herself  God's  foe.  Though  He  loved  her,  she  set  herself  against  Him  as
A  roaring  lion  (ver.  8).  One  whom  God  loves  may  therefore  unite  with  God's
enemies  :  1.  In  the  attitude  of  defiance ;  2.  In  the  experience  of  God's  displeasure
(ver.  8).

III.  The  penalties  of  Divine  abandonment  are  utterly  desolating.  As
God's  favour  is  life,  so  is  His  hatred  death  :  Jerusalem's  punishment  must
be  severe  as  if  inflicted  by  one  who  held  her  in  abhorrence.  1.  Having  ranked
herself  with  God's  foes,  she  is  given  over  to  her  enemies  (ver.  7,  9).  2.  Having
repudiated  God's  minister  (Jeremiah),  alien  ^^ pastors"  are  called  upon  the  sacred
land  (ver.  10).  3.  Desolation  tmthout  pity  (ver.  11),  and  devastation  without
restraint  (ver.  12),  would  ensue.  5.  "The  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord"  would
reduce  the  people  to  dismay  and  shame:  their  crops  a  failure;  their  defences
against  a  siege,  which  had  cost  them  *'  pain"  to  contrive,  would  prove  profitless;
and  their  "  revenues  "  in  which  they  relied  would  purchase  them  no  protection
from  the  devouring  "  sword  of  the  Lord.'*


Ver.  14-17.  Penalty  for  Oppressors,  Merot  for  Penitents,

"  The  spoilers  of  the  Lord's  heritage  are  also  to  be  carried  off  out  of  their  land  ;
but  after  they,  like  Judah,  have  been  punished,  the  Lord  will  have  pity  on  them,
and  will  bring  them  back  one  and  all  into  their  own  land.  And  if  the  heathen,
who  now  seduce  the  people  of  God  to  idolatry,  learn  the  ways  of  God's  people  and
be  converted  to  the  Lord,  they  shall  receive  citizenship  amongst  God's  people,  and
be  built  \ip  amongst  them ;  but  if  they  will  not  do  so,  they  shall  bo  extirpated,

247


OHAI.  xn.  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.

Thus  will  the  Lord  manifest  Himself  before  the  whole  earth  as  righteous  Judge,
and  through  judgment  secure  the  weal  not  only  of  Israel,  but  of  the  heathen
peoples  too." — Keil.

Here  is  a  message  of  mercy  blended  with  judgment  to  the  nations  bordering
upon  the  land  of  Judah,  who  had  been,  or  would  be,  injurious  to  the  peace  of
God's  people.     Oba

I.  To  touch  with  unhallowed  hand  the  heritage  of  God^s  people  is
criminal  (ver.  14).     1.  The  godly  are  often  closely  pressed  by  ungodly  neighbours.

2.  God  permits  those  whom  we  copy  in  wrong-doing  to  become  our  oppressors.

3.  Yet  He  watches  jealously  over  the  possessions  as  well  as  the  persons  of  His
people.  4.  And  will  hold  them  guilty  of  sacrilege  who  touch  Israel's  inheritance,
5.  Their  oppression  shall  return  in  kind  upon  themselves :  "  I  will  pluck  them
out  of  their  land."

IL  The  compassion  of  Jehovah  embraces  peoples  outside  of  His  covenant
(ver.  15).  God  has  uncovenanted  mercies  to  bestow,  even  on  such  as  (1)  had
wronged  His  people — compare  Saul  of  Tarsus ;  (2)  had  incurred  Israel's  hate,  as
these  **  evil  neighbours  "  did  :  yet  God  is  not  implacable  even  to  the  enemies  of  His
people  (Col.  i.  21).  1.  God's  judgments  are  ever  tempered  and  followed  by  com-
passion. 2.  His  graciousness  to  wrong-doers  designs  to  restore  to  them  all  which
their  sinfulness  forfeited.  3.  The  godly  should  cherish  a  comprehensive  charity
as  wide  as  God's  compassion.

III.  Preparation  for  the  experience  of  Divine  mercy  is  essential.  1.  God
discriminates  and  selects  the  objects  of  His  compassion  :  not  extended  to  all  re-
gardless of  their  state  and  conduct.  2.  The  sinner  must  make  earnest  efforts  if  he
would  avert  judgment  and  inherit  the  mercy  (ver.  16).  3.  With  what  sacred
favours  God  crowns  the  life  that  allies  itself  to  Him  :  though  "  not  of  Israel,"  united
to  Israel,  "built  in  the  midst  of  My  people."  4.  But  the  rebellious  shall  receive
judgment  without  alleviation  (ver.  17).  True  equally  for  nations,  families,
individuals :  grace  is  offered ;  abuse  it,  and  only  severity  can  ensue.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XII.

Ver.    1.    Theme:   God's   eighteous-  centrate  our  thoughts  on  a  narrow  line

NESS :  ITS  BAFFLING  ANOMALIES.  of  vision    may  mislead  us :  look  over

Thisistheobjection  which  unbelievers  the  ageSy  the  course  of  human  history y
urge  against  Providence  in  all  ages,  and  the  laws  which  assert  themselves  in  mavUs
the  difficulty  which  the  godly  often  experience^  the  Divine  rule  over  the
feel.  Since  the  Mosaic  covenant  re-  world^  the  vindication  of  His  righteous-
cognised  the  administrations  of  righteous-  ness  on  Calvary,  the  witness  of  a
ness  in  this  life,  many  Old  Testament  righteous  God  in  every  conscience ;  and
saints  stumbled  before  the  mysteries  this  broad  view  compels  the  acknow-
{cf  Job  xii.  6,  xxi.  7  ;  Psalms  xxxvii.  ledgment.
1,  35,  Ixxiii.  3 ;  Malachi  iii.  15).  II.  The  particular  administrations

L  The  broad  operations  of  Divine  of  Divine  righteousness  anxiously
righteousness  trustfully  acknowledged,  questioned.  "  Wherefore  doth  the  way
**  Righteous  art  Thou,  O  Lord."  A  firm  of  the  wicked  prosper,*'  <fec.  The
conviction  of  the  rectitude  of  God's  worldly  comfort  and  success  of  these
character ;  ergo,  of  His  proceedings,  Anathoth  conspirators  seemed  to  con-
despite  anomalies.  It  is  well  that  we  fute  God's  righteousness.  (See  on  Sec-
get  on  to  this  broad  rock  when  per-  tion  of  chapters,  supra,)  "  It  is  a
plexities,  like  riotous  waves  around,  common  grievance  to  live  and  experience
make  us  afraid,  and  the  spray  blinds  that  the  ungodly  are  prosperous  and  the
our  eyes.  When  hard  thoughts  of  God's  godly  are  unfortunate  "  (Cramer).  "  A
providence  trouble  us,  rise  up  to  this  difficulty  to  many  wise  and  good  men ;
wide  truth — He  it  righteous.  To  con-  they  see  the  designs  and  projects  of
248


TTQMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  J  ER  EM  I  AIT,


CHAP.  in.


flicked  people  successful,  their  affairs
and  concerns  prosper.  Hypocrites  are
chiefly  meant  (as  appears,  ver.  2),  who
dissemble  in  their  good  professions "
(Henry),  These  "  dealt  treacherously  "
not  only  with  God's  servant,  but  with
Jehovah  Himself.  Yet  they  were  pros-
peroits  and  happy.  E.g.,  Dionysius  is
reported  to  have  said  that  God  favoured
the  sacrilegious ;  for  he  had  sailed  in
safety  after  having  plundered  temples  and
perpetrated  robberies.  Wrong-doers  seem
"  in  their  lifetime  to  receive  their  good
things."     Sin  looks  the  grand  success.

III.  A  fuller  acquaintance  with  the
secrets  of  God's  righteousness  solemnly
entreated.  He  would  *'  plead  with
God  and  talk  with  Him  of  judgments  ; "
I.C.,  reason  the  case,  inquire  into  the
causes  why  the  wicked  are  allowed  to
succeed,  or  ask  for  a  clearer  vision  of
the  hidden  workings  of  God's  providence,
to  "see  the  end  of  the  Lord."  We
have  faulty  sight ;  our  gaze  is  clouded,
partial,  dim ;  we  have  limited  sight ;
our  eye  does  not  travel  far  enough  ;  we
cannot  see  afar  off  along  the  years  ;  we
look  at  the  near,  at  the  present  moment.
Watch,  wait :  God  is  working  out  of
our  sight;  His  plans  take  in  a  longer
time  than  our  impatience  reckons.

"  Can  we  conceive  anything  more
humane  and  gracious  than  our  dear
Lord?  We  know  beforehand  that  we
are  wrong;  we  do  not  doubt  that  He
does  all  well,  yet  it  oppresses  us.
Straight  to  our  Lord,  the  eternal  and
living  God,  with  all  our  ill-humour,
doubt,  care,  scruples  I  Pour  out  your
heart  before  Him." — Zinzendorf.

God  allows  our  expostulations,  in-
deed, welcomes  us  to  such  pleading  ;  and
the  soul  who  "  talks  with  "  God  of  the
perplexities  and  difficulties  which  beset
him,  will  find  that  "light  is  sown  for
the  righteous,"  and  that —

'*  God  is  His  own  interpreter.
And  He  will  make  it  plain."

Ver.   3.   Theme:  A  righteous  soul

PLEADING  WITH  THE  RIGHTEOUS  GOD.

I.  Value  of  conscious  integrity.  It
enables  the  soul  to  go  before  the  Lord
unabashed,  boldly,  with  filial  trust,  as-
sured of  acceptanceu


IL  Appeal  to  Divine  omniscience.

The  *'  pure  in  heart "  shrink  not  from
the  searching  light  ox  God's  eye.  A
joy  to  the  sincere  that  the  All-seeing
knows  his  whole  life  and  inmost
thoughts.

III.  Consolations  of  holy  innocence.
It  flings  oflf  slander,  is  a  shield  from
conspirators,  sustains  the  soul  in  per-
secution, and  gives  inward  comfort
amid  surrounding  strife.

IV.  Indignation  against  malevolent
wrong-doers.  They  seemed  to  hinder
and  refute  God's  providential  righteous-
ness, and  to  cast  discredit  upon  His
wise  and  beneficent  rule.  Let  them
"  reap  what  they  have  sown,*'  and  thus
witness  to  God's  antipathy  towards  sin
and  His  friendship  towards  innocence.
A  sufferer  at  the  hands  of  sinners  can
lawfully  entertain  such  feelings;  yet
the  Gospel  attitude  towards  persecutors
is — *'  Pray  for  (not  against)  them  that
despitefully  use  you,"  and  leave  God  in
His  own  way  to  vindicate  His  righteous
providence,  and  show  His  approval  of
His  loyal  servants.

Ver.  4.  Theme:  Disasters  conse-
quent UPON  sin.

"  The  land  mourned,"  indicating  gene-
ral misery ;  probably  a  drought  (see  xiv.
2,  (fee).  The  cause  of  this  was  "  wicked-
ness," i,e.,  wrong-doing,  oppression,
rapine,  violation  of  the  rights  of  property
and  sanctities  of  home ;  criminal  doings
which  carried  dismay  and  sorrow  every-
where. "  The  wicked  were  in  great
power."

I.  What  miseries  sinners  inflict  on
society.  They  can  make  a  whole
"  land  mourn."  Think  of  the  devasta-
tions wrought  by  habitual  intemperance,
reckless  speculations  in  commerce,  cir-
culation of  obscene  literature,  profana-
tion of  religion,  virulent  assaults  on
faith,  allurements  of  the  young  to  evil
courses  of  life,  <fec.  Homes  are  invaded
with  evils  worse  than  bereavement ;
society  is  infested  with  moral  plagues
which  destroy  virtue  and  honour  and
reciprocal  faith  ;  churches  are  robbed  of
the  hopeful  seekers  after  God.  Sinners
are  cruel  destroyers;  they  ruin  not
themselves  alone.

24p


CHAP.  XII.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JERBMIAJT.


TL  What  outrages  sinners  commit
against  Divine  law.  *' Wickedness  "
interrupts  the  beneficent  action  of  the
ordained  laws  of  Heaven.  Personal
happiness  and  social  prosperity  are  the
natural  issues  of  God's  laws.  "  Wicked-
ness "  outrages  those  laws,  works  against
them,  breaks  down  the  banks  of  flow-
ing, fertilising  rivers,  and  lets  in  a
destructive  inundation.  Jeremiah  re-
cognised that  this  "  wickedness  "  was
an  offence  to  God,  as  being  a  defiance  of
His  kindly  laws,  as  well  as  an  outrage
on  society.  Nations  and  societies  and
individuals  secure  their  weal  by  respect-
ing the  right  and  obeying  the  will  of
God.  Miseries — as  now  in  Judah's
experience — follow  upon  the  violation
of  God's  laws,  which  are  ordained  for
human  good.

m.  What  delusions  sinners  practise
upon  themselves.  "  They  said,  He
shall  not  see  our  last  end  "  (comp.  Lit,
Crit.  on  words).  1.  God  will  not  see,
&c.  :  that  affirms  the  theory  that  Jehovah
does  not  notice  and  punish  human  sin,
2.  Jeremiah  will  not  see,  <fec.  :  the  pro-
phets threatenings  are  vapid  and  untrue;
punishment  will  not  follow  upon  our
wickedness.  3.  No  one  shall  see  (im-
personal) :  our  safety  is  in  no  wise  im-
perilled by  our  sins;  man's  conduct
does  not  affect  God,  provokes  no  retri-
butive Providence,  nor  influences  human
experience  and  destiny,  so  we  need
not  be  apprehensive  of  ilL  And  thus,
in  every  age,  self-beguiled  sinners  say,
"  Peace,  peace,  whereas  sudden  destruc-
tion Cometh  upon  them."

Note,  that  there  is  a  *'  last  end "  to
the  career  of  "  wickedness."

Ver.    5.     Theme:    The     backward

OLANOE  OF  SORROW,  AND  THE  FORWARD

GLANCE  OF  FEAR.  "  If  thosc  hast  run
ufith  the  footmen  and  they  wearied  thee,
how  canst  thou  contend  with  horses  9  and
if  in  land  of  peace,  <5sc,,  how  in  swellings
of  Jordan  f  "

A  contrast  instituted  between  a  state
of  comparative  quiet  and  peace  and
one  of  great  commotion  and  trouble ;
and  from  the  remembrance  of  the  pro-
phet's weariness  amid  auspicious  cir-
cumstances, the  inquiry  arises  as  to
260


results  likely  to  follow  when  all  is  ad-
verse and  perilous.  Applies  to  all  who
have  found  themselves  weak  in  lesser
trials,  yet  before  whom  rises  the  pro-
spect of  greater.

I.  Sad  recollections.

A  review  of  the  past  with  Its  hum-
bling memories.  1.  Weariness  was  ex-
perienced when  conflicting  difficulties
were  insignificant.  Merely  "  running
with  footmen,"  with  whom  our  own
strength  and  perseverance  might  for-
sooth be  matched.  2.  Weariness  was
felt  when  external  circumstances  were
favourable.  "  In  the  land  of  peace  they
wearied  thee."  Amid  even  life's  com-
forts experienced  *'  vexation  of  spirit."
Even  in  youth  "  fainted  and  grew  weary,
and  young  men  utterly  fell."

II.  Anxious  forebodings.

A  glance  at  the  future  with  painful
misgivings.  1.  Trials  would  be  more
overwhelming  with  circumstances  less
propitious.  *'  Horses ; "  "  swellings  of
Jordan."  Larger  and  more  ominous.
When  storms  lower,  afflictions  come,
friends  are  gone,  age  upon  us,  death
lays  hand  upon  our  heart,  eternity
looms  before  our  gaze,  with  God  and
judgment-seat. — "  How  wilt  thou  do  ?  "

2,  This  severer  ordeal  may  come  at  a
time  when  least  expected.  As  came  the
inroads  of  the  Chaldean  army  :  cavalry
"  horses,"  the  **  swelling,"  or  pride,  per-
haps the  lions  of  Jordan.  Heavy  trou-
bles, dreadful  losses,  desolating  bereave-
ments, the  event  of  death — who  can
anticipate  them  ?

III.  Refuge  desirable.

The  need  of  a  Helper  suggested  by
the  prospect.  For  the  prophet  would
be  unequal  to  the  emergency.  He  would
want  God,  His  presence,  succour,  and
hiding.  So  shall  we,  or  how  shall  we
do  ?     Seek  Him  as

1.  A  Refuge  suited  to  every  emergency  ;
whether  "contending  with  horses,  "or  "in
the  swellings  of  Jordan."

2.  A  Refuge  accessible  in  every  ex-
tremity.

Having  Him,  we  can  say  :  "  I  am
persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life,
&c.,  can  separate  me  from  the  love  of
God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our
Lord."


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  IIL


Theme :  The  swellings  op  Jordan.
Jeremiah  had  become  impatient  with
his  troubles.  God  says  to  him  :  "If
you  cannot  stand  these  small  trials  and
persecutions,  what  are  you  going  to  do
when  the  greater  come  ? "  In  a  very
practical  way,  ask

I.  If  it  is  such  a  difficult  thing  to
get  along  without  the  religion  of  Jesus
Christ  when  things  are  comparatively
smooth,  what  shall  we  do  amid  the
overpowering  misfortunes  and  disas-
ters of  life  that  may  come  upon  us  ?

If  troubles,  slow  as  footmen,  surpass
us,  what  do  when  they  take  the  feet  of
horses  ?  If  now  submerged  with  sorrows
because  we  have  not  the  religion  of  Jesus
to  comfort  us,  what  do  we  when  stand
in  death  1  A  sad  thing  to  see  men,  all
unhelped  by  God,  going  out  to  fight  the
giants  of  trouble,  no  promise  of  mercy
to  soothe  the  soul,  no  rock  of  refuge  in
which  to  hide.  How  compete  when  the
swift  coursers  of  trouble  come  up  for  the
race  ?

We  have  all  yielded  to  temptation ;
been  surprised  afterwards  that  so  small
an  inducement  could  have  decoyed  us
from  the  right.  But,  if  overthrown  by
small  sins  through  lack  of  the  religion
of  Jesus,  how  can  we  stand  up  against
great  ones  ?

II.  The  great  tides  of  eternity  will
rise  about  us,  and  amid  the  swellings
of  Jordan  we  must  all  quit  this  life.

Our  natural  courage  will  not  hold  out
then.  The  first  dash  of  Jordan's  waves
will  swamp  all  natural  resources  for
ever.  We  feel  how  sad  it  is  for  a  man
to  attempt  this  life  without  religion  ;
but  how  will  he  feel  when  the  shadows  of
the  last  hour  gather  about  his  pillow  ?
If  the  religion  of  Christ  is  so  important
for  us  amid  life's  troubles  and  tempta-
tions, and  in  the  hour  of  death,  how
much  more  important  in  the  great  eter-
nity !  You  will  want  Christ,  When
the  world  is  going  away  from  your  grasp,
and  all  the  lights  that  shine  about  you
are  going  out,  and  friends  around  you
can  do  you  no  good,  and  you  feel  your
feet  slipping  from  beneath  you, — then
you  will  want  Jesus  to  stand  close  by
yon,  and  hold  you  up  amid  "  the  swell-
ings of  Jordan." — De  Witt  Talmage.


Theme :  The  Christiak  6  triumph.

One  who  had  fought  many  battles,
and  seldom,  if  ever,  lost  any,  was  asked
to  what  he  attributed  his  remarkable
success.  He  replied,  "  I  owe  it,  under
God,  to  this,  that  I  made  it  a  rule  never
to  despise  an  enemy."  To  what  warfare
is  this  so  applicable  as  to  the  Christian's  ?
Those  conflicts  were  best  maintained
which  we  counted  most  hazardous.
Estimate  your  foes  :  "  If  run  with  foot-
men and  wearied,  how  contend  with
horses  9  "  The  difficulty  implied  by  this
proverb  appears  in  this —

I.  That  man  is  less  a  match  for
Satan  now  than  when  Satan,  at  their
first  encounter,  proved  himself  more
than  a  match  for  man.

Defeated  in  Eden,  where  can  man  now
hope  for  success?  Overcome  in  our
state  of  innocence,  what  triumph  can  we
effect  in  our  state  of  guilt  1  None  apart
from  Christ.

II.  If  we  were  overcome  by  sin  ere
it  had  grown  into  strength,  we  are
now  less  able  to  resist  it.

If  we  could  not  turn  the  stream  near
its  mountain-cradle,  how  shall  we  turn
the  river  that  pours  its  flood  into  the
sea?  Sin  gains  power  lj  time  and
habit.  Some  things  weaken  and  wear
away  by  use,  but  not  the  power  of  sin.
All  sinners,  as  well  as  "  seducers,  wax
worse  and  worse."  Overcome  by  sin  when
it  was  weak,  how  hope  to  resist  it  when
strong  1  By  His  grace  alone,  with  whom
nothing  is  impossible  :  "  I  can  do  all
things  through  Christ  who  strength eneth
me."  Thus  can  "  they  that  are  accus-
tomed to  do  evil  learn  to  do  well."

II.  How  these  contending  forces  are
to  he  overcome.

Eenew  the  combat,  never  surrender :
"  Hope  in  God."  Recall  how  Peter,
"  wearied  by  the  footmen,"  nobly  and
successfully  **  contended  with  horses  " — a
coward  before  the  maid  in  the  judgment-
hall,  yet  bold  before  the  judges,  de-
claring he  would  not  keep  silence,  but
would  "obey  God  rather  than  man."
God  makes  good  His  promises — "My
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ; "  "  one  man
shall  chase  a  thousand ; "  "  he  that  is
feeble  among  them  shall  be  as  David,
and  David  shall  be  as  God."    With  His


CEAT.  zn.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


presence  we  may  contend  with  greatest
difficulties ;  and,  clinging  to  Jesus,  may
go  down  undaunted  even  into  "the
swellings  of  Jordan. '* — "  Way  to  Life"
Thomas  Guthrie,  DD,

Note :  "  The  argument  is  a  fortiori.
A  proverbial  phrase.  The  injuries  done
thee  by  the  men  of  Anathoth  (*  foot-
men ')  are  small  compared  with  those
which  the  men  of  Jerusalem  (*  horse-
men') are  about  to  inflict  on  thee.  If
the  former  *  weary  thee '  out,  *  how  wilt
thou  contend  with  *  the  king,  the  court,
and  the  priests  at  Jerusalem  ?  If  in  the
campaign  country  alone  thou  art  secure,
how  wilt  thou  do  when  thou  fallest  into
the  wooded  haunts  of  wild  beasts  % " —
Critical  Bible.

i.  While  we  are  in  this  world  we
must  expect  troubles  and  difficulties.

ii.  God's  usual  method  being  to  begin
with  smaller  trials,  it  is  our  wisdom  to
expect  greater  than  any  we  have  yet
met  with.

iii.  It  highly  concerns  us  to  prepare
for  such  trials,  and  to  consider  what  we
should  do  in  them.

iv.  In  order  to  our  preparation  for
further  and  greater  trials,  we  are  con-
cerned to  approve  ourselves  well  in
present  smaller  trials,  to  keep  hold  on
the  promise,  keep  in  our  way,  and,  with
our  eye  on  the  prize,  so  run  that  we  may
obtain.  — Henry,

Ver.  6.  Theme  :  Treacheey  crouch-
ing BEHIND  PAIR  WORDS.  In  the  perilous
times  nearing,  Jeremiah's  own  relatives
would  raise  the  hue  and  cry  after  him,
or  seek  by  "  fair  words "  to  allure  him
from  his  mission.

I  Godliness  may  estrange  family
relationships.  "  Even  thy  brethren,
&c.,  dealt  treacherously."

II.  Guilesome  words  will  assay  to
decoy  the  faithful  from  his  fidelity.
"  Speak  fair  words  unto  thee."

III.  Insidious  speech  from  the  un-
godly is  not  to  be  believed.  It  is  like
the  serpent's  voice  to  Eve.  *'  Believe
them  not ! "

IV.  Refusal  to  heed  guilesome  words
will  provoke  abusive  raillery.  "  Cried
loudly  after  thee,"  (See  Lit,  Qrit,  on
iNTords.)

259


V.  Treachery  will  attack  the  godly
from  most  covert  scenes.  In  the  very
"  house  of  thy  father,"  and  from  thine
own  '*  brethren."

VI.  Ceaseless  watchfulness  and  un-
swerving constancymust  be  maintained.
"  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into
temptation."  Pause  not  to  heed  any
"fair  words,"  even  when  loved  ones  of
the  home  softly  and  gently  "speak"
them :  heed  God  alone.  "  He  that
loveth  father,  mother,  brethren,  &c.,
more  than  Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me."
"  A  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own
household."

Note  :  "  JSven  thy  brethren."  Abel
was  slain  by  his  own  brother ;  Paul
suffered  most  from  his  own  countrymen  ;
Christ  found  no  little  depreciation  at  the
hands  of  those  near  akin.

"  They  have  called  a  multitude  after
thee."  Trapp  comments,  "  Or  with  full
mouth — Clamant  post  te  pleno  gutture —
as  those  did  against  Christ  who  cried,
*  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him  ; '  and  those
against  Paul,  '  Away  with  such  fellows
from  the  earth  ; '  and  those  against  the
primitive  Christians,  *  Christianos  ad
leones.*  *In  Rhodanumy  in  Rhodanum^
cried  many  at  Geneva  against  Farellus,
their  faithful  preacher,  'Into  the  river
with  him  ; '  but  God  preserved  him  from
their  fury,  for  the  good  of  many  other
cities  after  that  converted  by  him.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Cherished  trea-
sures CONSIGNED  TO  FOES.

God  seems  here  to  use  most  endearing
terms  in  order  to  mark  the  dreadful
desolation  about  to  overtake  Judah.
This  heartless  people  boasted  in  the
thought  that  they  were  God's  "  heri-
tage," His  "  dearly  beloved ;  *'  yet,
instead  of  valuing  their  high  estate  in
grace,  \ki&^  presumed  upon  it,  trifled  with
it,  and  even  set  themselves  lion -like
(ver.  8)  against  their  benignant  spiritual
Benefactor.  And  their  lofty  distinction
as  a  people,  which  should  have  prompted
them  to  proportionate  jealousy  to  remain
worthy  of  it  and  act  in  harmony  there-
with, led  to  spiritual  pride  and  national
degeneracy.     Observe :

I.  How  God  lingers  fondly  over  the
objects  of  His  gracious  regard.    At


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  Xll


if  reluctant  to  think  other  than  loving
thoughts  of  them :  enumerates  all  that
was  attractive,  "  house,  heritage,  be-
loved of  My  soul,"  as  if  He  would  keep
the  good  and  beautiful  in  His  sight,  and
thereby  hide  from  Himself  the  loath-
some.

^^  House  ^^  may  mean  Temple;  "heri-
tages^ the  goodly  land  ;  "  heloved^'^  the
people  whom  God  had  chosen  and
cherished.     Note  how  He —

1.  Asserts  His  claim.  "  Mine  house,
mine  heritage,"  <fec.

2.  Reveals  His  love.  Language  in-
stinct with  affection  :  "  The  dearly  be-
loved of  My  soul."

**  Loved  us  not^rithstanding  all."

3.  Laments  His  loss.  IVieirs  would
be  the  greater  loss  far  ;  God  alienated,
themselves  expatriated  from  their
country,  (fee. ;  yet  God  grieves  to  lose
His  children:  "How  can  I  give  thee  up?"

II.  How  God  necessarily  withdraws
from  those  who  violate  their  sacred
relationship.

1.  He  is  not  first,  but  last  in  alien-
ating Himself.  "  Slow  to  anger,  and  of
great  kindness."  Separation  between
humanity  and  Jehovah  began  with
humanity :  Adam's  sin.  Separation
between  the  individual  and  God  beojins
with  the  individual :

"  Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy  ;  '*

but  wickedness  banishes  God  as  the  life
advances.  Separation  between  the
heart  and  God  begins  with  the  heart ;
doubts  and  hard  thoughts  admitted,  or
"iniquity  is  regarded  in  the  heart,"  and
hence  the  withdrawal  of  God.  "Your
sins  have  hid  His  face  from  you,"  <fec.
(Isa.  lix.  2).

2.  He  cannot  perpetuate  a  violated
relationship.  It  would  be  unrighteous
in  itself,  and  injurious  in  its  results.

3.  He  wholly  abandons  the  faithless.
"  I  have  given — into  the  hand  of  her
enemies."  For  tliere  is  no  other  alter-
native ;  either  in  God's  love,  or  in  the
grasp  of  foes.

III.  How  God  permits  those  who
revolt  from  Him  to  suffer  appropriate
penalties.  The  correlate  fact  to  "  I  have
forsaken,"  is  that  Judah  should  be  "  in
Ihc  Jumd  of  her  enemies."     It  wm  only


by  Jehovah  keeping  near  that  enemies
were  kept  afar.

1.  They  forfeit  His  providentia^
protection.

2.  Enemies  are  alert  to  seize  a&
prey  those  whom  God  does  not  defend
and  befriend.

3.  Their  own  resources  of  security  and
strength  are  futile.

4.  A  melancholy  reversion  of  their
former  estate  of  privilege.  "  The
dearly  beloved  "  of  God  in  her  enemies'
hand  !  Such  repudiation  of  God's  love
has  but  one  alternative  :  "  delivered  over
to  Satan,"  consigned  to  the  foe  of  God
and  man.

Another  outline  :

I.  Pre-eminent  spiritual  distinction.

Raised  into   highest  privilege,  honour,
and  blessedness.

II.  False  grounds  of  assurance.
Presumed  upon  her  advantages,  and
violated  the  conditions  of  retaining
them.

III.  Glaring  abuse  of  Divine  grace.
Her  enjoyment  of  God's  tender  love
makes  her  faithlessness  the  more  crim-
inal and  abominable.

IV.  Merited  retribution.  The
**  dearly  beloved "  given  over  to  those
who  hated  her,  "  her  enemies."  Even
worse ;  the  lovinsj  Jehovah  Himself
came  to  "  hate  His  once  clierished  "  heri-
tage "  (ver.  8).

How  repugnant  is  sin  to  God  !  What
dire  results  ensue  to  determined  and
defiant  wrong-doers  !  The  brighter  the
light,  the  blacker  the  darkness  of  its
shadows;  so  the  more  "  dearly  beloved,"
the  more  terrible,  the  "  outer  darkness  "
of  being  "  hated  "  by  the  Lord  !

Starke  comments  :  The  heart  of  a
believer  is  God's  most  cherished  abode,
but  if  man  corrupt  it  with  wilful  sin,
God  must  forsake  His  house  (Isa.
lix.  2).

Comments :

Ver.  8.  "  Mine  heritage  is  unto  me
as  a  lion  in  the  forest.^'  One's  heritage
and  patrimony  is,  we  know,  his  delight.
God  shows  that  He  was  in  His  own
heritage  as  though  He  was  in  a  vast  and
wild  forest,  and  the  fields  which  ought
to  have  been  His  delight  were  become

^3


OBAP.  sn.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY    JEREMIAE,


places  of  the  greatest  horror,  as  though
a  lion  were  roaring  and  raging. — Calvin.

Judah  has  not  merely  refused  obedi-
ence, but  shown  itself  intractable  and
fierce  like  an  untamed  lion.  It  has
roared  against  God  with  open  blas-
phemy.— Speaker's  Com.

The  reason  why  Jehovah  gives  up  His
people  for  a  prey — ^it  has  behaved  to
God  like  a  lion,  i.«.,  has  opposed  Him
fiercely  like  a  furious  beast.  Therefore
He  must  withdraw  His  love. — Keil.

Ver.  9.  The  form  of  the  verse  is
interrogative  :  Is  My  heritage  unto  Me
as  a  speckled  bird?  Are  birds  of  prey
round  about  her  ?  As  around  a  strange
bird — probably  here  a  vulture — other
carrion  birds  collect  and  cruelly  abuse  it,
so  would  Judah's  foes  surround  and  de-
stroy her  ;  for  God  summons  also  ^^all
the  beasts  of  the  field  "  to  "  devour "
her.

Ver.  10-13.  Theme:  Complete  de-
vastation OF  THE  LAND.

God  speaks  of  this  utter  desolation
of  the  land  by  the  Chaldean  army  as  a
thing  done  ;  so  near,  so  sure  was  it.

i.  See  tuith  what  a  tender  affection  He
speaks  of  this  land,  notwithstanding  the
sinfulness  of  it,  in  remembrance  of  His
covenant,  and  the  tribute  of  honour  and
glory  He  had  formerly  had  from  it.  It
is  *'  My  vineyard,  My  portion.  My  plea-
sant portion"  (ver.  10).  Note,  God
has  a  kindness  and  concern  for  His
Church,  though  there  be  much  amiss
in  it.

ii.  See  with  what  a  tender  compassion
He  speaks  of  the  desolations  of  this  land.
*'  Many  pastors  have  destroyed  My  vine-
yard," without  any  consideration  either
of  the  value  of  it  or  of  My  interest  in  it ;
they  have  with  greatest  insolence  and
indignation  "  trodden  it  under  foot,"
and  that  which  was  a  pleasant  land
they  have  made  "  a  desolate  wilderness."
The  destruction  was  universal :  **  the
whole  land  is  made  desolate "  (ver.
11).  It  is  made  so  by  the  sword  of  war ;
"the  spoilers,"  the  Chaldean  soldiers,
**  have  come  through  the  plain  upon  all
high  places"  (ver.  12),  made  themselves
masters  of  all  the  natural  fastnesses  and
artificial  fortresses.  *'  No  flesh  shall
254


have  peace ;  **  all  have  corrapted  their
way — none  shall  have  peace.

iii.  See  whence  all  this  miiery  come$»
1.  From  the  displeasure  of  God  :  it  ii
**  the  sword  of  the  Lord  that  devours  "
(ver.  12).  It  was  the  "  fierce  anger  of
the  Lord  "  (ver.  13),  which  kindled  this
fire  among  them,  and  made  their  enemies
80  furious.  2.  It  is  their  sin  that  has
made  God  their  enemy.  Though  the
land  "  mourneth  unto  Me,"  pouring  out
its  complaint  over  desolation  before
God,  the  inhabitants  are  so  senseless  and
stupid  that  "  none  of  them  lays  it  to
heart,"  unafi'ected  by  God's  displeasure,
while  the  very  ground  they  go  upon
shames  them.

iv.  See  how  unable  they  shall  be  to
guard  against  it  (ver.  13).  "  They  have
sown  wheat,"  t.<?.,  have  taken  pains  for
their  own  security,  but  '*  shall  reap
thorns,"  what  shall  prove  grievous  and
vexatious  to  them.  Instead  of  helping
themselves,  they  shall  but  make  them-
selves more  uneasy.  "  Ashamed  of
your  revenues,"  that  they  have  depended
80  much  upon  their  preparations  for
war ;  and  their  silver  and  gold  shall
"not  profit"  them  in  the  day  of  the
Lord's  anger. — Henry.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  Unpitied  Misery.
**  The  whole  land  is  made  desolate,  be-
cause no  man  layeth  it  to  heart."

Applicable  to  any  scene  where  evil
thrives,  where  ruin  goes  on  unchecked,
where  ignorance,  sin,  and  oppression
work  human  wretchedness  and  over-
throw.

Applicable  to  any  special  national
vice  :  intemperance,  poisonous  literature,
polluted  pleasure  ;  by  which  homes  are
wrecked,  youth  betrayed,  the  country
weakened,  wasted,  or  degraded.

Applicable  to  the  scenes  of  heathenism,
where  benighted  souls  droop,  where
"  the  habitations  of  cruelty  "  rear  them-
selves, where  outrages  on  homes  and  con-
science and  life  are  enacted  in  the  name
of  idolatry.

I.  National  woes  should  move  us  to
patriotic  sorrow.  We  ought  to  "  lay  it
to  Jieart  "  when  our  "  land  mourneth."

1.  As  being  ourselves  a  part  oj  tJis
nation;*'  identified  with  it,  therefore,


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  UI.


in  quick  sympathy  with  what  happens
to  it,  feeling  its  sorrows  and  wrongs  to
be  our  own.  "  If  one  member  suffers,
all  the  members  suffer  with  it."

2.  As  being  intrusted  with  responsi-
bilities toward  our  nation.  We  each
share  the  benefits  of  the  commonwealth,
its  laws,  its  protection,  its  commercial
and  social  security,  (fee,  therefore,  we
should  to  our  ability  protect  its  interests,
rectify  its  wrongs,  take  part  in  its  strug-
gles, enter  deeply  into  its  great  woes
and  wants.

3.  As  being  solicitous  for  our  nation* s
weal.  Fired  with  the  patriotic  spirit,
glowing  with  a  sense  of  power  to  help
and  alleviate  and  bless ;  realising  the
service  we  can  render  to  men  and  to
God  in  a  life  of  wise  and  benevolent
enterprise,  however  lowly  and  obscure,
or  however  public  and  imposing.  What
can  be  done  for  my  people's  good  'i

II.  Torpid  indifference  surrenders
a  land  to  spoilers.  These  "  spoilers  "
were  intent  on  their  end  (ver.  1 2)  ;  they
would  capture  and  desolate  the  land.
Spoilers  are  still  active  and  plotting,
seeking  the  young,  the  gay^  the  ambi-
tious, the  intellectually  vain,  aiming  at
their  moral,  social,  mental,  and  spiritual
overthrow.

1.  Indifference  as  to  the  menacing  evils
which  were  gathering.  No  foresight,  no
apprehension.  Some  sleep  unsuspecting
till  the  enemy  is  at  the  gate.  "  We  are
not  ignorant  of  his  devices."  *'  Watch
and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta-
tion."

2.  Indifference  as  to  the  real  cause  of
prevailing  misery  —  irreligion.  Many
seek  to  remedy  ills  without  recognising
the  spring  and  source.  Neglect  of  God
explains  human  woe.  But,  ignoring  the
fact  that  impiety  is  at  the  root,  they
bring  superficial  ameliorations.

3.  Indifference  as  to  the  Divinely-sent
calls  to  reform.  God  appealed  by  His
prophet  to  the  nation  to  turn  again  to
Him.  Had  they  complied,  the  desola-
tion would  have  been  averted  ;  but  they
cared  not  to  hear  the  sacred  message.
So  still  the  people  sink  into  the  power
of  sin,  pleasure,  worldliness,  atheism,
which  bring  desolations,  because  they
despise   God's   messages,    repudiate    the


Gospel  of  Christ,  turn  from  the  only
Saviour  of  sinners,  whose  healing  grace
remedies  human  woes,  and  rectifies  all
the  desolations  sin  has  wrought.

III.  Scenes  of  desolation  summon
us  to  holy  endeavour.  "  Lay  it  to
heart,"  not  as  an  idle  sentiment,  but  an
inspiration  to  help.

1.  Christianity  commissions  its  fol-
lowers to  helpful  work.  It  is  the  mean-
ing of  the  Saviour's  own  example :
"  Seek  and  save  that  which  is  lost."  It
is  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament :
"  Go  and  do  likewise,"  i.e.,  as  did  the
good  Samaritan  to  the  man  who  had
fallen  among  thieves,  find  your  neigh-
bour in  the  first  sufferer  you  meet.
Christianity  makes  missionaries,  philan-
thropists, patriots  of  its  disciples.

2.  Where  the  spoiler  has  desolated,
there  the  Christian  must  go.  With  a
heart  pitying  the  fallen,  the  perishing,
and  the  blighted.  "  Into  all  the  world."
*'To  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the
mighty."

Ver.  14.  Theme:  A  triple  consola-
tion. Equally  true  of  the  Church  of
Christ  as  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.

L  God  is  watching,  and  will  punish
the  adversaries  of  His  people.

I.  They  environ  her:  "evil  neigh-
bours."

3.  They  molest  her :  "  touch  the  in-
heritance " — her  truths,  her  sacred  joys.

3.  They  invade  her  holy  scenes:  in-
trude upon  sacred  soil ;  her  sanctuary,
to  spoil  its  services;  the  privacy  of
prayer,  to  mar  the  soul's  fellowship,  &c.

4.  Yet  the  Divine  Friend  of  Hia
people  observes  our  foes ;  is  "  against "
them,  and  therefore  on  our  part ;  and
will  requite  the  evil  done  to  them  that
are  His.

II.  God  has  purposes  of  grace  for
His  suffering  people.

1.  Even  though  their  own  wickedness
explains  their  being  in  the  hand  of  foes.

2.  Yet  He  will  not  abandon  them  to
their  "  evil  neighbours ; "  for  our  foes
are  not  to  be  allowed  the  enjoyment  of
their  successes.  God  has  no  favour
towards  His  people's  enemies ;  they
shall  be  dispossessed  of  "  the  inherit-
ance which  I  have  caused  My  people  to

255


ofiAP.  in.


BO  MI  LET IG  COMMENTARY:  J  EM  Ml  Alt.


Inherit."  Though  the  guilty  take  our
peace  from  us,  they  shall  not  enjoy  it :
**  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  Though
they  deprive  us  of  our  hopes,  they
shall  not  inherit  them  :  **  having  no
hope."

3.  God  will  reclaim  His  people  to
Himself.  "  I  will  pluck  out  the  house
of  Judah  from  among  them."  He  did
this  from  the  hands  of  Judah's  enemies,
restoring  her  to  her  heritage  again  ;  and
"  He  will  pluck  out  our  feet  from  the
net,"  deliver  our  souls  from  the  spoiler,
and  save  His  Church  from  the  sophis-
tries of  her  foes  (ver.  15).

III.  God  designs  that  even  His
people's  enemies  shall  be  converted
unto  Him.  It  would  eventuate  in  the
good  of  Judah's  "  evil  neighbours  "  for
her  to  be  temporarily  scattered  into  their
lands,  and  for  those  neighbours  to
occupy  Judah's  heritage.

1.  It  hr ought  them  into  contact  with
Divine  realities ;  gave  them  knowledge
of  the  religion  of  Judah.  Those  who
entered  her  land  could  "  walk  about
Zion,"  and  learn  something  of  the
worship  of  Jehovah  and  the  sacred
oracles ;  whereas  tiiose  people  among
whom  Judah  was  dispersed  could
"  diligently  learn  the  ways  of  My  people,
to  swear  by  My  name "  (ver.  16).  It
offered  them  opportunity.

2.  The  results  proved  a  blessing  to  the
heathen.  Many  were  converted  to  the
Lord.  So  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  His
prayer  for  His  enemies,  availed  to  the
conquest  of  some  who  saw  and  heard.
The  dispersion  of  the  Early  Church  by
Saul  led  to  the  conversion  of  many
elsewhere.  Foes  are  being  won  to-day
even  while  assailing  truth  and  ill-using
Christ's  followers.

3.  Converted  enemies  would  then  be-
come united  with  God's  people :  "Be
built  in  the  midst  of  My  people  '*  (ver.
16) ;  a  place  given  to  them  within  her
borders,  and  a  share  in  her  spiritual
privileges :  Gentiles  gathered  into  Israel ;
sinners  and  even  enemies  drawn  into
Christ's  Church.  "  He  who  persecuted
the  Church  in  times  past  now  preacheth
the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed"
(Gal.  L  23).     (Addenda  on  verse.)

256


Ver.  15.    Theme :  Progressive  acts

OF  REDEMPTION.

The  complete  work  of  Divine  grace
is  not  effected  in  one  act ;  it  distributes
itself  into  distinct  parts,  sometimes  into
distant  periods.  As  in  the  instance  of
these  Jews  and  their  neighbours,  so  in
the  experience  of  the  sinner,  God's
redeeming  work  is  accomplished  by
progressive  stages.

I.  Rescue.  *'  I  have  plucked  them
out."  Divine  deliverance — from  wrong
scenes,  alien  countries ;  or  "  from  the
horrible  pit  and  miry  clay ; "  or
**  plucked  as  a  brand  from  the  burn-
ing ; "  or  "  delivered  from  the  bondage
of  corruption  ;"  or  "  translated  from  the
power  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of
God's  dear  Son."  In  any  aspect  of  the
experience,  it  is  the  initial  incident  in
the  process  of  redemption — rescue.

II.  Reconciliation.  "I  will  return,
and  have  compassion  on  them."  The
coming  back  of  the  alienated  God  to  the
rescued  soul.  Not  in  judgment,  nor  to
mark  iniquity,  nor  to  chide,  but  to  cover
over  the  whole  evil  past  with  the  fulness
of  Divine  *'  compassion."  Blotting  out
transgression,  drawing  the  rescued  one
near  to  the  personal  love  of  God  in  ex-
perience of  renewed  favour.  *'  O  Lord,
I  will  praise  Thee ;  though  Thou  wast
angry  with  me,  Thine  anger  is  turned
away,  and  Thou  comfortest  me."  *'  God
was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto
Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses
unto  them.*'

III.  Restitution.  **I  will  bring
them  again,  every  man  to  his  heritage,
and  every  man  to  his  land.**  What  sin
had  forfeited  grace  will  restore.  All
which  we  have  lost  by  alienation  from
God — peace,  purity,  happiness,  holiness,
heaven,  is  restored  by  redemption.  1.
Individual  restitution  :  *'  every  man  ; "
for  God  overlooks  none,  not  even  "  the
least  of  all  saints."  2.  Cornplete  restitu-
tion :  "  to  his  heritage,"  the  blessings  to
which  he  was  born ;  the  comforts  and
joys  and  privileges  which  would  always
have  remained  man's  but  for  his  self-
impoverishing  sinfulness  :  "  Father,
give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth
to  me."  Also,  "  to  his  land,''  the  home
and  destiny  for  which  his  heart  craves


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMTaH.


OHAF.  xn.


And  *'  our  conversation  is  in  heaven."
"Every  one  of  them  shall  appear  in
Zion  before  God."

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Aliens  united  in
THE  Chukch.

And  these  were  mutually  antagon-
istic. 1.  Politically:  '*Judah,"  and
*•  evil  neighbours ; "  a  historic  antipathy
estranged  them,  a  national  enmity  sepa-
i*ated  them.  2.  Religiously:  each  re-
pudiated the  other's  religion,  and  derided
their  object  or  objects  of  worship.  They
were  determined,  avowed,  and  implac-
able foes.

Is  there  any  meeting-place  of  union,
any  common  centre  of  reconciliation  for
Buch  1  Yes,  in  Christ ;  in  the  Church  of
Emmanuel.  "  Other  sheep  I  have,  which
are  not  of  this  fold ;  them  also  will  I
bring,  that  there  may  be  one  fold  and
one  Shepherd."

I.  The  standard  of  qualification.  All
must  "  learn  the  ways  "  of  God's  people,
and  '*  swear  by  Jehovah's  name."

I.  Renewal  of  life.  "  Cast  off  the
works  of  darkness,  and  put  on  the
armour  of  light.'*  To  "  learn  the  ways  "
of  God's  people  implies  antipathy  re-
moved, the  mind  and  heart  allured  to
assent  to  a  "  newness  of  life^^  and  so
full  a  reformation  of  conduct  as  to  be-
come assimilated  to  God's  people — (a.)
In  practical  godliness;  (b.)  in  homage
and  service  of  the  Lord.  For  "  the
ways "  of  God's  people  are  these —
holy  living  and  godly  service.

2  Allegiance  to  the  Lord.  "Swear
by  My  name,  the  Lord  liveth  "  (comp.
notes  on  chap.  iv.  2).  This  means  (a)
renunciation  of  other  gods;  (6)  loyal
attachment  to  Jehovah ;  (c)  opefn.  pro-
fession of  religion.

II.  The  process  of  preparation.
"  Learn."

1.  By  observation.  Seeing  what
Judah  did.  Men  watch  the  righteous,
and  feel  the  force  of  example.  The
Christian  life  is  as  a  "  light  shining  in
darkness  ; "  men  '^  see  their  good  works,"
are  influenced  by  the  piety  of  their
walk  ;  and  antagonism  dies  as  they  ob-
serve their  **  ways."

2.  By  imitation.  From  the  example
of  the  Jews  among  these  "  neighbours  "


there  would  be  going  out  the  continual
call,  "  Come  with  us,  we  will  do  you
good  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good
concerning  His  people."  Also,  persuasive
words  of  teaching  and  entreaty  could  be
spoken  to  those  who  were  without,  in-
viting them  to  join  with  God's  people.
And  thus  they  would  '*  learn  the  ways,"
and  adopt  them.  Even  as  these
heathen  had  beforetime  ^^  taught  Judah
to  swear  by  Baal"  and  thus  allured
them  from  Jehovah.

Qualification  is  progressive  :  it  is  the
issue  of  learning.  The  alien  becomes
transformed  by  a  gradual  process  into  a
"  fellow-citizen  of  the  saints  and  of  the
household  of  God."

III.  The  realisation  of  union.  "They
shall  be  built  in  the  midst  of  My
people."  The  stranger  and  the  citizen
established  in  Zion.  The  foe  of  Christ
united  to  His  followers  in  the  Church.
"  One  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  Gathered
together  in  one."

1.  Alienations  and  distinctions  are
annihilated  there.  A  sacred  sympathy
and  a  common  heritage  in  God's  grace
obliterate  all  antipathies.  Nationality
is  lost  in  realisation  of  a  heavenly  citi-
zenship :  "  there  is  neither  Jew  nor
Greek,  circumcised  nor  uncircumcised,
barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  or  free,  but
all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus."

2.  A  common  Divine  relationship
•unites  all  together.  "  Built  in  the
midst  of  My  people," — i.e,,  identified
with  and  included  among  "  My  people."
"  All  ye  are  brethren."  "  One  family,
we  dwell  in  Him."  The  Church  of
Christ  is  on  earth  the  meeting-place  of
all,  irrespective  of  nationality  or  social
gradation,  who  belong  to  the  brotherhood
and  household  of  faith.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  The  issue  of  peb-

SISTENT  ALIENATION.

God  opened  the  door  of  reconciliation
to  them  :  His  people  would  have  taught
them  their  "  ways  ;  "  they  might  have
become  partakers  of  all  Judah's  privi-
leges, and  found  a  place  within  Zion.
But  repudiating  all,  nothing  remained
but  complete  overthrow  and  destruction.
No  place  among  God's  people  means
outcast,  abandoned,  destroyed.

257


CHAP.  ZII.


HOMILETW  COMJIEXTABY:  JEREMIAH.


L  A  defiant  will.  Not  powerless
to  *'  obey,"  but  determination  "  not "  to
obey  :  deliberate  resistance  of  Jndah's
persuasions,  and  rejection  of  Divine  op-
portunity. Refused  to  "learn"  or  "obey.'*

IL  An  alarming  penalty.  The
issue  of  such  defiance  is  made  clear  :  no


equivocation.     "I  have  set  before  you
life  and  death."

III.  A  terrible  punishment.  *'I
will  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy."
'*  Punished  with  everlasting  destruction
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from
the  glory  of  His  power."


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XII. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,


Ver.  1.  Talking  with  God.  Never
shall  we  be  lonely,  never  have  to  com-
plain of  want  of  companionship,  if  we
acquire  this  blessed  habit  of  talking
with  God.  There  was  an  old  Scotchman
sitting  by  his  humble  fire,  and  a  visitor
asked  him  if  he  was  not  lonesome
sitting  there  all  day,  and  he  said,  "  Nae,
nae ;  I  just  sit  here  clacking  wi'  Jesus."
When  we  remember  that  "clacking"
is  with  the  Scotch  the  word  for  friendly
talking,  it  will  be  seen  there  was  no
irreverence  in  the  old  man's  words,  but
something  to  be  envied  and  admired. —
Power.

Many,  with  the  best  intentions,  pro-
pounded that  God  is  too  great  to  attend
to  our  little  things ;  and  all  kindred  theo-
ries have  one  point  at  least  in  common,
viz.,  the  idea  that  close  converse  could  not
be  held  with  God,  that  He  could  not  be
spoken  to  at  all  times  by  plain  folk,  in
a  plain  way,  about  things. — Idem.

There  is  such  a  thing  as  talking  with
God.  It  is  said,  in  that  venerable  old
record,  that  "in  the  cool  of  the  day
God  walked  in  the  garden,  and  called
to  Adam."  I  know  one  thing,  that  that
same  habit  has  continued  to  this  day,
for  I  have  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  on  the
hillside,  a  hundred  times  talked  with
Him  too.  God  is  accustomed  to  come
down  ;  He  makes  Himself,  by  the  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  guest.  There  is
such  a  thing  as  communion  with  Christ,
as  one  speaketh  to  a  friend  face  to  face.
— Beecher,

**  When  one  that  holds  commanion  with  the

Bkies
Has  filled  his  urn  where  those  pure  waters

rise,
And  once  more  mingles  with   us  meaner

things,
*TiB  e'en  as  if  an  angel  shook  his  wings  :
Immortal  fragrance  fills  the  circuit  wide,
That    tells    us  whence    his    treasures  are

•applied." — CowrSB.
258


God's  judgments.  The  heavier  the
cannon,  with  the  more  difficulty  are
they  drawn ;  but  when  arrived,  they
recompense  the  slowness  of  their  march
by  the  fierceness  of  their  battery.  The
longer  the  stone  is  in  falling,  the  more
it  will  bruise  and  grind  to  powder.
There  is  a  great  treasure  of  wrath  laid
up  by  the  abuse  of  patience. — Gharnock,

Thy  judgments,  saith  the  prophet,
are  sometimes  secret,  always  just ;  this
I  am  well  assured  of,  though  I  thus
argue.  Yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy
judgments;  let  me  take  the  humble
boldness  so  to  do,  that  I  may  be  further
cleared  and  instructed  by  Thee,  Where-
fore doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper,
whilst  better  men  suffer,  as  now  the
wicked  Anathothites  do,  whilst  I  go  in
danger  of  my  life  by  them  ]  This  ques-
tion hath  exercised  the  wits  and
molested  the  minds  of  many  wise  men,
both  within  and  without  the  Church.
(See  Job  xxi.  7-13 ;  Ps.  xxxvii  1,
Ixxiil  1-12;  Hab.  i.  4,  5.)  Plato,
Cicero,  Seneca,  Epictetus,  Claudian
against  Ruffin,  <fec. —  Trapp.

Prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Satan
with  ease  puts  fallacies  upon  us  by  his
golden  baits,  and  then  he  leads  us  and
leaves  us  in  a  fool's  paradise.  The
world  hath  by  the  glistering  of  her
pomp  and  preferment  slain  millions ;
as  the  serpent  Scytale,  which,  when
she  cannot  overtake  the  fleeting  pas-
sengers, doth  with  her  beautiful  colours
astonish  and  amaze  them,  so  that  they
have  no  power  to  pass  away  till  she  have
stung  them  to  death.  Adversity  hath
slain  her  thousands,  but  prosperity  her
ten  thousand. — Brooks,

It  is  the  bright  day  that  brings
out  the  adder.  .  .  .  Too  much  sail  is
dangerous.  ...  A  coat  too  richly  em-
broidered   only  encumbers  the  wearer.


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  xn.


•  •  .  Too  much  sunshine  weakens   the
•yes.

Ver.  3.  God's  knowledge  of  the
HEABT.  There  is  a  recent  application  of
electricity  by  which,  under  the  influence
of  its  powerful  light,  the  body  can  be
so  illuminated  as  that  the  workings
beneath  the  skin  can  be  seen.  Lift  up
the  hand  and  it  will  appear  almost
translucent,  the  bones  and  veins  clearly
appearing.  It  is  so  in  some  sort  with
God's  introspection  of  the  human  heart.
His  eye,  which  shines  brighter  than  the
sun,  searches  us  and  discovers  us  alto-
gether.— Pilhington.

Ver.  4.  "He  shall  not  see  dub
LAST  END."  God  shall  not,  and  so  they
deny  His  providence  and  prescience;
or  the  prophet  shall  not,  though  now  he
thunder  out  our  punishment  with  so
great  vehemence. — Trapp.

Mercury  could  not  kill  Argus  till  he
bad  cast  him  into  a  sleep,  and  with  an
enchanted  rod  closed  his  eyes ;  and  the
devil  cannot  hurt  any  man  till  he  has
lulled  him  asleep  in  security. — Flayttr,

Ver.  5.  "  What  wilt  thou  do  %  **
We  should  quit  ourselves  like  men,  and
not  be  perturbed  by  little  rivulets  ;  for
if  these  sweep  us  away,  what  shall  we
do  when  Jordan  is  swollen  to  the  brim,
and  we  have  to  pass  through  that  1
When  one  of  the  martyrs,  whose  name
is  the  somewhat  singular  one  of  Pom-
mely  \Trapp  gives  it  as  William  Cob-
berly,]  was  confined  previous  to  his
burning,  his  wife  was  also  taken  up
upon  the  charge  of  heresy.  The  good
woman  had  resolved  to  die  with  her
husband,  and  she  appeared,  as  far  as
most  people  could  judge,  to  be  very
firm  in  her  faith.  But  the  jailor's  wife,
though  she  had  no  religion,  took  a
merciful  view  of  the  case  as  far  as  she
could  do  so,  and  thought,  *'  I  am  afraid
this  woman  will  never  stand  the  test,
she  will  never  brave  death  with  her
husband;  she  has  neither  faith  nor
strength  to  endure  such  a  trial ; "  and
therefore,  one  day  calling  her  out  of  the
cell,  she  said  to  her,  "  Lass,  run  to  the
garden  and  fetch  me  the  key  that  lies
there."  The  poor  woman  ran  willingly
enough  ;  she  took  the  key  up  and  it
burned  her  fingers,  for  the  jailor's  wife


had  made  it  red  hot;  she  came  back
crying  with  pain.  "  Ah,  woman,"  said
she,  "  if  you  cannot  bear  a  little  burn
in  your  hand,  how  will  you  bear  to  be
burnt  in  your  whole  body  1 "  and  this
brought  her  to  recant  the  faith  she  had
professed.  I  apply  the  story  thus  :  If
we  cannot  bear  the  trifling  pangs  which
come  upon  us  in  our  ordinary  circum-
stances, which  are  but  as  it  were  the
burning  of  our  hands,  what  shall  we  do
when  every  pulse  beats  pain,  and  every
throb  is  an  agony,  and  the  whole  tene-
ment begins  to  crumble  about  the
spirit  that  is  so  soon  to  be  disturbed  ? —
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  comp,  Trapp  on  verse.

"  I  have  no  hope  in  what  I  have
been  or  done,"  said  Dr.  Doddridge  on
his  dying  bed,  "  yet  I  am  full  of  confi-
dence ;  and  this  is  my  confidence :  there
is  hope  set  before  me.  I  have  fled,  I
still  fly,  for  refuge  to  that  hope.  In  Him
I  trust,  in  Him  I  have  strong  consola-
tion, and  shall  assuredly  be  accepted
in  this  Beloved  of  my  soul."

Ver.  14.  Converted  enemies.  It  is
recorded  of  a  Chinese  emperor,  that,  on
being  apprised  of  his  enemies  having
raised  an  insurrection  in  one  of  the  dis-
tant provinces,  he  said  to  the  oflacers,
"  Come,  follow  me,  and  we  will  quickly
destroy  them."  He  marched  forward,
and  the  rebels  submitted  at  his  ap-
proach. All  now  thought  that  he
would  take  the  most  signal  revenge,  but
were  surprised  to  see  the  captives
treated  with  mildness  and  humanity.
**  How  I "  cried  the  first  minister,  "  is
this  the  manner  in  which  you  carry  out
your  threat  1  Your  royal  word  was
given  that  your  enemies  should  be  de-
stroyed, and  behold  you  have  pardoned
them  all,  and  even  caressed  some  of
them."  *'  I  promised,"  replied  the
emperor,  with  a  generous  air,  *'  to
destroy  my  enemies.  I  have  fulfilled
my  word ;  for  see,  they  are  enemies  no
longer.     I  have  made  friends  of  them."

Ver.  15.  "  Every  man  to  his  heri-
tage." To  the  Church ;  for  in  every
nation  he  that  feareth  God  and  worketh
righteousness  shall  be  accepted  of  Him,
shall  have  a  child's  part,  even  the  reward
of  inheritance. — Trapp.

Ver.    16.    Union    in    the    Church.

259


oiur.  ziii.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .  JEREMIA^.


When  mankind  depart  from  God,  they  Ver.  17.  The  issue  of  defiance.

lose  the  bond  of  unity  and  peace.     They  .,  ^^^  ,  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^

are  divided  then  into  parties,  which  con-  the  warning,

tend  with  and  exterminate  each  other ;  Till  our  warriors  grcAv  weak  in  the  day

but  when  these  have  again  united  them-  ,     of  despair,

selves  with  the  Lord,  the  unity  of  the  ^^  ""  5'S  ""'  *'"*  "  ""  '"«'"  *'  **"

_,,        _  •'        ,  morning,

members  is  restored.     Therefore,  there  T^at  gleams  for  a  moment,  and  melts

is  liberty,  equality,  fraternity  only  in  into  air."                         — Dams.
the  Lord. — NaegeUhazh.


OHAPTEK  XIII.

Cbitioal  and  Exeobtioal  Notes. — l.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.     The  reference  in  ver.

18  to  the  "queen"  is  regarded  as  determining  the  date  of  this  chapter,  Ewald,  Hitzig,
Umbreit,  Dahler,  Hend.,  and  Dr.  Payne  Smith  agree  in  identifying  her  as  Nehushta,  the
queen-mother  of  Jehoiachin.  For,  although  it  is  conjectural  whether  Jehoiachin  (Jeconiah)
was  eighteen  years  of  age  at  his  accession  (see  2  Kings  xxiv.  8)  or  only  eight  (comp.  2  Chron.
xxxvi.  9),  certainly  his  mother  shared  with  him  the  responsibilities  of  royalty  and  of  govern-
ment ;  and  together  the  mother  and  son  were  dethroned :  of  which  event  this  verse  is  peculiarly
descriptive.  But  Keil  and  Bleek  incline  to  put  the  prophecy  in  Jehoiakim's  reign,  explaining
that  the  "queen,"  his  mother  Zebuda,  in  common  with  all  queen-mothers,  would  retain
prominence  and  power  (comp.  1  Kings  xv.  13  ;  2  Kings  x.  13),  and  the  mention  of  her  does
not  necessarily  imply  the  king's  minority.  The  reason  for  preferring  Jehoiakim's  reign  to  that
of  his  successor  Jehoiachin,  is  that  after  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim's  reign  the  northern  foe  is
uniformly  definitely  spoken  of  as  the  Chaldeans ;  whereas  in  this  chapter  the  allusion  is  inde-
terminate. But  there  is  a  general  appropriateness  in  this  whole  chapter  to  Jehoiachin's  reign
which  prevails  to  fix  its  date:  t.«.,  B.C.  597  ;  or,  according  to  Assyrian  chronology,  B.C.  579.

2.  Cotemporary  Scriptures. — 2  Kings  xxiv.  8-16;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9,  10.

3.  National  Affairs. — Jehoiachin  abandoned  himself  to  flagrant  ungodliness  immediately
upon  his  accession  ;  and  as  promptly  asserted  his  revulsion  from  the  now  Chaldean  domination,
for  only  three  months  pass  ere  we  find  Nebuchadnezzar's  generals  again  besieging  Jerusalem.
The  power  of  resistance  was  gone ;  help  from  Egypt  was  no  longer  available  after  the  defeat
at  Charchemish,  while  also  the  harassing  inroads  of  the  "evil  neighbours"  (see  on  chap.  xii.
14)  had  kept  the  Jews  in  irretrievable  subjection.  Consequently,  without  offering  more  than
a  show  of  resistance  the  king  and  queen-dowager  surrendered  themselves,  and  both  they  and
the  princes,  troops,  artificers,  and  principal  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  together  with  Ezekiel  the
prophet,  were  carried  captive  to  Babylon  (comp.  2  Kings  xxiv,  14-16 ;  Jer.  lii.  28).

4.  Cotemporary  History. — Egypt  prostrate  tinder  Chaldean  ascendancy.  Nebuchadnezzar
incited  armed  bands  of  the  Moabites,  Ammonites,  &;c.,  to  frequent  incursions  of  Judea,  thus
maintaining  his  conquest,  and  keeping  the  Jews  impotent  and  defenceless.

6.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  4.  **  Euphrates: "  here  called  Phrath ;  most  frequently
mentioned  simply  as  "the  river."  It  was  distinctively  the  river  of  Western  Asia,  rising  in  the
Armenian  Mountains,  flowing  through  the  wildest  districts  of  Armenia  by  a  tortuous  course
towards  the  Mediterranean,  diverted  by  the  ranges  of  Amanus  and  Lebanon,  whence  it  moves
onward  for  above  1000  miles  towards  the  Persian  Gulf:  its  entire  course  being  calculated  at
1780  miles,  1200  miles  of  which  is  navigable  by  boats.  An  annual  inundation  oocurs  in  May,
occasioned  by  the  melting  snows  on  the  Armenian  heights.  Mentioned  as  one  of  the  four  riverg
of  Eden  (Gen  ii.  14).  See  Lit,  Crit.  on  verse,  below.  Ver  19.  **  CUies  of  the  South  :^'  Grotius
regards  this  as  a  reference  to  Egypt  (comp.  Isa.  xzx.  6 ;  Dan.  xi.  5),  indicating  that  no  help
could  come  to  them  from  thence.  More  properly,  the  southein  cities  of  Judah,  which  are
blockaded  by  the  enemy:  hence  flight  to  the  south  is  no  longer  possible  (see  on  chap,  vi,  1).

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  18.  "  The  king  and  the  queen  ":  see  supra,  on  Chronology  of  the
Chapter.  Ver.  23.  **  Ethiopian:  "  Heb.  Cushite :  *'  inhabitant  of  Abyssinia,  or  the  African  Cush  "
(Hend).  The  Cushite  of  Arabia,  whose  colour  would  not  be  so  swarthy  in  comparison  with  the
inhabitant  of  Palestine  as  to  render  the  reference  to  "  his  skin "  specially  significant,  could
scarcely  be  here  meant;  but  the  Cushite  of  Africa,  ».<.,  the  negro,  would  supply  at  once  an
emphatic  suggestion.

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  23.  **The  leopard  hit  tpots:**  see  on  chap.  v.  6.  The  ordinary
Hebrew  word  for  leopard  is  *)DJ,  so  called  from  being  spotted.   But  in  this  verse  the  word  is

••   T   '

JlllHl^n,  from  the  root  "^^H    to  be  marked  vnth  ttrtpet  or  lines,  variegated:  the  striped

panther.     As  the  Hebrews  had  no  name  for  the  tiger,  this  animal  was  probably  comprised  by
them  under  the  same  descriptive  word.
260


BOM  I  LET  10  COMMENTARY;  JEREMIAB.  OHAT.  nti.


8.  Maimers  and  Customs. — Ver.  1.  '^ Linen  girdle:"  the  common  girdle,  worn  by  both  sexes
in  the  East,  was  of  leatlier;  the  linen  girdle  was  sometimes  embroidered  with  either  silk,  gold,
or  silver  thread,  and  studded  with  gems,  fastened  with  a  clasp  of  silver  or  gold.  Ver.  11.
** The  girdle  cleavetk  to  the  loins  of  a  man:"  comp.  Isa.  v.  27,  xi,  6.  Ver.  12.  ^* Every  bottle
thall  ht  filled  with  wine :**  various  words  rendered  "  bottle:"  nod,  chemeth,  ob,  chemah\  bakbuk\
and  nebel:  by  these  two  latter  probably  earthen  vessels  are  denoted;  nibel  being  rendered
(Lam.  iv,  2)  by  "pitchers  ;"  for  evidently  other  bottles  than  those  made  of  skin  and  leather
were  in  common  use  (Jer.  xix.  1);  while  also  these  "bottles  filled  with  wine"  could  be
^^ dashed  one  against  another"  (ver.  14).  The  word  is  more  appropriately  rendered  ^ar,  the
"potter's  vessel''  of  Isa.  xxx.  14.  Ver.  22.  "Skirts  discovered,  and  heels  made  bare:"  allusion
to  "the  long  flowing  robes  {y")^  is  a  train  rather  than  a  skirt)  worn  by  ladies  of  rank"
(Speaker's  Com.).  These  robes  would  be  violently  upturned  {of.  ver.  26);  llend.  =  *'  thrown
up  .•"  and  the  heels  made  ba  e,  rather  ill-used^  roughly  treated:  Hend.  =her  sandals  torn  off
with  violence:  Chr.  B.  Micbaelis  =  loading  the  feet  with  chains:  Hit2ig  =  aflFront  done  to  the
person  suggested  by  mention  of  the  heels:  Keil  and  Payne  Smith  =  she  would  be  driven  forth
into  exile  barefoot,  with  violence  and  the  rod.  Cf.  Nahum  iii.  5.  It  describes  "an  ancient
mode  of  punishing  prostitutes"  (Hend.).  Ver.  27.  '*  Neighings  ;"  cf.  notes  on  chap.  v.  8.  *^0n
the  hills  in  the  field  : "  in  the  most  conspicuous  localities  she  had  carried  on  an  incestuous  traffic
with  idols,  revelling  in  the  shameless  heathen  orgies  {cf.  Notes  on  chap.  ii.  24,  v.  7).

9.  Literary  Criticisms.— Ver.  4.  "Euphrates:"  tlJlDB,    The  LXX.,Vulg.,  and  other  ancient

versions  give  Phrath  as  Euphrates.  The  word  occurs  in  fifteen  other  places  ;  in  twelve
instances  the  word  river  is  prefixed  ;  in  three  it  stands,  as  in  this  chapter,  alone ;  and  in  all
those  cases  Phrath  means  the  Euphrates.  But  the  word  Phrath  is  here  used  (vers.  4-7)  four
times,  and  not  once  is  the  word  river  added  ;  and  this  difficulty,  the  LXX.  met  by  supplying
wora/xdv.  Bochart,  Venema,  Dathe,  Hitzig,  Henderson,  and  others  prefer  to  take  Phrath  as  an
abbreviation  of  Ephrath,  Jl"lS)i^    the  original  name  of  Bethlehem.     This  rendering  avoids  the

difficulty  of  the  fact  that  a  journey  of  over  200  miles  would  have  had  to  be  taken  twice  by
Jeremiah  if  the  Euphrates  be  meant ;  whereas  Bethlehem  was  distant  but  six  miles.  Ver.  18.
*'  The  queen:"  m^^])    the  great-lady;  once  applied  to  the  queen-regnant  (1  Kings  xi.  19),

but  usually  means  the  queen-mother  (Speaker's  Com.).  "  As  the  Jewish  kings  generally  mar-
ried subjects  and  lived  in  polygamy,  the  king's  mother  took  precedence  of  his  wives  "  (Hitzig).
**  Tour  principalities : "  DD"*Jl\^N*)D    i.e.,  the  ornaments  of  your  head,  namely,  your  splendid

crown.  Ver.  21.  "<o  he  captains,  chief  over  thee:"  Keil  and  Speaker's  Com.  render  the  verse.
What  wilt  thou  say,  when  (or  if)  Ue  set  over  thee  for  head  (for  a  head)  those  whom  thou  hast  taught
to  be  thy  bosom  friends  (hast  accustomed  to  thee  as  thy  familiar  friends)  ?  The  Jews  had  courted
the  friendly  alliance  of  the  Chaldean  king  and  princes ;  now  they  would  become  their  tyrannical

rulers.     The  translation  of  the  verse  turns  upon  the  meaning  given  to  D*i)^K    rendered  in

A.V.  "captains."  Luther,  and  after  him  Gesenius,  Rosen.,  and  Lange  render  it  princes —
"  Whom  thou  hast  trained  to  be  princes  over  thee: "  this  meaning  is  sustained  in  Gen.  xxvi.  15,
Zech.  ix.  7.  But  its  more  ordinary  signification  is  familiar,  friend  {cf.  Psa.  Iv.  14,  Prov.  xvi.
28,  Mic.  vii.  5).  It  occurs  in  chap.  xi.  19,  tame,  domesticated  (see  Notes  in  loc).  Ver.  25.
"Trusted  in  falsehood:"  cf.  Notes  on  chap.  x.  8.  Ver.  27.  "  When  shall  it  once  heV — Lit.
After  how  long  yet/  A  conjectural  outlook  on  the  far  distant  purification  of  the  now  polluted
nation.

HOMILIES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  Off  AFTER  XIII.

Vers.    1-11.  An  acted  parable — the  spoiled  linen  girdle.
,,     12-17.  A  parable  in  speech — intoxicating  judgments.
,,     18-27.  An  iniquitous  nation  openly  degraded.

Vers.  1-11.  An  Acted  Pabable — the  Spoiled  Linen  Gibdls.

Symbolic  acts  sometimes  teach  more  impressively  than  eloquent  words.  A  clean
linen  girdle  purchased  and  worn,  but  never  washed  :  then  carried  away  to  the
Euphrates  and  buried  for  many  days  :  finally  disinterred,  found  to  be  marred,  and
pronounced  worthless.  Thus  facts  are  portrayed  to  Jeremiah's  observers :  Judali
girded  into  closest  connection  with  Jehovah,  yet  her  impurity  was  never  removed  :
in  consequence  she  was  to  be  carried  to  Babylon  and  lost  among  the  heathen  for  a
long  period :  ultimately,  when  brought  back,  she  is  found  "  profitable  for  nothing  :"
"  For  as  the  girdle  cleavetk  to  the  loins  of  a  man,  so  have  J  caused  to  cleave  unto  Me
the  whole  house  of  Israel  and  the  whole  house  of  Judahj  saith  the  Lobd  ;  that  they

261


CHIP.  Xin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAn,

might  he  unto  Me  for  a  people^  and  for  a  name,  and  for  a  praise^  and  for  a  glory;
hut  they  would  not  hear"

Note. — Greut  contention  among  commentators  whether  this  journey  to  Euph-
rates was  actual  or  merely  visionary.  It  is  objected  to  the  occurrence  being  literal,
that  the  Euphrates  was  nearly  250  miles  distant,  that  two  journeys  would  have
entailed  long  absence  of  the  prophet  from  the  scene  of  his  urgent  ministry.
Several  scholars,  to  avoid  this  supposed  difficulty,  incline  to  the  locality  being  not
Euphrates  but  Ephratha,  as  being  near  at  hand  (see  Lit.  Grit),  but  this  forfeits
the  whole  meaning  of  the  buried  girdle — God's  people  localised  and  lost  among
Babylonish  scenes.  Objections  to  its  being  merely  a  visionary  incident  are, — 1.
The  extreme  literalness  of  the  statement,  no  pretext  being  left  in  the  narrative  for
an  allegorical  interpretation  (see  ver.  5).  2.  The  lengthy  journey  was  a  small
matter  compared  with  the  vast  and  vivid  lessons  thereby  taught  to  Judah — that
she  would  be  carried  far  away  from  her  present  scenes  of  privilege,  and  be  lost  in
distant  exile.  3.  Also  Jeremiah's  visits  to  the  scene  of  his  nation's  approaching  cap-
tivity would  supply  him  with  valuable  information  ready  against  the  emergency,
and  prove  deeply  impressive  to  his  own  spirit,  and  helpful  to  his  ministry.  Here
consider,

I.  How  closely  Jehovah  binds  His  chosen  people  to  Himself.  ''As  the
girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  a  man  "  (ver.  11),  <fec.  Though  their  banishment  was
becoming  imperative,  yet  God  here  testifies  His  attachment  to  them,  and  declares
He  had,  without  any  reserve,  bound  them  intimately  and  lovingly  to  Himself:
they  were  "a  people  near  unto  Him"  (Psa.  cxlviii.  14).

n.  The  sacred  character  which  His  people  hear  in  His  esteem.  ''  Get  thee
a  linen  girdle  "  (ver.  1).  A  mistake  to  suppose  it  was  to  be  "  linen  "  because  it  was
to  be  worn  as  an  inner  garment  next  the  skin ;  though  that  might  be  impressive  of
the  close  union  of  His  people  with  the  Lord :  but  this  people — like  a  beautiful
girdle — was  to  be  "  for  a  name,  a  praise,  and  a  glory"  (ver.  11),  hence  worn  visibly
as  the  girdle  worn  by  the  wealthy  and  by  the  high  priest — a  thing  of  beauty.  But
its  being  **  linen  "  indicates  that  it  was  the  sacerdotal  girdle ;  for  God's  people  were
to  Him  '*  a  kingdom  of  priests,  a  holy  nation  "  (Exod.  xix.  6).  With  this  sacred
character  He  invested  them;  for  He  designed  they  should  be  a  pure,  priestly,  con-
secrated people.     Even  as  are  Christ*s  redeemed  ones  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).

ni.  A  holy  people  are  capable  of  proving  an  adornment  to  Jehovah.  "  That
they  might  be  unto  Me  for  a  people,  and  for  a  name,  and  a  praise,  and  a  glory  *'
(ver.  11);  even  as  the  beautifully-wrought  girdle,  embroidered  with  silk  and  gold,
and  decorated  with  gems,  was  to  the  wearer  (1  Sam.  xviii.  4 ;  Dan.  x.  5 ;  Rev.  i.
13,  XV.  6),  and  as  the  "curious  girdle  of  the  ephod"  (Exod.  xxviii.  8)  was  a  work
of  exquisite  grace.  Note  :  God's  people  are  a  choice  and  beautiful  work  (Eph.  ii.
10),  and  are  designed  to  adorn  and  glorify  Ilim.

IV.  Although  so  closely  identified  with  God,  impurity  was  contracted  by
His  people.  "Put  it  not  in  water"  (ver.  1).  Necessarily,  therefore,  the  girdle
became  soiled ;  and  from  its  defilement  it  was  not  cleansed.  How  truly  descrip-
tive of  Israel  and  Judah  !  The  longer  they  were  God's  people  the  less  pure  they
became.  Defilement  was  contracted,  and  their  state  became  increasingly  corrupt.
Pure  as  a  "linen  girdle"  when  first  bound  to  God,  they  grew  soiled,  stained,  filthy
with  wear.  Is  this  not  too  true  of  God's  people  still  1 — the  early  days  of  their
betrothment  were  their  best  and  holiest  days  {cf.  ii.  2,  3).

V.  Because  of  this  impurity  His  people  are  carried  away  from  holy  scenes
into  exile.  "Arise,  go  to  Euphrates,  and  hide  it  there  in  a  hole  of  the  rock"
(ver.  4).  Canaan  was  chosen  for  the  residence  of  a  godly  nation ;  Jerusalem  was
the  place  of  God's  glory — "  Holiness  becometh  Thine  house,  0  God,  for  ever."  1.
Defilement  disqualifies  us  for  sacred  privileges.  2.  Impurity  separates  God^s  people
from  Him :  the  girdle  was  unclasped  from  the  prophet's  loins,  and  laid  aside  in  the
land  of   the  heathen ;   for  "  your  iniquities  have  separated,"  <fec.   (Isa.  iix.   2).

262


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JEREM I  AH.  chap.  xin.


Defiled  souls  are,  in  God's  regard,  placed  among  the  heathen.  All  pride  and  self-
glorying  are  thereby  put  to  shame  (vers.  9,  10).  The  unclean  shall  not  stand
before  Him.

VI.  Banishment  from  God  is  a  pitiable  experience  for  His  people.  "  Behold
the  girdle  was  marred,  it  was  profitable  for  nothing."  Afflictions  sometimes  hal-
low the  spirit;  but  estrangement  from  God  never  brings  good  results.  Iniquity  in
**  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord "  degrades  piety  altogether  and  dishonours  Jehovah,
A  fallen  Christian  can  never  be  any  honour  to  his  Master ;  he  may  be  recalled — as
these  banished  ones  were — but  he  is  "marred,  profitable  for  nothing."  He  may
illustrate  God's  fathomless  grace  in  showing  how  poor  and  profitless  a  soul  may  be,
and  yet  be  saved ;  but  he  is  of  no  use  for  the  high  purpose  God  had  in  redeeming
him,  that  he  should  be  to  Him  for  a  nam^,  and  a  praise,  and  a  glory  I

The  Mystery  op  Election.

Naegelshach,  on  this  section,  remarks :  "  The  Lord  has  put  on  Israel  as  a  girdle
for  His  own  adornment  and  for  Israel's  highest  glory.  This  figure  is  unquestion-
ably one  of  the  most  precious  which  the  Scripture  employs  to  represent  the  mystery
of  electimi.  Elsewhere  Israel  is  called  Jehovah's  inheritance  (Dent.  iv.  20,  vii.  6),
His  wife  and  His  beloved  bride  (Hos.  ii.  16,  sqq. ;  Jer.  ii.  2),  His  first-born  son
(Exod.  iv.  22),  His  servant  (Isa.  xli.  8),  His  flock  (Jer.  xiii.  17),  His  vineyard
(Isa.  V.  7),  His  signet  ring  (Hag.  ii.  23).  Like  the  last  emblem,  the  girdle  also
denotes —

i.  The  closest  intimacy.     iL  Indispensable  service,     iii.  A  valuable  ornament.

But  great  as  is  the  love  which  the  Lord  thus  shows  to  Israel  in  calling  them  His
girdle,  as  great  is  the  severity  with  which  He  declares  that  the  honour  thus  received
will  not  save  them  from  destruction.

Let  every  particular  Christian  Church  mark  this  I  However  closely  it  may  be
attached  to  the  Lord,  this  saves  it  neither  from,  (1)  Internal  corruption,  nor  from
(2)  External  judgment  (comp.  Luke  iii.  8,  9)."

Vers.  12-17.  A  Pabable  in  Speech — Intoxicating  Judgments.

"  Every  bottle  shall  be  filled  with  wine.  ...  I  will  fill  all  the  inhabitants  of  this
land  . .  ,  with  drunkenness."  The  figure  is  not  understood  by  the  people,  they  see
not  its  deeper  significance  (ver.  12)  ;  so  it  is  explained  by  Jehovah,  and  then
appears  terrible  in  import  (vers.  13,  14).

I.  The  Divine  parable  ominous  of  misery  and  ruin.  The  nation,  every  man,
should  be  filled  with  the  wine  of  God's  wrath,  and  in  a  drunken  frenzy  should
destroy  one  another.  The  highest  in  the  realm — **  kings ; "  the  holiest  in  the
nation — "  priests  and  prophets  ; "  all  classes  of  society — "  inhabitants  ; "  shall  be-
come mutually  destructive  of  the  state  and  nation  :  the  nation  would  become
faxAious  and  fanatical,  and  hurry  on  its  own  ruin.

1.  A  delirious  nation  :  "  filled  with  drunkenness,"  folly,  and  frenzy,  like  an  in-
toxicated man,  giddy,  blustering,  boastful,  and  violent.

2.  A  destructible  nation :  "  every  bottle ; "  brittle  vessels  :  with  all  their  arrog-
ance.    Easily  destroyed  ;  **  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction."

3.  A  demented  nation:  "proud"  (ver.  15),  "my  soul  shall  weep  for  your
pride"  (ver.  17);  inflated  with  a  voluble  conceit,  arrogant,  even  in  their  degrada-
tion and  peril :  incapable  as  a  drunken  man  of  defending  himself,  yet  noisily  boast-
ful and  vain.     *'  Whom  God  will  destroy — He  infatuates."

4.  A  desolated  nation:  "dash  them  one  against  another:"  the  wild  fury  of
drunken  frenzy  would  drive  the  nation  into  hostile  factions  and  ruinous  agitations ;
civil  contentions,  mutually  destructive,  *'  dashing  one  against  another."

n.  The  prophet's  expostulation  admonitory  and  pathetic.  "  Hear  ye,  and
give  ear,"  <kc.  (vers.  16-17)  :  they  were  heedless  and  reckless.

263


CHAP.  xra.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


1.  He  appeals  to  the  high  authority  of  his  message  :  "the  Lord  hath  spoken."
They  had  repudiated  Jeremiah  :  now  they  had  to  do  with  Jehovah.

2.  He  exposes  the  secret  of  their  hardened  indifference:  "be  not  proud."  The
cause  of  their  contumacy  was  pride  :  just  as  humility  is  the  spring  of  obedience,
pride  is  the  motive  to  refractoriness,  rebellion,  and  obstinate  impiety.

3.  He  announces  the  remedy  for  their  evil  state :  "give  glory  to  the  Lord  your
God."  Their  apostacy  and  impenitence  must  be  abandoned ;  for  by  ceasing  from  the
iniquity  that  displeases  and  dishonours  God  (Josh.  xvii.  19),  they  could  "  give  Hitn
glory."  Sin  is  an  assault  upon  Jehovah's  glory;  repentance  and  reconciliation
yield  Him  glory.

4.  An  alternative  is  presented  of  plaintive  misery :  *' before  He  cause  darkness,"
&c. — all  their  joys  and  comforts  covered  with  gloom  :  "  and  your  feet  stumble  upon
the  dark  mountains  " — wandering  bewildered  amid  terrors  and  perils :  "  while  ye
look  for  light,  He  turn  it  into  the  shadow  of  death  " — all  hope  he  extinguished  in
the  dense  death-shade  of  despair  :  "  and  make  it  grow  darkness  " — total  spiritual
nightj  in  which  God  and  knowledge  of  Him  are  wholly  lost ;  "  darkness  covers
the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people  "  (Isa.  Ix.  2).

5.  A  piteous  bewailing  over  his  wretched  nation  (ver.  17).  (a.)  For  their  self-
ruinous  "  pride,"  he  would  weep  "  in  secret,"  for  very  shame  at  their  obdurate  sin.
(6.)  For  their  lamentable  desolation  his  eyes  would  "  weep  sore  "  in  open  grief,  be-
cause of  the  woe  of  their  captivity.  He  commiserated  their  misery,  and  felt
anguish  for  their  ruin.  Amid  it  all  note — 1.  He  still  speaks  to  Judah  of  Jehovah
as  *^  your  God"  (ver.  16);  the  Almighty  Friend  still  availed  them  if  they  would
heed  His  word.  2.  He  still  speaks  of  Judah  as  ^^the  Lord^s  flock"  (ver.  17),
claimed  by  Him,  and  cherished  even  though  they  were  wilful  and  perverse.  What
exhaustless  pitifulness  is  there  in  Jehovah !  "  slow  to  anger  and  plenteous  in
mercy,"

The  Earthen  PiTCHBRa

Naegelshach  suggests  the  following  points  : —

i.   What  they  signify :  proud,  yet  perishable  things ;  the  world.

ii.  What  will  be  their  fate:  "dash  them,"  &c.  (ver.  14);  "carried  away
captives  "  (ver.  17).

iii.  What  is  the  means  of  escaping  this  fate:  a  humble  attention  to  the  Lord
(ver.  15) ;  glorifying  God  by  their  repentance  and  return  to  Him  (ver.  16).

Vers.  18-27.  An  Iniquitous  Nation  Openly  Degraded.

To  put  his  nation  to  the  deepest  blush  for  their  sin,  Jeremiah  again  compares
their  conduct  with  Jehovah  to  the  vile  and  graceless  behaviour  of  an  adulteress  ;  and
likens  the  shame,  which  would  cover  his  people  in  consequence,  to  the  open  dis-
grace with  which  a  prostitute  was  sometimes  treated  (see  Manners  and  Customs^
supra).

I.  Royalty  addressed  in  bold  reproof  and  warning  (vers.  18,  19).  See  Ad-
denda on  ver.  18,  the  queen,  and  rebiihing  royalty).  Upon  them  is  threatened — i
The  loss  of  their  dignity  and  crown,  ii.  The  capture  of  their  cities  and  captivity  of
their  people.     Observe  :

1.  Gois  judgments  do  not  spare  those  in  highest  station.  Jechoniah  had  sinned,
and  by  his  royal  example  encouraged  the  licentiousness  and  ungodliness  of  the
nation.  Therefore  he  and  his  queen-mother  should  be  "  humbled  ,*"  and  are  called
to  "  sit  down,"  as  slaves  on  the  ground  (Isa.  xlvii.  1).  It  is  high  treason  against
the  King  of  kings  for  royal  personages  to  rebel  against  His  rule  and  laws  ;  theirs
shall  be  the  greater  condemnation  ;  their  station  degraded,  their  crown  forfeited.
"  Fallen  is  your  crown."  A  faithful  witness  for  God  may  have  to  reprove  kings
in  His  name.
364


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  ohap.  xni.


2.  The  conquest  of  their  cities  is  threatened  as  a  retribution :  "  The  crown  falls
when  the  king  loses  country  and  kingship  "  (Keil).  "  The  cities  of  the  south  "  are
specified,  not  because  the  enemy  had  first  possessed  himself  of  the  southern
extremity  of  the  land  (as  Sennacherib  did,  advancing  on  the  capital  from  the  south,
2  Kings  xviii.  13 ;  xix,  8),  but  because  they  were  the  cities  most  distant  from  the
north  coming  foe  ;  hence,  when  they  were  in  his  power,  it  implied  the  whole  land
was  conquered.  Thus  the  prophet  threatens  against  godless  royalty,  the  degrada-
tion of  their  station,  the  forfeiture  of  their  crown,  the  conquest  of  their  country,
the  captivity  of  their  people.

n.  Jerusalem  summoned  to  witness  the  woes  of  capture.  "  Lift  up  your  eyes,
and  behold/'  <fec.  (ver.  20).  The  verb.  Lift  up,  is  fern.,  and  refers  to  Lion  under-
stood.    Upon  Jerusalem  is  here  threatened —

1.  Depopulation.  "  Where  is  the  flock  ?  *'  Her  streets  are  to  be  deserted,  her
inhabitants  carried  afar.  Or  "  she  is  asked  where  the  cities,  which  once  lay
grouped  around  her,  like  a  goodly  flock  of  sheep,  are  gone  1  The  question  im-
plies blame.  It  was  the  example  of  Jerusalem  which  had  led  the  cities  of  Judah
into  sin  (Micah  i.  5),  and  brought  upon  them  an  invading  army  "  (Speaker's  Com.)

2.  Foreign  domination.  (See  Lit.  Grit,  on  ver.  21.)  What  could  Jerusalem  say
when  they,  whom  she  had  courted  into  power  as  allies,  should  assert  their  power  as
conquerors  1  We  call  in  ungodly  resources  of  help  when  our  sin  forfeits  God*s
protection  ;  these,  our  allies,  will  become  our  tyrants,  ruling  us  with  a  sore  and
unchallengeable  despotism.

m.  Debasement  of  licentious  Judah  vividly  portrayed.

1.  Affected  innocence  silenced  hy  a  condemning  charge  (ver.  22,  see  Crit.  Notes
on  verse).

2.  Her  doom  justified  in  that  her  iniquity  transcended  remedy  (ver.  23).  Nothing
can  alter  and  improve  her  state.  Her  habitual  spiritual  licentiousness  had  become
inveterate  and  incurable :  expatriation  therefore  must  ensue  (ver.  24).

3.  God  associates  Himself  with  her  degradation  and  doom.  She  had  despised
His  grace;  repudiated  His  calls;  ignored  Him  for  idols — ^^ falsehood ;^  but  she
should  recognise  Him  in  the  judgments  He  had  measured  to  her  (ver.  26).

4.  Disloyalty  to  her  Lord  punished  with  appropriate  degradation  (ver.  27;  see
Grit.  Notes).  Openly  put  to  shame.  Her  sin  had  been  open  :  God  would  expose
her  to  open  contempt  (Lam.  i.  8).     Politically  degraded.

5.  Vileness  depicted^  cleansing  despaired  of  (ver.  27  ;  see  Lit,  Grit.).  Jeremiah
counts  it  impossible  that  she  will  soon  be  cleansed  ;  her  case  seems  hopeless.  The
present  generation  cleaves  immovable  to  wickedness.  Yet,  in  the  far  future,  after
sore  judgments,  there  may  be  reform !  On  the  prophet's  despair  there  falls  one
faint  gleam  of  hope,

HOMILETIO  OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XIII.

Ver.  1-11.    Theme:   Buried  gifts.  V.  In  this  men  often  fail.    The  his-

I.  God  confers  upon  man  innumer-  tory  of  the  Jew  an  illustration.  Men
able  gifts  of  talent,  privilege,  oppor-  fail  through  ignorance,  sloth,  negligence,
tunity,  blessing.  In  the  case  of  the  Jew  lust  and  impulsiveness,  unfaithfulness,
especially  great.  pride,  selfishness.     Men  bury  their  gifts

II.  These  gifts  are  suited  to  our  cir-     in  these  things.

cumstances  and  requirements  (Matt.  VL  Buried  they  are  lost.      1.  God

XXV.  15).  withdraws  them  (ver.  9  ;  Matt.  xxv.  29).

III.  These  gifts  are  intended  for  our  2.  The  power  to  use  them  departs
good  and  God's  glory  (ver.   11).  (2  Cor.  ix.  6).     3.  They  rot  and  decay.

IV.  The   use   to    which   we    apply  The  grave  is  the  house  of  decay  (ver.


them  depends  upon  man's  wisdom  and     8 ;  Eccles.  ix.  10),
will  (vers,  10,  11  j  Matt.  xxv.  H,  26).


265


«HAF.  XIU.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Learn —

1.  That  man  is  blessed  with  treasure
gifts  capable  of  unlimited  development.

2.  That,  by  neglecting  these,  instead  of
rising  to  be  an  angel,  he  sinks  to  be  a  fiend.

3.  That  we  should  guard  them  jea-
lously and  cultivate  them  diligently.

— E.  Jerman.
Ver.  2.    Theme:   Suggestions  con-
cerning THE  GIRDLE  OP  TRUTH.

I.  We  are  responsible  for  the  effort
to  obtain  the  girdle  of  truth.  ^'  I  got
the  girdle.*'

II.  We  can  get  the  girdle  of  truth
only  by  knowing  the  Word  of  the  Lord.
"According  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."

III.  We  must  make  appropriate  use
of  the  girdle  when  it  has  been  obtained.
"  Put  it  upon  my  loins."

IV.  We  can  expect  further  know-
ledge of  God*s  Word  only  by  the  use
ofwhatwealready  know  (ver.  3).  "The
word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me  the
second  time." — W.    Whale.

Ver.  3.   Theme :  God's  Woed  to  men.
"  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto
me  the  second  time,  saying."

I.  Jehovah  is  always  speaking  to
man  by  one  method  or  another.  Crea-
tion, providence,  revelation.

II.  Some  persons  in  all  ages  and
climes  have  heard  His  Word.  In  mys-
tery, in  power,  in  mercy.  Some  have
heard  it  many  times.

III.  It  is  a  moment  of  supreme  im-
portance when  any  one  soul  becomes
conscious  of  hearing  the  voice  of  God.
Adam,  Cain,  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  <fec.,  <kc.

IV.  The  way  in  which  a  man  treats
the  Word  of  God  will  show—

1.  His  present  spiritual  condition.

2.  His  general  course  of  conduct.

3.  His  probable  future  destiny.

—  W.  Whale.

Ver.  2-6.  Theme:  The  standard
OF  GODLY  CONDUCT.  "  So  I  got  a  girdle
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  So
I  went  and  hid  it  <w  the  Lord  commanded
me."  Letting  God's  word  rule  and
regulate  our  life  absolutely.

I.  The  surrenders  it  involves.  It
gives  up  the  life  into  God's  hands,  every
faculty  and  purpose  submitted  to  Him,
266


yielded  gladly  to  the  requirements  and
captivity  of  Christ.

1.  The  surrender  of  the  loiU:  letting
God  rule ;  doing  what  He  bids,  bowing
personal  desires  and  plans  to  His  pur-
poses. "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine,  be
done."     Unselfish  obedience.

2.  Surrender  of  the  judgment :  per-
plexing to  Jeremiah  to  see  why  he  must
wear  this  girdle,  why  go  to  Euphrates,
why  hide  the  girdle  there,  &c.  God's
*'  ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  His
thoughts,"  &c.    Unquestioning  obedience.

3.  Surrender  of  ^ase  .*  a  toilsome  jour-
ney of  nearly  250  miles,  twice  taken.
Uncomplaining  obedience.

4.  Surrender  of  time :  occupy  weeks
in  obeying  these  demands  of  God.  Con-
science must  stand  aside.  Ungrudging
obedience.

5.  Surrender  of  selfy  of  the  life,  of  all:
*'  Keep  back  no  part  of  the  price."
"  Speak,  Lord,  Thy  servant  hearetb."
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  1 "
Unreserved  obedience.  (See  Addenda,
"  Perfect  obedience.")

II.  The  satisfaction  it  inspires.  The
yielding  of  self  to  God  brings  choice
and  compensatory  advantages.

1.  It  gives  simpliciti/ to  OUT  life.  "The
eye  is  single."  No  other  lord  rules.
God  is  everything  to  us.  "  One  is  our
Master,  even  Christ " — not  self,  not  cus-
tom, not  the  world,  <fcc.

2.  It  gives  decision  to  our  life.  Saves
us  from  "halting  between  two  opinions  :*'
for  the  Lord  is  God  and  we  follow  Him.
Saves  us  from  uncertainty  :  His  word  is
law.  From  delay  :  To  hear  Him  is  to
respond.  From  conflict  of  conviction  :
we  only  ne«d  a  call  from  Him :  have
not  to  select  or  choose  our  way.  Any-
where, if  only  He  commands.

3.  It  gives  repose  to  our  life.  We
are  not  burdened  with  the  responsibility
of  life  :  we  '*  are  the  Lord's,"  He  guides
and  plans  and  arranges  for  us.  We
"  live  exempt  from  care."    Our  motto  is,

**  Lead  Thou  me  on  1  One  atep's  enough  for
me!"

4.  It  gives  nobleness  to  our  life.
What  a  grovelling  career  they  live  who
obey  themselves — fitful,  earthly,  restless.
Or  the  customs  of  society — slaves  to  the


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


CEAT.  znL


caprice  of  fashion.  Or  the  ^'  god  of  this
world" — "led  captive  by  him."  But
Christ  calls  into  a  high  and  holy  career :
godly  and  Godward.  They  who  live
only  to  obey  Him,  unreservedly  obe-
dient, He  leads  by  still  waters,  into
pleasant  heritages  of  rest,  assurance,  and
joy  divine.

5.  It  gives  sanctity  to  our  life.  He
who  lives  for  God  becomes  more  godly
and  God-like.  Wise  in  His  wisdom,
strong  in  His  strength,  sufficient  in  His
sufficiency,  true  in  His  Tightness,  holy
in  His  holiness.  He  will  guide  by  His
counsels,  lead  in  the  '*  good  and  right
way,"  until  the  life  rises  to  His  blest
abode.  *'  Follow  me  ! "  is  the  Saviour's
call  :  and  the  issue  is,  "  These  are  they
which  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever
He  goeth."

Ver.  5.  Theme:  Aspects  of  pastoral
SEKVICE.  Jeremiah  was  to  go  to  Eu-
phrates ;  perhaps  not  solely  to  hide  this
girdle :  exiles  were  there,  to  whom  he
might  carry  messages  and  comfort  from
Jehovah ;  Ezekiel  and  Daniel  were  there,
and  with  them  he  might  hold  helpful
converse.

i.  His  own  toilsome  obedience  would
be  a  lesson  to  his  disobedient  nation,
inciting  them  to  take  pains  even  in  order
to  fulfil  God's  commands.

ii.  His  resolute  performance  of  this
mission  would  awaken  in  his  people
attention  to  the  significance  of  his  con-
duct, and  impress  them  with  the  lessons
designed.

I.  Self-sacrificing  obedience  to  God
enforces  its  lessons  on  others.  Our
people  will  heed  our  consecrated  lives,
though  they  may  ignore  our  eloquent
words.     A  living  sermon  has  vast  power.

II.  God's  chosen  servants  must  yield
Him  absolute  subjection.  What  God
bids,  they  must  do ;  where  He  sends,
they  must  go.  Ministers  of  Christ  must
be  willing  to  accept  His  demands  un-
questioningly  and  entirely  ;  to  lay  them-
selves out  for  any  service  which  may  be
for  the  good  of  their  people  ;  to  spend
and  be  spent  in  the  Master's  service  and
their  nation's  weal.

Ver.  6,  6.  Theme  :  God's  command-
ments.

i.   Always  wise  and  authoritative.


ii.  Often  mysterious,  and,  to  human
reason^  apparentfy  absurd.

iii.  Can  be  heartily  carried  out  only
by  a  true  believer  in  the  divine  wisdom,
power,  and  love.

iv.  May  involve  much  effort,  incon-
venience, and  suffering.  Journey  from
Jerusalem  to  Euphrates  must  have  been
very  trying.

V.  Will  effectually  test  the  condition
of  the  soul,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My
commandments."  '*  To  obey  is  better
than  sacrifice."  "I  do  alway  those
things  which  please  the  Father."  "Leav-
ing us  an  example,"  &c.,  &c.  "  Our
sufficiency  is  of  God."

Application  :  "  This  is  His  command-
ment, that  ye  believe  on  His  Son  whom
He  hath  sent."  "  His  commandments
are  not  grievous." — W.  Whale.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  The  injuriousness
OF  estrangement  from  God.  *'  The
girdle  was  marred."

I.  The  original  sacredness  and
beauty  of  the  godly  soul.

1.  "  ZiwcTi "  indicates  the  sacerdotal
girdle  :  the  soul  was  sacred  in  God's
esteem.

2.  "  Linen "  suggests  the  purity  of
the  soul  in  its  first  love.

3.  The  "  line7i  girdle  "  was  curiously
and  exquisitely  wrought  in  choice  colours
and  precious  gems ;  betokening  the  beauty
and  spiritual  grace  of  the  soul  when  first
allied  to  God.

4.  The  girdle  clasped  upon  the  pro-
phet denotes  the  close  mutual  attach-
ment between  the  soul  and  God  in  the
hour  of  first  love ;  and  also  the  resolute
design  of  God  to  keep  that  soul  bound
— ''  clasped  " — to  Himself.

n.  The  defiled  soul  separated  from
the  Lord.  It  necessarily  became  soiled
by  being  worn,  yet  linen  will  wash,  and
it  could,  therefore,  be  cleansed.

1.  y/ie  cleansing  process  was  neglected.
"Put  it  not  in  water"  (ver.  1).  This
represents  the  criminality  of  Judah.
There  was  '*  water,"  easily  found,  ready
to  hand :  so  is  there  Divine  cleansing ;
"  A  Fountain  open  for  sin  and  unclean-
ness  : "  but  the  defiled  life  is  "  not  put
in  water."

2.  A  tainted  thing  must  be  removed
from    God.      Nothing   impure   will  the

267


OHAF.  zm.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


Holy  One  of  Israel  retain.  "  He  can-
not look  upon  iniquity."  Certainly  He
will  not  wear  as  an  ornament  a  thing
defiled.  So  the  tainted  girdle  was  car-
ried away  :  "  Take  the  girdle,  and  arise,
go  to  Euphrates"  (ver.  4).

3.  A  faithless  soul  is  banished.  Afar
from  holy  scenes,  buried  in  a  holCf  as
unfit  for  any  to  see  :  for  nothing  is  more
loathsome  to  God's  sight  and  man's  than
a  spiritual  apostate,  a  renegade  Chris-
tian. It  is  put  at  a  far  distance  from
God's  presence,  buried  from  sight,  lost
as  an  outcast  thing,  hidden  among  hea-
thenish scenes,  as  if  belonging  more  to
them  than  to  God.

III.  The  damaging  effects  of  sepa-
ration from  God.  "  After  many  days  "
(ver.  6).  The  girdle  was  sought  and
brought  back.

1.  God  does  not  forget  and  forsake
even  the  estranged  soul.  "  Yet  doth  He
devise  means  whereby  His  banished  be
not  expelled  from  Him"  (2 Sam.  xiv.  14).

2.  The  recovered  soul  is  found  griev-
ously damaged  by  his  banishment.  "  The
girdle  was  marred;'^  the  ship  had
sprung  a  leak  hopelessly ;  the  rift  was
in  the  lute  silencing  the  harmony ;  the
rot  was  at  the  heart.  Never  again  would
the  old  joy  in  God,  the  old  love  and
zeal,  return.  A  faithless  soul  loses  what
never  again  can  be  recovered.  Child-
hood never  conies  back  again  !

3.  From  a  reclaimed  soul  no  profit
can  accrue  to  God.  Saved,  indeed,  but
no  power  left  for  service.  A  rescued
life,  but  impotent  to  recall  others,  or
commend  the  gospel.  A  disabled  and
dispirited  army  the  captain  refuses  to  use
again  on  the  field.  The  coward  spirit
is  never  more  trusted.  God  cannot
wear  as  a  "  praise"  (ver.  11)  the  girdle
which  has  lost  its  beauty.  Only  the
faithful  and  the  pure  can  glorify  Him.
'*  Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that
no  man  take  thy  crown."  "  No  man
having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and
looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of
God."  ''  Profitable  for  nothing."  "Salt
is  good ;  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  its
savour,  it  is  good  for  nothing,  but  to  be
cast  out  and  trodden  under  foot  of  men  "
(Matt.  V.  13).

Ver.  7.  Comments :  "  The  girdle  was
268


ROTTED."  "  This  showed  that  the  Jews
should  in  that  country  lie  rotting,  as  it
were,  in  baseness,  and  servility,  and
in  together  many  years ;  so  that  God
might  justly  have  left  them  there  still
in  misery,  as  a  man  leaves  his  rotten
girdle  to  become  dung." — Trapp.

"  Many  days."  The  length  of  time
was  required  to  afford  time  for  the  gir-
dle to  become  spoiled  and  unfit  for  use.
To  that  condition  the  Jews  had  been  re-
duced by  the  corrupting  idolatries  of  the
heathen.  They  had  disqualified  them-
selves for  acting  as  witnesses  for  Jehovah;
as  the  only  true  God,  and,  like  a  cast-
away girdle,  they  were  to  be  humbled
and  rejected." — Henderson.

*'  By  the  *  many  days '  are  signified
the  seventy  years'  captivity." — Speaker^s
Com,

Ver.  9.  Theme:  God's  spoliation
OP  PRESUMPTUOUS  PRIDE.  There  may
be  a  reverent  pride^  based  on  gratitude
and  joyous  appreciation  of  God's  dis-
tinguishing mercies.  There  may  also
be  an  arrogant  pride — **  Stand  off,  I
am  holier  than  thou ! "  Equally  pos-
sible is  a  self-reliant  pride — sufficient
of  ourselves  :  "  Who  is  the  Lord  that
I  should  obey  Him  ]  "  Likewise,  the
pride  of  carnal  assurance:  fortified  in
self-esteem,  satisfaction  with  one's
own  goodness  and  merits.  But  this
"  Grreat  pride  of  Jerusalem "  was  a
vaunting,  boastful,  arrogant  pride ;  a
glorying  in  spiritual  possessions  and
privileges,  which  they  were  nevertheless
abusing  —  the  pride  of  presumption  :
and  '*the  presumptuous  soul  do  I  hate."

I.  Spiritual  presumption  can  only
assert  itself  where  true  piety  has
declined.  Piety  is  lowly.  Loss  of
solemn  reverence  makes  room  for  arro-
gance. Then  the  soul  presumes,  vaunts
itself,  makes  even  religion  an  occasion
for  self-glorying.  God's  grace  becomes
the  pedestal  for  self-exaltation.

II.  Spiritual  presumption  is  pecu-
liarly offensive  to  a  God  who  loves
truth.  Pride  is  a  mocking  pretence.
Of  what  have  the  best  of  men  to  be
proud  %  '*  What  have  we  that  we  have
not  received?"  This  pride  assumes  and
arrogates  to  ourselves  the  credit  of  what
God  has  given.     His  is  the  glory,  not


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XIII.


ours.     This  wrongs  Him,  and  boasts  in
a  lie.

III.  Spiritual  presumption  leads  to
the  most  heinous  abuse  of  sacred  privi-
leges. Holy  trusts  should  make  those
who  possess  them  holier,  ergo^  hum-
bler, more  grateful,  and  more  devoted.
But  pride  reverses  all  this :  the  soul
dwarfs  amidst  surrounding  magnificence ;
becomes  degraded  by  the  abuse  of  exalt-
ing privileges.  This  perverts  and  out-
rages the  Divine  endowments  and
blessings.

IV.  Spiritual  presumption  will  as-
suredly court  Jehovah's  withering
contempt.  Dig  a  hole  and  bury  it !  as
a  rotten,  loathsome  thing.  "  Thus  will
I  mar  the  pride."  He  poureth  contempt
upon  princes  I  God  has  resources,  ap-
palling in  their  efficacy,  for  humbling
the  arrogant  and  withering  the  proud.
Think  what  he  did  to  these  Jews  !  Cast
them  as  a  filthy  girdle  into  a  "  hole."
We  may  well  fear  to  court  His  contempt.
See  what  befel  the  proud  Nebuchad-
nezzar— sank  into  a  mere  beast.  Oh
how,  in  life's  end,  will  all  our  vanity
mock  us,  and  our  presumption  turn
upon  us  with  tortures  I  (See  Addenda,
'' Pride  Abased.")

Ver.  10.  Herein  is  shown  to  what
their  *^ pride"  led  them —

i.  Disregard  of  Divine  messages.

ii.  Indulgence  of  their  own  wilful
inclinations.

iii.  Enthronement  of  debasing  idola-
tries :  ergo,  the  dethronization  of  Jeho-
vah in  their  hearts  and  their  worship.

Yer.  10.  Theme:  "Good  for  no-
thing."

The  most  dutiful  are  unprofitable
servants,  doing  no  more  than  their  duty.
But  how  few  could  honestly  declare  of
themselves,  **  I  have  done  all  I  could."
If  the  best  are  imperfect,  what  can  be
said  of  the  cold-hearted  and  indolent  1
Still  worse,  far  worse,  is  the  case  of
those  who  are  gone  out  of  the  way
(Rom.  iii.  12).  This  verse  symbolizes
God's  people  in  their  idolatry  and  con-
sequent captivity.     We  proceed  to —

I.  Dwell  upon  a  painful  fact.
"They  were  His  own,  a  peculiar  people
to  Him,  a  kingdom  of  priests  who  had
access  to  Him  above  all  other  nations,"


To  them  were  sent  lawgivers,  priests,
psalmists,  and  prophets.  To  them  were
committed  the  oracles  of  God.  To
them  were  given  a  Divine  directory  and
method  of  worship.  Yet  were  they
"  good  for  nothing."  All  was  done  for
the  vineyard  which  could  be  done,  yet
it  brought  forth  wild  grapes.

II.  Point  out  the  cause  of  their
sad  condition.  They  became  an  evil
people,  as  is  shown  in  this  verse.  Dis-
obedient and  hardhearted.

1.  The^  refused  to  hear  the  word  of
the  Lord.     (See  notes  on  ver.  3.)

2.  They  followed  the  imagination  of
their  hearts.  When  a  man  will  not  hear
God,  he  has  generally  resolved  to  have
his  own  way.  He  puts  fancy  for  faith,
and  self  for  God.

3.  They  became  idolaters.  Forsaking
the  true  they  follow  the  false.  Man
must  worship,  even  it  be  but  the  fancy
of  his  own  brain,  or  work  of  his  own
hand.  Man  must  serve,  but  often
chooses  the  wrong  master.  The  value
of  a  man  or  a  nation  is  in  proportion  to
the  truth  possessed,  and  the  degree  of
obedience  rendered  to  it.  The  unfaith-
ful are  good  for  nothing.

III.  Show  what  they  might  have
been  as  a  people.

1.  They  might  have  been  separated
from  the  nations  as  being  peculiarly  the
people  of  God.

2.  They  might  have  been  before  the
nations  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  as
opposed  to  idols.  "For  a  name,  and
for  a  praise,"  &c.

3.  They  might  have  been  among  the
nations  as  examples  and  witnesses,
setting  forth  the  beneficial  influences
of  true  religion.

IV.  Proclaim  some  universal  truths.

1.  Refusing  to  hear  God's  word  is
proof  that  the  people  are  an  evil  people.

2.  An  evil  people  will  substittite  a
false  worship  for  that  which  is  true.

3.  A  false  worship  will  produce  and
foster  an  erroneous  religious  life.

4.  A  people  walking  according  to  the
imagination  of  their  own  hearts  must  be
useless  to  themselves,  to  the  world,  to
the  Church,  or  to  God. —  W.  Whale.

Yer.  10,  11.  Theme:  God's  girdle.
From  ver.  11  we  conclude  that  Israel

269


CHAP.  xm.


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


and  Judah  were  God's  girdle.  They
formerly  clave  unto  Him,  but,  at  the
time  referred  to  by  the  prophet,  had
gone  away  to  idols.  Because  of  their
sin  God  sent  them  into  captivity  until
they  were  reduced  to  extreme  weakness.
Observe —

I.  That  Israel  and  Judah  clave
unto  Jehovah  as  a  girdle  to  the  loins
of  a  man  (ver.  11).  Unto  His  person
for  favour.  Unto  His  word  for  direc-
tion and  teaching.  Unto  His  promise
for  encouragement.  Unto  His  worship
for  devotion.

II.  That  Israel  and  Judah  were
then  a  praise  and  glory  to  Jehovah
(ver.  11).  A  girdle  of  strength  and
honour  before  the  nations.

1.  As  opposed  to  the  idolatries  of
the  world.

2.  As  expressing  obedience  to  Divine
law.

3.  As  exhibiting  the  beneficial  effects
of  true  religion.

III.  That  Israel  and  Judah  became
faithless  and  disobedient  (ver.  10).

1.  An  evil  people,  refusing  to  hear
the  Word.

2.  A  stubborn  people,  going  their
own  way.

3.  A  deluded  people,  in  vain  ima-
ginations.

4.  An  idolatrous  people,  like  the
nations  less  favoured,  going  after  other
gods  to  serve  and  worship  them.

IV.  That  Israel  and  Judah  becom-
ing faithless,  became  also  weak  and
worthless.  Went  from  prominence  to
obscurity.  Went  from  freedom  to  cap-
tivity. Went,  in  general,  from  privilege
to  punishment. —  W.  Whale.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  God's  glorious
PURPOSE  FOR  His  people.

Keeping  still  to  the  allegory  of  "  the
girdle,"  there  seems  here  a  reference  to
the  holy  girdle  of  Aaron  (Exod.  xxviii.
8),  which,  together  with  his  sacred  gar-
ments, should  be  "for  a  glory  and  a
beauty"  (ver.  2).

I.  How  determinedly  Jehovah  makes
them  His  own.  The  form  of  sentence
is  intensitive  :  "I  have  caused  to  cleave
unto  Me,"  <fec.

1 .  By  the  mighty  working  of  His  grace
Qod  united  them  to  Himself.  It  was
270


His  act,  not  theirs,  "  I  caused ;  **  a  <fo-
ter mined  act,  "  caused : "  a  constraining
act,  '*  caused  to  cleave.^*  (Comp.  Eph.
i.  19.)

3.  Into  living  connection  with  His  own
Person  He  bound  them.  Fastened  them
on,  as  a  girdle,  to  Himself.  Not  merely
drew  them  to  believe  in,  or  serve  Him  ;
but  to  a  personal  union.  He  was
ItraeVs  God.

n.  What  exalted  aims  He  cherishes
on  their  behalf.  He  designs  for  them
that  they  be  established  and  known  as
His—

1.  In  covenant  relationship:  "for  a
peopled  Israel,  His  peculiar  treasure.
"  What  are  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His
inheritance  in  the  saints"  (Eph.  i.  18).

2.  As  a  witness  of  Him  to  the  world  :
" for  a  name"  He  desired  to  be  known
among  the  nations  by  the  name,  "  The
God  of  Israel"  (1  Chron.  xvii.  24).  He
purposed  to  win  renown  among  the
peoples  by  His  dealings  with  Israel  and
Judah.

3.  To  rejoice  in  His  goodness  :  "  for  a
praise."  They  were  to  be  glad  in  the
Lord,  a  joyous  people,  praising  Him
for  signal  blessings,  a  psalm  sounding
through  the  world,  commending  Him
to  others  by  their  joyous  piety.

4.  Contributing  to  His  honour  :  "  for
a  glory."  An  ornament,  a  decoration,
— as  was  the  beautiful  girdle,  studded
with  gems,  to  the  wearer.  (Comp.
Ezek.  xvi.  14.)

Alas !  a  disobedient  heart,  *'  they
would  not  hear,"  changed  and  desolated
all !  Sin  robs  God  of  all  the  happiness
and  honour  He  would  find  in  man,  and
robs  man  of  all  the  blessedness  and
spiritual  wealth  he  might  realize  in
God.

Ver.   12-14.   Theme:  The  wine  op

THE  WRATH  OP  GOD.

This  symbol  supplements  the  former
and  teaches  another  part  of  needed
truth.  It  is  less  dramatic  in  its  form,
but  not  less  definite  as  a  threatening  of
judgment.  If  we  notice  the  general
truths  contained  in  the  portion,  there
can  be  no  difficulty  in  applying  them  to
this  or  any  other  particular  case.

Observe,  then —

I.  That  every  man  is  being  fitted  a


BO  Ml  LET  10  COMMEjSTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


OHAT.  ZUL


vessel  to  honour  or  dishonour,  to  good
or  evil.

II.  That  every  man  will  ultimately
be  filled  to  his  utmost  capacity  by
good  or  evil,  according  to  his  spiritual
state.

III.  That  the  process  of  adaptation
is  being  carried  on  by  loyalty  or  dis-
obedience to  truth  and  God.

IV.  That  where  all  are  evil  every
one  will  be  injurious  to  the  other.
This  will  make  a  hell.  The  reverse  of
this  is  true  also.  Where  all  are  good,
each  one  is  a  blessing  to  the  other.  This
goes  far  to  make  a  heaven.

V.  That  Grod,  who  is  love,  has  a
time  for  severity  as  well  as  a  time
for  mercy.  "I  will  not  pity,"  &c.,
kc.

VI.  That  if  God  help  not,  none  can
aid  effectually.  If  God  save  not  there
is  no  salvation  in  any  other. —  W.  Whale.

Comments —

Ver.  12.  "Every  bottle  shall  be
FILLED  WITH  WINE."  "Every  earthen
^agon  (comp.  xlviii.  1 2) — the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem,  her  kings,  her  [)riests  and
prophets,  will  be  filled  with  the  wine
of  the  intoxicating  beverage  of  God's
wrath  (see  xxv.  15;  Isa.  xxviii.  7,  IL
17 ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  31 ;  Pi.  Ix.  3,  Ixxv.  8),
given  them  as  a  punishment  for  the
pride,  and  cruelty,  and  impiety,  which
they  drank  greedily  as  wine.  (Comp.
Rev.  xiv.  8,  xviii.  3),  where  the  Harlot
drinks  the  wine  of  her  own  fornication
and  gives  it  to  others,  and  intoxicates
herself  and  them  with  it  (xvii,  2,  xviii.
6);  and,  therefore,  God  gives  her  the
cup  of  His  wrath,  and  she  reels  under
it." —  Wordsworth,

"Wine  they  loved  well,  and  a  great
vintage  they  now  expected.  They  shall
have  it,  saith  God ;  but  of  another
nature  than  they  look  for." — 7'rapp.

"  They  were  like  bottles  ;  though  God
had  indeed  chosen  them  for  an  excellent
use,  yet,  forgetful  of  their  frailty,  they
had  marred  their  own  excellency,  so
that  they  were  no  longer  of  any  use,
except  that  God  would  inebriate  them
with  giddiness,  and  also  with  calamities."
— Calvin.

"  Do  WB  NOT  OEBTAINLY  KNOW  THAT
BVERT  BOTTLE,"  &C.


"An  instance  of  sceptical  mocking."
—  Wordsworth.

"  This  they  seem  to  speak  insolently
and  jeeringly — q.d.  You  should  tell  us
some  news  ! " — Tiapp.

"Then  shall  the  hearers  take  this
prophecy  in  scorn,  and  say,  What  won-
ders are  these  thou  tellest  us?  As  if
we  knew  not  that  the  use  of  bottles  is
to  be  filled  with  wine.*' — Bp.  Hall.

Ver.  13.  "Then  shalt  thou  say.
Thus  saith  tbe  Lord."  The  very
solemn  way  in  which  the  explanation
of  the  symbol  is  introduced  is  in  striking
contrast  with  the  frivolity  of  the  people.
— Speaker's  Com.

"Filled WITH  DRUNKENNESS."  When
the  wine  is  in,  the  wit  and  wisdom
and  virtue  are  out.  Like  drunken  men,
they  shall  be  full  of  confusion  in  their
counsels,  sick  of  all  their  enjoyments,
shall  fall  into  a  slumber,  and  be  utterly
unable  to  help  themselves  ;  like  men  who
have  drunk  away  their  reason,  they
shall  he  at  the  mercy ^  and  expose  them-
selves to  the  contempt  of  all  about  them.
And  this  shall  be  the  condition,  not  of
some  only  among  them  (if  any  had  been
sober  they  might  have  helped  the  rest),
but  all,  even  kings,  priests,  prophets,
and  inhabitants  would  be  indulgent  of
their  lusts  and  deprived  of  their  senses.
— Henry,

"Not  with  giddiness  as  of  drunken
men  staggering  (Isa.  xix.  14),  but  with
the  impotence  of  men  whose  minds  are
stricken  with  the  wrath  of  God  (Ps.  ix.
3j  Isa.  Ix.  17)." — Speaker's  Com.

"  The  Jews,  without  regard  to  rank,
office,  or  position,  were  all  to  be  in-
volved in  one  common  ruin." — Hender-
son.

"Even  the  kings  that  sit  upon
David's  throne."  Four  kings  in  suc-
cession were  overthrown  in  the  fall  of
Jerusalem.

Ver.  14.  "  Dash  one  against
ANOTHER  : "  shattering  them  as  vessels.
"Vessels  of  wrath,  fitted  for  destruction."

Civil  war  is  hereby  foreshadowed. —
Hitzig,

Bather,  a  collision  of  parties  in  the
state,  resulting  in  mutual  confusion  and
confutation.

"The  Midianites  (Judges  vii.  12) and

271


CnAl\  illl.


tiOMlLM'W  COMMLWfTARY:  JI^REMIAH,


the  Philistines  (I  Sam.  xiv.  20),  who
exterminated  each  other,  were  also  seized
by  a  spirit  of  intoxication.  If  not  in
this  sense,  yet  in  that  of  mutual  hatred,
reciprocal  oppression,  and  injury  in
general." — Naeg.

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Attention  to  God's
Word.  "  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear;  .  .  for
the  Lord  hath  spoken."

Tbe  Bible  worthy  of  attention  and
study  as — (1)  An  ancient  book,  dealing
with  the  history  of  the  human  race —
(2)  A  book  full  of  literary  beauty — (3)
A  book  of  great  power  and  influence.
Here  attention  is  claimed  because  it  is
the  Word  of  God.

I.  How  should  we  attend  to  it  %  1.
With  reverence.  2.  In  faith.  3.  Diligent-
ly, earnestly.  4.  Intelligently.  5.  Intend-
ing to  be  governed  by  it.     6.  Prayerfully.

n.  There  is  here  an  implied  neglect.
The  exhortation,  and  especially  the  men-
tion of  pride,  implies  this.  Men  neglect
the  Bible,  because — 1.  They  are  filled
with  other  things.  2.  They  do  not
know  its  worth.  3.  They  do  not  appre-
hend the  bearing  it  may  have  on  their
well-being.  4.  They  are  not  willing  to
submit  to  its  teachings.

III.  Why  should  we  attend?  Our
text  gives  the  paramount  reason — God
has  spoken.     Consider —

1.  The  dignity  and  glory  of  the  Lord.

2.  His  wisdom  and  knowledge.

3.  His  beneficence,  interest,  and  love.

4.  He  speaks  to  us  of  matters  in
which  we  have  the  deepest  interest.

Learn —

I.  To  read  the  Bible  regularly.
To  treasure  it  in  the  heart.  3.
honour  it  in  your  life. — E.  Jerman.

Theme:  Revelation.

Given  at  different  times,  and
various  methods,  such  as  visions,  dreams,
inspiration  or  rapture  of  soul,  and  direct
vocal  communication.  Its  object,  to  re-
veal God,  to  instruct  and  guide  man.
Here  we  have —

L  The  fact  of  revelation.  "The  Lord
hath  spoken."

II.  The  authority  of  revelation.
*^  The  Lord  hath  spoken."

in.  The  appeal  of  revelation.  "Hear
ye,"  &c.

IV.  The  purpose  of  revelation.

272


all     wrong-


2.
To


by


To


rebuke  for  sin.  To  save  from  judg-
ment. To  make  known  the  way  of
mercy.  To  direct  true  souls  into  paths
of  progress  and  happiness.  To  announce
Jehovah's  wrath  asjainst
doing. —  W.  Whale.

Theme :  Pride  the  great  hind-
rance TO  THE  reception  OF  God's
Word.  "  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear  ;  be
not  proud  :  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken."

I.  Pride  will  not  seek  the  knowledge
of  God.

1.  Pride  will  not  brook  a  rival.

2.  Is  unwilling  to  be  taught.

3.  Is  unwilling  to  use  the  means  of
knowledge.

4.  Is  unwilling  to  pray.

II.  Pride  will  not  seek  the  favour  of
God.

III.  Pride  will  not  seek  likeness  to
God.

IV.  Pride  will  not  seek  communion
with  God. — Pay  son  on  Ps.  x.  14.

"Both  the  symbols — girdle  and  ves-
sel— were  of  a  nature  very  humiliating  to
the  national  self-respect :  but  the  prophet
warns  them  against  letting  any  such
feeling  interfere  with  the  humble  recep-
tion of  the  words  of  God. — Speaker^ 8
Com.

"  Here  is  good  counsel  given,  to
humble  themselves  under  the  mighty  hand
of  God.  If  they  will  harJcen  and  give
ear,  this  is  that  which  God  has  to  say
to  them.  Be  not  proud.  This  was  one
of  the  sins  for  which  God  had  a  contro-
versy with  them  (ver.  9)  ;  let  them  mor-
tify and  forsake  this  sin,  and  God  will
let  fall  His  controversy.

i.  Be  not  proud  when  God  speaks  to
you  by  His  prophets.  Do  not  think
yourselves  too  good  to  be  taught.  Be
not  (a)  scornful,  (b)  wilful.  Let  not
your  hearts  rise  against  the  tvord,  nor
slight  the  messeiigers  that  bring  it  to  you.

ii.  Be  not  proud  when  God  is  coming
forth  against  you  in  His  providence.
Be  not  (a)  secure  when  He  threatens;
(b)  impatient  when  He  strikes.  Pride  is
at  the  bottom  of  both.

It  is  the  great  God  who  has  spoken  ;
1.  Whose  authority  is  incontestable  :  2.
Whose  power  is  irresistible ;  therefore
bow  to  what  He  says." — (Comp.  Henry.
See  "  Noticeable  Topics  "  on  this  verse.)


So  Ml  Let ic  comMentarT.  JbremiaM.


OHXP.  TTtt.


Vers.  16,  17.  Theme:  Rendering
God  glory  by  repentance.  Giving
glory  to  God  is  opposed  to  being
proud;  which  is  self-glory.

"  Jeremiah  was  as  constant  a  preacher
of  repentance  as  Paul,  and  after  him
Augustine,  were  of  the  free  grace  of
God.  The  impenitent  person  robbeth
God  of  His  right,  the  penitent  man  sar-
cit  injuriam  Deo  irrogatam^  seemeth  to
make  some  kind  of  amends  to  God,  whom
he  had  wronged,  by  restoring  Him  His
glory,  which  he  had  run  away  with,
whilst  he  putteth  himself  into  the  hands
of  justice,  in  hope  of  mercy." — Trapp.

**  The  phrase,  to  give  glory  to  Jehovah^
when  used  in  reference  to  such  as  had
incurred  guilt,  means  to  acknowledge
the  justice  of  God  in  the  infliction  of
deserved  punishment  (Josh.  vii.  19)." —
Hend,

"  How,  indeed,  can  we  ascribe  glory
to  Godf  except  by  acknowledging  Him
to  be  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom,  justice,
and  power,  and  especially  by  trembling
at  Bis  sacred  Word  ?  Whosoever,  then,
does  not  fear  and  reverence  God,  who-
soever does  not  believe  His  word,  he
robs  Him  of  His  glory." — Calvin.

L  Counsel.  "  Give  glory  to  the
Lord."

1.  Because  the  Lord's  glory  is  man's
good.

2.  Because  in  them  that  glory  might
appear  (ver.  11).

3.  Because  by  them  that  glory  might
be  obscured.

IL  Warning.  "  Before  He  cause  dark-
ness," <kc.

1.  Fading  light.  No  clear  vision  when
God  is  not  glorified.

2.  Stumbling  feet.  No  power  of  pro-
gress unless  for  God's  glory.

3.  Bewildering  night.  Captivity.  All
lost.

IIL  Pleading.  "  But  if  ye  will  not  hear,
my  soul  shall  weep,"  <kc. — His  "  Lamen-
tations."

1.  It  is  the  counsel  of  tender  love.
For  love's  sake.

2.  It  is  the  counsel  of  utter  unselfish-
ness. *'  For  Christ's  sake." — Rev.  John
Farren.

See  Noticeable  Topics  on  these  verses.
Also  Addenda   on  ver.  16,  Repentance


glorifying  God ;  and  on  ver.  17,  Za-
menting  pride.

Ver.  16.  Comments:  "  He  cattsb
DARKNESS."  The  night  of  affliction.
Light  is  the  emblem  of  joy ;  and  happy
times  are  expressed  by  bright  and  plea-
sant days ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  troubles
and  calamities  are  represented  by  the
night  and  darkness,  when  everything
looks  melancholy  and  dismal.  —  W.
Lowth.

"  Stumble  upon  the  dark  moun-
tains : "  Before  the  time  comes  when
ye  shall  be  forced  to  fly  by  night  upon
the  mountains  for  fear  of  your  enemies.
•—IT.  Liywth.

"  Here  is  a  double  metaphor  :  Judah
is  not  walking  upon  the  safe  highway,
but  upon  dangerous  mountains  :  and
already  the  dusk  is  closing  around  her.
While  then  the  light  still  serves,  let  her
return  unto  her  God." — Speaker  s  Com.

Ver.   16.    Theme :    Waning    light

FORESHADOWING   UTMOST   GLOOM.

God  can  darken  all  hope  and  joy.
Life's  gloom  is  admonitory.  We  should
seek  the  Lord  when  shadows  gather,  and
thus  turn  darkness  into  dawn.

I.  Total  darkness  will  overtake
those  who  refuse  God  glory.  It  will
gather  more  thickly  and  intensely  around
them,  till  it  become  dense.  Note  the
strengthening  imagery  :  *'  Cause  dark-
ness "  —  "  shadow  of  death  "  —  "  gross
darkness:"  it  indicates  that  the  awful
gloom  increases  upon  the  godless  soul,
ending  in  utter-most  night.  '*  To  whom
is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for
ever."

II.  Fading  light,  denoting  the  de-
cline of  spiritual  opportunity.  Action
must  be  quicks  for  "  darkness "  sets  in.
Repent,  "  give  glory  to  God,  before  He
cause  darkness,"  ere  His  judgments
deepen  upon  you,  and  the  gloom  hides
all  way  of  escape.

1.  Attempts  to  escape  vdll  desperately
fail.  "  Your  feet  will  stumble  on  dark
mountains."  The  way  of  deliverance
would  be  hidden  from  their  eyes,  and
their  own  efi'orts  would  only  lead  to  misery
and  defeat.

2.  7%e  shadows  counsel  speedy  return
to  God.  Before  the  dread  darkness
environs  us,  it  ia  our  wisdc^n  to  seek

273


CHAP.  XIII.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEEEMTAII.


God,  bow  before  Him  in  reconciliation,

and  glorify  Him  by  submission.

III.  Delusive  hopes  will  perish  in
the  terrible  gloom.

1.  N^o  light  will  return  when  once  that
darkness  falls  on  souls.  Impenitent  sin-
ners may  "  look  for  light;"  for  amelio-
ration of  woe,  for  escape  from  judgment,
but  light  will  not  come.

2.  Deepest  terrors  will  finally  over-
whelm the  godless,  God  will  "  turn  it
into  the  shadow  of  death,"  appalling
horror  and  despair :  and  "  make  it
gross  darkness,"  which  no  ray  of  hope
or  relief  will  pierce.  Those  who,  when
the  fourth  vial  was  outpoured,  "  repented
not  to  give  God  glory"  were,  with  the
next  vial,  overwhelmed  with  "  darkness,"
and  filled  with  agony  (Rev.  xvi.  9,  10).

The  literal  meaning  of  the  metaphor
is  that  there  was  nigh  at  hand  a  most
dreadful  vengeance,  except  the  Jews  in
time  anticipated  it,  and  submitted  them-
selves to  God.  "  Seek  righteousness,
seek  meekness,  it  may  be  ye  shall  be
hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger"
(Zeph.  ii.  3).

(See  Addenda  on  ver.  16.  Stumble
upon  the  dark  mountains).

Ver.   17.    Theme:   Bitter  weeping

OVER   HARDENED  TRANSGRESSORS.

The  burdened  heart  finds  relief  in  tears.
And  God  is  not  unmindful  of  the  grief  of
holy  commiseration.  Such  tears  are  more
pleading  and  potent  than  prayers  :  they
express  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  ut-
tered." "  Thou  wilt  put  all  my  tears  into
Thy  bottle  " — precious  are  they  to  God.

I.  Men's  wilfulness  in  sin  occasions
heaviest  sorrow  to  God's  messenger.
"  If  ye  will  not  hear  it,"  &c.  Ministers
know  something  of  the  *'  terrors  of  the
Lord,"  and  the  preciousness  of  souls,
and,  therefore,  feel  bitterest  grief  over
the  obstinate,  who  put  salvation  from
them.  Christians  ought  to  be  keenly
afi'ected  by  the  guilt  of  others ;  and  to
feel  the  prevailing  rejection  of  God  as  a
personal  distress.

II.  Melancholy  justification  is  sup-
plied for  such  holy  grief.

1.  Defiant  pride^  in  repudiating  God's
word.

2.  Desolating  exile  of  God'f  cherished
flock.      Two     distinct     aspec  s :    man's

274


hardened  iniquity — a  sad  fact  to  u>ii
template  ;  God's  kingdom  dishonoured —
for  it  was  a  discreditab'e  incident  that
His  flock  shjuld  be  carried  away  cap-
tive. And  over  human  guilt  and  God'a
sullied  honour  we  have  still  sufficient
justification  for  grief.  When  our  work
and  word  fail,  we  can  still  weep  and
pray  in  private.

III.  Sorrowful  tears  have  a  benig-
nant purpose  to  serve.

1.  In  'prayerful  retirement  they  may
be  poured  out  before  God,  in  plaintive
supplication  for  sinners.  When  preach-
ing effects  no  good,  we  can  weep  in  secret
for  the  hardened  ;  and  our  tears  shall  be
a  holy  libation  to  God.  "  My  soul  shall
weep  in  secret  places  for  your  pride."

2.  In  open  lamentation  they  may  be
shed  over  sinners  who  will  not  weep  for
themselves.  Hearts  may  be  touched  by
a  preacher's  grief  who  would  not  feel
his  words.  They  may  plead  ivith  men
as  well  as  with  God.  **  Mine  eyes  shall
weep  sore,  and  run  down  with  tears,
because  the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away
captive."  Would  not  that  sight  of  the
broken-hearted  prophet  send  a  pang  to
many  an  unreflective  observer?  Tears
may  melt  a  feelingless  heart,  and  holy
grief  allure  a  prodigal  to  God.  Weeping
is  the  last  resort  of  love.  "  When  He
beheld  the  city.  He  wept  over  it,  saying,
If  thou  hadst  known  ! "

(See  Addenda  on  ver.  17.  Sorrowful
tears.)

Theme :  The  pathos  op  an  earnest
SOUL.  Jeremiah  was  not  a  mere  official
with  a  formal  message,  but  a  patriot,
and  a  devout  lover  of  his  fellow-men.
Looking  into  the  text,  we  note —

1.  A  fearful  possibility.  The  Lord's
flock  captive.

II.  A  solitary  hope.  If  they  will
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.

III.  A  faithful  messenger.  Jere-
miah speaking  God's  word.

IV.  A  dreadful  anticipation.  If
they  will  not  hear.

V.  A  pathetic  resolve.  **  If  they  will
not  hear,  my  soul  shall  weep."

Application  :  1.  To  ministers — that
they  feel  deep  interest  in  the  people,  so
as  to  weep  over  them,  &c.

2.  To  people — that  it  is  a  question  of


BOM  J  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  xm.


essential  importance  concerning  which
God  speaks.  That  their  treatment  of
the  Divine  Word  will  decide  whether
the  future  shall  be  captivity  or  prosperity
and  bliss.  —  W,  Whale.

Vers.  18,  19.  See  homily  on  section,
supra,

**  When  the  enemies  are  at  the  gate,
the  plague  in  the  city,  and  there  is  no
escape,  while  human  help  there  is  none,
then  it  is  time  when  preachers  may
speak  to  their  princes  who  are  in  error ;  at
other  times  they  would  be  esteemed  in-
solent. .  .  .  Sometimes  God's  witnesses
are  clothed  with  an  authority  which  no  one
understands,  but  all  feel." — Zimendorf.

"  They  who  are  chosen  to  the  office
of  teaching  cannot  faithfully  discharge
their  duty  except  they  boldly,  and  with
intrepid  spirit,  dare  to  reprove  both
kings  and  queens ;  for  the  word  of  the
Lord  is  not  to  be  restricted  to  the  com-
mon people,  or  men  in  humble  life.  This
prophecy  was,  no  doubt,  very  bitter  to
the  king  as  well  as  to  the  common
people ;  for  the  king  and  his  mother
thought  they  could  not  possibly  be  de-
throned."— Calvin.

Ver.   20.    Theme:   The  lost  flook

DEMANDED  OF  THE  FAITHLESS  SHEPHEBD.

God  expects  of  those  who  were  en-
trusted with  the  care  of  others  due  at-
tention to  their  responsibilities.  And
God  will  require  their  flock  at  their
hands ;  that  they  should  return  to  Him,
saying,  "  Behold  me,  and  the  children
Thou  hast  given  me ! "  or,  as  they  to
whom  talents  were  entrusted  returned
to  their  Lord  with  the  usury.  Yes,  and
He  will  hold  them  accountable  for  what
befalls  the  flock :  "  their  blood  will  I
require  at  thy  hands."

Amazed  at  the  depopulation  of  the
surrounding  cities,  Jeremiah  demands
of  Jerusalem  an  explanation  of  the  deso-
lations :  or,  demands  of  the  State  [for
the  pronoun  is  fem.\  an  explanation  of
the  captivity  and  devastation  of  Judah,
"  What  does  this  mean,  that  the  flock  is
scattered  which  was  entrusted  to  thee  ?  "

I.  Imminent  perils  jeopardise  the
defenceless  flock.

1.  Foes  are  visible:  **Lift  up  your
eyes  and  behold  them  ! "  Adversaries
are  clearly  within  sight,  menacing  the


safety  and  weal  of  society ^  the  peace  and
progress  of  the  Churchy  the  piety  and
happiness  of  the  family  ^  the  integrity  and
honour  of  commerce,  the  healthful  tone
and  influence  of  literature,  the  veracity
and  authority  of  revealed  truth  and
Christian  doctrine.

2.  Foes  are  advancing  :  "  they  come
from  the  north."  Heathenish  forces
advance  against  our  sacred  inheritances
— would  rob  Israel  of  her  possession  of
Canaan  ;  invade  our  holy  scenes,  besiege
Jerusalem,  and  desecrate  the  Templewheve
God  is  worshipped,  for  no  hallowed
scene  awes  them  away ;  assail  our  very
liberty — intend  to  conquer  and  capture
the  people,  to  make  souls  their  prey,  and
carry  captive  the  helpless.  For  mani-
festly the  "flock"  is  defenceless,  when
the  rulers  and  shepherds  "  fear  not  God
neither  regard  man."  As  indeed  are
our  homes  and  liberties  if  they  be  not
environed  by  the  covenant  care  of  God.

IL  Solemn  responsibility  charged
npon  the  heedless  shepherds.  *^  Where
is  the  flock  r'  <fec.

a.  With  which  they  had  been  put  in
trust :  "given  unto  thee."

b.  Which  needed  and  merited  faithful
care :  "  thy  beautiful  flock."

c.  Of  whose  safety  God  will  require
solemn  account :  "  Where  is  the  flock  ? "
This  is  applicable  to —

1.  Magisterial  responsibility  for  the
wellbeing  of  their  people.  They  must
protect  their  subjects  from  invading
evils,  and  care  for  the  moral  as  well  as
physical  good  of  those  they  govern.

2.  Parental  responsibility  for  the
career  of  their  children.  Where  are
they  ?  Trained  in  "  the  good  and  right
way,"  led  after  Jesus,  guided  into  the
Church  of  Christ  1  Or  wandering  into
worldly  scenes,  amid  snares  and  sophis-
tries %  God  will  want  to  know  "  where  "
they  are  at  the  end  of  their  life  on
earth,  when  we  appear  before  Him  to
give  account  of  our  stewardship.

3.  Ministerial  responsibility  for  the
salvation  of  those  they  taught.  Have
they  watchfully  tended  the  flock,  been
faithful  and  dutiful  shepherds  %  Where
are  the  souls  to  whom  you  ministered
the  word  of  redemption,  "over  whom
the  Holy  Ghost  made  you  overseer  1"

27^


eliAP.  tin.


BOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


When  the  Chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,
He  will  require  tlieir  souls  of  those  who
were  put  in  charge  of  the  gospel.  (See
Noticeable  Topic  on  this  verse.)

Ver.  21.   Theme:  What  wilt  thou

SAY  WHEN  HE  SHALL  PUNISH  THEE.

Time  coming  when  God  would  call
Jewish  nation  to  awful  account.  God
Las  solemnly  threatened  the  wicked  with
punishment.  When  summoned  to  His
bar,  "  what  wilt  thou  say  ? "  What  rea-
son allege  against  justice  of  thy  doom?

I.  Eeflect  on  that  change  of  cir-
cumstances which  will  be  favourable
to  a  correct  judgment.

1.  The  infidelity  which  now  blinds
^our  minds  will  then  be  removed.  You
will  see  there  is  a  God,  your  duty  on
earth,  your  guilt  in  ignoring  Him.

2.  The  mission  of  Christ  will  then  be
understood.  Then  see  the  infinite  evil
your  sins  wrought  on  Calvary.

3.  The  ** opened  books*'  vnll  show  re-
cord of  all  your  sinSj  God's  dealings  with
you,  &c.,  making  a  "revelation  of  the
righteous  judgment  of  God."

4.  Eternity  mil  be  laid  open  to  your
view,  the  glories  of  heaven,  the  horrors
of  doom.

5.  The  infinite  and  eternal  interests
which  God's  law  was  appointed  to  pro-
tect, and  against  which  your  sins  waged
eternal  war,  will  then  stand  displayed.

6.  Sin  will  then  be  seen  as  in  raging
hostility  to  the  whole  creation;  against
God,  &c.

7.  Nothing  will  then  divert  attention j
or  excite  false  hopes,  or  offer  excuses.
Everything  will  then  burst  upon  you
marked  with  eternity  and  infinity.  Who
can  describe  the  emotions  of  that  day  ?

n.  Examine  the  several  pleas  which
may  be  supposed  to  offer  themselves
then  to  thought.

1.  Will  you  say  that  you  meant  no
evilf  But  it  will  appear  how  your  sel-
fish heart  opposed  God,  &c.

2.  That  your  sins  effected  no  serious
results  f  But  they  have  wrought  im-
measurable evils ;  crucified  Christ,  <fec.,
and  perhaps  destroyed  souls.

3.  That  eternal  punishmerit  is  too
seve7-e  for  tempoiary  sins  ?  The  sin  of
an  hour  can  fix  lasting  misery,  and  must
fall  on  the  culprit  himself.

276


4.    That  your  sins  being  ftnUe,   do

not  merit  infinite  punishment!  You
sinned  against  an  infinite  God,  therefore
your  punishment  should  be  infinite^
though  it  is  finite  in  degree  to  comport
with  your  nature.

6.  Will  you  plead,  You  are  no  worse
than  others  ?  There  was  no  obligation
to  do  evil  with  the  multitude.  God's
law  bound  you  individually.

6.  Will  you  say.  You  had  strong  temp-
tations? They  were  sent  to  test  your
obedience.  They  showed  you  loved
your  idols  more  than  God.  Your  de-
pravity gave  them  power.

7.  Will  you  say.  Those  wiser  than  you
betrayed  you  into  errors  of  doctrine?
You  had  the  Word  of  God,  the  truth  was
plainly  written  there.

8.  Will  you  plead,  You  had  good
desires  and  did  good  ?  In  God's  account
you  had  no  good  desire,  and  did  no
good  act.  This  udll  appear  against  all
the  unregenerate.

9.  Will  you  say,  You  did  not  know
God?  God  was  before  you  in  Hia
works,  and  more  gloriously  in  His  Word.
Your  ignorance  arose  from  your  un-
belief— "He  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned."

10.  IFill  you  say,  The  Holy  Spirit  did
not  strive  ?  Had  you  heeded  His  voice
you  would  not  have  been  in  this  con-
dition now.

1 1 .  Willyou  say,  Ministers  and  friends
did  not  warn  you  ?  Say  not  so.  They
would  have  snatched  you  from  destruc-
tion, but  they  could  not.

12.  Will  you  charge  the  blame  on
God — say  He  gave  you  passions  which
betray  you?  All  false.  He  gave  you  no
passions  to  lead  you  astray.  Self-love
changed  all,  and  you  alone  are  to  blame.

1 3.  Will  you  plead,  You  could  not  love
God,  could  not  repent  and  believe,  nor
change  your  heart  ?  This  is  saying  your
heart  would  yield  to  no  motives;  and
if  God  may  not  punish  that,  He  can  no
more  exercise  moral  government.

1  i.  Will  you  say,  You  were  excluded
by  God's  foreknowledge  and  decree  ?  If
God  foresaw  you  would  reject  the  gospel,
did  that  compel  you  to  do  so.  You
rejected  it  as  freely  as  if  it  had  not  been
foreknown.


MOM  I  LET  W  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  iltl.


15.  Will  you  say,  It  is  hard  for  a
crectture  to  he  brought  into  existence
without  his  ovm  consent,  and  then  to  he
made  eternally  miserable  ?  Who  art
thou  that  repliest  jigainst  God  ?  If  He
may  not  create  intelligent  beings,  and
punish  them  when  they  sin,  He  has  no
right  to  maintain  moral  government.

1 6.  Will  you  say  J  Why  did  He  suffer
me  to  sin  ?  If  the  penalty  of  the  law
was  not  executed,  it  would  have  been
annihilated,  and  the  law  turned  into
advice.  Could  not  infinite  Wisdom
judge  as  well  as  you  ?

1 7.  Will  you  say,  There  is  no  need  of
9uch  severity^  God  could  make  the  uni-
verse happy  tvithout  your  destruction?
Can  you  look  through  eternity,  and
judge  better  than  God  1  Or  teach  Him
what  is  best  for  public  good?  Aban-
don these  charges,  fall  down  at  the  feet
of  Christ,  and  cast  your  soul  on  Him.
Come,  "  for  all  things  are  ready."
God,  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are
ready.    Are  you  ready  1     Come. — Anon.

Vers.   21,   22.  Theme:  God's  juDg-

MiNT     UPON     THE      FAITHLESS      VINDI-
CATED.

I.  The  tyranny  of  usurpers  is  ex-
plained. Why  are  God's  people  found
in  a  state  of  captivity — does  it  not  im-
ply that  He  has  failed  to  guard  them?
No !  *'  Thou  hast  taxight  them"  <fec.
By  coquetting  with  foreigners,  thou
hast  given  them  advantages  over  thee,
which  they  have  used  for  thy  conquest.
(See  Lit  Grit,  on  verse.)  If  we  court
the  friendship  of  sinners,  we  lay  our-
selves open  to  subjugation,  and  invite
them  to  seize  the  unwary  prey.  Heze-
kiah,  by  showing  the  ambassadors  his
treasures,  thus  tempted  the  Babylonish
king  to  plunder.

II.  The  misery  of  the  vanquished
is  justified.  "Shall  not  sorrow  take
thee,  as  a  woman  in  travail  ? "  Poignant
will  be  the  anguish ;  and  not  a  reason
will  the  sufferers  be  able  to  adduce  why
sorrows  shall  not  take  them.  /Self-con-
demnation, the  consciousness  of  merited
misery,  is  "  the  worm  that  dieth  not,
the  fire  that  caimot  be  quenched."

III.  The  afflictions  of*  judgment
threatened.  "  What  wilt  thou  say  when
He  shall  punish  thee  ? "    There  is  still


an  interval  of  suspended  judgment.  But
the  unsheathed  sword  ^i\\  assuredly  fall
on  the  impenitent.

IV.  The  questionings  of  self-vindi-
cation silenced,  "  And  if  thou  say  in
thine  heart.  Wherefore  come  these  things
upon  me?"  There  is  reason  to  doubt
whether  the  sufferer  will  dare  to  ask
such  a  question,  for  he  will  know  the
reason  all  too  well :  "  if  thou  say."
Even  if  he  venture  on  such  a  self-
answered  inquiry,  it  will  not  dare  utter
itself,  only  rising  in  silence,  as  being
ashamed  of  being  heard:  "say  in  thine
heart"  Yet,  should  any  ask  for  the
justification  of  the  Divine  afflictions,
here  it  is — ^^  For  the  greatness  of  thine
iniquity."

V.  The  degradation  of  apostates  is
depicted.  "  Thy  skirts  discovered,  and
thy  heels  made  bare."  (See  Lit.  Grit,
on  verse).  This  public  shame  (see  also
ver.  26)  prefigures  the  confusion  and
contempt  which  will  be  openly  poured
upon  all  them  that  forget  God  and  dis-
honour Him  by  their  iniquitous  disre-
gard of  His  claims  and  His  grace.

Ver.    23.     Theme :     Escaping    the

THRALDOM  OF  EVIL  HABITS.

I.  The  great  difficulty  of  reforming
vicious  habits.  This  difficulty  of  chang-
ing a  bad  course  arises —

1.  From  the  general  nature  of  habits.

2.  From  the  particular  nature  of  bad
habits.

3.  From  the  natural  and  judicial  con-
sequences of  the  great  progress  and  long
continuance  of  a  bad  course.

II.  This  difficulty  is  not  desperate.
There  is  some  ground  of  hope  and  en-
couragement.

1.  There  is  left  even  in  the  worst  of
men  a  natural  sense  of  the  evil  and  un-
reasonableness of  sin.

2.  Very  bad  men,  when  they  have
any  thought  of  becoming  better,  are
apt  to  conceive  some  good  hopes  of  God's
grace  and  mercy.

3.  Who  knows  ivliat  man,  thoroughly
roused  and  startled,  may  resolve  to  do  ?

4.  The  grace  and  assistance  of  God,
when  sincerely  sought,  is  never  to  be
despaired  of. — Tillotson.

Suggestions  arranged  from  Lange —
i.  A  comfortless  perspective  (ver.  23).

277


ovAP.  xm.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEnEMlAB.


ii.  Yet  mtk  God  nothing  is  tmpotsihle
(Matt.  xix.  26).

iii.  Purification^  though  slow  and  sue-
eessivCy  can  be  efected.  The  conclusion
of  ver.  27  shows  this.     In  purification —

1.  We  obtain  a  point  of  support
without  ourselves  (Archimedes).

2.  And  a  new  principle  of  life  in
Christ  Jesus.  (See  Addenda  on  verse
23,  Inveterate  Habits,)

Theme :  The  power  op  evil  habits.

We  take  notice  of  particular  evil  acts^
but  are  strangely  insensible  of  an  evil
principle  operating  within  us.  This
principle  shows  itself  in  daily  habits.
Experience  shows  that  our  habits  of  sin
are  not  easily  broken.

I.  The  power  of  sin,  as  inherent  in
our  nature.

1.  It  pervades  all  our  faculties j
whether  of  mind  or  body.  Understand-
ing blinded,  will  perverse,  affections
earthly,  conscience  stupefied,  <fec.  (Rom.
iii.  12-15;  vi.  13).

2.  It  finds  in  us  nothing  to  counteract
its  influence.  Neither  reason  nor  con-
science perform  their  oflfice  in  opposing
this  evil  principle.     (See  Rom.  vii.  18.)

3.  It  receives  aid  from  everything
around  us.  "  All  that  is  in  the  world,
lust  of  flesh,  lust  of  eyes,  and  pride  of
life,"  are  confederates,  and  solicit  us  to
sin.

4.  It  conceals  its  influence  under
specious  names.  What  will  it  not  com-
mend under  the  idea  of  amusement,  and
sanction  as  conviviality  and  good  breed-
ing ?

II.  Its  power,  as  confirmed  and  aug-
mented by  evil  habit.

1.  Its  odiousness  is  diminished.  We
see  to  what  lengths  wicked  men  will
proceed  when  once  the  restraints  of
conscience  and  remorse  are  broken
through  ;  glory  in  their  shame  (Phil,
iii.  18,  19).

2.  Its  power  is  strengthened,  Man
may  so  accustom  himself  to  anger,  in-
temperance, impurity,  or  sloth,  as  to
become  powerless  to  resist  temptation
(2  Pet.  ii.  14;  Prov.  xxvi.  14;  Matt,
xix.  24).

3.  Its  opportunities  for  exercise  are
multiplied.  Habits  call  around  us  per-
sons   and    temptations    subservient   to

278


their  indulgence.    Thus,  "  sin  most  easily
besets  them''  (Prov.  vii.  22,  23).

4.  The  'powers  whereby  it  should  be
resisted  are  destroyed.  Conscience  be-
comes *' seared"  (1  Tim.  iv.  2);  mind
hardened  against  fear  (Heb.  iii.  13).
Hence  **  wax  worse  and  worse  "  (2  Tim.
iii.  13.)

5.  Everything  good  is  by  it  put  at  an
unapproachable  distance.  "How  shall
they  do  good  ?  "  <fec.  If  the  "  putting
off  of  the  old  man  "  be  so  difficult,  what
hope  is  there  of  "  putting  on  the  new?"
(Eph.  iv.  22-24).     Learn—

a.  Tour  need  of  converting  grace.
"  Must  be  born  again."

b.  The  diference  between  sin  and
grace,  as  affected  by  our  liabits.  Habits
of  sin  will  augment  of  themselves ;  not
so  with  habits  of  grace.  '*  Let  him  that
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he
fall."  Yet  the  L  rd  is  able  to  hold  you
up,  and  "  His  strength  is  made  perfect  in
weakness." — Simeon.

Theme:  The  alarming  power  op  sin.

This  passage,  like  some  others  in  the
sacred  writings,  is  not  to  be  interpreted
in  the  strictest  sense ;  of  the  same  de-
scription is  the  declaration  of  Christ,
"  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through
the  eye  of  a  needle  than  for  a  rich  man
to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."
And  yet  such  men  are  saved,  though  the
difficulties  in  the  way  of  their  salvation
are  many  and  great.  So,  in  some  in-
stances, are  men  long  accustomed  to  do
evil  diverted  from  their  courses  of
iniquity.  But  this  is  not  usual.  It  is
a  truth  which  should  affect  the  minds
of  every  class,  that  the  long-continued
impenitence  of  men  augments  the  diffi-
culties in  the  way  of  their  salvation.

I.  The  habits  of  men  are  strength-
ened and  confirmed  by  indulgence.

II.  The  influence  of  this  world,  as
men  advance  in  life,  usually  becomes
more  perplexing,  and  a  greater  hin-
drance to  their  conversion.

III.  As  years  increase  men  become
less  interested  in  the  subject  of  re-
ligion, and  more  obdurate  and  averse
to  any  alteration  in  their  moral  cha-
racter.

IV.  The  thought  of  multiplied  and
long-continued  transgression  is  very


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  xm.


apt  to  disconrage  all  attempts  at  re-
pentance.

V.  There  is  awful  reason  to  appre-
hend that  God  will  leave  men  of  this
description  to  perish  in  their  sins.

Atplication —

1.  Whxt  is  the  admonition  which  it
addresses  to  the  aged?

2.  Our  subject  addresses  those  who  are
in  middle  life.

3.  Ft  addresses  the  young, — Dr,  D,
Spring,

Comments —

"  Custom  in  sin  is  a  very  great  hin-
drance to  conversion  from  sin," — Henry.

**  Learned  men  in  our  age  do  not
wisely  refer  to  this  passage,  when  they
seek  to  prove  that  there  is  no  free-will
in  man ;  for  it  is  not  simply  the  nature
of  man  that  is  spoken  of  here,  but  the
habit  that  is  contracted  by  long  prac-
tice. Aristotle,  a  strong  advocate  of
free-will,  confesses  that  it  is  not  in  man's
power  to  do  right,  when  he  is  so  im-
mersed in  his  own  vices  as  to  have  lost
a  free  choice  (7,  Lib,  Ethicon\  and  this
also  is  what  experience  proves." — Calvin,

"  Inveterate  habits  are  justly  regarded
as  a  second-nature ;  but,  being  moral  in
their  character,  instead  of  extenuating,
they  aggravate  the  guilt  of  those  who
are  the  subjects  of  them.  Strong,
therefore,  as  is  the  physical  reference
here  made,  it  can  with  no  propriety  be
employed  in  support  of  the  physical
impossibility  of  moral  reformation.'*
— Henderson,

See  Noticeable  Topics  on  this  verse.

Ver.  24.  Comments —

"Scatter  them  : "  "This  was  no  small
aggravation  of  their  misery  that  they
should  be  thus  severed  one  from  another.
So  the  persecutors  of  primitive  times
relegated  and  confined  the  poor  Chris-
tians to  isles  and  mines,  where  they
could  not  have  access  one  to  another  for
mutual  comfort  and  support,  as  Cyprian
coniplaineth." — Trapp,

Ver.  25.  "  Thy  lot,  the  portion  op
THY  measures;"  The  portion  I  have
measured  out  to  thee  (Job  xx.  29 ;  Ps.
xi.  6) ;  as  by  line  and  measure  I  formerly
allotted  thee  <in  inheritance  in  Canaan.

"In  falsehood:"  *.«.,  in  false  gods
and  foreign  usurpers.


Ver.  26.  Their  punishment  should
answer  to  their  crime.  In  spiritual
harlotry  with  heathen  gods  they  had
exposed  themselves  to  others ;  God
would  expose  them  to  shame  and  igno-
miny before  the  eyes  of  heathen  foes.

Ver.  27.  Theme:  Judah's  cleans-
ing— A  FORLORN  HOPE.

"  Wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  t  When
shall  it  once  be  ?"

I.  Purification  deliberately  refused.
"  Not  be  made  clean."  (See  on  ver.  1  :
"  Put  it  not  in  water.")  As  yet  Judah
delighted  in  her  defilement.

II.  Purification  extremely  difficult.
"  Shall  it  once  be  1 "  These  words  ex-
plain ver.  23.  Repentance  on  the  part
of  Judah  seemed  to  have  become  a
moral  impossibility  ;  therefore  cleansing
could  not  be  effected.  No  cleansing
where  there  is  no  penitence,

m.  Purification  remotely  possible.
*'When  shall  it  be?"  In  the  far  dis-
tant future  the  prospective  possibility
opens  to  the  Seer.  It  cannot  yet,  or
50071  be.  Nevertheless  he  cherishes  the
distant  hope.  His  patriotic  love  leads
him  to  this  generous  surmise.  And  his
knowledge  of  the  patience  and  mercy  of
Jehovah  forbid  him  to  desitair.

Theme:  An  affectionate  expostu-
lation WITH  judah.  "  Wilt  thou  7lOt
be  made  clean  f  "

"Though  it  was  adjudged  next  to
impossible  for  them  to  be  brought  to  do
good  (ver.  23),  yet  while  there  is  life
there  is  hope,  and  therefore  still  he
reasons  with  them  to  bring  them  to
repentance  (ver.  27).

"  i.  He  reasons  with  them  concerning
the  thing  itself.  'Wilt  thou  not  be
made  clean  1 '  Note,  It  is  the  great
concern  of  those  who  are  polluted  by
sin  to  be  made  clean  by  repentance  and
faith  and  an  universal  reformation.
The  reason  why  sinners  are  not  made
clean  is  that  they  will  not  be  made
clean ;  and  therein  they  act  unreason-
ably.

**  ii.  Concerning  the  time  of  it.  *  When
shall  it  once  be  ? '  Note, — It  is  an  in-
stance of  the  wonderful  grace  of  Qod,
that  He  desires  the  repentance  and  con-
version of  sinners,  and  thinks  the  time
long  till  they  are  brought  to  relent ;  but

27d


OHAP.  xm.


EOMILETIC  COM  ME  XT  A  RY:  JEREMJAE.


it  is  an  instance  of  the  wonderful  folly
of  sinners  that  they  put  that  off  from
time  to  time  which  is  of  such  absolute
necessity  that,  if  it  be  not  done  some
time,  they  are  undone  for  ever.  They
do  not  say,  they  will  never  be  cleansed,
but,  not  yet ;  they  will  defer  it  to  a  more
convenient  season,  but  cannot  tell  us
*  when  it  shall  once  be.' " — Henry.

Theme:  Cleansing  possible,  yet
REFUSED.  "Woe  unto  thee,  O  Jeru-
salem !  Wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  %
When  shall  it  once  be  % "

Every  impenitent  sinner  is  involved
in  guilt  and  polluted  with  sin.  God  is
willing  to  pardon,  if  he  repent  and
believe  the  gospel.  "The  blood  of
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  clean seth  us  from
all  sin."     It  is  implied —

I.  That  it  is  possible  for  creatures
involved  in  guilt  and  polluted  with
sin  to  obtain  both  pardon  and  purity.
"  Wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  1  When
shall  it  once  be  ? "

God  is  able  to  cleanse  us  from  sin.
Our  own  unwillingness  greatly  obstructs
it,  yet  it  is  possible  to  obtain  it,

1.  It  is  possible  to  have  our  guilt  re-
moved, and  to  be  delivered  from  the  con-
sequences of  sin.

2.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  be  delivered
from  the  pollution  of  sin.

II.  It  is  supposed  That  many  raise
objections  against  this  cleansing  and
the  means  appointed  for  it.  "  Wilt
thou  not  be  made  clean  1 "

The  unbelieving  Jews  objected  to  the
charge  of  guilt  brought  against  them  by
the  prophet.

1.  Some  are  willing  to  be  delivered
from  the  consequences  of  sin,  but  not
from  its  power.  Would  willingly  escape
hell,  but  care  not  to  live  a  holy  life ;
would  accept  a  free  and  full  salvation,
but  are  not  ready  to  take  up  their  cross
to  follow  Christ.

2.  Some  are  willing  to  be  cleansed
outwardly,  but  not  inwardly.  Many  do
not  object  to  leave  off  some  of  their
gross  sins,  but  dislike  what  is  internal
and  spiritual

3.  Some  are  willing  to  be  cleansed
partly^  but  not  entirely.  There  are  sins
they  cannot  give  up.

4.  Some  raise  objections  to  GodU  ap-

280


pointed  mHhods  for  cleansing  sins.  Ob-
ject to  the  mediation  of  Christ  as  the
ground  of  their  hope :  would  prefer  to
do  some  good  work  for  themselves.
Not  willing  to  be  pardoned  and  sancti-
fied in  God's  appointed  way.

5.  Some  wlio  admit  the  importance  of
being  cleansed,  object  to  being  cleansed  yet;
"  at  once.*'  Religion  is  important,  but
it  is  to  be  attended  to  at  some  future
time.

III.  That  those  who  object  to  be
cleansed  render  themselves  liable  to
Divine  judgment.  The  words  are  in-
troduced with  a  Woe.  "  Woe  unto  thee,
O  Jerusalem  !  "  Refusing  pardon,  they
deserve  judgment  for  their  impenitence.
So  those  under  the  gospel,  who  remain
impenitent  and  ungodly,  are  exposed  to
the  most  awful  judgment.

1.  Those  who  refuse  to  apply  to  the
sacrifice  of  Christ  have  no  way  of  mercy
left  to  them.  "  There  is  no  other  name
under  heaven,"  <kc.

2.  Those  who  are  not  cleansed  from
sin  must  be  excluded  from  heaven.  "  Ex-
cept a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see
the  kingdom  of  God."

3.  There  is  great  danger  if  you  are
not  cleansed  yet,  that  you  will  remain
and  perish  in  your  coiruption. — Anon.

Theme  :  Mercy's   appeal  —  *'  Wilt

THOU  BE  MADE  CLEAN  ?  "  <fec.

The  favoured  city  under  a  ban — be-
cause of  uncleanness — Divine  offer  of
help  the  only  hope.     Mercy*8  appeal.

1.  Mercy  s  appeal  is  faithful,  con-
vincing of  sin,  and  commanding  repent-
ance.

2.  Mercy  s  appeal  is  humiliating.
Jerusalem  is  unclean  and  unable  to  make
itself  clean.  Ungodly  and  without
strength.     Dependent  on  Divine  love.

3.  Mercy's  appeal  is  helpful.  God
has  made  provision  for  cleansing.  He
is  anxious  to  afford  aid.

4.  Mercy* s  appeal  is  to  the  moral  wish
of  man.     "  Wilt  thou  1 "  &c.

6.  Mercy's  appeal  is  effectual  when
man  is  made  willing  to  be  clean.

Another  method  on  same  text —

L   The    great    need  of   the    soul,

cleansing.

II.  The  great  helplessness  of  the

soul,  cannot  cleanse  itself.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xm.

in.  The  great  grace  of  God.     He  V.  The  great  work  of  the  ministry.

has  provided  for  cleansing,  and  offers  to  1.  To  bring  home  the  feeling  of  guilt.

cleanse.  2.  To  ask  the  question  of  the  text.

IV.    The   great   drawback   on   our  3.  To  direct  to  the  cleansing  fount.

part.     We  do  not  naturally  wish  to  be  4.  To  urge  the  im[)ortance  of  imme-

clean*  diate  application. — W,  Whale,

NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XII L

Topic:  Nbarnkss  to  God  Destroyed  by  Sin.     (Vers.  1-11).

The  sacred  writers  use  the  incidents  of  life  and  the  symbolism  of  nature  to  in-
culcate truth.  Christ  did  the  same.  Reason  of  this — (1.)  Difficult  to  secure  man's
attention.  (2.)  Difficult  to  effect  a  lodgment  of  the  truth  in  the  heart.  We  have
here  a  symbolic  action,  the  burying,  &c.,  of  the  girdle,  intended  to  represent  the
nearness  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  God,  and  their  alienation  and  destruction
through  sin.

Subject :  Nearness  to  God  Destroyed  by  Sin.

1.  Nearness  to  God. — 1.  These  Jews  were  like  a  girdle  bound  upon  the  loins.
Should  have  entwined  themselves  around  God.  So  nations  may  be  near — (1)  In
the  great  things  that  God  had  done  for  them.  (2)  In  the  covenant  relation  which
He  had  entered  into  with  them.  (3)  In  the  privileges  which  He  had  conferred
upon  them.

2.  Man  is  near — (1)  He  is  near  by  nature — created  in  God's  image.  (2)  He  is
near  to  God's  heart.  (3)  He  is  near  in  God's  care  over  him.  (4)  He  is  near  in
the  privileges  of  liberty,  religion,  knowledge,  discipline,  warning.  (5)  In  a  posi-
tion to  become  eternally  nearer  by  growing  up  into  Christ.  Entering  into  his
fellowship).  Entering  into  His  palace  above.  (6)  Brought  near  for  God's  glory
(ver.  11).

II.  His  nearness  destroyed  by  sin. — 1.  Sin  is  the  destroyer  of  nations  as  well
as  individuals.     The  Jews  destroyed  by  idolatry,  lust,  selfishness,  pride.

2.  As  of  nations  so  of  individuals,  sin  will  destroy  them  unless  resisted  and  cast
forth.  Man  in  Paradise,  Antediluvian  world,  A  Lab,  Haman,  Lot,  and  Solomon
almost.

3.  This  destruction  is  voluntary.     The  sinner  is  a  suicide.     (Ver  10,  <kc,).

4.  God  is  represented  as  active  in  this  destruction,  v.q, —  (1)  Not  that  God
deserts  the  sinner  fir.st.  Pharaoh  hardens  his  heart  repeatedly  before  God  is  said
to  harden  it.  (2)  But,  when  the  measure  of  sin  is  full,  God  removes  restraints,
and  sets  in  motion  the  agency  of  judgment.

5.  This  destruction  will  consist  in — (1)  Separation  from  God.  (2)  Utter
corruption  and  rottenness.

Learn : — 1 .  The  terrible  power  of  sin.  2.  To  guard  against  it  as  our  chief  enemy.
■— ^.  Jerman,

Topic:  Life  Lessons — "Bb  not  Proud:"  ChildrerCs  Sermon.    (Ver.  15.)

The  lily  of  the  valley,  growing  in  the  shade,  and  concealing  itself  in  its  own
leaves,  hints  this  same  lesson.  So  does  the  nightingale,  which  "asks  no  witness
to  her  song."  Not  need  to  describe  pride,  as  if  it  were  a  new  thing,  or  a  rare  curio-
sity, something  which  we  must  travel  to  ruins  of  Nineveh  to  find :  as  ancient  as
Garden  of  Eden,  and  common  as  thorns  and  thistles.  It  is  exceedingly  deceitful,
escapes  punishment  by  assuming  a  fictitious  excellence,  but  in  any  form  it  is  sin  !
And,  it  is  enmity  to  God,  sets  up  idols  where  He  should  reign,  and  breeds  envies,
malice,  &c. — things  worthy  of  death.  Its  varieties  are  manifold  :  dwell  on  four  of
(he  chief —

281


CHAP.  XIII.  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


I.  There  is  race  pride.  Be  thankful  for  good  and  pious  ancestors  :  but  what  is
there  to  hoast  of?  Did  we  help  to  make  them  what  they  were;  and  are  we  as
good  as  they  ]  Jews  were  race  proud  :  "  "We  have  Abraham  to  our  father ; "  **  We
be  the  children  of  Abraham  ! "  Not  wrong  to  rejoice  tliat  our  progenitors  have
been  noble  and  holy,  but  to  be  arrogant  and  supercilious  on  account  of  this,  and
treat  others  disdainfully,  is  a  ridiculous  and  detestable  habit.

II.  There  is  face  pride.  Lovely  or  manly  features  are  not  to  be  despised.
Astonishing  what  favours  they  obtain,  how  many  bolted  doors  they  open.  But  if
they  foster  pride,  beauty  is  no  longer  beauty;  it  is  despicable  vanity.  Remember
how  inferior  outward  appearance  is  to  moral  qualities,  how  empty  it  will  leave  you
if  disease  despoils  you  of  beauty ;  culture  "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet
spirit."

in.  There  is  place  pride.  Your  position  in  society,  fine  house,  carriage,  rich
dress,  education,  accomplishments — these  do  not  render  you  better  than  those
whose  station  is  lower ;  not  wiser,  nobler,  holier.  You  received  them  from  God,
''  without  money  and  without  price ;"  be  not  haughty  about  them.

IV.  There  is  grace  pi-ide.  The  worst  sort  of  pride,  pride  in  godliness  !  Mingles
with  our  prayers,  praises,  charities,  repentance,  and  tears.  We  estimate  our  devo-
tions or  services,  and  think  them  satisfactory,  congratulate  ourselves  on  them  :  we
then  offer  incense  to  self  instead  of  to  God.     Grace  pride  corrupts  all  grace.

"  Be  not  proud  "  therefore,  because — 1.  We  have  nothing  to  he  proud  of:  we  are
poor,  weak,  dependent  creatures.  2.  It  is  abhorrent  to  God :  it  shuts  Him  away.
**  The  proud  He  knoweth  afar  off."  "God  resisteth  the  proud."  Fallen,  depraved,
perishing  beings,  proud/  3.  It  is  so  unlike  Christ.  Yet  He  was  "altogether
lovely;"  knew  everything,  possessed  everything,  could  do  everything;  yet  "meek
and  lowly  in  heart."  4.  It  is  ruinous.  **  Pride  goeth  before  destruction."  What
warnings  do  Saul,  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  Herod  offer !  Watch  against  inducements
to  pride  :  bravely  struggle  with  and  subdue  it. — Rev.  James  Bolton^  in  "  Family
IVeasury."

Topic :  God  Glorified  in  the  Fall  of  Prtdk.  Text :  "  Be  not  proud;  give
glory  to  the  Lord  your  God,  But  if  ye  will  not  hear,  my  soul  shall  weep  in
secret  places  for  your  pride  ;  and  my  eyes  shall  weep  sore,  and  run  down
with  tears  J  because  the  Lord*  s  flock  is  carried  aivay  captive"  (vers.  15-17).

What  a  wonderful  circumstance  claims  attention ;  the  Everlasting  God  Himself
pleads  for  an  audience !  "  Hear  ye  and  give  ear,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  ! "  He
tells  of  matters  of  vast  importance  ;  and,  if  you  listen,  through  eternity  you  will
thank  God  for  having  attended  to  His  word.

I.  Ask,  What  is  it  which  stops  people  from  hearing  the  voice  of  God  ?  Text
points  to  one  special  obstacle  which  is  the  last  we  should  have  thought  possible —
pride.  When  Jehovah  condescends  to  speak  to  the  heart  of  one  so  worthless,  vouch-
safes to  offer  us  counsel  of  most  momentous  concern,  the  thing  which  bars  our  door
against  the  entrance  of  Jesus,  or  deadens  our  ear  to  the  sound  of  His  voice,  is  this
accursed  thing  called  ^* pride.*'     Varied  aspects  assumed  by  pride: —

1.  One  form  of  "  pride  "  is  shame.  Many  kept  from  Christ  because  ashamed  to
come  and  give  themselves  up  to  Him.  For  fear  of  the  paltry  scorn,  the  momen-
tary ridicule,  the  soul  will  risk  eternity !  You  have  to  choose  between  shame  now
and  shame  eternally.  Yet  what  is  there  to  be  ashamed  of,  that  you  should  be  kept
from  Christ  ^  Rather  there  is  cause  for  shame  in  being  a  sinner,  impenitent,  self-
condemned  !

2.  There  is  the  "  pride  "  of  respectability  and  social  position.  Hold  apart  from
religion,  because  in  the  one  way  all  must  go  without  distinction.  Yet  who  would
not  prefer  the  position  of  the  vulgar  beggar  Lazarus  to  that  of  the  respectable
citizen  Dives  ?  What  can  justify  in  a  lost  sinner  any  high  and  vain  thoughts
of  self?

282


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  crap.  xrn.


3.  There  is  the  "  pride  "  that  conceals  a  ivound.  God's  word  has  stricken  the
heart ;  healing  and  joy  could  be  had  if  we  humbly  go  to  God,  yet  hide  the  grief  and
unrest  within,  from  man  and  Heaven  !  Let  this  pride  be  broken  down,  and  con-
fession be  made  in  the  ears  of  your  God.

4.  There  is  the  "  pride "  of  self-righteousness,  "  Thank  God,  I  am  not  like
other  men  ! "  What  say  when  before  the  Throne — that  you  were  too  good  to
accept  the  GospeH  Like  the  man  without  the  wedding-garment,  *'you  will  be
speechless."  You  might  be  clothed  with  the  righteousness  which  is  from  God  by
faith  ;  yet  choosing  your  own,  you  are  justly  condemned  I

II.  Human  pride  must  effectually  be  broken  down.

1.  When  pride  is  humbled^  and  the  man  is  crushed,  then  it  is  God  speaks.  And
what  does  He  say?  Might  expect — "Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed!"  Nay:  ** Give
glory  to  the  Lord  your  God."  Your  God  still,  though  turned  your  back  upon  Him,
grieved  Him,  "would  none  of  His  ways."  How  make  return  for  the  wrong  done,
years  wasted,  opportunities  lost?     "  Give  glory  to  the  Lord  your  God ! "

2.  The  contrite  sotd  cannot  realise  its  ability  to  glorify  God,  A  child  of  sin  and
sorrow,  heart  vile,  sins  crying  out  in  reproach,  all  life  a  transgression,  how  can
such  an  one  glorify  God  1  Note :  A  sinner  can  in  one  sense  glorify  God  more  than
the  brightest  angel  before  His  throne.  From  deepest  woe  He  raises  the  soul  to
highest  bliss  and  holiness  !  And  while  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  God  over
the  sinner"  repentant,  the  Most  High  is  glorified  in  the  achievement  of  wondrous
grace  I  Give  this  glory  to  your  God ;  broken  down,  powerless,  self-despairing,
cast  yourself  on  His  salvation.

3.  There  is  a  desperate  alternative ;  that  "  you  will  not  hear."  By  and  by  your
feet  will  "  stumble  on  the  dark  mountains."  The  day  of  disease  will  come ;  life
will  grow  dim  ;  the  thin  grandeur  of  a  fading  world  will  begin  to  pass  away;  all
around  the  gloom  will  thicken,  and  on  a  dying  world  ^^ gross  darkness"  of  un-
relieved despair,  will  cover  you.     Then  the  last  moment  comes ;  one  terrified  "  look

for  light"  but  in  vain ;  the  soul  is  "  carried  away  into  captivity."

Tears  for  lost  Jerusalem  !  Tears  for  a  lost  soul  1  **  Mine  eyes  shall  weep  sore."
— Aitken's  "  Mission  Sermons."

Tcpie  :  God's  claim  on  Parents.     Text:  "  Where  is  the  flock  that  was  given  thee,

thy  beautiful  flock  ?  "  (ver.  20).

If  kings  are  responsible  for  their  subjects,  teachers  are  for  their  scholars,  parents
are  for  their  children.

I.  What  is  here  shown  us  respecting  the  flock.  "  The  fiock  that  was  given
thee,  thy  beautiful  flock."

1.  The  flock  is  not  yours:  not  yours  in  proprietorship,  but  only  yours  in  charge.
It  is  "the  flock  given  thee."  Mighty  kings  and  tyrants  have  regarded  subjects  aa
their  property  :  such  have  always  wrought  the  ruin  of  their  nation.  The  flock
belongs  to  God,  Israel  was  His.  Children  are  peculiarly  and  specially  God's.
Authority  over  them  is  God's  gift  to  parents ;  but  He  has  a  claim  [>rior  to  yours.
He  continues  His  work  of  Creation  in  every  child  born.  Its  existence  is  wonderful.
Much  more  wonderful  are  its  capacities — physical,  mental,  social,  spiritual !

2.  Christ  highly  estimates  the  flock.  "  Thy  beautiful  flock."  "  Whosoever  shall
receive  one  such  child  in  My  name,  receiveth  Me."  Christian  hospitality  to  a  child
is  homage  to  God.  Teachers,  parents,  the  children  of  your  charge  constitute  the
flock  that  is  given  you ;  but  you  are  not  owners,  only  shepherds ;  and  the  obliga-
tion of  shepherds  is  on  you.

II.  The  responsibility  of  parents  to  whom  God  has  entrusted  His  flock.
The  question  will  be  put,  sooner  or  later,  "  Where  is  the  flock  given  thee?"

The  great  responsibility  of  parents  is  seen  in  this,  that —

1.  They  had  to  impart  religious  ideas.  At  home  the  first  principles  are  instilled  :
indeed,  the  child's  mind  is  there  made  acquainted  with  the  germs  of  all  truth — sin,

283


OBAF.  xm.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y .-  JEREMIA  B.


forgiveness,  righteousness,  salvation,  love  human  and  Divine  :  all  the  ideas  invoWed
in  religion.

2.  Parents  represent  to  their  children  the  character  of  the  Invisible  God^  Jewish
kings  substituted  and  were  to  represent  the  "  King  of  kings."  The  Incarnate  Jesus
revealed  "  the  Father  in  heaven."  The  gospel  is  a  declaration  of  the  Paternal
Love.  The  parental  relationship,  therefore,  represents  God  to  the  little  ones ;  and
they  get  their  first  ideas  of  Him  from  what  their  parents  are.

3.  The  inquiry  *^for  the  flock "  will  be  addressed  to  parents.  God  will  ask  of
them  "  the  beautiful  flock  "  that  made  bright  their  homes.  The  time  will  come
when  this  inquiry  will  be  addressed  from  the  judgment  throne  to  parents.  And
among  the  gathered  flocks  in  the  "  one  fold  "  of  heaven  Christ  will  ask  for  yours.
Alas  !  some  will  pass  childless  into  the  gates  of  heaven  ;  bereaved  not  by  death  but
by  sin :  themselves  saved,  their  children  lost.  How  will  their  ears  receive  the
words,  "  Enter  into  the  joy  of  your  Lord"  1  Others  will  themselves  be  arrested  at
the  throne ;  themselves  rejected  :  and  to  them  also  will  the  inquiry  come,  *'  Where
is  thy  flock?"  Driven  by  thee  into  perdition — souls  which  were  not  thine,  lambs
whom  Jesus  came  to  save  I

III.  The  way  in  whicli  this  responsibility  should  be  met.  If  you  would  pre-
pare to  answer  joyfully  this  question,  set  it  before  you  as —

1.  A  distinct  purpose.  The  wish  for  your  children's  salvation  is  not  enough.
Many  good  people  are  bad  parents  through  lack  of  this  purpose  that  their  children
shall  be  saved ;  a  purpose  registered  in  the  sight  of  God  over  each  child  singly.

2.  Intense  devotion  is  necessary.  Lukewarm  piety  will  never  enable  a  man  to  say
at  the  throne,  *' Behold  I  and  the  children  which  God  has  given  me!"  To  have
converting  power  over  your  own  children  you  must  love  their  souls,  and  hold  them
fast  for  God. — Rev.  Alden  Davies,  in  "  Christian  World  Pulpit.**

Topic :  Custom  in  Sin  Exceeding  Dangerous.  Text :  "  Can  the  Ethiopian
change  Ins  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots  f  then  may  ye  also  do  good  that  art
accustomed  to  do  evil "  (ver.  23).

The  miserable  condition  of  sin  is  here  exhibited  in  two  branches,  its  defilement
and  its  entanglement.

I.  The  defilement  of  sin.  This  is  propounded  from  a  double  resemblance,  the
bloAikness  of  the  Ethiopian,  and  the  spots  of  the  leopard.  It  is  a  polluting  and  de-
forming thing ;  whether  man  be  regarded  as  corporeal  or  spiritual.  Let  it  be
beauty  of  the  body,  sin  will  cause  loathsomeness  ;  or  beauty  of  mind,  sin  will  take
off  the  comeliness,  and  reduce  it  to  coarseness  and  lust.  Let  men  be  what  they
may,  yet  if  defiled  by  sin,  they  are  so  far  forth  very  unlovely.  They  may  not  see
their  own  ugliness,  deformity,  and  filthiness  in  sin,  as  Ethiopians  do  not  perceive
their  own  blackness,  nor  are  sensible  of  it ;  nay,  they  count  their  blackness  their
greatest  beauty  ;  yet  this  does  not  make  them  a  whit  the  comelier.

To  open  this  defilement  and  deformity  which  is  in  sin  the  morey  w«  may  take
notice  of  four  particulars  : —

1.  The  inherence  of  sin.  Like  the  blackness  of  the  Ethiopian,  and  epots  of
leopard.  "  Behold  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,"  <kc.  (Pi.  IL  5)  ;  "  \V  are  by  nature
children  of  wrath "  (Eph.  ii.  3) ;  **  The  wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womh  "
(Ps.  Iviii.  3).  (1)  This  should  humble  and  abase  us  in  consideration  of  our  own  vile-
ness  ;  not  lead  us  to  excuse  our  sins.  If  sin  were  a  thing  which  men  fell  into  only
by  chance,  as  something  adventitious  to  them,  some  palliation  might  be  found  ;  but
its  being  inbred  and  natural  makes  it  the  more  abominable.  Let  us  prosecute  the
work  of  humility  and  deep  contrition,  being  aflBicted  in  soul  on  account  of  this
natural  deformity.  And  (2)  we  see  here  what  cause  we  have  to  desire  that  God  would
change  our  nature,  and  bestow  a  new  nature  upon  us.

2.  The  m>onstrov,sness  of  sin.  As  we  have  seen  it  in  its  generation,  so  may  we
look  upon  it  in  its  degeneration.      (\)  If  niters  a  man^s  country ;  turns  an  Israelis

284


BOM  1  LET  I C  aOMMJSNTAMY :  JERBMIAB,  oSap.  xm.

into  an  **  Mhiopian"  and  thus  causes  a  degeneration  there.  (2)  It  also  alters  a
man's  nature;  gives  a  man  the  quality  and  disposition  even  of  the  beasts,  makes
him  a  "  leopard,"  and  thus  makes  a  degeneration  there.  See  Ps.  xlix.  20,  "  I  was
at  a  beast  before  Thee."  Thus  does  sin  degenerate,  debase,  and  put  the  sinner
below  himselfl

.3.  The  multiplication  of  sin.  It  is  various;  expressed  here  by  the  **  leopard's
spots.'*  Sin  is  a  beast  of  divers  colours  and  marks  and  spots.  A  large  catalogue
in  Gal.  v.  19,  where  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  made  manifest.  There  are  not  more
spots  in  a  leopard  than  there  are  lusts  in  a  corrupt  heart.

4.  The  universality  of  sin.  It  is  a  deformity  in  all  the  parts,  not  one  excepted:  as  is
the  blackness  of  the  Ethiopian  and  the  spots  of  the  leopard.  Sin  makes  a  man
universally  sinful  and  polluted  in  every  part  and  member  of  him  (Isa.  i.  5  ;  Gen.
vi.  5).  On  the  other  side,  good  men  are  freed  from  these  spots:  "Thou  art  all  fair,
my  love,  there  is  no  spot  in  thee"  (Cant.  iv.  7) ;  "  Not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,"
Ac.  (Eph.  V.  27).     See  also  2  Peter  iii.  14 ;  James  i.  27  ;  Jude  23.

Let  us  not  look  upon  these  things  as  mere  metaphors,  but  as  carrying  a  manifest
truth  and  reality  in  them  ;  believe  them,  and  be  affected  by  them.  Let  this  carry
us  so  much  the  more  closely  to  Christ,  and  cause  us  to  admire  God's  free  grace  in
Him,  as  the  *'  Fropitiation  for  sin/*  and  "the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world."  The  vileness  of  sin  should  make  it  loathsome  to  us,  and  love  the
means  appointed  for  our  recovery  from  it,

IL  The  entanglements  of  sin.  Expressed  in  the  unmovahleness  and  un-
changedbleness  of  it ;  as  "  the  Ethiopian  cannot  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his
spots."

1.  The  qualification  [or  condition]  of  the  persons  *'  accustomed  to  do  evil."
More  correctly  '*  taught  to  do  evil."  Taught  (1^  By  doctrine  and  instmction.  There
is  a  great  deal  of  such  teaching  in  the  world  (see  Matt.  v.  19  ;  Tit.  i.  11 ;  Mark
vii.  7)  ;  and  a  great  deal  of  ill -learning  also  follows  thereupon  ;  people  are  here
quickly  taught,  so  capable  and  appreciative  are  they  (2  Tim.  iv.  3,  4).  Those  who
are  thus  taught  to  do  evil  cannot  do  good;  there  is  an  impotency  and  indisposition
upon  them  to  all  good,  and  a  proneness  to  all  eviL  Popery,  Pelagianism,  Anti-
nomianism,  though  they  do  not  always  break  forth  into  actual  enormities,  yet  have
that  within  them  which  teaches  and  leads  to  sin.  (2)  By  pattern  and  example.
That  which  men  see  to  be  practised  they  soon  and  easily  fall  into.  (3)  By  practice
and  use  "  accustomed  to  do  eviL"  Use  makes  perfect.  There  is  an  art  in  wicked-
ness itself :  '*  wise  to  do  evil."  Men  are  not  expert  and  expedite  at  first  in  such
sins  as  swearing,  drinking,  gaming ;  but  experience  comes  with  use ;  then  "  they
drink  in  iniquity  as  water" — *'draw  on  iniquity  as  with  cart-ropes" — "do  evil
with  both  hands  earnestly" — "turn  to  evil  course  as  a  horse  rusheth  to  the
battle."

2.  7%e  invincible  necessity  which  follows  upon  custom  in  sin — they  "  cannot  do
good."  As  well  attempt  to  make  the  Ethiopian  white  or  remove  spots  from
leopard,  which  are  expressions  of  labour  in  vatTi,  as  to  reduce  an  habituated  sinner.
The  invincible  necessity  and  tyranny  of  accustomed  sin  shows  itself  (1)  In  an
impotency  to  good  (Gal.  v.  17).  (2)  A  precipitancy  unto  evil  (Eccles.  viii.  11).
Tlie  ground  of  this  prevalency  of  custom  is  the  fixedness  of  it ;  it  being,  as  it
were,  a  second  nature,  which  is  sure  and  constant  to  its  principle.  Naturalia  non
mtUantur ;  those  things  which  are  natural  are  unchangeable,  (a  )  l^ake  heed  of
having  anything  to  do  with  sin  at  first.  (6.)  If  any  should  fall  into  sin,  do  not
stay  in  it,  but  hasten  out  of  it  with  speed  (Rom.  vi.  1).  (c.)  7^ake  heed  of  relapses^
and  falling  back  to  sin  again  (2  Pet.  ii.  20).  Evil  custom  reassumed  and  habits
returned  to  are  specially  dangerous.

But  when  is  sin  come  to  a  habit  1  Or  how  may  it  be  discerned  so  to  be  ?  We
may  know  it  by  three  considerations —

i.  Frequency.     When  often  and  familiarly  committed.     'Eyyvi  rh  tcoKKcLxxti  r(d

285


lAP.xm.  BOMILlSTlC  COMMENTARY:  JEnEMfATT.


5si,  says  tlie  philosopher  :  That  which  is  often  is  next  to  that  which  is  alwap§;
and  it  very  suddenly  falls  into  it.

ii  Facility.  When  one  is  expedite  in  doing  it.  "  He  that  is  born  of  God  doth
not  commit  sin;"  i.«.,  does  not  make  a  trade  of  it;  but  with  an  unregenerate
heart  it  is  far  otherwise,  he  is  prompt  and  ready  at  it.

iiL  [Felicity]  complacency  and  delight  in  it.  "They  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in
the  daytime"  (2  Pet.  ii.  13;  Ps.  Ixii.  4).  When  wickedness  has  reached  this
height  in  those  corrupted  with  it,  it  proves  very  hard  and  difficult  to  wean  them
from  it :  an  invincible  necessity  lies  upon  the  accustomed  sinner.

Reflection.  This  seems  a  very  uncomfortable  doctrine,  that  an  accustomed
dinner  is  unreclaimablef  and  seems  to  carry  much  disheartening  and  discouragement
in  it.  For  are  those  inured  to  sin  altogether  lost, — without  hope  of  recovery  t
This  is  to  be  understood,  not  absolutely  and  peremptorily,  but  with 'due  limitation.
There  is  One  who  can  reduce,  reform,  and  reclaim  an  habituated  offender.  "  Who  •
can  bring  clean  out  of  unclean  'i  "  **  Not  one  ;"  i.e,y  not  one  man.  Comp.  Matt,
six.  26.  The  Lord,  by  converting  grace,  can  make  the  most  monstrous  sinner  a
good  Christian  ;  can  change  the  skin  of  the  Ethiopian,  <fec.  Instances :  Manasses,
Paul,  jailor,  Mary  Magdalene.  (See  Isa.  xi.  6,  7  ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  31  ;  Acts  viii.  27;
Ethiopian  changed  his  skin.)  The  Lord  is  able.  But  we  must  take  the  words  as
applicable  to  the  sinner,  thus —

1.  He  cannot  do  it,  i.e.,  of  himself .  An  accustomed  sinner  cannot  alter  his  own
heart  or  course  (Jer.  x.  23).  It  is  not  the  question.  Can  the  Ethiopian's  skin  be
changed?  but,  Can  he  change  it?  (Comp.  2  Cor.  iii.  5;  Phil.  ii.  13.)  We  can
no  more  convert  ourselves  than  create  ourselves,  no  more  give  ourselves  a  spiritual
being  than  a  natural,  no  more  raise  ourselves  from  the  death  of  sin  than  from  the
death  of  the  grave.

2.  He  cannot  do  it,  i.e.,  easily.  There  is  great  diflSculty  in  reclaiming  one  habitu-
ated in  sin.  (a.)  Because  Satan  will  be  busy  in  presenting  his  temptations ;
(6.)  Lust  in  the  heart  of  man  will  struggle  towards  the  enticement  (GaL  v.  17)  ;
(c.)  Grace  is  oftentimes  asleep,  which  should  restrain  and  subdue  sin.

Suggestions:  1.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  abstain  from  evil,  we  must  also  "c?o
good"  (see  Ps.  xxxiv.  14;  Isa.  xvi.  17  ;  Rom.  xii.  9).  This  meets  your  negative
Christians,  merely  inoffensive  ;  like  Pharisee,  "  no  extortioner,  no  thief,"  <fec.  But
what  good  do  they  do  ?  2.  Sins  of  commission  have  sins  of  omission  in  them.
Doing  what  they  should  not,  they  neglect  what  they  should  do:  for  they  forfeit
the  opportunity,  lose  the  ability,  and  alienate  the  proffered  assistance  (Ps.  Ii.  11).
3.  N^o  man  can  do  any  good  till  his  nature  be  first  changed.  We  must  become  good
ourselves,  *'  change  skin,"  then  may  good  come  from  us.  This  is  a  fact  confirmed
by  observation  (Matt.  vii.  16),  and  by  doctrine  (Heb.  xi.  6).  Therefore  should  we
seek  the  regenerating  of  God's  Spirit. — Thomas  Norton,  D,D.,  A.D.  1678.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XIII.  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,

Ver.    1.       The   unwashed   girdle.  house  of  Judah  and  of  Jerusalem.  .  .  .

**  Put  it  not  in  water,"  i.e.,  to  wash  or  God  has  put  us  on  as  a  girdle  in  their

whiten  it ;    but   take    it    as  it  is  first  stead.     For   He  has   not  thrown  away

made,  Ut  sorditiem  magis  contrahat,  to  the  girdle  and  remained  unadorned,  but

show,  say  some,  that  the  Jewish  nation,  has     woven     Himself    another.       This

when  first  chosen,  was  black  by  sin  and  girdle  is  tlie  Church  from  the  heathen,

nothing  amiable.     Or,  "  Put  it   not  in  It  should  know  that,  as  God  spared  not

water,"  i.e.,  keep  it  from  being  rotted,  the    former,   much    more   will    He   not

as  a  type  of  God^s  care  of  and  kindness  spare  it  when-  it  sins  and  is  not  worthy

to  that  people. —  Trapp.  of  God's  loins." — Origen.

Ver.  5.  Thk  buried  girdle.     '*  God  Vers.  2,  6.  The  standard  of  goodly

has  cast  off  His  first  people,  the  whole  conduct.     Perfect  obedience.
286


HOMILETI G  COMMENT  A  RY :  J  EREM I A  H.


CHAP.  XUI.


*•  I  worship  Thee,  sweet  Will  of  God  I
And  all  Thy  ways  adore ;
And  every  day  I  live,  I  seem
To  love  Thee  more  and  more.

*'  When  obstacles  and  trials  seem
Like  prison  walls  to  be,
I  do  the  little  I  can  do

And  leave  the  rest  to  Thee.

••  I  know  not  what  it  is  to  doubt,
My  heart  is  ever  gay, —
I  run  no  risks,  for  come  what  will
Thou  always  hast  Thy  way  f

••  I  have  no  cares,  0  blessed  will,
For  all  my  cares  are  Thine  ;
I  live  in  triumph.  Lord,  for  Thou
Hast  made  Thy  triumph  mine."

— Faber,

Ver.  9.  Pride  abased.  "There  never
was  a  saint  yet  that  grew  proud  of  his
fine  feathers  but  the  Lord  plucked  them
out ;  there  never  was  an  angel  that  had
pride  in  his  heart  but  ^he  lost  his  wings
and  fell  iuto  Gehenna,  as  Satan  and
those  fallen  angels  did  ;  and  there  never
shall  be  a  saint  who  indulges  self-con-
ceit and  spiritual  pride  but  the  Lord
will  spoil  his  glories  and  trample  his
honours  in  the  mire." — Spurgeon,

**  Pride  thrust  proud  Nebuchadnezzar
out  of  men*s  society,  proud  Saul  out  of
his  kingdom,  proud  Adam  out  of  Para-
dise, })roud  Haman  out  of  court,  proud
Lucifer  out  of  heaven." — Henri/  Smith.

**  Whose  robe  is  white,  but  heart  is  black
with  pride,
He  for  himself  hell's  gate  has  opened  wide,
For,     weighed    in    God-the-AU-sufficient's

scale,
Kot  claims  nor  righteousness  of  man  avail ;
But  these  are  costly  in  His  sight  indeed —
Repentance,  contrite  shame,  and  sense  of
need. "  — Trench,

"  Remember  what  thou  wert  before
thy  birth — nothmg ;  what  thou  wert
for  many  years  after — weakness;  what
in  all  thy  life — a  great  sinner  ;  what  in
all  thy  excellencies — a  mere  debtor  to
God,  to  thy  parents,  to  the  earth,  and
to  all  creatures.  Upon  these  or  the  like
meditations,  if  we  dwell,  we  shall  see
nothing  more  reasonable  than  to  be
humble,  and  nothing  more  foolish  than
to  be  proud." — Bishop  Tat/lor,

*'  Those  boughs  and  branches  of  trees
which  are  most  richly  laden  with  fruit
bend  downwards  and  hang  lowest." —
Dr,  Gill,


**  Lowliness  is  the  base  of  every  virtue  :
And   he  who  goes  the  lowest  builds  the

safest.
May  Qod  keep  all  His  pity  for  the  proud  1 "

— Bailey.

Ver.  15.  Be  not  proud.  "I  have
read  of  Menecrates,  a  physician  that
would  needs  be  counted  a  god,  and  took
no  other  fee  of  his  patients  but  their
vow  to  worship  him.  Dionysius  Syra-
cusanus,  hearing  of  this,  invited  him  to
a  banquet,  and,  to  honour  him  according
to  his  desire,  set  before  him  nothing  but
a  censer  of  frankincense,  with  the  smoke
whereof  he  was  feasted  till  he  starved,
while  others  fed  on  good  meat." — J,
Adams.

"  Diogenes,  being  at  Olympia,  saw  at
that  celebrated  festival  some  young  men
of  Rhodes  arrayed  most  magnificently
and  exclaimed,  "  This  is  pride !"  After-
wards meeting  with  some  Lacedaemo-
nians in  a  mean  and  sordid  dress,  he
saw  the  same  vanity  in  another  guise,
and  said,  "  And  this  is  also  pride  ! "

Ver.  16.  Rbpentanck  glorifying
God.

**  On  bended  knees,  replete  with  godly  grief,
See  where  the  mourner  kneels  to  seek  relief.
No  *  Qod  I  thank   Thee  t '   freezes  on   his

tongue
For  works  of  merit  that  to  him  belong  ;
Deep  in  his  soul  conviction's  ploughshare

rings,
And  to  the  surface  his  corruption  brings ;
He  loathes  himself,  in  lowest  dust  he  lies,
And,  all-abased,    *  Unclean,   unclean  ! '  he

cries.
From  his  full  heart  pours  forth  the  gush-
ing plea,
*  Qod  of  the  lost,  be  merciful  to  me  !  *
The  light  of  life  descends  in  heavenly  rays.
And  angels  shout  and  sing,    '  Behold,   he
prays  1  '*  —  W.  Holmes,

"  Christ  Jesus  rejoices  over  those  as
blessed  who  mourn  over  themselves  as
cursed,  *  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,
for  they  shall  be  comforted.'  Out  of
the  subtlest  water  God  can  brew  the
sweetest  liquor.  The  skilful  bee  gathers
the  best  honey  from  the  bitterest  herb.
When  the  cloud  has  been  dissolved  into
a  shower  there  presently  follows  a  glori-
ous sunshine.  The  more  a  stone  is
wounded  by  the  hand  of  an  engraver,  the
greater  beauty  is  superinduced  tliereon.
By  groans  unutterable  the  Lord  ushers
in  joys  unspeakable." — Seeker.

287


OBAP.  xin.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  16.  "Stumble  upon  the  dark
mountains;"

**Not  Thou  from  ub,  O  Lord  I  but  we
Withdraw  ourselves  from  Thee.

**  When  we  are  dark  and  dead.
And  Thou  art  covered  with  a  cloud
Hanging  before  Thee  like  a  shroudt
So  that  our  prayer  can  find  no  way.
Oh,  teach  us  that  we  do  not  say,

*  Where  is  Thy  brightness  fled  t*

"  But  that  we  search  and  try
What  in  ourselves  has  wrought  this  blame,
For  Thou  remain  est  still  the  same  ;
But  earth's  own  vapours  earth  may  fill
With  darkness  and  thick  clouds,  while  still

The  sun  is  in  the  sky." — Trench,

**  Arise,  and  search  thy  heart — ^let  nothing  stay
thee;
The  fatal  cause  is  there ;
This  traitor  in  thy  soul  may  else  betray  thee
To  ruin  and  despair.

"  Nor  doubt,  when  thou  with  heart  contrite
and  lowly
Hast  all  thy  sins  confessed.
Thy  night  shall  pass  away,  and  God  the  holy
Shall  hear  and  give  thee  rest." — Dewart,

Goethe's  dying  exclamation  was  mourn-
fully significant — "Open  the  shutter,
and  let  in  more  light !"  Hobbes,  the
infidel,  before  death,  said,  "I  am  taking
a  fearful  leap  into  the  dark !"

Ver.  17.  Lamenting  pbide.  Howard,
the  noble  philanthropist,  was  one  day
visited  by  a  German  Count,  governor  of
Upper  Austria,  with  his  countess,  in-
terested to  see  the  man  who  had  so
excited  public  attention.  The  Count
asked  his  opinion  as  to  the  state  of  the
prisons  in  his  department.  Mr.  Howard
replied,  **  The  worst  in  all  Germany ;''
and  advised  that  the  Countess  should
visit  the  female  prisoners.  "  I,"  she  said
haughtily,  '*  I  go  into  prisons ! "  and
hastily  left  his  presence  in  anger.
Howard,  indignant  at  her  proud  and
unfeeling  disposition,  followed  her,  and
said  in  earnest  remonstrance,  ''Madam,
remember  you  are  a  woman  yourself,  and
must  soon,  like  the  most  miserable
prisoner  in  your  dungeons,  be  enclosed
in  a  small  space  of  that  earth  from
which  you  equally  originated  ! "

Ver,  17.  Sorrowful  tears.

*'  What  gem  hath  dropp'd,  and  sparkles  o*er
his  chain  ?
The  tear  most  sacred — shed  for  others'  pain,

288


That   starts   at   once — bright,    pure — from

pity's  mine,
Already  pohshed  by  the  hand  Divine."

— Bynm,

**The  rose  is  fairest  washed  with  morning  dew.
And   love  is  loveliest  when   embalmed  in
tears."  — Scott.

"Hide  not  thy  tears,  weep  boldly — and  be

proud
To  give  the  flowing  virtue  manly  way:
'Tis   Nature's    mark,   to    know   an   honest

heart  by.
Shame  on  those  breasts  of  stone  that  cannot

melt
In  soft  adoption  of  another's  sorrow." — HUL

Ver.  18.  "  Thb  Queen."  The  Hebrew
has  no  word  to  express  "queen,**  the
fern,  of  "  king,"  nor  its  equivalent  dig-
nity. The  word,  gehirah^  translated
queen,  means  "  mistress "  or  "  lady,"
and  is  used  only  twice  of  a  king's  mfe
(1  Kings  xi.  19,  wife  of  king  of  Egypt,
and  2  Kings  x.  13,  Jezebel,  who  was
not  only  wife  but  daughter  of  a  king).
In  two  other  places  (Jer.  xiii.  18  ',  xxix.
2)  it  may  be  king's  mother,  as  it  clearly
is  in  1  Kings  xv.  13 ;  2  Chron.  xv.  16.

— Gray,

Ver.  18.  Rebuking  royalty.  When
Beza,  in  the  behalf  of  the  Reformed
Churches  of  France,  made  a  speech  at
Possiacum  before  the  young  king  and
the  queen-mother,  he  spake  so  eflfectually,
says  Rivet,  that  a  great  cardinal  who
heard  it  wished  that  either  he  had  been
dumb  that  day,  or  that  they  had  all
been  deaf.

Ver.  23.  Inveterate  habits.  "  Bad
habits  are  very  easily  formed,  but  when
once  formed  they  are  like  the  course  of
a  mighty  river.  Some  of  the  oldest
rivers  in  the  world  have  the  same  place
in  the  map,  and  the  same  windings  on
the  face  of  the  earth  which  they  first
cut  for  themselves  ;  and  that  way  they
have  continued  to  follow  through  the  suc-
cession of  generations." — J.  A.  Wallace,

**  When  at  first  from  virtue's  path  we  stray.
How   shrinks    the   feeble    heart    with   sad

dismay !
More  bold  at  length,  by  powerful  habit  led,
Careless  and  seai  'd  the  dreary  wild  we  tread ;
Behold  the  gaping  gulf  of  sin  with  scorn,
And   plunging  deep   to  endless  death  are

borne."  — J.  Scott.


"  Then  the  shepherds  led  the  pilgrims
to  a  place  where  the^  saw  one  Fool,  and


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xiy.


one  Want-wit   washing   an   Ethiopian,  blackamoor.     And   the  like  said  Nazi-

with  an  intention  to  make  him  white ;  anzen  concerning  Julian  the  Apostate,

but   the    more    they    washed   him   the  It  is  said   that  the   negroes  paint   the

blacker  he  was.     Tlien  they  asked  the  devil  white,  as  being  a  colour  contrary

shepherds  what  this  should  mean.     So  to  their  own,  and  which   they  less  well

they  told  them,  saying,  "  Thus  it  is  with  affect." — Trapp,

the  vile  person  :  all  means  used  to  get  "  Custom  in  sin  takes  away  the  sense

such  an  one  a  good  name,  shall  in  con-  of  it :  and  it  looks  for  continual  enter-

clusion  tend   but   to   make  him   more  tainment  where  it  hath  once  gotten  a

abominable.       Thus    it   was   with   the  haunt.     Nothing  so  weak  as  water ;  yet

Pharisees,  and  so  shall  it  be  with  all  let   much    water   (as    sin,    Satan,    and

hypocrites. — Bunyan,  custom)  be  joined  together,  and  nothing

stronger.     It  was  not  for  nothing,  there-

"  Habitual  evil«  change  not  on  a  sudden,  ^         ^^^^  ^y^^  Cretans,  when  they  would

But  many  daj^s  must  pass,  and  many  sorrows;  .i     •                 •            •^•t             1    i.-.^

Conscious  remorse  and  anguish  must  be  felt,  C«rse    their    enemies    with    most    bitter

To  curb  desire,  to  break  the  stubborn  will,  execrations,    wished    that    they   might

And  work  a  second  nature  in  the  soul,  take  delight  in  some  or   other  evil  cus-

Ere  Virtue  can  resume  the  place  «^«^^-J^  tom.      Modestoque  voti  genere  efficacissi-

mum  ultionis  genus  reperiunt,  saith  the

"Said  Diogenes,  when  he  reproved  an  historian  (Val.  Max.);  by  a  modest  kind

ill  man  to  no  purpose,  *  JBthiopem  ahluo  of  wish  they  sufficiently  avenged  them-

iU  eandidum  reddam;*  I  do  but  wash  a  selves." — Idem,


CHAPTER  XIV

Cbitioal  and  Exeoetioal  Notes.— 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  This  and  chapter  xv.
form  one  prophecy  (although  Lange,  Keil,  and  others  connect  chapters  xiv.  to  xvii.,  regarding
them  as  interwoven  and  synchronous).  From  evidence  of  personal  hardship  towards  Jeremiah
(xv.  10),  most  probably  these  prophecies  were  delivered  during  the  early  years  of  Jehoiakim's
reign.  (See  on  chapter  vii.)  Also  for  Contemporary  Scripttires :  National  Affairs,  Contempo-
raneoug  ffigtory,  see  chapter  vii.

2.  Natural  History.— Ver.  1.  **  Dearth  :*'  hatstaorethy  restraint,  «c  of  rain.  Although
Palestine  is  a  very  fruitful  land,  famine  naturally  followed  close  upon  failure  of  rain  (1  Kings
xvii.;  Josephus,  Ant.  xv.  9,  1).  See  on  chapter  ii.  ver.  16  ;  and  specially  Historic  Events,  cf.
"The  Land  withered  by  Drought,"  p.  62.  Ver.  2.  ''Gates  languish.**  (See  Addenda  on
verse).     Ver.   5.    "The  hind:*'  the  female  of  the  hart  or  stag:  ri/^J^.     The  Aydeth  is  a

V  r  ~

frequent  Scripture  figure  suggesting  gentleness  (Prov.  v.  19),  fleetness  and  agility  (Ps.  xviii.
83;  Hab.  iii.  19),  delicate  modesty  (Cant.  ii.  7,  iii.  6),  and  in  this  verse,  maternal  affection,  she
being  adduced  as  an  extreme  illustration  of  the  effects  of  the  famine  on  one  of  the  most  ardent
creatures.     Ver.  6.  "  Wild  asses:"  cf.  notes  on  ii.  24.     *'  Dragons:**  ef.  notes  on  ix.  11.

8.  Manners  and  Customs.— Ver.  3.  **  Nobles  have  sent  their  lUtle  ones  to  the  waters:*'  t.e.,  to
the  tanks  for  holding  water ;  pits  or  cisterns.  (See  notes  on  ii.  13.)  **  Covered  their  heads:  '*
(See  on  ii.  37).  Ver.  8.  '*  Wayfaring  man  that  turneth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night:**  t.«.,  thai
pitcheth  his  tent  to  tarry  :  in  recognition  of  the  custom  of  travellers  to  carry  their  tent  with
them,  and  in  which  they  tarried  for  the  night.  Ver.  12.  **  An  oblation:**  i.e.,  meat-offering
{ef.  Lev.  ii.  1) ;  the  minchah,  which  was  not  a  sacrificial  offering,  but  was  usually  offered  as
supplementary  thereto,  and  consisted  of  articles  of  food,  or  of  oil.

4.  Literary  Critldims.— Ver.    1.    ''Dearth:**    occurring    here    in    the  plural^  D^I^JSn,

restraintSf  it  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  numerical  succession  of  dearths,  but  is  used  idiomati-
cally (a  common  form  in  the  Heb.)  for  intensity  and  continuance.  Whatever  has  extension  of
time  or  space  is  expressed  by  the  Heb.  pi.  Ver.  2.  "Black  unto  the  ground:**  "covered  by
mourning  even  to  the  earth"  (Naeg.) ;  "they  bow  mourning  towards  the  earth"  (Hend.).
Ver.   8.    "Nobles   sent   their  little  ones:"  the  word  rendered   "little  ones,**  ^S^^  =tobe

meant  inferior,  as  well  as  little  :  and  in  this  instance  more  correctly  should  be,  their  servants
or  inferiors.  Ver.  i,  "Cfround  is  chapt:*'  lit.  dismayed.  Ver.  6.  "No  grass:**  comp.  with
ver.  6,  "  no  grass,"  The  two  words  are  different,  Ktt^l  (ver.  6),  =  green-grass ;  ^^V^  (ver.  6),=
under-shrvbs,  or  bushes  (Gen.  i.  11,  =  herb).  Ver.  8.  "  Tumeth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night:*
yf?^  711^2'  the  nmple  meaning  of  illO^  her*  rendered  "turneth  sMdm"  is  to  stretch  outt
'       V'  "  289


(WAP.  XIV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  .  JEREMIAH,

unfold,  i.e.,  to  spread  a  tent :  lit.  to  stretch  (his  tent)  to  pass  the  night.  Ver.  9.  **  A  man
astonied:'*  a  word  which  occurs  only  here,  DHT^  •  Syriac  give&  feeble,  Vulgate,  vagtu;  but

the  LXX  (either  mistaking  the  word  for  DT^i    or  changing  it)  render  it  by  inrvCiv,  in  deep

sleep  ;  but  the  word  is  by  all  critics  traced  to  the  Arabic  dahama,  to  confound,  take  unawareSp
ztupify,  strike  dumb.  Ver.  13.  "  Oive  you  assui  ed  peace : "  lit.  peace  of  truth,  i.e.,  true,
durable  peace.     Ver.   14.   "ul  thing  of  nought :"   7Wi^     "  eZtZis  probably  a  diminution  of  e2»

God,  and  signifies  a  small  idol  made  of  the  more  precious  metals  (Isa.  ii.  20,  zix.  3).  But  as
the  Jews  habitually  called  idols  vanity,  falsehood,  and  the  like,  the  word  clU  soon  suggested  a
derivation  from  the  negative  particle  al.  not :  and  there  are  two  places  where  it  has  the  secondary
meaning  of  worthlessness  (Job  xiii.  4;  Zeeh.  xi.  17).  A.V.  Idol  shepherd.  Elul  (in  text)  may  be
an  oracle  given  by  an  Elil.'* — Dr.  Payne  Smith.  Ver.  17.  **  A  very  grievowt  blow:"  cf.  notes
on  X.  19.  Ver.  18.  "  Behold  them  that  are  sick  with  famine  ;"  lit.  the  sickness,  or  tortures  of
famine,  ^K^/nj^    turments.     ''^  Qo  about  into   a   land  that   they  know  not:"  i5rend.  =  ** shall

migrate  into  a  land  which  they  know  not ;  "  Naeg.,  '*go  into  the  country  and  know  nothing  ;**
Speaker's  Com.,  "go  about  into  a  land  and  know  not ;"  Rosen.  Umbreit,  "wander  about  in  the
land  and  know  not  what  t(  dt  •  "  Oraf.  "shall  go  as  beggars  into  a  strange  land;"  Mitzig.
**  they  move  into  a  land  which  they  know  not."

HOMILIES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XIV.

Sections   1-9.  Pleading  with  God  over  a  calamitous  dearth.

„     19-16.  Jehovah's  refusal  to  allow  intercession  to  preraiL
,,     17-22.  A  piteous  lament  for  the  nation's  woe.

Vers.  1-9.  Pleading  with  God  over  a  Calamitous  Dearth.

The  first  verse  is  the  title  to  the  whole  chapter :  it  does  indeed  all  concern  the
dearth,  but  much  of  it  consists  of  the  prophet's  prayers, — not  unfitly  said  to  be
"  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  him  ;"  for  every  acceptable  prayer  Qtodi  puts
into  our  hearts ;  our  word  that  goes  to  Him  is  His  word  that  comes  to  us.

I.  The  language  of  nature  lamenting  the  calamity.

1.  2' he  people  of  the  land  were  all  in  tears.  *'  Judah  mourns  ;"  not  for  the  sin
but  for  the  trouble,  not  for  the  withholding  of  God's  favour  but  of  rain.  "  The
gates  languish,"  those  who  pass  through  them,  or  assemble  there  are  pale  with  want
and  fear.  "  They  are  black  unto  the  ground ; "  as  mourners,  they  sit  on  the
ground.  "  The  cry  of  Jerusalem  is  gone  up ;  "  not  the  cry  of  their  prayer  but  of
their  complaint.

2.  The  great  men  of  the  land  felt  ilie  judgment.  "The  nobles  sent,"  <fec. ;  perhaps
having  bad  to  part  with  their  servants  through  scarcity,  they  had  to  send  their
own  "  children  "  (comp.  1  Kings  xviii.  5,  6).  Rather,  their  inferior  officers.  But
they  "returned  with  their  vessels  empty."  Not  "ashamed"  for  their  sins  but
unsuccess.

3.  The  husbandmen  suffered  most  severely  (ver.  4).  The  ground  was  so  parched
and  hard,  nothing  could  be  done.  How  dependent  are  husbandmen  upon  the
Divine  providences  I

4.  The  case  even  of  tlie  toild  beasts  was  very  pitiable  (vers.  5,  6).  Man's  sins
bring  judgments  upon  the  earth  which  make  even  the  inferior  creatures  groan.
"  The  hinds,"  what  have  they  done  ?  Lovely  and  loving  creatures  ;  yet  they  were
driven  to  act  contrary  to  natural  instincts.  *'  The  wiki  asses  "  cannot  breathe  in
the  parched  land,  so  climb  to  "  highest  places,"  and  there  "  snuflf  up  the  wind  like
dragons."

II.  The  language  of  grace  lamenting  the  iniquity,  and  complaining  to  God  of
the  calamity.

The  people  are  not  forward  to  pray,  but  the  prophet  prays  for  them,  to  excite
them  to  pray  for  themselves.

1.  Sin  is  humbly  confessed  (ver.  7).     Our  sins  are  witnesses  against  us,  and  true
penitents  see  them  as  such  :  too  numerous  to  be  concealed,  for  they  "are  many  :**
too  heinous  to  be  excused,  for  they  are  "  against  Thee."
390


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  x:t.


2.  Mercy  is  earnestly  begged.  *•  Though  our  iniquities  testify  against  us,  yet  do
Thou  it  for  Thy  name's  sake  "  (ver.  7).  Not  particularising  whaty  leaving  that  to
God.  Our  best  pleas  in  prayer  are  fetched  from  the  glory  of  God's  own  name —
we  have  notliing  to  plead  in  ourselves,  but  everything  in  Him.  Also,  *'  Leave  us
not"  (ver.  9).  We  should  dread  and  deprecate  God's  departure  more  than  every
loss.

3.  TJieir  relation  to  God  is  most  pathetically  pleaded.  Their  interest  in  Him
and  expectations  from  Him  grounded  thereon  (vers.  8,  9).

(1.)  They  look  upon  Him  as  One  they  have  reason  to  eocpect  should  deliver  them
in  distress.  He  pleads,  "  Thou  art  the  Hope  of  Israel;"  God  had  encouraged  His
people  to  hope  in  Him.  "  The  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  truth;"  since  God  is  their
all-sufficient  Saviour  they  ought  to  look  to  Him  in  their  greatest  straits.  "  2'hou
art  in  tJie  midst  of  us  ;^^  we  have  the  special  tokens  of  Thy  presence,  temple,  ark,
oracles.  "  We  are  called  hy  Thy  name  :"  therefore,  what  evils  we  are  under  reflect
dishonour  upon  Thee,  as  if  Thou  wert  not  able  so  relieve  Thine  own.

(2.)  It,  therefore,  grieves  them  that  He  does  not  appear  for  their  deliverance.
Because  He  will  seem  (a.)  Unconcerned  for  His  own  people  ;  as  "  a  stranger  in  the
land"  who  does  not  interest  himself  in  its  interests  ;  ^*  as  a  wayfaring  man"  (fee,
instead  of  *'  resting  here  for  ever."  Though  God  never  is,  yet  He  sometimes  seems
careless  of  His  Church.  Christ  slept  when  His  disciples  were  in  a  storm.  (6.)  In-
capable of  giving  them  relief.  (Comp.  Num.  xiv.  16.)  ^^  As  a  man  astonied"  at
a  loss  what  to  do,  or  ^*  as  a  mighty  man  "  overpowered  by  others  more  mighty,  and
therefore  **  cannot  save."  Either  conception  was  an  insult  to  the  Divine  perfec-
tions. It  becomes  us  thus  in  prayer  to  be  equally  concerned  for  God's  glory.
(Comp.  Henry.     See  also  Noticeable  Topics  to  chap.  xiv.  infra,)

Vers.  10-16.    Jehovah's  Refusal  to  allow  Intercession  to  Prevail.

See  Addenda  on  ver.  8,  ^^Intercessory  Prayer;"  and   on   ver.    12,  ^^  Fasting
offensive."     Comp.  Section  nhdi.^.  xi.  14-17;  also  on  chap.  vii.  16-20.
I.  The  Lord's  answer  to  the  prophet's  prayer.

1.  He  points  to  the  backsliding  of  the  people,  for  which  He  now  punishes  them
(ver.  10).  In  the  **  thus  have  they  loved  to  wander  "  lies  a  backward  reference  :
not  to  the  vain  wanderings  for  water  (ver.  3),  nor  to  the  restless  movements  of  the
thirsty  animals  (ver.  5,  6),  but  to  the  substance  of  Jeremiah's  prayer,  in  which  he
complained  of  God's  seeming  alienation  and  indifiference  :  thus^  in  like  degree  as
Jehovah  has  estranged  Himself  from  His  people  (vers.  8,  9),  have  they  estranged
themselves  from  their  God.  They  loved  to  wander  after  strange  gods,  therefore
He  punishes  them  (Hos.  viii.  13).

2.  He  refuses  the  prophet's  prayer  because  He  loathes  the  peoples  soulless  fastings
and  sacrifices  (vers.  11,  12).  They  turn  to  Him  in  their  need,  but  only  in  lip
service  and  formality  ;  their  hearts  are  with  their  idols.  By  bringing  sacrifices,
these  hollow-hearted  hypocrites  thought  to  give  '*  pleasure  '*  to  God,  and  win  His
leniency  and  mercy.

3.  He  specifies  the  m^ans  by  which  He  will  destroy  this  backsliding  people.
Threefold  :  battle,  famine,  and  pestilence,  when  their  cities  are  besieged  by  the
nearing  foe  (cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  25,/.).

II.  The  prophet  renews  his  endeavours  to  entreat  God's  favour.

1.  He  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  they  had  been  deceived  (ver.  13).  He  offers
the  excuse  for  this  people  that  the  delusive  forecastings  of  false  prophets  who
promised  peace  had  confirmed  them  in  their  infatuation.

2.  But  they  are  not  excused  on  that  account;  for  they  gave  credit  to  lies.  (1)
God  had  not  comtnissiimed  these  prophets  (ver.  14).  The  cumulation  of  these
words,  "  lying  vision,"  <kc.,  shows  God's  indignation  against  the  wicked  practices
of  these  uien.      (2)  Their  easy  and  willing  dupes  are   condemned  to   ignominy.


CHAP.  xrr.  ffOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


The  lies  of  these  false  prophets  flattered  the  sinful  passions  of  the  people,  who
therefore  would  not  hear  nor  take  to  heart  the  word  of  the  true  prophets  who
preached  repentance  and  return  to  God.

3.  Seducers  should  perish  with  those  they  seduced.     They  should  perish  *'  by
sword  and  famine"  who  affirmed  these  should  not  come  upon  the  people.     And
with  the  specification  of  the  various  classes  of  the  people  upon  whom  judgments
sliould  fall,  must  be  compared  the  account  of  their  participation  in  idolatry  (vii
1 8) . — Arranged  from  Keil.

Vers.  18-20.  A  Pitbous  Lameitt  for  the  Nation's  Woe.

"  Thou  shalt  say  unto  them  this  word ; "  but  actually  no  word  from  God
follows.  What  then  ?  Is  there  a  message  here  lost  from  God^s  book  ?  Nay.
Jehovah  bids  His  prophet  utter  his  cries  and  prayers  in  the  hearing  of  tlie  hardened
nation  and  pour  out  his  tears  of  grief ;  that  his  pain  in  contemplating  Judah's
nearing  ruin  may  touch  and  arouse  them.

I.  Doleful  scenes.  Depicted  vividly  by  the  prophet,  whose  shocked  and
appalled  gaze  rests,  by  prevision,  upon  them.

1.  Occasions  for  grief  The  miseries  the  Chaldeans  would  inflict  are  all  arrayed
under  his  eye  :  "  broken  with  a  great  breach,  with  a  very  grievous  blow."  (See
Section,  x.  17-25  ;  and  Homilies  on  x.  19,  20.)  "  In  the  field"  tlie  slain  ;  "»»
the  city,"  the  starved.

2.  Froftision  of  tears.  For  one  he  tenderly  cherishes — "  the  virgin  daughter  of
my  people ; "  and  in  whose  miseries  he  poignantly  shares.  "  Let  mine  eyes  run
down  with  tears,"  &c.     (See  Homilies  and  Notes  on  ix.  1,  and  xiii.  17.)

II.  Painful  conjectures.  He  lifts  his  eyes  from  the  scene  of  stricken  Judah  to
Judah's  God,  and  assays  to  interpret  God's  reason, — the  dreadful  explanation  that
lay  behind  the  appalling  facts;  "  Hast  thou  utterly  rejected?"  &c.  (ver.  19).

1.  That  God  had  abandoned  His  people.  It  seemed  incredible.  Paul  asked  in
equal  amaze  and  shrinking,  "Hath  God  then  cast  away  His  people  1"  (Rom.  xi.  1).
True,  Judah  merited  such  abandonment :  but  is  the  rejection  final,  hopeless  :
"  utterly  rejected  "  ?

2.  That  Zion  should  he  **  loathed"  by  Him.  The  word  means,  to  throw  away  as
worthless.  And  can  Zion  have  become  thus  obnoxious  to  Jehovah  1  No  yearning
pity  left  in  the  ^^  soul"  of  Him  who  had  said,  "  I  remember/or  thy  sake  the  kindness
of  thy  youth,  and  the  love  of  thine  espousals  ? "  (See  Notes  and  Homilies  on
ii.  2,  3.)

III.  Frustrated  hopes.  Here  the  prophet  expresses  the  people's  delusive  ex-
pectations :  *'  We  looked  for  peace,"  <fec.

1.  Flattering  hopes.  Easily  and  gladly  cherished.  Sinners  are  ready  to  believe
in  coming  good.

2.  False  hopes.  Unfounded  expectations  bring  bitter  awakenings:  the  delusions
yield  to  desolations.     (See  Notes  and  Homilies  on  viii.  16.)

IV.  Penitent  confessions.  This  is  language  spoken  for  them  which  should
have  been  spoken  by  them  (ver.  20).

1.  Personal  trarisgression.  "Our  wickedness;"  their  own  individual  outrage  of
righteousness,  violation  of  covenants,  provocations  of  Divine  wrath.  No  evading
the  directness  of  their  criminality.

2.  Perpetuated  iniquity.  "  The  iniquity  of  our  fathers."  Not  that  they
acknowledged  their  ancestors'  sin,  they  might  leave  that ;  but  we  acknowledge  our
wickedness,  the  iniquity  of  our  fathers,"  t.c,  which  is  the  repetition  of  their  iniquity.

3.  Inexcusable  wickedness.  "Sinned  against  Thee  I"  Against  a  God  so  holy,
munificent,  faithful.      (See  Addenda  o\\  ver.  20,  ^^ Sin  acknowledged.")

IV.  Wrestling  prayers.     Jeremiah   had  been   prohibited  by  Gk)d  to  pray  (ver.
11),  but  lie  returns  to  his  knees  in  impassioned  importunity  and  pathos.
292


HOMILBTIC  COMNENTART:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xit.


1.  He  pleads  thai  God  will  not  alienate  His  heart  from  Judah,  Afflict  with
Thine  hand  if  need  be,  but  do  not  shut  us  from  Thine  heart :  "  do  not  abhor  us**

2.  He  appeals  to  the  honour  and  fidelity  of  Jehovah.  The  honour  of  Hia
name  :  "  For  Thy  name's  sake."  The  honour  of  His  temple;  "  the  throne  of  Thy
glory,"  preserve  that  from  defamation  and  spoliation.  The  honour  of  His  promises:
"break  not  Thy  covenant  with  us."     Remember  Thy  word  unto  Thy  servants,  <kc.

3.  He  casts  all  hope  implicitly  on  God.  No  other  object  of  worship  availed  for
their  help :  "  Are  there  any  among  the  vanities  of  the  Gentiles  that  can  cause
rain  1 "  No  regard  to  Nature  or  heed  of  second  causes  would  now  suffice  :  **  Can
XhQ  heavens  give  showers?"  Nay,  God  "made  all  these  things."  Therefore,  on
Him  alone  and  trustfully  they  would  wait  (Zech.  x.  1).  And  this  was  the  en-
couragement of  their  trust ;  not  only  in  God's  power  as  Creator,  but  in  this  fact,
"  Art  not  Thou  He,  O  Lord  our  Godf  "  Our  help  Ib  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
who  made  both  heaven  and  earth."

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XIV.

Ver.  1.  "  Concerning  the  dearth ;"  see  2.   Unless  he  drink  soon  he  must  die.

Historic  Events.    Cf  The  land  mth-  Therefore  "  the  nobles "  bestirred  them-

ered  by  drought,  chap.  iii.  3 ;  and  Notes  selves  :  as  once  king  Ahab  and  his  lord

and  Homily  on  ix.  12.  chamberlain  Obadiah  had  to  do  (1  Kings

Ver.   3.   Theme:  Vain  SBAmOH   for  xviii.  5,  6):  for  all  ranks  of  mankind

WATER.  are  dependent  on  water  for  life — must

For    explanation    of   *'  pits    and   no  drink  or  die.

water,"  see  Notes,   Manners  and  Cus-  HI.  Search  utterly  vain.     "Found

tomSy  ch.  ii.  13  :  and  for  General  Com-  no  water."

ments,  see  Section  ii.  9-13.     See  also  1.  Fruitless  efforts.     "They  came  to

Addenda  on  verse.  the  pits,  and  returned  with  their  vessels

L  God's  vital  drink:  "water."     In  empty."     So  men  who  seek  happiness,

God's  hand  to  give  or  withhold.  and  self-justification,  and  peace  of  spirit,

1.  Wate?',  a  physical  necessity.     Can-  and  eternal  hopes,  in  dry  pits,

not  exist  without  it.     A  common  com-  2.  Mocking  sources.     These   "pits"

modity,  despised  as  a  drink  by  those  of  were  the  nation's   sole    supplies — their

vitiated  taste,  but  nevertheless  impera-  reservoirs.    "  Broken  cisterns  which  hold

tive  for  all.  no    water."      (See    on    chap.    ii.     13 ;

2.  Water,  a  spiritual  emblem.    Water  specially  Noticeable  Topics.)

of  life  =  (a.)  the  Gospel  of  Jesus — "  If  3.  Desolating  shame.  "  Returned,
any  thirst,  come  to  Me  and  drink:'*  ashamed,  covered  heads:"  sign  of  very
(b.)  the  sanctifying  Spirit  "  be  in  you  a  great  grief  (2  Sam.  xv.  30 ;  xix.  4).
well  of  water:"  (c.)  the  sacred  refresh-  What  shame  and  grief  will  cover  souls
ings — Draw,  water  out  of  the  wells  of  who  return  to  their  Lord,  never  having
salvation."  Without  these  none  can  found  living  water,  at  the  great  judg-
live.  "  Ho  !  every  one  that  thirsteth,  ment !  And  what  anguish  will  over-
come ye  to  the  waters."  whelm  those  who,  in  the  eternal  world,

IL    Man's     urgent     thirst.      The  never  have  "  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  their

drought   caused    misery  and   mourning  tongues ! "

everywhere:    "Judah   moumeth,   gates  (a.)  When  God  withholds  rain  man's

languish "  (ver.  2).     Suggests :  what  ap-  effort  and  hopes   perish    amid   natural

palling  woe  would  ensue  were  the  Gospel  drought.

%Diihdrawnivomiti2ifi'.  t\iQ  Spirit^ s  sancti-  (b.)  When    the   era   of  grace   closes,

fying  ministry  recalled  by  Jesus ;  and  water  will  nowhere,  never  be  found  for

the  "  wells  of  salvation  "  closed  against  man's  spiritual  needs.

the  pilgrims  to  Zion  !  Ver.  3.  Theme  :  Cisterns  and  the

1.  Without  drink  man   must  perish  FOUJiTAiN.     "They   came  to   the  pits,

Ro  spiritually.  and  found  no  water."

293


CBAP.  XIT.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Jeremiah  describes  the  anxiety  of  the
nobles  for  their  own  safety.  They  and
their  families  were  in  imminent  peril.
The  claims  of  nature  were  urgent  and
the  supply  doubtful.  In  the  hour  of
their  anguish,  both  children  and  ser-
vants were  sent  forth  to  see  if  perchance
any  water  might  yet  remain  in  the
natural  hollows,  or  in  the  artificial  dykes
and  cisterns.  Their  effort  was  vain,
neither  nature  nor  art  responded  to  their
cry  nor  rewarded  their  effort.  Failure
and  disappointment  made  their  hearts
sad.  They  covered  their  heads  with
shame,  confusion,  and  sorrow.  It  is  a
struggle  for  life,  and  death  appeared  to
be  gaining  the  victory.  Their  boasting
was  hushed,  their  folly  was  made  clear,
their  sin  was  finding  them  out,  as  God
declared  it  would.  They  now  realised
that  it  was  a  mournful  and  fatal  error
in  them  to  forsake  the  Fountain  of
Living  Waters,

[God  is  the  Fountain.  The  arm  of
flesh,  the  fancies  of  the  human  brain,
the  energies  of  human  life  are  not  such
as  to  enable  man  to  do  without  God.
Mans  reason  is  a  useful  cistern,  but
fails  most  when  most  required.  God's
word  of  promise  is  the  fountain  whence
flows  our  hope  when  reason's  efforts  fail.
Creeds  are  cisterns  holding  for  practical
and  ready  use  portions  of  knowledge,
but  Christ  is  the  Fountain  in  which  all
the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge
are  to  be  found,  and  from  whom  alone
they  are  to  be  obtained.  Science  hews
out  her  hollows  in  the  rock,  explores  the
cave,  descends  the  valley,  or  scales  the
mountain  height  if  she  may  but  satisfy
the  thirst  of  man,  but  faith,  knowing
that  man  thirsts  for  the  living  God,
listens  for  the  voice  of  Him  who  says
"  Come  unto  Me  and  drink.*']

L  Cisterns  are  human,  the  Fountain
is  Divine.

Human  fancies,  speculations,  attain-
mentSy  achievements,  inventions^  and  works
are  insufficient.  The  love  of  God,  the
work  of  Christ,  the  fellowship  of  the
Spirit,  the  exercise  of  faith,  these  are
Divine,  saving,  comforting.

II.  Cisterns  are  dependent,  the
Fountain  is  self-sustaining.

Our  thoughts  and  experiences  depend
2U


on  many  circumstances,  but  God  revealedy
approachable,  loved,  obeyed,  adoredy  is  in
us  an  ever-springing  well,  <fec.

III.  Cisterns  are  superficial,  the
Fountain  deep.

Things  earthly  and  human  easily
dried  up,  or  by  constant  demand  ex-
hausted. Things  Divine  imperishable,
inexhaustible,  God's  love,  word,  glory
The  well  is  deep.  The  waterpot  is
small.

IV.  Cisterns  are  fullest  when  least
needed,  the  Fountain  always  fulL

The  Prodigal  found  it  so.  It  was  so
at  the  marriage  in  Cana.  The  wine
was  exhausted,  but  Christ  and  His  power
were  then  best  displayed.

V.  Cisterns  are  useful  only  as  con-
nected with  the  fountain.

Solomon's  pools.  Water-supply  of
our  large  towns.  Cisterns,  when  rightly
used,  receive  and  cherish  that  which
flows  from  the  fountain.  A  cistern  in-
stead of,  or  apart  from,  a  fountain  is
the  work  of  presumption  and  folly,  of
unbelief  and  sin.

VI.  Cisterns  need  to  he  kept  in  good
condition  as  well  as  being  connected
with  the  fountain.

Broken  cisterns  can  hold  no  water.
The  means  of  grace,  the  throne  of  grace,
the  obedience  of  faith,  and  all  God's
methods  of  communicating  good  should
be  kept  in  proper  repair,  and  constant
use.  The  wretched  and  selfish  pursuits
of  unbelief  and  sin  are  incapable  of
holding  any  divine  blessing.

VII.  Come  to  the  Fountain.  Christ
is  the  Fountain.  "  If  any  man  thirst  let
him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  Come
and  wash.     Come  and  drink.

Application —

1.  Avoid  the  follies  of  those  who
forsake  God.

2.  Enow  that  all  earthly  comforts
are  insufficient  and  transient.

3.  At  the  time  of  your  deepest  need
go  not  to  pits,  but  to  THE  FOUN-
TAIN.—r.  Whale,

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Man  perishes  ;  QoD

MUST  WORK.

Jews  in  great  distress  by  reason  of
drought.  Every  temporal  calamity  was
viewed  by  them  as  a  Divine  judgment.
No  rain,  blighted  country,  cattle  perish-


BOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  JEEPIMrAtt.


cttAP.  irr.


Ing,  people  languisbfng  in  gates,  what
all  this  but  proof  of  God's  displeasure?

Close  analogy  between  temporal  and
spiritual :  dearth  on  land  =  desolation
of  soul  y  no  gracious  rain  =  no  heavenly
blessing.  This  their  case :  through  sin
alienated  God ;  ver.  8,  implying  fel-
lowship, had  ceased,  God  withdrawn.
While  ver.  9  suggests  that  in  their
distress  God  did  not  arise.

Desolate  lot.  Yet  many  cry,  Why  as
a  Stranger  to  our  souls  ]  Why  lost  fel-
lowship with  Thee  ?  **  Where  is  the
blessedness  I  knew?"  0  Lord,  Saviour
of  Israel,  why  as  cannot  save?  Men
need  salvation,  from  sin,  perils,  care.
The  cry  of  perishing  rises,  "  0  Lord,
though  our  iniquities  testify  against  w«,
do  Thou  it  for  Thy  name^s  sake.^*

I.  A  trustful  prayer  :  "  O  Lord,  do
Thou  it ! "  Whatever  the  prayer  sought,
it  is  clear  that  the  prophet  knew —

1.  God  could  answer  it.  If  favour
lost,  He  could  renew.  Aid  needed,  God
could  exert  power.  Their  case  could
not  surpass  Him.  Hence  aBked  ver.  9.
Knew  God  could  "do  it."  We  know
"  nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord."
Deep  misery,  extreme  need,  great  ini-
quity, ready  to  perish ;  yet  God  can
"  do  "  all  our  case  requires.

2.  God  alone  could  answer  that  prayer.
Appeal  direct  to  "  Lord  :  do  Thou  it."
(See  ver.  22).  Prophet  learned  the
vanity  of  every  other  trust,  but  God
was  "  Hope  of  Israel."  He  was  his
exclusive  trust,  to  none  other  would  he
seek.  Misery  great,  yet  if  Lord  not
relieve,  noue  could.  The  Lord  is  our
only  source  of  hope  or  help.  Look  not
elsewhere,  though  He  seem  to  withhold.

n.  A  mournful  confession :  "  Our
iniquities  testify  against  us."  Sad  that
prayer  must  ever  open  with  this  acknow-
ledgment !

1.  Their  evil  condition.  "  Iniquities^^
the  guilt  and  curse  of  sin  was  on  them.
Many  in  number ;  though  they  had  re-
ceived warning,  and  might  have  shunned
tbem.  "  Testified  against  them  " — con-
science reproached ;  pursued  by  them.
Hearts  cry  out  against  us.  Evil  lives
rise  up  in  witness  against  us,  and  call
for  our  condemnation.

2.  Their  ill  desert.     The  prayer  was


for  God's  favour,  but  sins  were  against
them,  menaced  them.  Mercy  was  asked,
but  iniquities  cried  out  for  judgment.
"My  sins  are  ever  before  me;"  "  Our
iniquities  are  gone  up  into  the  hea-
vens."

3.  Their  stricken  spirit.  Prayer
offered  with  shame  and  contrition.  No
extenuation,  no  excuses.  Confession
ought  thus  to  be  made  in  a  spirit  of  deep
sorrow,  and  humble  sense  of  demerit.
(See  Addenda  ver.  7,  Contrite  Prayer.)

III.  A  prevailing  plea :  "  Do  it,  for
Thy  name's  sake."

1.  Recognises  the  total  absence  of  any
claim  to  mercy.  Could  solicit  nothing
for  their  sakes.

2.  Forgoes  all  allusion  to  mitigating
circumstances.  Nothing  mentioned  to
soften  their  criminality  and  propitiate
God.     "  Just  as  I  am."

3.  Bases  the  hope  of  compassion  on  the
Name  of  God.  His  name  was  *'  The
Lord  merciful  and  gracious,"  <fec.  On
the  ground  that  God's  name  declares
Him  forgiving  and  loving,  ask  forgive-
ness and  love  divine !  "  For  Thy
name's  sake,  0  Lord,  pardon  mine
iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  *'  If  we  con-
fess our  sin,  God  is  faithful  and  just
to  forgive  us  our  sin  and  to  cleanse
us,"  <fec.  In  this  Gospel  dispensation
we  have  the  great  Name  of  Jesus,
"  Saviour,"  to  plead ;  and  "  whatever
ye  shall  ask  the  Father,  in  my  name.  He
will  give  it."

Theme:  God's  name  the  sinner's
Plea.

The  prophet,  though  forbidden  to
pray  (vii.  16  ;  xi.  14,  and  ver.  11),  could
not  forbear,  but  urged  his  prayers  with
all  imaginable  tenderness  and  compas-
sion. Though  he  could  find  no  excuse
for  Israel,  he  could  find  a  plea  in  the
very  character  of  God.

I.  The  sinner's  acknowledgment.

1.  The  prophefs  confession  is  precisely
such  as  befits  the  world  at  large.  (Comp.
Hos.  vii.   10 ;  Ps.  xxxvl   1 ;  Hos.  v.  4,

2.  With  too  great  reason,  also,  may  it
be  adopted,  even  by  the  best  of  men.  The
world  are  willing  slaves  of  sin,  whilst
the  godly  resist  spiritual  enemies.  Yet
much  amiss  within  them :  sins  of  com-

295


GtLkf.  Xlt.


BOMILETW  COMMmTARY:  JEkBMIAS.


mission,  omission,  and  defect  (Isa.  lix.
12).

II.  The  sinner's  plea.  The  request
is  not  specified,  but  seems  to  be  for
restoration  of  God's  favour.  This  all
may  ask,  not  for  what  is  in  us,  but  for
the  sake  of  God's  honour,  and  the  glory
of  His  name.

1.  His  plea  is  open  to  all.  His  exer-
cise of  mercy  is  His  highest  glory  (Deut.
ix.  5;  Ezek.  xx.  9,  14,  22).  Even
when  we  have  provoked  God  to  anger,
we  may  approach  Him  with  this  plea
(see  Josh.  vii.  8,  9).

2.  This  plea  shall  never  he  urged  in
vain.  In  Joshua's  case  it  brought  im-
mediate success  (Josh.  vii.  10,  11).  So
with  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  9-14).  Surely
when  we  plead  the  name  of  Jesus  I
(John  xiv.  13,  14).

Application —

1.  What  should  he  the  effect  of  sin
upon  the  soul  ?  Conviction  of  sin  should
not  keep  us  from  God,  but  hring  us  to
Him :  "  though  our  iniquities  testify,"
<kc.  (Com  p.  Ps.  XXV.  11.)  Sin  is  a
just  ground  for  humiliation,  but  not  for
discou  ragement.

2.  What  shall  surely  he  effectual  to
remove  it  from  the  soul  f  Prayer:  peni-
tential weeping ;  humble  and  contrite
(Jer.  iii.  12,  13,  25)  fervent  and  perse-
vering (Dan.  ix.  18,  19);  offered  in  de-
pendence on  God's  promised  mercies  in
Christ  Jesus  (Jer.  xiv.  20,  21).  God
has  solemnly  engaged  not  to  cast  out
one  who  comes  to  Him  in  His  Son's
name  (Jno.  vi  37). — Simeon.

(See  Noticeable  Topic  on  ver.  8,  infra).
Ver.  8.   Theme :  God  and  teoublbd

HUMANITY.

The  troubles  of  Judah  were  over-
whelming at  this  period.  Indicated  in
preceding  verses.  Text  is  a  patriotic
wail :  "  O  Hope  of  Israel,  the  Saviour
thereof,"  &c.  We  have  to  notice  two
things —

I.  What  God  always  is  to  troubled
humanity.

1.  He  is ''the  Hope."  The  Hope  of
Israel.  Men  in  trouble  want  hope.
Hope  alone  can  buoy  up  amidst  the
surging  sea  of  sorrow.  Of  all  true  hope
God  is  the  author.  (1)  He  is  the  In-
tpirer  of  true  hope.  He  implanted  the
296


instinct  in  the  human  soul.  He  calls  it
forth  by  trial,  makes  the  spark  blaze  in
the  dark  night,  (2)  He  is  the  Sustainer
of  all  true  hope.  Oftentimes  the  lamp
would  go  out  did  He  not  feed  the  wan-
ing flame,  and  shelter  it  from  the  gust.
(3)  He  is  the  Realiser  of  all  true  hope.
If  ever  the  anticipated  deliverance  comes,
it  comes  from  Him.  The  storm-tossed
mariner  "He  bringeth  to  the  desired
haven."

2.  He  is  the  Saviour.  "  The  Saviour
thereof."  He  has  a  claim  to  this  title.
(1)  The  redemption  system  He  has
given  to  the  world  attests  this.  The
Gospel  is  an  infallible  antidote  for  all
the  sorrows  of  humanity,  (2)  The  ex-
perience of  all  who  had  attended  to  His
directions  testifies  this.  It  is  no  objec-
tion to  this  that  men  are  not  saved.
The  physician  may  have  an  infallible
antidote,  yet  if  the  patient  partake  not
of  it,  of  what  value  is  it  to  bim  1  He
alone  can  attest  the  full  ralue  of  a
nautical  chart  who  has  sailed  by  it.
All  the  shipwrecks  of  those  who  neg-
lected it  is  no  argument  against  its  in-
fallibility. Every  man  that  has  adopted
God's  remedial  scheme  has  been  saved.
He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.

XL  What  God  sometimes  seems  to
troubled  humanity.  *'  A  stranger  and
a  wayfaring  man  in  the  land."  A
stranger  in  the  land  is  one  more  or  less
unacquainted  with  what  it  local  and
uninterested  in  it.  There  are  times
when  God  seems  to  be  a  "itranger"
in  these  respects.  He  seems  as  if  He
did  not  know  what  was  going  on  ;  or,
if  He  knew  it,  was  absolutely  in-
different. When  does  He  appear  as  if
a  stranger  to  the  good  f

1,  When  Christlike  enterprises  are
frustrated.     When  great  plans  of  social

philanthropy  and  evangelical  propagan-
dism  break  down  and  disappoint  the
hopes  of  piety,  the  good  man  is  likely
to  feel  that  God  is  "  a  stranger,"  that
He  is  either  ignorant  of  or  indifferent
to  what  is  going  on.

2.  When  the  most  useful  men  are  cut
down  in  the  very  zenith  of  their  life.
When  the  statesman  with  a  measure  for
the  liberties  of  a  nation,  an  author  with
a  book  for  the  mental  quickening  of  a


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAff.


C%M».  It^.


whole  people,  a  preacher  with  a  power
to  attract  and  interest  listening  thou-
sands, is  struck  down  in  a  moment,  the
good  are  likely  to  look  on  and  cry  out
to  the  great  God,  "  Why  art  Thou  a
stranger  in  the  land?"

3.  When  prosperity  attends  the  wicked
and  adversity  the  good.  This  has  ever
been  felt  to  be  a  trial.  "  Wherefore  do
the  wicked  become  rich  % "  Asaph  said,
"  My  foot  well  nigh  slipped,  when,"  <fec.
Who  that  sees  the  wicked  rising  to  for-
tune and  eminence,  and  the  good  sinking
to  penury  and  want,  does  not  often  ex-
claim within  himself,  "  Why  art  Thou
a  stranger  ] "

4.  When  enormous  outrages  are
rampant  in  society.  Such  as  the  cruci-
fixion of  Christ,  tremendous  wars,  <fec.
At  such  seasons  the  good  look  up  to
heaven  and  cry,  "  Why  art  Thou  a
stranger  ?  "  Why  not  interpose,  break
the  sword,  and  strike  evil  down  t —
Homilist.

Vers.    7-9.     Theme:    Jebemiah    a

WRESTLER  WITH  THE  LORD  IN  PRAYER.

In  this  he  is  a  second  Jacob  who
was  called  '*  Israel."

L  In  what  the  Lord  is  strong
against  the  prophet.  The  sin  of  the
people.     **  Iniquities  testify  against  us."

II.  In  what  the  prophet  is  strong
against  the  Lord.  The  name  of  the
Lord.  "Though  iniquities  testify  against
us,  do  Thou  it  for  Thy  name's  sake."

1.  In  itself:  God's  name  compels
Him  to  show  He  is  not  a  desperate  hero,
a  giant  who  cannot  save  (ver.  9).

2.  In  that  His  nam^  is  borne  by
Israel :  thus  He  is  bound  to  show  Him-
self as  He  who  is  in  Israel  (not  a
guest  or  a  "stranger,"  ver.  9),  and
consequently  the  comforter  and  helper
of  Israel. — ffeim  and  Hoffman,  *'  The
Major  Prophets.  (See  Addenda  on
ver.  8,  "  Intercessory  Prayer.")

Theme:  Prayer  has  within  itselv

ITS  OWN  REWARD.

The  prayer  of  the  prophet  consists
of  confession  and  petition  :

L  Confession.  This  fitly  begins.  It
is  the  testimony  of  iniquity ;  and  that
this  iniquity  is  against  God  Himself.
When  we  are  to  encounter  any  enemy
or  difficulty,  it  is  sin  weakens  us.    Now


confession    weakens   it, — takes   off  the
power  of  accusation,

II.    Petition.       "For  Thy    name's

sake."  Th  is  is  the  unfailing  argument
which  abides  always  the  same  and  hath
always  the  same  force.  The  children  of
God  are  much  beholden  to  their  troubles
for  clear  experiences  of  themselves  and
God.  Though  thou  art  not  clear  in
thy  interest  as  a  believer,  yet  plead  thy
interest  as  a  sinner,  which  thou  art  sure
of. — Leighton,  quoted  in  Lange.

Comments —

In  earnest  and  hearty  prayer  there  is
a  conflict  between  tJie  spirit  and  the
flesh.  The  flesh  regards  the  greatness
of  the  sins  (ver.  7),  and  conceives  of
God  as  a  severe  Judge,  who  either  will
not  help  further  or  cannot  help  (ver.  9).
The  spirit,  on  the  other  hand,  adheres
to  the  name  of  God  (ver.  7),  i.e.,  to  His
promises ;  apprehends  God  by  faith  as
his  true  comfort  and  aid,  and  depends
upon  Him. — Cramer.

"  Ideo  non  vult  Deus  cito  dare,  ut
discas  ardentius  orare." — Augtistine.

The  name  of  God  is  the  manifestation
of  God's  being.  From  Moses'  time,
Jehovah  has  revealed  Himself  as  the
Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  the  children
of  Israel  and  as  God  who  is  merciful
and  gracious,  <kc.  (Ex.  xxxiv.  6).  As
such,  He  is  besought  to  reveal  Himself
now  that  they  confess  their  backsliding
and  sin,  and  seek  His  grace.  Not  for
the  sake  of  His  honours  in  the  eyes  of
the  world,  lest  the  heathen  believe  He
has  no  power  to  help  (as  Graf,  holds),
for  all  reference  to  the  heathen  nations
is  foreign  to  this  connection ;  but  He  is
entreated  to  help,  not  to  belie  the  hope  of
His  people,  because  Israel  sets  its  hope
on  Him  as  Saviour  in  time  of  need  (ver.
9).  If  by  withholding  rain  He  makes
His  land  and  people  to  pine,  then  He
does  not  reveal  Himself  as  the  Lord
and  owner  of  Judah,  not  as  the  God
that  dwells  amidst  His  people,  but  He
seems  a  stranger  passing  through  the
land,  who  sets  up  his  tent  there  only  to
spend  the  night,  who  "  feels  no  share
in  the  weal  or  woe  of  the  dwellers
therein "  {Hitzig).  .  .  .  The  pleader
makes  further  appeal  to  God*8  almighty
power.     It  is  impossible  that  God  can

297


<mkt.  xm


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMUB.


let  Himself  look  like  a  man  at  his  wit's
end,  or  as  a  nervelesff  warrior f  as  He
would  seem  if  He  should  not  give  help
to  His  people  in  their  preseut  ueed.  .  .  .
The  passage  closes  with  an  appeal  to  the
relation  of  gra^e  which.  Jehovah  sustains
towards  His  people  :  '*  Yet  art  Thou  iu
our  midst,"  i.e.,  present  to  Thy  people.
"  Thy  name  is  named  upon  us,"  i.e.,
Thou  hast  revealed  Thyself  to  us  as  God
of  salvation  :  "  Lay  us  not  down,"  i,e.,
let  us  not  sink. — Keil.

'*  Leave  us  not ; ''  lit.  lay  us  not
down.  Jeremiah  evidently  had  in  mind
the  magnificent  words  of  Deut.  xxxii.
11,  12. — Speaker's  Commentary.  (See
Noticeable  Topic,  ^^  Triumphant  Prayer^*^
on  vers,  7-9.

Vers.  8,  9.  Theme;  God's  seemino
DISREGARD  OP  MAN.  "  0  hopc  of  Israel,
the  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble,
why  shouldst  Thou  be  as  a  stranger  1 "
kc.

A  sore  perplexity  that  God  appears
to  dwell  so  far  off  and  so  apart  from
human  affairs.  Appalling  crises  come
and  go,  dreadful  occurrences  transpire
in  the  nation,  in  the  church,  in  the
home,  in  individual  life,  and  hearts  are
dismayed  and  paralysed,  yet  God  ap-
pears not  in  Providence  nor  manifests
Himself  in  grace.  And  this  seeming
disregard  compels  to  the  cry,  "  O  hope
of  Israel,"  <fec.

I.  It  contradicts  God's  character
and  name.

1.  "  Hope,"  A  name  implying  that
Israel  had  learned  to  hope  in  Him
when  all  else  failed.  That  is  the  cha-
racter God  bears.

2.  ^^  Saviour.''  He  had  saved,  was
THE  Saviour  :  "  Beside  Him  there  was
no  Saviour."  And  men  believed  him
to  be  so.

3.  "  Mighty  man."  "  Able  to  save  to
the  uttermost."  With  great  power  He
redeemed  Israel  from  Egyptian  bond-
age. "  Miglity  to  save."  All  revela-
tion has  declared  God  to  be  man's
hope,  man's  Saviour,  man's  mighty
Redeemer  ;  and  when  God  seems  heed-
less, it  covers  His  name  with  obscurity.

IL  It  baffles  the  godly  souL     To
Jeremiah   it  was    painfully    perplexing
that    ''  the    hope     of  Israel,    and    iti
298


Saviour,"  should  act  towards  His  people
thus  :  as

1.  "  -4  stranger."  Indifferent,  there-
fore, having  no  acquaintance  or  sym-
pathy with  Israel,  no  knowledge  of
their  distresses  or  needs ;  wholly  uncon-
cerned in  their  forlorn  and  imperilled
state.

2.  '*  ^  wayfaring  man."  Inconstant,
therefore  :  passing  through  the  land
instead  of  as  of  old,  "Here  will  I
dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it  ;"  alienated,
no  longer  attached  to  the  Holy  Land  and
Temple ;  about  to  depart.

3.  "  A  man  that  cannot  save."  Im^
potent,  therefore  :  the  power  of  His  arm
gone,  the  zeal  of  His  heart  expired.

When  the  godly  see  God  thus  in-
active for  human  weal  and  His  people's
rescue,  faith  trembles  and  the  cry  rises
from  amid  terrifying  gloom.

IH.  It  leaves  man  in  a  deplorable
case.

1.  His  condition  is  distressing.  It
is  "  a  time  of  trouble,"  and  in  such  a
time,  if  "  the  Hope  of  Israel "  forsake
and  fail  him,  he  has  "no  hope."

2.  His  relief  is  urgent.  Without  it
man  will  sink  and  perish  amid  "trouble,"
which  means  peril.  If  the  "  Saviour  "
relieve  him  not,  he  has  no  helper,  no
salvation.

3.  His  sole  expectation  is  in  God.
Man  can  turn  nowhere  else.  These
people  have  no  other  "  hope  "  or  **  Sa-
viour," or  "  mighty  man."  And,  amid
sore  troubles,  no  appeal  rises  but  to
Him.  If  He  be  a  "  wayfaring  man,"
and  depart,  doom  rests  on  them  !

IV.  It  arouses  to  wrestling  prayer.
It  drove  Jeremiah  to  God  in  earnest
supplication  :  a  good  result.

1.  Expostulating.  "  Why  shouldst
Thou  be  ?  why  shouldst  Thou  be?"  He
could  not  rest  amid  such  contradictions.
He  went  "  with  boldness  to  the  throne
of  grace,"  and  entreated  God  to  arise
and  help.

2.  Protesting.  "  Yet  Thou,  O  Lord,
art  in  the  midst  of  us,"  although  Thou
art  as  a  stranger  and  wayfaring  man.
He  puts  God  in  mind  of  precious /ac^#,
and  bases  firm  arguments  and  appeals
thereon.  "We  are  called  by  Thy  name,**
help  and  save  Thine  own.


MOMJLETtC  COMMENTAUT:  jeremiab.


OHAf.  XIV.


8.  Entreating.  "  Leave  us  not ! "
*'  Thou  art  in  our  midst ;  be  not  even
OS  a  wayfarer ;  abide  with  us  !  "  He
would  detain  God.  "  I  will  not  let
Thee  go  !  "  "  Constrain  Him,  saying,
Abide  with  us  !"  When  thus  entreated,
Jesus  "  went  in  to  tarry  with  them."
(See  A  ddtnda  on  ver.  8,  "  God^s  toith-
drawingsJ')

Ver.  9.  Theme:  A  prayer  for  all
SEASONS.     "Leave  us  not  !  "

God  sometimes  hides  Himself  from
us,  as  a  friend  withdraws  when  slighted,
or  a  father  when  grieved.

I.  Here  is  a  prayer  for  all  seasons.
There  is  "  a  time  for  everything,"  but
every  time  is  for  this.  This  prayer
should  rise  in —

1.  Times  of  joy.  Need  pillar  of  cloud
hy  day.  Our  prosperity  will  ruin  us  if
God  be  not  with  us.  Uzziah  fell  "  when
he  was  strong  "  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  1 6).

2.  Times  of  adversity.  3.  Times  of
labour.     4.   Times  of  perplexity,  &c.

IL  Here  is  a  prayer  for  all  saints.

1.  All  need  to  pray  thus.  For  all
deserve  to  be  abandoned.

2.  All  must  pray  thus.  For  all  desire
continuances  of  His  presence.

3.  All  tvill  pray  thus.  For  all  know
the  bitterness  of  soul  consequent  upon
His  withdrawaL

III.  Here  is  a  prayer  always  an-
swered. If  it  come  from  sincere  and
penitential  hearts.

1.  Always  answered,  for  it  is  accord-
ing to  His  tvill.  He  delights  to  remain
with  His  own.

2.  Always  answered, /or  it  honours  His
Ham£.  It  implies  that  we  know  and  prize
His  presence. — Sermon  Framework.

Ver.  10.  Theme  :  Reckless  wander-
E£S  REJECTED.  *'  Thus  have  they  loved
to  wander  .  .  .  the  Lord  doth  not  ac-
cept them,"  <kc.  [On  the  reference  of
**thus  have  they,"  <fec.,  see  Homily  on
Section  10-16,  supra.]  "  Thus  "  means
/ust  so.  Rashi  suggests,  in  addition  to
those  given  in  Section  by  Lange,  that
the  point  of  conparison  is,  "  For  as  de-
termined as  I  am  to  punish  them,  just
to  they  love  to  continue  their  offence."
(See  Addenda  on  ver.  10.)

I.  A  covenant  people  heedless  of
their  privileges.


1.  Having  Jehovah  as  their  God.
Their  conception  of  what  tlieir  God  was
to  them  is  given  in  vers.  7-9.

2.  Having  bounteous  blessings.  In
their  country,  "  a  goodly  land  ;  '*  their
social  advantages,  their  spiritual  dis-
tinctions.

3.  Having  assured  prosperity  and
peace.  God  had  covenanted  their  secu-
rity against  foes  and  enjoyment  of  un-
measured good.

Yet  withal  they  depreciated  their
eminent  blessings.

II.  A  heedless  people  3rielding  to
inconstancy.  "  They  loved  to  wander,"
<fec.

1.  There  was  within  them  a  delight  in
backsliding.  A  "  love^^  of  it.  See  Notes
on  chap.  ii.  23,  24,  25  ;  ver.  31.

2.  Upon  their  inclination  to  apostasy
they  put  no  restraint.  "  They  have  not
refrained  their  feet."  We  may  have
wrong  dispositions,  may  **  love  to  wan-
der," yet  are  called  to  control,  and  check,
and  correct  our  wrong  desires  and  de-
lights. But  these  surrendered  them-
selves unrestrained,  "  followed  the  de-
vices and  desires  of  their  own  hearts."

III.  An  inconstant  people  rejected
firom  God's  favour.  '*  Therefore  the
Lord  doth  not  accept  them."

1.  Even,  though   the  prophet  pleaded

for  them.     As  he  did  in  vers.  7-9,  as

an   intercessor,    yet    God     refused  (ver.

11).       (See   Notes   on   chap.    vii.    16;

xi.  U.)

2.  Even  though  they  themselves  mighi
cry  to  Him  (ver.  12).  There  is  a  time
when  God's  mercy  closes.

IV.  A  rejected  people  consigned  to
sore  distress.

1.  Buried  memories  of  sin  will  be  re-
called against  them,  God  '*  will  remem-
ber their  iniquity,"  which  He  would
have  let  remain  in  oblivion  had  they
sought  Him  opportunely.  Oh,  to  find
all  that  God  recollects  against  us  arrayed
for  our  doom  !

2.  Due  recompense  of  sin  will  be  brought
upon  them.  He  "  will  visit  their  sins."
Fain  would  He  have  made  "  grace  much
more  to  abound  where  sin  abounded.*'
But  repudiation  of  His  goodness  brings
the  inevitable  stroke  of  anger  :  it  is  "  the
wrath  of  the  Lamb,"

299


osAP.  zrr.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  11.  See  Notes
chap.  vii.  16  ;  xi.  14.

Ver.  12.  See  Notes
chap.  ii.   ver.  28;  and


and  Homilies  on

and  Homilies  on
Homilies  on  Sec-
tions 14-28  ;  also  Outlines  on  chap.  xi.
11,  14,  15.

Theme:  Fasting  rendered  offen-
sive. *'  When  they  fast  I  will  not  hear
their  cry ;  .  .  but  I  will  consume
them,"  &c.

Hypocrites,  void  of  all  sincerity,  yet
professed  to  be  true  worshippers  of  God,
and  by  external  rites  wished  to  prove
themselves  to  be  so.  They  profaned
the  name  of  God  when  they  thus  grossly
dissembled  with  Him.

I.  Pious  demeanour  is  not  what  God
desires,  but  faith.

1.  God  abominates  a  double  and  false
hearty  and  the  greater  the  fervour  hypo-
crites display  in  external  rites,  the  more
they  provoke  Him.

2.  Fasting  is  observed  as  giving  inten-
sity to  prayer.  Reverted  to  when  there
is  danger,  or  when  there  appears  evidence
of  God's  wrath,  or  when  we  are  under
heavy  affliction.

3.  They  who  *^fast "  professedly  avow
that  they  deprecate  God^s  disfavour.  It
is  an  acknowledgment  of  conscious  guilty
and  a  declaration  of  penitence.

4.  But  God  values  not  outward  ap-
pearance. He  regards  the  faith  of  the
heart.  Pretentious  penitence  must  be
specially  offensive  to  Him.

III.  Fasting  is  not  in  itself  a  religi-
ous duty,  but  a  mere  index  to  a  humble
spirit.

1.  What  is  intended  by  fasting  f  (a.)
That  there  may  be  greater  alacrity  in
prayer.  (6.)  That  it  may  be  an  evidence
of  humility  in  confessing  sins,  (c.)  As
indicative  of  a  purpose  to  subdue  lust.

2.  What  is  fasting  apart  from  these
intents  f  (a.)  A  frivolous  exercise,  (b.)
A  profanation  of  God's  worship,  (c.)  It
provokes  God's  wrath  as  being  a  super-
stition by  which  His  worship  is  polluted.
Fastings  are  not  only  without  benefit,
except  when  prayers  are  added,  but  they
incur  Divine  displeasure  unless  indicat-
ing a  humble  and  reverent  spirit.

XXL  No  value  is  in  fasting  to  merit
Ood's  favour.

Papists  seek  to  pacify  God  by  fasting
300


as  by  a  sort  of  satisfaction,  deem  it  a
work  of  merit  and  a  kind  of  expiation.

Yet  though  hypocrites  joined  prayer
to  their  fasting  they  were  rejected
(comp.  Matt.  xvii.  21  ;  Mark  ix.  29  ;  1
Cor.  vii.  5).  There  was  no  sincerity  in
their  hearts,  but  only  an  outward  ap-
pearance, a  mere  disguise.

But  God  regards  the  heart,  and  only
sincerity  pleases  Him.

IV.  Mocking  profanation  was  in-
tolerable, and  should  be  punished.  "  I
will  consume  them,"  &c.

1.  God  shows  Himself  armed  with
various  kinds  of  punishment  :  "  sword,
famine,  pestilence."

2.  He  forewarns  that  they  who  had
provoked  Him  should  surely  suffer.
From  the  impending  destructions  none
could  deliver  himself.

3.  God  does  not  disregard  or  reject  reli-
gious signs,  but  when  what  they  signify
is  separated  from  them,  there  is  then  an
intolerable  profanation. — Arranged  from
Calvin  :  see  Commentary  in  loc.  (See
Addenda  on  ver.  12,  "  Fasting  qffemive.*^

Ver.  14.  Theme :  Assured  Peace.
"  I  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this
place."

Hitzig  and  Graf,  render  the  sentence,
"  I  will  give  you  peace  and  continuance,"
<fec.  ;  Septuagintf  "truth  and  peace;"
Vulgate  and  Targum,  "  true  peace  ; "
Syriac,  "  peace  and  security ;"  Lit,
"  peace  of  truth."  Real  and  lasting
peace,  not  delusive,  not  evanescent.

I.  Human  life  wants  it.

Sin  robbed  man  of  it.  All  sinned ;
and  wicked,  like  troubled  sea,  which
cannot  rest.  Oh,  how  man  craves  for
peace !

1.  Uncertainty  troubles  our  life.
Transient  hours  of  repose  come  to  us,
but  tumult  rushes  in.  No  calculating
on  restful  days  and  years.  Want  "  as-
sured peace  "  in  this  uncertain  world.

2.  Delusions  embitter  our  heart.  We
have  heeded  false  prophets,  have  "looked
for  peace,  and  behold  trouble."  Seems
no  reliance  on  any  promising  thing.
Mocked  at  every  turn.  It  is  not  gay
and  fleeting  enjoyments  we  need,  but
something  "  assured."

3.  Misgivings  weary  our  sards.  Are
we  safe,  saved  f     Is  death  nearing  f     Is


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JBREMTAff,


cmkT.  XIV.


God  propitious  ?  Have  we  a  "  right  to
enter  through  the  gates  into  tlie  city  1 "
"  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know,"  &c.  The
soul  asks  certitude,  not  conjecture,  nor
even  hope,  but  **  full  assurance,"  firm
anchorage,  "  a  title  clear,"  "  strong  con-
solation," '*  the  peace  of  God  which  shall
kee[)  our  hearts  and  minds."  The  cry
of  humanity  is  for  "assured  peace,"
which  will  not  elude,  will  never  be  lost.

**  Oh  where  can  rest  be  found.
Rest  for  the  weary  soul? **

II.  God  alone  can  give  it.  "  I  will
give  you  assured  peace."

1.  Peace  is  not  a  human  commodity ^
hut  a  Divine  boon.  Man  cannot  buy  it
of  man,  he  must  beg  it  of  God.  Priests
cannot  bestow  it  on  penitents,  sinners
must  get  it  direct  from  heaven.

2.  Peace  comes  only  to  divinely -pre-
pared hearts.  It  cannot  dwell  where
sin  lurks,  sin  unrepented  or  unforgiven.
"  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace
with  God."  ''  There  is  no  condemna-
tion to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus."
**  In  Me  ye  have  peace."

3.  Peace  is  specifically  the  Saviour's
benefaction.  For  He  only  can  remedy
the  evils,  and  remove  the  impurities
which  ruin  man's  peace.  "  My  peace  I
give  unto  you — let  not  your  hearts  be
troubled.*'

III.  Lying  voices  offer  it.  "Pro-
phecy lies."

1.  False  prophets  preach  peace  still.
In  our  churches  promising  it  through
ceremonies,  confession,  righteous  works,
(fee.  In  pleasure* s  scenes,  assuritig  the
gay  and  frivolous  of  satisfaction,  &c.

2.  Beguiled  dupes  are  ensnared  still.
Won  by  false  promises  souls  follow.
But  *'  destruction  and  misery  are  in  their
ways,  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not
known."

3.  Yet  assured  peace  is  available  still.
May  be  found  by  all.  "  Come  unto  me,
all  ye  that  labour,"  <kc.,  "  Learn  of  me,
and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your  soul."

Vers.  13-16.  Theme:  Ruinous  Pro-

PHEBYINGS.

How  lone  the  voice  which  bewails
the  currency  of  religious  frauds  and
ecclesiastical  deceits !  None  but  Jere-
miah's cry  of  lament  over  his  beguiled


people  rose  to  God.  Lying  prophets
were  and  are  more  in  number  than
the  faithful  witnesses  and  preachers  of
truth.  The  world  *'  believes  a  lie,"
because  it  loves  not  the  truth  :  and,
upon  this  prevalent  mood  of  self-decep-
tion and  credulity,  scheming  priests  and
plausible  preachers  are  ready  to  trade,
saying,  "  Peace,  peace;  where  there  is  no
peace."

L  Delusive  declarations.  "Behold
the  prophets  say  unto  them,  Ye  shall
not  see  the  sword,  neither  shall  ye  have
famine ;  but  I  will  give  you  assured
peace  in  this  place"  (ver.  13).

1.  This  kind  of  preaching  had  early
and  evil  origin  :  "  The  serpent  said,  Ye
shall  not  surely  die,  but  your  eyes  shall
be  opened,  &c."  (Gen.  iii.  4,  5).

2.  Modem  reproductions  are  rife.
Priestly  teaching  of  the  saving  value  of
sacraments,  &c.  Broad  theology  which
minimises  human  sin  and  spiritual  peril.
A  subtle  Socinianism  which  denies  man's
fall  or  need  of  redemption.  Annihi-
lationism,  which  destroys  a  hereafter  for
the  unchristian  soul.

II.  Repudiated  preachers.  "  I  sent
them  not,  neither  have  I  commended
them,  neither  spake  unto  them"  (ver.  14).

1.  Pleasant  preaching  may  be  in  Gods
esteem  "  lies,'*  The  people  liked  it,  but
Jehovah  denounced  it.

2.  Plausible  prophets  do  not  always
have  authority  for  their  messages.
Because  a  preacher  teaches  what  men
want  to  hear,  and  fiock  to  learn,  he  does
not  on  that  account  possess  Divine
warrant.  Popularity  is  not  a  seal  of
authority.  Indeed  the  truth  most  unwel-
come, and  the  preacher  most  deserted,
may  have  the  highest  sanction.  "Who
hath  believed  our  report,"  &c.  Jeremiah
was  now  deserted  for  these  plausible
prophets:  yet  who  preached  Divine  truthi

III.  Deceptions  disclosed.  "They
prophesy  unto  you  a  false  vision,  and
divination,  and  a  thing  of  nought,  and
the  deceit  of  their  hearts"  (ver.  14).

Thus  are  these  delusive  teachings  dis-
owned by  God,  they  have  no  origin  in
Him,  neither  in  prayerful  contemplation
of  His  Word,  neither  in  any  spiritual
illumination  :  they  are  traced  to  the  dark
caverns  of  a  deceitful  heart.

301


OKAP.  ZIT.


HOMILETlG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMtAB.


1.  "  Visions  and  divinations"  may
have  a  had  origin.  A  preacher  may  be
"clear"  and  "clever"  in  his  presenta-
tion of  doctrine,  but  his  "visions"  maybe
**  false,"  and  his  "divination"  a  *'  deceit."
Does  he  "  prophesy  in  My  name  f

2.  It  is  possible  for  the  human  ^' heart "
to  suggest  falsehood.  Yes ;  the  "  heart "
may  forge  a  "  deceit,"  and  thus  impose
upon  the  prophet  himself ;  and  the  fancy
or  theory  he  has  framed  within  himself
may  so  enamour  him  that  he  may  come
to  believe  it  true  and  authoritative.
Then  he  will  in  turn  impose  upon  heed-
less hearers^  who  desire  "  a  thing  of
nought"  rather  than  the  serious  mes-
sage of  God.

IV.  Retributive  ruin.

1.  On  deceivers  (ver.  15).  The  very
evils  from  which  they  decoyed  men's
just  fears  should  come  upon  themselves.
Forbearing  to  warn  men  of  the  coming
"  sword  "  (see  Ezek.  xxxiii.),  that  sword
should  smite  the  faithless  watchman
himself.

2.  On  the  deceived  (ver.  16).  Who
were  willingly  beguiled  (comp.  v,  31.
see  supra,  ver.  10).  Men  still  "turn
their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  are  turned
into  fables/'  But  they  do  not  escape
the  threatenings  of  the  truth  because
they  "  believe  a  lie."  Self-deception  is
self-ruin.

Comments —

"Although  preachers  lead  their  hearers
astray,  yet  the  hearers  are  not  thus  ex-
cused. But  when  they  allow  themselves
to  be  led  astray,  the  blind  and  those
who  guide  them  fall  together  into  the
ditch  "  (Luke  ri.  S9).— Cramer.

"  The  false  prophets  are  thus  described
as  deceiving  the  people  in  three  ways —
(1)  by  asserting  that  they  had  seen  a
vision  ;  (2)  by  using  conjuring  tricks  ;
(3)  by  professing  to  consult  these  small
idols  [JSlil ;  see  Lit.  Crit.  on  "  thing  of
naught"],  in  the  same  way  that  they
divined  by  the  Teraphim  (Comp.  Zech.
X.  2,  where  these  three  modes  of  divina-
tion occur  again,  only  the  Terapbim  takes
the  place  of  the  Elilim.  Probably  they
were  much  the  same).  All  these  three
method.s  the  prophet  declares  to  be  the
deceit  of  their  heart,  i.e.,  not  self-deceit,
but  a  fraud  suggested  by  their  heart  or
302


mind,  i.e.,  a  wilful  and  intentional  fraud."
— Speaker's  Com.

"  To  Hitzig  it  seems  surprising  that,
in  describing  the  punishment  which  is
to  fall  on  seducers  and  seduced,  there
should  not  be  severer  judgment,  in  words
at  least,  levelled  against  the  seducers  as
being  those  involved  in  deeper  guilt;
whereas  the  very  contrary  is  the  case  in
the  Hebrew  text.  But  it  was  necessary
to  set  before  the  people  the  terrors  of
this  judgment  in  all  their  horror,  in  order
not  to  fail  of  effect." — Keil.

Ver.  17.  "  Let  mine  eyes  run  doum
with  tears,^*  &c.  See  Homilies  on  Chaps,
ix.  1,  xiii.  17,  supra.

"  The  virgin  daughter  of  my  people,**
see  on  Chap.  viii.  21,  &c.  Li  Oriental
households  virgins  are  carefully  secluded
and  guarded  ;  so  had  God  watched  over
and  protected  Judah.

"  Broken  with  a  great  breach,  with  a
very  grievous  blow,"  see  on  Chap.  x.  19.

"  Those  cities  are  called  *  virgins  *
which  never  came  into  a  conqueror's
hands.  In  the  same  sense  the  prophet
here  calls  Jerusalem  a  *  virgin,'  because
she  had  been  hitherto  under  God's
immediate  protection,  and  preserved  by
Him  from  all  attempts  of  her  enemies
(Comp.  Amos.  v.  2).  The  dissolution  of
a  government  or  body  politic,  is  called
a  *  breach,*  by  way  of  allusion  to  the
breaking  or  disjointing  of  the  limbs  of  a
human  body  (see  Chap.  viiL  21,  Lam.
ii.  13)."— TT.  Lowth.

Ver.  18.   Theme:  The  woes  op  war.

I.  Scenes  on  the  field  of  battle.
"If  I  go  forth  into  the  field,  then
behold  the  slain  with  the  sword."

II.  Miseries  within  the  besieged
city.  "  If  I  enter  into  the  city,  then
behold  them  that  are  sick  with  famine  !"
Yes,  and  heart  sick  with  grief  over  sons,
husbands,  and  fathers,  slain.

III.  Captives  carried  into  alien
scenes.  "  Yea,  both  the  prophet  and
the  priest  [even  those,  and  therefore  the
people,  whom  the  conqueror  would  be
less  likely  to  leave]  go  about  into  a  land
that  they  know  not."  "  By  the  rivers
of  Babylon  we  sat  down,  yea,  we  wept
when  we  remembered  Zion."

Note  on  "  go  about  into  a  land  that
they    know    not"       These    words    are


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XI?.


varioiislj  rtndered  (See  Lit.  Crit.  on
Terse),  and  Tariously  interpreted.  Graf
and  Keil  suggest  for  "  go  about "  the
meaning  " heg  their  way**  A.  V.  in
margin  gives  *^  make  merchandised*  But
Rosenmiiller  and  Umbreit  give  the  inter-
pretation that  these  prophets  and  priests
move  to  and  fro,  go  over  their  own
desolated  country  (Judea)  baffled  and
bewildered  and  impotent ;  **  they  wander
about  itf  the  land,  and  know  not  what  to
do**  But  the  simplest  meaning  is,  they
go  into  exile  in  a  strange  land.

Ver.  19.  Theme  ;  Patbiotic  pbayers

UBSPSESSIBLE.

See  Addenda  on  ver.  19,  "  Wrestling
fyrayers**  Jehovah  had  prohibited  Jere-
miah's intercession  for  His  people  (ver,
11);  had  wholly  discouraged  all  propitia-
tion by  His  people  (ver  12).  What  then'?
nothing  could  be  done  by  man  for  them,
nor  aught  by  themselves  for  themselves.
It  is  in  bold  desperation  that  the  prophet
now  besieges  God  on  the  plea  of  His
gracious  interest  in,  and  covenant  re-
lationship to,  Judah.  Can  it  be  that
there  is  "  no  healing  "  even  in  Jehovah
for  *'the  virgin  daughter"  on  whom  has
fallen  "a  very  grievous  blow"  (ver.  17).

%*  For  homiletic  arrangement  of
this  and  following  verses,  see  section,
vers.  17-32,  supra.  Also  Homily  on
chap.  viii.  15.

I.  Agonising  inquiries  addressed  to
God.  Is  there  no  room  for  hope,  no
pla^e  left  for  Judah  and  Zion  within
Divine  pity  ?  Are  we  abandoned  to  our
miseries  without  any  alleviation  avail-
able ;  smitten  by  Thee,  yet  *'  no  healing"
procurable,  none  possible  f

n.  Desolated  hopes  arrayed  before
God.

1.  Our  expectations  misled  us.  Ill-
prepared  for  such  a  reverse  of  our  hopes
and  desires.

2.  Our  desolation  amazes  us,  "There
is  no  good  ;"  not  one  solace  or  respite
shows  itself,  blank  misery.  "Behold
trouble  !  "  It  rises  upon  our  gaze,  and
we  are  terrified !

m.  Astonishment  expressed  at  the
severity  of  God.

1.  After  so  much  grace  from  God,
J«dah  cherished  ;  Zion  long  beloved.

Z'  Aft^r   frequent    healings    by    God,


For  oft  He  had  smitten  and  then  bound
up.

3.  I^ow  utterly  loathed  and  abandoned.
Yet  God  can  be  severe.  It  will  amaze
those  who  calculated  upon  His  love,  and
trifled  with  it.

Ver.  20.  Theme:  Sin  Acknowledged.

To  a  right  acknowledgment  of  our
iniquity,  and  in  order  that  sin  may
be  pardoned,  there  are  required  three
things —

L  Contrition.  Iniquity  truly  and
duly  deplored.  A  poignant  sense  of  the
evil  of  sin  in  itself,  and  our  evil  state  in
having  committed  sin.  A  real  grief  for
the  wrong  we  have  done  God,  and  the
woe  we  have  merited  on  ourselves.

II.  Confession.  Which  should  be
unfeigned,  self -abhor  rent,  lamentable^
specific,  unreserved.  The  heart  should
utter  itself  in  our  words,  and  deep  shame
should  fill  our  souls  as  we  prostrate  our-
selves before  the  most  Holy  God.

III.  Conversion.  Repentance  should
issue  in  reformation.  Forsaking  the
sin  we  acknowledge  and  lament,  we
should  hereafter  live  a  righteous,  sober,
and  godly  life.  "  Bring  forth  fruits
meet  for  repentance."  Moved  by  grati-
tude to  God  for  being  '*  ready  to  for-
give," and  constrained  by  love  to  the
Atoning  Mediator  by  whose  redemption
we  may  escape  both  guilt  and  its  penalty,
our  afterlife  should  be  humble,  obedient,
devoted,  and  holy.  See  Addenda  on
ver.  20,  "  Sin  acknowledged.**  Comp.
Homily  on  chap.  iii.  25.

Note. — The  "  and "  is  not  in  the
Hebrew,  and  corrupts  the  sense.  Na-
tional sin  is  the  sin  of  the  *^ fathers**
perpetuated  generation  after  generation
by  the  children.  When  thus  successive
opportunities  for  repentance  had  been
rejected — for  each  generation  had  its
own  probation — the  nation  is  ripe  for
chastisement. — Speaker's  Com.

Theme:  Dreading  God's  Abhor-
rence. "  Do  not  abhor  us,  for  Thy
name's  sake."

The  occasion  of  the  prayer  (vers.  2-6).
Prayer  for  removal  of  calamity  (vers.  7-
d).  Though  visited  with  judgment  and
threatened,  the  false  prophets  preached
peace  (vers.  13,  14).  The  prophet,  how-.
^ve?}  continued  to  plead  witli  God.

393


CHAP.  xrr.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH*


L  The  petition.

i.  These  words  imply  that  it  is  pos-
sible for  creatures  once  the  objects  of
Divine  favour  to  become  the  objects  of
Divine  displeasure.

2.  The  solicitude  of  the  prophet  indi-
cated how  real  and  near  those  Divine
judgments  were.  He  was  commanded
not  to  pray  that  the  threatened  judg-
ment should  not  be  inflicted,  but  was
assured  the  sword  and  famine  should
overtake  them  (ver.  15).  Where  im-
piety and  irreligion  prevail  among  a
people  favoured  with  religious  advan-
tages, Divine  abhorrence  will  certainly
express  itself  in  punishment.

3.  There  is  nothing  which  godly  men
more  vehemently  dread  and  deprecate
than  that  God  should  abhor  and  reject  a
people  once  distinguished  hy  His  favour
and  by  religious  privileges.  Jeremiah
knew  his  people  must  be  scattered,  but
he  dreaded  nothing  so  much  as  their
being  utterly  cast  off.  Against  this  he
prayed,  '*  Do  not  abhor  us,  Lord,  <fec.

II.  The  argument  used  as  enforcing
his  petition.

"  Do  not  abhor  us,  for  thy  name^s
sake."  This  argument  has  been  used
with  the  Most  High  before.  When  God
thinks  to  destroy  the  children  of  Israel,
Moses  pleaded  what  God  had  done  for
them  (Exodus  xxxii.  11-13).  Joshua
also  pleaded,  "  What  wilt  Thou  do  for
Thy  great  Name?"  (Josh.  viii.  9).
"  Should  the  Egyptians  say,"  &c.  <fec.
This  argument  Jeremiah  used  to  sup-
port his  petition.  God  had  made  a
covenant  with  His  servant  Jacob — if,
then,  Jacob  had  been  abhorred  so  as  to
be  utterly  cast  off — how  could  that
economy  be  maintained  1  "  Remember,
break  not  Thy  covenant  with  us,  for
Thy  name's  sake."

God's  name  is  His  character,  including
all  the  glorious  perfections  that  encom-
pass it.  Some  of  the  perfections,  con-
sidered apart  from  others,  would  cause
only  fear  when  our  guilt  as  individuals
or  the  guilt  of  communities  is  realised.
If  the  prophet  had  dwelt  only  upon  the
holiness,  justice,  and  power  of  God  when
he  considered  the  guilt  of  hip  country,
he  would  have  had  no  encouragement
\o  pray,  and  if  we  dwelt  only  upon
304


some  attributes,  vve  shall  be  more  likely
to  sink  into  despair  than  to  be  encouf'
aged  with  hope.  But  there  are  other
perfections  in  the  divine  attributes,  such
as  boundless  mercy,  unparalleled  love,
infinite  wisdom,  and  inviolable  faithful-
ness.

This  argument  may  be  used  in  prayer
under  personal  distress ,  and  under  general
calamity  either  endured  or  apprehended,

1.  Under  personal  distress,  to  be  con-
sidered as  coming  from  guilt  or  from
particular  trouble,  and  in  both  cases  can
the  name  of  God  furnish  us  with  a  suit-
able or  a  powerful  argument  in  prayer.

(1.)  We  may  use  it  under  a  sense  of
guilty  either  when  first  convinced  of  sin
or  when  we  may  have  wounded  our
conscience.  A  life  spent  without  the
fear  of  God,  in  open  disaffection  to  and
rebellion  against  Him,  calls  for  vengeance.
The  glory  of  God  requires  that  He
should  resist  such  impiety  and  manifest
His  displeasure  against  it.  He  might
justly  abhor  us  and  utterly  reject  us.
But  His  name  affords  us  a  plea.  "God  is
Love,"  He  delighteth  in  mercy.  He  is
the  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious.
This  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
perfections  of  God.

2.  The  believer  may  adopt  it  under
particular  trouble  and  the  tribulations
through  which  he  may  pass.  The
covenant  of  grace  affords  encouragement
to  use  it.  "  H  thy  children  forsake  my
law,"  <fec.  <kc.  "  Do  not  abhor  us."  If
Thou  art  pleased  to  chastise  us,  cast  us
not  off — let  all  Thy  glorious  perfections
of  mercy,  pardon,  wisdom,  and  faithful-
ness be  displayed  in  supporting,  sanctify-
ing, and  in  over-ruling  all  things  for  our
good.  "  Do  not  abhor  us,  for  Thy  name's
sake"  <kc.

(2.)  This  argument  may  be  used  by
the  righteous  under  general  calamities ;
calamities  experienced  or  apprehended.

1.  Under  national  trouble.  Such
were  the  circumstances  under  which  the
prophet  presented  the  prayer.  A  dearth
was  experienced — the  swarm  of  the
Chaldeans  was  threatened.  He  prayed
that  the  sheep  might  not  be  abandoned.
"  Do  not  abhor  us."

Under  national  calamity  the  name  of
God  affords  enco2iragement  for  prayer.


HUMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XIT.


The  godly  at  such  times,  when  they
can  see  that  prevailing  iniquity  calls
for  vengeance,  though  professing  sub-
mission, yet  find  the  name  of  God
a  plea.

2.  This  plea  may  he  used  by  the
godly  when  apprehensive  of  spiritual
judgments  upon  spiritual  account.

There  is  nothing  more  offensive  to
God  than  a  lukewarm  spirit.  "  I  would
that  thou  wert  either  cold  or  Lot,"  &c.
Now  where  hike warmn ess  prevails,  the
Spirit  of  God  will  be  grieved  and  be
withdrawn ;  the  prayer  is  then  most
important,  "  Do  not  ahhor^^  &c.,
«*  Take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit,"  &c.

3,  It  is  a  plea  that  may  be  used  in
reference  to  churches  at  large.  How
much  is  there  in  Christendom  to  be
deplored  !  How  much  that  is  religious
only  in  name !  How  little  Christian
charity  among  different  denominations  !
Though  it  is  admitted  that  efforts  are
made  to  do  good  by  churches  of  different
denominations,  and  upon  these  efforts
God  has  smiled,  yet  these  evils  must
be  offensive  to  Him  who  prayed  that  His
Church  might  be  kept  from  the  evil  that
was  in  the  world ;  and  we  may  fear  the
expression  of  Divine  displeasure  until
they  are  removed.

We  learn  from  the  subject  that  the  pro-
per plea  to  be  used  in  all  our  prayers  is
the  name  of  God.  His  mercy  and  grace
displayed  as  harmonising  with  holiness
and  justice  through  the  mediation  of
Jesus  Christ.  In  our  own  name,  as  a
ground  of  righteousness,  we  can  never
be  accepted.

If  God  Iiears  and  answers  prayer,  it
must  be  in  a  way  that  will  be  for  His
glory.  And  though  in  some  measure
His  glory  may  require  judgment,  yet  if
the  prayer  is  offered  in  reliance  upon
the  mediation  of  Christ,  the  mercy  and
faithfulness  of  God  assure  us  of  ac-
ceptance. "  Mercy  and  truth  meet  to-
gether— righteousness  and  peace,"  <fec.

A  nd  that  prayer  for  others  should  be
incessant.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer
of  the  righteous  man  availeth  much." —
Anon,

Ver.    21.      Theme:    The    ultimate

ARGUMENT  WITH  GOD  FOR   MERCY.       See

Addenda  on  ver.  21,     *'  Do  not  disgrace
V


the  throne  of  Thy  glory. ^^  Nothing  may
be  found  to  extenuate  man's  spiritual
criminality,  so  heinous  may  be  his  sin,
as  was  Judah's.  Nothing  acceptable  or
propitiatory  may  exist  in  his  self-morti-
fications and  oblations  (ver.  12).  His
guilt  and  insincerity  may  even  justify
God's  refusal  of  intercession  on  his  be-
half (ver.  11).  Yet  there  remain  the
highest  arguments  still  by  which  to
plead  with  God,  viz.,  His  Name,  His
Honour,  and  His  Covenant.
I.  Explanation  of  the  language.

1.  God's  name  :  it  was  a  pledge  of
pardon  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  But  more,
God's  name  was  identified  with  His
people;  hence  what  befell  them  would
reflect  credit  or  discredit  on  God.  If
Thou  dost  "  abhor  us,''  Thy  name  as
"  the  God  of  Israel "  will  be  forfeit.

2.  God's  honour:  "disgrace  not  the
throne  of  Thy  glory."  Jerusalem,  or
the  Temple  wherein  God  dwelt  there
(chap.  iii.  17),  was  God's  glorious
throne  :  if  He  suffered  it  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  heathen  conquerors,  it  would
be  disgraced,  and  God's  glory  dis-
honoured.

3.  God's  covenant:  He  had  chosen
the  race  of  Abraham,  had  pledged  to
David  a  lasting  throne,  had  promised
that  Messiah  should  come  of  Judah.
Though  they,  the  guilty  people,  merited
abhorrence,  yet  for  the  covenant's  sake,
spare  them,  that  the  Word  of  God  may
stand.

II.  Application  of  the  argument.
Jeremiah  turns  from  the  people's  evil
state  and  deserts,  and  appeals  to  God's
attributes.

1.  That  God's  name  is  a  tower  of
defence  for  the  guiltiest.  Not  only  may
"  the  righteous  run  into  it  and  be  safe,"
but  sinners  may  plead  it  as  a  basis  of
hope,  as  an  argument  for  mercy  (see
ver.  7).  Though  nothing  else  can  be
found  on  which  to  rest  prayer  for  Divine
pity,  yet  God,  who  is  the  "  Father  of
mercies,"  the  "  God  of  our  salvation,'*
and  whom  the  only  begotten  Son  has
declared  as  the  ''  God  who  so  loved  the
world"  may  be  entreated /or  His  name's
sake  to  spare  **  sinners,  even  the  chief."

2.  That  God's  glory  is  involved  in  H%$
administration    of   mercy.     He    would

305


CHAP.  XIV.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


•*  disgrace  His  throne  '^  did  He  allow  the
enemy  to  triumph  and  despoil  His
temple.  If  Satan  vanquishes  the
Church,  or  wrests  a  sinner  from  the
grace  of  Christ,  the  High  Majesty  of
Heaven  is  dishonoured.  True,  we  may
merit  abandonment^  as  did  profane
Jerusalem,  yet  "  let  not  the  enemy  pre-
vail"— where  sin  abounds,  grace  shall
much  more  abound !

3.  That  God's  covenant  outlives  man^s
disloyally.  Man  may  violate  his  part
in  that  covenant :  yet  shall  the  Right-
eous and  Gracious  God  therefore  break
His  word  ?  No  !  Man*8  falsity  cannot
obliterate  God's  graciousness.  The  in-
finitely pitiful  Jehovah,  who  keepeth
covenants  and  never  faileth,  will  still
remember  His  promises.  He  has  as-
sured of  "salvation  even  to  the  utter-
most," pledged  Himself  "in  nowise  to
cast  out ; "  and  on  that  covenant  we  may
ever  rest.  Calvin  remarks,  '*  God  did,
according  to  the  common  apprehension
of  men,  abolish  the  covenant  by  which
the  Jews  thought  Him  to  be  bound  to
them ;  and  yet  He  remained  true ;  for
His  truth  shone  forth  at  length  from
darkness,  after  the  time  of  exile  was
completed,"  (See  Noticeable  Topic  on
ver.  21.  "  God's  covenant  an  argument
in  prayer")

Ver.    22.     Theme:  The  lone  hope

OP  MAN  IN  MISERY.

The  misery  was  from  the  **  dearth  "
(ver.  1—6) ;  the  dearth  was  consequent
upon  Judah's  iniquity  (ver.  7).  And
that  iniquity  consisted  largely  in  God*s
people  turning  from  Him  to  *'  the
vanities  of  the  Gentiles."

I.  To  choose  others  for  God  is  to
court  hopeless  misery.  Not  one  of
these  "  vaiiities  of  the  Gentiles  "  could
alleviate  the  calamities  which  had  come
upon  them  through  their  desertion  of
Jehovah.


1.  Sin  mil  entail  appalling  dttatter,

2.  In  disaster  we  shall  need  help  and

deliverance.

3.  Ddiverance  cannot  come  from  the
^* vanities''  for  which  we  have  surrendered
God.

Therefore  we  create  for  ourselves  a
desolate  future.

II.  No  secondary  causes  can  suffice
us  in  calamity.  '*  Showers  "  do  indeed
fall  from  *'  the  heavens,"  but  it  is  God
who  "  gives  "  them.

1.  Behind  all  sources  of  comfort  God
dwells.

2.  If  He  be  alienated  He  dries  up
these  sources  of  comfort.

3.  Hence  to  look  to  these  sources  and
ignore  the  Divine  spring  is  to  ensure
mocking  disappointment.  (Comp.  chaps,
il  12,  13,  iii.  23.)

III.  God  Himself  is  man's  true  need.
Read  the  words  — "  Art  Thou  not
Jehovah  our  God  ? "

1.  Our  one  only  Saviour  (Isaiah  xlv.
21-25).

2.  The  Creator  of  all  the  channels  of
comfort,  "  Thou  hast  made  all  these
things" — the  heavens  with  their  showers,

3.  The  hojye  of  man  in  the  day  of
his  distress.

For  He  who  hath  torn  can  heal ;  He
who  hath  impoverished  with  "  drought "
can  replenish  with  luxury.  Ye  shall
receive  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all
your  sins.

IV.  The  attitude  of  a  troubled  souL
"  Therefore  we  will  wait  upon  Thee."

1.  Humbly:  for  sin  lies  at  the  root
of  man's  distress.

2.  Patiently  :  for  after  long  rejection  of
God  we  must  "  wait  "  His  time  for  relief.

3.  Trustfully:  for  grace  will  not  be
denied  any  lowly  suppliant ;  and  faith
will  win  the  blessing  sought.

See  Addenda  on  verse.  Maris  loM
hope.


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XIV.

Topic:   Concerning  the  Dearth  (vers.  1-9).

See  Addenda  on  ver.  1.  The  events  here  recorded  most  probably  gave  occasion
for  the  fast  referred  to  in  chap,  xxxvi.  9.  "  A  more  true  description  of  an  Oriental
drought  in  its  leading  circumstances  and  eflfects  we  have  never  yet  seen."  We  pro-
ceed to  show  from  the  words  of  the  prophet  the  dir^  ffffQta  of  th§  brought,  and  by
ct>U6tant  inference  the  foUy  of  forsaking  God,

30§


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap.  XIT.


L  The  effects  of  dronght  npon  inanimate  creation.

1.  The  pits  were  empty.  Some  of  these  were  natural  hollows  in  the  hard  rocks
and  in  the  caves  where  evaporation  was  less  speedy.  Others  were  dykes  and
cisterns,  the  works  of  man.  But  neither  nature  nor  art  could  afford  supplies  when
God  dealt  with  them  in  His  judgments.

2.  2^he  ground  was  chapt.  Kitto  says,  "  After  long  drought  in  the  East,  particu-
larly where  the  soil  is  rich  and  hard,  the  ground  splits  into  wide  and  deep  fissures."
These  are  earth's  wounds  for  man's  sin.  Mute  mouths  crying  to  Heaven  for  pity.
The  lips  of  earth  suflfering,  waiting  for  a  drop  of  water  to  relieve  the  torment  of
an  awful  thirst.

3.  There  was  no  grass.  The  world  is  complex,  man  is  complex, — Grod  is
complex.  In  complex  systems  harmony  is  essential  to  life, — discord  is  ruin.  The
shower  can  do  nothing  good  without  the  sun.  The  sun  can  only  scorch  if  the  rain
fall  not.  Earth  can  produce  no  fruit  unless  both  sun  and  shower  combine  tc  aid.
The  sun  cannot  say  to  the  dewdrop,  "  I  have  no  need  of  thee,"  <fec.

II.  The  effects  of  drcnght  upon  the  animal  creation.

1.  l^he  hind  calved  in  the  field  and  forsook  it.  The  fact  that  the  hind  was  iu
the  field  proves  that  pasture  had  failed  on  the  higher  lands.  It  was  not  unusual
for  the  hind  to  drop  her  calf  by  reason  of  fright  or  grief  (Ps.  xxix.  9).  The
maternal  instinct  in  these  creatures  being  strong,  it  was  very  unusual  for  them  to
forsake  their  young,  and  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  entire  failure  of  the
mother  to  obtain  food  or  drink.

2.  The  wild  asses  were  in  intense  agony  on  account  of  hunger.  These  creatures
were  capable  of  great  endurance,  and  needed  but  little  to  sustain  life.  The  language
of  ver.  6  shows  to  what  a  desperate  condition  even  such  hardy  creatures  had  been
reduced.

m.  The  effects  of  drought  upon  the  human  creation.

1.  The  husbandmen  were  ashamed.  The  earth  they  had  cultivated  had  brought
forth  no  fruit,  and  they  were  unable  to  alter  its  condition.  As  they  looked  uj»on
the  hard,  chapt,  barren  earth,  they  covered  their  heads  in  shame  and  grief.

2.  The  people  generally  were  languishing.  Ver.  2  shows  that  places  of  public
resort  were  scenes  of  sadness.  Their  drooping  condition  found  expression  in  one
general  cry  of  anguish.

3.  The  nobles  were  threatened  with  death  through  thirst.  They  sent  servants  and
children  in  search  of  water,  but  they  returned  with  empty  pitchers.

"  The  hot  blood  etands  in  each  glassy  eye ;
And,  *  Water,  O  God  1 '  is  the  only  cry."

**  Their  tongues  are  parched  and  rough,  and  cling  to  the  roofs  of  their  mouths ;
their  lips  are  black  and  shrivelled,  and  their  eyeballs  red  with  heat,  and  sometimes
a  dimness  comes  over  them  which  makes  them  stagger  with  faintness.  There  is
not  one  in  all  that  multitude  who  probably  would  not  have  given  all  he  possessed
in  the  world,  and  parted  even  with  a  limb,  ...  for  one  cool  draught  of  water."—
Kitto,

**  'Twas  thirst !  'twas  maddening  thirst  alone.
That  wrung  my  spirit's  inmost  groan.
Hunger  is  bitter,  but  the  worst
Of  human  pangs — the  most  accursed
Of  want's  fell  scorpions — is  thirst." — Cook,

IV.  The  effects  of  drought  on  the  devout  heart  of  Jeremiah.

1.  He  regarded  it  as  a  clmstisement  for  sin.  The  sin  of  forsaking  God  and
trusting  in  idols  who  are  unable  to  deliver.  "  We  have  sinned."  Our  iniquities
testify  against  us.

2.  He  regarded  God  as  their  only  hope,  A^l  Jiope  in  Israel  was  gone,  and  his
only  plea  ^a*^— -"  For  Thy  name's  sjij^e,  '^  ,
^^  ^                                                                                      807


•OAP.  «T.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


3.  He  ^.arnesily  prayed  for  mercy.  That  God  would  abide  with  them  and  not
Jeave  them  That  God  would  remove  the  trouble.  His  prayer  was  vain,  since  it
was  unaccompanied  by  the  repentance  of  the  people.

Application  :

1 .  In  forsaking  God,  they  forsook  the  fountain.

2.  Earth's  broken  cisterns  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  the  Divine.

3.  Jesus  said,  '^  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."

—-W.  Whale.


Topic:  God's  withdra.wings  from  His  people,  and  theib  exeboisb  under

THEM  (ver.  8).

See  Addenda f  ver  8.  God's  withdrawals.  Prophet  laments  the  grievous  drought
and  want  of  rain,  as  a  token  of  God's  withdrawing  His  presence.  He  deprecates
God's  judgments,  and  especially  that  terrible  one — God  lost  to  His  Church  and
people  :  "  JFhy  shouldst  Thou  he  a  stranger,'^  <fec.     Consider —

I.  When  it  may  be  said  God  withdraws,  and  behaves  as  a  stranger  to  His
people.

1.  When  He  withholds  His  wonted  acts  of  kindness  to  them.  Sees  them  in  trouble
and  comes  not  to  their  relief.  Of  this  the  Church  complains  (Isa.  Ixiii.  15).  See
also  complaint  of  Gideon  (Judges  vi.  13).

2.  When  He  threatens  to  remove  from  them  the  signs  and  symbols  of  His  pre-
sence — the  Word  and  Sacraments  ;  when  He  permits  their  enemies  to  combine  and
carry  on  their  plans  for  that  purpose  (Lam.  v.  9).

3.  When^  tlwugh  continuing  the  ordinances  and  sacraments^  the  Lord  renders  them
profitless  (Mai.  ii.  2).  When  ministers  are  straitened  in  preaching  and  the  people
in  hearing,  when  all  is  cold  and  dead.

4.  When  the  Divine  providences  are  adverse.  Outward  mercies  denied  them,
temporal  calamities  allowed.  So  when  Zion's  captivity  was  prolonged  (Isa.
xlix.  U).

5.  When  He  denies  them  access  to  Himself  Breaks  ojff  His  wonted  correspon-
dence with  them.  They  seek  Him  in  private  and  public  ordinances,  but  cannot
find  Him.     Job's  language  is  theirs  (Job  xxiii.  3).    Also  Jeremiah's  (Lam.  iii.  8).

II.  The  reasons  why  the  Lord  deals  thus  with  His  people.  Infinite  goodness
cannot  take  delight  in  thus  afflicting.  There  must  be  a  cause.  In  general,  sin  is
the  cause  (Is.  lix.  2).     As —

1.  When  they  fall  into  gross  sin  and  bring  reproach  upon  religion  (Isa.  i.  13,  14).
Or,  as  David's  case  (2  Sam.  xii.  14 ;  comp.  Ps.  li.  11).

2.  When  they  become  earthly  minded.  Prefer  pleasure  of  sense  (Isa.  Ivii.  17).
The  Gergesenes  preferred  their  swine  to  Christ;  then  He  turned  His  back  and
departed  from  their  coast  (Matt.  vii.  28).

3.  When  they  become  dothful  and  formal  in  duty.  Do  not  stir  themselves  up  to
seek  God's  face  (Isa.  Ixiv.  7 ;  Cant.  iii.  1).

4.  When  they  neglect  or  slight  the  Mediator,  by  whom  we  have  access  to  God ;
either  by  not  looking  to  Him  for  strength  to  perform  our  duties,  or  by  making  a
Saviour  of  our  duties,  and  so  putting  them  in  the  place  of  Christ.

5.  When  they  sin  under,  or  after,  great  afflictions.  Though  these  were  appointed
to  reclaim  them  (Isa.  Ivii.  17).

6.  When  they  do  not  chej'ish  and  entertain  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit
(Cant.  V.  2,  3,  6,  7).

7.  When  they  grow  hardened  and  impenitent  under  provocation.  No  due  sense
of  their  own  sins,  nor  of  the  sins  of  the  land  they  lived  in  (Hos.  v.  15).

III.  When  it  may  be  said  we  are  properly  exercised  under  such  a  painf^
dispensation.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohap.  xit.


1.  When  we  are  truly  sensible  of  our  loss,  and  that  our  sin  is  the  cause  of  it.
Mourn  after  the  Lord,  as  Israel  in  the  days  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.  2).

2.  When  we  place  all  our  happiness  in  God's  favour  and  presence.  Every  com-
fort regarded  as  empty  without  God,  regarding  Him  as  "  the  Hope  of  Israel,"  and
our  only  desire  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  25).

3.  When  we  sngage  all  the  powers  of  our  souls  to  seek  after  God  (Ps.  cxix.  10).
For  God  takes  particular  notice  of  those  who  do  (Jer.  xxx.  21).

4.  When  we  diligently  embrace  every  opportunity  for  finding  an  absent  God,  and
use  every  appointed  means  (Cant.  iii.  2).

5.  When  we  torestle  with  Him  in  prayer  to  return.  Use  every  argument,  as  here
the  prophet  did.  He  pleads  (a)  The  glory  of  His  name:  "  for  Thy  name's  sake."
{b)  Their  helpless  state  without  Him  :  "Oh,  the  hope,"  &c.  (c)  His  former  kindness
to  them :  "  the  Saviour  in  time  of  trouble."  \d)  His  power :  *'  Why  shouldst
Thou,"  <fec.  (ver.  9).  (e)  The  outward  symbols  of  His  presence  :  "  Thou  art  in  our
midst."     (/)  The  covenant  relation:  '*  we  are  called  by  Thy  name."

6.  When  we  are  not  satisfied  with  the  best  means,  unless  we  find  God  in  them.  David
was  not  content  with  the  tabernacle,  ark,  sacrifices,  passover ;  but,  in  midst  of  all,
cried  for  God  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  2).

IV.  Whence  it  is  that  the  Lord,  being  as  a  stranger  to  His  people,  occasions
them  so  much  concern.

1.  Because  of  the  incomparable  happiness  arising  from  the  enjoyment  of  His
presence.  All  blessedness  comes  with  His  presence,  and  when  He  withdraws  we
may  cry  out  with  Micah  (Judges  xviii.  24).

2.  Because  of  the  sad  effects  attending  the  loss  of  His  presence.  Great  darkness
(Lam.  iii.  2),  much  deadness  (John  xi.  21),  disability  for  duty  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4,
xl.  12  ;  John  xv.  6),  barrenness  (John  xv.  6),  exposure  to  danger  and  enemies
(Numb.  xiv.  9),  distress  when  remembering  former  blessings  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  3),  melan-
choly thoughts  of  death  and  judgment  (Ps.  xxiii.  4),  the  fear  of  being  entirely
rejected  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  9,  10,  cxix.  8).

Infer :

(1.)  There  are  but  few  true  seekers  of  God  among  us.  Many  are  troubled  for  other
trifling  losses,  but  few  can  say  with  David  (Ps.  xxx.  7).

(2.)  The  misery  of  those  who  are  far  from  God  now,  and  may  be  deprived  of  His
presence  for  ever  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  27).  Ungodly  men  desire  not  His  presence  (Job  xxL
14).     Their  choice  will  be  their  punishment  (Matt.  xxv.  41).

(3.)  l^he  sad  case  of  those  whom  God  forsakes,  never  to  ret^irn  again — as  with
Saul  (1  Sam.  xvi.  14).  The  Lord  preserve  us  from  this  great  woe,  and  grant  us
enjoyment  of  His  presence  here  and  in  heaven  ! — Hannum.

Topic  :  Triumphant  Prayer  (vers.  7-9).

See  Addenda  on  ver.  8,  ^^Intercessory  Prayer.''  Expositors  have  differed  as  to
whether  the  drought  which  forms  the  basis  of  this  prayer  was  a  literal  one,  or  is
the  prophet's  way  of  putting  the  sore  calamities  that  Lad  fallen  on  Israel.  But
throughout  Scripture,  the  metaphor  of  the  "  rain  that  cometh  down  from  heaven
and  watereth  the  earth  "  is  the  symbol  for  God's  Divine  gift  of  His  Spirit ;  and  the
picture  of  *'a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  is"  is  the  appropriate  sign  of
the  soul  and  the  Church  void  of  the  Divine  presence.

I.  The  mysterious  contradiction  between  the  ideal  of  Israel  and  the  actual
condition  of  things.  Recur  to  the  historical  event  upon  which  this  text  is  based,
"  The  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  a  good  land ;  a  land  full  of  brooks  and  w^ter,
rivers  and  depths "  (Deut.  viii.  9) ;  and  the  fulfilment  is  this — a  land  full  of
misery  for  want  of  the  thing  promised !  So  also,  the  ancient  charter  of  Israel's
existence  was  tbat  God  should  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  :  but  things  are  as  if
the  perennial   presence  promised  had   been   changed  into  visits,  short  and  far

309


OTiF.  XiT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .  JEREMIAH.


between  (ver.  8).  Two  ideas  conveyed  :  the  "brief  transitory  visits,  with  long  dreary
■tretches  of  absence  between  them  ;  and  the  indiference  of  the  visitant,  ms  a  man
who  pitches  bis  tent  for  a  night,  caring  little  for  the  people  among  whom  he
tarries  the  while.  More  :  instead  of  the  perpetual  energy  of  the  Divine  aid
promised  to  Israel,  it  looks  as  if  Thou  art  "  a  mighty  man  astonied/'  <fec. — a
Samson  with  his  locks  shorn.

The  IDEAL  was  :  Perpetual  gifts,  perpetual  presence,  perpetual  energy.

The  REALITY  is  :  Parched  places,  fitful  visitations,  and  a  paralysis,  as  it  would
api)ear,  of  all  the  ancient  might.  And  what  was  God^s  ideal  for  us.  His  Church  f
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,"  <kc.  '*  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,  salt  of  the
earth."  It  sounds  like  irony  rather  than  a  promise  !  What  is  the  Church  ?  The
Church  at  home  does  not  keep  pace  numerically  with  the  increase  of  population,
while  heathenism  remains  scarcely  touched — all  unconquered  !  "  Why  shouldst
Thou  be  as  a  mighty  man  that  cannot  save  1  "

II.  Our  low  and  evil  condition  should  lead  to  earnest  inquiry  as  to  its
cause.

Prophet  asks,  **  Why  shouldst  Thou  leave  us  t  "

1.  The  reason  is  not  in  any  variableness  of  that  unalterahley  uniform,  ever-present,
ever-full,  Divine  gift  of  God's  Spirit  to  His  Church.  We  do  not  believe  in  an
arbitrary  sovereignty.  The  great  reservoir  is  always  full.  If  there  be  any  changes
in  the  fulness  of  our  possession  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  t\\Q  fault  lies  wholly  within  the
region  of  the  mutable  and  the  human,  and  not  at  all  in  the  region  of  the  perennial
and  tlie  Divine.

2.  The  reason  is  not  in  the  failure  of  adaptation  in  God's  Word  and  ordinances
for  the  great  work  they  had  to  do.

3.  The  fault  lies  here  only :  *'  O  Lord,  cue  iniquities  testify  against  its,"  &c.
We  have  to  prayerfully,  patiently,  and  honestly  search  after  this  cause,  and  not  to
look  to  possible  variations  and  improvements  in  order  and  machinery,  (fee,  but  to
recognise  this  as  being  the  one  sole  cause  that  hinders, — the  slackness  of  our  own
hold  on  Christ's  hand,  and  the  feebleness  and  imperfection  of  our  spiritual  life
(ver.  7).

III.  This  consciousness  of  our  evil  condition  and  knowledge  of  the  cause
lead  on  to  lowly  penitence  and  confession.  We  err  in  being  more  ready,
when  awakened  to  a  sense  of  wrong,  to  originate  new  methods  of  work,  to  begin
with  new  zeal  to  gather  in  the  outcasts  into  the  fold  ;  instead  of  beginning  with
ourselves,  deepening  our  own  Christian  character,  purifying  our  own  hearts,  and
getting  more  of  the  life  of  God  into  our  own  spirits.  Begin  with  lotvly  abasement
at  His  footstool.  Let  us  see  that  we  are  right  in  our  own  inmost  hearts.  To  our
knees  and  to  confessions  !  *'  Sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  assembly,"  <fec.  (Joel
ii.  16-17).

IV.  The  triumphant  confidence  of  believing  prayer.

1.  Look  at  the  substance  of  his  x^etitioiK  "  Do  Thou  it  for  Thy  name's  sake  :
leave  us  not."  He  does  not  prescribe  what  should  be  done,  nor  ask  that  calamity
be  taken  away,  but  simply  for  the  continual  Divine  presence  and  power.

2.  Look  at  these  pleas  with  God  as  grounds  of  confidence  for  ourselves,  (a)  The
name  :  all  the  ancient  manifestations  of  Thy  character.  Thy  memorial  with  all
generations,  (b)  Israel's  hope  :  the  confidence  of  the  Church  is  fixed  upon  Thee ;
and  Thou  who  hast  given  us  Thy  name  hast  become  our  hope,  (c)  The  perennial
and  essential  relationship  of  God  to  His  Church :  we  belong  to  Thee,  and  Thou
hast  not  ceased  Thy  care  for  us !

Lowly  repentance  should  rise  to  the  triumph  of  believing  hope.  The  expecta-
tion is  the  precursor  of  the  gift,  and  the  prayer  is  the  guarantee  of  the  acceptance
(vers.  20-22)  ;  for  with  that  prayer  on  our  lips,  be  sure  that  the  old  answer  will
come  to  us,  "  I  will  pour  rivers  of  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  flooc[s  upop
Ihf  dry  ground."— ul,  WLaren,  BA..  ''ChrMm  World  fulpi^^'*

m


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARlt .  JEUEMtA If.  csaf.  xfv.


Theme :  God's  Covenant  an  Argument  in  Prayer.     Text:  *^ Remember,  break  not

Thy  covenant  with  us"

Suggestions  :  A  "covenant"  between  God  and  man  can  be  only  an  accommo-
dating expression,  since  man  cannot  be  regarded  as  properly  qualified  to  make  an
agreement  with  Jehovah,  being  essentially  unreliable  and  impotent.  Strictly
speaking,  such  a  covenant  is  quite  unconditional,  and  amounts  to  a  promise  (Gal.  iii.
15  sq.)y  where  ivayyeX/a  and  dic/.d^xi^  are  used  almost  as  synonyms)  or  act  of  mere
favour  (Ps.   Ixxxix.   28,  where  IDH  stands  in  parallelism  with  /IHB)  on  God's

part.  Thus,  the  assurance  given  by  God  after  the  flood  that  a  like  judgment
should  not  be  repeated,  and  that  the  recurrence  of  the  seasons,  and  of  day  and
night,  should  not  cease,  is  called  a  covenant  (Gen.  ix.  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  20).  Generally,
however,  the  form  of  a  covenant  is  maintained  by  the  benefits  which  God  engages
to  bestow,  being  made  by  Him  dependent  upon  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions
which  He  imposes  on  man.  Thus,  the  covenant  with  Abraham  was  conditioned
by  circumcision  (Acts  vii.  8),  the  omission  of  which  was  declared  tantamount  to  a
breach  of  the  covenant  (Gen.  xvii.) ;  the  covenant  with  the  priesthood,  by  zeal  for
God,  His  honour  and  service  (Numb.  xxv.  12,  13  ;  Mai.  ii.  4,  5)  ;  the  covenant
of  Sinai,  by  the  observance  of  the  ten  commandments  (Ex.  xxxiv.  27,  28).  This
last-mentioned  covenant,  which  was  renewed  at  diflferent  periods  of  Jewish  history
(Deut.  xxix.  ;  Josh.  xxiv.  ;  2  Chron.  xv.,  xxiii.,  xxix.,  xxxiv.  ;  Ezra  x.  ;  Neh.  ix.,
X.)  is  one  of  the  two  principal  covenants  between  God  and  man,  distinguished  as
Old  and  New  (Jer.  xxxi.  31-34;  Heb.  viii.  8-13).     Compare  Kitto.

L  That  God  should  make  a  covenant  with  man  is  an  act  of  unmerited
grace.

II.  That  man  should  fail  to  keep  the  covenant  accords  with  all  human
history.

III.  That  failure  on  man's  part  justifies  God  in  withdrawing  His  covenanted
goodness.

IV.  Nevertheless,  that  a  gracious  covenant  made  by  God,  who  knows  our
waywardness,  might  stand  though  man  proved  faithless.

V.  Therefore,  that  God  may  be  entreated  to  keep  His  part  in  a  covenant
even  with  a  faithless  people  who  have  forfeited  all  right  to  His  grace.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XV. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.   1.    Concerning  the  dearth,  powers  and   crushes  the  maternal   in-

A  terrible  drought  had  fallen  upon  the  stincts.     "  Yea,  the  hind  also  calved  in

land  ;  and  the  prophet's  picture  of  it  is,  the  field,  and  forsook  it,  because  there

if    one    might   say    so,    like    some   of  was  no  grass."     And  on  every  hill  top,

Dante*s  in  its  realism,  its   tenderness,  where  cooler  air  might  be  found,  the

and  in  its  terror.     In  the  presence  of  a  once  untamable  wild  asses  are  standing

common   calamity,    all    distinctions   of  with  open  nostrils  panting  for  air,  their

class  have  vanished,  and  the  nobles  send  filmy  eyes  failing  them,  gazing  for  the

their  little  ones  to  the  water,  and  they  rain  that  will  not  come." — McLaren.
come   back    with    empty   vessels    and  Ver.    2.       "  The    gates     thereof

drooping   heads,   instead   of   with   the  languish."     "  The  gates  of  cities,  be-

gladness  that  used  to  be  heard  in  the  ing  places  of  public  resort,  where  courts

place  of  drawing  of  water.     Far  afield  of  justice  were  held,  and  other  common

the  ploughmen  are  standing  among  the  business  transacted,  seem  here  to  be  put

cracked  furrows  gazing  with  despair  at  for   the   persons   that   meet  there ;   as

the  brown  chapped  earth,  and  out  in  when  we  say,  *  The  court  is  in  mourn-

the  field  the  very  dumb  creatures  are  ing,*  we  mean  the  persons  that  attend

sharing  in  the  common  sorrow,  and  the  the  court  or  the  king's  palace.     So  in

imp«hau«  loss  of  self-preservation  over-  this  passage  we  are  to  understand  that

311


OBAP.  XIT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMTAB.


all  the  persons  who  appear  in  public  are
dejected,  and  put  on  black  or  mourning
on  account  of  the  national  distress." —
Dr.  Blayney.

"  Or,  that  they  look  black  and  ghastly,
and  cast  themselves  down  upon  the
ground  out  of  grief  and  despair  (comp.
viii.  21;  xiii.  18)."— TT.  Louth.

*'  As  the  gates  were  the  usual  place
of  concourse,  the  misery  of  the  people
would  there  show  itself  most  plainly,"
—-Speakers  Com.

Ver.  3.  "  Came  to  the  pits  and
FOUND  NO  water.**  Jerusalem  was
supplied  with  water  by  two  lakes  or
pools,  called  "  the  Upper  Pool "  and
**  the  Lower  Pool "  (see  Isa.  vii.  3,
xxii.  9),  whence  the  water  was  con-
veyed into  cisterns  [here  rendered
*'pits"]  for  the  use  of  the  city. —
W.  Louth,

Ver.  6.  "Snuffed  up  the  wind."
"Asses,  in  defect  of  water,  can  continue
long  by  drawing  in  the  air;  as  Aristotle
likewise  testifieth  of  the  goats  of  Cepha-
lonia,  that  they  drink  not  for  divers
days  together,  but  instead  thereof  gnpe
and  suck  in  the  fresh  air." — Trapp,

Ver.  7.  Contrite  prayer.

"  All  powerful  is  the  penitential  sigh
Of  true  contrition.     Like  the  placid  wreatha
Of  incense  wafted  from  the  righteous  shrine,
Where  Abel  minister'd,  to  the  blest  seat
Of  mercy,  an  accepted  sacrifice,
Humiliation's  conscious  plaint  ascends.*'

— Hayet,

Ver.  8.  Intercessory  prayer.

"  A  good  man's  prayers
Will    from  the    deepest    dungeon  climb  to

heaven's  height,
And  bring  a  blessing  down."

— Joanna  BaiUie.
**  Temporal  blessings  Heaven  doth  often  share
Unto  the  wicked,  at  the  good  man's  prayer."

— Quarles.
**  But  that  from  us  aught  should  ascend  to
Heaven
So  prevalent  as  to  concern  the  mind
Of  God  high  blest,  or  to  incline  His  will.
Hard  to  belief  may  seem  ;    yet  this  will
\         prayer.  **  — Milton.

"  A  STRANGER  IN  THE    LAND."       "  As

none  but  citizens  in  old  time  had  any
political  rights  or  privileges,  a  sojourner,
however  long  might  be  his  stay,  naturally
took  little  interest  in  the  country  where
not  choice  but  necessity  had  made  him
fix  his  dwelling." — ,Speaker's  Com,
312


Ver.  9.  God's  withdrawals  from  his

PEOPLE.  "  God  does  not  always  frown,
lest  we  should  be  cast  into  despair  ;  He
does  not  always  smile,  lest  we  should
be  careless  and  presume." — Owen.

"  A  father's  frowns  are  but  the
graver  countenance  of  love.*' — Cowper.

'*  I  know,  as  night  and  shadow  are
good  for  flowers,  and  moonlight  and
dews  are  better  than  continual  sun,  so
is  Christ's  absence  of  special  use,  and  it
hath  some  nourishing  virtue  in  it,  and
giveth  sap  to  humility,  and  putteth  an
edge  on  hunger,  and  furnishes  a  fair
occasion  for  faith  to  put  forth  her  hand
and  lay  hold  on  what  she  seeth  not." —
Rutherford.

"  God  sometimes  hides  Himself  that
we  may  cling  the  closer  to  Him  and
hang  the  faster  upon  Him.  By  with-
drawing from  His  people,  He  prevents
His  people  withdrawing  from  Him  ;  and
so  by  an  affliction  He  prevents  sin  ;  for
God  to  withdraw  from  me  is  but  my
affliction,  but  for  me  to  withdraw  from
God,  that  is  my  sin  ;  and,  therefore,  it
were  better  for  me  that  God  should
withdraw  from  me  a  thousand  times
than  that  I  should  once  withdraw  from
God"  (Heb.  x.  38,  Z^).— Brooks.

Ver  10.  "  They  love  to  wander."

**  I  have  not  kept  Thy  word.
And  yet  Thou  biddest  me  to  taiste  Thy  love  ;
Shaming   my  faithless  heart  that  ere  could
rove
From  Thee,  0  gracious  Lord.
**  Shame  wraps  my  heart  around
Like   morning   gloom    upon   the   mountains

spread ;
Indignant  memory,  avenger  dread.
Deepens  each  restless  wound."

—Thomas  W.  Welh,

Ver,  12.  Fasting  offensive.

**  When  thou  a  fast  wouldst  keep,
Make  not  thy  homage  cheap
By  publishing  its  signs  to  every  eye ;
But  let  it  be  between
Thyself  and  the  Unseen ;
So  shall  it  gain  acceptance  from  on  high,*

— Barton,
"  Is  this  a  fast — to  keep
The  larder  lean,  and  clean

From  fat  of  veals  and  sheep  t
**  Is  it  to  quit  the  dish
Of  flesh,  yet  still  to  fill

The  platter  high  with  fiah  t
'*  Is  it  to  fast  an  hour,
Or  ragged  go,  or  show

A  downcast  look  and  aoiirf


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  X7.


"No!  'tii  a  fast  to  dole
Thy  sheaf  of  wheat,  and  meat

Unto  the  hungry  soul.

It  is  to  fast  from  sti'ife.
From  old  debate,  and  hate —

To  circumcise  thy  life.

To  show  a  heart  grief- rent;
To  starve  thy  sin — not  bin —

And  that's  to  keep  thy  Lent."

— Herrich,

Ver.  13.  "Assured  peace."  Peace
Is  not  a  compromise  with  circumstances.
It  is  a  Divine  reality  in  the  heart.
Righteousness  is  rest — holiness  is  peace
— rectitude  with  God,  arising  through
trust  in  the  atonement  of  God  the  Son,
means  tranquillity  deep  and  unchanging
as  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  under-
standing ! — Joseph  Parker,  D,D.

**  Far,  far  away  the  roar  of  passion  dieth.
And  loving  thoughts  rise  calm  and  peace-
fully;
And  no  rude  storm,  how  fierce  soe'er  it  flieth.
Disturbs   that   deeper   rest,   0   Lord,  in
Thee."  —H.  B.  Stawe.

Ver.  19.  Wrestling  prayers.  "  If
thy  suit  be  not  honest,  never  begin  it :
if  it  be,  never  leave  it." — IVapp.

Ver.  20.  Sin  acknowledged.  "Many
people  can  mourn  for  a  body  from  which
a  soul  is  departed,  but  they  cannot
mourn  over  a  soul  whom  God  has  de-
serted. Alas  !  what  is  a  spot  in  the  face
to  a  stab  in  the  heart '{  Inward  diseases
are  least  visible  and  yet  most  fatal.  A
man  may  die  of  a  plague  though  his
spots  never  appear." — Seeker.

Contrition  necessary.  "  Take  the
cold  iron,  and  attempt  to  weld  it,  if
you  can,  into  a  certain  shape.  How
fruitless  the  effort !  Lay  it  on  the  an-
vil, seize  the  blacksmith's  hammer  with
all  your  might,  let  blow  after  blow  fall
on  it,  and  you  shall  have  done  nothing ;
but  put  it  in  the  tire,  let  it  be  softened
and  made  malleable,  then  lay  it  on  the
anvil,  and  each  stroke  shall  have  a
mighty  effect,  so  that  you  may  mould
it  into  any  shape  you  may  desire.  So
take  your  heart,  not  cold  as  it  is,  but


put  it  into  the  furnace  ;  let  it  be  molten,
and  after  that  it  can  be  fashioned  into
the  image  of  Jesus  Christ." — Spurgeon.
Conversion.  A  Scotch  lassie  was
converted  under  the  preaching  of  Whit-
field. She  was  asked  if  her  heart  were
changed,  and  replied,  "Something,  I
know,  is  changed  ]  it  may  be  the  world,
it  may  be  my  heart;  there  is  a  great
change  somewhere,  I  am  sure;  for  every-
thing is  different  from  what  it  once
was."

**  I  need  a  cleansing  change  within  :
My  life  must  once  again  begin ;
New  hope  I  need,  and  youth  renewed,
And  more  than  human  fortitude  ;
New  faith,  new  love,  and  strength  to  cast
Away  the  fetters  of  the  past."

— Hartley  Coleridge.

Ver.  21.  "Do  not  disgrace  the
THRONE  OP  THY  GLORY."  The  Romans
held  the  extinction  of  the  vestal  fire  a
sign  of  the  destruction  of  their  city,  be
the  cause  thereof  /vhat  it  will.  We  may
well  think  the  same  of  the  loss  of  God's
ordinances,  which  therefore  we  must
deprecate,  as  here,  with  all  our  might ;
for  as  Bodin  said  well  of  obtaining,  so
likewise  of  retaining,  religion,  ^on  dis-
putationibus  sed  rogationihus,  <fec.  :  the
business  will  be  the  better  effected  by
requests  than  by  disputes.  Pray,  there-
fore, for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,  yea,
take  no  nay.  Deus  ipse  qui  nullis  con-
tra se  virihus  super  are  potest ,  precihus
vincitur  (Jerome).  The  invincible  God
is  overcome  by  the  power  of  prayer.
— Trapp.

Ver.  22.  Man's  lone  hope.  "Our
hope  is  not  hung  upon  such  an  un-
twisted thread  as  '  I  imagine  so,'  or  *  It
is  likely; '  but  the  cable,  the  strong  rope
of  our  fastened  anchor,  is  the  oath  and
promise  of  Him  who  is  eternal  verity  :
our  salvation  is  fastened  with  God's
own  hand  and  Christ's  own  strength
to  the  strong  stake  of  God's  unchange-
able nature." — Rutherford,


CHAPTER  XV.

Cbitioal  akd  Exeostioal  Notes — For  Chronology  of  the  Chapter  and  Hiitorieal  Factt^  see  on
chap.  xiv.  in  loc.

1.  Personal  AllUBions.  Ver.  1.  ** Moses  and  Samud,"  here  mentioned  as  Laving  heen  pre-
eminent and  prevailing  intercessors  on  behalf  of  their  people.  Comp.  Exod.  zxxii.  11-14  ;
Numb.  xiv.  13-20,  as  to  Moses;  and  1  Sam.  vii.  9  ;  zii.  23,   as  to  Samuel :  confer  also  Psalna

313


olAF.  tr.  HOMILETtC  COMMENTARt:  JEttBMtAff.


icix.  as  to  both.  Yer.  4.  "  Manatieh,  son  of  Hezekiah : "  Hezekiah  was  a  most  devout  and
religious  king,  whose  piety  throws  into  more  heinous  contrast  the  unrestrained  guiltiness  of
bis  impious  son,  Manasseh — the  thirteenth  king  of  Judah  ;  reigned  longer  than  any  other
monarch  of  the  Davidic  line;  born  (probably)  cir.  B.C.  710;  his  mother,  Hephzibah,  daughter
of  a  citizen  or  prince  of  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxi).  He  succeeded  to  the  throne  at  the  age  of
twelve;  the  event  was  the  signal  for  complete  moral  and  spiritual  debasement  of  the  whole
nation;  every  form  of  foreign  idolatry  was  introduced — loathsome,  sensuous,  barbaric — even  to
the  Moloch  fires  (2  Kings  xvi.  3;  Isa.  xxx.  33;  Jer.  vii.  31),  while  the  worship  of  Jehovah
was  repudiated,  the  hoUness  of  the  very  sanctuary  defiled  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  4),  God's  prophets
ruthlessly  persecuted  and  slain  (2  Kings  xxi.  16),  and  the  Theocracy  openly  repudiated  and
contemned.  In  the  twenty-second  year  of  his  reign  (according  to  a  Jewish  tradition),  Esar-
haddon,  king  of  Assyria,  invaded  Israel,  and  carried  Manasseh  into  Babylonian  captivity,  from
which  he  was  released  (probably,  for  Scripture  is  strangely  silent  respecting  his  career)  at  the
death  of  this  Assyrian  monarch.  He  then  returned  to  his  laud,  and  attempted  a  reformation
of  his  apostate  «.nd  degraded  nation  and  the  restoration  of  Jehovah's  worship  (2  Chron.  xxxiii«
15,  16),  but  the  impurity  and  impiety  of  the  people  were  beyond  lecal.  His  name,  notwith-
standing this  repentance,  was  long  held  in  abhorrence  among  the  Jews.

2.  Natural  Hlstoiy.  Ver.  3.  **Dogs  to  tear,  fowls  of  the  heaven  and  beasts  of  the  earth  to
devoWf"  &c.  "  Troops  of  hungry  and  semi-wild  dogs  wander  about  the  fields  and  streets  of
the  cities,  devouring  dead  bodies  and  other  oflFal  "  (Dr.  W.  Smith),  These  dogs  would  tear,
mutilate,  and  partly  devour  the  dead  bodies  {cf.  2  Kings  ix.  35,  37),  and  birds  and  beasts  of
prey,  vultures,  jackals,  and  others,  would  make  an  end  of  such  portions  as  the  dogs  left  (Keil).
Ver.  9.  **  Her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it  is  yet  day  :  "  Dr.  Payne  Smith  suggests  that  many  con-
sider the  reference  here  "to  the  battle  of  Megiddo,  depicting  the  consternation  of  Jerusalem
at  that  event.  If  so,  in  the  sun  going  down  while  it  was  yet  day^  there  will  be  a  reference  to  the
eclipse  on  Sept.  30,  B.C.  610.'*  Thus  Hitzig  remarks  that  the  prophet  "refers  to  the  battle  of  Me-
giddo, the  more  probably  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29)  as  the  figure  of  the  sun  setting  in  bright  daylight
might  then  be  founded  on  the  eclipse  which  took  place  in  that  valley  Sept.  30,  B.C.  610."

3.  Manners  and  Chutoms.  Yer.  3.  **I  mil  appoint  over  themfowr  kinds:"  {appoint,  same
word  as  in  xiii.  21  *Tj^5);  just  as  Qod  had  set  over  Israel  kings,  priests,  prophets,  and  judges

for  the  nation's  well-being,  so  now  He  placed  the  people  under  the  jurisdiction  of  these  four
destructive  agencies  {cf.  Ezek.  xiv.  21).  Ver.  7.  ^'  I  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates  of  the
land:"  allusion  to  the  winnowing  process  by  which  the  chaflf  is  driven  out  of  the  windows  of
the  threshing-floor ;  in  such  manner  would  this  people  (mere  chafiF)  be  driven  out  of  the  openings
and  exits,  "the  gates  of  the  land."  Ver.  10.  "Lent  on  usury:'*  the  Mosaic  law  interdicted
interest  on  loans  to  the  poor  (Exod.  xxii.  25),  and  later  on  discriminated  between  foreigners  and
Hebrews,  permitting  usury  upon  loans  to  foreigners,  but  repudiating  it  with  their  brethren
(Deut.  xxiii.  19,  20).  From  this  verse  it  appears  that  discredit  was  attached  to  any  who  lent  on
usury  even  so  late  as  in  Jeremiah's  days.  Yet  there  were  departures  from  this  law,  and  they
caused  bitter  "strife  and  contention  "  between  money-lender  and  debtor.  Ver.  17.  **  Sat  not  in
the  assembly  of  the  mockers  :  "  convivial  gatherings  ;  meetings  where,  amid  hilarity  and  festivity,
God  was  ignored  and  sacred  things  ridiculed.  See  notes  on  chap.  yi.  11.  "  /  sat  alone  because
of  Thy  hand:  "  either  because  the  prophetic  power  so  possessed  his  soul  as  to  draw  him  apart
from  ordinary  society  and  compel  him  to  an  isolated  life  (so  Keil,  Clarius,  Vatablus,  Ac),  or
**  because  of  the  faithful  communication  of  his  inspired  messages  he  had  been  expelled  from
society,  and  been  made  the  object  of  their  fierce  indignation  "  (Henderson).

4.  Literary  Criticisms.     Ver.  1.  "  Cast  them  out  of  My  sight ;"  send  them,  or  drive  them,

from  My  presence  ;  lit.,  from  before  My  face,  ''J3"^J^D  •  the  form  implies  (supposititiously)

that  the  people  were  assembled  before  Jehovah  within  the  Temple — they  were  to  **go  forth,"
leave  the  sacred  precincts;  Qod  would  not  be  interceded  for  them.  Ver.  3.  *^  four  kinds  :**
JH^nDli^D    lit.    families;   agencies  of  destruction.      Ver.  4.  *^ Cause  them  to  be  removed:**

T    :   •  *

nV}T     from  the  root  ^^T    tossing,  violent  motion,  maltreatment,  quaking,  terror.     These

various  shades  of  meaning  supply  diflferent  interpretations  of  the  text:  I  will  cause  them  to  be
tossed  violently  hither  and  thither,  abused,  maltreated  (Keil):  I  will  give  them  up  to  agitation ;
they  should  have  no  rest,  but  be  driven  from  place  to  place  (Henderson):  I  will  make  them  a
shuddering  unto  all  kingdoms  (Hitzig,  Graf):  cause  them  to  be  a  terror  (Payne  Smith):  a

horror  fLange).  Ver.  5.  *'  Pity  .  .  .  bemoan  ,  ...  go  aside^"  &c.:  ,pn  to  feel  sympathy;
*7J)2,  to  lament  and  deplore;  "1^)0,  to  turn  out  of  the  way — **to  ask  how  thou  doest.**
D^ /I^7  to  salam,  salute,  inquire  as  to  one's  health.  No  one  will  cherish  the  people  with
sympathy,  indeed  no  one  will  trouble  themselves  to  inquire  as  to  their  good.  Ver.  6.  **  Thou
hast  forsaken  Me,  saith  the  Lord:"  UStl^'Di^^  "'Di^  D]l}J^2  Di^ '  the  word  "forsaken"  isa

feeble  rendering  of  I£^D3  "thou  hast  cast  Me  out,  abandoned  Me."  And  this  emphatic  re-
pudiation  of  Jehovah  on  their  part  justifies  God's  refusal  to  be  interceded  for  them.     Ver.

314


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  orlb.  xt.


7.  **  Gates  of  the  land:"  VIKn.      Ewald  and  Graf  render  it  earth,  and  understand  it  that  God

-■     T       T

would  winnow  them  tlirougli  the  extremities  of  the  earth,  remotest  regions;  but  Keil,  Lange,
Henderson,  retain  "land:"  God  would  drive  them  through  the  gates  of  their  own  land  into
exile.     Ver.  8.  **  I  have  brought  upon  them  against  the  mother"  ho.'.  Henderson:  "The  wordg

*l^n^  DN*" /J^  have  been  very  differently  construed.  The  LXX.  eirl  fiTjripa  veavlaKovs.  Some
(Syriae,  Arabic,  C.  B.  Michaelis,  and  Ewald)  compare  the  phrase  D''^3l  P^  D^^  the  mother
with  her  chiHren,  but  the  position  of  the  preposition  before  and  not  after  Di^  renders  such
construction  untenable.  Others  (Chaldean,  Kimchi,  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Hitzig,  Graf,  and
Naegelsbach)  take  "I'lH^l  D^^  to  be  in  the  construct  Btate:  the  mother  of  the  young  man,  or,
regarding  the  nouns  as  collectives,  the  mothers  of  the  young  men.  Jarchi,  Capellus,  Castalio,
Dr.  Dieu,   Doderlein,   Eichorn,  and  Dahler  (and  Reshi)  consider  Di^    mother,  to  mean,  the

metropolis  (as  2  Sam.  xx.  Id)."  Favouring  this  latter  rendering,  Henderson  reads  the  words
thus:  I  have  brought  to  them — against  the  mother  (city) — a  young  spoiler  (Nebuchadnezzar),
But  with  Jerome  and  Kimchi,  &;c.,  both  Keil  and  the  Speaker's  Comm.  coincide,  and  translates:
I  )»^ve  brought  upon  them,  even  upon  the  mother  and  the  young  man^  a  spoiler,  &c. — i.e.,  no  age
or  sex  will  escape  the  spoiler.  **  I  have  caused  him  to  faU  upon  it  suddenly  ;"  rather,  caused
pangs  and  terrors  to  fall  upon  her  suddenly.     Ver.  10.  ** Every  one  doth  curse  me:"    The

Hebrew  words  ^^l^^pD  H^J  bave  been  wrongly  divided,  and  should  be  ^J^//p  DH /3
The  form  DH/D  (1st  pers.)  is  unusual,  yet  is  found  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  C.  Ver.  11.  "  Vei'Uy
it  shall  he  well  with  thy  remnant:"  a  various  reading  appears  here:  a  different  pointing
wholly  changing  the  sense:  ^/Tinti^  may  be  pointed  thus,  ^Jli"lti^    (the  infinitive  Kal  from

")*1t£l  to  oppress),  or  ^Jli"1Ii^  (from  n*)t£t    to  loose).     The  latter  is  preferable,  and  agrees  with

the  rendering  given  to  the  only  other  appearance  of  the  verb  in  the  Heb.  Scriptures  (Job  xxxvii.
3  ;  setteth  the  lightning  loose).  The  reading  of  the  words  then  is.  Verily  thy  loosing  shall  be  for
good ;  or,  Verily  I  have  loosed  thee  for  good.  "  Thy  remnant:"  these  words  of  course  disap-
pear from  the  text,  being  included  and  lost  in  the  above  translation  of  the  sentence.  *'  Cause
the  enemy  to  entreat  thee  well:"  ''i^y^SH  (from  ^^3^  to  meet,  make  peace,  cause  to  supplicate):

hence,  I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  supplicate  thee  in  the  time  of  evil.

Ver.  12.  ** Shall  iron  break:"  can  iron  (ordinary  iron)  break  northern  iron  and  brass  f  not
"  steel ;  "  or,  can  one  break  iron,  i.e.,  northern  iron  and  brass  ?  Ver.  14.  "  /  wUl  make  thee  to
pass  with  thine  enemies : "  for  the  form  ^jn^^ni   Henderson  and  Dr.   Payne  Smith  give

^iTl^^nV  I  will  cause  thee  to  serve  thine  enemies:  they  make  this  change  of  the  letter

("7  instead  of  ■^)  on  the  ground  of  numerous  MSS.,  also  from  the  authority  of  the  parallel
passage,  chap.  xvii.  4.  Ver.  15.  ** Suffered  r«6w^«;"  reproach.  Ver.  18.  "Pain  incurable:'*
very  sick.     Hli^lJ^^    malignant  (comp.  chap.  xxx.  12  ;  Mic.  i.  9  ;  Isa.  xvii.  11).     "  Wilt  Thou

het"=s  Art  Thou  become.    "  A  liar : "  3T^^^    as  a  deceitful  (brook  or  stream).    "  A  nd  as  waters

that  fail:"  as  precarious  water;  the  opposite  of  the  perennial  stream  of  Amos  v.  24.  Ver.  19.
**  Bring  thee  again,"  Ac,  rather,  I  will  cause  thee  again  to  stand  before  my  face  (see  Lit.  Crit.
on  ver.  1,  supra).  This  was  an  assurance  to  Jeremiah,  that  if  he  returned  to  his  unquestioning
trust  in  God's  wisdom  and  ways,  God  would  confirm  him  in  his  prophetic  and  vicegeral  relation
to  Himself.  It  was  a  gentle  reproof  of  his  impatient  questionings,  and  a  pledge  of  the  renewal
of  his  sacred  trust.  **  Thou  shalt  stand  b^ore  me,"  Luther  renders,  Thou  shalt  remain  my
preacher.

EOMILETIC  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XV.

Section   1-9.   God*s  decisive  refusal  of  the  prophet's  petitions.

„    10-14.  The  consequent  outcry  of  woe  answered  with  Divine  expostulations.
„    15-21.  Fretting  lamentations  silenced  with  promises.

Vers.  1-9.   God's  Decisive  Refusal  of  the  Prophet's  Petition.

I.  There  may  be  a  criminaUty  for  which  no  intercession  can  be  adequate.

1.  Intercessors  had  prevailed  even  in  cases  of  appalling  guilt.  When  Moses  and
Samuel  interceded  efifectually,  the  condition  of  Israel  was  most  iniquitous  and  pro-
vocative of  Divine  wrath;  yet  they  prevailed  in  prayer.  Such  "effectual  fervent
prayers  of  righteous  men  avail  much."  It  would  almost  seem  that  nothing  could
transcend  the  reach  of  mediatorial  pleadings.  315


CBAP.  XT.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


2.  Tet  there  is  a  hound  to  the  prevalency  of  intercession.  Even  Moses  and
Samuel  would  now  find  their  mediation  fail.  For  (1)  God  could  not  he  reconciled
to  such  a  people.  His  "  mind  "  was  irremediably  averted  from  them.  (2)  He  had
irrevocahly  determined  their  hanishment;  could  not  endure  or  permit  their  remain-
ing within  His  sight.  Persistent  and  defiant  criminality  can  effectually  alienate
God.  ^^  There  is  a  sin  which  is  unto  death;  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray
for  it."

3.  ^Nevertheless,  in  these  times  of  grace,  through  Christ j  it  appears  impossihle  to
exceed  Divine  clemency.  What  Moses  and  Samuel  and  Jeremiah  could  not  do,
Jesus  can/  "What  the  law  (of  Moses)  could  not  do,"  <fec.  (Rom.  viii.  3).
"  Wherefore  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,'*
&c.  (Heb.  vii.  25).

II,  Destructive  agencies  are  in  readiness  for  sinners  abandoned  to  judgment.

1.  A  discriminating  consignment  to  various  forms  of  doom.  All  will  not  experi-
ence similar  and  equal  judgment.  A  different  form  of  punishment  is  allottt^d  to
each.  Yet  this  "  going  forth "  is  not  merely  to  hanishment,  but  to  execution.
*'  These  shall  go  away  to  everlasting  destruction.'*

2.  Ruthless  agencies  of  execution  await  their  opportunity  to  destroy.  So  long  as
God  shielded  this  people  and  retained  them  "  before  His  face,"  they  were  secure.
So  long  as  we  are  shielded  by  His  mercy,  ruin  cannot  reach  us,  however  we  may
merit  the  ruin.  But  instantly  God  sent  them  "  out  of  His  sight,"  away  from
His  befriending,  lo !  "  death,  the  sword,  famine,  and  captivity,"  all  rushed  upon
tbem.     Cast  away  from  God's  presence,  we  shall  find  executioners  vigilant.

3.  Abandoned  spiritual  apostasy  is  the  unpardonable  offence  with  God.  (See
Personal  Allusions  on  ver.  4,  "  Manasseh.")  The  horrifying  indulgences,  sacri-
ligeous  debasements,  foul  practices,  defiance  and  defilement  of  God's  holiness  and
holy  place  :  these  were  the  people's  crimes  under  Manasseh.  He  did  but  let  loose
their  cherished  apostasy.  Himself  vile,  the  nation  rushed  into  and  revelled  in
vileness  and  villany.     This  is  "  the  sin  unto  death."

III.  Flagrant  wickedness  ultimately  alienates  all  commiseration  or  com-
passion.

1.  Human  pity  is  estranged  (ver.  6).  No  one  will  sympathise  with  their
misery,  lament  their  ruin,  or  inquire  for  their  condition.

2.  Divine  relenting  is  exhausted  (ver.  6).  God  was  "  weary  with  repenting,"  and
would  now  inexorably  punish.

3.  Justice  effectually  avenges  impenitence.  "  They  return  not  from  their  ways  *'
(ver.  7).  That  justifies  their  final  and  severe  doom.  (1)  From  their  land  driven
forth  (ver.  7).  (2)  Their  holy  city  desolated  (ver.  8).  (3)  Death  and  doom
overtaking  all,  irrespective  of  sex  or  age  (ver.  9,  see  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse).

Note  :  **  Pity "  is  slow  to  die,  even  from  the  human  heart ;  it  survives,  and
asserts  itself  even  when  all  affection  is  dead.  Far  more  slowly  does  God's  pity  die.
Yet  heinous,  determined,  ostentatious,  and  persistent  guilt  will  eventually  destroy
all  pity  for  the  wicked.     Then  only  terrible  and  implacable  miseries  can  ensue.

Ver.  10-14.  Thb  Outcry  op  Woe  answered  with  Expostulations.

Seeing  that  he  availed  nothing  by  prayer,  the  prophet  raised  his  lament.  Into
his  cry  enter  both  personal  disappointment  and  patriotic  dismay.

I.  He  bemoans  Ms  troubled  prophetic  career,  since  it  accomplished  no
national  good.

He  repines  over^:  1,  His  personal  hardships,  2.  His  prophetic  calling  and  connr-
mission^  for  these  had  been  fruitful  of  grief,  suffering,  and  calumny.  And
3.  The  hostility  he  encounters  :  "Every  one  doth  curse  me  ;"  his  experiences  are
as  distressing  as  if  he  had  himself  been  '*  a  man  of  strife  and  contention,"  and  as  if
his  occupation  had  been  that  of  the  hated  usurer !  Observe  how  he  gives  promi-
316


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xv.

nence  to  the  comfortless  aspects  of  his  career, — how  he  thrusts  his  own  troubles
forward,  almost  ignoring  the  wisdom  and  benignity  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  com-
missioning him  to  prophetic  duties.  What  were  his  suflferings  and  discomforts  as
compared  with  the  opportunities  and  persuasives  to  salvation  God  had  sent  to  the
nation  through  him  %     He  betrays  :

i.  Grief  for  apparent  failure  in  his  work  and  prayers.  "  He  felt  angry  that  he
efifected  less  than  he  wished  "  (Calvin).     All  ministers  could  alike  complain.

ii.  Regret  for  the  hardships  his  ministry  had  entailed.  Sinners  are  apt  to  judge
and  slander  faithful  preachers  as  contentious  disturbers  of  their  peace.

iii.  Trouble  for  the  irrevocable  ruin  of  his  nation.  The  hearts  of  his  people
were  unmoved,  unchanged.  And,  his  preachings  and  prayers  notwithstanding,
Judah  was  doomed  1

II.  With  mingled  promises  and  threatenings  God  answers  the  prophet's
complaint.     Jehovah  meets  the  outcry  thus  : —

1.  He  assures  him  of  ameliorating  mercies  amid  the  coming  distress  (ver.  11).
He  should  bp  exempt  from  the  national  woe,  and  be  treated  with  forbearance.

2.  Explains  the  prophet^s  impotency  in  intercession.  His  prayers  are  but  as
"iron,"  stout  and  determined  indeed;  yet  God's  purpose  to  send  Judah  into
exile  is  inflexible  as  '*  northern  iron  and  steel,"  or,  the  Assyrian  invasion  cannot  be
repelled  now  by  your  prayers  (ver.  12).

3.  Justifies  the  severe  judgments  He  had  determined  upon  Judah,  Her  prevalent
"  sins  "  (ver.  13)  necessitated  punishment.

4.  Avows  Himself  moved  to  a  fiery  anger  which  should  consume  the  hardened
nation.  God  was  wroth,  justly  and  resolutely  angry  ;  and  such  righteous  anger
could  not  be  restrained,  as  if  it  were  fitful,  by  even  His  prophet's  cries.  Personal
feeling  must  bow  to  Divine  equity.


Ver.  15-21.  Fretting  Lamentations  silenced  with  Promisks.

In  the  strophe  (ver.  15-18),  the  prophet,  though  recognising  that  the  fall  of  Judah
is  inevitable,  as  shown  in  ver.  12-14,  and  that  he  cannot  escape  the  hard  lot  of
having  to  predict  the  ruin  of  his  country  as  a  purpose  absolutely  determined,  yet
offers  unto  God  a  last  expostulation,  and  that  in  a  tone  of  reproach,  as  if  the
promises  made  in  chap.  i.  18  had  not  been  fulfilled.

His  words  are  full  of  meaning  :

I.  He  appeals  to  God  the  all-knowing  (who  was  acquainted,  therefore,  with  the
manner  of  his  call,  the  promises  made  him,  the  hopes  with  which  he  had  accepted
his  office,  his  disappointment,  liis  dangers,  the  opposition  he  had  met  with,  and  his
perseverance  when  in  despair)  to  show  that  He  remembered  him  by  visiting  him,  i.e.y
by  interfering  in  some  marked  manner  in  his  behalf  and  punishing  his  persecutors.

To  the  prophet  God's  long-sufifering  towards  the  wicked  seemed  to  be  the  aban-
donment of  himself  to  death,  and  justice  itself  required  that  one  who  was  suffering
contumely  for  God's  sake  should  be  delivered.

IL  He  contrasts  the  joy  with  which  he  had  accepted  his  office  (ver.  16),  when
he  received  God's  words  and  "did  eat  them,"  with —

III.  The  present  revulsion  of  his  feelings  (ver.  17) :  the  intense  "indignation"
with  which  he  regarded  the  sins  of  the  people,  which  were  heinous  in  themselves^
grievous  offences  against  God^  and  involved  the  ruin  of  His  Church.     Then

IV.  Prays  for  more  evident  help  (ver.  19).  It  is, the  prayer  of  a  man  in  bitter
grief,  whose  human  nature  cannot  at  present  submit  to  the  Divine  will.

V.  Laments  that  the  delivery  of  God's  message  availed  nothing.  His  labours
were  in  vain.  This  made  his  "pain  perpetual,"  <kc.  Nothing  he  did  had  in  aught
changed  the  miserable  state  of  things  around  him.  Jeremiah  had  expected  that,
called  to  so  high  an  office,  there  would  be  perpetual  interference  of  Providence  in

317


CHAP.  XT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


his  behalf,  instead  whereof,  things  seemed  to  take  only  their  natural  course  God
seeiiied  "  as  a  deceitful  stream  "  to  him.

To  all  this  God  made  a  reply  full  of  forbearance  and  graciousness,  although
comfort  is  blended  with  rebuke.

I.  Solemn  conditions  are  specified.  These  were  imperative  to  the  prophet's
reinstatement  in  official  dignity  and  service  (ver,  19).

1.  Personal  ^*- return."  Jeremiah  had,  as  in  chap,  xii.,  questioned  God's
righteousness;  he  is  told  he  must  "return,"  must  repent  him  of  his  doubts,
and  think  only  of  his  duty.

2.  Separation  in  himself  of  what  was  divine  and  holy  from  the  dross  of  human
passion  (Maurer)  :  let  tlie  "  precious  "  metal  be  distinct  from  the  "  vile."

II.  Gracious  assurances  are  given.

1.  The  restoration  of  Jeremiah  to  the  prophetic  office:  "  I  will  cause  thee  again
to  stand  before  me  "  (see  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse).  To  stand  before  a  person  means  to
be  his  chief  officer  or  viceregent,  and  is  said  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  1),  and  Elisha
(2  Kings  iii.  14),  as  God's  prophets;  of  David  as  Saul's  minister  (1  Sam.  xvi.  21,
22),  of  Nebuzar-adan  as  commander-in-chief  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  arms  (Jer.  Iii  1 2,
margin).

2.  He  should  he  again  the  organ  hy  which  God  would  speak:  '*Thou  shalt  be  aa
My  mouth."  Here  is  supplied  a  principle  for  regulating  the  prophet's  conduct : —
*'  Let  them  return  unto  thee,  but  return  not  thou  unto  them  :"  concede  not  to  the
people — a  flattering  prophet  perishes  with  the  people  whom  his  soft  speeches  havo
confirmed  in  their  sin ;  but  the  truthful  speaking  of  God's  Word  saves  both.

3.  The  original  promises  and  covenant  with  Jeremiah  are  confirmed  (ver.  20,  21).
This  repeats  God's  pledge  given  at  Jeremiah's  original  call  (see  chap.  i.  18,  19),
adding  the  promise  of  deliverance  from  men  of  open  violence — **the  terrible,"—
Arranged  from  Speaker's  Com,

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XV,

Ver.    1.     Theme :     The    loathsome  ness.     He  proclaims  Himself  to  be,  and

SOUL  OUTCAST  FROM  GoD.     "My  mind  would  be  known  as,  "The  Lord  merci-

could  not  be  toward  this  people ;  cast  ful  and  gracious,"  &c.
them  out  of  My  sight."  4.     Love      delights    to    assert     itself

Such    is    Jehovah's    answer    to    the  towards  those   in    the   lowest   deptlis  of

kneeling,    weeping,    pleading    prophet.  alienation.     It  seeks  and  saves  the  lost.
Jeremiah,   in  his  pray  ex,  had  asked,  as  5.  Extreme  cases  in  the  Gospel  records

if  it  could  never  really  be  so,  "  Hath  encourage  hope  for  vilest  sinners.     The

Thy    soul    loathed    Zion?"    (xiv.    19).  crucified  malefactor,  who  cast  revilings

Now  God  affirms  that  the   people  had  in  Christ's  teeth  ;  Mary  Magdalene,  out

become  irrevocably  loathsome  to  Him.  of  whom  was  cast  seven  devils;  Saul,

I.  Loathing  would  seem  impossible  who    breathed    out    threatenings    and

to  a  God  of  beneficent  love.  slaughter,  &c.

1.  Sin^  though  repulsive^  did  not  II.  Loathing  can  only  ensue  where
alienate  God's  love  from  the  world.  For  love  has  been  relentlessly  outraged.
"  God  commended  His  love  towards  us,  Tliis  was  Judah's  case  ;  her  conduct  had
in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  exhausted  and  exceeded  all  the  resources
Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  of  Divine  love.

2.  However  defiled  and  worthless  the  1.  Love  may  not  neutralise  the  law
sinner^  there  dwells  abounding  grace  in  and  action  of  rightness.  It  may  inter-
Ghrist.  None  can  exceed  the  virtue  of  pose  and  mitigate  justice,  but  not
His  atonement  or  the  com})ass  of  His  frustrate  it.  And  where  love  effects  no
pity,  or  the  fulness  of  His  Gospel  calls.  change    in    the    sinner,  right    nmst    be

3.  It  is  the  crowning  glory  of  God  allowed  to  pursue  its  course  and  requite
that  He  is  merciful  to  our  unrighteous-  the  guilty  conduct

318


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHJLF.  XV.


2.  Wilful  contempt  of  patient  and
pitying  love  courts  Divine  aversion.
Such  treatment  of  God's  gentleness  and
patience  arouses  indignation.  "  Last  of
all,  He  sent  His  Son,  and  Him  they
slew  I "

3.  The  superlative  crime  of  the  sinner
it  to  outrage  and  alienate  love.  To
break  law  is  evil  enough,  but  when  love
interposes  to  shield  the  wrong- doer,  for
him  then  to  abuse  love  is  to  culminate
iniquity.

III.  Loathing,  when  once  incurred,
closes  all  hope  of  reconciliation.  "  My
mind  cannot  be  towards  this  people."

1.  The  very  thoughts  of  God,  as  well
as  His  affections,  turn  irrevocably  away
from  such  heinous  transgressors.

2.  No  intercession  can  effect  a  recal
of  the  Divine  complacency.  He  cannot
look  upon  such  sin.

3.  While  the  horrible  heartlessness  of
men  remains  there  can  be  no  basis  of
reconciliation.  "  Intercession  is  power-
ful, and  is  not  without  fruit,  when  he
who  prays  and  tLey  for  whom  he  prays
are  of  like  spirit  "  (Cramer).  But,  ^^  ith
relentless  hostility  in  the  human  heart,
God  can  never  turn  compassionately
towards  the  sinner.

IV.  Loathing  having  been  right-
eously merited,  the  doom  of  banish-
ment follows.  *'  Cast  them  out  of  My
si^ht."

1.  No  place  in  the  Divine  mind  entails
no  place  in  the  Divine  presence.  Having
forfeited  God's  favour,  the  soul  must
quit  His  abode.

2.  No  place  in  the  Divine  presence
entails  irrevocable  banishment.  An  out-
cast,— "  a  castaway."  *'  These  shall  go
away."  *'  Oh,  that  they  were  wise,  that
they  understood  these  things,  that  they
would  consider  their  latter  end.'*

Theme :  Intercessory  prayer.

Prayer  is  both  a  duty  and  a  privilege.
Scripture  commands  that  those  who
pray  should  not  limit  prayer  to  self :
"  Pray  one  for  another."  Intercessions
are  to  be  made  for  all  men  (1  Tim.  ii.
1,  2).  Jeremiah  had  prayed  very
earnestly  for  his  people.  He  was  not
only  unsuccessful,  but  was  even  for-
bidden to  pray  for  them  (xiv.  ver.  11).
Moreover,  he  is  informed  that  though


Moses  and  Samuel  should  both  stand
before  God,  even  they  could  not  prevail.
This  suggests  to  us  that  there  are  limits
to  the  duty  and  to  the  power  of  inter-
cessory prayer.     Consider,  then,

I.  That  intercessory  prayer  is  an
exercise  of  great  value.

1.  As  developing  our  love  to  man.
Interesting  ourselves  in  his  trials,  seek-
ing to  save  him  from  his  sins.  This
love  may  be  shown  first  to  our  nearest
friends,  but  it  will,  if  true,  take  in  man
as  man.  We  are  to  pray  even  for
"  them  that  despitefully  use  us."

2.  As  carrying  out  the  Divine  pre-
cejMs.  In  the  spirit  of  Christ,  in  the
fellowship  of  life.  "  When  ye  pray  say,
Our  Father."  The  model  prayer  is  in
the  plural,  "our,"  "us,"  "we;"  not  I,
my,  me.

3.  ^5  following  after  noble  examples.
Abraham,  Moses,  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.
9),  Elijah,  Jeremiah,  Jesus,  and  all
good  men  who  love  the  souls  of  their
fellows,

4.  As  obtaining  great  blessings  for
others.  Lot  appears  to  have  been  saved
by  Abraham's  prayer.  Israel  often
spared  because  Moses  or  Samuel  prayed
(Exod.xxxii.  11-14;  Numb.  xiv.  17-20;
1  Sam.  vii.  9).  The  prayer  of  faith  was
to  save  the  sick,  to  obtain  even  salvation
(James  v.  15  ;  1  John  v.  16),  &c.

II.  That  intercessory  prayer  can
be  offered  only  by  good  men.  "The
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous
man  availeth  much."

1.  He  must  not  be  under  the  sin
against  which  he  prays.  If  it  be  a
prayer  of  sympathy  for  one  in  trouble,
this  rule  has  no  force.  It  is  essential
that,  as  the  priest  of  old  time  went  in
first  for  himself  then  for  the  people,
so  it  should  be  also  with  intercessory
prayer.

2.  Should  know  by  experience  tlit
value  of  the  blessing  he  craves  for  another.
Else  how  can  he  pray  with  the  heart
and  understanding.

3.  He  must  be  willing  to  join  effort
with  prayer.  Otherwise  his  sympathy
and  desire  will  be  a  mere  pretence,  a
thing  of  words,  a  mere  worthless  senti-
ment. God  will  not  hear  the  prayers  of
those  who  will  do  nothing  but  pray,  if

319


OBAP.  XT.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


they  are  able  to  do  other  things  besides
to  gain  the  object  of  their  prayers.

III.  That  intercessory  prayer  has
some  limitations  even  when  offered
by  the  best  of  men.  Such  as  Jere-
miah, Moses,  Samuel.

1.  7%is  is  evident  from  Scripture.
Abraham  could  not  prevail  to  save
Sodom.  Peter  would  not  pray  for
Simon  Magus ;  he  must  pray  for  him-
self. John  in  his  First  Epistle  says,
"  There  is  a  sin  unto  death ;  I  do  not
say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it."  (See
other  texts.)

2.  This  is  evident  from  observation.
We  have  all  known  many  prayers  offered
for  others  which  have  been  apparently
unanswered.  Sometimes  the  faults  are
in  ourselves  (see  under  II.),  but  some-
times we  fail  to  find  explanation.

3.  Reason  would  lead  to  the  same
conclusion.  The  best  of  men  are  but
men.  They  may  at  times  be  more  in-
fluenced by  sorrowful  sights  than  by
sinful  acts.  Personal  feeling  controls
them  as  it  does  others.  Prayer  is
powerful,  but  not  all-powerful.  God
will  grant  their  requests  if  in  so  doing
He  can  be  just  and  true  to  all — His
character  and  all  His  people.

IV.  That  intercessory  prayer  is  a
grand  distinction  and  provision  of  the
Gospel.     We  have

1.  The  best  of  intercessors  (Heb.  vii.
25).  In  office,  in  sympathy,  in  work,
in  influence.

2.  Praying  for  the  best  of  blessings.
Salvation,  preservation,  comfort,  glory
(John  xvii.  24).

3.  Taking  up  the  case  of  every  soul
that  trusts  Him.  "  All  that  come  unto
God  by  Him"  (Heb.  vii.  25).

4.  Always  successful  in  His  inter ces-
tion.  He  will  not  take  up  any  case
which  would  or  could  fail.  He  always
does  those  things  which  please  the
Father.  He  is  always  heard  (John  xi.
42).  His  plea  is  irresistible, — it  satis-
fies law,  it  magnifies  grace,  it  humbles
the  sinner,  it  glorifies  the  Father,  it  con-
secrates life  to  good  deeds.

Let  the  failure  of  others  teach  us  to
fly  for  refuge  to  the  only  One  whose  in-
tercessions are  unfailing.     **  We  have  an
advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ,
320


the  righteous "   (His  prayer  for  Pet«r
Luke  xxii.  31,  32).— W.  Whale.

Ver.  2.  Theme:  Incredulity  at
God'  message  op  doom.  '*  If  they  shall
say  unto  thee  " — as  they  are  likely  to
do  in  a  jeer  and  with  scoffing  incredulity
— "  Whither  shall  we  go  forth  ?  "

I.  The  seeming  incredibility  of  the
doom  pronounced.

1.  Sinners  cannot  think  their  ruin
really  imminent.  They  dream  on  de-
mented, revel  in  sin,  blinded  to  its
enormity  and  their  own  peril.

2.  Messages  of  doom  seem  to  them
empty  menaces.  It  was  so  when  Noah
prophesied  the  Flood ;  so  when  the
angel  threatened  Sodom's  overthrow ;
80  with  the  terrible  predictions  of  our
Lord  concerning  Jerusalem's  destruction ;
and  is  so  still  when  the  "  end  of  all
things"  and  the  fiery  judgment  are
announced.

3.  Dreadful  calamities  start  in  the
mind  a  revulsion  which  produces  in-
credulity. A  kind  of  blank  bewilder-
ment results  from  the  attemj^t  to  enter-
tain a  terrifying  announcement —
"  Whither  shall  we  go  forth  1 "  It  is
simply  incredible,  impossible.  So  now,
in  our  own  times,  sinners  answer  the
announcement  of  the  woes  awaiting  the
impenitent  with  a  light  indifference,  a
jeering  unbelief.  It  is  not  credible  that
God  will  doom  us,  will  dismiss  us  for
ever  from  salvation  !

IL  The  ready  incredulity  of  those
under  doom.

Condemned  souls  would  prefer  not  to
realise  the  sentence  true  ;  so  find  evasive
questions,  endeavour  to  explain  away
the  menace  as  meaningless,  and  then
jeer  contemptuously  at  the  messenger
who  prophesies  evil  against  them.  The
same  process  is  rife  to-day ;  for  cavillers
answer  the  preacher  thus — There  is  no
doom  to  the  unsaved :  whither  will  the
ungodly  be  banished  ?  Doom  will  not
be  very  distressing :  it  is  impossible
that  a  soul  should  be  for  ever  lost.

1.  Man  meets  God's  threatenings  toith
incredulity.

2.  God  m£ets  man^s  incredulity  with
specific  affirmations.  "  Such  as  are  for
death,''  <fec.  There  is  a  dreadful  pre-
cision  in   God's  dire  messages:    they


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XT.


cannot  well  be  explained  away  as  para-
bolic images,  as  oriental  and  pictorial
figures,  merely  setting  off  in  bold  colours
a  trifling  occurrence.  Such  things  as
are  here  arrayed  in  order  to  bring  in-
credulity to  its  sober  senses — death,  the
tword,  famine,  captivity — are  more  thaa
imaginary  forms  of  speech ;  they  are
terrific  facts,  api)allingly  literal.

Note  :  Sinners  would  be  wise  to  be-
lieve God  means  exactly  what  He
threatens.  What  madne^-s  to  risk  the
future  on  an  evasive  interpretation  of
His  menaces !
^QQ  Addenda:  Scornful  Incredulity.

Theme :  Scoffing  answered  by  sar-
casm. The  words  may  be  so  inter-
preted—

I.  Derisive  CLuestionings  :  "  Whither
shall  we  go  forth  ?  "  Perhaps  you  will
tell  us  a  little  more  explicitly  what  our
doom  is  to  be  !  Inform  us,  if  you  can,
where  and  to  what  we  are  to  be  driven.

II.  Sarcastic  directions.  Would
you  know  more  precisely  to  what  God
will  send  you  forth  ?  Then  hear  :  Each
to  his  allotted  doom  :  one  shall  "  go
forth "  to  "  death,"  and  he  shall  cer-
tainly meet  it ;  another  to  **  the  sword,"
<fec.  The  way  will  he  made  quite  plain
to  ym,  so  plain  that  you  will  not  he
likely  to  miss  your  appointed  doom.
These  evils  you  jeer  at  will  be  found
waiting  for  you  in  their  appointed  place.
Do  not  think  there  will  be  any  pro-
bability of  your  missing  them.  All  is
carefully  and  conveniently  arranged  for
you.     (Comp.  vers.  3,  4.)

Ver.   4.   Comments —

I  WILL  CAUSE  THEM  TO  BE  REMOVED.

Blayiiey  rightly  observes  that  the
word  rendered  "  to  be  removed,"  in  our
version,  lias  no  such  meaning.  The
verh  means  to  move,  agitate,  disquiet,
but  not  to  move  from  one  place  to
another.  The  noun  as  found  here  is
rendered  "vexation"  in  Isa.  xxviii.  19,
and  ** trouble"  in  2  Chron.  xxix.  8.
The  idea  of  removing  is  not  given  in
any  of  the  versions,  nor  in  the  Targum,
It  is  used  in  two  places  by  Jeremiah,
chap.  xxiv.  9;  xxix.  18.  In  both  places
"vexation,    trouble,     or    disquietude"


would  be  the  best  rendering.  The  sen
tence  may  be  thus  translated  :  And  I
will  render  them  a  vexation  to  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Literally  it  is,
*'  I  will  give  them  for  a  vexation,"  &c.
And  so  they  became  ;  they  were  a  trouble
and  a  disquietude  wherever  they  were ;
and  hence  they  became,  as  it  is  said  in
chap.  xxix.  18,  a  curse,  a  hissing,  and
a  reproach  among  all  nations.

Venema  gives  this  rendering  :  And  I
will  give  them  for  a  shaking  to  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Which  he
understands  to  mean,  that  they  would
he  given  to  he  shaken,  agitated  and  dis-
quieted.— Ed.  of  Calvin.

The  Jews  were  to  have  no  rest,  but
were  to  be  driven  from  place  to  place  at
the  pleasure  of  their  enemies.  Ewald  :
Spiel  des  Windes. — Hend.

Rather  :  I  will  cause  them  to  be  a
terror.  So  the  Syriac  and  Rashi  render,
Every  one  who  hears  of  the  calamity
that  has  befallen  them  will  tremble.
The  words  are  quoted  from  Deut.  xxviii.
25. — Speakers  Com.

*'  Because  op  Manasseh  the  son
OF  Hezeriah."  The  sin  upon  which
this  severe  sentence  is  grounded —

i.  It  is  in  rememhrance  of  a  former
iniquity.  It  is  *'  because  of  Manasseh."
What  *'  he  did  in  Jerusalem "  we  are
told  (1  Kings  xxiv.  3,  4).  This  is
brought  into  the  account  with  the  pre-
sent generation,  to  show  that  the  guilt
of  hlood  will  light  and  lie  somewhere
sooner  or  later,  and  that  reprieves  are
not  pardons.

ii.  It  is  in  consideration  of  their  pre-
ient  impenitency.  Their  own  sin  is  de-
scribed in  vers.  6  and  7.  There  is  mercy
for  those  who  have  turned  aside,  if  they
will  return ;  but  what  favour  can  they
expect  who  persist  in  their  apostasy  ?
— Henry.

"  The  son  of  Hezekiah."  But  alto-
gether degenerate.  He  was  therefore
the  worse,  hecause  he  should  have  heen
hetter ;  and  the  worse  again,  because  he
was  author  puhlicce  corruptelaSj  a  ring-
leader of  rebellion  to  others,  as  was
Jeroboam. — Trapp.

God  keeps  an  exact  protocol  (register)
of  sins,  and  visits  them  to  the  tiiird  and
fourth  generation. — Cramer.

321


eBAP.  XT.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


See  what  uncertain  comforts  children
are,  and  let  us  therefore  rejoice  in  them
as  though  we  rejoiced  not. — Henry,

Qualis  rex  talis  grex. — Forster,

Theme:  An  anomaly  in  the  law
OP  TRANSMISSION.  "  Because  of  Ma-
nasseh,  the  son  of  Hezekiah."

Notice  that,  1.  Grace  was  not  trans-
mitted from  Hezekiah  to  Manasseh :
parental  virtues  do  not  necessarily  re-
appear in  the  children.  2.  Guilt  was
transmitted  from  Manasseh  to  that  gene-
ration :  evil  travels  down,  reappears
through  successive  years.

Explanation :  The  human  heart  is
not  naturally  enamoured  of  godli-
ness, does  not  instinctively  appreciate
and  reciprocate  good  example  ;  but
*'  men  love  darkness,"  are  quick  to  re-
spond to  the  sway  and  charm  of  a  bad
example.

I.  Eminent  piety  in  the  father  does
not  ensure  godliness  in  the  son.  Social
life  cannot  guarantee  what  a  child's
future  will  be.  Only  God's  grace  can
implant  holiness.

1.  Godliness  is  not  hereditary.  Pa-
rents cannot  produce  it  in  their  children.
Neither  is  it  transmitted  involuntarily.

2.  To  see  godliness  at  home  does  not
necessarily  awaken  others  to  love  and
emulate  it.  The  example  of  holiness  is
not  omnipotent,  neither  is  it  sure  to
charm  others.  The  heart  is  not  prone
to  it.

II.  Criminality  is  deepened  when  a
holy  parental  example  is  repudiated.

1.  It  was  Manasseh's  duty,  personally
and  publicly,  to  follow  Hezekiah's  ex-
ample. For  the  reforms  Hezekiah  had
effected  were  manifestly  I'ight  in  them-
selves, and  beneficial  to  the  nation,  as
weil  as  due  to  God,  who  had  befriended
Judah.

2.  It  was  an  aggravation  of  his  guilt
that  he  reversed  all  his  father  had  done.
He  owed  it  to  his  father  to  respect  the
work  he  had  so  laboriously  wrought ;
and  to  his  father^s  God  to  preserve  the
worsliip  and  sacred  institutions  he  had
so  zealously  restored.

[Notes : —

"The  name  of  the  pious  father  in-
tensifies the  horror  at  the  wickedness  of
322


the  son"  (2  Kings  xxi.  3). — Speakei^9
Com.

"  We  learn  that  they  are  worthy  of  a
heavier  punishment,  who  have  been  reli-
giously brought  up  from  their  childhood,
and  have  afterwards  degenerated ;  who,
having  had  pious  and  godly  parents,
afterwards  abandon  themselves  to  every
wickedness.  Hence  a  heavier  judgment
awaits  those  who  depart  from  the
examples  of  godly  fathers." — Calvin.

*'  His  relation  to  so  good  a  father  was
a  great  aggravation  to  his  sin,  so  far
was  it  from  being  an  excuse  for  it."
— Henry  J]

III.  Rueful  consectuences  will  over-
take a  people  who  elect  and  follow  a
guilty  leader.  Why  does  God  threaten
vengeance  on  this  generation  for  Manas-
seh's sins  ?

1.  His  example  did  not  justify  them
in  doing  the  same.  They  could  not
shelter  themselves  under  the  plea  of
Manasseh's  leading.

2.  Their  continuance  in  guilt  was  wil-
ful and  determined.  They  reproduced
Manasseh's  crimes,  but  it  was  not  be-
cause some  force  urged  them  on  in-
voluntarily ;  they  did  evil  of  their  own
accord.

3.  The  people  had  a  choice  ofexampltB
before  them.  Hezekiah  had  shown  them
the  way  of  godliness;  Manasseh,  the
way  of  sin.  But  they  "  loved  dark-
ness rather  than  light,  because  their
deeds  were  evil."  There  was  in  them
"  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing
from  the  living  God."

4.  To  follow  evil  leading  will  lead  to
evil  issues.  "  I  will  cause  them  to  be
removed — to  be  a  horror — among  the
nations,  because  of  Manasseh."  "  Both
fall  into  the  ditch."

See  Addenda :  Parentage,

Ver.  5.   Comments —

Who  will  take  pity  .  .  ,  to  unsh  thee

well?  '* From  vers.  1-4,  it  follows  with
absolute  certainty  that  Jehovah  will  no
longer  hel[),  and  that  therefore  Israel  is
inevitably  lost.  No  longer  any  escape  I
If  the  Lord  will  not,  who  else  will  have
pity  on  the  peopled  (Isa.  li.  19;  Nah.
iii.  7.)  Who,  indeed,  will  even  ask  how
they    are  1


The    thought    seems  to  b«


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMUH.


CHAP.  Xt.


Implied,  that  still  less  will  any  one  do
aught  for  the  welfare  of  the  people,  or
any  longer  intercede  for  them  as  the  pro-
phet has  done  (xvi.  7  seq.)" — Naeg.

"  When  God  abandons  us,  we  are
abandoned  also  by  the  holy  angels  nnd
all  creatures.  For  as  at  court,  when
two  eyes  are  turned  away  the  whole
court  turns  away ;  so  when  the  Lord
turns  away,  all  His  hosts  turn  away
also." — Cramer.

"The  sinful  people  will  be  given  up
to  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  to  be
ill  used,  for  no  one  will  or  can  have
compassion  on  Jerusalem,  since  its  rejec-
tion by  God  is  a  just  punishment  for  its
rejection  of  the  Lord  (ver,  6).  Have
pity  and  hemoan  denote  loving  sympathy
with  the  fall  of  the  unfortunate. — KeiL

Theme  :  Lost  even  to  pity.  "  Who
shall  have  pity  upon  thee,  O  Jerusalem  V*

It  is  usual  to  pity  the  ignorant,  the
unfortunate,  the  weak  ;  but  the  wilfully
evil,  those  who  sin  against  the  light  of
knowledge  and  the  manifestations  of
love,  must  be  blamed  and,  unless  they
repent,  condemned.  In  her  sorrows
Jerusalem  seemed  an  object  of  pity,
but  there  were  none  to  show  favour
unto  her.  The  gods  which  she  had
worshipped  could  render  no  help,  and
the  people  at  whose  evil  desire  she  had
compromised  her  honour  now  taunted
and  derided  her  (Lam.  ii.  15).  Who
shall  pity  thee  J

I.  Thou  hast  had  the  oracles  of  God.
Thy  case  is  not  as  the  heathen  who
have  no  knowledge,  but  as  of  those  who
**  love  darkness  rather  than  light."

II.  Thou  hast  had  great  religious
advantages.  The  priesthood,  sacrifices,
and  mercy-seats.  The  Sabbaths,  sacred
feasts,  and  gracious  promises.

III.  Thou  hast  had  a  history  of
Divine  mercies.  In  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob.  By  Moses  and  Aaron,
Joshua  and  the  Judges,  Samuel,  David,
and  Solomon.  At  the  Red  Sea,  at
Marah,  at  Elim,  at  Rephidini,  at  Horeb,
at  Jordan,  <fec.

IV.  Thou  hast  insulted  and  forsaken
thy  best  Friend.  Thy  choice  has  been
fatal  to  thee,  for  thou  hast  gone  away
after  the  weak,  worthless,  and  wicked.


V.  He  who  pities  thee  most  is  com
pelled  to  punish  thee.  For  His  holi-
ness' sake,  and  as  a  warning  to  others
(Matt,  xxiii.  37,  39).

VI.  All  other  pity  is  useless  to  theo.
It  cannot  deliver  thee,  it  cannot  take
away  thy  sin.  Oh  that  thou  wouldest
truly  repent  and  turn  unto  the  Lord,
then  would  He  not  only  pity,  but  pardon
and  prosper  thee. —  W.  Whale,

See  Addenda  :  Lost  to  Pitt.

Ver.  6.      Theme:   Jehovah  weary

WITH  REPENTING.

These  words  do  not  accord  with  our
ideas  of  the  Divine  Being.  We  are
accustomed  to  the  words,  "  He  fainteth
not,  neither  is  weary,"  and  "  He  is  not
man  that  He  should  repent."  The  word
"repent"  evidently  is  not  to  be  taken  in  its
ordinary  sense  as  applied  to  men.  So
far  from  the  word  *'  repent  "  indicating
change  in  God,  it  is  the  outworking  of
His  immutability.  He  ever  regards  sin
with  abhorrence,  and  contrite  hearts  with
pity  and  grace  ;  if,  therefore,  the  people
are  hardened  in  sin,  He  sends  a  message
like  that  by  Jonah  to  Nineveh,  but  if,
during  the  day  of  grace,  the  people
truly  repent  and  cry  for  mercy,  then,  by
the  same  law  of  His  being,  He  refrains
from  carrying  out  His  threatenings.
There  is  a  real  change  in  the  people,
which  alters  the  relationship  in  which
they  stand  towards  God,  but  there  is
only  an  apparent  change  in  the  Divine
dealing.  To  the  impenitent,  God  is
unchangeably  just.  To  the  penitent,  He
is  unchangeably  merciful.  The  fact  that
God  is  "  weary  of  repenting,"  shows —

I.  That  God  had  often  turned  from
His  threatenings,  and  dealt  in  mercy
with  the  people.

II.  That  the  Divine  mercy  had  heen
frequently  abused,  and  the  people  had
gone  hack  again  to  their  sins.

III.  That  not  a  change  in  His  being,
but  only  a  change  of  relationship,  is
expressed  by  the  word  "repent"  (Jonah
iii.  10).

IV.  That  judgment  is  alien  to  God's
heart,  whereas  mercy  is  His  delight.
If  He  can,  without  weakening  the  force
of  justice  and  encouraging  sin,  He  will
magnify  grace  and  save  men.

323


CHAP.  XT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


V.  That  when  God  is  met  with  per-
sistent ingratitude,  and  men  relapse
continually  to  sin,  He  must  eventually
punish  them.  He  is  weary  with  re-
penting, and  will  deal  in  judgment  with
them.

VI.  That  the  operations  of  the
Divine  mind  can  only  be  expressed
in  human  language  with  difficulty  and
limitation.

VII.  That  we  should  be  careful  in
not  trifling  with  or  abusing  the  patient
longsuffering  of  God.  "My  Spirit
shall  not  always  strive  with  man." —
W.  Whale

Weary  with  repenting.  "  The
punishment  due  has  been  delayed  into
weariness,  and  this  seeming  failure  of
justice  has  made  Judah  withdraw  far-
ther from  God." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

"  This  determi  ation  of  the  Lord  will
not  change,  for  He  is  weary  of  repenting. **
^Keil.

"  God  is  represented  as  a  man  whose
patience  is  at  last  quite  tired  out,  it
being  to  no  purpose  to  withdraw  His
hand  any  longer  from  striking." — Lowth,

Comments —

Ver.  7.  "  The  gates  of  the  land  mean
the  places  by  which  men  enter  or  leave
it.  As  God  winnows  them,  they  are
driven  out  of  the  land  through  all  its
outlets  in  every  direction."  —  Payne
Smith.

"  The  gates  of  the  land  mean  the
extreme  points  at  which  an  entrance  or
an  exit  was  effected.  Jehovah  threatens
to  carry  them  thither,  to  be  thence
scattered  among  the  nations."  (Comp.
Nah.  iii  13.) — Henderson.

Ver.  8.  *'  Against  the  mother  of  the
young  men"  <fec.  (See  Lit.  Crit,  on
ver.  p.  315.)  Most  of  the  old  com-
mentators reo;arded  this  as  a  reference
to  the  mother-city,  Jerusalem.  Arch-
bishop Seeker  suggested  that  "  the  nation
in  general  is  called  the  *  mother '  of  each
Jewin  particular,"  citing  Isa.  1.  1  andHos.
ii.  2-5.  But  exact  criticism  brings  out
the  sense — against  the  mother  of  the  young
maUy  the  word  rendered  "  young  man  "
meaning  a  picked  warrior  ;  and  suggest-
ing that  even  the  vigorous  woman  who
had  borne  a  valorous  warrior  would  fall
before  the  spoiler.  Neither  strength  nor
324


valour  could  deliver  from  him.  Others
suggest,  that  both  mother  and  son
would  fall,  neither  age  nor  sex  being
respected.

Ver.  8.  Theme  :  Sudden  spoliations.

A  spoiler  at  noonday:  Henderson! i
reading  (see  Lit.  Crit.\  "  a  young
spoiler,"  leads  him  to  adopt  into  his
comments  a  historic  statement  which
Josephus  cites  from  Berosus,the  Chaldean
historian,  which  reads  thus :  "  That
Nabopollassar,  king  of  Babylon,  hear-
ing that  the  provinces  of  Egypt,  Ccele-
Syria,  and  Plienice  had  revolted,  and
being  himself  infirm  from  age,  sent  a
part  of  his  forces  under  his  son  Nebu-
chadnezzar {i.e.y  Nebuchadnezzar  XL),
then  in  the  prime  of  youth^  by  whom
these  provinces  were  again  reduced."
After  defeating  Pharaoh-Necho  at  Char-
chemish,  he  marched  forward  against
Jerusalem  and  captured  it.  The  noon-
day attack,  at  an  hour  when  military
operations  were  usually  sus[)ended,  indi-
cated the  restlessness  of  the  spoiler — he
could  not  wait;  and  the  unexpected-
ness of  the  attack — at  an  hour  when
none  anticipated.  So  that  these  facts
stand  out :

I.  The  Divinity  which  rules  in
calamities.  **/  have  brought  upon
them:"  "/  have  caused,"  <kc.  (1.)
God  works  always.  (2.)  Disasters  have
a  meaning  and  a  mission.  (3.)  The
law  is  being  Divinely  enforced  that  sin
brings  misery.

II.  The  resources  of  Jehovah  for
chastisement.  God  would  have  "  the
young  spoiler  "  ready  when  the  hour  of
judgment  arrived.  (1)  He  foreknows
history,  (2)  anticipates  the  careers  of
nations,  (3)  provides  for  contingencies,
and  (4)  prepares  His  emissaries  for  the
work  to  be  done.

III.  The  startling  aspects  of  mis-
fortune.

1.  At  an  unlikely  hour  :  "  noonday."

2.  By  an  impatient  agent:  eager,
restless,  could  not  wait  for  the  sultry
noon  to  pass.

3.  With  an  impetuous  force:  "sud-
denly," like  a  lightning  stroke ;  and
"fall  upon,"  as  a  crushing  avalanche,
irresistible,  overbearing  aU.     Even  the


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JMRBMJAB.


cflAf.  xtr.


young  warriors  fell  before  the  spoiler,
and  the  mother  too.

(a.)  Thus  affliction  comes,  and  health,
loved  lives,  are  stricken.

(6.)  Thus  7'€V€rses  befall,  and  home,
fortune,  are  shattered.

(c.)  Thus  conscience  terrifies,  and  the
soul  is  filled  with  anguish  for  its  guilt.

(d.)  Thus  death  seizes  its  victims,  and
we  lie  cold  ;  or  "  widows  "  multiply,  or
*'  young  men  "  fall,  or  **  mothers  "  weep
for  the  slain.

{e.)  Thus  the  last  day  will  come,  and
the  archangels'  cry  will  suddenly  appal
the  world.

Theme:    Life's    noontide.      "The

spoiler  at  noonday."

Sermon  to  the  Young.

I.  In  the  noontide  of  life  we  suspect
no  nearing  ills.  The  foe  would  not  be
antici[iated  at  "noonday."  The  young
ex[)ect  no  perils.

II.  In  the  noontide  of  life  spoilers
conspire  for  our  fall.  The  schemes
of  the  enemy  are  founded  on  our  not
ex})ecting  him.      He  takes  advantage.

III.  In  the  noontide  of  life  the
young  have  been  destroyed.  Think  of
Byron.  Yes,  even  the  "  young  warrior."
**  The  young  men  do  utterly  fall."

IV.  In  the  noontide  of  life  death
seizes  its  prey.  No  age  is  spared.  The
"  spoiler  "  respects  none.  Youth  may
die.

V.  In  the  noontide  of  life,  God's
redeeming  care  is  urgently  needed.
Only  as  He  befriends  us  are  we  safe
when  the  "  spoiler  "  comes.  Religion  is
not  nierely  for  old  age.  Youth  needs
God.  Hid  with  Christ  in  Him,  nought
can  harm.  "  I  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art
with  me."

See  Addenda  :  Life's  Noontide.

Vers.  6-9.  Theme:  GoD  forsaking
AND  God  forsaken.

When  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came
ui'OM  Arariah,  the  son  of  Oded  (2
Chron.  XV.  1,  2),  he  was  moved  to
say  unto  Judah  and  Benjamin,  "  The
Lord  is  with  you,  while  ye  be  with
liim  ;  and  if  ye  seek  Him  He  will  be
found  of  you,  hut  if  ye  forsake  Him
lie  will  forsake  you."     These  verses  re-


markably verify  that  inspired  utterance.
Here  we  meet —

L  A  God  forsaking  people.  They  are
convicted  by  God  Him^elt*  of  a  great
folly  and  sin  :  "  Thou  hast  forsaken
Me."  In  chap.  ii.  13  the  charge  is
more  complete.  Creation  is  called  upon
to  express  surprise  at  a  folly  so  conspic-
uous as  that  of  forsaking  the  fount  of
all  good,  and  taking  up  with  helpless
vanities.

^^  Thou" — who  oughtest  to  have  been
unto  Me  a  loyal  and  loving  people,  tes
tifying  of  My  power  and  grace,  and
proving  by  separation  from  the  nations
your  preference  for  the  living  and  true
God.

** East  forsaken"  —  not  simply  for-
gotten, or  disobeyed,  but  of  deliberate
choice  hast  taken  other  gods,  and  disre-
garded Jehovah.

" Me"  —  who  called  Abraham  and
made  a  covenant  of  lasting  privileges
with  him  and  his  descendants,  who
brought  you  out  of  Egypt,  who  led
you,  fed  you,  protected  you,  and
gave  to  you  the  land  in  which  you
dwell ;  and  assured  you,  by  wondrous
promises  which  yet  await  fulfilment,
of  future  good  and  greatness  to  you,
if  you  could  but  be  faithful  to  Je-
hovah.

II.  A  God  forsaken  people.  This
is  the  effect,  man's  conduct  the
cause.  **  If  ye  forsake  Him,  He  will
forsake  you."  When  a  people  are  for-
saken of  God,  they  are —

1.  Always  retrograde.  "Thou  art
gone  backward,"  spiritually  gone  back
into  Egypt.  All  who  forsake  God  go
backward,  always  backward,  and  down-
ward. Unless  they  repent  and  obey
God,  there  is  no  way  forward  and
upward.  Forward  and  upward  is  the
desire  and  movement  of  a  true  soul.

2.  Always  in  danger  of  destruction,
"  Therefore  will  I  destroy  you."  There-
fore {i.e.),  because  you  have  gone  back-
ward. It  is  the  penalty  of  a  backward
movement.  It  must  come  upon  all  who
forsake  God.  If  we  forsake  the  mercy,
we  inherit  the  misery.

3.  Always  exposed  to  terrors  and
disasters.  Suggested  by  such  words
as,  "  bereave," — "  widows," — "  spoiler,*

325


CHAP.  XT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


— "terrors."     All  caused  by  the  God
they  have  forsaken.

4.  Always  drifting  into  languor ,
premature  decline^  shamey  and  death  (ver.
9).  Such  is  the  end  of  those  who  are
forsaken  of  God.  No  strength^  no
courage  J  no  pi'ogress,  no  real  t7'ue  life;
but  decline,  captivity,  and  darkness.
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  for  why  will  ye  die,
O  house  of  Israel  ]  "—If.  Whale,

Comments —

Ver.  9.  "  She  that  hath  home  seven
languisheth."  Seven,  being  the  perfect
number,  signifies  fulness :  Jerusalem,
the  mother-city,  was  once  fully  popu-
lated, now  she  is  deserted  !  "  Formerly
she  prided  herself  in  her  offspring "
(conip.  1  Sam.  ii.  6),  but  now  she  is
"ashamed  and  confounded  "  (Lam.  i.  1).

*^ She  hath  given  up  the  ghost:"  lit.,
She  hath  breathed  out  her  life,  as  if  in
laboured  sighs  :  expiring  in  heavy  heart-
breaths  of  grief.  (Comp.  Job  xxxi.
39.)

"  Her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it  was
yet  day."  "The  sun  of  her  life  sets
before  the  evening  has  been  reached."
(Comp.  Amos  viii.  9.) — Keil.

"  The  sun  of  her  life,  and  the  happi-
ness (comp.  Mai.  iii  20,  Psa.  Ixxxiv.
12)  which  she  had  in  her  sons,  is  gone
down." — Naeg.

Connecting  these  verses  with  the  ill-
fated  battle  of  Megiddo,  and  accepting
these  words  as  descriptive,  most  com-
mentators regard  them  as  depicting
the  consternation  of  Jerusalem  at  that
disastrous  event.  If  so,  the  going  down
of  tJie  sun  while  it  was  yet  day  holds
an  apt  reference  to  the  eclipse  which
occurred  on  Sept.  30,  B.C.  610.

Theme :  Life  prematurely  closed.
Text :  "  Her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it
was  yet  day."  Specially  applicable  to  a
useful  Christian  life  cut  off  by  death  in
the  midst  of  its  years.

L  A  lustrous  life.  She  was  our
"  sun."  In  the  horizon  of  our  home,
or  our  church,  or  our  friendships,  she
glowed,  and  with  her  radiant  charac-
ter and  gleaming  ministries  gladdened
all.

326


1.  A  conspicuou<^  life :  of  worth,  of
usefulness,  of  eminence.

2.  A  beneficent  life :  giving  out  good
and  gladness  to  others.

3.  An  illuminated  life.  For  God
gave  the  sun  its  glory.  All  our  ex-
cellences, all  our  power  of  usefulness,
are  His  gifts.  '*  The  heavens  declare
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament
showeth  His  handiwork*  Yes :  and
"  we  are  His  workmanshi'p,''*  "  The  Lord
gives  grace  and  glory  '

II.  A  lustrous  life  prematurely
darkened.     "  While  yet  day."

1.  The  course  of  human  life  is  not  of
uniform  duration,

2.  The  most  benignant  and  beautiful
life  may  suddenly  end.  Though  we  be
robed  with  grace  and  living  for  Christ,
that  does  not  assure  to  us  length  of
days.

3.  When  a  beautiful  life  ends,  preter-
natural  gloom  ensues.  Some  deaths
cause  no  bewailing.  It  is  a  tribute
to  the  worth  of  a  life  that  it  is  so
missed  and  so  lamented.  "  Devout  men
made  lamentation  over  him."

III.  A  lustrous  life  prematurely  set
will  again  rise  and  shine.  All  lives
are  not  lustrous,  yet  all  lives  must  set  in
the  grave.  Death  comes  to  all  sooner
or  later.  Our  lives  diflfer  in  degree  of
grace  and  glory.  Our  deaths  therefore
differ.  All  will  rise  again,  but  not  all
to  shine.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous
shine  forth,"  <fec.

1.  Comfort  in  this  thought.  The
sun  will  again  rise  and  shine.  So  will
the  cheiished  life  we  mourn  as  having
"  gone  down."

2.  Inspiration  in  this  thought.  Ra-
diant careers  on  earth  will  glow  with
splendour  hereafter.  Therefore,  "  Let
your  light  shine  before  men."  Live
beneficent  lives.

3.  Satisfaction  in  this  thought.  Life
is  not  a  blunder ;  death  is  not  a  catas-
trophe. Sudden  death  is  sudden  blessed-
ness. "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die
in  the  Lord."  The  soul  whom  Jesus
robes  with  beauty,  and  is  thus  beloved
and  beneficent  while  on  earth,  does  not
cease   its  ministry.       All  the  grace  of


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAF«  TV


Christ  is  not  bestowed  in  vain.  Death
spoils  nothing.  The  life  is  hid  from  our
vision  by  the  darkness  into  which  it  has
"gone  down;"  but  it  shall  rise  again,
and  shine  in  the  light  of  God.

4.  Warning  in  this  thought.  We
cannot  calculate  upon  years.  "This
night  thy  soul  may  be  required  of  thee."

See  Addenda :  Early  Death.

Ver.  15-9.  T^Aeme  ;  Beautiful  BUT
BRIEF.  "  Her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it
was  yet  day."

The  text  is  part  of  a  gloomy  description
of  IsraeFs  decline.  We  take  it  from  the
context  and  use  it  topically,  as  an  appro-
priate description  of  the  end  of  a  brief
but  beautiful  life.  Of  our  friend  it  may
be  said  that — •

I.  Her  life  was  like  the  sun  in  its
shining.

1.  it  was  gloriously  bright  with  faith
and  joy.

2.  It  was  blessedly  useful  in  diffusing
light.

3.  It  was  constantly  comforting,  by
its  warmth  of  love,  and  hope.

4.  It  was  Christianly  generous,  always
giving.

5.  It  was  a  centre  of  attraction,  in  the
house,  in  the  class,  in  the  social  circle,
and  in  the  church.

II.  Her  death  was  like  the  sun  in
its  setting.

1.   Gradual.  2.   Beautiful.

3.   Peaceful.  4.  To  rise  again.

III.  Her  sunset  was  early  in  the
day  of  life.

1.  In  the  prime  and  beauty  of  being.

2.  In  the  midst  of  work.

3.  It  seems  unnatural,  and  suggests
questions.

4.  it  is  an  interposition  of  God  in  His
Providence,  doubtless  wise  and  loving.

5.  It  leads  us  from  the  creature  to  the
Creator.

6.  It  suggests  that  we  be  all  ready,
always  ready,  "at  such  an  hour  as  ye
think  not. "—TT.  WhaU.

Vers.    15-9.      Theme:    Premature

SUNSET.

An  expressive  metaphor.  Not  true
to  nature,  because  the  history  so  de-
scribed was  not  natural.     Both  heaven


and  earth  were  called  upon  to  express
surprise  (Isa.  i.  2,  3).  Unnatural
conduct  leads  to  an  unnatural  end,  the
wicked  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days.
Sunset  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful
sights  in  nature,  but  a  sudden,  stormy
hiding  of  the  sun  at  midday  is  cal-
culated to  fill  the  beholder  with  distress.
Such  is  the  metaphor.  Let  us  con-
template it —
I.  In  nature.

1.  It  would  he  unnatural.

2.  It  would  he  injurious  to  all  life.

3.  It  would  make  us  less  confident,  at
to  the  unerring  regularity  of  nature* s  law,

II.  In  history.  We  see  many  cases
in  which  nations  have  fallen,  not  with
the  decrepitude  of  age,  but  through  early
and  self- wrought  ruin.  The  Old  World,
Sodom,  Nineveh,  Babylon,  <fec.,  <fec.  The
case  of  Jerusalem  conspicuous  (Matt,
xxiii.  37-39).

III.  In  individual  life.  The  young
— the  immoral  —  the  unprincipled  in
character  generally.  Obedience  to  God
gives  a  long  day  and  beautiful  sunset.

The  text  may  be  used  topically  for  a
funeral  sermon,  in  the  case  of  a  young
woman.. —  TT.  Whale,

Theme:  Thoughts  upon  death.
"  She  hath  given  up  the  ghost,  her  sun
is  gone  down  while  it  was  yet  day."

1.  Death  is  a  solemn  event ;  it  is  the
end  of  our  probationary  state,  and  the
beginning  of  a  new  and  unchanging
state  of  being — and  it  is  of  frequent
occurrence.

2.  No  class  can  escape  from  the  state
of  death.  The  aged  cannot  live  long,
and  the  young  may  be  cut  down  in  the
noonday  of  life.

I.  Death  dissolves  our  connection
with  the  world.

1.  Dissolves  all  natural  relationship.

2.  Ends  dangers  and  perils.

3.  Takes  away  the  means  of  grace.

4.  Closes  our  probationary  state.

5.  Discloses  onr  eternal  needs.

II.  Death  is  the  departure  of  the
soul  to  another  state.

1.  It  does  not  sink  into  insensibility
as  does  the  body.     The  soul  lives.

2.  Should  death  come  now,  how  would
it  find  us  1

827


OIAP.  XT.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .  JEREMIAH,


ni.  The  change  at  death  is  very  great.

1.  The  mode  of  its  occurrence  is,  to
us  now,  very  mysterious,

2.  It  is  an  awful  event  to  the  ungodly
and  impenitent

IV.  Though  the  event  is  certain,  the
time  is  uncertain.

V.  The  solemnity  of  the  event  is
realised  by  all  who  think  seriously
upon  it.

VI.  Death  will  leave  us  in  this
separate  state  until  the  last  judgment.
Means  of  grace  must  be  improved ;
salvation  of  the  soul  must  be  secured
before  tbe  welfare  of  the  body.  Pre-
paration for  death  is  necessary  for  all,
for  all  must  die.  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy
God."— O/ci  MS,

Vers.  11-14  considered  together  :

"Tlie  sense  seems  to  be  this —

i.  The  Lord  does  not  vouchsafe  to
give  a  direct  answer  to  the  prophet's
complaints  and  munnurings  concerning
his  own  condition  and  calling.  By
til  is  silence  He  administers  a  tacit
rebuke  to  Jeremiah  for  speaking  in  a
spirit  of  sullenness  and  discontent.

ii.  He  turns  aside  to  Jerusalem,  and
explains  His  dispensations  towards  her,
and  thus  by  implication  He  replies  to
Jeremiah.  He  says  to  her  (ver.  11)  I
will  afflict  thee  for  good^  and  will  make
thine  enemies  to  entreat  thee.

This  was  fulfilled  in  the  kind  treat-
ment that  the  Hebrew  captives  received
from  their  conquerors,  even  Nebuchad-
nezzar in  the  case  of  Daniel  and  the
three  children  ;  and  of  Belshazzar,  and
of  Cyrus,  Darius,  Ahasuerus,  and  Ar-
taxerxes  in  succession,  after  the  days
of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Even  the  captive
king  of  Judah,  Jehoiachin,  was  treated
kindly  at  Babylon  by  Evil-Merodach.

iii.  The  prophet  answers,  Can  this
be  true  1  Can  iron  break  the  northern
iron  and  steel  ?  Can  the  Hebrew  nation
have  any  power  against  the  mighty
power  of  the  northern  realm  of  Chaldea  ?

iv.  No,  answers  the  Lord,  this  will
be  done  by  their  own  power.  The  iron
of  Jerusalem  will  not  break  the  iron  and
eteel  of  Babylon.  On  the  contrary,
turning  to  Jerusalem,  He  says,  /  will
give  thy  substance  to  the  spoil  for  thy
328


sinSy  and  will  make  thee  to  pass  into  the
land  which  thou  hnowest  not.  But  yet,
I  who  scatter  thee  for  thy  sins  in  My
wrath,  will  chasten  thee  for  thy  good
(ver.  11).  Thus  God  always  tempered
judgment  with  mercy  in  His  dealings
with  His  people." — Wordsworth,

[See  also  Sectional  treatment,  p.  316.]

Ver.  10.  Theme:  A  troublous
PREACHER  TROUBLED.  AloLs  /  a  man  of
ttrife.

*'  Even  those  who  are  not  quiet  and
peaceable,  if  they  serve  God  faithfully,
are  often  made  men  of  strife.  We  can
but  follow  peace;  we  have  the  making
only  of  one  side  of  the  bargain,  and
therefore  can  but  as  much  as  in  us  lies
live  peaceably." — Henry,

Jeremiah's  case  suggests —

1.  Distraction  over  the  results  of  a
faithful  ministry.  "  I  am  for  peace,  but
they  are  for  war."  It  was  not  that  he
strove  with  them,  but  they  with  him  and
his  work  for  God.  Yet  no  one  can  rebuke
sinners  without  stirringantagonism.  "Art
thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ? "  "  These
men  which  turn  the  earth  upside  down  are
come  hither  also  I"  **  Have  I  become
your  enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth? "

1.  A  fearful  witness  for  God  cannot
win  popular  favour.

2.  Hostility  to  his  work  is  sure  to  pain
the  true  [)reacher*s  heart.

II.  Innocence  of  blame  for  the  anta-
gonism aroused.  Had  Jeremiah  been  a
had  debtor^  or  disobeying  creditor,  they
could  not  have  acted  more  virulently  to-
wards him.

1.  Hostility  to  a  faithful  preacher  is
unreasonable  and  unjust,  "  Why,  what
evil  hath  He  done  ? "  asked  Pilate  of  the
incensed  crowd.

2.  History  repeats  itself  in  the  harsh
usage  borne  by  God's  ministers.  '*  Which
of  the  prophets  have  ye  not  persecuted  V*
So  with  Rutherford,  Wesley,  Bunyan,
&c.  The  natural  man,  at  enmity  with
God,  will  not  be  at  peace  with  the  man
of  God  who  convinces  him  of  his  sin.
Fashion  still  scorns  the  faithful  and
evangelical  preacher.  Public  bodies  are
at  strife  with  religious  societies  and
Christian  alliances  which  resist  measures
for  the  desecration  of  the  Lord's  day,  (fee.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMUU.


CHAP.  XT.


See  Addenda:  ATboubled  Ministry.

III.  Despondent  misapprehension  of
a  Divine  mission.  Jereiiiiali  in  a  dole-
ful mood  only  saw  the  "  strife  "  he  had
aroused.  Moments  when  our  best  work
shows  only  ill  results.  All  workers  for
Christ  "go forth  weeping."  Good  work
is  often  done  with  pain.  We  cannot  see
all  the  blessed  effects  of  godly  service.
But  "woe  is  unto  us,  if  we  preach  not."
Courage  and  grace  can  alone  prevent
us  from  "  fainting  in  the  day  of  adver-
sity," and  enable  us  to  continue  "  faithful
unto  deuth."

See  Noticeable  Topics:  "Men  op
Progress,  Men  op  Strife."

Comments —

Ver.  11.  The  Lord  said,  Verily y  (fee.
Henderson  renders  the  verse  thus  :  "  Je-
hovah saith.  Have  I  not  set  thee  free  for
good  1  Have  I  not  made  the  enemy  take
thy  part  in  the  time  of  calamity  and  in  the
time  of  distress  1 "  Dr.  Gotch  (in  Eyre  &
Spottiswoode's  "Revised English  Bible")
translates:  '* Verily,  I  set  thee  free  for
thy  good  ;  verily,  I  will  cause  the  enemy
to  make  supplication  to  thee,  in  the
time  of  evil,  and  in  the  time  of  afflic-
tion."

"The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  thy
remnant,  gives  an  untrue  sense.  It
would  mean  all  the  rest  of  Jeremiah's
days,  which  were  by  no  means  days  of
happiness.  Nor  had  he  even  at  last  a
period  of  tranquillity.  But  tJiy  loosing
means  thy  being  set  free,  thy  deliverance,
and  this  sense  is  satisfactory." — Payne
Smith.

"  Entreat  thee  well :  "  rather,  suppli-
cate thee ;  fulfilled  in  chaps,  xxi.  1,2;
xxxvii.  3;  xlii.  2.

i.  God's  despised  prophet  will  be  found
useful.  "In  the  time  of  evil,  and  in  the
time  of  affliction."

ii.  Maledictions  will  give  place  to  sup-
plications. "  Affliction  "  wonderfully
changes  tlie  tone  and  temper  of  those
who  once  hated  and  resisted  the  mes-
senger of  Heaven.  The  day  of  pride
will  soon  close.

iii.  Divine  protection  overshadows  His
faithful  witnesses.  Surrounded  with
strife,  yet  Jehovah  both  guards  and  ulti-
mately vindicates  His  servants.


Ver.  12.  Theme :  The  northern  iron
AND  STEEL.  "  Shall  iron  break  the
northern  iron  and  the  steel  1 "

The  Jews  treated  Jeremiah  so  harshly
and  unjustly,  that  he  feared  they  would
break  his  heart ;  they  smote  him  as  with
an  iron  rod,  and  he  felt  like  one  crushed
beneath  their  unkindness.

God  never  did,  and  never  will,  place  a
man  in  a  trying  position  and  then  leave
him.  If  the  rebellious  seed  of  Israel
were  iron,  the  Lord  declared  that  Hia
prophet  should  be  hardened  by  sustain-
ing grace  into  northern  iron  and  steel.
If  they  beat  upon  him  like  hammers  on
an  anvil,  he  should  be  made  of  such
strong,  enduring  texture,  that  he  should
be  able  to  resist  all  their  blows.  Iron
in  the  olden  times  amongst  the  Israelites
was  very  coarsely  manufactured,  but  the
best  was  the  iron  from  the  north.  So
bad  was  their  iron  generally,  that  an
admixture  of  brass,  which  amongst  ua
would  be  thought  rather  to  deteriorate
the  hardness,  was  regarded  as  an  im-
provement ;  so  the  Lord  puts  it,  "  Shall
iron — the  common  iron — break  the  most
firm  and  best-prepared  iron?"

This  is  a  proverbial  expression,  appli-
cable to  many  other  matters  besides  that
of  the  prophet  and  the  Jews;  it  is  clearly
meant  to  show  that

In  order  to  achieve  a  purpose
there  must  be  sufficient  force.  the
weaker  cannot  overcome  the  stronger.
In  a  general  clash  the  firmest  will  win.
You  cannot  cut  granite  with  a  pen-
knife, nor  drill  a  hole  in  a  rock  with
an  auger  of  silk.  We  shall  apply  this
proverb —

I.  To  the  people  of  God  individually.
Shall  any  power  be  able  to  destroy  the
saints  1  Weak  as  they  are,  they  will
tread  down  the  strength  of  their  foes.
There  is  a  force  about  them  which  can-
not be  put  down.

1.  Many  Christians  are  subjected
to  great  temptations  and  persecutions;
mocked,  ridiculed,  called  by  evil  names,
leisecuted  one,  will  you  deny  the
faith  1  If  so,  you  are  not  made  of
the  same  stuff  as  the  true  disciple  of
Jesus  Christ ;  for  when  the  grace  of
God  is  in  them,  if  the  world  be  iron,
they  are  aQyth^era  iron  and  steel.     Will

329


eB4P.  XT.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


you  shrink  in  the  day  of  trial  1  Do
you  mean  to  play  the  coward  %  "  Shall
the  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and
steel  ?"  Be  strong.  Quit  you  like  men ;
and,  in  the  energy  of  the  H0I5  Ghost,
endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is  iuvisible.

2.  We  are  frequently  called  to  serve
Go  I  amid  great  difficulties.  Some  of
you  who  go  to  the  lodging-houses  to
speak,  who  visit  the  alleys,  (fee,  find
much  annoyance  and  disappointment.
Will  you  say,  there  is  no  converting
these  dark  and  obdurate  souls  ?  Is  the
iron  to  break  the  northern  iron  and  steell
Are  we  to  give  way  under  difficulties  1
Look  at  Mont  Cenis  Tunnel,  made
through  one  of  the  hardest  rocks ;  with
a  sharp  tool,  edged  with  diamond,  they
have  pierced  the  Alps.  As  St.  Bernard
says  :  *'  Is  thy  work  hard  ?  set  a  harder
resolution  against  it ;  for  there  is  nothing
so  hard  that  cannot  be  cut  with  something
harder  still,"

3.  To  labour  with  non-success^  and  to
wait,  is  hard  work.  It  is  a  grand  thing
for  a  Christian  to  continue  patiently  in
well-doing.  He  is  a  man  who  under
long-continued  disappointment  will  not

**  Bate  a  jot
Of  heart  or  hope,  but  still  bear  up  and  steer
Right  onward."

The  well-annealed  steel  within  him
ere  long  breaks  in  shivers  the  common
iron  which  strikes  him  so  severely.  To
him  to  overcome  by  grace  is  glory
indeed.

See  Addenda:  Be  not  Discour-
aged,

11.  Applicable  to  the  cause  of  God  in
the  world  —  to  the  Church.  What
power,  however  like  to  iron,  shall  suffice
to  break  the  kingdom  of  Jesus,  which
is  comparable  to  steel  ?

1.  We  hear  it  said  that  Romanism
will  again  vanquish  England ;  that  the
Gospel  light,  which  Latimer  helped  to
kindle,  will  be  extinguished.  Atrocious
nonsense,  if  not  partial  blasphemy.  If
this  thing  were  of  men,  it  would  come
to  nought ;  but  if  it  be  of  God,  who  shall
overthrow  it  1  As  surely  as  the  Lord
liveth  the  end  of  Komish  Antichrist  will
come,  and  the  long-expected  cry  shall
be  heard,  "  Babylon  the  great  is  fallen."
330


2.  Others  foretell  the  triumph  of
infidelity.  Consider  what  these  gloomy
forebodings  mean  ?  That  the  gates  of
bell  are  to  prevail  against  the  Church;
that  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  is  not  to
prosper  in  His  hand.  Who  but  a  lying
spirit  would  thus  lay  low  the  faith  and
confidence  of  God's  people?  Infidelity
and  Socinianism  have  ready  tongues,
but  every  tongue  that  rises  against  the
Church  in  judgment  He  will  condemn.
The  Church  can  bear  the  blows  of
Ritualism  and  Infidelity,  and  survive
them  all,  and  be  better  for  them  too.
The  iron  will  never  break  the  northern
iron  and  steel.

See  Addenda :  Evil  shall  not  Pre-
vail.

III.  Apply  the  principle  to  the  self-
righteous  efforts  which  men  make  for
their  own  salvation.  The  iron  will
never  break  the  northern  iron  and
steel.

1.  The  bonds  of  guilt  are  not  to  be
snapped  by  a  merely  human  power.
Habits  of  sin  yield  not  to  the  raspings
of  unregenerate  resolves.  All  your
efforts  apart  from  Jesus  are  utterly  use-
less. He  must  bring  liberty — ^you  can-
not emancipate  yourselves.

2.  Yet  that  were  an  easy  task  com-
pared with  a  man  renewing  his  ovm
heart.

3.  Do  you  think  you  can  force  your
way  to  heaven  by  ceremony?  There  is
no  potency  in  baptism,  confirmation,
outward  ceremonies  of  man's  devising
or  of  God's  instituting,  to  deliver  you
from  the  bonds  which  hold  you.  Come,
sinner,  with  thy  fetters ;  lay  thy  wrist  at
the  cross-foot,  where  Christ  can  break
the  iron  at  once.

IV.  Applicable  to  all  persons  who  are
making  self-reliant  efforts  for  the  good
of  others.  How  are  we  driven  to  the
conclusion  that  it  is  "  not  by  might  nor
by  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God."
Man's  heart  is  very  hard ;  it  is  like  tho
northern  iron  and  steel.

1.  Our  preaching — we  try  to  make  it
forcible — how  powerless  it  is  of  itself  I
We  plead,  reason,  seek  goodly  words,
<fec.,  but  the  northern  iron  and  steel
remain  immovable.  The  cries  and
tears  of  a  Whitfield  would  not  avail.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


CHAP.  XT.


Though  all  the  Apostles  reasoned  with
them,  they  would  turn  a  deaf  ear.

2.  The  best-adapted  means  cannot
succeed.  A  mother's  tears,  as  she  spoke
to  you  of  Jesus ;  the  pleadings  of  a  grey-
headed father  over  you — no  power  to
change  your  heart !  The  Gospel,  though
put  to  you  very  tenderly  by  those  you
love  best,  leaves  you  unsaved  still  I
You  have  been  sick,  near  death,  within
an  inch  of  doom  ;  yet  even  the  judgments
of  God  have  not  aroused  you.  But  it  is
not  Ezekiel's  duty  to  make  the  dry  bones
live  :  whether  they  live  or  not,  it  is  his
duty  to  prophesy  to  them.  Go  on  with
your  work,  but  let  a  sense  of  your  per-
sonal inability  make  you  fall  back  upon
your  God.  Let  it  keep  you  from  self-
reliant  prayer  or  work,  much  more  from
one  self-confident  sermon  or  address.
God  will  have  us  feel  that  the  iron
cannot  break  the  northern  iron  and
steel.

V.  This  text  has  a  very  solemn
application  to  all  those  who  are  rebels
against  God.  Fight  against  God,  would
you  1  Measure  your  Adversary,  I  charge
you.  The  wax  is  about  to  wrestle  with  the
flame,  the  tow  to  contend  with  the  fire.
**  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against
the  pricks."  Cast  down  your  weapons.
Come  now,  and  ask  for  reconciliation ;
but  oh,  resist  no  longer,  for  the  iron
cannot  break  the  northern  iron  and  steeh
— Rev.  G.  H.  Spurgeon,  Metropolitan
Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No,  993.

Comments —

Ver.  12.  Shall  iron  break  t  ko.  This
simile  is  variously  interpreted  Thus  : —
"  By  the  iron  is  meant  Jeremiah's  inter-
cession ;  but  this  cannot  alter  the  Divine
purpose  to  send  Judah  into  exile,  which  is
firm  as  steel  and  brass." — Payne  Smith.

"  Can  trouble  and  affliction,  though
hard  as  iron,  break  one  who,  like  Jere-
miah, is  firm  as  steel  and  brass*?" — Rashi
and  Umbreit,

"Not  even  iron,  much  less  the  Jews,
could  resist  the  northern  Colossus  of  the
Chaldean  empire." — Ewald  and  Hen-
derson.

Others,  by  northern  iron, — 1.«.,  the
steel  made  by  the  Chalybes  on  the
Pontus, — understand    the    obduracy   of


the  Jews,  which  not  even  iron  could
break.

"  Can  I,  Jeremiah,  even  if  I  be  iron,
break  the  obduracy  of  the  people  hard
as  steel  or  brass  ^  " — Graf,

The  Targum  regards  "the  iron"  as
Pharaoh  -  Necho,  and  "the  steel  and
brass  "  as  Nebuchadnezzar.

"  Though  there  be  great  hardness  in
you  (Jews),  can  it  yet  break  that  which
is  in  the  Assyrians?  but  ye  are  not
equal  to  them.  The  prophet's  design
was  to  divest  the  Jews  of  the  falsa
confidence  in  which  they  boasted."—
Calvin,

"God  had  made  him  (Jeremiah)  an
*  iron  pillar  and  a  wall  of  brass,*  and  He
asks,  now,  was  it  possible  for  his  enemies
to  destroy  him  whom  God  had  thus
made?" — John  Owen,

[  Vide  next  verse.]

Ver.  1 3.  "  F(yr  all  thy  sins,  even  in  all
thy  borders.*'  These  words  at  once  show
that  it  is  not  the  prophet  who  is  ad-
dressed in  the  verse  preceding,  but  the
Jewish  people.

"  To  the  spoil  without  price,"  i.e,,
"  not  making  thee  any  compensation,  but
inflicting  these  losses  upon  thee  as  a
punishment  for  thy  sins." — Dr.  Blayney,

"  As  God  sells  His  people  for  nought,
i.e.,  gives  them  up  to  their  enemies
(comp.  Isa.  lii.  3,Ps.  xliv.  13),  so  here  He
threatens  to  deliver  their  treasures  to
the  enemy  as  a  booty,  and  for  nought"
— KeU,

"  Three  things  are  said  : —

"i.  That  God  would  give  JudaKn
treasures  away  for  nothing.  It  is  an
act  of  contempt,  implying  that  He  did
not  value  them.

"ii.  The  cause  of  this  contempt  is
JudalCs  sins,

"  iii.  This  is  Justified  by  the  extent  of
those  sins.  Judah  had  committed  them
everywhere,  throughout  her  whole  land."
— Dr,  Payne  Smith.

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Thb  desire  to  be
REMEMBERED.  "O  Lord,  Thou  know-
est ;  remember  me  and  visit  me,"

Jeremiah  desires  many  things ;  but
the  thing  he  asks  first,  as  including  all
the  rest,  is  that  God  would  not  let  him
drop  out  of  sight  and  thought.

331


CHAP.  Xf,


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAE,


I.  The  perpetually  recurring  phrase,
"  God  knows,"  expresses  a  mood  of
thought  common  to  rational  creatures.

A  craving  everywhere  to  be  remem-
bered. From  the  lips  of  the  dying,
from  friends  of  whom  we  are  taking  our
farewell,  fall  the  words,  "Remember
me."  Those  ambitious  minds,  not  con-
tent that  their  memorial  should  be  kept
in  a  few  hearts,  labour  that  their  names
may  be  remembered  by  multitudes.
Oblivion  appals  us.

The  moralist  can  easily  show  the
vanity  of  this  desire,  and  the  emptiness
of  the  end.  What  good  will  it  do  you,
he  asks,  to  be  remembered  when  you  are
out  amid  Australian  wilds,  or  on  the
parched  plains  of  India?  what  harm
would  it  do  you  to  be  forgot  t

Enough  for  us  that  He  who  made  us
80  made  us  that,  hy  the  make  of  our
being,  we  desire  to  he  kindly  remembered.

II.  This  desire,  then,  is  in  our  nature  ;
and  the  prophet  shows  us  the  right
direction  in  which  to  train  it.

Pointing  us  to  the  heaven  above  us,
he  bids  us  seek  to  be  remembered  there  !
The  thought  that  such  a  prayer  may  be
offered  to  God,  teaches  us  a  great  deal
of  His  kindliness,  condescension,  and
thoughtful  care.  You  feel  that  you  are
speaking  to  a  Real  Person  in  offering  a
prayer  like  this — not  to  some  vague,
undefined  *'  Great  First  Cause  least  un-
derstood," but  to  a  merciful  Father  in
heaven,  who  looks  down  upon  His
child,  and,  "  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his
children,  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him."

It  was  while  looking  upon  the  kindly
human  face  OF  Christ  that  the  whole
heart! s  wish  of  the  poor  penitent  thief
went  out  in  the  '*  Lord,  remember  me  ! "

It  was  in  special  clearness  of  revelor
tion  of  God's  love  that  the  Psalmist  was
emboldened  to  say,  *'  I  am  poor  and
needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me."

III.  Consider  the  encouraging  view
of  the  Hearer  of  Prayer  implied  in  the
Words  of  the  prophet's  petition.

The  petition  was  an  acceptable  one,
and  it  w  as  right  that  he  offered  it.  *'  Re-
member me,"  said  he,  in  his  day  of
Borrow,  to  God.

1.  He  was  not  staggered,  as  he  drew
near  in  prayer,  by  intruding  doubt
332


whether  the  Almighty  would  listen  to
his  poor  words  or  consider  his  heart's
desires.  David,  psalmist  and  king,
knew  this  dread  :  *'  When  I  consider  Thy
heavens,  .  .  ,  what  is  man  that  Thou
art  mindful  of  him,  or  visit  himV*
Jeremiah  almost  repeats  these  ideas :
**  Remember  and  visit  me."  What  a
steady  faith  in  God  is  in  this  prayer!
Coming  like  a  little  child  to  the  great
Father,  the  little  voice  pleads,  "  Do  not
forget  me  /  "

2.  It  is  not  presum,ption,  but  faith,
that  speaks  here.  Be  sure  that  when
your  prayer  is  earnest  and  sincere,  and
offered  in  simple  faith  in  Christ  the
Mediator,  you  never  spoke  words  to
your  nearest  neighbour  that  he  heard
more  distinctly  than  the  Almighty  hears
that  prayer.  And  you  may  press  upon
Him  all  your  small  requests,  and  tell
out  to  Him  all  that  concerns  you,  say-
ing, "O  Lord,  remember  me  and  visit
me."

3.  Ponder  for  your  comfort  that
God  ** thinketh  upon**  y^^i  that  He
"knoweth  your  frame,  and  remembereth
that  you  are  dust."

IV.  In  such  individuality  of  prayer
there  is  no  selfishness.  It  is  not  the
wish  to  be  distinguished  and  favoured
above  other  children  of  the  family.  It
is  but  the  wish  to  be  remembered  even  as
the  others.  It  is  but  that  when  Christ,
the  Great  Intercessor,  speaks  to  Almighty
God  for  Himself  and  His  brethren  of
mankind,  saying,  in  the  name  of  all,
"  Our  Father,"  the  poor  sinner  should
not  be  left  out.  So  he  puts  forth  a
trembling  hand,  lifts  a  feeble  voice,  and
cries,  "  Bless  mtf  also;"  "Lord,  remember
me,"  <kc.

V.  Mark  what  simple  trust  in  God's
wisdom  and  kindness  is  implied  in  the
offering  of  such  a  petition.

1.  Everything  is  asked  in  that.  It
was  enough  just  to  put  one's-self  under
God's  eye,  just  to  get  God  to  think  of
one  at  all.  If  God  would  but  remember
us.  He  would  see  all  our  wants,  and
be  willing  to  give  us  all.  The  thief  on
the  cross  felt  that.  Only  **  remember
me,"  and  all  will  be  right.

2.  Further  it  is  assumed,  that  if
God  remembers  us  it  will  be  in  love.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAF.  XT.


Remember  how  Joseph,  in  the  dungeon,
asked  the  chief  butler  to  think  of  him  ;
and  said  hoto  he  desired  to  be  thought
of,  ^^  and  show  kindness  unto  me,"  &c.
But  there  is  no  need  to  specify  how  we
wish  God  would  remember  us.

3.  Further.  God's  remembrance  is
practical.  He  comes  to  our  help.  The
want  remembered  will  be  relieved.

4.  Doubtless  there  is  a  season  in  the
history  of  the  unconverted  man  in  which
he  can  have  no  real  desire  that  God
should  remember  him  :  he  rather  de-
sires to  keep  out  of  God's  sight  and
remembrance.  To  be  sure  that  every
word  and  deed  is  going  down  in  "the
book  of  God's  remembrance  "  is  the  very
last  tiling  the  utterly  ungodly  man
would  wish.

6.  Yet  the  prayer  expresses  the  first
reaching  after  God  of  the  awakeiied  soul,
"  Remember  me  ! "  cried  prophet,  psal-
mist, penitent  thie£

If  we  make  it  our  desire  and  prayer
to  be  remembered  by  our  Saviour  and
God,  we  need  not  fear  that  we  shall  pass
from  His  recollection.  Others  we  loved
may  forget  us.  But  amid  all  the  care
of  this  universe,  He  will  stoop  down  to
think  of  us — never  forgotten  by  Him  /
In  our  dark  days  and  weak  faith  we  may
be  ready  to  think  we  have  passed  from
His  thoughts.  There  is  no  such  ex-
perience but  believers  have  passed
through  before  us.  Thousands  of  years
since  our  doubts  and  fears  were  felt,  and
God  supplied  the  perfect  answer.  Lis-
ten to  the  ancient  words  of  doubt y  and
God's  blessed  answer :  '*  But  Zion  said,
The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  and  my
God  hath  forgotten  me."

"Can  a  woman  forget  hersucking  child,
that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on
the  son  of  her  womb?  Yea,  they  may  for-
get, yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.'' — A.  K,
H.  B.y  condensed  from  "  Counsels  and
Comfort"  &c.

See   Addenda:    On    Being  Remem-

BEBED.

Ver.  16.  Theme  :  Prater.  "  O  Lord,
Thou  knowest  j  remember  me  and  visit
me,  and  revenge  me,"  <fec.

Jeremiah  had  prayed  earnestly  for
the    people   and    without    success.     Li


offering  supplication  for  himself  he
found  favour  with  God.  In  his  prayer
the  pain  and  troubles  of  his  life  were
laid  before  God,  and  the  questionings
of  his  heart  were  not  kept  back.  Ob-
serve—

I.  Divine  knowledge  is  no  hindrance
to  prayer.  "  Thou  knowest "  :  l.  My
character ;  2.  My  condition ;  3.  My
need.  Yet,  though  Thou  knowest,  yea,
because  Thou  knowest,  I  will  pray  to
Thee.

II.  Divine  condescension  an  encour-
agement to  prayer.

1.  Remember  me.

2.  Visit  me.

3.  Vindicate  me.  "  Revenge  "  means
only  vindication.

III.  Human  need  a  stimulus  to
prayer.  He  was  poor,  persecuted,  and
in  peril.

Where  could  he  go  for  help  ?
He  is  driven  to  God  by  trouble,  and
drawn  by  lovingkindness.

IV.  The  vicissitudes  of  life  suggest
topics  for  prayer.  Poverty,  weakness,
want,  affliction,  persecution,  temptation,
— the  sins  and  sorrows  of  others.  The
needs  of  the  world,  <kc.

V.  Conscious  sincerity  gives  freedom
in  prayer.  "I  have  suffered  for  thy
sake."

VI.  The  mediation  of  Christ  gives
efficacy  to  our  prayer.  "1  have  not
joined    in    their   sins"    (ver.   10).  —  W^

Whale.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Enjoying  God's
Word.  "  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I
did  eat  them  .  .  .  rejoicing."

The  people  of  God  have  always  a  re-
lief in  prayer,  in  the  worst  circumstances.
Jonah  cried  out  of  the  belly  of  hell,
"  Yet  will  I  look  again."  David  cw-
couraged  himself  Jesus,  "  being  in  an
agony,  prayed."  Jeremiah,  borne  down
by  the  storms  of  the  world,  prayed,
"  O  Lord,  thou  knowest,  remember,  visit
me."  The  disciples  took  up  the  body
of  John,  and  went  and  told  Jesus.

Remember,  the  best  thing  you  can
do  with  your  trouble  is  to  take  it  to
Him.  Sanctioned  by  highest  autho-
rity :  "Ifl  any  afflicted,  let  him  pray."

333


OBAP.  XT,


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


A-ttested  by  experience :  of  all  the  millions
that  tried  it,  not  one  but  will  say,  **  It
is  good  for  me  to  draw  nigh  to  God."
Creatures  cannot  help  when  they  would  ;
will  not  when  they  can,  but  God  both
can  and  will  be  **  a  present  help."

Jeremiah  found  it  so.  And  he  backs
bis  prayer  by  an  important  plea.  He
avouches  the  serenity  of  his  character,
"  Thy  words  were  found ; "  the  reality
of  his  experience,  **  I  did  eat  them ;  *'
his  past  joys  in  religion,  "  they  were  the
rejoicing;"  the  particular  relationship
he  bore  to  the  God  of  grace,  "I  am
called  by  Thy  name."

Need  not  confine  it  to  Jeremiah;
apply  it  to  self.  Take  it  as  a  test
by  which  to  try  the  reality  of  your
religion.

The  views  it  affords  of  personal
RELIGION.     It  implies —

I.  A  high  valuation  for  this  word.
It  is  prized  as  God's  word,  and  SOUGHT
under  that  character.

Love  to  the  word  of  God  is  a  sure
sign  of  a  gracious  heart.  A  neglected
Bible  is  a  sign  of  a  graceless  heart.
How  many  read  the  books  and  writings
of  men  who  never  read  the  Book  of  God  !
When  God  Himself  turns  author,  some
will  not  give  His  works  a  reading  ;  but
Christians  prize  the  word,  and  prove  it
by  searching  into  it  (David,  Ps.  xix.)

Thy  word.  It  partakes  of  the  divi-
nity of  its  Author,  As  Phidias,  a  self-
evidencing  power.

It  is  adapted  to  the  nature  of  its  sub-
ject ;  suited  to  man.  A  key  fitted  to  un-
lock such  a  heart.

It  \i2^^  produced  most  astonishing  effects.
Infancy  and  age.  If  the  slightest  agency
draws  from  the  truth, the  slightest  agency
recovers.  If  Peter  fell  by  a  look,  he
rose  by  a  look.

1.  Have  you  found  this  word  i

2.  Has  this  word  found  you  ?

A  poor  sailor  was  cast  away — lost  his
all.  The  first  half-crown  he  obtained,  he
inquired  where  to  make  a  purchase,  of
what  1 — that  neglected  book,  a  Bible.

**  1  have  many  books,"  says  Mr.  New-
ton, **  that  I  cannot  sit  down  to  read  ;
they  are  indeed  good  and  sound,  Int,
like  halfpence,  there  goes  a  great  quan-
tity to  a  little  amount.  There  are  silver
334


books  and  a  very  few  golden  books,  but
I  have  one  worth  more  than  all,  called
the  Bible,  and  that  is  a  book  of  bank-
notes."    Ap}>ly  this  test:

II.  A  personal  experience  of  its
power.     *'  I  did  eat  it."

This  is  different  from  speculation.
David  does  not  say.  Listen  and  hear,
but,  *'  Taste  and  see."  Apply  to  him  for
yourself  instead  of  relying  on  the  autho-
rity of  others.  As  in  a  case  of  disputed
relish,  you  determine  not  by  testimony,
but  by  taste.  In  other  words,  it  means
experience.  Experience  is  knowledge
derived  from  experiment,  in  contradic-
tion from  theory.

We  are  apt  to  confound  familiarity
with  knowledge.  Many  are  familiar
with  all  the  truths  and  doctrines,  but
have  not  the  experience  of  the  power  of
one.  Like  Bunyan's  Talkative.  Like
Balaam,  who  saw  the  visions  of  God
and  was  proud  of  what  he  saw — but  no
experience.  Like  Judas,  who  preached
and  wrought  miracles,  but  died  despair-
ing. How  worthless  this  knowledge  !
To  know  the  way,  but  never  walk  in  it.
To  know  there  is  an  ark,  but  never  enter
it.  To  know  Christ  is  a  crucified  and
almighty  Saviour,  but,  like  the  dying
thief,  never  to  apply  to  Him.

The  knowledge  of  which  you  boast
will  aggravate  your  doom.  Like  Uriah
with  his  fatal  letter,  place  you  in  the
forefront  of  battle.

But  religion  is  not  only  something  to
be  known,  but  something  to  be  ex-
perienced.  Religion  is  the  life  of  the
soul  as  the  soul  is  the  life  of  the  body.
Truth  is  the  sustenance  of  the  moral
man.  Divine  truth  must  be  incorporated
with  the  elements  of  the  intellectual
nature  or  we  perish.  "  Except  ye  eat  the
flesh."  Put  test  of  experience.  A  sign
of  spiritual  decay,  and  the  loss  of  spiri-
tual health,  when  this  word  is  under-
valued, when  men  can  spend  days  and
weeks  without  reading  it.

When  you  come  to  the  word,  remem-
ber that  Divine  influence  can  alone  make
it  effectual.  As  you  say  grace  before
meat,  let  your  reading  be  preceded  by
prayer.  "I  will  be  as  dew."  How
sweet  the  fragrance  after  the  dew!

III.  A  conscious  participation  of


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OBAP.  XY.


the  happiness  it  produces.  "  It  was  the
rejoicing  of  my  heart."  How  does  it
promote  joy  ?

I  By  the  light  it  imparts  to  the  under-
standing. Truly,  light  is  sweet.  It
preserves  us  from  dark  uncertainty ;
from  the  dubiety  of  suspense ;  from  the
vacillation  of  doubt;  from  the  fluctua-
tion of  undetermined  choice.  It  gives
decision  to  the  judgment.  It  fully
occupies  the  mind  upon  the  noblest
subject.  It  engages  faculties  and  powers
in  God's  service.

ii.  By  the  relief  it  gives  to  the  con-
science. In  the  hope  of  pardon  and
acceptance.  Sprinkled  from  an  evil
conscience.

iii.  By  the  exercise  it  affords  to  the  best
affections  of  the  heart.  Love  to  God  is
a  source  of  happiness  ;  love  to  man,  a
source  of  happiness.  The  pleasures  of
benevolence  are  genuine  pleasures ;  al-
lied to  the  happiness  of  God  Himself.
He  is  the  blessed  God,  the  happy  God.
Happy  in  the  diffusion  of  happiness;
BLESSED  in  the  inipartation  of  blessed-
ness. "  I  will  bless  thee."  How  1  By
making  thee  a  blessinij.  And  taste  the
joy  of  God.  Misery  of  malevolent  affec-
tions; ha[)piness  of  kind  ones.  As  de-
light springs  from  the  play  of  good
feelings,  so  misery  springs  from  the
play  and  interchange  of  bad  ones.  There
are  virtues  sweet  to  the  taste  of  inner
man  ;  vices  bitter  and  corroding  to  the
heart.  Scowl  of  malice,  the  malignity
of  revenge.      Gall  of  bitterness.

iv.  By  the  consolations  and  hopes  under
sorrow.  The  paper  is  yet  extant  on
which  martyr  Smith  recorded  his  ex-
perience. They  gave  him  pen  and  ink
to  sign  a  draft  on  the  treasurer;  he  did
BO,  and  in  the  corner  put  down  these
figures,  "  1  Cor.  iv.  8,  9."

IV.  A  sense  of  consecration,  "I
am  called  by  Thy  name."

Improvement :

1.  It  reproves  those  who  never  seek.

2.  Those  who  are  content  with  know-
ledge without  experience.

3.  Those  who  are  strangers  to  religious
peace  and  joy.    If  you  eat,  it  will  be  joy.

4.  Those  who  neither  own  God's
name,  nor  are  owned  of  Him. — Samuel
Tliodey,  1837.


See  Addenda:  Enjoying  God's
Word.

Theme:  Found,  eaten,  and  en-
joyed.

These  words  appear  to  be  part  of  the
prophet's  prayer,  and  were  given  to  ac-
count for  the  fact  that  he  had  suffered
rebuke,  <kc.,  from  the  people.  It  is  the
only  verse  containing  any  pleasant  re-
ference to  Jeremiah's  experience,  and
then  it  is  in  connection  with  God's
word,  and  not  with  man's  dealings.
It  is  as  if  he  said,  "  In  the  midst  of  my
sufferings  and  sorrows,  I  came  upon  the
promises  of  God's  word ;  I  seized  upon
them  with  avidity ;  so  great  was  my
need  of  comfort.  I  devoured  them ;
and  indeed  my  soul  was  comforted.
They  led  me  to  meditate  upon  my  fel-
lowship with  Jehovah,  and  to  see  that
even  my  sufferings  were  for  His  name's
sake.  The  word  was  unto  me  *  the  joy
and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart."'  Here
we  observe —

I.  That  ail  important  discovery
was  made.     "  Thy  words  were  found."

1.  Words  are  the  representatives  of
tliought.  They  are  of  value  for  this
reason.  Words  have  great  power  to
move  men's  minds.  How  much  have
they  affected  the  destiny  of  nations,  and
the  development  of  great  enterprises  1
Demosthenes,  Cicero,  Luther,  Knox,
Whitfield,  Brougham,  <fec.

2.  Words  derive  much  of  their  power
from  the  mind  which  utters  them.  Truth
is  truth  come  whence  it  may,  but  truth
may  be  spoken  by  most  men  without
having  much  power  to  do  others  good.
The  stroke  of  a  royal  pen  may  mean
liberty  or  slavery,  peace  or  war  to  mil-
lions. God^s  words  are  a  hammer ,  a  fire,
a  sword,  a  balm,  a  saving,  sanctifying
power  to  men  who  receive  and  obey  thenu

3.  That  which  is  found  must  previously
have  existed.  God's  words  were  found*
A  grand  discover}',  not  an  invention.
Treasure  is  not  made  by  man,  but  the
discoverer  has  much  fame,  and  confers
upon  the  race  great  benefits.  God's
word  exists  whether  men  find  it  or  not.
He  who  finds  it  is  wise,  rich,  and  happy.
It  is  the  living  word.  Seek  Him.  Seek,
and  ye  shall  find.

83fi


CHAT.  XT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


II.  That  a  peculiar  method  of  ap-
propriation was  adopted.  "  I  dui  eat
them."

1.  It  implies  soul  hunger.  Caused
by  stress  of  duty,  and  pressure  of  per-
secution, and  multiplied  sorrows.

2.  It  affirms  that  God's  ivords  are  soul
food.  The  soul  may  be  starved,  or  may
feed  on  husks  ;  but  if  the  appetite  be
right  and  rightly  directed,  only  God
and  His  word  will  satisfy.  (Ezek.  iii.
1-3,  Kev.  X.  9,  Ps.  cxix.  103.)  God's
word  is  wholesome,  nourishingy  savoury^
saving.

III.  That  a  delightful  experience
was  realised.  **  It  was  unto  me  the
joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart."  Joy
and  rejoicing —

1.  In  what  the  word  revealed  of  God.

2.  In  the  way  thai  revelation  met  his
utmost  need.  In  work,  in  trouble,  in
danger.

3.  In  the  hiowledge  of  salvation  tliere
unfold e  L

4.  In  the  prospects  to  which  the  atten-
tion of  God's  servants  was  directed.

Note —

1.  Jeremiah's  religion  was  a  religion
of  tlie  word.

2.  Jeremiah's  religion  was  a  religion
of  tiie  heart.

3.  Jeremiah's  religion  was  a  religion
of  rejoicing.

IV.  That  an  emphatic  public  testi-
mony was  given.  "  I  am  called  by  thy
name,"  &c.

1.  God^s  name  was  called  upon  him,
(See  Margin.)  As  the  saving  power,  and
source  of  hope  and  joy,  the  name  of
Christ  has  been  called  upon  us.

2.  tie  ivas  called  by  God's  name.  As
a  professor,  a  prophet,  a  servant,  <fec.
We  are  called  by  Clirist's  name.

3.  He  was  strengthened  hy  God  in  all
his  works.  Jehovah  was  to  him  *'  The
Lord  of  hosts,"  inspiring  with  courage,
leading  to  battle,  giving  the  victory,
distributing  rewards.

Application —

1.  The  word  discovered — a  treasure.

2.  The  word  in  the  heart — a  joy.

3.  The  word  on  the  lips — a  mes-
sage.

4.  The  word  in  the  hand —ft  weapon.
—If.  Whale.

336


Theme  :  God's  word  the  joy  op  thh

GODLY.

Bread  is  sweet  to  the  hungry.  Man,
when  quickened  by  God,  does  "  not  live
by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word,"  <kc.
One  of  God's  children  could  say,  "  I
have  esteemed  the  words  of  Thy  mouth
more  than  my  necessary  food."  (Also
Ps.  cxix.  72 ;  xix.  10.)

i.  Bible  history,  in  its  development

of  THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  DiVINE  GOVERN-
MENT, is  to  a  man  of  God  deeply  in-
structive :  **  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  his
heart."

ii.  Prophecy,  teaching  us  that  the

FUTURE    IS    KNOWN    TO    THE    LoRD,    the

future  of  the  Church,  the  world,  and  of
every  child  of  man  ;  and  that  nothing
unseen  by  us  can  arise  to  thwart  His
designs,  becomes  a  very  fountain  of  de-
light to  every  good  man  :  '*  the  joy  and
rejoicing  of  his  heart."

iii.  The  words  of  the  Lord  as  em-
bodied IN  LAW,  prohibiting  nothing  but
what  the  enlightened  conscience  con-
demns, and  commanding  nothing  but
what  that  conscience  approves,  constrain
the  righteous  man  to  say,  "Oh,  how  I
love  Thy  law  ! "  Conformity  to  the
law  is  his  earnest  solicitude,  and  when
love  is  perfected  this  desire  will  be  real-
ised, for  '4ove  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."

iv.  But  if  the  words  of  the  Lord  in
history,  prophecy,  and  law  are  sweet,
sweeter  still  are  His  words  as  they  sound
forth  in  the  Gospel  op  His  Son.  They
are  '*no  cunningly-devised  fables"  to
the  soul  that  has  seen  the  adaptation  of
the  great  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  to  its
moral  and  spiritual  needs.

Faith  is  a  living  upon  the  truths  of
the  Gospel:  "Eating"  them.  Faith
makes  both  the  truth,  and  Christ  the
substance  of  the  truth,  precious.  *'  Unto
you  which  believe  He  is  precious." — Bev.
D.  Pledge^  "  Walks  with  the  Prophet
Jeremiah.'*

Theme :  The  Prophet  on  his  watch-
tower.

I.  The  discovery.     God's  "worda,"

1.  Sometimes  hidden. .

2.  Yet  expected,

3.  And  sought.

II.  The  treasure  used,  ''Did  eal
them."


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


etLAT,  XT.


Made  them  his  own.     The  taste  both

bitter  and  sweet.

m.  The  result.  "The  joy  and  re-
joicing oi  mine  heart."

Joy  (1)  in  knowing  God's  will,
Joy  (2)  in  seeing  the  working  out  of
God's  goodness. — S.  Farren,

Theme :  Hidden  manna.

I.  A  memorable  discovery,  **Thy
words  were  found."

Many  have  heard  God's  word  for
years,  yet  have  never  found  it.  "  Eyes
have  they,  but  they  see  not ;  ears,  but
hear  not."  Oh  that  they  had  found  the
"  treasure  hid  in  the  field  ! "

What  is  meant  by  finding  God's  words  ]

1.  A  thing  found  has  usually  to  be
sought  for.  Happy  is  he  who  reads  or
hears  the  Scriptures,  searching  all  the
while  for  the  hidden  spiritual  sense,  (See
Prov.  ii.  4,  5.)

2.  To  find  God's  word  means  that
we  have  been  made  to  understand  them
(1  Cor.  iii.  14).  The  Bible  is  a  dull
book  till  illuminated ;  a  tantalising
riddle  till  you  get  the  key ;  but,  the  clue
once  found,  it  absorbs  our  attention,
delights  our  intellect,  and  enriches  our
heart.

3.  Means  to  appropriate  it  as  belong-
ing to  yourself.  Reading  a  will  is  not  in-
teresting tillyou  find  you  have  a  part  in  it.

See  Addenda:  Appropriating  God's
Word.

II.  An  eager  reception,  "  I  did  eat
them."

Not  "  I  did  hear  them."  Herod  heard
John  gladly,  yet  became  his  murderer.
Not  "  I  did  learn  them  by  heai't."  Hun-
dreds have  committed  chapters  to  me-
mory, yet  were  wearied  rather  than
benefited.  Not  "  I  did  repeat  them,"  as
a  parrot  repeats  language  it  is  taught,
"I  did  EAT  them."  What  is  meant  by
eating  them  ?

1.  An  eager  study.  Greedy  for  the
truth.  Some  professors  grow  squeamish
and  proudly  delicate.  My  soul  hungered
even  to  ravenousness  to  be  fed  upon  the
bread  of  heaven.

2.  Cheerful  reception.  My  soul  was
in  love  with  the  word.

3.  An  intense  belief .  Not  questioning
it,   but   living  upon   it.     The  language


means,  besides,  both  the  diligent  treasure
ing  up  of  the  truth,  and  the  inward
digestion  of  the  same.  It  is  not  the
hasty  swallowing  of  the  word  which  is
blessed  to  us,  but  a  deliberate  eating  of
it.  It  then  becomes  dissolved  and  ab-
sorbed— a  part  of  the  eater's  very  exist-
ence.

III.  The  happy  consequences,  "Thy
word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing
of  my  heart."

1.  Hold  the  truth  in  its  entirety  and
harmony y  and  then  it  will  be  joy  to  your
heart.

Jeremiah  first  speaks  of  God's  "  words,"
th^n  he  changes  the  number  and  speaks
of  God's  *'  word."  We  are  not  only  to
receive  parts  of  the  Gospel,  but  the  whole
of  it.  That  man's  heart  is  right  with
God  who  can  honestly  say  that  all  the
testimonies  of  God  are  dear  to  him.
There  are  threatenings,  and  precious  pro-
mises; testimonies  of  Jesus.  Receive
the  whole  of  God's  word,

2.  The  word  of  God  would  have  given
no  joy  had  he  not  been  obedient  to  it,

3.  Yet  there  are  certain  choice  truths
in  God's  word^  especially  joy-giving  :  the
doctrine  of  election,  to  know  that  you
are  called  and  predestinated ;  and  of  the
immutability  of  divine  love,

IV.  A  distinguishing  title.  "  I  am
called  by  Thy  name,"  <kc.

1.  The  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts
was  reviled  in  Jeremiah's  day,  yet  he
felt  it  an  honour  to  he  associated  with
the  Lord  in  this  contempt.  Oh  ye  who
love  the  Lord  Jesus,  never  shun  the
scandal  of  the  cross !

2.  Some  do  not  count  it  a  fair  thing
to  bear  the  name  of  the  Most  High.  It
is  a  disgrace  to  any  man  that  his  Lord
should  die  for  his  soul  on  Calvary  and
yet  he  be  afraid  to  wear  His  livery.  To
confess  Christ  is  so  easy  a  burden ;  it
involves  so  temporary  a  loss,  and  so  real
a  gain.  Bow  your  willing  back  to  His
cross,  and  go  with  Him  without  the
camp. — G.  U.  Spurgeon,  Metropolitan
Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No.  980.

See  Addenda:  Enjoying  God's  Wobd.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  The  isolation  rb-

SULTINO  FROM  CONSECRATION,

This   describes   the  effects   following

337


OBAV.  XV.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


upon  his  appropriating  God*s  words  and
becoming  His  prophet,

I.  Separation  from  the  frivolities  of
life.

1.  Deserting  the  company  of  triflert.
"I  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  the
mockers,"  or  laughers.  Formerly  he  had
joined  their  merry  meetings ;  he  now  re-
nounced them.

2.  Restrained  the  levity  of  his  own
nature,  "Nor  rejoiced;"  ie.,  did  not
make  merry.  Even  innocent  mirth  was
laid  aside,  and  a  gravity  came  upon
him  according  with  his  renewed  state
and  solemn  mission.  Just  so.  Paul
had  *'  great  heaviness  and  continual  sor-
row of  heart "  (Rom.  ix.  2).

II.  Isolation  under  sense  of  a  Divine
trust.  "I  sat  alone  because  of  Thy
hand;"  i.e.,  because  of  the  impulse  of
the  prophetic  spirit  in  him.  (Comp.  1
Kings  xviii  46,  Ezek.  i.  3.)

1.  Responsible  duty  leads  us  into  in-
evitable isolation.  We  cannot  share  it
with  others.  We  are  thereby  separated
to  a  life  of  practical  and  conscious  lone-
liness, having  a  "charge  to  keep,"  in
which  none  can  participate.

2.  Consecration  to  God*s  work  singles
out  and  separates  us;  e,g.,  one  who  is
devoted  to  the  ministry  must  live  a  life
separated  from  the  common  pursuits
and  habits  of  youth.  He  is  devoted  to
God.

3.  Expulsion  from  hilarious  society  fol-
lows avowal  ofreligivn.  The  "  laughers  "
did  not  want  him  amongst  them.

III.  Oppression  of  spirit  amid  pre-
vailing impiety.  "  Thou  hast  filled  us
with  indignation."  Calvin  thus  com-
ments on  the  word  "indignation:"
"  He  had  not  been  slightly  moved,  but
had  been  inflamed  with  zeal  for  God  j
for  we  cannot  really  execute  the  com-
mission given  us  unless  we  be  filled  with
indignation ;  that  is,  unless  zeal  for  God
burns  inwardly,  for  the  prophetic  office
requires  such  a  fervour."

1.  Taught  of  God,  the  prophet  sees
the  great  sinfulness  of  tJie  people.

2.  Recognises  the  offensiveness  to  Jeho-
vah,  and  awful  heinousness  of  their  sins.

3.  Perceives  the  ruin  thereby  entailed
upon  his  nation  and  God's  Church.

A  "  seer  "  may  well  be  stirred  to  **  in-
338


dignation  :"  impetuous  energy  of  thought
and  feeling,  grief  over  sin,  impatience
to  check  the  wrong  which  prevails,  and
rescue  souls  from  impending  doom.  All
God's  pro[)hets  and  preachers  have  had
this  vision  of  iniquity  around  them,  and,
like  Paul  at  Athens,  their  spirit  has  been
"stirred'*  in  them  as  they  beheld  the
rampant  impiety  which  called  tiiem  to
their  earnest  ministry  for  Christ  and
souls.

Ver.  18.  Theme:  God  appears  to  bb
A  VA.TN  HOPE.  "  Wilt  Thou  be  altogether
unto  me  as  a  liar,  and  as  waters  that
faiir'

L  Distressing  experiences  distort
our  views  of  God.  Jeremiah's  condition
and  feelings  were  peculiarly  painful.

1.  Great  anguish  :  "  pain,"  "  wound."
Such  words  indicate  severe  suffering,  less
physical  than  mental.  Physical  pain
will  throw  its  dark  cloud  over  the  mind.
Melancholy  is  the  result :  melan-  (black)
cholic.  In  times  of  heavy  anguish  the
mental  state  grows  despondent,  and  its
power  of  discernment  becomes  warped.

2.  Unalleviated distress :  "perpetual,"
"  refuseth  to  be  healed."  This  unmiti-
gated trouble  of  mind  and  heart  is  indeed
bitter  to  endure.  Very  rare.  Yet  many
of  God's  children  go  through  years  of
disconsolate  experiences.  Wave  upon
wave  rolls  over  them.  Ill  health,
disasters,  bereavements.  Or  spiritual
struggles — doubts,  temptations,  loss  of
faith,  <kc.  A  spirit  thus  bowed  and
Boroly  tested  cannot  easily  think  bright
thoughts  of  God.  The  disciples,  in  con-
sequence of  the  tempest  and  toils  of  one
wild  night,  thought  Jesus  only  a  ghost,
and  "cried  out  for  fear."

3.  Hopeless  dejection.  "My  wound
incurable,  refuseth  to  be  healed."  He
sees  no  prospect  of  better  things,  and
abandons  himself  to  despair.  His  labours
will  all  be  in  vain,  his  delivery  of  God*g
messages  will  eflfect  no  good,  and  his
ministry  will  only  bring  more  calumny
and  abuse  upon  himself.  A  hard  lot;
a  black  outlook.  All  the  windows  are
darkened.  How  can  he,  then,  think
cheerfully  of  God  1

II.  Distorted  views  of  God  render
religion  a  grave  disanpointment.  What


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  IT.


comfort  is  left  to  a  godly  man  if  God
become  to  him  "as  a  liar?"

1.  All  his  suficieiicy  and  safety  were
to  he  drawn  from  God,  So  Jeremiah
felt.  He  was  on  a  difficult  and  perilous
mission  ;  if  God  failed  him,  he  was  for-
lorn indeed.  "  He  had  expected  that ,
called  to  so  high  an  office,  there  would
be  a  perpetual  interference  of  Providence
in  his  behalf,  instead  whereof  things
Beemed  to  take  their  natural  course*'
(Payne  Smith).  **  God  had  in  a  m^toner
deserted  him  for  a  time,  had  left  him  to
sttns^de  with  difficulties  unforeseen  and
unexpected"  (Dr,  Waterland).  What
guarantee  is  left  us  if  Jesus  fail  ?  Every
Cliristian  would  share  Jeremiah's  sense
of  desolation.

If  ever  a  position  occurred  in  which
we  missed  the  succour  of  our  Lord,  we
should  feel  forlorn.  We  have  no  self-
sufficiency  —  Christ  is  all  to  us ;  no
power  of  «e{/^-protection  —  He  is  our
Saviour  and  shield.  Let  it  once  be  pos-
sible to  say,  "  Thou  hast  failed  us"
and  assurance  would  wholly  desert  us;
we  should  be  "  of  all  men  most  miser-
able."

2.  All  his  happiness  and  hopes  rested
in  God,  He  had  left  all  to  be  His
prophet  (ver.  19).  He  looked  fo^  solace,
befriending,  serenity  amid  agitations,
gladness  when  mocked  and  abuL^ed ;  for
all  light  and  promise  amid  his  ha-iardous
work — from  the  God  he  served.  Even
so  has  the  Christian  disciple  to  '*  take  up
his  cross  daily  and  follow  "  Jesus.  But
he  is  not  unwilling.  Has  not  Christ
said,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu-
lation, but  in  Me  ye  have  peace ;  **  "I
will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will
come  to  you ; "  "  Ye  shall  see  Me  again,
and  your  joy  shall  no  man  take  from
you"?  Can  He  hreah  His  word  of  pro-
mise— become  "as  a  liar"?  Then  all
happiness  and  hope  is  dead  within  the
believer's  heart.

Note  the  figure  :  **  Asa  liar,  as  waters
that  fail,"  Calvin  renders  the  words
thus :  "  Thou  wilt  be  to  me  cw  a  decep-
tion of  inconstant  waters ;  *'  or,  "  of  un-
faithful waters,"  i.e,,  of  such  as  flow  not
continually;  adding,  "for  faithful  or
constant  waters  are  those  which  never
fail ;  as  the  Latins  call  a  fountain  inex-


haustible whose  spring  never  dries,  so
the  Hebrews  call  a  fountain  faithful  or
constant  which  never  fails  either  in
summer  or  in  drought.  On  the  con-
trary, they  call  waters  unfaithful  which
become  dry;  as  when  a  well  which  has
no  perennial  veins  is  made  dry  by  great
heat."  Wordsworth  comments  :  "  The
stream  of  God's  favour,  which  had  flowed
in  a  full  current  of  love  towards  him,
seemed  suddenly  to  have  been  dried
up,  and  he  was  left  to  perish  with
thirst."

The  language  suggests  the  deceptive
mirage:  which  mocks  thirst  with  illu-
sory pictures  of  refreshing  waters.

III.  Disappointment  in  God  can
never  have  a  just  warrant.  "  Wilt
Thou  be  unto  me  as  a  liar  %  "

1.  Despondency  is  a  faithless  inter-
preter.  It  is  as  false  as  a  crooked  mirror
— it  reflects  beauty  in  hideous  forms.

2.  Impatie7ice  spoils  our  childhood
sweetness.  It  is  a  sad  failing  to  be  hast-
ening conclusions  about  God  and  His
dealings.  "  He  that  belie veth  should  not
make  haste."

3.  Fidelity  is  an  essential  chara>cteris'
tic  of  God,  Immutability  is  impressed
on  Creation,  "  I  change  not "  is  a  truth
evident  in  the  perennial  action  of  ma-
jestic laws  in  nature  ;  and  therefore  the
universe  endures,  and  "  all  things  con-
tinue as  they  were  from  the  creation  of
the  world."  In  His  love  and  relation-
ships to  uSy  "  with  Him  is  neither  varia-
bleness nor  shadow  of  turning."  In
His  words  and  promises^  "  not  one  good
thing  He  hath  spoken  shall  fail  to  come
to  pass."  Hopes  cast  upon  Him  "  shall
not  make  ashamed."  And  to  every  soul
which  cleaves  to  and  trusts  in  Jesus —
as  Redeemer,  Friend,  and  King,  for  life
here  and  in  eternity — He  is  "  the  same
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."

Ver.  19.  Theme:  A  ministky  of
DISCRIMINATION.  "  If  thou  take  forth
the  precious  from  the  vile."

God,  in  the  freeness  of  His  grace,  ap*
portions  the  reward  that  He  promises  to
Jeremiah  to  the  sense  which  He  enter-
tains of  the  greatness  and  difficulty  of
the  work  to  which  He  had  called  him,
"  Thou  shalt  he  as  My  mouth  " — My  re-

339


CHAP.  XV.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


presentative,  My  acknowledged  and  ao-
credited  servant — here  is  the  greatest
honour  tliat  could  be  conferred  on  any
man.  *'  TJiou  shalt  take  forth  the  pre-
cious from  the  vihy  and  he  to  the  people  as
a  fenced  brazen  wall" — here  is  one  of
the  most  difficult  and  arduous  duties
thut  mortality  can  possibly  sustain.  The
talents  of  an  angel,  the  zeal  of  a  seraph,
if  accompanied  with  the  infirmities  of
humanity,  must  sink  under  the  task,
unless  supported  by  Divine  strength
and  blessing.  Well  then  may  we  ex-
claim, "  Who  is  sufficient?"

The  difficulty  of  such  a  course  as  this,
that  of  making  full  proof  of  our  minis-
try, can  only  be  understood  by  him  who
has  tried  it,  and  it  certainly  has  not
diminished  since  Jeremiah's  time.  For
though  we  have  less  outward  persecu-
tion, it  is  equally  difficult  in  all  ages  to
combat  with  the  prejudices  and  enmity
of  the  carnal  mind;  difficult  to  pene-
trate the  thick  disguise  of  character —
difficult  to  maintain  the  sternest  faith-
fulness accompanied  with  the  purest
love — to  pursue  the  Proteus  forms  of
ungodliness  into  their  secret  retreats,
and  so  effectually  to  separate  between
the  precious  and  the  vile,  as  that  we
may  commend  ourselves  to  every  man's
conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  Our
Lord  Himself  who  tried  the  experiment
knew  its  difficulty,  and  His  last  promise
was  a  promise  to  ministers  :  "  Lo,  I  am
with  you ;  "  and  He  has  enabled  us  to
form  an  estimate  of  the  greatness  of  the
work  from  the  greatness  of  the  reward,
for  addressing  the  minister,  the  Angel
of  Ephesus,  He  says,  **  Be  thou  faithful
and  I  will  give"  &c,

L  What  is  supposed?

II.  What  is  required  t

III.   What  is  promised  t

L  "What  is  supposed  ?

1.  The  va^t  importance  and  responsihir
lity  of  the  work  assigned  to  ministers
with  a  view  to  the  welfare  of  their  people,
"  If  thou  separate  between  the  precious
and  the  vile."  It  is  no  common  office,
no  slight  responsibility.  The  Gospel  dis-
pensation is  often  spoken  of  fts  the
ministry  of  reconciliation ;  but  it  is  here
presented  under  a  new  char:«,cer,  the  minis-
340


try  of  discrimination.  Christ  is  repre-
sented commonly  jis  a  Saviour,  but  He  is
to  be  regarded  as  a  witness  and  a  judge
— for  Judgment  am  I  come  into  the  world.
Ministers  are  usually  considered  as
heralds  of  mercy,  sons  of  consolation,
but  they  are  also  to  be  considered  as
messengers  of  heavy  tidings.  Ours  is  an
office  of  edification,  but  it  is  an  office  of
separaticm  too,  a  ministry  of  discrimina-
tion.  We  have  to  distinguish  between
truth  and  truth,  between  character  and
character,  between  holiness  and  sin  ;  and
to  advocate  the  rightful  claims  and  high
supremacy  of  heaven  against  the  usurped
dominion  of  sin  and  hell.  Ministers  are
to  take  the  precious  from  the  vile;  to
separate  the  wheat  from  the  weeds;  to
distinguish  the  dross  from  the  gold  ;  to
guide  their  hands  wittingly,  as  Jacob
did  when  he  bestowed  the  blessing  upon
the  sons  of  Joseph  ;  they  are  sometimes
to  blow  the  silver  trumpet  of  Jubilee,
and  not  unfrequently  to  sound  the
trumpet  of  Alarm.  "  A  faithful  ambas-
sador is  health"  says  Solomon.  ^^  As  an
earring  of  gold  and  an  ornament  of  fine
gold,  so  is  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  obe-
dient ear,"

2.  It  is  further  supposed  that  there
are  some  essential  distinctions  between
right  and  wrong,  between  good  and
evil,  between  truth  and  error,  between
the  base  and  the  honourable  of  char-
acter, between  the  precious  and  the  vile.
These  distinctions  are  real,  not  nominal ;
essential,  not  arbitrary;  they  are  regarded
so  by  God  Himself.  These  distinctions
were  originally  imprinted  on  the  mind
when  man  was  created  in  God's  own
image ;  and  the  capacity  of  making
them  still  remains,  as  you  see  from  the
clearness  with  which  any  man  can  judge
upon  a  subject  of  right  and  wrong  where
his  own  conscience  is  not  concerned,  and
the  zeal  with  which  men  reprobate  that
which  is  villanous  and  dishonourable.

3.  A  standard  of  truth  is  supposed.
God  has  given  us  the  rule  of  judgment.
We  have  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,
and  as  the  office  of  a  judge  is  not  to
make  the  law  but  to  declare  it,  so  the
office  of  a  minister  is  not  to  burden  the
ears  of  people  with  his  own  doubtful
speculations,  but  to  declare  the  whole


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XT


counsel  of  God.  To  the  law  and  to  the
testimony,  if  they  speak  not  according
to  this  rule  they  have  no  light.  This  is
the  ylass  we  hold  up  to  show  you  the
true  features  of  your  character;  this  is
the  Lamp  we  exhibit  to  guide  your  foot-
steps,— "  And  as  many  as  walk  by  this
rule,  peace  be  on  them  and  on  the  Israel
of  God.''

4.  It  is  further  supposed  in  the  text
that  these  characlers  are  closely  inter-
mingled,  and  that  there  is  a  great  disin-
ctiuation  in  mankind  to  have  the  truth
fidly  told  them,  and  to  be  brought  to
the  decisive  test,  the  final  decision.  The
tares  and  the  wheat  strangely  grow  to-
gether— the  sheep  and  the  goats  both
are  found  in  the  same  pasture — the  pre-
cious and  the  vile  have  some  points  in
common.  Cain  and  Abel  both  bring
their  offering  to  the  Lord ;  Jacob  and
Esau  both  kneel  for  the  blessing ;  Elijah
and  tlie  priests  of  Baal  openly  build
their  altars  on  Mount  Carmel  ;  the  five
foolish  virgins  as  well  as  the  five  wise
ones  go  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom ;
Judas  and  John  both  receive  the  pas-
sover  in  the  supper-chamber.  And  we
know  that  men  halt  between  two  opi-
nions— they  dwell  on  the  borders  of  the
Land  of  Promise — they  love  to  know
that  an  ark  is  provided,  and  even  love
to  watch  the  progress  of  the  building,
but  they  obey  not  the  summons,  "  Gome
thou  with  all  thy  house  into  the  ark"

6.  One  thing  more  is  plainly  sup-
posed, that  it  is  of  the  utmost  consequence
to  both  parties,  that  the  separation
should  be  made — take  forth  the  precious
from  the  vile,  and  the  most  advantageous
results  will  immediately  accrue  to  each.
Is  it  not  desirable  to  the  children  of
God  to  know  that  they  are  so — that
they  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise
— that  they  are  precious  in  His  sight  and
honourable?  Would  it  not  strengthen
tlie  weak  hands  and  confirm  the  feeble
knees,  and  give  them  the  oil  of  joy  for
mourning,  could  we  say  to  them  beyond
contradiction,  *'  Go  thy  way,  eat  thy
bread  with  joy  and  drink  thy  wine  with
a  merry  heart,  for  God  now  accepteth  thy
works " f

If  the  distinction  be  valuable  to  the
precious,  it  would  be  scarcely  less  ad-


vantageous to  the  vile  themselves.  To
be  robbed  of  the  cloak  of  a  false  pro-
fession would  be  no  loss,  for  we  know  it
does  them  no  honour  and  brings  them
no  peace.  If  they  stood  out  in  their
true  colours  to  their  own  conscience
they  could  not  suffer  more,  but  they
might  be  more  safe.  You  had  better
meet  the  case  at  once,  at  its  worst,  and
say,  Behold  I  am  vile.

XL  What  is  demanded  of  ministers
with  a  view  to  this  solemn  discrimina-
tion?

The  text  })lainly  demands  that  every
effort  should  be  used  on  their  part  to
remove  the  willing  delusions  of  man-
kind, to  disabuse  their  blinded  under-
standings in  reference  to  the  great
things  of  God  and  Eternity  and  their
souls'  health.  What,  then,  is  necessary
so  far  as  we  are  concerned  in  separat-
ing—

1.  A  plain  and  decisive  exhibition  of
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  We  are  to
contend  earnestly  for  the  faith.  We  are,
as  we  have  opportunity,  to  vindicate  it
from  the  blasphemies  of  the  infidel,  the
perversions  of  the  worldling,  the  mis-
takes of  the  Pharisee,  and  the  corrup-
tions of  the  Antinomian.  Whether  men
will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear,
we  must  speak  to  them  of  the  evil  of
sin,  of  the  danger  of  continuance  in  it,
and  of  the  only  way  of  escape  from  it.
We  must  show  them  the  insufficiency  of
the  forms  of  godliness,  the  worthless-
ness  of  their  own  self-righteousness,  the
necessity  of  a  vital  union  to  Christ,  and
their  positive  obligations  to  that  holi-
ness without  which  no  man  can  see  the
Lord.

2.  A  fearless  application  of  Scripture
truth  is  necessary.  To  the  careless  and
thoughtless,  the  young  man  void  of
understanding,  trained  in  the  ways  of
religion,  but  a  living  plague  to  the  circle
in  which  he  moves,  hardening  in  sin
and  fast  hardening  against  the  reach  of
conviction  :  Know  that  *^  your  judgment
now  of  a  long  time  lingereth  not,  and
your  damnation  slumbereth  not.**  To  the
apostate  from  a  religious  profession  :
*'  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speak'
ethy  To  the  self-satisfied  formalist :
"  Strive  to  enter**      To    the    young ;

341


OffAP.  XY,


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


**  Rimemher  now^^  &c.  To  the  a^ed  :
**  £J scape  for  thy  life,**  To  the  pre-
cious :  "  Say  ye  to  the  righteous^  It
shall  he  well  with  him,**  To  the  vile  :
**  Woe  to  the  wicked,  for  it  shall  he  ill
with  him**

3.  To  point  ourselves  and  our  hearers  to
the  ordy  Agent  who  can  make  the  word
efifectual.

III.  What  is  promised  ?  "  Thou
ahalt  be  as  My  mouth."  The  accredited
and  approved  servant  —  to  speak  in
accordance  with  His  will — be  the  organ
of  His  clemency — all  his  authenticated
messages  crowned  with  success.  None
of  his  words  to  fall  to  the  ground.

Mighty  and  blessed  such  a  ministry.
Surely  the  people  among  whom  such  a
Divinely  effectual  ministry  is  carried  on,
would  be  drawn  to  the  Saviour's  feet,
and  souls  would  find  grace  and  salvation
as  on  the  Pentecostal  morning.

**  Faithful  ministers/*  says  Henry,
"  are  God's  mouth  to  us,  and  we  are  to
hear  God  speaking  to  us  by  them.*'—
Samuel  Thodey^  A.D.  1823.

Comments —

Ver.  19.  *'  7/"  thou  return^  then  udll  I
bring  thee  again**  &c.  "  There  is  in  God's
answer  a  mingling  of  comfort  and  re-
buke. If  thou  return — repent  thee  of
thy  doubts  and  think  only  of  thy  duty,
then  will  I  hring,  <fec.  "  I  will  cause  thee
again  to  stand  before  Me."  To  stand
before  a  person  means  to  be  his  chief
officer  or  vicegerent,  and  is  said  of  Elijah
(1  Kings  xvii.  1)  and  Elisha  (2  Kings
iii.  4)  as  God's  prophets,  of  David  as
Saul's  minister  (1  Sam.  xvi.  21,  22),  of
Solomon's  counsellors  (1  Kings  xii.  6),
and  of  Nebuzar-adan  as  commander-in-
chief  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  army  (Jer.  liiL
12,  marg.)** — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

"  If  thou  take  forth  the  precious  from
the  vile.**  Jeremiah  was  to  separate  in
himself  what  was  divine  and  holy  from
the  dross  of  human  passion  :  So  many
commentatora.  Discriminate  between
good  and  bad  men,  or  between  the  good
and  bad  in  men :  Other  authorities
favour  this  rendering.

"  Let  them  return  unto  thee,  hut  return
not  thou  unto  them.**  Rather, "  They  shall
return  unto  thee,  but  thou  shalt  not,'*  &Qh
842


"  A  flattering  prophet  perishes  with  the
people  whom  his  soft  speeches  have  con-
firmed in  their  sin;  but  the  truthfui
speaking  of  God's  word  saves  both." —
Speaker*s  Com.

*'  Not  surrender  unpopular  truths  to
popular  fallacies." —  Wordsworth.

'*  Not  concede  to  the  vices  of  men  nor
cherish  their  fancies,  but  constrain  them
to  undertake  the  yoke  of  God.  The
truth  of  God  ought  not  to  bend  to  the
will  of  men ;  for  God  changes  not,
neither  does  His  word." — Calvin,

Vers.  19,  20.  Theme:  The  ministry

OP  THE  WORD.

We  have  here  God's  answer  to  the
prophet's  prayer.  Jeremiah  is  not  al-
lowed to  retire  from  the  work,  either
because  of  its  offensiveness  to  the  people,
or  because  it  grieved  him  to  be  a  man
of  strife  among  them.  He  is  promised
divine  assistance  and  protection  in  those
great  undertakings  to  which  he  is  ap-
pointed. Concerning  the  ministry  of
the  word,  we  are  here  reminded  that  it
is—

L  A  ministry  of  divine  authority.
"  Thou  shalt  stand  before  Me."

II.  A  ministry  of  divine  revela-
tions.    *'  Thou  shalt  be  as  My  mouth."

III.  A  ministry  of  wise  discrimiua-
tiOH.  "If  thou  take  forth  the  precious
from  the  vile."

IV.  A  ministry  often  opposed  by
those  to  whom  it  is  sent.  "  And  they
shall  fight  against  thee."

V.  A  ministry  requiring  much  cou-
rage. "  I  will  make  thee  ...  a  fenced
and  brazen  wall."

VI.  A  ministry  which  will  be  di-
vinely vindicated.  "I  am  with  thee,
to  save  thee,  and  to  deliver  thee,  saith
the  Lord."

VII.  A  ministry  which  lifts  up
Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  men.  "  As
Moses  lifted  up,"  &c.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted
up,"  <fec.  "  We  preach  Christ  crucified,"
&c.— TT.  Whale.

Ver.  20.  Theme:  Impregnablb  bb-
CURITY  IN  Jehovah's  service.

"  I  will  make  thee  a  fenced  brazen
wall,"  &c.  This  is  a  repetition  of  the
promise  >iiade  bj  Jehovah  to  Jeremiah


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  XT.


at  the  outset  of  his  prophetic  career  (ch.
i  18,  19).  Jeremiah  may  confidently
rely  on  protection  from  on  high,  and
God-given  fortitude,  if  he  will  maintain
fidelity  in  liis  messages  and  witness  for
righteousness  among  a  depraved  and
hostile  people.

God's  address  of  encouragement  meets
the  faltering  prophet  with  definite  pro-
mises and  hopeful  statements,  and  affirms
the  four  facts  : —

I.  Invincible  courage  supernaturally
supplied.

1.  lis  source,  "  I  will  make  thee."
No  self-reliance,  therefore;  nor  self -de-
spair.

2.  Its  scope.  "  Unto  this  people."
It  must  be  shown,  and  shown  in  scenes
definitely  indicated.

3.  Its  stability.  "  A  fenced  brazen
wall."  Proof  against  all  assaults ;  in-
flexible, immovable.

"  Hie  murus  aheneus  esto,
Nil  conscire  sibi,  nulla,  pallescere  culpA."
— Horat.  I  Epis.  i.  60.

n.  Determined  hostility  from  the
wicked.  "They  shall  fight  against
thee."

Not  passive  unconcern ;  not  airy  in-
credulity ;  not  frank  and  friendly  re-
monstrance ;  but  defiant  antagonism,
and  angry  abuse.

1.  Resistance  of  his  messages,

2.  Resentment  against  him  personally,

3.  Rebellion  against  the  God  he  served.
Jeremiah  must,  therefore,  lay  himself

out  for  vigorous  and  valorous  warfare ;
get  rid  of  sentimental  fears,  and  quit
himself  like  a  stalwart  warrior  for  God's
cause  and  glory  !

III.  Supremacy  guaranteed  over
antagonists.  "I'hey  shall  not  prevail
against  thee."

1.  Inhere  would  be  actual  encounter,
A  struggle  man  to  man.  This  is  the
true  idea  of  a  faithful  ministry.

2.  There  would  be  need  of  self-defence.
Assailants  would  intend  to  prevail
against  the  prophet ;  to  defeat  him  in
argument;  to  destroy  his  faith  in  God ;
and  to  silence  his  messages  amid  derision.
Jeremiah  would  need  to  look  to  himself
and  defend  his  own  fidelity.

3.  There  would  be  a  triumphant  issue,
Jeremiah  should  "  prevail."     Whom  God


makes  invincible  He  also  makes  Wc^orMwa^
Not  only  successful  defence  against  at-
tack, but  supremacy  over  assailants.

IV.  Personally  guarded  by  Jehovah
Himself.

1.  God's  pe7^sonal  protection.  It  is  a
precious  promise  that  "  He  will  give  His
angels  charge,"  (fee,  also  that  "  the  eyes
of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,"  (fee,
also  that  "  as  thy  day  is  so  shall  thy
strength  be."  But  better  far  this — *'I
will  be  with  thee."

2.  6od*s  sure  protection.  "  To  save
thee" — preservation  from  his  enemies;
"to  deliver  thee" — rescue  from  the
wiles  and  assaults.

The  idea  of  rescue,  should  the  prophet
become  entangled  by  their  sophistries  or
captured  by  force,  is  more  fully  expressed
in  ver.  21  :  "  I  will  deliver  thee  out  of
the  hand  of  the  wicked  (malignant),  and
I  will  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  (from
the  grasp)  of  the  terrible."  So  that  we
may  boldly  say,  ''The  Lord  is  my  helper,  I
will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  me."

Ver.  20.  Them^e  :  God's  ambassador
FORTIFIED.  **I  will  make  thee  unto
this  people  a  fenced  brazen  wall,"  <fec.

I.  God's  qualification  of  an  overseer
of  His  Church.

The  metaphor  of  a  call  implies :

1.  Courage,

2.  Integrity  (innocence,  therefore).

3.  Authority.

II.  The  opposition  a  church  over-
seer will  meet  with.

*'  They  shall  fight  against  thee  :  "

1.  By  seditious  preaching  and  pray-
ing.

2.  By  railing  and  libels.

3.  By  (possibly)  open  force.

IIL  The  issue  and  success  of  such
opposition.

"  They  shall  not  prevail." — South.

Ver.  21.  Theme:  God's  perfect  sal-
vation. "  And  I  will  deliver  and  re-
deem thee,"

The  prophet's  loneliness  and  the  op-
position of  the  people  burdened  his
spirit.  Jehovah's  assurances  must  have
aff'orded  precious  consolations  and  con-
fidence to  him.  The  promised  presenca
and  interposing  power  of  God.

343


OBAP.  XT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


I.  Alarming  perils.     **  The  hand  of  III.  Complete  redemption.     **  To  de-

the  wicked ;  the  hand  of  the  terrible"  liver;  to  redeem."

Implying    the    moral    quality   which  Salvation    has   various    forms:    from

distinguislies  our  spiritual  foes,  and  the  perils  of  tliis  world,  from  taint  of  sin,

fierce  malignity  with   which  th^v  plot  from  spiritual  foes,  from  personal  feara

our  ruin.  and  faults,  from  terror  of  death,  (fee.

Perils  to  character ^to  peace^  to  security  Redemption  by  price  ;  deliverance  by

in  God,  to  the  soul  itself.  power,

II.  A  mighty  Saviour.     "  I  will  de-  IV.  Unfailing  certainty.     *'  I  will ;  I
liver;  I  will  redeem."  wilV*

Greater  than  our  foes.     Equal  to  all  Expresses  determination^  earnestness,

exigencies.     No  one  else  can  save  ;  it  love,  certainty.

is  His  work.     Employed  in  His  service,  **  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with

He  will  undertake  our  defence  and  de-  witf,"
liverauce.    Saved  by  Him.    Safe  in  Him.


\  NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XV.

Topic:  Prayer  for  a  People  Unavailing.    (Ver.  1).

Moses  and  Samuel  held  responsible  offices,  and  were  faithful  to  their  trusta
With  their  piety  as  men,  and  fidelity  as  servants,  God  was  well  pleased.  If  any
two  men  could  have  prevailed  with  God  on  behalf  of  a  rebellious  people,  these
could.     But  the  conduct  of  the  people  had  alienated  His  mind  from  them.     Thus —

i.  There  may  be  complete  alienation  of  God  from  sinful  men.  "  My  mind  could
not  be  towards  this  people."

ii,  There  is  a  limit  to  the  Divine  forbearance  towards  defiant  souls.  "  He  will
not  always  chide,"  though  He  chides  again  and  again ;  neither  will  He  keep  back
His  anger  for  ever.  Cast  them  out  of  My  sight.  Then  no  prayers,  even  from  the
best  of  men  and  the  most  eminent  servants  of  God,  can  arrest  the  judgment.

I.  Manifestly  the  prayers  of  good  men  do  avail  much.  Instances  prove  that
it  is  an  established  law  for  prayers,  by  the  Moses  and  Samuels  who  stand  before
the  Lord,  to  prevail.

II.  While  the  power  of  prayer  is  obvious,  there  is  no  merit  in  prayer  nor  in  him
who  offers  it.

1.  Prayer  supposes  the  absence  of  all  claim,  for  what  a  man  can  claim  he  need
not  pray  for.

2.  Prayer  can  only  make  its  appeal  to  mercy,  and  mercy,  being  purely  sovereign,
can  heed  or  refuse  the  appeal  according  to  its  pleasure.  Had  mercy  refused  every
prayer,  justice  would  have  received  no  violation.

III.  God's  right  to  refuse  to  answer  prayers  is  beyond  all  challenge.

1.  His  declaration  :  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy,"  (fee,  a^sserti
His  right  to  withhold  or  bestow  grace  according  to  His  sovereign  will.

2.  This  right  involves  the  right  to  hear  or  not  to  hear  the  prayers  of  suppliants,
be  those  suppliants  Moses  and  Samuels,  or  publicans  and  sinners.

3.  If  God  were  under  obligation  to  hear  prayer  and  bestow  mercy,  mercy  would
be  no  longer  mercy,  and  grace  would  be  no  longer  grace.  Obligation  is  justice,  and
not  mercy ;  duty,  and  not  grace.

IV.  All  our  appeals  for  mercy  and  grace  must  be  based  on  the  Atoning
Sacrifice.

1.  Every  act  of  mercy  flows  to  us  through  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  the  only
channel  of  mercy  from  God  to  man.

2.  Even  when  our  appeals  are  based  on  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  they  must  be  left
to  the  sovereignty  of  Divine  mercy  to  answer  or  not  to  answer.

3.  If  we  rightly  recognised  this  sovereignty  of  Divine  mercy,  our  prayers  would

344


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  XT.

h$  more  humbly  presented  and  answers  would  kindle  a  loftier  praise,  exclaiming,
"  Blessed  be  God,  who  hath  not  turned  away  my  prayer  nor  His  mercy  from
me!"

V.  Prayer  is  music  in  the  ears  of  God.  The  sounds  of  earnest  prayer  enter
into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth,  and  delight  Him  more  than  ten  thousand
harpers  harping  with  their  harps.  The  prayer  of  the  penitent  gives  joy  to  all  the
hosts  of  heaven,  and  the  prayers  of  saints,  our  Moses' and  Samuels,  give  pleasure  to
the  gracious  God  even  when — for  wise  and  judicial  reasons — He  cannot  grant  their
requests.  Whether  answered  or  unanswered,  *'  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  His
delight." — Arranged  from  ^^ Morning  and  Evening  Walks  with  the  Prophet  JeremiaK^^

Topic:    Men  op  Pbooress,  Men  op  Strife.     (Ver.  10).

Jeremiah  called  of  God  to  an  essential  but  unpopular  work.  He  is  judged  to  be
a  fault-finding,  quarrelsome  person,  whereas  he  is  really  a  sympathetic  friend.
They  hear  his  outspoken  denunciations  against  sin,  and  the  utterance  by  him  of
divine  threatenings ;  but  they  do  not  hear  his  prayers  for  them,  or  know  the
groanings  of  his  spirit.  He  is  misjudged.  He  is  lonely.  He  would  rather  have
been  born  to  a  quiet  life,  and  wishes  God  would  have  chosen  some  one  else  to  the
prophetic  work.

Jeremiah  is  typical  of  public  men  who  have  been  the  reformers  of  society,  the
leaders  of  thought,  and  often  the  martyrs  of  some  great  movement.  We  may  note
some  reasons  why  such  persons  appear  to  be  men  of  strife  : —

I.  Because  of  noncompliance  with  popular  sins.  Jeremiah  asserted  his  freedom
from  prevailing  evils.  Always  some  interested  in  doing  wrong,  and  maintaining
evils  among  the  people.  Those  who  will  not  conform,  especially  such  as  speak
and  labour  against  sin,  are  considered  men  of  strife — Micaiah,  Elijah,  John  Baptist,
Jesus,  and  many  others.

II.  Because  they  are  in  advance  of  the  age.  They  look  at  all  matters  from  a
more  elevated  standpoint,  and  seek  to  bring  the  peo[)le  up  to  their  level.  Paul
was  in  advance  of  the  craftsmen  of  Ephesus.  Luther  was  in  advance  of  the
church  of  Rome,  as  WiclifFe  before  him  had  been.  Copernicus  and  Galileo,  Huss
and  Wesley,  not  to  mention  others  in  all  departments,  were  pioneers  of  progress,
and  were  in  advance  of  their  fellows.

III.  Because  they  were  earnest  and  energetic  men.  Some  can  be  indifferent ;
true  souls  cannot  be.  Cannot  agree  to  leave  things  alone,  and  let  every  one  go
his  own  way.  Must  bear  testimony  for  God  and  truth.  Many  now  would  call
Noah,  Elijah,  Daniel,  Jesus,  Paul,  visionaries,  enthusiasts,  madmen,  as  indeed
they  often  speak  of  those  who  have  their  spirit.

IV.  Because  all  good  work  causes  strife.  Evil  has  to  be  conquered,  the  devil
has  to  be  cast  out  No  curse  will  peaceably  give  place  to  a  blessing.  In  the  heart,
and  in  the  world,  it  must  be  conflict.  Christ  came  to  give  peace  to  the  trustful
heart,  but  not  to  bring  peace  immediately  on  earth.  In  Bethlehem,  in  Nazareth,
in  Capernaum,  in  Jerusalem,  He  made  conflict.  Every  great  work  has  its  stage  of
martyrdom,  its  age  of  chivalry,  before  its  triumph ; — its  Egypt  and  wilderness
before  its  Canaan, — its  manger,  baptism,  wilderness  trial,  Gethsemane,  and  cross,
before  it  sits  on  the  throne  waiting  till  its  foes  be  made  its  footstool.

V.  Because  the  field  of  battle  is  the  path  of  glory.  "We  must  fight  if  we  would
reign."  The  promise  is  "  to  him  that  overconieth.*'  Salvation  is  finally  for  "  him  that
endureth  to  the  end."  The  exhortation  is  not  only  to  repent  and  believe,  but  to
"  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith.*'  The  provision  is  for  the  warrior  ;  he  who  would  be
a  saint,  must  be  a  soldier.  The  martyrs  of  one  age  are  the  heroes  of  the  next.
Prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  missionaries,  and  reformers  have  all  been  men  of  war.
We  honour  them  for  the  battles  they  fought  and  the  victories  they  won.  The
record  of  their  lives  appeals  to  us —

345


CBAf  XT.  HO  MI  LET IC  CO  MM  ENTA  R  Y :  J  ERE  MIA  H,


•*  Hark  !  His  a  marshal  sound,
To  arms,  ye  saints,  to  arms,
Your  foes  are  gathering  round,
And  peace  has  lost  its  charms.

Prepare  the  helmet,  sword,  and  shield,
The  trumpet  calls  you  to  the  field.**

— TT.  Wh(d$,
Topic:  The  Power  op  Kebuke.     (Vers.  19,  20.)

**  If  thou  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile,  tbou  shalt  be  as  My  mouth  ;  and
I  will  make  thee  unto  the  people  a  fenced  brazen  wall."

It  is  by  the  gracious  word  of  Divine  mercy  that  the  hearts  of  men  are  to  be
subdued.

The  human  mind  is  found  to  be  influenced  far  more  by  hope  and  tenderness,
than  by  terror  and  rebuke.

I.  The  Christian  ministry  includes  also  an  office  of  commination.  If  the
messengers  of  heaven,  when  among  the  outcasts  of  mankind,  who,  in  igno-
rance of  Gody  have  gone  astray  from  virtue,  speak  much  more  of  virtue  than  of
wrath  ;  when  they  stand  among  those  who,  being  well  informed  in  matters  of
religion,  use  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  to  palliate  their  vices,  the  messages  of  wrath
must  be  most  upon  their  lips.

II.  The  tendency  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  to  move  down  from  its  remedial
functions  to  become  an  office  of  delectation.

1.  Furnishing  intellectual  entertainment ;  uttering,  as  matters  of  gorgeoui
eloquence,  the  appalling  verities  of  eternal  justice.  Nature  forbids  such  an  in-
congruity, and  the  renovating  Spirit  refuses  to  yield  the  energy  of  His  power  to  the
sway  of  a  mere  minister  of  public  recreation.

2.  Affording  spiritual  entertainment ;  by  exhibiting  the  conceits  and  ingenuities
of  mystic  exposition  ;  by  painting  in  high  colours  the  honours  and  privileges  of  the
believer,  and  allowing  professors  of  all  sorts  to  appropriate  the  fulsome  description;
or  by  pealing  out  thunders  of  wrath  against  distant  adversaries,  rather  than  at  the
impure,  unjust,  rapacious,  and  malicious  who  fill  the  pews  around  him.  This  latter
direct  method  might  turn  the  whole  tide  of  his  popularity  !

III.  It  behoves  preachers  to  beware  of  the  indurating  effect  of  accustomed
phrases  and  forms  of  words.  Such  ct)nventional  phrases  conceal  from  the  mind
the  ideas  they  should  convey ;  hence  preachers  should  continually  endeavour  to
break  up  the  mental  incrustations  which  are  always  spreading  themselves  over  the
sensitive  surface  of  the  soul.  This  is  most  especially  necessary  in  reference  to
matters  wherein  the  drowsy  formalities  of  language  tend  directly  to  augment  the
stupefying  influence  that  belongs  to  all  vicious  indulgences.  A  mind,  already
rendered  callous  by  sensuality,  receives  every  week  a  new,  and  again  a  new  insensi-
bility from  the  heavy  monotonies  of  the  pulpit.

IV.  It  is  a  pressing  duty  of  the  minister  of  religion  to  maintain,  in  vigour,  the
spirit  he  needs  as  the  reprover  of  sin  and  the  guardian  of  virtue.  It  is  easy  to
teach  the  articles  of  belief,  to  illustrate  the  branches  of  Christian  ethics,  to  proclaim
the  Divine  mercy,  to  meet  and  assuage  the  fears  of  the  feeble  and  sorrows  of  the
afflicted.  But  to  keep  in  full  activity  the  power  of  rebuke,  demands  rare  qualities.
It  is  fruitless  to  search  aside  for  substitutes  for  these  qualities.  The  preacher  may
avail  himself  of  abstract  demonstration  respecting  the  unalterable  rigour  of  the
Divine  government,  to  prove  that  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  moral  system  can
never  pass  over  transgression,  but  must  needs  exact  the  appointed  penalty  from
either  the  transgressor  or  his  substitute.  The  erudite  argument,  for  any  substantial
effect  it  will  produce,  might  as  well  have  related  to  the  planets.

Or  he  may  adopt  the  devices  of  eloquence  ;  turning  descriptive,  pathetic,  indignant.
Yet  while  the  walls  ring  with  these  sounds  of  alarm,  the  covetous  man  continues
counting  his  gold,  the  eye   of  the   rain  and  prurient  is  darting  from  object  to
object  of  illicit  attraction,  <fcc.
346


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  tV.


But  to  speak  efficacioutly  of  the  holiness  and  justice  of  the  Almighty  God,  and
of  its  future  consequences ;  to  speak  in  modesty,  tenderness,  and  power,  of  the
approaching  doom  of  the  impenitent,  must  he  left  to  those  whose  spirits  have  had  much
communion  with  the  dread  Majesty  on  high.  On  these  topics  ordinary  preachers
are  most  at  fault ;  they  are  not  themselves  in  spiritual  fitness  and  equipment  for
their  duty  of  rebuke  and  testimony  of  judgment.

V.  There  are  three  indispensable  qualifications  for  the  vigorous  exercise  of
the  Christian  minister  for  this  power  of  rebuke.

1.  Such  a  conviction  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  as  shall  render  him  proof  against
assaults  from  within  and  from  without.  The  quarrel  of  the  world  with  Christianity
comes  to  its  issue  upon  the  doctrine  of  future  retribution.  Meditating  upon  the
scenes  of  joy  which  the  Gospel  spreads  before  us,  we  are  not  perplexed  by  discordant
doubts ;  for  joy  and  hope  are  emotions  indigenous  to  the  human  mind.  But  the
same  law  which  makes  joy  and  hope  spontaneous,  unsuspectingly  impels  us  to
doubt  when  we  set  our  foot  upon  the  region  which  sin  has  replenished  with  terrors.
Fatal  to  his  influence  as  a  refuter  of  sin  must  be  a  lurking  scepticism  in  the
preacher's  breast  The  infection  of  his  own  doubts  will  pass  into  the  heart  of  the
hearer,  and  will  serve  to  harden  each  transgressor  in  his  impenitence.

2.  A  resoltUe  loyalty  to  the  divine  administration  will  be  equally  needful.  It  rests
itself  upon  the  assurance,  '*  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  It
takes  its  force  from  genuine  piety  and  affection  to  truth.  It  is  the  same  spirit  that
led  the  royal  poet  to  utter  his  persuasion,  "  I  know,  O  Lord,  that  all  Thy  judgments
are  right;"  and  moved  Paul  with  a  similar  force  of  healthy  piety  to  exclaim,  "  Yea,
let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar."  Such  loyalty  will  break  through  the  mazes
of  much  sophistry,  will  support  the  servant  of  God  when  assailed  by  more  fallacies
than  he  can  at  the  moment  refute,  and  enable  him  to  cleave  under  all  obloquies
and  embarrassments  to  what  he  inwardly  and  firmly  knows  must  in  the  end  prove
itself  the  better  cause,

3.  Not  less  necessary  to  the  minister  of  truth  is  an  unaffected  and  sensitive  comr
passion  towards  his  fellow-m^n^  and  a  jompassion  of  that  efficient  kind  which
nothing  has  ever  produced  but  the  Gospel.  The  servant  of  Heaven  can  effect  his
commission  only  as  he  gains  access  to  the  human  heart ;  and  there  is  no  other  path
of  access  but  that  of  love.  Men,  rather  than  angels,  are  sent  to  preach  repentance,
that  the  promulgation  of  mercy  may  always  be  heard  in  tones  of  tenderness  and
humiliation.  The  end  of  all  reproof  is  mercy.  If  there  were  no  redemption  at
hand,  it  were  idle  or  cruel  to  talk  of  judgment. — Isaac  Taylor,  Saturday  Evening^  nv.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XV.:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,


Ver.  1.  Intercessory  prayer.  **  I
ought  to  study  Christ  as  an  intercessor.
He  prayed  most  for  Peter,  who  was  most
to  be  tempted." — M*Cheyne.


''Sandalphon  stands  listening  breathless
To  sounds  that  ascend  from  below  }—

**  From  the  spirits  on  earth  that  adore,
From  the  souls  that  entreat  and  implore

In  the  fervour  and  passion  of  prayer ;
From  the  hearts  that  are  broken  with  losses,
And  weary  with  dragging  the  crosses

Too  heavy  for  mortals  to  bear,

**  And  he  gathers  the  prayers  as  he  stands,
And  they  change  into  flowers  in  his  hands.

Into  garlands  of  purple  and  red;
And  beneath  the  great  arch  of  the  portal,


Through  the  streets  of  tho  city  immortal.
Is  wafted  the  fragrance  they  shed."
— "  Legend  of  the  Angel  of  Prayer.**
— Longfellow,

Limits  to  prayer.

'*  If  by  prayer
Incessant  I  could  hope  to  change  the  will
Of  Him  who  all  things  can,  I  would  not  cease
To  weary  Him  with  my  assiduous  cries.
But  prayer  atiainst  His  absolute  decree
No  more  avails  than  breath  against  the  wind,
Blows  stifling  back  on  him  t  hat  breathes  it  forth :
Therefore  to  His  great  biddint^  I  submit."
— Milton's  **  Paradise  Lost.*'

"  What  is  the  limit  of  our  prayer  I
This  :  '  Not  my  will  but  Thine  be  done  I*
Is  that  a  limit  1  Why,  that  is  glorious
liberty  !     Not  my  will  but  Thine, — not

347


«ltAP.  XV.


BOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  JEMMlAB.


a  little  will  but  a  great  will, — not  my
thought  but  Thine, — not  my  love  but
Thine '  Is  it  a  limit  1  It  is  the  lark
rising  irom  its  field-nest  with  the  bound-
less liberty  of  the  firmament  Truly  we
do  not  limit  ourselves  when  we  exchange
the  creature  for  the  Creator," — Joseph
Parker,  D.D,

Ver.  2.  Scornful  incredulity.
"  Rest  thee  well  assured,  0  scorner !  that
thy  laughs  cannot  alter  truth,  thy  jests
cannot  avert  thine  inevitable  doom.
Though  in  thy  hardihood  thou  shouldst
make  a  league  with  death,  and  sign  a
covenant  with  hell,  yet  swift  justice  shall
overtake  thee,  and  strong  vengeance
strike  thee  low.  In  vain  dost  thou  jeer
and  mock,  for  eternal  verities  are  mightier
than  thy  sophistries;  nor  can  thy  smart
sayings  alter  the  divine  truth  of  a  single
word  of  this  volume  of  Revelation.  Oh  !
why  dost  thou  quarrel  with  thy  best  friend,
and  ill-treat  thy  only  refuge  1" — Spurgeon.

Ver.  4.  Parentage.  "  The  account
that  begins  to  be  incurred  when  parents
rejoice  because  a  child  is  born  to  them,
is  the  most  solemn  account  that  ever  is
incurred  aside  of  one's  own  individual
duty  towards  God.  I  do  not  mean  that
all  the  misconduct  and  evil-endings  of  the
child  are  to  come  back  upon  the  parent,
and  that  there  is  to  be  in  the  child  no
free  will,  so  that  no  individual  account
can  belong  to  him.  For  if  a  parent  has
cleansed  his  skirts  of  his  children,  the
guilt  of  their  sins  will  rest  on  their
heads,  and  not  on  his.  But  unless  the
parent  can  show  that  the  child's  miscon-
duct and  wreck  of  eternity  are  not  attri-
butable to  any  fault  of  his,  the  weight  of
the  child's  condemnation  will  be  divided."
— H.  W.  Beecher,

"  The  last  thing  forgotten  in  all  the
recklessness  of  dissolute  profligacy  is  the
prayer  or  hymn  taught  by  a  mother's
lips  or  uttered  at  a  father's  knee ;  and
where  there  seems  to  have  been  any
pains  bestowed  even  by  one  parent  to
train  up  a  child  aright,  there  is  generally
more  than  ordinary  ground  for  hope."
— The  Experience  of  a  Prison  Chaplain.

Ver.  5.  Lost  to  pity.

**  19 one  piiiei  him  that'i  in  the  snare,
And,  warned  before,  would  not  beware.  **

—  1 1  crick.

348


Ver.  8.  Life's  noontide.

**  0  life,  how  pleasant  is  thy  mornings,
Young  Fancy's  ravis  tlie  liills  adorning  I
Cold,  pausing  Caution's  lessons  scorning

We  frisk  away,
Like  schoolboys  at  the  expected  warning,

To  joy  and  play.'*  — Burnt,

*•  For  ah  1  my  heart,  how  very  soon

The  glittering  dreams  of  youth  are  pant;
And  long  before  it  reach  its  noon,

The  sun  of  life  is  overcast."     — Moorem

•*  What  is  youth  ?    A  dancing  billow.
Winds  behind,  and  rocks  before  1 "

— Wordsworth*

*'  Live,  that  thy  young  and  glowing  breast
Can  think  of  death  without  a  sigh^
And  be  assured  that  life  is  best
Which  finds  us  least  afraid  to  die."

— Eliza  Cook.

Ver.  9.  Early  death.  "  What  is  this
voice  to  us  ? "  says  Bonar  of  the  early
death  of  M*Cheyne.  "  Only  this  much
we  can  clearly  see,  that  nothing  was
more  fitted  to  leave  his  character  and
example  impressed  on  our  remembrance
for  ever  than  his  early  death.  There
might  be  envy  while  he  lived ;  there  is
none  now.  There  might  have  been  some
of  the  youthful  attractiveness  of  his
graces  lost  had  he  lived  many  years ;
this  cannot  be  impaired  now.  It  seems
as  if  the  Lord  had  struck  the  flower  from
the  stem  ere  any  of  the  colours  had  lost
their  bright  hues  or  any  leaf  its  fra-
grance."

It  is  remarkable  yet  mysterious  how
many  of  God's  choicest  servants  have
been  removed  so  early.  Look  over  this
list:— H.  Kirke  White  (at  21),  Andrew
Gray  (21),  John  Janeway  (23),  Patrick
Hamilton  (24),  R  M.  M^Cheyne  (29),
Captain  Hedley  Vicars  (29),  David  Brai-
nerd  (30),  H.  W.  Fox  (30),  Felix  Neflf
(31),  J.  H.  Forsyth  (32),  H.  Martyn
(32),  Toplady  (35),  W.  Archer  Butler
(35).

Ver.  10.  A  troubled  ministry.
"  Exposed  to  criticisms  and  interfer-
ences of  the  vulgarest  and  coarsest  kind.
One  man  will  ask  how  it  is  that  so
few  additions  are  made  to  the  Church  %
Another  will  inquire  how  it  is  that  the
collections  have  fallen  off?  A  third  will
profess  to  lament  that  the  seats  were
better  let  in  former  years.  A  fourth
will  intimate  that  we  must  have  preach-


nVMlLETlO  COMMENTAk  Y :  JER  EM  I A  it.


CfiAP.  XV.


ing  which  is  abreast  of  the  times.     The

minister  often  listens  to  these  things
with  a  justly  angry  spirit,  oftetier  still
with  a  heavy  or  aching  heart ;  but  what
can  he  do  ?  Shall  he  answer  a  fool
according  to  his  folly  1  This  is  exactly
what  the  fool  would  like  above  every-
thing. Shall  he  restrain  himself  and
swallow  his  grief?  He  does  so  ;  but  such
discipline  often  brings  with  it  discourage-
ment and  sadness, — sometimes  almost
despair. " — Parker,

Ver.    12.     Be     not    discouraged.
"  Some  of  the  greatest  works  that  were
ever  performed  by  Christian  people  were
not   immediate   in   their   results.     You
know  the  story  of  the  removal  of  old
St.  Paul's  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren.     A
very  massive  piece  of  masonry  had  to  be
broken  down,  and  the  task,  by  pick  and
shovel,  would  have  been  a  very  tedious
one,  so  the  great  architect  prepared  a
battering-ram    for   its    removal,    and   a
large  number  of  workmen  were  directed
to  strike  with  force  asjainst  the  wall  with
the  ram.     After  several  hours  of  labour,
the  wall,  to  all  appearances,  stood  fast
and  firm.     Tiieir  many  strokes  had  been
apparently  lost,  but  the  architect  knew
that  they  were  gradually  communicating
motion  to  the  wall,  creating  an  agitation
throughout  the  whole  of  it,  and  that,  by
and  by,  when  they  had  continued  long
enough,    the   entire    mass  would   come
down    beneath   a   single   stroke.      The
workmen,  no  doubt,  attributed  the  re-
sult to   the    one    crowning   concussion,
but  their  master  knew  that  their  pre-
vious  strokes   had  only  culminated  in
that  one  tremendous  blow,  and  that  all
the  non-resultant  work  had  been  neces-
sary to   prepare  for  the   stroke   which
achieved  the  purpose." — C  H.  Spurgeon,
Evil  shall  not  prevail, — '*In  the
dark   ages  the    enemy  thought  he  had
destroyed  the  Church,  but  life  came  into
the  monk  in  his  cell,  and  Luther  shook
the  world.     The  Church  in  England  fell
into  a  deadly  slumber  in  the  days  of
Whitfield  and  Wesley ;  but  she  was  not
dead,  and  therefore  a  time  of  awakening
came.     The  flame  burned  low,  but  the
heavenly  fire  still  lingered  among  the
ashes,  and  only  needed  the  Holy  Spirit
to  blow  upon  it,  and  cause  a  hallowed


conflagration.  Six  young  men  in  Oxford
were  found  guilty  of  meeting  to  pray :
their  offence  was  contagious,  and  soon
there  sprang  up  hundreds  glorying  in
the  same  blessed  crime.  Earnest  ser-
vants of  the  living  God  were  forth-
coming, and  no  man  knew  whence  they
came  ;  like  the  buds  and  blossoms  which
come  forth  at  the  bidding  of  spring,  a
people  made  willing  in  the  day  of  God's
power  came  forward  at  once.  Seeing
that  there  is  life  in  the  Church  of  God,
you  can  never  calcuhite  what  will  hap-
pen within  its  bounds  to-morrow ;  for
life  is  an  unaccountable  thing,  and
scorns  the  laws  which  bind  the  formal
and  inanimate.  The  statues  in  St*
Paul's  Cathedral  stand  fixed  on  their
pedestals,  and  the  renowned  dead  in
Westminster  Abbey  never  raise  a  riot ;
but  who  can  tell  what  the  living  may
next  conceive  or  attempt  1  They  burnt
the  Gospel  out  in  Spain,  did  they  not  1
And  in  the  Low  Countries  they  erased
the  memory  thereof.  How  is  it  now  ?
Has  not  Spain  achieved  her  liberty  at
a  blow  %  Is  not  also  Belgium  free  to
the  preacher  of  the  Word  1,  Not  even
Italy  or  Rome  itself  is  safe  against  the
obnoxious  heretic.  Everywhere  the
Gospel  penetrates.  Even  the  earth
helps  the  woman,  and  swallows  up  the
flood  which  the  dragon  casts  out  of  his
mouth  to  drown  the  man-child  :  political
rulers  restrain  the  violence  of  those  who
otherwise  would  slay  the  saints  in  one
general  massacre."—  G.  H.  Spurgeon.

Ver.  15.  On  being  remkmbered.
See  Bonar's  hymn,  *'  I' lie  Everlasting
Memorial.*'

"  I  need  not  be  missed  if  my  life  has  been

bearing
(As  its  summer  and  autumn  moved  silently

on)
Its  flower  and    its   fruit :    I  shall  still    be

remembered —
Yes,  but  remembered  by  what  I  have  done."

Ver.  16.  Enjoying  God's  Word.
"  What  do  I  not  owe  to  the  Lord,"
writes  Henry  Martyn,  '*  for  permitting
me  to  take  part  in  the  translation  of
His  Word  ?  Never  did  I  see  such  won-
ders, and  wisdom,  and  love  in  the
blessed  Book,  as  since  I  have  been
obliged  to  study  every  expression :  and

349


OftAF.  1 VI.  BOMtLBTtC  COMMElfTA  R  T :  JBMMIAB.


it  is  a  delightful  reflection,  that  death  your  own  soul  ?  The  Dutch  farmers  at
cannot  deprive  us  of  the  pleasure  of  the  Cape,  at  no  very  distant  period,  con-
studying  its  mysteries."  sidered  the  Hottentots  around  them  to

Shortly  before  his  death,  Dr.  Buchan-  be  little  better  than  beasts,  quite  inca-

nan,  giving  to  a  friend  some  details  of  pable  of  anything  beyond  mere  eating,

his  laborious  revisions  of  his  Syriac  Tes-  drinking,  stealing,  and  lying.     After  our

tament,  suddenly  stopjjed  and  burst  into  missionaries   had   laboured    among  the

tears.     On  recovering  himself,  he  said,  natives    for  a  time,    one  of  them    was

"  I  am  not  ill,  but  I  was  completely  found  reading  the  Bible  by  the  roadside,

overcome  with  the  recollection  of  the  The  Dutchman  inquired  of  him,  *What

delight    which    I  have  enjoyed  in  this  book  are  you  reading?*     *  The  Bible.*

exercise.     At   first    I    was  disposed  to  *  The    Bible !       Why,    that    book    was

shrink  from  the  task  as  irksome,  and  ap-  never  intended  for  you*      *  Indeed    it

prehended  that  I  should  find  even  the  was,*  said  the  black  man,  *  for  I  see  my

Scriptures  pall  by  the  frequency  of  this  name    here.'      *  Your    name!    where?*

critical  examination.     But,  so  far  from  cried   the    farmer.      *  Show  it  to    me.*

it,  every  fresh  perusal  seemed  to  throw  *  There,*  said  the  Hottentot,  putting  his

fresh  light  on  the  Word  of  God,  and  to  finger  on  the  word  'sinners.*     'That's

convey  additional  joy  and  consolation  to  my  name ;  I  am  a  sinner,   and  Jesus

my  mind."  Christ  came  to  save  me.*     It  were  well.

Appropriating  God's  Woed.  "  Have  indeed,  if  men  would  but  read  the  Bible,

you  an  ear  to  hear  Gospel  truth  as  the  saying,  *  In  this  volume  the  great  God

voice  of  the  Infinite  God  addressed  to  condescends  to  speak  to  me." — Spurge<m,


CHAPTER  XVL


Cbitioal  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  Chapters  xvi.  and  xviL
form  one  prophecy.  The  taunt  in  chap.  ivii.  15  shows  that  this  message  from  God  was  deli-
vered before  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  which  occurred  at  the  close  of  Jehoiakim's  career.
Jehoiakim  was  slain  in  the  eleventh  year  of  his  reign,  «.e.,  in  common  chronology,  B.C.  597,  or
in  Assyrian  chronology,  b.o.  578.  There  are  allusions  in  the  prophecy  which  lead  to  the  con-
clusion that  it  was  delivered  during  this  reign  ;  and  we  may  conjecture  it  to  be  a  few  yean
before  its  end.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures;  3.  National  Affairs;  and  4.  Contemporary  History;  cf.  Notes
in  chapters  vii.,  x.,  and  xi.  5.  Geographical  References — none.  6.  Personal  Allusions —
none.     7.  Natural  History — none.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  6.  "  Nor  cut  themsdvest  nor  make  themselves  bald  for  them.**
Among  the  Jews,  as  among  almost  all  ancient  nations,  it  was  customary  to  lacerate  tliemseives,
and  to  make  bald  a  patch  on  the  front  of  their  heads,  as  signs  of  excessive  grief.  This  had
been  prohibited  the  Jews  by  Divine  law  (Lev.  xix.  28 ;  xxi.  5  ;  Deut.  xiv.  i.),  yet  seemed  still
to  be  a  common  practice  (chaps,  vii.  29  ;  xli,  5 ;  Isa.  xxii.  12  ;  Ezek.  vii.  18  ;  Amos  viii.  10;
Micah  i.  16).  Ver.  7.  " Tear  themselves^'  (see  Margin) — *'' Break  bread:*'  the  bereaved  having
fasted  for  a  while,  their  friends  came  and  urged  food  upon  them  (2  Sam.  i.  12 ;  iii.  35  ;  xii.  16,
17);  food  was  also  distributed  to  the  monrners  at  the  funeral  (Ezek.  xxiv.  17;  Hos.  ix.  4).
Ver.  16.  ^*  Many  fishers  :  viany  hunters."  Fishers  were  wont  to  use  drag-nets,  wiiicli  swept  the
waters  and  captured  all  the  fish  ;  so  hunters  would  surround  a  large  space  witli  beaters  and  nets,
and  drive  every  creature  forward  into  some  enclosed  spot  for  capture  or  destruction.  **  Literally
understood,  the  'fishers'  are  the  main  armies,  who,  in  the  towns  and  fortresses,  capture  the
people  in  crowds  as  in  a  net;  while  the  'hunters'  are  the  light-armed  troops,  who  pursue  the
fugitives  over  the  whole  country,  and  drive  them  out  of  their  hiding-places  with  an  eager  plea-
sure as  hunters  track  out  their  game  (comp.  Amos  iv.  2;  Hab.  i.  16)." — Speaker's  Com.

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  4.  ^' Gi-ievout  deatJis:"  lit.,  deaths  of  diseases,  i.e.,  deaths  by
those  manifold  diseases  which  accompany  war.  The  word  D^^^7^J^  here  rendered  grievous^
is  the  same  as  occurs  in  chap.  xiv.  18  [see  Lit.  Crit.  in  loc.\  tortures  of  famine.

Ver.  5.   "House  of  mourning:*'  HtlO  JV^       In  Amos  vi.  7  (the  only  other  occurrence

of  this  word  in  Scripture),  n?1D  is  rendered  banquet.     Doubtless  the  root  HT")  means  a  loud

try;  in  this  verse  it  is  the  shriek  of  grief ;  in  Amos,  the  shout  of  jubilation.     Enter  not  into
the  house  of  shouting.     The  LXX.  give  the  rendering,   "Enter  not  into  their  bacchanalian
assembly  "  {diacov) ;  Vulgate  and  Targum  h&ve  feast;  Jerome,  domus  eonvivii.
350


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohaf.  xn.

Ver.  7.  ** Neither  thaU  tear  for  them:**  V)B  is  used  interchangeably  by  Jeremiah  for
lt^")3  (Lam.  iv.  4) ;  here  eliptically  for  DH  /  DID,  to  break  bread,  frangere,

Ver.  12.  "Imagination:"  stubbornness  (comp.  iii.  17;  ix.  11-16).

Ver.  13.  "  There  fihall  ye  serve  other  godsy  where  1  will  not"  «fcc.  The  form  of  the  sentence  ia
ironical :  there  ye  may  serve  other  gods  night  and  day,  tinee  I  will  show  you  no  favour.

Ver.  14.  **  Therefore,  behold:'*  p7  should  be  rendered  nevertheless,  not  *♦  therefore."
Blayney  gires,  After  this.

Ver.  18.  "And  first:"  ^2Wlk^.  Henderson  says,  is  nsed  adyerbially,  and  girea  it  as  prs'

viously,  i.e.,  before  Ood  restores  them,  as  stated  in  rer.  14.  Venema  agrees  with  this  :  And  I  will
first  recompense  doubly  their  iniquity  ;  i  e.,  before  I  restore  them.  Calvin,  rendering  the  word
formerly— from  the  beginning,  explains  thus :  God  would  collect  together  all  the  iniquities  which
had  been  long  buried,  so  as  to  include  fathers  and  children  in  the  punishment  thereof.  Jerome,
Hitzig,  Ewald,  Keil,  and  Umbriet  accord  with  Henderson  and  Venema.

"Carcases  of  their  detestable  things:"  hXX.ssSvTifftfAalois,  "the  dead  bodies  of  their  abomi-
nations;" Vulgate,  "the  carrions  of  their  idols;"  Hyriac,  **the  sacrifices  of  their  idols;'*
Blayney,  "thevileness  of  their  odious  practices;"  Keil,  "the  carcases  of  their  detestables" —
whicl)  may  refer  either  to  "their  lifeless  and  hateful  idols"  (Dr.  Payne  Smith),  or  **Tictims
offered  to  idols  "  (Rosenm. ).

HOMILETIC  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OP  CHAPTER  XVI.

Sections  1-9.  Impending  national  desolations  warn  from  contracting  social  relationships
f,    10-13.  Apostasy  punished  with  exile.
^    14-21.  Benignant  promises  of  future  restoration  and  conversion.

Vers.  1-9.  Impending  Desolations  warn  fbom  Contkactino  Social

Bblationships.

Near  calamities  1  With  death  and  woe  approaching,  it  was  no  time  for  social
alliances  and  family  life.  Happy  they  who  were  not  parents,  for  they  would  be
spared  anguish  over  offspring.  Dark  the  day  for  those  who  had  loved  ones,  for
destruction  would  seize  those  whom  they  cherished.  They  who  were  usually  con-
doled with  because  of  family  loneliness  would  now  be  congratulated  that  they  had
none  to  love,  none  therefore  over  whom  to  grieve.

i.  Home  life  requires,  in  order  to  its  enjoyment,  inward  serenity  and  external
ucuriiy,

it  Family  relationships  multiply  <mr  wrrows  in  times  of  adversity  and  experi-
ences of  calamity.

iii.  Without  a  prospect  of  affording  happiness^  marriage  and  the  creation  of  a
home  are  inexcusable.     (See  Addenda:  Mabriaob.)

Thus  the  topics  of  the  section  suggest : —

L  Domestic  alliances  discouraged. — Ver.  2.  With  Jeremiah  the  case  was
special.  The  impending  disasters  emphatically  forbade  him  to  entail  on  himself
domestic  responsibilities  and  claims.  If  a  man  "  provide  not  for  his  own,  and
specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an
infidel."  And  his  very  calling  in  such  adverse  and  calamitous  times  would  render
it  impossible  for  him  to  fulfil  a  husband's  or  a  parentis  part,

1.  We  should  have  regard  to  the  future  in  forming  home  relationships,  and
estimate  contingencies.

2.  We  should  endeavour,  by  caution  and  frugality y  to  screen  our  loved  ones  from
impending  distress.

3.  We  should  realise  how  seriously  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  entire  houst'
hold  depends  upon  our  condttd,

XL.  Family  desolations  depicted. — ^Vers.  3,  4.  A  piteous  prospect!  Whole
families  destroyed  (ver.  3).  Agonising  deaths  shall  overtake  them  (ver.  4).  Nont
■ball  perform  the  offices  of  lamentation  or  sepulture  (ver.  5).

The  general  lessons  are  these  ;-»-

351


CHAP.  XVL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


'     1.  How  utterly  desolating  may  be  the  calamities  which  shall  despoil  peaceful  and
pleasant  homes !

2.  How  all  the  social  respect  and  personal  affection  which  prosperous  times  ensured
us  may  fail  us  in  evil  days !

3.  How  ruthless  are  the  destructions  of  the  enemy !  Nothing  spared :  not  beauti-
ful childhood,  nor  reverend  age  !

IIL  Unmerited  pity  prohibited. — Vers.  5-8.

1.  Appalling  ruin  naturally  arouses  us  to  "lament  and  bemoan."

2.  Miseries  entailed  hy  sin  should  he  discriminated  from  unprovoked  calamities.

3.  Amid  the  destruction  of  God^s  enemies,  His  people  must  remember  that  He
doeth  all  things  well,  and  not  allow  a  sentimental  pity  to  overrule  their  recognition
of  righteous  judgment.

4.  God's  servants  should  shun  any  festive  companionships  with  those  whose
iniquities  invoke  His  anger  (ver.  8).

IV.  Divine  justice  explained. — Vers.  6  and  9.  The  "  grievous  deaths  "  (ver.  4)
and  the  social  desolations  will  not  be  accidental.

1.  The  impending  woes  will  be  God^s  righteous  visitation  (ver.  9).

2.  Forewarned  by  the  prophet^  the  victims  of  nearing  ruin  paid  no  heed  (ver.  10).

3.  The  withdrawal  of  God's  mercy  will  expose  them  to  the  destroyer  (ver.  5).
"  I  have  taken  away  My  peace  from  this  people,  saith  the  Lord."  His  gracious
security  had  ensured  their  serenity  even  amid  all  their  sins  thus  far ;  but  the  hour
of  abandonment  comes,  and  then  "  destruction  and  misery  are  in  their  ways,  and
the  way  of  peace  "  will  be  lost  for  ever.


Vers.  10-13.  Apostasy  Punished  with  Exiul

L  Rebels  affecting  ignorance  of  their  wrong.— Ver.  10.
II.  Iniquity  brought  home  to  the  transgressors. — Vers.  11,  12.
III.  Banishment  the  penalty  of  apostates. — Ver.  13.

Vers.  14-21.  Benignant  Promises  op  Future  Restoration  and  Conversiow.

The  verses  contain  the  following  suggestions : —

L  God's  former  miraculous  acts  of  grace  recounted. — Ver.  14.  That  is  the
background  with  which  the  following  promise  is  brought  into  comparison.

II.  God's  former  miraculous  acts  of  grace  surpassed. — Vers.  14,  15.  Rescued
from  a  more  powerful  foe,  and  more  hopeless  dispersions.

III.  Effective  ministries  of  restoration  depicted. — Ver.  16.  (See  preliminary
note  under  Manners  and  Customs  on  this  verse.)

IV.  Complete  recovery  of  the  scattered  ones  assured. — Ver.  16.  None  over-
looked.    Found  in  unlikely  places.      Brought  from  hiding-places  safely  home.

V.  Omniscience  fails  not  in  minutest  supervision. — Ver.  17.  Has  seen  ih^ir
**  miquities  "  in  their  own  land.  Will  see  their  "  ways  "  when  scattered  over  all  lands.
[Here,  however,  the  word  "  ways  "  refers  not  to  the  ways  of  flight,  but  their  course
of  action.]

VI.  Heavy  chastisements  to  precede  restoration. — Ver.  18.  Grievous  have
been  their  apostate  deeds  ;  dishonouring  God,  and  defying  His  holy  land.

VII.  Humanity  returning  to  the  true  and  living  God. — Ver.  19.  The  prophet,
hy  experience^  knew  God.  The  nations  would  in  the  end  discover  their  need  of  Him,
and  seek  the  Lord.

VIII.  Refuges  of  lies  gladly  renounced. — Vers.  19,  20.  In  ignorance  many
follow  ''vanities;"  often  fall  into  the  habits  of  their  "fathers."  Idolatry  will
disjyrove  itself  (ver.  20).

IX.  Jehovah  realised  as  Israel's  blessed  hope. — Ver.  Zl,
353


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  zn.


1.  A  grand  crisis  of  Divine  manifestation.  "I  will  this  once  cause  them  to  know
My  hand  and  My  migJu."

2.  A  manifestation  in  which  they  shall  recognise  their  God.  "  They  shall  know
that  My  name  is  Jehovah."  (Comp.  Isa.  xxv.  9.)  "  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that
day,  Lo,  this  is  the  Lordy^  <fec.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XVI.


Ver.  2.  Theme  :  Jeremiah  called  by

ACTIONS  TO  ATTEST  flIS  PREDICTIONS.

1.  He  had  complained  that  God's  word
through  him  seemed  to  fail,  because  ful-
filment was  deferred  (chap.  xv.  18).

2.  He  is  now  commanded  to  show
his  own  faith  in  his  messages  by  abstain-
ing from  social  alliances.

3.  He  u  ould  by  such  conduct  confirm
his  words  and  awaken  serious  expectancy
among  his  people.

Actions  preach  where  words  are  im-
potent. *'  For  this  I  say,  brethren,  the
time  is  short ;  it  remaineth  that  they
that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had
none  .  .  .  for  the  fashion  of  this  world
passeth  away."

Comments —

Jeremiah's  prohibition  to  marry  has
this  application:  "Let  it  not  be  that
thy  children  charge  thee  as  thou  hast
charged  thy  mother,  chap.  xv.  10." —
Naegelsbach.

And  these  meanings:

"  By  remaining  in  a  single  state,  Jere-
miah was  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  then
future  condition  of  his  countrymen  (comp.
Ezek.  xxiv.  15-27)." — Henderson.

"  It  was  to  show  that  the  people  were
wholly  given  up  to  destruction ;  and
the  nearing  desolation  and  solitude  of  the
whole  land.  Celibacy  is  not  here  com-
mended."— Calvin,

Vers.   2-4.  Theme:  Limitations  op

MABRIAOE.

Generally  speaking,  "  it  is  not  good
for  man  to  be  alone."  God  has  made
woman  to  be  his  companion  and  help-
meet Generally  speaking  also,  "  chil-
dren are  an  heritage  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.
cxxvii.  3—6.)  But  there  are  some  ex-
ceptions to  the  rule,  and  great  discretion
is  needed  even  within  the  limits  of  the
divine  precept,  else  man  may  not  have
a  helpmeet,  nor  will  children  be  to  him
a   comfort.     Marriage   may   become    a


calamity  to  husband,  wife,  and  children
under  some  circumstances.  It  is  not
always  necessary  to  show  that  a  mar-
riage, or  any  other  act,  is  unlawful;  for,
though  lawful,  it  may  yet  be  inexpedi-
ent owing  to  the  conditions  of  life,  such
as  sickness,  poverty,  or  public  calamity.
Let  the  peculiar  circumstances  pass  away,
and  then  that  which  is  lawful  may  not
be  inexpedient.

I.  Marriage  may  be  inexpedient
owing  to  a  call  to  some  peculiar  work.
It  Would  appear  that  others  were  not
forbidden  to  marry,  but  only  the  pro-
phet. He  was  commissioned  to  a  hazar-
dous undertaking,  and  the  cares  of  a
family  would  have  brought  considera-
tions which  might  not  have  been  help-
ful to  him  in  the  work.

We  can  well  imagine  that  Micaiah,
Jeremiah,  Daniel,  John  Baptist,  Paul,
and  such  like  men,  might  find  it  best
to  be  free  from  the  claims  of  a  wife  and
family.  Of  course  they  had  to  sacrifice
the  comforts  of  home.

It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  how
our  Lord  could  have  carried  out  His
work  for  us  had  He  been  married,  and
that  not  because  there  was  any  reason
in  Him  why  it  would  have  been  unlaw-
ful, but  because  He  could  not  be  entan-
gled by  any  secondary  considerations.

Paul  gives  advice  most  difficult  to
follow  when  he  asks  that  those  who
have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none.
This  needs  much  grace  and  great  wis-
dom to  do  aright

Many  workers  for  Christ,  as  mission-
aries, and  those  who  have  undertaken
difficult  tasks,  have  denied  themselves
the  comforts  of  companionship,  and  the
luxuries  of  home,  "  for  His  name's  sake."
This  is  not  monastic  celibacy,  but  di-
vine singleness  of  eye  and  heart  to  one
all-absorbing  pursuit.

II.  Marriage  may  be  inexpedient
owing  to  some  peculiar  phase  in  a
nation's  history.     Jerusalem  was  under

3^3


CHAP.  XVI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


divine  thre.atening,  and  great  calamities
were  about  to  come  upon  her;  it  was
kindness  to  Jeremiah  to  advise  and  even
to  command  that  he  should  not  involve
others  more  than  might  be.  So  in  times
of  epidemic,  famine,  siege  of  cities,  or
any  great  public  misfortune,  it  may  be
a  duty  to  limit  ourselves  in  any  in-
dulgence or  luxury,  however  lawful  in
itself,  or  justifiable  under  other  circum-
stances.

We  recognise  the  mercy  of  God  in
thus  preventing  much  misery  to  any
offspring  which  might  have  resulted
from  such  a  marriage.  They  would,
according  to  the  text,  have  been  born
to  an  inheritance  of  misery  and  ruin.
God's  servants  desire  for  their  children
a  happy  and  useful  life.  There  will  be
enough  of  sorrow  taking  life  even  at
its  best,  but  oh  the  grief  of  being  born  to
almost  necessary  and  unavoidable  ruin  !

III.  Marriage  may  be  inexpedient
owing  to  some  peculiar  spiritual  con-
ditions. It  was  from  spiritual  causes
that  the  troubles  came  upon  Jerusalem.

It  was  for  spiritual,  as  well  as  natural,
reasons  that  God  gave  the  command  to
Jeremiah.

Much  of  the  sorrow  of  life  arises  from
disregard  to  spiritual  conditions  as  quali-
fications for  marriasfe.  There  is  often
the  marriage  of  the  body  when  there  is
no  real  union  of  the  soul.

Such  marriages  are  not  only  inex-
pedient, but  unscripturaL

The  consequences  to  children,  to
society,  and  to  the  Church  of  Christ
are  very  serious  indeed.

The  Scripture  gives  great  liberty,  but
it  also  prescribes  some  rule.  We  are
at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom  we
will  "  only  in  the  Lord."

If  we  rightly  understand  the  precept,
it  indicates  God's  desire  for  our  comforts,
and  His  consequent  direction  as  to  the
only  way  it  can  be  realised.

Marry  only  to  those  who  love  God.

Marry  only  when  you  can  confer  real
happiness  on  the  object  of  your  affection.

Marry  only  to  those  who  will  not  im-
pede your  spiritual  progress^  or  hinder
your  efforts  to  serve  the  Lord  and  His
Church.— W.  Whale.

See  A  ddenda  :  Marrtaok.
354


Comments —

Ver.  4.  "  They  shall  die  of  grievom
deaths;  they  shall  not  be  lamented,  neither
shall  they  be  buried"  <kc.

**  Similarly  in  the  plagues  of  Athens
and  London,  the  greatness  of  the  general
misery  crushed  out  the  gentler  sympa-
thies of  human  nature."  (Comp,  Thuc
ii.  52.) — Dr.  Payne  Smith,

Ver.  5.  Theme :  Sin  excludes  from
SYMPATHY  AND  SORROW.  '*  Enter  not
into  the  house  of  mourning,  neither
go  to  lament  nor  bemoan  them ;  for
I  have  taken  away  My  peace  from  this
people,  saith  the  Lord,  even  lovingkind-
ness  and  mercies."

Indicate  how —

I.  Sin  brings  heavy  woes  upon
transgressors.

1.  Tlie  loss  of  God's  peace,  "  Taken
away  My  peace."  Therefore  there  is  no
peace  to  the  wicked.

2.  The  alienation  of  Providential  fav-
ours.  "Even  lovingkindness  and  mer-
cies." Godly  lives  are  girded  about  by
heavenly  ministries,  and  enriched  with
daily  '*  blessings  of  goodness."

3.  The  accumulation  of  calamities  and
sorrows.  So  that  there  is  occasion  to
"  lament  and  bemoan."  All  men  have
trouble,  are  "born  to  trouble";  but  the
godly  "  hides  himself  in  the  sacred  place
of  the  Most  High,"  and  finds  "  Everlast-
ing arms  underneath  him  "  in  his  day  of
grief.  But  the  wicked  are  comfortless
in  their  miseries.  No  "consolations
wherewith  God  comforts  us  in  any  sor-
row "  alleviate  the  transgressor's  desola-
tions and  distresses.  Nor  has  the  sinner
any  heavenly  outlook  which  brightens
his  present  gloom.

II.  Sin,  if  prolonged,  necessitates
Divine  abandonment.

1.  God  is  slow  in  withdrawing  His
grace.  And  indeed  the  Intercessor  pleads,
"  Let  be  this  year  also."

2.  Yet  slighted  patience  leads  to  unth-
drawal  of  peace.  Trifling  with  God*s
"lovingkindness  and  mercies"  compels
Him  at  last  to  "  take  away  His  peace**
and  leave  the  soul  to  its  terrors.

3.  There  are  actual  instances  of  such
Divine  abandonment.  This  is  not  a
prediction^  a    menace-  but  a  statement


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XVL


of  fact:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  /  have
taken  away"  <kc.  Any  in  the  assembly  :
old  sinners,  reckless  and  perverse  youths  !
"  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry  and
ye  perish  from  the  way."

III.  Sin,  when  persistent,  alienates
tenderness  and  pity.

1.  Criminals  can  expect  little  com-
miseration.

2.  Condolence  with  sinners  when  suffer-
ing the  consequences  of  their  sins  is  an
error.  It  overlooks  the  righteousness
of  punishment.

3.  Generally  the  craving  of  guilty  per-
tons  for  sympathy  amid  their  miseries
is  attended  by  no  contrition  for  their
iniquities  which  entailed  such  disasters
upon  them.

Without  contrition  there  can  be  no
conversion,  and

Without  conversion  no  consolation.

Ver.  9.  Theme:  Godless  mirth  si-
lenced. Steeped  in  guiltiness  as  were
these  people,  they  yet  were  hilarious.
Their  sins  were  allowed  license.  They
lived  on  in  mirth  as  if  there  were  no  God.

See  Addenda :  Frivolous  Sinning.

I.  Sinful  revelries.

1.  Sinners  sport  with  sin.  Live  as  if
free  to  do  as  they  listed.

2.  Unlicensed  self-indulgences  are  their
delight.

3.  Conscience  and  God  are  silenced
amid  their  revelries.

4.  Mad  mirth  heeds  not  God's  fronm.
Indifferent  and  even  defiant.

5.  2^0  silence  Divine  denunciations
(as  now  through  Jeremiah),  sinners
plunge  into  yet  more  exciting  self-in-
dulgences and  gaieties.  Oh,  what  a
scene  of  reeking  vice  and  appalling  blas-
phemy lies  under  the  eye  of  Heaven  !

IL  Nearing  retribution.  "  I  will
cause  to  cease  in  your  days."

1.  Reckless  mirth  cannot  arrest  the
retribution  it  ignores.

2.  Godless  revelries  will  not  escape
God's  judgment.  While  revelry  goes  on
within,  "  behold  the  Judge  standeth  be-
fore the  door."

3.  The  term  of  indulgence  is  alarm-
ingly curtailed.  "  In  your  days."
While  the  prophet  lived  the  end  of  all
this  impious  conduct  would  copae.


m.  Silenced  rejoicings.  "I  will
cause  to  cease,"  <fec.

1.  God  will  assuredly  hush  these  im-
pious revelries.

2.  Death  will  seal  the  lips  of  carou^ers
in  silence.

3.  Boon  companions  in  sin  will  ex-
change hilarity  for  hitter  lamentations,

4.  Scenes  of  mirth  will  be  deserted  in
the  day  of  calamity.  They  supply  no
solace  to  crushed  lives.

5.  Troubles  desolate  the  brightest
homes,  and  silence  the  sounds  of  gladness.

Reflections —

(a.)  Joy  may  be  pure ;  and  God  would
have  us  joyful.

{b.)  Pure  joy  has  no  sting,  and  is
enduring.

{c.)  God  will  enrich  the  joys  of  the
good.

(d.)  Trouble  nor  death  can  silence  the
gladness  of  the  godly.

{e.)  Their  earthly  scenes  of  joy  will  be
by  them  exchanged  for  a  land  "  where
there  is  fulness  of  joy  and  pleasure  for
evermore."

(/.)  Shun  irreligious  pleasures,  and
you  shall  inherit  the  blessedness  of  a
life  whose  joys  are  Divine.

Ver.  10.  Theme:  Sinnebs  in  altkr-
CATioN  with  God.

The  messages  of  Jehovah  produce
effect.  Even  rebels  feel  them.  There
is  in  Heaven's  words  something  which
compels  the  most  godless  to  notice  them.
Indeed  sinners  are  stirred  to  vindicate
themselves  against  God's  messages,  and
rise  in  strife  with  His  prophets.

Instances  of  altercation  with  the  pro-
phets are  numerous  in  the  Scriptures
(comp.  especially  chaps,  v.  19;  Ezek.  ii
6-8,  xxxiii.  17;  Mai.  iii.  13,  &c.)

I.  Challenging  the  justice  of  Gh>d.
"Wherefore,"  <fec.

1.  Willingly  oblivious  of  their  de-
merits.

2.  Feigning  innocency  of  great  trans-
gressions.

3.  Self-excusings.

4.  Professing  ignorance  of  having
done  wrong.

II.  Surprise  at  the  seveTity  of  Qod.
Their  reply  is  virtually  this : —

|.  The  evil  threatened  is  out  of  all

3^^


CHAP.  XVI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


reasonahle  proportion.  "  Wherefore  hath
the  Lord  pronounced  all  this  great
eviir'

2.  Such  severity  disproves  His  assured
graciousness.  Did  He  not  pledge  Him-
self specially  gracious  to  us f  Yet  "all
this  great  evil  against  %is/"

3.  There  has  been  no  specific  sin  calling
down  such  vengeance.  "  What  is  our
iniquity,  and  what  is  our  sin,"  <fec.

II.  Resistance  of  the  condemna-
tions of  God.  For  all  springs  from
this  purpose.

1.  They  refuse  to  he  convinced  of  sin.

2.  They  resent  the  charge  of  God^s
prophet,

3.  They  reject  the  call  to  contrition,

4.  They  affect  religious  feelings  as  a
cloak  for  all  tbeir  guilt.  Speak  piously  :
"  What  sin  have  we  committed  % "  as
if  they  could  not  be  wicked.  Further :
What  have  we  done  *'  against  the  Lord
our  God  "  ?  Ob,  the  hypocrisy,  to  dare
call  Jehovah  their  God  after  such  shame-
less apostasy  %  Rather,  "  Let  the  wicked
forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man
his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  unto
the  Lord,"  &c.

Comments —

Ver.  10.  "  When  people  are  despe-
rately bad,  and  will  not  be  told  so,  they
must  be  regarded  as  heathens  and  pub-
licans (Matt.  xvii.  18;  Tit.  iii.  10;
1  Cor.  v.  9)." — Cramer.

*'  If  people  are  so  hardened  in  their
sins  as  to  expostulate  with  the  prophet,
he  is  to  show  them  that  the  severe  sen-
tence passed  upon  tbem  is  the  conse-
quence of  idolatry,  persisted  in  through
many  generations  till  it  has  finally
deepened  into  natural  apostasy."  —
Speaker's  Com,

Ver.  11.  God^s  reply.  See  Homilies
on  chapters  v.  19;  vii.  25-28;  xiii,
21,  22.

Ver.  12.  Theme:  Worse  than  your
Fathers.

The  stream  swells  as  it  extends  its
course.  These  men  were  guiltier  be-
cause tbey  had —

I.  Fuller  warning.  The  fate  of  their
35G


ancestors  admonished  them,  giving  em-
phasis to  God's  tlneatenings.

II.  More  restraints.  God's  dealings
of  mercy  had  been  known  for  longer  time,
and  proved  in  7nore  manifold  forms.
They  had  a  history  to  keep,  a  name  to
honour.

m.  Greater  advantages.  Their
Scriptures  were  larger  than  those
their  fathers  possessed  ;  for  they  grew
as  their  history  enlarged,  and  as  succes-
sive prophets  wrote  and  spake.  Their
OfCquaintance  with  God  and  His  will  was
more  clear.  Their  indebtedness  to  His
grace  was  more  evident.

IV.  Heavier  criminality.

Apostasy  assumed  most  heinous  forms.
Iniquity  ran  into  revolting  licenses.
Defiance  of  God's  messages  and  prophet  wm

more  insolent.
Disregard  of  their  national  safety  and  honour

was  more  reckless.

(a.)  Sin  increases  in  volume  and  force
by  an  inevitable  law  of  accumulation.

(6.)  Actions  take  their  moral  charac-
ter from  the  inducements  which  prompt
them,  or  the  restraints  which  check
them.

(c.)  Guilt  attains  its  climax  when  it
becomes  insolently  "  stubborn."

Vers.  14,  15.  Theme :  The  greater
FUTURE  OF  Israel.

Restoration  from  Egypt  will  be  for-
gotten in  contrast  with  the  deliverance
from  the  North.  Doubtless  the  return
from  Babylon  is  primarily  meant  here,
but  there  yet  awaits  the  ingathering
"  from  all  lands."

Note :  This  restoration  is  yet  pro-
spective :  so  points  to  the  coming  glories
of  God's  ancient  peo|)le.

L  Severer  preliminary  sufferings,

1.  The  bondage  in  the  iron  furnace
of  Egypt  would  be  easy  ;ind  light  con-
trasted with  the  despotism  under  which
they  would  groan  in  the  Nortb.

2.  Instead  of  their  being  carried  away
into  one  land,  as  in  Egy[)t,  they  would
now  be  '  driven"  through  "  all  lands;"
separate' I y  helpless^  abandoned.

II.  More  astonishing  preservation
in  exile.

1.  Dangers  greater.  In  the  hands  of
a  more  relentless  despotism.  The  armies
of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  ground  other


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  XVI.


nations  they  conquered  and  captured
into  a  confused  mass,  destroying  their
individuality.  In  this  captivity  they
would  not  be  kept  together,  nor  loca-
lised, but  driven  into  widest  dispersion.

2.  Destruction  more  threatening.  The
North  meant  their  complete  obliteration
as  a  people,  and  did  all  that  could  he
done  to  effect  it.  Egypt  did  not  design
nor  attempt  this.

in.  Grander  supernatural  redemp-
tion.

1.  It  should  be  recognised  as  God^s
work  of  rescue,  "  The  Lord  liveth  that
brought  up  the  children  of  Israel."

2.  It  should  surpass  their  great  his-
toric deliverance  from  Egypt,  All  along
their  career  hitherto  Jehovah  had  per-
petually reminded  them  that  He  was
their  God  that  brought  them  out  of
Egypt :  see  the  frequency  and  varied
circumstances  under  which  He  recurred
to  that  fact.  But  it  would  henceforth
be  forgotten  in  contrast  with  the  coming
redemption.

IV.  Richer  revelation  of  Divine
grace.

1.  Their  greater  sin  did  not  lead  God
to  abandon  them.

2.  Renewed  apostasy  did  not  weary
God's  patience.

3.  Amid  their  exile  He  would  jea-
lously guard  and  individually  care  for
them.

4.  None  should  be  lost  in  the  glad
ingathering  to  their  own  land.

Vers.  16, 17.  Theme:  Nets  to  catch

MEN.

They  used  trawl-nets  in  those  days
for  sweeping  the  waters  of  fish  and  the
country  of  game.  (See  note  under  Man-
ners and  Customs  for  explanation  )

1.  Imagery  of  invading  captors.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  figures  here.

1.  "  Fishers "  express  the  ease  with
which  these  invaders  would  capture
the  prey.  The  Northern  armies  would
secure  them  with  as  little  diflficulty  or
trouble  as  anglers  gather  fishes  within
their  trawl-nets.

2.  "  Hunters  **  express  the  keenness  and
resoluteness  with  which  these  Northern
invaders  would  pursue  their  prey  ;  neg-
lecting no  hiding-place,  penetrating  into


every  retreat,  and  allowing  small  hope
of  escape.

(a.)  Tempters  thus  throw  out  nets  for  the
unwary,  and  gather  the  simple  into  the
enclosures  of  pleasure  and  sin.  "  We
are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices^

(6.)  Disputers  thus  hunt  the  more  valor-
ous  souls,  and  seek  to  capture  them  with
doubts  of  the  truths  of  religion,  and  con-
quer them  by  force  of  argument.

(c.)  Various  are  the  nets  employed,  for
the  resources  of  those  who  would  cap-
ture souls  are  multitudinous,  yet  adapted
to  **  catch  men,"  Flattery,  indulgence,
companionships,  books,  worldly  advan-
tages, to  draw  into  sin  ;  or  annoyance,
browbeating,  calumny,  argument,  to
drive  to  despair  and  neglect  of  God.

(c?.)  Death  drags  its  net  to  gather  in
men,  and  it  sweeps  the  sea  of  life  effec-
tually.

(tf.)  The  angels  of  judgment  will  at  the
end  of  the  world  gather  souls  in  from
all  lands,  and  not  a  sinner  shall  escape.

Bee  Addenda:  Hunting.

n.  Imagery  of  redeeming  agencies.

1.  Of  the  recovery  of  scattered  Israel
from  the  lands  of  the  spoiler.

Some  expositors  misapplied  these
verses  to  that  idea,  and  supposed  God
was  here  predicting  their  ingathering.

Yet  the  words  may  without  incon-
sistency be  so  applied.  The  figure  of
fishing  is  so  used  by  Ezekiel  (xlvii.  9, 10).
And  surely  in  Israelis  restoration  they
will  be  graciously  hunted  wherever  they
have  been  driven,  and  brought  back
from  heights  and  valleys,  and  even  re-
pelling "  holes  of  the  rocks."  For  God's
"eyes  are  upon  all  their  ways"  (ver.  17)
in  their  dispersion,

2.  Of  the  capture  of  souls  for  Christ.
"  I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."
"  Being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with
guile."

(a.)  Gentle  attractions  of  the  Gospel.
Easily  drawing  souls  into  the  kingdom.

(6.)  Manifold  yet  adapted  truths  of
Scripture,  winning  men  individually
into  conviction  and  faith.  The  precious
promises,  words  of  sacred  comfort,  con-
vincing truths,  inspiring  teaching  of
God's  Word  capture  souls,  and  "  sweetly
force  them  in  "  to  the  enclosure  of  Di-


vine assurances.


957


CHAP.  XTL


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


(ft)  The  Holy  Spirifs  worh^  of  awaken-
ing souls  to  their  state  and  need,  of
witness  in  consciences  and  hearts,  and  of
revealing  Christ  and  the  Gospel  to  men.

(rf.)  Wise  ministrations  of  Gospel  mes-
sengers. Preachers  and  teachers  so  pre-
sent Christ's  truth,  so  contend  with
hearers*  doubts  and  hesitancy  to  '*  per-
suade men,"  that,  being  wise,  they  *•  win
souls,*'  and  so  draw  sinners  and  weary
lives  to  the  Saviour.

III.  Imagery  of  a  grand  ingathering.

1.  0/  the  scattered  sons  of  Israel  to
restored  Zion.  From  all  lands  shall  they
come.  It  shall  be  "  as  life  from  the
dead"  (Rom.  xi.  15).

2.  Of  humanity  dravm  into  the  faith  of
Christ.  *'  Other  sheep  I  have,  them  also
will  I  bring*'  <fec.  (John  x.  16).  "And
I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will
draw  all  men  unto  Me  "  (John  xii.  32).

3.  Of  redeemed  souls  to  thd  glorious
heaven.  "  They  shall  come  from  the
east  and  west,  north  and  south,  and  sit
down  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  "Re-
deemed out  of  every  kindred  and  people
and  tongue  and  nation."

Ver.  17.  Theme:  Omniscience  regu-
lates JUDGMENT.  "  For  Mine  eyes  are
upon  all  their  ways,"  <kc.  Ways  means
career  of  conduct.  God's  dispensations
are  determined  upon  full  knowledge  and
examination  of  our  doings.

I.  Human  life  attracts  the  obser-
vant eye  of  God.  "  Mine  eyes  are  upon
all  their  ways."  This  fact,  that  God
so  attentively  and  constantly  watches  us,
suggests —

1.  The  Divine  interest  in  His  creature
mxin,

2.  JehovaJCs  solicitude  for  His  peoples
welfare.

3.  His  great  distress  on  beholding  their
faithlessness.

4.  His  longing  to  witness  in  them
loyalty  and  love.

II.  Man's  inicLuity  is  minutely
watched  by  Omniscience.  "  Neither
is  their  iniquity  hid  from  Mine  eyes."
It  so  grieves  Him,  and  is  so  amazing
•fter  all  He  has  done,  that  He  cannot
withdraw  His  gaze.

1.  Iniquity  has  a  beginning ^  and  a
course  of  development.
359


2.  The  sinner  s  path  is  beset  with  re-
strictioiis  or  inducements.

3.  Ungodliness  varies  in  degree  and
animus.

4.  Much  wrongdoing  is  done  secretly^
and  guilt  is  often  more  in  the  heart  than
in  the  act.  But  God's  eyes  search  out,
and  His  thouorhts  weigh  the  measure  of
every  act,  or  thought,  or  motive  of  sin.
Yea,  our  secret  sins  are  set  in  the  light
of  His  countenance.  He  understands
our  thought  afar  off.

III.  Divine  chastisements  are  deter-
mined by  men's  deeds.  "Their  ways
are  not  hid  from  My  face,  neither  their
iniquities  hid  from  Mine  eyes."

1.  Caprice  never  moves  God  in  His
dispensations  of  wrath.

2.  Heaviest  judgments  cannot  exceed
the  sinner* 8  demerits.

3.  Anguish  derives  its  keenest  pang
from  the  sufferer^s  knowledge  that  he
righteously  incurred  it.

4.  None  can  hope  for  escape  from  pun-
ishment so  equitably  administered.  *  *  None
doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  "  He  will
appoint  to  every  man  according  to  his
deed."  "  Every  mouth  shall  be  stopped,
and  all  become  guilty  before  GJod."

Conclusion  : —

1.  Who  can  expect  to  evade  judgment  f
"  If  Thou,  Lord  shouldst  work  iniquity,
O  Lord,  who  shall  stand  ] "

2.  Where  can  redemption  be  found  t

If  we  cannot  escape  from  judgment,  can

we  from  the  sin  which  necessitates  iti

Yes ;  Christ  removes  the  sin,  and  thuB

ransoms  us  from  the  judgment,

"  Cover  my  defenceless  head
"With  the  shadow  of  Thy  wing."

Ver.  18.  Theme :  Requiting  sinners
FOR  their  work  OF  SPOLIATION.  (See
Lii.  Crit.  on  this  verse.)

We  fail  to  recognise  what  wrong  we
do  God,  what  ravages  our  misconduct
works,  when  we  sin.

I.  Sin  despoils  what  God  prizes.
"  My  land,"  "  Mine  inheritance."

1.  God  lias  a  right  to  all  the  pleasant
scenes  which  men  wickedly  use  and  pro-
stitute to  their  selfish  and  sinful  enjoy-
ments.    "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,"  <fec.

2.  Upon  every  life  He  has  set  His  seal,
and  justly  requires  that  we  preserve  ite
powers  and  affections  inviolate.     All  y^9


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEllEMtAlI.


ohap.  xvt


are,  all  our  endowments  and  abilities  He
entrusted  us  with.

3.  When  we  luithhold  from  God  His
dtie,  in  love,  loyalty,  and  service,  we
"  rob  God."    He  made  us  for  His  glory.

4.  Every  use  of  God's  fair  world  for
evil  purposes  is  sacrilege.  We  do  Him
a  wrong.     We  "  defile  His  land."

5.  Siich  cruel  misuse  of  our  life  and
the  scenes  we  occupy  must  be  as  offensive
to  God  as  it  is  criminal  in  itself.  He
values  us,  loves  us — "so  loved  us  that
He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son  *'  to
redeem  us,  and  grieves  over  our  aliena-
tion and  prodigality:  "wasting  our  sub-
stance in  a  far  country,"  degrading  our
being,  and  dishonouring  His  handiwork.

II.  Sin's  spoliations  will  God  requite.
**/  will  recompense  their  sin  and  their
iniquity  double,  because^**  <fec.

1.  The  punishment  foretold  is  but
retribution  for  sins.  It  was  so  with
these  Jews,  it  is  so  with  us.  Nothing
is  threatened  against  the  sinner  but  is
the  "  due  reward  of  our  deeds."  Having
defiled  the  land  by  their  idolatry,  they
shall  be  driven  out  of  it.  And  "  the
wicked,"  having  misused  earth's  fair
scene,  "  shall  be  turned  into  hell."

2.  Divine  inflictions  have  a  twofold
severity.  Yes ;  it  may  be  thought  that
God's  punishments  are  therefore  exces-
sive; that  He  not  merely  requites  sin,
but  goes  beyond  our  deserts.  St.  Chry-
Bostom  here  points  out  that  "  many,
taking  these  words  literally,  have  been
troubled  in  mind,  as  though  God  did
not  punish  men  according  to  their  desert,
but  more  than  their  desert.  But  really
every  punishment  is  twofold;  for  first,
there  is  the  loss  of  the  blessing  which
would  have  followed  upon  obedience,  and
secondly,  the  presence  of  actual  misery,^*
So  also,  as  Dr.  Payne  Smith  suggests,
tin  is  twofold:  there  is  the  leaving  of  God* s
will  undone,  and  the  actual  wrongdoing.

Sinners  lose  God's  favour  and  incur
His  wrath  :  "  recompense  double."

They  lose  the  bliss  of  heaven  and
inherit  the  woe  of  hell :  "  double."

Tet  nothing  they  lose  and  suffer  can
equal  the  wrong  which,  by  "  their  ini-
quity and  their  sin,"  they  have  done  God/

(1.)  They  defiled  His  land  with  the
▼ileness  of  their  detestable  things,  and


(2.)  They  filled  His  inheritance  with
their  abominations.

Thus  did  they  pervert  sacred  sceneg
to  detestable  purposes ;  render  the  holy
land  offensive  to  Him  whose  inheritance
it  was ;  and  by  their  foul  idolatry  they
gave  the  glory  of  their  service  and  wor-
ship to  abominations.  "  Oh,  do  not  the
abominable  thing  which  I  hate."

See  Addenda  :  The  Evil  of  Sin.

Ver.    19.   Theme:    The  good  man's

STRENGTH,  FORTRKSS,  AND  REFUGE.     "  O

Lord,  my  strength,  and  my  fortress,  and
my  refuge  in  the  day  of  affliction."

I.  The  Infinite  becomes  the  strength
of  the  finite.  We  may  well  ask  how  the
Eternal  becomes  the  strength  of  the  mor-
tal ;  God,  the  strength  of  a  man  \  And
reply —

1.  By  the  confidence  reposed  in  Him,
Confidence  in  a  leader  is  the  very
strength  of  those  who  follow.  Thus
Wellington  was  the  strength  of  his  army,
and  Nelson  of  his  navy.  God's  people
have  confidence  in  His  wisdom,  power,
love ;  hence  "  through  God  they  do
valiantly,  for  He  it  is  that  treads  down
their  enemies  under  them."

2.  The  valorous  deeds  effected  by  men
of  God  are  marvellous.  Paul's  list  in
Hebrews  xi.  illustrates  the  triumphs  of
faith.  And  what  is  faith  but  confidence
in  God  ]  The  triumphs  of  faith  are  the
wonderful  achievements  effected  through
this  confidence  in  God,  so  that  God  be-
comes the  strength  of  men.  Girded  with
strength  Divine  they  can  each  say,  "  I
can  do  all  things."

3.  The  man  whose  strength  is  the  Lord  i$
able  to  bear  what  would  crush  other  men.
He  who  gave  Samson  strength  to  bear  and
carry  away  massive  gates,  gives  to  His  ser-
vants strength  to  bear  weightiest  troubles
and  heaviest  sufferings.  See  Paul's  recital
of  his  sufferings;  yet  he  afterwards  talks
of  "  these  light  afflictions,"  <kc.

11.  Yet  the  Lord  gives  to  His  people
protection.      He  is  their  "  fortress."

This  Divine  fortress  is  impregnable,
"  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail
against  it."  Yet  it  may  be  asked.  Have
not  thousands  of  God's  saints  been
slaughtered  by  persecutors  ?  What  is
the  Book  of  Martyrs  but  a  record  of

35d


enxp.  XVI.


tlOMlLSTJC  COMMENTARY:  JERtlMlAM.


God's  slain  ones  1  True ;  but  tbe
Divine  fortress  is  for  the  protection  of
souls,  not  of  bodies.  The  exposure  of
the  body  to  peril  on  the  one  hand,  and
the  safety  of  the  soul  on  the  other,  are
clearly  indicated  by  our  Lord's  words,
"  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,
but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul."

Ill  Further,  He  is  "their  Refuge
in  the  day  of  affliction."  In  the  evil
day  we  hasten  to  Him  as  soldiers  to  a
fortress  when  hotly  pursued,  or  as  vessels
to  a  harbour  when  the  wind  blows  a
gale.  When  "  tossed  with  tempest  and
not  comforted,"  we  have  found  the  Lord
"  a  refuge  from  the  storm  and  a  covert
from  the  tempest."  And  this  refuge  is
open  still  to  every  troubled  saint  and
every  penitent  sinner. — Rev.  D.  Pledge  :
"  Walks  with  the  Prophet  Jeremiah!*^

Vers.  19,  20.  Theme:  The  con fession
OP  THE  Gentiles.  "  The  Gentiles  shall
come  unto  Thee  from  the  ends  of  the
earth,  and  shall  say,  Surely  our  fathers
have  inherited  lies,  vanity,  and  things
wherein  there  is  no  profit.  Shall  a  man
make  gods  unto  himself,  and  they  are  no
gods  ? ''

.  The  result  of  God's  judgments  on  the
Jews  will  be  that  both  the  Jews  when
restored,  and  the  Gentiles  who  have
witnessed  those  judgments,  shall  re-
nounce idolatry  for  the  worship  of
Jehovah  (Fausset).

(Note :  This  prophecy  in  course  of
fulfilment.)

I.  Their  repentance.  "  Shall  come."
They  had  followed  the  devices  of  their
own  hearts — its  failure  "  profited  them
nothing."  Trusting  in  gods  made  by
their  own  hands  could  not  profit  them ;
for,  "  Shall  a  man  make  gods  unto  him-
self, and  they  are  no  gods  1 "  a  contra-
diction in  terms.  They  repent  of  their
folly,  and  come  to  Jehovah — the  only
true  God.

(a.)  Repentance  is  necessary  to  our
acceptance  hy  God,  A  man  must  realise
the  folly  of  his  sin,  and,  turning  from  it
with  his  face  toward  God,  must  make
confession  of  his  transgressions  in  order
to  their  remittance.  '*  Repent,  and  be
baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  Name
of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,
360


and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost "  (Acts  ii.  38).

(6.)  Must  he  with  the  heart.  Sincere.
"  Our  real  existence  in  the  sight  of  God
consists  in  the  inner  and  not  in  the
outer  life  **  (Farrar).

II.  Their  confession.  "  Our  fathers
have  inherited  lies  and  things  wherein
there  is  no  profit."  Idolatry  in  all  its
forms ;  not  only  gods  of  wood  and
stone,  but  all  the  idols  of  our  own
heart,  our  own  imagination — e.g,,  the
love  of  riches.  All  idolatry  must  be
renounced,  and  a  confession  made  unto
God  that  we  have  abandoned  them.
The  essential  element  of  confession  is
that  it  be  spiritual  and  true.  To  a
right  confession  we  must  have —

(a.)  A  knowledge  of  our  otvn  hearts.
If  this  is  possessed,  the  heart  will  be
laid  open  to  God  for  its  purification.
There  is  only  one  way  of  getting  a  heart
and  mind  pure,  and  that  is  by  confes-
sing to  God  its  present  impurities — ^im-
ploring Him  to  create  in  us  a  clean  heart.

(6.)  Faith  in  God.  In  His  willing-
ness to  hear,  in  His  power  to  do.  Their
faith  was  strong ;  they  acknowledge
that,  apart  from  God,  all  is  vanity  and
lies.  The  world  promises  much,  but
when  those  promises  are  chased  and
caught,  you  have  in  your  hand  nothing
better  than  *'  vanity  and  lies."

III.  Their  acceptanca  This  we  in-
fer, because  "  If  we  confess  our  sins.
He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our
sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  un-
righteousness"  (John  i  9).  Wherever
the  contrite  heart  is,  there  is  the  forgiv-
ing God.  The  Gentiles  shall  come — they
are  coming,  and  by  the  power  and  attrac-
tion of  the  Cross.  The  Gospel  has  many
victories  yet  to  achieve.  The  Saviour
said,  "And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  shall  draw
all  men  unto  Me." — Achilles  Taylor.

Vers.  19,  21.    Theme:   Mission aey

SERMON.

The  true  knowledge  of  God  :

L  It  is  to  he  had  in  Christianity
(ver.  19).

II.  It  will  also  make  its  way  to  the
heathen.     For

1.  It  is  God's  will  that  they  should
be  instructed  (ver.  21).


MOMIlBTIC  COMMBNTAHY  :  J  ERE  Ml  AS.


eiut,  ItL


2.  They  are  ready  to  be  instructed
(vers.  19,  20).

Comments —

Ver.  19.  "Jfy  strength  and  my  for-
tress" "  Lit.,  my  strength  and  my  place
of  strength — the  one  for  attack,  and  the
other  for  defence." — Speaker^ s  Com.

"  The  calling  of  the  heathen  is  very
consolatory.  For  as  children  are  re-
joiced at  heart  when  they  see  that  their
parents  are  greatly  honoured  and  obtain
renown  and  praise  in  all  lands,  so  do  all
true  children  of  God  rejoice  when  they
see  that  God's  name  is  honoured  and  His
glory  more  widely  extended." — Cramer.

Ver.  21.  "  I  will  this  once  cause  them
to  know."  "  As  the  Jews  had  chosen  to
put  their  trust  in  such  senseless  things
as  idols,  of  which  the  very  heathen
will  be  ashamed  (ver.  19),  Jehovah  will
teach  them  this  once,  i.e.,  in  a  summary
manner  once  for  all,  by  a  punishment
which  the  nation  shall  never  forgety  that
there  is  a  difference  between  Him  and
idols." — Dr.  Payne  Smith,


"  This  once."  "  Whether  we  consider
the  greatness  of  the  national  disgrace  and
suffering  caused  by  it,  or  its  effect  upon
the  mind  of  the  Jews,  the  burning  of
Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  followed
by  the  captivity  of  the  people  at  Babylon,
stands  out  as  the  greatest  manifestation
of  Qod*s  hand  in  all  His  dealings  with
them.  Neither  in  the  times  of  the
Judges,  nor  in  the  persecution  of  An-
tiochus  Epiphanes,  was  there  anything
comparable  to  it.  Only  one  other  event
in  their  history  is  of  equal  magnitude —
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus ;
but  that  was  the  closing  of  their  history
as  the  preparatory  Church,  and  comes
therefore  under  a  different  category." —  ^
Dr.  Payne  Smith.

*'  I  WILL  CAUSE  THEM  TO  KNOW."  "No-
thing can  be  learned  of  God  without  God.
God  instructs  the  people  by  His  mouth  and
His  hand,  verbis  et  verheribus." — Cramer.

"  Know  that  my  name  is  the  Lord."
"  The  fulfiller  of  His  threatenings,  as
well  as  the  performer  of  His  promises  "
(Exod.  vi.  3). — Lowth.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XVI.:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  2.  Marriage.

"  God  is  the  best  Maker  of  all  mar-
riages. " — Shakespeare.

When  the  Rev.  Philip  Henry  was
minister  at  Worthenbury,  he  sought  the
hand  of  the  only  daughter  of  a  wealthy
man.  The  father  demurred,  saying
that  though  Mr.  Henry  was  an  excellent
preacher  and  a  gentleman,  yet  he  did
not  know  from  whence  he  came.  '*  True,"
said  the  daughter,  "  but  I  know  where
he  is  going,  and  I  should  like  to  go  with
him."

'*  Marriage  is  a  feast,  where  the  grace
is  sometimes  better  than  the  dinner." —
Colton.

'*  We  are  really  what  we  are  rela-
tively."— P.  Henry.

"  Let  us  no  more  contend,  nor  blame
Each    other,    blam'd  enough   elsewhere;    but

strive,
In  offices  of  love,  how  we  may  lighten
Each  other's  burden,  in  our  share  of  woe."
— MiUon's  **  Paradise  Lost."

Family  Maxims:  "Let  God  be  first"
"  Be  happy  and  make  happy."


Ver.  9.    Frivolous  sinning.

"  Pools  make  a  mock  of  sin,  will  not  believe
It  carries  such  a  danger  in  its  sleeve.
*How  can  it  be?'   they  say,   *that  such  a

thing,
So  full  of  sweetness,  e'er  should  wear  a

sting?'
They  know  not  that  it  is  the  very  spell
Of  sin,  to  make  men  laQgh  themselves  to

hell.
Look  to   thyself   then,  deal   with   sin   no

more,
Lest  He  tliat  saves  against  thee  shuts  the

door. " — Bunyan.

Ver.  16.  Hunting.

The  original  term  for  hunting  occurs
in  reference  to  the  invasion  of  human
rights,  in  1  Sam.  xxiv.  12,  Lam.  iii.  15,
and  Jer.  xvi.  16.  This  usage  affords  a
clue  to  Nimrod's  character.  With  the
band  of  lawless  spirits  his  skill  had
attracted,  he  proceeded  from  hunting
beasts  to  oppressing  man  : —

**  Proud  Nimrod  first  the  mighty  chase  began;
A  mighty  hunter — and  his  prey  was  man.'*

— Pope,

Hunting,  with  its  snares,  may  remind

361


dbAP.  xtti.  MOMILETIC  COMMENT  AH  T .-  JEREMIAH.


us  of  that    mighty  hunter   Satan,   and  We  might  illustrate  the   evil  of  sin

his  devices — pitfalls,  decoys,  snares,  &c.  thus :    Supposing    I  were   going   along

— for  the  unwary.     Hence  the  duty  of  a  street,    and  were   to    dash   my   hand

watchfulness  :  "  In  vain  is  the  net  spread  through   a   large    pane    of  glass,    what

in  the  sight  of  any  bird  "  (Prov.  i.  17).  harm  would   I   receive? — "You  would

"Walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  be  punished  for  breaking  the  glass." —

as  wise."     Satan  is  now  the  "  mighty  Would  that  be  all  the  harm  I  should

hunter"  who  hunts  down  sins,  ignorance,  receive  % — "  Your  hand  would  be  cut  by

bad  habits,  <fec.     God  helps  us  to  escape  the  glass." — Yes ;  and  so  it  is  with  sin.

out  of  the  machinations  of  the  wicked  If  you  break  God's  laws,  you  shall  be

iPs.  cxxiv.  6-8).   Death  is  a  great  hunter  punished  for  breaking  them  ;  and  your

Ecc.  ix.  12). — Topics  f<yr  Teacliers,  soul  is  hurt  by  the  very  act  of  breaking


Yer.  18.  The  evil  of  sm.


them. — J.  Jnglis,


CHAPTER  XVIL


Critical  and  Exboetical  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Ohapter.     Vers.  1-18  eontinna

the  prophecy  of  chap.  xvi.  A  distinct  break  in  the  continuity  of  the  book  is  noticeable  at  ver,
19.  [Keil  seems  alone  in  suggesting  that  this  section  "may  very  well  be  joined  with  the  preceding
general  reflections  as  to  the  springs  of  mischief  and  of  well-being ;  inasmuch  as  it  shows  how
the  way  of  safety  appointed  to  the  people  lies  in  keeping  the  decalogue,  as  exemplified  in  one
of  its  fundamental  precepts."  This  is  so  far  true,  but  is  not  sufficient  to  decide  the  connec*
tion  with  the  antecedent  prophecy  when  this  section,  vers.  19-27,  stands  out  so  manifestly
distinct  and  complete  in  itself.]  At  what  date  must  this  section,  19-27,  be  placed  t  Plainly,
before  the  guilty  relapse  under  Jehoiakim  ;  for  the  tone  of  the  message  is  not  condemna-
tory  :  It  is,  as  Dr.  Payne  Smith  says,  *' dissuasive  of  future  neglect*'  rather  than  objurgatory
of  past  misconduct.  Henderson  suggests  Josiah*s  reign,  "delivered  in  connection  with  and
shortly  after  his  reformation."  Hitzig  assigns  it  to  the  period  of  Jeconiah,  or  that  immediately
following  Jehoiakim's  death.  But  Eichorn,  liosenmuller,  Maurer,  Naegdsbach,  Payne  Smithy
and  Jamieson  agree  that  its  deliveranee  was  at  the  outset  of  Jehoiakim's  reign,  before  he  began
the  evil  course  by  which  he  undid  the  good  effected  by  Josiah's  reformation.  Its  similarity  to
chap.  zxii.  1-5  makes  it  probable  that  the  two  messages  were  contemporaneous,  and  this  latter  was
doubtless  delivered  in  Jehoiakim's  reign  also.  Usher  assigns  vers.  1-18  to  B.c.  605  ;  and  vers.
19-27  to  B.O.  600.  Hales:  B.C.  601  and  599  respectively.  (Stee  Chronological  Note  of  chap,  vii.)
For  2.  Contemporary  Scriptures ;  3.  National  Affairs;  4.  Contemporaneous  History,  see
also  Notes  on  chap.  vii.

5.  Geographical  References. — Yer.  3.  **  My  mountain  (Jerusalem)  in  the  field  :^  the
surrounding  country.  Ver.  6.  A  saU  land  (see  Deut.  xxix.  23  ;  comp.  Job.  xxxix.  6,  Ps.
cvii.  34).  Salt  regions  suggest,  as  a  figure,  total  want  of  the  means  of  life.  Yer.  19.  **  Gate
of  the  children  of  the  people  :**  described  further  as  that  "whereby  the  kings  of  Judah  come
in  :"  most  probably  the  Gate  of  David,  now  called  the  Joppa  Gate.  Denominated  the  People's
Gate,  as  being  the  principle  thorouglifare  for  the  tribes  coming  from  the  south,  south-west,  and
north-west.  Yer.  26.  **  Cities  of  Judah : "  that  part  of  the  country  bordering  on  Jerusalem.
**  Latid  of  Benjamin : "  the  northern  province  of  Judah,  and  south  of  Ephraim.  *'  The  plain  ;'*
the  low  country  between  Joppa  and  Gaza  (Josh.  iz.  1,  xii.  8,  xv.  21,  33).  The  mountains:
the  hill  country  of  Judea  (Josh.  xv.  48  sq.)  ** South:*'  southern  district  of  Judah.  "The
rerse  is  interesting,"  says  Dr.  Payne  Smitb,  **a«  specifying  the  exact  limits  of  the  dominions
of  the  Davidic  kings,  now  confined  to  Judah  and  Benjamin.  These  two  tribes  are  divided,
according  to  their  physical  conformation,  into  the  ShefUah,  or  low  country,  lying  between  the
mountains  and  the  Mediterranean  ;  the  mountains,  which  formed  the  central  region,  extending
to  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  on  the  Dead  Sea ;  and  the  Negeb^  or  arid  region,  which  lay  to  the
south  of  Judah. "

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Yer.  5.  **  Cursed  he  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man."  Many  com-
mentators find  here  reference  to  the  perfidious  character  and  tyrannical  conduct  of  Jehoiakim.
So  also  Maurer  recognises  in  ver.  9  an  allusion  to  Jehoiakim's  cupidity.

7.  Natural  History. — Yer.  6.  ** Heath  in  the  desert:**  1^"}^  is  generally  accepted  as  de-
scribing the  juniper  tree,  which  (says  Henderson)  is  found  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Arabah,  or  the
Great  Yalley  to  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  doubtless  the  same  **  desert "  which  Jeremiah
here  calls  n^^iy^n  •  the  image,  therefore,  being  a  solitary  juniper  in  an  arid  desert.  Pliny  saya
thai  the  **  heath"  was  on«  of  the  plants  excluded  from  religious  uses,  because  it  is  neither  Mwa

362


nOMILETW  COMMENTARt :  J:EREMIAB.  chap.  xvn.


nor  planted,  and  has  neither  fruit  nor  seed.  (See  Lit.  Crit.  below  on  "Heath**).  Ver.  11.
** Partridge  sitteth  on  eggs:"  Xl''pj  the  Arabs  apply  this  name,  Korea,  to  a  bustard.  It  is  not
true  of  the  partridge  that  she  stole  the  eggs  of  other  birds  and  hatched  them  as  her  own  ;  but
the  ancients  believed  slie  did.  Henderson  cites  in  proof  Epiphan.  Physiol,  cap.  ix. ;  IsiD.  Origg.
xii.  7.  But  Jamieson  urges  that  **it  is  not  needful  to  make  Scripture  allude  to  an  exploded
notion  as  if  it  were  true,"  and  therefore  states  that  the  name  "Korea,"  from  a  root,  to  call,
alluding  to  its  cry,  is  now  applied  to  a  bustard — heavy  birds  of  slow  flight,  like  the  ostrich.

8.  Mannerg  and  Customs. — Ver.  1.  ** Pen  of  Iron:"  (See  Note  on  chap.  viii.  8,  under
Manners  and  Customs.  Comp.  Job  xix.  24,  Ps.  xlv.  1,  Isa.  viii.  1.)  The  iron  stylus  was  used
only  for  writing  or  carving  letters  in  a  hard  material.  *'  Point  of  a  diamond: "  indicating  the
very  hardest  substance  on  which  the  graving  was  wrought.  *'  Upon  the  horns  of  your  altars:"
the  names  of  the  gods,  to  whom  sacrifices  were  devoted,  were  inscribed  on  the  horns  of  the
altars  (cum  p.  Acts  xvii.  23).  Ver.  2.  ^*  Altars  and  groves"  &c.  (comp.  Note  in  loc.  chap.
ii.  20).  Oroves  should  be  Asherahs,  in  all  probability  images  of  Astarte,  the  goddess  of  the
heavenly  hosts,  represented  under  the  imagery  of  a  **tree."  Ver.  3.  High  places:"  on  which
it  was  iheir  custom  to  erect  idolatrous  altars.  Ver.  21.  "  Bear  no  burden  on  the  Sabbath  day : "
Probabilities  are  that  the  country  people  brought  their  agricultural  produce  into  Jerusalem  with
them  when  they  came  ostensibly  to  worship  on  the  Sabbath  ;  and  that  the  residents  of  Jerusalem
"carried  forth  burdens  out  of  their  houses"  (ver.  22),  i.e.,  took  their  wares  to  the  city  gates,
and  bartered  or  exchanged  with  the  villagers  for  their  goods  (comp.  Neh.  xiii.  15-22).

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Vers.  1-4  are  omitted  by  tlie  LXX.,  and  Bleeh  coincides  in  their
omission  ;  but  all  the  other  Greek  versions  and  authorities  retain  the  verses.  Ver.  2.
**  Groves  by  the  green  trees:"  instead  of  **by"  read  "upon."  The  sense  seems  to  require
under;  but  the  LXX.  have  iirl.  Ver.  3.  **  Thy  high  places  for  sin :  "  Text  obscure  here:
Ewald  recalls  the  similar  phrase  in  chap.  xv.  13,  and  renders,  without  price  for  thy  sins.  The
reading  may  however  be,  "I  will  give  thy  substance,  all  thy  treasures,  and  thy  high  places  to
the  spoil  on  account  of  (for)  sin  throughout  (committed  throughout)  all  thy  borders."  Ver.  4.
**  And  thouy  even  thyself :  "  tJ3-1  Lit.,  even  with  thyself  i.e.,  with  thy  bare  life  ;  or  (Henderson)

and  through  thee,  by  means  of  thine  own  wickedness  ;  or  (Jamieson)  owing  to  thyself  by  thy  own
fault;  or  (  Vulgate)  and  that  with  thyself  alone.     Ver.  6.     **  Heath:"  ^V^V.     The  word  in  the

same  (bim  appears  in  Ps.  cii.  17,  destitute.  Like  a  destitute  man;  and  Speaker* s  Com.  insists
that  tiie  verbs,  he  shall  see  (or  fear),  and  shall  inhabit,  plainly  show  that  a  man  is  here  meant,
and  not  a  plant.  But  surely  the  "heath"  is  not  the  nominative  of  these  verbs!  Rather  the
man  (ver.  5)  of  whom  ver.  6  recounts,  *^  He  shall  be  like  the  heath,"  &c.  There  is  in  this
verse  a  contrast  of  the  solitary  pining  juniper  tree  [see  Natural  History  above]  and  "  the  tree
planted  by  the  waters"  (ver.  8).  Ver.  9.  *^ Deceitful :"  npV  from  2,\>V  to  lie  in  wait  foTy
trip,  act  insidiously — the  word  from  which  Jacob  took  his  name.  ^'Desperately  wicked:'*
wofully  sick  (ver.  16):   ^^^,    incurable,   malignant,  desperate.       Mentally  sick,  as   in   chap.

XV.  18.  Ver.  11.  **  Sittetk  on  eggs  and  hatcheth  them  not:'*  Lit.,  gathcreth  young  which  she
hath  not  brought  forth.  Ver.  12.  ".4  glorious  high  throne  "  &c.  Most  probably  this  verse
should  read  on  continuously  with  the  next,  thus:  ''Thou  throne  of  glory,  on  High  from  the
beginning  ;  thou  place  of  our  sanctuary,  thou  hope  of  Israel,  the  Lord  I  So  Ewald,  Graf,  Keil,
Payne  Smith.  Ver.  16.  "Not  hastened:*'  i.e.,  sought  to  escape.  "From  being  a  pastor ;**
Hitzig  and  Graf:  "from  following  lovingly  after  thee."  Umbreit  reads:  "I  have  not  forced
myself  forward  to  follow  Thee  as  a  shepherd."  But  Speaker's  Com.  gives,  From  being  a
shepherd  (see  on.  ii,  8,  ruler)  after  thee;  i.e.,  as  one  invested  with  authority  by  God  to  guide
and  direct  the  political  course  of  the  nation.  Naegelsbach  thinks  Jeremiah  means  he  was
literally  a  pastor,  a  shepherd  lad  tending  his  flock  when  God  called  him,  and  pleads  that
priests  had  pasture  land  (comp.  Josh.  xxi.  and  1  Chron.  vi.)  intended  expressly  for  the  cattle
(Num.  XXXV.  4),  and  Anathotii  had  its  pasture  (Josh.  xxi.  18).  But  Henderson  and  Wordsworth
suggest :  /  have  not  hastened  away,  or  backward,  from  being  a  shepherd.  Ver.  21.  **  Take  heed
to  you/rselves  :  "  in  your  «owZ«,  i.e.,  conscientiously.  Naegelsbach:  '^Carewith  foresight  for  your
souls."  Ver.  25.  "This  city  shall  remain  for  ever:'*  be  inhabited  ;  not  mere  continuance,
but  populousness.

HOMILETIC  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OP  CHAPTER  XVIL

Section    1-4.  Judah's  guilt  flagrantly  manifest.

,,       5-11.  Spiritual  corruption  traced  to  its  root-causei.

„     12-18.  Safety  and  vindication  sought  in  God.

„     19-27.  Exhortation  to  hallow  the  Sabbath.

Section  1-4. — Jitdah's  Guilt  Flagrantly  Manifest.

The  denial  of  having  sinned  against  Jehovah  (xvi.  10)  must  mean  that  the  fact
of  idolatry  is  by  them  denied.  Against  such  a  bold  and  shameless  assertion,  the
prophet  rises  here  with  visibly  increasing  indignation.     He  says  that —

363


OfiAi.  xvn.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JeREMIAB.


I.  Judah's  sin  is  forcibly  certified,  and,  aa  it  were,  recorded  in  the  archives.

1.  Ill  their  own  consciences ;  in  which  the  memory  of  their  idolatrous  abomina-
tions is  fixed  like  an  ineffaceable  brand.     And —

2.  Externally,  on  the  horns  of  the  altars,  where  the  blood  of  the  slaughtered
children  adheres  as  an  equally  ineffaceable  memorial  (ver.  1).

11.  Judah's  sin  is  inerradicably  remembered.  While  the  two  testimonies  (in
their  own  consciences  and  on  the  horns  of  the  altars)  were  deep  and  inextinguishable
to  them,  the  actors  present  at  their  idolatrous  barbarities,  it  was  also  true  that —

1.  Their  children  would  never  lose  the  impression  of  that  horrible  cult  which  had
snatched  so  many  from  their  midst.  The  horror  of  the  sight  of  those  frightful
holocausts  would  remain  unforgetable.

2.  So  deep  was  this  impression,  that  the  mere  sight  of  green  trees  and  high  hilU
was  sufficient  to  refresh  the  revolting  memory  continually  (ver.  2).

in.  Judah's  sin  therefore  would  be  severely  punished.  On  the  basis  of  the
fa^ts  thus  certified,  the  prophet —

1.  Repeats  the  announcement  of  the  Divine  punishments.  These  will  consist  in
(a)  plunder  of  substance ;  {h)  desolation  of  the  land,  according  to  the  analogy  of
the  year  of  release ;  and  (c)  deportation  into  an  unknown  land  (vers.  3,  4).

2.  Bewails  the  desolations  which  Judah  must  endure.  A  cry  of  grief  escapes  the
prophet's  lips  as  he  describes  the  ravages  with  which  Judah's  crimes  will  be
punished.  "  Oh  my  mountain  in  the  field  1 "  His  patriotic  soul  bemoans  the  catas-
trophe which  sin  invokes.     (Comp.  Naegelshaxih  in  Lange.)

The  people  had  asked  (xvi.  10),  What  is  our  iniquity,  and  what  is  our  sinf
Here  we  have  a  reply  to  their  challenge.

I.  The  indictment  is  fully  proved.  Both  the  fact  and  the  fault  Their  sin  is
too  plain  to  be  denied,  and  too  bad  to  be  excused.

1.  They  cannot  plead  not  guilty,  for  their  sins  are  upon  record  in  the  book  of
God's  omniscience  and  their  own  conscience ;  nay,  they  are  obvious  to  the  eye  and
observation  of  the  world  (vers.  1,  2).

(a.)  They  are  written  before  God,  and  in  most  legible  and  indelible  characters,
and  sealed  among  His  treasures,  never  to  be  forgotten  (Dent,  xxxii.  34).

(b.)  What  is  so  written  udll  never  be  worn  out  by  time.  "  With  a  pen  of  iron,"  <fcc,
"  Graven  in  the  rock  for  ever."  Sin  is  never  forgotten  till  it  is  forgiven.  It  is
^^ graven  on  the  heart"  and  though  covered  for  a  time,  cannot  be  rubbed  out,  and
will  be  produced  in  evidence  when  the  books  shall  be  opened.  If  they  will  not
own  the  conviction  of  their  consciences,  then  the  horns  of  their  altars  will  witness
against  them.  And  their  own  "children"  shall  be  witness  against  them:  "they
remember  the  altars  and  the  groves  "  to  which  their  parents  took  them  when  they
were  little  (ver.  2).

2.  They  cannot  plead  that  they  repent,  or  are  come  to  a  better  mind.  For  as
their  guilt  is  undeniable,  so  their  inclination  to  sin  is  invincible  and  incurable.  In
this  sense  many  understand  vers.  1  and  2.

(a.)  Their  sin  is  deeply  engraven  in  their  hearts.  It  is  inwrought  into  their  very
natures ;  and  is  cu  dear  to  them  as  that  is  of  which  we  say,  It  is  engraven  on  our
hearts  !

(6.)  They  had  pledged  themselves  to  their  idols;  bound  themselves  as  "  with  cords
to  the  horns  of  their  altars ; "  and  given  up  their  names  to  their  idols.

(c.)  They  remember  their  idolatries  with  affection.  For  ver.  3  may  be  rendered
thus ;  As  they  remember  their  children,  so  remember  they  their  altars  and  their
groves — they  are  fond  of  them,  and  loth  to  part  with  them,  as  men  with  their
children.

XL  The  judgment  is  affirmed  and  the  sentence  ratified.  Inasmuch  as  they
were  thus  wedded  to  their  sins  and  will  not  part  with  them —

1.  They  shall  be  made  to  part  with  their  treasures  (ver.  3).  Both  the  stores  of
364


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  xnt


the  city  and  the  products  of  the  country  will  be  seized  by  the  Chaldeans,  Justly
are  men  stripped  of  that  with  wliich  they  have  served  their  idols,  and  made  the
food  and  fuel  of  their  lusts.  What  we  make  for  a  sin  (ver.  3),  God  will  make  for
a  spoil.

2.  They  shall  be  made  to  part  with  their  inheritance  (ver.  4).

{a.)  God  owns  it  was  their  "  heritage,^  and  that  He  gave  it  them.  It  was  an
aggravation  of  their  folly  in  throwing  themselves  out  of  the  possession  of  it.

(6.)  Their  discontinuance  in  occupancy  of  the  land  should  give  it  rest.  The  word
here  used,  discontinue^  is  the  word  used  in  the  appointment  (Ex.  xxiii.  11)  that
the  land  should  rest  one  year  in  seven.  They  did  not  observe  that  law,  and  now
God  would  compel  them  to  let  it  rest.  But  it  should  be  no  rest  to  them,  for  "  they
should  serve  their  enemies  in  a  land  they  knew  not."

Observe  (i.)  Sin  works  ^,  discontinuance  of  our  comforts;  deprives  us  of  the  enjoy-
ment of  that  which  God  has  given  us.

Observe  (ii.)  A  discontinuance  of  the  possession  is  not  a  defeasance  of  the  right.
It  is  intimated  that  upon  their  repentance  they  should  recover  possession  again.—
M.  Henry,

Section  5-11.— Spiritual  Corruption  Traced  to  its  Root-causes.

All  this  outward  perfidy  and  prostitution  are  but  manifestations  of  inward  and
spiritual  apostasy.  The  whole  affections  and  dispositions  of  the  soul  have  gone
astray  from  God,  and  therefore  their  moral  conduct  has  become  degraded,  and  their
religious  behaviour  disloyal.  This  section  delineates  three  radical  defects,  and  to
each  is  attached  its  corresponding  and  appropriate  judgment.

I.  A  perverse  disposition.

1.  Its  action.  It  rests  not  in  Jehovah,  but  regards  flesh  as  its  better  confidence,
seeking  in  man  the  spring  and  supply  of  good  (ver.  5).

2.  Its  judgment.  The  forlorn  and  deserted  picture  of  ver.  6  supplies  an  idea  of
the  consequences  of  deserting  God.  This  desolate  result  is  further  emphasised  by
the  contrast  presented  in  vers.  7  and  8.

II.  Perfldiousness  of  heart.  Total  faithlessness,  and  illimitable  trickery.

1.  The  depths  of  its  deceptiveness  human  thought  fails  to  reckon  (ver.  9).

2.  God's  reckoning  and  punishment  will  rest  upon  His  complete  knowledge  of
the  heart's  wickedness  (ver.  10).

IIL  Impetuous  avaxice. — Ver  11.

1.  It  cruelly  acquires  that  for  which  it  restlessly  craves.  Seizes  as  its  own  the
treasures  of  others.

2.  It  forcibly  relinquishes  the  spoil  it  has  violently  seized.  Brief  years  are
threatened,  and  a  fool's  end.

Section  12-18. — Safety  and  Vindication  Sought  in  God.

Here  the  prophet  turns  from  the  corruption  ot  his  people,  saddened  and  sickened
at  heart,  to  meditate  on  his  God  and  his  personal  safety  in  Him.  This  was  the
realisation  of  the  Psalmist's  prayer:  "  When  my  heart  is  overwhelmed,  lead  me  to
the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  I."     Then  there  arise  before  his  contemplation —

I.  Majestic  guarantees  for  the  godly  soul.— Vers.  12,  13.  He  apostrophises
God.      [See  Ldt.  Grit,  on  verse.]

1.  He  celebrates  the  power  and  glory  of  God,  "  Thou  Throne"  symbol  of
royal  power  and  supreme  sway.  "Throne  of  Glory,"  language  expressive  of
highest  majesty,  surpassing  all  powers,  most  glorious  in  royalty,  dominion,  and
dignity.

2.  The  eternal  excellency  of  God,  "  On  high  from  the  beginning."  Exalted  on
high,  since  loftiest  glory  is  His  ;  yet  also  highest  in  excellency  ;  for  who  in  grace
and  glory  can  be  compared  to  God  ?     And  ''  from  the  beginning" — *'  or  ever  Thou

305


ofiAP.  xrn.  HOMILMTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


hadst  formed  the  earth  and  the  world,"  or  from  the  outset  of  Israel's  national  exist-
ence, God  has  been  supreme ;  supreme  in  personal  majesty,  supreme  as  Israel's  Lord.

3.  I'he  tievout  souPs  hiding-place.  "  Thou  place  of  our  sanctuary  " — for  security,
rest,  reverence,  and  Vjliss.

4.  IsraeVs  covenanted  Hope.  "  O  Jehovah ! "  name  of  God  in  which  He  is
pledged  to  His  people.  "  The  Hope  of  Israel ;  '*  never  having  failed  them  through
all  their  past  history.  Their  enduring  Hope^  notwithstanding  all  they  have  done  to
alienate  Thee.  Their  sole  Hope^  for,  losing  Thee,  what  have  they  left  1  ^\\e\T future
Hope  ;  for  after  mournful  desertion  of  Thee,  they  will  return  to  the  Lord  as  their
**  everlasting  strength."

5.  The  living  spring  of  refreshing.  **  Fountain  of  living  waters."  (See  Notez
on  chaps,  ii.  13,  ix.  1.)

Thereupon  Jeremiah  utters  his  assertion,  that  forsaking  Him  will  eventuate  in
titamji  while  they  live,  and  contemptuous  oblivion  as  the  end  !

n.  Fearless  appropriation  of  Divine  graciousness. — Vers.  14-18.  Jeremiah
lays  his  claim  to  all  that  he  knows  God  to  be.  Treasures  of  grace  are  valueless
8  far  as  we  are  concerned,  unless  they  become  ours.  The  prophet  appeals  to
God  for —

1.  Present  tranquillity  and  safety  (ver.  14).  This  appeal  for  healing  suggests  the
troubled  and  aggrieved  state  of  his  spirit  (Ps.  tL  3,  xxx.  3).  For  salvation ;  that
his  life  was  encompassed  with  perils — from  scorners  and  unbelievers,  who  rejected
his  word  and  his  claim  to  prophetic  mission.  He  bases  his  appeal  on  what  God
tvas  to  him — *'  my  praise  : "  he  had  boasted  in  God,  and  had  occasion  to  rejoice  in
God ;  and  more,  Jehovah  had  delighted  him  with  favours,  and  distinguished  him
with  honours  as  His  servant.

2.  Official  vindication.  He  was  ridiculed  (ver.  15).  He  had  been  faithful  (ver.  16).
God  was  his  witness — "Thou  knowest;"  and  that  guaranteed  that  God  would
make  others  know  the  verity  of  the  words  he  had  spoken  in  God's  name.

3.  Future  refuge.  A  "  day  of  evil  "  was  coming ;  full  of  "  terror  "  to  evil-doers
(ver.  17).  But  in  that  evil  time  God  would  discriminate  between  the  persecutors
and  the  persecuted,  confounding  them  but  sheltering  the  prophet ;  and  God  would
fulfil  His  predictions  in  their  complete  destruction.  Refutation  of  his  foes,  refuge
for  himself.

"  Double  destruction  ;  "  .«.,  sharing  in  the  national  ruin  which  was  impending,
and  suffering  for  their  sin  in  persecuting  and  deriding  God's  messenger.

Section  19-27. — Exhortations  to  Hallow  the  Sabbath.

A  sermon  which  the  prophet  received  from,  the  Lord,  and  was  ordered  to  deliver
in  the  most  solemn  and  public  manner — proclaimed  in  all  the  places  of  concourse,
"  the  gates."  First  at  the  court-gate,  whereby  "  the  kings  of  Judah  "  enter  :  let
them  be  told  their  duty  first,  and  particularly  this  duty.  Then  also  in  all  the  gates
of  Jerusalem,  as  being  a  matter  of  great  and  general  concern.

L  How  the  Sabbath  is  to  he  sanctified,  and  what  is  the  law  concerning  it.

1.  They  must  rest  from  their  worldly  employ.  '*  Bear  no  burdens  "  into  the
city,  nor  carry  any  out  of  their  houses.

2.  They  must  apply  themselves  to  the  proper  business  of  the  day.  "  Hallow  ye
the  Sabbath-day,"  <fec.  (ver.  22).     Consecrate  it  to  the  service  of  God.

3.  They  must  herein  be  very  circumspect.  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves  "  (ver.  20).
Where  God  is  jealous,  we  must  be  cautious.

4.  They  must  observe  the  statute  made  and  provided.  This  was  no  new  imposi-
tion, but  what  "  I  commanded  your  fathers."

II.  How  the  Sabbath  had  been  profaned — Ver.  23.  Their  fathers'  disobedience
in  this  respect  is  mentioned  to  show —

1.  Tliat  there  needed  a  reformation  in  Sabbath  conduct.

36r>


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xvn.


2,  That  God  had  a  just  controversy  with  them,  for  the  long  transgression  of  this
law.

3.  And  because  they  disregarded  this  law  with  the  intent  to  evade  all  instruction
on  other  commands.  Where  Sabbaths  are  neglected,  all  religion  sensibly  goes  to
decay.

III.  With  what  blessings  God  would  reward  Sabbath  sanctification.  Though
their  fathers  had  been  guilty  of  its  desecration,  yet  if  (ver.  24)  they  would  make
conscience  of  Sabbath  sanctification —

1.  The  court  shall  flourish  (ver.  25).  The  honour  of  the  government  is  the  joy
of  the  kingdom  ;  and  the  support  of  religion  would  contribute  greatly  to  both.

2.  The  city  shall  flourish  (ver,  25).  "  This  city  shall  remain  for  ever.**  What-
ever supports  religion  tends  to  establish  the  civil  interests  of  a  land.

3.  The  country  shall  flourish  (ver.  26).  The  cities  of  Judah  and  the  land  oj
Benjamin  shall  be  replenished  with  inhabitants,  abounding  in  plenty  and  living
in  peace,  which  shall  appear  in  the  multitude  and  value  of  their  offerings  to  God.
By  this  the  flourishing  of  a  country  may  be  judged  of :  What  does  it  for  the  honour
of  God?

4.  The  church  shall  flourish  (ver.  24).  "  Meat  offerings,"  dec.  Everything  shall
go  in  the  right  channel.

V.  With  what  judgments  God  would  punish  Sabbath  profanation. — Ver.  27.

1.  The  enemy  would  besiege  their  city,  "  kindle  a  fire  in  the  gates."  And  justly
shall  those  gates  be  fired  that  are  not  used  to  shut  out  sin,  and  to  keep  the  people
in  to  an  attendance  on  their  duty.

2.  The  fire  should  destroy  their  palaces — where  the  princes  and  nobles  dwell ;
who  did  not  use  their  power  and  interest,  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  to  keep  up
the  honour  of  God's  Sabbaths.

3.  The  fire  shall  not  be  quenched,  until  it  has  laid  the  whole  city  in  ruins.
Fulfilled  by  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans  (chap.  lii.  13).  The  profanation  of  the
Sabbath  is  a  sin  for  which  God  has  often  contended  with  a  people  by  fire. — Comp.
M.  Henry*

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XVII.

Ver.  1.   Theme:  Sins  hold   on  the  eff(yrts.     If  sin  was  ever  to  be  removed,

INMOST  MAN.     "  It  is  graven  upon  the  "  a  new  heart "  must   be  given.     And

table  of  their  heart."  only   God   can   "  create   in  us   a   clean

Suggestions : —  heart."

i   &in  indelibly  impresses  itself  upon  See  Addenda:   Indelible   Records

tinners.     Its  mark  is  deep.     Its  influ-  of  Sin.
ence  is  not  superficial  or  evanescent,  but

ineffaceable  and  perpetual.  Theme:  the  deep-seated  character

ii.  Sin  had  become  inwrought  into  their  OF  sin.     The  hardness  of  Judah's  heart

affections.     Worked  into  the  very  texture  is  repeated  in  the  stubbornness  of  bar-

of  the  heart.  barian,  Roman,   Greek,  Scythian ;  seen

iii.   Hid  in  the  deepest  secrecy  of  their  indeed  in  ourselves.

being.     The  heart  is  a  profound  hiding-  I.  Answer  the  question,  What  is  sin  7

place.     It  is  the  citadel  and  secret  chani-  Always  hearing  about  it,  from  preacher ;

ber  of  the  entire  man.  and  reading  about  it,  in  every  Scripture

iv.   It  cannot  be  ignored  in  their  own  page.     What  is  it  1

consciousness.     Every  movement — affec-  Pharisee  says  :  *'  It  is  eating  with  un-

tion   and    action — of    the    heart   would  washen  hands,"  <fec.     But  to  break  some

make  the  presence  therein  of  sin  evident.  of   the   commandments,    especially    the

It    would    testify    its    presence    by   the  ecclesiastical    commandments,    of   men,

force  of  feeling.  may  be  virtuous,  and  indicate  enlight-

V,    Oamwt   be   erc^sed    by  their  own  eumeutl

di»7


OHAP.  XTII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


Sin  is  the  repudiation  of  our  obliga-
tions to  God.  "Against  Thee  have  I
sinned."

IL  How  is  the  fixedness  of  sin
proved  1

1.  It  is  in  the  very  heart  of  man.
Deep  ingrained.

2.  They  sinned  in  their  veiy  religion.
**  On  the  horns  of  their  altars."  Con-
verted men  frequently  prefer  the  form
of  religion  most  gratifying  to  their  tastes,
ears,  and  sight.  Or  they  stain  the  horns
of  God's  altars  by  their  own  righteousness,
by  carelessness,  by  vaiii  thoughts,  by  hypo-
crisy, — as  Demas  and  Judas.

IIL  What  is  the  cause  of  this?
How  did  sin  get  such  a  firm  footing  in
humanity  ?     The  answer  is —

1.  We  must  never  forget  the  Fall,  We
are  none  of  us  as  God  made  us.  **  We
are  born  in  sin,"  (fee.

2.  Our  habits  of  sin.  Well  may  sin
be  deeply  engraven  in  the  man  who  has
continued  in  his  iniquity  for  twenty,
forty,  perhaps  seventy  years.  "  Can  the
Ethiopian  change,"  &c.  Use  is  second
nature.

3.  Sin  is  a  most  clinging  and  defiling
thing.  One  license  renders  us  easily  en-
slaved.

4.  The  prince  of  the  powers  of  dark-
ness allies  himself  with  sin.  He  will
never  let  the  tinder  lie  idle  for  want  of
sparks.

IV.  What  is  the  cure  for  all  this  ?
Can  sin,  thus  ingrained,  ever  be  got  outi
It  must  be  got  out  if  we  are  ever  to
enter  heaven.  Only  done  by  super-
natural processes.

1.  Christ  Jesus  does  take  away  these
deeply-inscribed  lines  of  sin  from  human
nature.  It  is  part  of  the  covenant  of
grace  and  part  of  His  Gospel  that  Jesus
can  give  to  us  hearts  free  from  tendency
to  sin.

2.  And  since  the  guiltiness  of  sin  is
as  permanent  as  sin  itself,  Jesus  Christ
is  able  to  take  our  guilt  away.  '*  The
blood  (»f  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth
us  from  all  sin."  And  the  vilest  sinner
may  be  *'  made  partakers  of  the  Divine
nature,  having  escaped  the  corruption
which  is  in  the  world  through  lust." —
fS}>u)geon  :  '*  Metropolitan  Pulpit,^'  No.

ai2.


Ver.  2.  Theme :  Our  children's  wb-
COLLECTION  OF  OUR  SIN.  "  Whilst  their
children  remember  their  altars,'*  <kc.

Probably  we  here  have —

i.  An  allusion  to  their  sacrifice  of
children  to  Molech.

il  The  horrors  of  such  blood-stained
rites  would  be  for  ever  engraven  upon
the  memory  of  any  who  were  present  to
witness  them,

I.  Our  evil  deeds  vividly  impress
our  children.

II.  Fixed  upon  their  memory,  our
children  may  keep  alive  recollections
we  fain  would  obliterate.

III.  Parental  sins  will  reappear  in
our  children's  lives.  The  horrid  ghosts
of  our  old  iniquities  resuscitated  !

IV.  Remembrancers  of  old  iniquities
crowd  around  our  life.  We  may  shun
suggestive  scenes  that  bring  up  dark
memories,  but  our  '*  children  remember
the  groves,'*  <fea,  and  will  point  them
out  to  us.  We  cannot  clear  the  world
of  these  accusers.

V.  Children  may  thus  become  wit-
nesses against  us.

1.  By  their  inability  to  forget  what
we  would  gladly  consign  to  oblivion  ;

2.  By  their  reproduction  of  our  evil
habits,  continuing  the  wicked  ways  they
learned  from  us  ;  and

3.  Before  God  in  the  last  day  of  ac-
count, when  we,  and  our  children  with
us,  stand  in  the  judgment.

Vers.  3,  4.  See  note  in  Geog.  Refer-
ences ;  also  Lit.  Grit,  on  these  verses ;
also  Homilies  and  Comments  on  chap.
XV.  13,  U.

Comments — "  My  mountain  in  the
field  :  "  Jerusalem  or  Zion  ;  called  "  the
Rock  of  the  plain"  in  chap.  xxi.  13,  and
*'  Mountain  of  Jehovah,"  Micah  iv.  2.

"  Being  the  place  which  Jehovah  had
chosen  as  the  residence  of  His  visible
glory.  He  claims  it  as  His ;  just  as  He
frequently  calls  it  *  My  holy  mountain '
(Isa.  xi.  9,  Ivi.  7)." — Henderson.

Ver.  5.  Theme  :  The  accursed  trust.

The  Jews,  in  looking  now  to  the
Assyrians  and  then  to  the  Egyptians,
thought  to  gain  sufficient  defence  against
God  Himself.     This  false  confidence  waa


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP,  xyh


a  hindrance  to  tlieir  relying  on  tlie  favour
of  God,  and  kept  tliem  from  rei)entance.
I.  Men  axe  variously  deceived  while
trusting  in  men.

1.  They  begin  with  themselves.  Every
one  is  inflated  with  vain  confidence,
either  in  his  own  prudence,  dexterity,  or
power.  There  is  no  one,  even  the  most
wretched,  who  does  not  trust  in  himself
before  he  trusts  in  others;  no  one  so
contemptible  but  that  he  swells  with
some  secret  pride.

2.  They  take  aids  to  themselves  from
every  quarter.  This  is  the  out- working
of  what  they  deem  their  own  prudence.
Yet  their  goings  round  are  useless  ;  and
not  only  so,  but  they  turn  out  to  their
own  destruction.

II.  God  derides  the  folly  of  such
delusive  trust  in  men.

1.  He  declares  that  they  who  so  trust
are  *^  cursed."  This  curse  of  God  ought
to  strike  us  with  terror;  for  we  hence
learn  that  God  is  highly  displeased  with
all  those  who  seek  their  own  salvation  in
the  world  and  in  creatures.

2.  He  charges  such  with  estrangement
of  heart  from  Himself.  When  confidence
is  reposed  in  flesh,  God  is  deprived  of
His  own  honour.  These  two  things  can-
not be  connected — confidence  in  flesh,
and  reliance  on  God.  Wiien  water  is
blended  with  fire,  both  perish.  To  at-
tempt to  unite  trust  in  man  with  trust
in  God  is  like  mixing  heaven  and  earth
together.  It  is  to  confound  the  order  of
nature,  when  men  imagine  that  they  have
two  objects  of  trust,  and  ascribe  half  of
their  salvation  to  God  and  half  to  them-
selves or  to  other  men.

3.  All  are  apostates  and  deserters  from
God  who  fix  their  hope  on  men.  True
in  the  present  life;  twofold  a  madness
in  respect  of  eternal  things, — Arranged
from  Calvin.

Comments —

Ver.  5.  "  There  is  great  occasion  for
this  cursed  dependence  on  flesh,  when
one,  from  the  hope  of  good  personal
protection,  gives  up  the  work  of  the
Lord  to  the  powers  of  the  earth.  It  is
true  the  Church  is  to  have  foster-parents
who  are  kings,  but,  nevertheless,  neither
kings  nor  princes  are  its  tutelar  deities,
5a


much  less  lords  and  commanders  of  the
Church  ;  but  One  is  our  Master,  One  our
Judge,  One  our  King — the  Crucified."
— Zinzendorf

Ver.   5-8.     Theme :    The  duty  op

TRUSTING  IN  GOD.

Every  created  being  derives  its  exist-
ence and  support  from  God.  Yet  man  is
prone  to  depend  on  the  creature  rather
than  on  Him.  Though  constantly  disap-
pointed, he  still  leans  on  an  arm  of  flesh.
But  such  conduct  is  justly  reprobated.

I.  Tke  characters  that  are  con-
trasted.

(a.)  Every  man  by  nature  trusts  in
man,  makes  flesh  his  arm,  and  in  his
heart  departs  from  the  Lord.  We  need
not  go  to  heathens  or  infidels  to  find
persons  of  this  description.  We  need
only  search  the  records  of  our  own  con-
science. In  temporal  things  we  never
think  of  looking  above  the  creature.
If  they  be  prosperous,  we  trust  in  un-
certain riches,  and  take  tlie  glory  to  our-
selves. If  adverse,  we  lean  to  our  own
understanding  and  exertions,  or  rely  for
succour  on  our  friends.  In  spiritual
things  we  seek  to  establish  a  righteous-
ness of  our  own.  We  expect  to  repent
and  serve  God  by  our  own  strength.

(6.)  The  true  Christian  "  trusts  in  the
Lord,  and  makes  the  Lord  his  hope,"
He  trusts  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as
the  God  of  providence.  He  commits  his
afi*airs  to  Him,  expecting  His  [)romised
aid.  He  trusts  also  in  Jesus  as  the
God  of  grace.  He  renounces  all  hope  in
his  own  goodness  or  resolutions.  These
marks  afford  a  sure  line  of  distinction
between  the  nominal  and  real  Christian.
Nor  is  this  difi^erence  between  them  of
trifling  import.

II.  Their  respective  conditions.
Men's  eternal  state  will  be  fixed  with  per-
fect equity.  The  conditions  of  the  charac-
ters before  us  are  strongly  contrasted : —

1.  Simply:  "  blessed,"  <kc. ;  "cursed,"
<kc.  What  can  be  more  important  than
these  declarations?  They  are  not  the
dictates  of  enthusiasm,  but  the  voice  of
God.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  God
has  given  His  Son  to  be  our  Saviour;
but  while  some  confide  in  Him,  others,
by   not   trusting   in   Him,    reject    Him.

3(39


OHAF.  XTII.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH


How  reasonable  then  is  it  that  a  curse
should  attach  to  tliese  and  a  blessing  to
those  !  Such  a  difference  in  their  condi-
tions seems  the  necessary  result  of  their
own  conduct.  Let  every  one  inquire
which  of  these  conditions  he  has  reason
to  expect.

2.  Figuratively  :  "  heath  in  desort," —
"  tree  planted  by  the  waters."  To
mark  the  contrast  more  clearly,  it  is
further  observed  that  both  the  blessing
and  the  curse  shall  be —

(a.)  Abundant.  The  «^7i6eZiever  "  shall
be  like  the  heath  in  the  desert."  He
shall  be  left  in  a  state  of  extreme  barren-
ness and  wretchedness  ;  and  this,  too,
amidst  all  his  boasted  fulness  (Job  xx.
22).  The  believer  "  shall  be  as  a  tree
planted  by  the  waters,"  <fec.  He  shall
be  made  flourishing  and  happy  by  rich
supplies  of  grace  (Phil.  iv.  9).

(6.)  Unmixed.  The  w«6e/iei^er  *' shall
not  see  when  good  cometh."  He  re-
ceives none  of  the  heavenly  dew  that
falls  around  him.  The  believer  "  shall  not
see  when  heat  cometh,  but  his  leaf  shall
be  green,  nor  shall  he  be  careful  in  the
year  of  drought."  He  may  experience
heat  and  drought,  i.e.,  he  shall,  however,
not  be  injured,  but  benefited  by  them
(Heb.  xii.  11).

(c.)  Eternal.  The  unbeliever  "  shall
inhabit  the  parched  places  in  the  wilder-
ness, in  a  salt  land,  and  not  inhabited."
He  shall  be  an  outcast  from  God  in  the
regions  of  misery.  The  believer  "  shall
not  cease  from  yielding  fruit."  His
present  enjoyments  are  the  pledge  and
earnest  of  eternal  happiness.

Infer  (1.)  How  glorious  a  person  must
Christ  be  !  If  He  were  a  mere  creature,
it  would  be  ruinous  in  the  extreme  to
trust  in  Him.  (2.)  How  are  we  all  con-
cerned to  trust  in  Christ.  God  regards,
not  merely  our  outward  conduct,  but
the  frame  of  our  hearts.  On  this  our
present  and  everlasting  happiness  de-
pends. — Simeon.

See  also  Noticeable  Topics.

Vers.  5,  6.  Tlieme:  The  heath  in  the
DESERT.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Cursed  be
the  man  that  trusteth  in  man, and  maketh
Hesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departetli
Ifum  the  Lord.  For  lie  sUj^U  be  Uke  tlje
^70


heath  in  the  desert,  and  shall  not  see
when  good  cometh  ;  but  shall  inhabit
the  parched  places  in  the  wilderness,  in
a  salt  land  and  not  inhabited."

The  Jews  had  withdrawn  dependence
from  God,  and  trusted  to  themselves  and
Egypt.  They  were  delivered  to  the  Baby-
lonians. To  this  the  text  refers  prima-
rily.    But  it  may  apply  to  alL

Two  definitions  of  a  heath,  A  shrub
growing  in  barren  places,  and  a  sandy
barren  plain  of  Arabia  seldom  rained
upon.  These  plains  and  the  shrubs  they
produce  do  not  "see  when  good  cometh."
The  trees  of  Canaan  by  the  rivers  are
refreshed  by  nightly  dews.  God's  vine-
yard is  as  a  watered  garden,  and  yields
the  rose  of  Sharon  and  the  lily  of  the
valley,  but  the  wastes  of  Arabia,  doomed
to  barrenness,  never  "  see  when  good
cometh. "

I.  Let  us  learn  against  whom  this
curse  is  denounced,  and  trace  resem-
blances between  them  and  the  heath,  <fec.
They  are  those  who  disclaim  dependence
on  God — idolators,  infidels,  and  the  pro-
fane.

1.  Those  who  do  not  realise  their
dependence  on  God  for  all  true  happiness^
but  think  it  lies  in  worldly  gain.  They
make  no  daily  petition  to  God  for  it,
Tlie  prayerless,  stupid,  and  worldly  in-
herit the  curse  in  the  text.

2.  Those  who  trust  in  man  and  make
flesh  their  arm,  and  neglect  to  fix  all
dependence  on  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Spirit.  They  do  not  feel  they  are  hope-
less and  helpless,  or  they  would  cast
themselves  upon  Christ  as  the  only
hope  of  sinners;  they  are  therefore  under
the  curse  against  those  who  trust  in
man.

3.  There  is  yet  another  class  under
this  curse.  Some  are  in  the  Church ;
some  are  not.  Punctual  perhaps  on
ordinances,  they  depend  upon  a  form
of  godliness  without  the  power,  and,
excepting  a  little  animal  sympathy,
remain  cold  as  ever.  They  are  a
numerous  class  even  in  the  Church  of
Christ.     "  Five  were  wise,  and  five  were

foolish,"

II.  How  do  these  resemble  the
heath  in  the  desert?— the  prayerless,
stupid,  awd  worldly.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  XV1I»


1.  In  barrenness  and  deformity.  God
gave  them  powers  to  bear  fruit,  but  He
conies  year  after  year  and  finds  nothing,
and  worse — a  crop  of  misshapen  shrubs.
After  so  many  benefits,  they  refuse  to
serve  Him.

2.  T'hey  are  like  the  heath  in  being
desolate^  forsaken,  and  unhlesU  No  voice
of  joy  or  song  is  heard  on  the  heath,
while  those  who  wait  on  God  are  re-
freshed like  Eden.  Those  who  are  like
the  heath  in  barrenness  and  deformity
shall  resemble  it  in  desolation  and  woe.

3.  While  the  holy  land  is  refreshed
with  dew  from  heaven,  the  desert  remains
parched  as  before.  This  feature  of  resem-
blance exists  at  this  time.  Showers  of
grace  fall  on  some,  but  the  barren  sands
know  not  "  when  good  cometh."

4.  Showers  falling  on  desert  heath  only
promote  the  growth  of  deformed  shrubs  ;
and  the  influence  of  heaven  falling  on
this  class  calls  forth  a  more  fatal  resist-
ance of  the  Holy  Spirit.

5.  The  heath  cannot  be  made  fruitful^
and  all  God's  visitations  fall  unregarded
upon  many.

6.  It  is  plain  that,  while  many  obey
the  Gospel  call,  others  remain  desolate  and
uncheered  by  any  heavenly  influence.

7.  Some  of  the  awakened  may  say,  "  /
cannot  change  my  own  heart ;  I  do  the
best  I  can  " — Do  you  1  even  for  a  day  ?
Drop  these  excuses,  and  cry,  "  God  be
mercifsl  to  me  a  sinner."

8.  Others  resemble  the  heath  in  defor-
mity and  barrenness.  They  resort  to  sac-
raments, but  yield  no  fruit,  and  so  will
they  remain  till  death.

Application —

(a.)  /  address  those  who  cast  off  fear
and  restrain  prayer.  Waste  not  out,  I
pray  you,  your  life,  seeking  independent
happiness.  Return  and  seek  happiness
in  God  alone,  and  become  rich  for  eternity,

(6.)  /  warn  you  who  are  awakened.
Trust  not  in  ministers  or  Christians.
Only  Christ  can  give  the  mighty  blessing.
Let  Calvary's  Voice  draw  you  to  Him.

(c.)  I  speak  to  those  who  think  they  love
God  better  than  father,  mother,  or  life,
yet  are  chained  to  earth — these  are  the
most  discouraging  of  all  men.  It  is
easy  to  alarm  the  humble,  but  a  task  to
destroy  fj^lse  hopes,


(d,)  Let  the  dear  loved  children  of
God  receive  the  precious  promises  suc-
ceeding the  text :  "  Blessed  is  the  man
that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  whose
hope  the  Lord  is." — Edward  Griffin^
D.D.

Ver.   7.  Theme :  Making   God  oub

TRUST.

Man,  sensible  of  his  weakness,  re-
quires for  his  happiness  some  object
without  himself  in  which  he  can  trust.
In  what  do  men  trust?  God  alone
furnishes  an  object  adequate  to  the  re-
quirements of  our  trust.  All  lesser  ob-
jects are  frail,  variable,  uncertain.

L  The  soul's  right  and  only  trust.

1.  We  owe  it  to  the  supremacy  of
the  divine  nature.

2.  Entire  resignation  to  God's  wis-
dom and  will.

3.  Entire  withdrawal  of  our  trust
from  all  inferior  things.

4.  Sincere  acceptance  of  Christ  as
our  Saviour.

6.  Sincere  effort  to  live  a  holy  and
pious  life.

IL  The  blessedness  with  which
godly  trust  is  crowned.  This  will  be
seen  in  the  following  contrast  of  believer
and  unbeliever.

1.  The  objects  of  the  unbeliever's
trust  are  uncertain  and  insignificant;
the  believer's,  certain  and  glorious.

2.  The  one  inadequate  and  perishing,
the  other  all-sufficient  and  abiding  (1
Pet.  i.  4).

3.  The  one  bears  a  burdened  con-
science and  a  character  ill  at  ease,  the
other  enjoys  peace  and  rest  (Matt.  xi.
28-30).

4.  The  one  regards  God  as  his  foe,
and  resembles  the  inferior  objects  of
his  trust ;  the  other  regards  God  as  his
friend,  enjoys  His  protection  and  fel-
lowship, and  resembles  Him.

Learn —

1.  Not  to  be  deluded  by  inferior
things.

2.  Seek  this  blessing  by  submission
to  God's  will  in  a  crucified  Saviour. —
E.  Jerman.

Comments —

*'  Blessed  are  those  teachers,  who  have

371


CBAP.  XVII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


betaken  themselves  to  His  protection,
who  once  promised  His  Church  that
even  the  gates  of  hell  should  not  pre-
vail against  it.  Who  has  ever  been
put  to  shame  who  trusted  in  Himi" —
Zimendorf,

Ver.  8.  Theme:  Verdure  in  thb
MIDST  OF  DESOLATION.  "  He  shall  not
see  when  heat  cometh."

Nothing  in  nature  more  admirable
than  the  strange  and  unlikely  circum-
stances in  which  we  often  see  plants
and  trees  retaining  their  sap  and  ver-
dure, and  manifesting  the  most  luxuriant
fruitfulness.  By  a  wonderful  instinct
of  their  nature,  they  adapt  themselves
each  to  their  appointed  place,  and  thus
continue  to  live  and  flourish  abundantly
where  another  would  perish  in  an  hour.
No  natural  influence  more  fatal  to  vege-
table life  than  extreme  drought ;  yet,
even  that  in  some  favoured  instances
may  prove  innocuous.  Some  plants
and  trees  "  do  not  see  when  heat  cometh,
but  their  leaf  is  green,"  <fec.

This  beautiful  fact  the  prophet  trans-
fers from  the  natural  world  to  the
spiritual  by  way  of  illustration  and  ana-
logy. There,  too,  often  verdure  appears
in  midst  of  desolation — life  in  midst  of
death.  True  happiness  and  true  holi-
ness depend,  not  on  outward  advantages,
but  on  inward  state.

Let  us  consider  further  this  interest-
ing and  instructive  phenomenon.

I.  The  fact  itself.  Meets  us  every-
where in  the  natural  world.  So  also  in
the  kingdom  of  grace.  Spiritual  health
depends  not  alone  or  mainly  on  our  cir-
cumstances, but  on  the  temper  and  state
of  our  souls.  In  the  cottage,  the  palace ;
in  want,  in  affluence ;  in  retirement,  on
busy  Exchange  ;  in  youth,  in  age  ;  in
health,  in  disease  and  sickness,  God's
Enochs  have  "  walked  with  God."
Every  situation  not  equally  favourable
to  soul's  life,  but  none  utterly  unfavour-
able;  e,g,f  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,
Joseph,  Caleb,  Samuel,  Elijah,  Jere-
miah, Daniel,  Esther,  and  others,  are
witnesses  to  this  truth.  Look,  then,
within  for  source  of  weakness,  decay,
low  spiritual  state.
JI.  The  explanation.  The  man
372


**  trusteth  in   the   Lord,   and  his  hope
the  Lord  is."

L  He  lives  in  constant  believing  com-
munion with  God.

2.  He  improves  what  advantages  he
possesses.  They  may  be  few,  but  he
aspires  after  and  improves  them.  If
Jesus  is  "  passing  by,"  he,  like  Zaccheus,
will  be  on  the  sycamore- tree.

3.  He  retains  the  good  he  receives.
Careful  to  retain  the  fruits  of  opportu-
nities after  they  are  gone.  Those  who
make  rich  are  not  only  they  who  get
much,  but  who  keep  what  they  get,

4.  He  sedulotLsly  improves  and  turns
to  account  the  grace  he  has.  The  surest
way  alike  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen
any  holy  principle  is  to  carry  it  into
action.  Talents  are  increased  by  trad-
ing. The  idle  Christian  is  a  feeble,
drooping,  pining  Christian.

Such  is  the  secret  of  a  holy,  happy
walk  with  God,  in  any  times  and  in  the
worst  times.  Get  truly  planted  by  the
waters  of  salvation,  and  your  roots
stretched  out  by  the  rivers  of  God. —
Bev.  Islay  Bums^  Dundee:  **  Family
Treasury,"  1859.

Comments —

"  The  Musorites  changed  the  word
FEAR  into  'shall  not  see  when  the  heat
cometh,'  in  order  to  make  it  correspond
with  ver.  6.  But  the  change  is  not
merely  unauthorised,  but  meaningless.
God's  people  see  the  heat  when  it  comes ;
they  feel  trouble  as  much  as  other
people,  but  they  do  not  fear  it,  because
they  know —

**  i.  That  it  is  for  their  good,  and

"  ii.  That  God  will  give  them  strength
to  bear  it." — Dr,  Payne  Smith.

"The  servants  of  God  are  planted,
as  it  were,  in  a  moist  soil,  irrigated
continually  by  streams  of  water.  The
prophet  intimates  that  God^s  children  are
not  exempt  from  adversities  :  the  *  heat
cometh,'  and  they  feel  the  heat  of  the
sun,  being,  like  trees,  exposed  to  it;
but  moisture  is  supplied,  and  the  juice
diffuses  itself  through  all  the  branches.
Though  they  feel  great  heats  as  well  as
the  unbelieving,  for  this  is  common  to
both,  God's  children  shall  yet  he  kept  scfe  ;
ther^  js  a  remedy  for  them — their  root


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CElP.  XVTL


has  moisture.  The  word  rendered  *  see*
DK^>  dag,  means  to  fear  and  to  be  care-
ful ;  also  to  grievf,  and  so  some  render
it  here,  It  will  not  gi'ieve  ;  but  the  better
meaning  is,  It  shall  not  be  afraid  of
heat/' — Calvin.

Ver.    9.    Theme:  The  falsity   AlH)

FOULNESS  OF  MAN's  HEAHT.

The  Bible  reveals  what  man  would
have  failed  to  discern,  that  the  heart  is
the  root  of  character,  the  seat  of  the
moral  quality  attaching  to  the  thoughts
and  actions  of  men.  This  truth,  plainly
taught  in  Scripture,  accords  with  reason,
and  finds  irrefutable  proof  in  man's
career.  There  are  three  aspects  of  the
heart  here  susigested  : —

L  Surpassing  deceptiveness.  "  De-
ceitful above  all  things."

1.  Its  cruel  delusions.  It  often  prompts
a  man  to  evil,  promising  joy  and  reward,
then  leaves  him  befooled  by  his  desires ;
allures  him  to  follow  passion,  then
leaves  him  to  the  tortures  of  conscience;
assures  him  of  courage  in  difficult  hours,
then,  at  the  crisis,  leaves  him  trembling
in  fear,  &c.  It  jQatters  its  dupes ;  is  a
false  syren.

2.  Its  religious  frauds,  Fosters  hy-
pocrisy in  the  superficial,  urges  men  to
assume  a  religious  profession,  and  walk
as  if  God  were  being  reverently  served ;
and  then,  in  secret,  craves  and  impels
towards  hidden  vice  and  subtle  indul-
gences. Flatters  a  man  into  a  belief
in  his  own  goodness  when  life  is  plea-
sant and  easy  ;  and  then,  in  death,  mocks
and  chides  him  for  his  sin.

3.  Its  supreme  falsity.  "  Above  all
things."  Above  the  desert  mirage  ? —
Yes.  Above  gold  ? — Yes.  Above  plea-
sure  ? — Yes.  Above  fickle  beauty  1 — Yes.
For  the  heart  is  the  cause  of  all  deceits  ;
it  supplies  the  fantasy  in  us  which
makes  the  illusion  })ossible.

n.  Malignant  guiltiness.  "Despe-
rately wicked."

1.  Its  action  in  the  region  of  common
life.  To  what  detestable  iniquities  would
it  impel  men  !  Judge  of  this  by  con-
sidering the  filthy,  atrocious,  idolatrous
customs  and  social  habits  which  pre-
vailed in  Oriental  scenes.  Where  the
passions  are  left  unrestrained  by  civi-


lisation and  religion,  what  a  foul  life  is
man's  !  Nearer  home  :  what  revolting,
sensual,  brutal  careers  men  live  amongst
us  where  neither  fear  of  God  nor  regard
of  man  rule  !  What  are  the  furious
schemes  of  the  assassin,  the  usurper,
the  traducer,  the  felon,  the  adulterer,
but  illustrations  of  the  heart's  unbridled
lusts  !  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil
thoughts,  murders,"  &c.

2.  Its  action  in  the  sphere  of  religion.

We  expect  of  the  heart  that  it  responds
to  love;  but  how  does  it  respond  to  "the
great  love  wherewith  God  hath  loved
us  "1  How  does  it  keep  outside  its  closed
doors  Him  who  long  has  knocked  there
in  vain,  yet  "  who  first  loved  us  "  1  And
after  having  avowedly,  in  discipleship  of
Christ,  given  Him  our  heart,  how  does
*'an  evil  heart  of  unbelief"  lead  us  to
"  depart  from  the  living  God,"  and  urge
us  by  fervent  cravings  to  fall  back  into
sin !

IIL  Profound  inscrutahleness.  "Who
can  know  iti"  Having  used  the  strongest
language  to  describe  it,  yet  words  fail  to
tell  its  depths  of  iniquity.

Looking  on  the  loathsome  sights  of
vice,  squalor,  villatiy,  and  woe  around
us,  and  asking,  "Whence  came  these?"
Christ  replies,  ^^  Out  of  the  heart,"  The
heart's  wilfulness  "brought  death  into
the  world,  and  all  our  woe."  It  still
can  prompt  brutal  cruelty  to  requite
tender  love ;  it  still  stirs  the  lascivious
to  decoy  innocence  into  ruin  worse  than
death,  &c.

"  Who  can  know  "  his  own  heart  /
We  cry,  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he
should  do  this  thing  1"  yet  we  do  it,
and  worse  far.

"  Who  can  know  "  the  hearts  of  others  ?

Is  there  a  bound  which  the  heart's
impulses  will  not  pass  1  Is  there  a
thought,  at  whose  horribleness  the  mind
staggers,  and  of  which  we  exclaim,
"  Surely,  it  could  never  be  that  a  man  is
capable  of  it ! "  Yet  greater  enormities
are  being  wrought:  cold-blooded,  sinister,
vengeful,  devilish  !  "  Who  can  know
it?"

If  this  be  so  '  fween  man  and  man,
oh,  how  shall  we  fathom  the  depths  of
man's  great  criminality  to  God — slaying
His  Son;  to  Jesus — "crucifying  Him

373


CHAP.  XVIT


HOMILETIC  COMMEMARY :  JEREMIAH.


afresh  and  putting  Him  to  open  sliaiiie  ;"
to  the  Holy  Spirit — ''grieving  the  Holy
Spirit  of  God" !

(a.)  Do  you  think  this  description  exag-
geraud 'i  But  this  is  the  deceitfulness
of  your  hearty  flattering  you  that  you
cannot  be  so  bad,  or  are  not  so  bad  as
others.

(6.)  Should  not  this  urge  you  to  self-
abasement  before  the  Gross  ?  Boasting  no
more  your  self-righteousness,  and  hasten-
ing to  the  Fountain  opened  for  sin  and
unclean ness,  crying,  "  Create  in  me  a
clean  heart,"  <fec.

See  Addenda  on  vers.  9  and  10.
Falsity  op  Heart,  and  Seaechino
THE  Heaet.

Theme :  The  heaet's  deceitfulness

TOWARDS  ITSELF.

There  is  great  deceit  in  the  dealings
of  men  in  the  world,  in  their  counr<els
and  contrivances,  in  their  private  and
public  affairs,  in  their  words  and  actings ;
the  world  is  full  of  deceit  and  fraud.
But  all  this  is  nothing  as  compared
with  the  deceit  in  a  man's  heart  towards
himself  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of
the  expression  here),  and  not  towards
others.

This  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  whereby
it  is  exceedingly  advantaged  in  its  har-
bourings  of  sin,  lies  chiefly  in  two  things:
that —

L  It  abounds  in  contradictions,  so
that  it  is  not  to  be  dealt  with  on  any
constant  rule.

The  frame  of  the  heart  is  ready  to
contradict  itself  every  moment.  None
know  what  to  expect  of  it.  Facile  now,
then  obstinate ;  open,  then  reserved  j
gentle,  then  revengeful

This  ensues  from  the  disorder  wrought
upon  our  faculties  by  sin.  God  created
all  in  perfect  harmony.  The  mind's
subjection  to  God  was  the  spring  of  the
orderly  and  harmonious  motion  of  the
soul.  This  being  disturbed  by  sin,  the
rest  of  the  faculties  move  cross  and  con-
trary one  to  another;  the  will  chooseth
not  what  the  mind  discovers  good,  the
affections  delight  not  in  what  the  will
chooseth,  (fee.

II.  Its  deceit  lies  in  its  full  promisings
Upon  the  first  fippearange  of  things.
374


Sometimes  the  affections  are  wrought
upon,  and  the  whole  heart  appears  in  a
fair  frame,  and  all  promises  well :  sud-
denly all  is  reversed.  Who  can  mention
the  treacheries  which  lie  in  the  heart  of
man  1  Uncertain  in  what  U  doth;  false
in  what  it  2>romises,

1.  Never  let  us  think  our  work,  in
contending  against  indwelling  sin^  is
ended.  The  place  of  its  habitation  is
unsearchable-  There  are  still  new  stra-
tagems and  wiles  to  be  dealt  withal.
Many  conquerors  have  been  ruined  by
their  carelessness  after  a  victory,  David
was  so.  Many  decline  into  sin  in  old
age  :  they  gave  over  the  task  of  mor-
tifying sin  before  their  work  was  at  an
end.

2.  The  fact  that  the  heart  is  inconstant
calls  for  perpetital  watchfulness.  An
open  enemy,  that  deals  by  violence  only,
always  gives  some  respite ;  but  against
adversaries  that  deal  by  treachery  nothing
but  perpetual  watchfulness  will  give  secu-
rity. The  heart  hath  a  thousand  deceits,
and  if  we  are  the  least  off  in  our  watch
we  are  sure  to  be  surprised  (Prov,
XXV iiL  6).

3.  Commit  the  whole  matter  therefore
to  Him  who  searcheth  the  heart.  Here
lies  our  safety.  There  is  no  deceit  in
our  hearts  but  He  can  disappoint  it.
David  takes  this  course  (Ps.  cxxxiz.
8,  9,  10,  23).— i>r.  John  Owen,

Theme:  The  deceitfulness  of  the
HEART.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above
all  things  "  (Jer.  xvii.  9).

I.  Men  impose  on  themselves  re-
specting their  own  character.  The
heart  practises  deception  in  regard  to
its  natural  tendency  and  disposition.

1.  Men  do  not  attribute  to  themselves
the  character  given  of  the  human  heart  in
the  Bible.     The  Christian  does.

2.  Is  it  not  possible  that  your  heart
deceives  you  f  If  the  Bible  be  true,  there
is  no  such  native  excellence  of  character
as  you  suppose  that  you  possess.  Mul-
titudes who  once  had  the  same  view  of
themselves  have  been  convinced  of  their
error.

3.  Nothing  easier  than  self-deception,
II.  Men  deceive  themselves  in  re-
gard to  their  x^^l  i^ttacbiaeati.


ffOMILETtC  COM^tENTARY:  JERJilMTAtt.


ctfAi».  Jttn.


in.  The  heart  is  deceitful  in  regard
to  its  power  of  resisting  temptation.

IV.  In  its  promises  of  reformation
and  amendment.

Improvement —

1.  There  is  a  danger  of  losing  the  soul.

2.  You  have  a  heart  which  is  not  to  he
trusted.

3.  Wake  from  all  delusions  to  the
reality  of  your  condition*  —  Albert
Barnes.

Theme:    Deoeitfulness    of    man's

HEART.

Nothing  so  mean  as  deceit.  The  text
calls  attention  to  the  deceitfulness  of
our  hearts.

I.  A  difficult  subject  to  deal  with,
because —

1.  The  examination  is  made  by  the
guilty  party  into  his  own  character.

2.  Nothing  more  humiliating  and
painful  to  man's  pride.

IL  No  deception  like  that  of  the
heart.  The  garden — the  cornfield — the
mercantile  speculation — the  youth — may
promise  well  and  deceive,  but  the  heart
is  deceitful  above  all.

1.  It  is  the  fountain  of  deceit.

2.  Deceives  its  owner  and  best  friends
often.

3.  Its  deceit  is  in  a  very  large  mea-
sure voluntary.

4.  Its  deceitfulness  is  insidious  in  its
growth.

5.  Will  be  terrible  in  its  consequences.
Its  possessor  is  travelling  in  a  dan-
gerous path,  but  fancies  all  well.  His
character  is  being  fixed  in  evil.  The
future  must  be  terrible  in  the  circum-
stances of  its  misery,  and  its  disappoint-
ment and  despair.

in.  The  examples  of  Scripture  hear
this  out.  Old  prophet,  1  Kings  xiii.
11-18;  Gehazi,  2  Kings  v.  22-27;
Hazael,  2  Kings  viii.  7-15 ;  Ananias  and
Sapphira,  Acts  v.  5-10.

IV.  The  heart  deceives  its  possessor
continually.     With  regard  to —

1.  Its  motives.  2.  Its  inclinations.
3.  Its  safety  amidst  temptations.  4.  Its
power  of  reformation.

Learn —

1.  To  distrust  and  watch  it.  2.  To  trust
in  Christ  and  His  word. — E.  Jerman.


Theme :    The    heart's    deceptive-^

NESS    AND    WICKEDNKSS.

This  truth  is  not  difficult  to  illustrate
and  prove.  It  requires  no  penetrating
genius  to  bring  it  up  from  the  depths.
As  illustrative  of —

I.  The  heart's  deceptiveness,  we
point —

i.  To  the  mistakes  into  which  it  falls
relative  to  religion.  Scripture  declares
it  "  the  one  thing  needful " ;  the  heart
deems  it  not  needful  at  all,  or  only  of
secondary  consequence.  Or,  if  it  heeds
religion,  it  mistakes  its  forms  for  the
reality  of  Christianity.

ii.  Further  apparent  in  its  pursuit  of
pleasure.  The  Source  of  true  happiness
is  God ;  but  the  heart  supposes  that
pleasure  must  be  found  in  things  seen
and  temporal.  "  A  deceived  heart  has
turned  them  aside.'*

iii.  Still  further  seen  in  the  fact,  that
God  has  not  left  it  to  he  its  own  guide,
A  Law  has  been  given  for  its  conduct,
and  a  Gospel  for  its  faith,  while  "  line
upon  line,*'  &c.,  has  been  added  to  guide
its  commonest  actions.  The  ant  wants
no  guide,  for  its  instincts  are  safe  and
sufficient.  But  the  heart's  tendencies
are  wholly  untrustworthy.

iv.  Further  proved  by  the  declaration
of  the  Lord,  that  the  heart  must  he  re-
newed. The  mariner  when  voyaging
never  thinks  of  changing  his  com[)ass,
knowing  that  the  one  he  has  is  faithful
and  true.  But  man's  heart  is  so  wrong
that  a  new  heart  is  demanded.

But  the  heart  is  not  the  only  deceitful
thing  in  the  ivorld :  other  things  are  de-
ceitful, though  not  equally  so.  "  The
heart  is  deceitful  ahove  all  things."

It  surpasses  all  other  things  in  two
particulars —

1.  In  its  extent.

2.  In  its  fatality.

Other  things  may  deceive  a/ew  men  ;
this  deceiveswery  man.  Other  things  may
so  deceive  as  to  ruin  man's  temporal  inte-
rests; this  ruins  man^s  eternal  interests.

n.  The  proof  of  the  heart's  wicked-
ness is  equally  easy  :

i.  It  is  at  enmity  with  God — the  best
and  most  gracious  of  beings.

ii.  Utterly  opposed  to  the  holy  law  of
God  ;  ignores  its  claims,  &c.

375


\


\


CSaP.  XVII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAkr:  JEREMIAH.


iii.  Sternly  rejects  the  Gospel ;  flings
aside  God's  greatest  Gift,  and  costliest
Sacrifice.

iv.  Wilfully  disregards  the  warnings
and  threatening s  of  God.

V.  Notwithstanding  all  the  culture  the
heart  receives  from  education,  preaching,
and  literature,  it  brings  forth  nothing
hut  the  briers  and  thorns  of  unrighteous-
ness.

vi.  Its  desperate  wickedness  is  further
seen  in  the  fearful  punishment  with
which  its  wickedness  will  be  visited.
The  "  undying  worm,"  the  "  unquench-
able fire."  Only  greatest  criminals  are
punished  with  direst  punishments.

1.  As  this  truth  rests  upon  Divine
testimony,  to  deny  it  is  to  make  God  a
liar,  and  prove  the  hearths  self-deceiv-
ings.

2.  How  different  is  the  new  heart  from
the  old  !  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,
for  they  shall  see  God," — Eev.  D.  Pledge,

Theme :  The  heart  inscrutable.
"  Who  can  know  it  ?  "

It  is  extremely  difficult  for  sinners  to
know  their  liearts.

I.  What  is  implied  in  their  know-
ing their  own  hearts  '\

It  implies  :  1.  A  knowledge  of  their
selfishness.  2.  Of  their  desperate  incur-
able wickedness.  3.  Of  their  extreme
deceitfidness.

II.  Why  is  it  so  extremely  difficult
for  them  to  know  their  own  hearts  ?

Because  :  1.  They  are  unwilling  to
know  them.  2.  Because  of  the  deceitful-
ness  of  sin.  They  love  or  hate,  as  they
appear  friendly  or  unfriendly  to  their
cherished  feelings, — (a)  God,  (6)  Christ,
(c)  good  men,  (d)  the  world,  (e)  their
own  hearts,  (/)  the  means  of  grace,  {g)
their  convictions,  (h)  heaven.

III.  Application —

1.  Tlie  only  way  to  know  the  heart
is  to  inquire  whether  it  loves  God  or
not.

2.  Saints  can  more  easily  ascertain
their  true  characters  than  sinners  can.

3.  All  changes  of  life  are  trials  of  the
h  eart. — Emmons.

See  also  Noticeable  Topics  on  the
Human  Heart.
376


Ver.  1 0.  Theme :  God's  bulb  of
JUDGMENT.  "I  the  Lord  search  the
heart,  1  try  the  reins,  even  to  give  every
man  according  to  his  ways,  and  accord-
ing to  the  fruit  of  his  doings."

None  but  God  can  explore  the  depths
of  iniquity  in  the  human  heart.  As  He
will  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day,  He
must  have  access  to  the  inmost  recesses
of  the  soul,  and  be  able  to  bring  forth  to
judgment  all  its  hidden  abominations.

Accordingly  God  is  employed  noticing
and  recording  everything,  that  He  may
then  reward  "  every  man  according  to
his  ways."     We  here  see —

I.  The  preparation  God  is  making
for  the  future  judgment.  God  is  not
an  unconcerned  spectator  of  what  is  done
upon  earth.

1.  He  continually  marks  the  ways  of
men.

(a.)  All  their  actions  He  observes,  ac-
cording to  the  principles  from  which
they  proceed,  and  the  ends  for  which
they  are  done.

(b.)  Our  wordSy  also,  and  our  very
thoughts  (Ps.  xi.  4,  Prov.  xvi.  2).

Hezekiah  evinced  the  mixture  of  motives
and  principles  which  lay  behind  actions
(2  Chron.  xxxiu  31);  and  these  need  to
be  analysed  and  distinguished.  God
"  tries  the  reins,"  as  a  philosopher  assays
gold.

2.  He  records  everything  in  the  book  of
His  remembrance.  The  thoughts  as  well
as  the  words  of  men  (Mai.  iii.  16).  All
will  be  educed  in  the  judgment  (Job  xiv.
17).  Nothing  escapes  His  attention ;
certainly  not  any  "  good  thing  "  eludes
His  sight  (1  Kings  xiv.  13).

II.  The  rule  by  which  the  judgment
shall  be  determined.

1.  The  sentence  will  be  according  to
every  man's  works  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8  ;  2  Cor.
ix.  6).

2.  Rightly  understood,  this  strongly
declares  the  equity  of  God^s  future  judg-
ments. Everything  that  can  affect  the
quality  of  an  action  will  be  taken  into
account.

Behold  then —

i.  What  an  awful  prospect  is  here
opened  to  the  ungodly  !

ii.  What  an  encouragement  is  here
afforded  to  the  righteous  !


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


oBAT.  ztn.


Moses  looked  to  "  the  recompense
of  reward."  Paul  anticipated  "the  far
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of
glory." — Chas.  Simeon,

Theme :  God's  interest  in  man.

I.  Respects  '*  Fruit  "  in  men's  lives.

II.  Deals  with  men  *' according  to
Fruit."

III.  Where  Fruit  is  to  be  found — (in
the  heart).

IV.  The  Search  for  Fruit. — J.  Farren,
See  Addenda:  Seaechino  the  Heart.

Comments —

Ver.  1 1.  "  As  the  partridge  hath
gathered  eggs  which  it  laid  not."  Epi-
phanius  says:  ''The  partridge  is  not
satisfied  with  the  fniit  of  her  own  womb,
but  steals  the  eggs  of  other  birds  and
carries  them  to  her  nest "  (Phisiol.  9).

"  This  notion  might  easily  be  taken  for
the  great  number  of  eggs  which  the  part-
ridge lays.  Another  interpretation  is
given  by  Hippolytus,  who  says  that  *  the
partridge  calls  to  it  the  young  belonging
to  other  broods,  and  gathers  them  under
its  wings,  but  when  they  hear  the  cry  of
the  true  parent  they  leave  the  false  one.*
The  general  sense  is  that  the  covetous
man  is  as  sure  finally  to  reap  only  disap-
pointment as  the  partridge  which  piles  up
eggs  not  of  her  own  laying,  and  is  unable
to  hatch  them." — Dr.  Fayne  Smith.

"  As  Jehoiakim  is  described  by  Jere-
miah as  a  covetous  tyrant  (chap.  xxii.  17),
and  as  he  died  at  the  age  of  thirty-six,
he  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  referred
to  in  these  words." — Ihid.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  Wealth  unjustly
ACQUIRED.  Violence  and  fraud  had  been
reigning  in  Jerusalem.

I.  Unlawful  means  used  to  acquire
wealth  may  win  success.

1.  Opportunities  to  acquire  money
Umvpt  to  oppression  and  fraud.

2.  A  temporary  prosperity  is  realised
in  the  possession  of  ill-gotten  gains.

3.  The  rich  toil  to  gather  wealth,  and
then  tit  brooding  over  it,  like  the  part-
ridge ;  but  it  never  gives  comfort  or  satis-
faction. They  are  always  anxious  and
uneasy ;  for  their  sinful  projects  may  mis-
carry.


4.  Treasures  acquired  by  wrong  me-
thods leave  an  unquiet  conscience.  The
rich  man  may  say,  I  am  innocent  (Hos.
xii.  8),  but  that  only  mocks  his  con-
science.

II.  Wealth  when  acquired  cannot
long  be  retained.  "  He  shall  leave  them
in  the  midst  of  his  days."

1.  God  shall  cut  him  off  by  some  sur-
prising stroke  (Luke  xii.  19,  20).

2.  Gathered  riches  cannot  he  taken  into
eternity  :  "  He  shall  leave  them."

3.  Uis  impoverished  death  shows  him
to  be  a  miserable  ^^fool."  He  was  "not
rich  towards  God,"  only  had  "  ill-gotten
gains,"  and  had  to  "  leave  "  all  in  death  ;
went  into  eternity  "  poor  indeed " —
"  poor  and  miserable,  and  blind  and
naked."

IIL  Parting  with  his  wealth  in
death  is  a  great  vexation  to  a  worldly
man.

1.  It  naturally  frets  him  to  leave  to
another,  who  may  squander  all,  the
treasures  he  has  wasted  his  life  in  ac-
cumulating.

2.  It  justly  appals  him  to  go  into
God*s  presence  with  nothing  but  the
memory  of  unjustly-accumulated  gains.
"  He  shall  be  a  fool : "  the  laughing-
stock of  death.

Vers.  12  and  13.  See  Homiletio
Outlines  on  Sections.

Theme  :  The  Church  op  the  Lord.

L  What  it  is  in  itself.  Peace  of  sanc-
tuary ;  throne  of  divine  glory  ;  house  of
Him  who  is  Israel's  Hope.

ii.  What  it  will  be.  It  will  ever
remain  firm  (Matt.  xvi.  18).

iii.  What  they  find  who  forsake  it.
Shame,  oblivion,  unsatisfied  thirsts. —
Naegelsbach.

Ver.  14.  Theme:  A  cry  for  healino
AND  SAVING  GRACE.  ^^  Heal  me,  0
Lord,  and  I  shall  be  healed,"  dhc.

One  great  proof  of  the  experience  of
converting  grace  is  the  disposition  to
vindicate  God  and  condemn  ourselves.
"That  Thou  might  be  justified,"  &c.
Here  Jeremiah  justifies  divine  dispensa-
tions.

I.  That  sin  is  the  disease  of  the
sonl,  and  is  so  felt.     All  its  symptoms

377


cttAp.  rttt.


ffOMrlHTW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAtt.


are  dreaded  V)y  the  Christian.  The
worldling  does  not  fear  nor  dread  them.
He  is  like  a  man  in  consumption,  whose
case  is  seen  and  dreaded  by  all  but  him-
self. But  the  Christian  dreads  the  evil
as  well  as  punishment  of  sin.  He  knows
the  plague  of  his  own  heart.  All  the
symptoms  are  dangerous.  Sin  like  a
venomous  disease.

There  is  the  loss  of  rest — **  no  peace."

There  is  the  depravation  of  taste — he
feedeth  on  ashes.     Want  of  appetite.

Tiiere  is  the  loss  of  sight — but  the
Christian  prays,  "  Open  Tliou  mine
eyes."

There  is  the  loss  of  hearing — the
wicked  is  like  a  deaf  adder.  But  the
Christian  says,  "  The  hearing  ear  and
teeing  eye,  the  Lord  hath  made  both.'*

li.  That  Christ  is  the  only  physi-
cian, the  Good  Physician.  Other  phy-
sicians are  prodigal  of  the  patient's
blood,  and  sparing  of  their  own  ;  but
Christ  shed  His  own  blood  to  save  our
souls.  *^When  Justice  calls  for  sinner^
bloody  the  Saviour  shows  His  own.^'

Never  was  the  disease  known  yet  that
mocked  His  skill.  The  blind,  the  dumb,
the  maimed,  the  deaf,  the  very  dead —
owned  His  power;  and,  behold,  the  Lord's
arm  is  not  shortened.  There  are  seasons
in  which  nothing  short  of  this  conviction
of  the  infinite  ability  of  Christ  to  pardon
and  to  save  can  bring  peace  to  the  mind.

i.  Consider  the  infinite  efficacy  of
Christ's  atonement ^  as  showing  God's
readiness  a^  well  as  ability  to  pardon.
What  pledge  of  God's  delight  in  mercy
could  He  give  like  this,  "  He  spared  not
his  own  Son  "  /

ii.  Consider^  has  not  God  inculcated
unlimited  forgiveness  on  us?  (Matt,  xviii.
21;  Luke  xvii.  4.)  If  God  requires  for-
giveness of  us  without  bounds,  will  not
He  extend  forgiveness  without  bounds?

iii  Consider  the  direct  statements  of
Scripture :  "  /,  even  /,  am  He  that  blot-
teth  out,**  (fee;  ^^  All  sins  in  depth  of
sea.

iv.   From  great  instances  of  mercy.

III.  That  prayer  is  our  only  refuge.
It  is  the  appointed  means.  It  has  never
failed.  Your  desire  for  the  benefit  of
purity  and  pardon  is  a  proof  it  shall  be
extended.  He  will  fulfil  desire.
378


IV.  That  praise  should  he  our  truest
delight.  "Thou  ait  my  praise."  Our
praises  should  be  renewed,  for  past  mer-
cies, with  prayers  for  new  onea — Samuel
Thodey,  a.d.  1841.

Theme:  Prayer  forsalvation  based
UPON  PRAISE.  "  Heal  me,  O  Lord,  and
I  shall  be  healed,"  (kc.

I.  The  blessings  sought.

1.  Health.  What  temporal  blessing
greater.  The  health  of  the  soul  is  the
highest  form  of  health.

2.  Salvation.     (Explain  the  term.)
n.  How  they  are  sought.    By  prayer.

1.  Confession  of  need.

2.  Seeking  inrightway ;  of  right  sourcei

3.  Sincerity  of  prayer,  shown  in  use
of  right  means  to  preserve  health  and
obtain  salvation.

III.  The  ground  of  the  prayer  for
these  blessings.    **  Thou  art  my  praise."

What  does  this  mean  but  that  he  who
rightly  offers  this  prayer  is  living  in  the
service  of  God,  seeking  to  please  Him,  re-
joicing in  His  favour,  acknowledging  His
mercy  ?— "  The  Hive"  vol.  viii.,  1875.

Theme:  The  penitent's  prayer.
The  words  express —

I.  An  earnest  desire  for  salvation.

n.  He  applies  to  Almighty  God
for  it.

III.  Through  the  medium  of  prayer.

IV.  With  confidence  that  He  will
be  heard. — Dr.  A.  Thomson^  of  Edin-
burgh, from  Lange.

Vers.  14,  15.  Theme:  A  preacher's
CRY  FOR  HELP.  He  is  tempted  on  account
of  the  truth.

i.     The  temptation  (ver.  13).

ii.  The  demonstration  of  innocence
(ver.  16).

iii.  The  cry  for  help.

(a.)  Negative  (vers.  17,  18).

(6.)  Positive  (vers.  19). — Naegelshach,

Comments —

Ver.  14.  "  Thou  art  my  praise.**
"  When  a  teacher  confines  himself  to  the
praise  of  the  Cross,  and  lets  all  other
matters  of  praise  go  which  might  adorn
a  theologian  of  these  times,  and  adheres
immovabiv  to  this  :  *  I  am  determined


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAF.  XTIL


not  to  know  anything  among  you  save
Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucitied ' — amid
all  the  shame  of  His  Cross,  He  is  vic-
torious over  the  rest." — Zirizendorf,

Ver.  15.  "  Where  is  the  word  of  the
Lord?  let  it  come  now  !"  "This  taunt
shows  that  this  prophecy  was  written
before  any  signal  fulfilment  of  Jeremiah's
words  had  taken  place,  and  prior  therefore
to  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  at  the  close
of  Jehoiakiin's  life." — Dr.  Payne  Smith,

Ver.  16.  *'  From  heing  a  pastor,^*  See
Lit.  Crit.  on  this  verse.

^^ Desired  the  woful  day  :^^  i.e.f  the
day  on  which  Jerusalem  was  to  be  de-
stroyed and  the  temple  burnt.  Though
these  calamities  would  verify  Jeremiah's
word  and  vindicate  him  against  scorners,
yet  his  patriotic  soul  recoiled  from  the
nearing  desolation  of  bis  country  and
ruin  of  his  people.

Ver.  16.  ^'That  which  I  have  preached
was  right  be/ore  Thee."  "  It  is  not
diflScult  to  know  in  these  times  what
is  right  before  the  Lord.  There  is  His
Word :  he  who  adheres  to  this  strictly,
knows  in  this  that  he  is  right.  In  all
this  it  is  the  teacher's  chief  maxim,  not
to  make  use  of  the  application  without
need,  but  to  make  the  truth  so  plain  in
his  discourses  that  the  hearers  must
necessarily  make  the  application  to  thern^
telves.  *  Thus  saying,  Thou  reproachest
us  also,'  said  the  lawyer  (Luke  xL  45).
Others  went  away  convicted  in  their
consciences. " — Zinzendorf

Ver.  17.  Theme  :  The  soul's  hope
IN  A  TIME  OF  TERROR.  "  Be  not  a  terror
unto  me.  Thou  art  my  hope  in  the  day
of  evil."

Jeremiah  had  forewarned.  It  was  a
painful  duty.  He  now  looks  forward
to  the  "  woful  day  "  with  deep  anxiety
for  his  people.  And  as  one  who  sees
the  storm  pending,  and  looks  around  for
hiding-place,  he  draws  near  and  appeals
to  God,  sure  that  amid  the  terrors  of
the  "  day  of  evil"  He  would  preserve  his
soul.

Our  case  is  sadly  accordant  with  that
of  Judah.

1.  The  heartless  rebellion  of  Jvdah
did  not  exceed  the  iniquity  of  many  of
us  who  have  trifled  with  grace.


2.  Tlie  judgments  pronounced  were
not  heavier  than  those  standing  against
the  impenitent  sinner  who  despises  the
great  salvation.

3.  The  mission  of  the  preacher  is  still
to  rush  in  among  men  "  whose  hearts
have  departed  from  the  Lord,"  and  pro-
test, warn,  and  call  to  repentance.

4.  And  the  consolations  of  the  righteous
are  as  true  as  with  the  prophet ;  for  he
knows  God  is  his  "  Hope  "  in  the  day  of
evil

L  A  day  comes  when  God  will  be
a  terror.  God  would  take  from  Judah
all  tlds  world's  *'  heritage  "  they  prized,
and  all  the  spiritual  benefits  they  failed
to  profit  by.

"  Days  of  evil " —

(a.)  Come  suddenly.  Sweep  down  on
us  like  unexpected  storms.

(6.)  Find  us  desolate,  "  While  we
say,  Peace,  peace,  sudden  destruction
Cometh  upon  us."  When  our  **  desola-
tion Cometh  like  a  whirlwind,"  it  is  then
too  late  to  be  seeking  a  sure  refuge.

In  these  "  days  of  evil,"  which  come
on  the  soul  of  the  guilty,  we  must
include —

1.  The  day  of  the  sinner's  conviction
and  anguish.  When  God  arrests  the
soul  and  confronts  him  with  his  guilt.
Oh,  what  agony !  "  Woe  is  me,  I  am
undone  I "  God  is  a  "  terror  "  to  him.
"  Whither  can  I  go  from  Thy  presence  V*
**  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful
man,  O  Lord  ! "

2.  The  day  when  death  calls  the  guilty
soul  from  earth.  Comes  "  as  a  thief  in
the  night."  How  terrible  is  the  death
of  the  wicked  !  How  the  soul  shudders
to  be  hurrying  before  God  unreconciled,
unsaved !

3.  The  day  when  the  spirits  of  men
will  be  arraigned  for  judgment.  We
shall  meet  God  1  No  exaggeration  of
facts  in  the  description  of  men  "  calling
on  mountains  and  rocks  to  hide  "  them,
God  will  be  a  "  terror "  to  the  guilty.
"It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  living  God."

II.  In  the  day  of  terror  God  may  be
found  our  Hope.  God  is  not  neces-
sarily a  terror  to  the  soul  in  the  day  of
calamity.  The  righteous  prophet  knew
He  would  be  his  "  Hope."

379


CHAP.  xvn.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


1.  This  is  the  known  character  of  God,
He  is  called  *'  the  Hope  of  Israel "
(ver.  13).  See  also  xiv.  8.  It  is  on
this  well  understood  character  of  God
that  the  exhortation  is  given,  "  Let
Israel  hope  in  the  Lord,  for  with  the
Lord  is  forgiveness :  and  He  shall  re-
deem Israel  from  all  her  iniquities."
God  is  not  willingly  a  "  terror  "  to  any
soul.  Listen  to  His  Name  declared
amid  Sinai.  Read  Gospel  statement,
**  God  so  loved  the  world."  Watch  His
ways  in  providence:  "  His  tender  mercies
over  all  His  works."  When  He  becomes  a
"  terror,"  it  is  through  a  dire  necessity.

2.  He  will  become  the  Hope  of  every
soul  who  seeks  Him,  Calls  :  "  Turn  ye
to  the  Stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope ;"
bids  us  **  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before
us."  **  We  have  a  strons;  consolation  who
have  fled  for  refuge,"  &c.  Every  soul
may  find  the  same.

Observe  here  the  way  by  which  God
is  made  a  "  terror"  (ver.  13)  ;  and  the
way  by  which  He  will  become  as  our
''Hope''  (ver.  14).

3.  The  confident  reliance  and  expecta-
tion of  the  believer.

{a)  How  unwavering  the  repose.
"  Thou  art  my  hope."  David,  "  I  will
fear  no  evil."

(b.)  How  personal  this  appropriation  1
"  Thou  art  my  hope."    (Comp.  ver.  18.)

(c.)  How  single  is  the  soul's  trust.
''ThousLTt."  Qod  only:  God  Himself  (Ps.
xci  1,  2).

i.  Unless  this  Hope  is  ours  before
terror  comes.  He  will  not  be  so  in  the
day  of  evil

ii.  As  the  day  of  evil  is  uncertain  and
may  be  near,  we  should  promptly  seek
the  Lord  (ver.  7).  If  "  without  Christ,"
"  no  hope  in  the  world."

See  Addenda:  The  Soul's  Hope.

Theme:   Divine  wrath  an  object

OF  FEAR.

Every  believer  can  adopt  the  for-
mer of  these  expressions,  but  not  the
latter.  Why  sol  Words  spoken  in  an
evil  time — a  time  of  corruption,  cala-
mity, ruin.  Jeremiah  himself  was  in
great  danger.      How  appropriate  then.

Notice  —I.   The  petition,     II.  TJie  ex-
pression of  confidence,
380


I.  The  petition.     "Be  not  a  terror

unto  me."

1.  God's  majesty  is  in  itself  an  object
of  fear  and  dread  (Heb.  xii.  21,  Isa.  vi
5,  Hab.  iii.  16,  Hos.  iii.  5).

2.  Divine  chastisements  are  to  be
feared  (Jer.  x.  24,  Ps.  vi.  1,  Job  ix.  34).

3.  God's  wratli  is  still  more  dreadful.

4.  The  prophet  prays  for  support  and
comfort  in  the  time  of  trial.

II.  The  expression  of  confidence.
**  Thou  art  my  Hope  in  the  day  of  evil."

1.  The  grace  exercised  is  hope.
Though  troubled,  he  is  not  destroyed.
(2  Cor.  iv.  8,  &c. ;  Rom.  viii.  24).

(1.)  God  is  the  object  of  His  people's
hope  (Ps.  Ixxi.  5,  Ixxviii.  5).

(2.)  God  is  the  end  of  their  hope.
They  need  no  more  (Ps.  xvi.  11,  xvii.
15).

2.  Observe  the  time  when  this  grace
is  exercised  :  '*  Day  of  evil."

(1.)  Sin  and  sorrow  make  every  day
an  evil  day,  still  let  us  hope  (Ps.  Ixii.  8,
Ixxi.  14).

(2.)  Yet  there  are  peculiar  days  of  evil:
National  calamity  ;  reverses  in  business ;
disappointments  ;  affliction ;  old  age  (Ps.
Ixxiii.  26,  2  Tim.  i.  12).

Learn —

1.  That  hopes  and  fears  are  blended
together  in  the  experience  of  the  godly
(Ps.  cxlvii.  11).

2.  If  God  is  sometimes  a  terror  to  His
own  people,  how  much  more  to  the
wicked  ?  (Deut  xxviii.  66-67).

From  "  Short  Discourses,"  by  B.  Bed'
dome.

Vers.  19  to  end,  on  Sabbath  conse-
cration, see  Homilies  on  Sections.

Ver.  21.  Theme :  Sabbath  rest.
"  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  bear  no
burden  on  the  Sabbath-day."

The  Sabbath  argument  is  easy  to  the
devout.  Like  exhorting  a  hungry  man
to  take  refreshment,  or  a  mother  to  love
her  child,  or  the  slav^  to  enjoy  freedom.

**  Welcome,  sweet  day  of  rest,"  etc.

The  early  Christians  called  it  the  Day
of  Light,  and  the  Queen  of  Days.  The
ancient  Church  had  it  in  great  venera-
tion.    It  was  a  badge  of  their  religion,


HO  MI  LET JC  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


oHAP.  xm


for  when  asked,  "  Keepest  thou  the  Sab-
bath ? "  the  answer  was,  **  I  am  a  Chris-
tian, and  dare  not  omit  the  celebration
of  the  Lord's  day,"

I.  Motives  for  the  ohservance  of
the  Sabbath.  There  should  be  rest  of
body,  with  a  view  to  the  sanctity  of  the
soul ;  and  such  a  withdrawal  from  all
worldly  and  sinful  pursuits  as  may  con-
duce to  our  spiritual  advancement.  We
urge  this —

1.  From  the  Divine  command.  Twice
given  by  God  himself  in  Eden,  twice
inserted  in  the  Decalogue,  and  twice
engraved  on  stone  by  God  and  given  to
Moses.

2.  From  the  nature  and  reason  of  the
ease.  Intended  to  give  opportunity  of
rest  from  toil ;  to  be  a  commemoration  of
the  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of
God  in  the  creation  of  the  universe ;  to
furnish  encouragement  to  acquire  holi-
ness and  obtain  salvation.  The  day  is
needful  for  rest  and  devotion.

3.  From  the  blessings  necessary/  to
form  a  truly  religious  character.  Ab-
sorbed by  the  business  and  vanities  of
this  world,  the  recollections  of  the  other
world  would  be  blotted  out  but  for  the
return  of  the  Sabbath.  In  the  absence
of  our  usual  occupations,  and  in  seasons
of  leisure,  conscience  regains  her  empire,
and  the  mind  is  turned  inwardly  upon
itself,  and  the  voice  of  God  is  heard.

4.  From  the  consequences  of  disobedi-
ence to  the  claims  of  the  day.  Further
from  God ;  hardened  in  worldliness ;
left  godless,  and  led  Christless,  to  sink
into  ever  increasing  alienation  from  all
that  is  holy,  and  hopeful,  and  heavenly.

II.  Some  of  the  burdens  which
should  be  laid  aside.

1.  The  burden  of  nredless  toil  (Exod.
xxxi.  15).  Surely  the  anointing  of
Christ  was  commendable  work,  yet  Mary
Magdalene  waited  till  the  Sabbath  was
past  (Luke  xxiii.  57).  God  forbade
manna  to  be  gathered  on  the  Sabbath.


2.  The  burden  of  wilful  sin.  Abstain
from  amusements,  convivial  parties,
needless  journeys,  unprofitable  conver-
sations, &c.

3.  The  burden  of  anxious  care.  "  Cast
thy  burden  on  the  Lord."  Do  it  by  faith
and  prayer.  Think — who  cared  for  Noah
in  deluge,  for  Moses  in  bulrushes,  for
Daniel  with  lions,  for  Paul  in  storm?

4.  The  burden  of  desponding  appre-
hensions for  the  future.  Commit  thy  way
unto  the  Lord  and  trust  in  Him.  Oh,  rest
in  the  Lord,  (fee, — Samuel  Thodey^  A.D.
1845.

See  Addenda:  Sabbath  Rest.

Theme:  The  Sabbath  and  the  Lord's

DAY.

I.  What  they  have  in  common.  The

weekly  holyday  is  in  both  cases —

1.  A  monument  of  the  loving  care  of
our  God.

(a.)  For  our  body  ;  (b.)  for  our  soul.

2.  A  right  of  God^  which  forms  a
holy  obligation  towards —

(a.)  God,  if>.)  ourselves,  (c.)  our  neigh-
bour.

II.  The  differences  wLich  distin-
guish them.

1.  The  day  of  Jehovah  is  founded  on
the  creation  of  the  perishable  world  ;  the
day  of  the  Lord  is  founded  on  the  resur-
rection of  Christ,  as  of  a  new,  eternal
world.

2.  The  observance  of  the  day  of
Jehovah  was  only  legal;  i.e.  (a)  im-
posed by  external  compulsion,  (b)  by
requirements  to  be  fulfilled  with  out-
ward ceremonies :  the  observance  of
the  day  of  the  Lord  is  to  be  more  and
more  an  evangelical  one ;  i.e.  (a)  a  free,
(6)  a  spiritually  free  one,  satisfying  the
right  as  well  as  the  obligation  of  per-
sonality. ~  Naegelsbach.

See  also  Noticeable  Topics  :  On  the
Sabbath.


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XVII,

Topic:  The  Blessed  and  the  Cursed.     (Vers.  5-8.)

Great  is  the  distinction  between  the  godly  and  the  ungodly  (Ps,  i.  6,  vii.  11,  xi.  5)
in  their  cAarac^^r^,  in  their  practice,  in  their  experience,  in  their  €7id.  This  distinc-
tion will  appear  in  the  day  of  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  34-41).


CHAP.  XVII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


I.  The  characters  here  contrasted.  Specially  descriptive  of  the  situation  of
Judah  at  the  time.  Threatened  with  invasion,  they  trusted  in  Egy{»t  as  a  rival
with  Babylon;  or  in  their  own  strength — artificial  fortifications  (Ps.  xlviii.  12,  13);
or  in  their  individual  accomplishments,  as  wise,  rich,  and  powerful  (Jer.  ix.  23).

This  may  apply  to  us  as  a  nation.  We  form  alliances,  raise  armies  and  navies ;
but  woe  to  us  if  we  trust  in  them  so  that  our  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord !  (Ps.
XX.  6-8.)

1.  The  character  of  the  wicked  is  stated  (ver.  6).

(a.)  The  root  of  all  ungodliness  is  perversion  of  heart  fr<mi  God,  The  sinner  will
not  have  the  Lord  to  reign  over  him.     **The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."

(6.)  The  wicked  trust  in  human  means  for  success  and  prosperity,  and  even  for  the
salvation  of  their  souls.  They  rely  on  wisdom  and  skill;  on  riches  (Prov.  xviii.  11),
in  ihexv  fortitude  and  heroism^  to  the  pleasurable  diversion*  invented ;  to  their  actions
as  m,eritorious  for  salvation.

Such  procedure  indicates:  (1.)  Ignorance — of  God,  law,  themselves  as  depraved ;
(2.)  Contempt — of  Providence,  and  Christ's  redemption ;  (3.)  Presumption,

2.  The  character  of  the  righteous  is  stated  (ver.  7).

(a.)  The  righteous  trust  in  the  Lord  from  a  conviction  that  vain  is  the  help  of  man.
They  have  a  knowledge  of  the  human  heart  that  it  is  "  deceitful  above  all  things,"
<kc.     Self-confidence  is^  therefore,  also  abandoned.

(6.)  They  trust  in  the  God  of  salvation  alone.  They  can  say  of  Christ,  "  He  loved
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."

(c.)  They  trust  Him  when  they  cannot  trace  Him;  know  that  He  will  do  all  things
well ;  and  God  is  their  hope  in  all  their  troubles,  difficulties,  fears — in  prospect  of
death  and  eternity.

IL  The  conduct  determining  the  "blessing,  i.e,,  whether  we  trust  in  man  or  in
the  name  of  the  Lord.

L  As  we  trust  the  wisdom  of  men,  or  the  revealed  will  of  God,  we  are  under  the
curse  or  the  blessing.  Some  avowedly  reject  revelation,  others  admit  only  what
accords  with  their  own  reason  :  the  Christian  takes  the  Scriptures.

2.  As  to  righteousness,  the  determining  question  is  whether  we  trust  the  righte-
ousness of  man,  or  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God.

3.  Though  we  trust  in  the  Saviour  Himself,  yet  if  we  consider  Him  only  as  a
man,  we  incur  the  denunciation  of  the  text.  If  Christ  be  only  a  man,  to  trust  in
Him  is  to  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  If  His  Divinity  be  denied,  there  is  no  ground
for  trust     (Com p.  1  Tim.  i.  12,  1  John  i  9.)

m  The  consequences  of  the  conduct  of  these  contrasted  characters.

1.  As  to  those  who  trust  in  man.  "  He  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  desert "
(ver.  6).

(a.)  Barrenness.  He  must  remain  destitute  of  God's  fertilising  and  refreshing
grace — unholy,  fruitless,  worthless.

ib.)  Wretchedness,  "  HeAth.  in  desert;"  *^  inhQ.hit  parched  places,'*
c.)  Loss  of  all  good.  **  Not  see  when  good  cometh."  It  comes  in  a  preached
Gospel,  in  ofi'ers  of  salvation,  in  aflBiction,  in  the  testimony  of  conscience,  in  the
Spirit's  influence,  but  they  see  it  not  /  "  Good  "  comes  uj^on  the  Cliurch  in  the  dew
of  heaven  :  "  Great  grace  is  upon  them  all ; "  upon  believers  even  in  their  trials,  and
even  when  Christ  comes  to  judgment ;  but  the  godless  see  it  not,  share  it  not,

2.  As  to  the  righteous.  The  result  of  trusting  in  the  Lord  is  permanent  fruitfuU
ness  (ver.  8).     (Comp.  Ps.  i  3,  xcii.  13-15).     Indicates —

(a.)  Enjoyment,  "  A  tree  planted  by  the  waters,"  drawing  in  pleasure  and
refreshment.

(6.)  Growth,  or  prosperity — ^ogress.  The  Christian  flourishes,  **  grows  in
grace."

(c)  Security,     "He  shall  not  see  (not /ear)  when  heat  cometh,"  dec.     ''Heii
kept  by  the  power  of  God  unto  salration,"  <fec.
382


ROM  I  LET  I G  CO  MM  E  NT  A  R  V:  JEREMIAH.  OHAP.  XVIL


{d,)  Permanent  heauty  and  fruitfulness.  "  Her  leaf  shall  be  green,  neither  ceast
yielding  fruit."  Is  there  anything  more  beautiful  than  a  Christian's  life — a  Chris-
tian's deeds — a  Christian's  death — a  Christian's  entrance  into  heaven? — Altered
from  ^*  Helps  for  the  PulpitS

Topic:  Deceitfulness  op  the  Human  Heart.     (Ver.  9.)

Many  have  been  the  laboured  panegyrics  indulged,  in  the  endeavour  to  establish
on  a  firm  footing  the  dignity  of  human  nature.  One  eminent  preacher  has  not
scrupled  to  affirm — first,  that  men  in  general  (if  not  every  individual)  are  very
•wise ;  secondly,  that  men  in  general  are  very  virtuous ;  and  thirdly,  they  are  very
happy.

A  charitable  person  once  discovered  that  there  was  no  sinner  in  the  world  but
the  devil.  "For,"  was  the  argument,  "he/orc<?s  men  to  act  as  they  do,  therefore
they  are  not  accountable.     The  blame  lights  on  Satan."

But  whatever  baptized  or  unbaptized  infidels  may  say  concerning  the  innocence
of  mankind,  He  that  made  man,  and  best  knows  what  He  has  made,  gives  a  very
different  account  of  him.  He  informs  us  *'  that  the  heart  of  man  " — of  every  man
born  into  this  world — **  is  desperately  wicked,"  and  that  it  is  "  deceitful  above  all
things,"  so  that  we  may  well  ask,  *'  Who  can  know  it  ? "

I.  The  wickedness  of  man's  heart  It  is  "  desperately  wicked."  In  consider-
ing this —

1.  We  have  no  need  to  refer  to  any  particular  sins.  When  Satan  had  once
transferred  his  own  self-will  and  pride  into  the  parents  of  mankind,  together  with
a  new  species  of  sin,  love  of  the  world,  the  loving  the  creature  more  than  the
Creator,  all  manner  of  wickedness  soon  rushed  in.  The  earth  soon  became  a  field
of  blood.  Injustice  in  ten  thousand  forms — hatred,  envy,  malice,  blood-thirstiness,
falsehood — rode  triumphant,  till  the  Creator,  looking  down  from  heaven,  would  be
no  more  entreated  for  an  incorrigible  race,  but  swept  them  off  the  face  of  the  earth.

2.  God  having  created  us  gratuitously  of  His  own  mere  mercy  (for  we  could
merit  nothing  of  Him  before  we  had  a  being),  has  laid  us  under  obligation  to  yield
Him  our  obedience.

3.  From  the  devil,  the  spirit  of  independence,  self-will,  and  pride,  productive  of
all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness,  quickly  infused  themselves  into  the  hearts  of
our  first  parents  in  Paradise,  and,  through  them,  their  posterity,  alienating  us  from
God,  making  way  for  idolatry,  atheism,  &c.

4.  Melancholy  truth,  that  all  mankind  now  "  have  corrupted  their  ways  before  the
Lord,"  unless  when  the  Spirit  of  God  has  made  the  difference.

5.  But  if  this  bo  the  case,  how  is  it  that  every  one  is  not  conscious  of  it  ?  For
this  plain  reason — because  the  heart  is  not  only  "  desperately  wicked,"  but  "  deceit-
ful above  all  things."

II.  The  deceitfulness  of  man's  heart.

1.  It  is  "  deceitful  above  all  things," — that  is,  in  the  highest  degree,  above  all
that  we  can  conceive.  So  deceitful  that  the  generality  of  men  are  continually
deceiving  both  themselves  and  others.  Imagining  themselves  to  be  abundantly
better  than  they  are.

2.  And  if  men  thus  deceive  themselves,  is  it  any  wonder  that  they  deceive
others  also,  and  that  we  seldom  find  "  an  Israelite  indeed  in  whom  there  is  no
guile"?

3.  This  is  one  of  the  sorts  of  desperate  wickedness,  whioh  cleaves  to  the  nature
of  every  man,  proceeding  from  those  fruitful  roots — self-will,  pride,  and  indepen-
dence of  God.

4.  Hence  there  is  in  the  heart  of  every  child  of  man  an  inexhaustible  fund  of
ungodliness  and  unrighteousness,  deeply  and  strongly  rooted  in  the  soul,  that
nothing  less  th&n  Almighty  grace  will  cure.

383


CHAP.  XVII.  BO  Ml  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


5.  There  are  exceptions  as  to  the  wickedness  of  man's  heart.  '*  He  that  is  born
of  God  keepetli  himself,  and  the  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  His  heart  is
purified  by  faith.  His  wickedness  is  departed  from  him,  "  Old  things  are  passed
away,  all  things  (in  him)  are  become  new."

III.  Lessons —

1.  '*  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  For  who  that  is  wise  would
trust  one  whom  he  knows  to  be  desperately  wicked  1

2.  That  when  thou  seest  a  man  *'  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  there  is  more  hope  of
a  fool  than  of  him."  For  at  what  distance  from  wisdom  must  that  man  be  who
never  suspected  his  want  of  iti

3.  Wisdom  of  the  caution,  **  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest
he  fall."  How  firmly  soever  he  may  stand,  he  has  still  a  deceitful  heart.  In  how
many  instances  has  he  been  deceived  already  1

4.  Is  it  not  wisdom  for  him  that  is  now  standing,  conljdnually  to  cry  to  God,
'*  Search  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me  :  Let  me  not  think  of  myself  more  highly
than  I  ought  to  think ;  but  let  me  always  think  soberly,  according  as  Thou  hast
given  me  the  measure  of  faith  "  % — John  Wesley,


Topic:  The  Christian  Sabbath.     ^^  Halloxo  ye  the  Sabbath  day^^  (ver.  22),

The  awful  desecration  of  the  Lord's  day  which  everywhere  presents  itself  to  our
view,  in  scenes  of  pleasure,  business,  and  dissipation,  is  at  once  a  foul  blot  upon
our  national  character,  and  a  source  of  humiliation  and  sorrow  to  the  sincere
Christian.

The  Sabbath  is  an  institution  both  of  divine  origin  and  permanent  obligation.

I.  The  Sabbath,  as  a  day  appropriated  to  rest  and  religious  duties,  is  an  original
institution,  coeval  with  the  existence  of  man.  (See  Gen.  i.  31,  and  ii.  1-3.)
Thus  the  Sabbath  dates  its  origin  from  the  completion  of  creation,  and  was  designed
to  commemorate  that  great  event.  This  was  the  day  God  sanctified,  setting  it
apart  from  all  the  rest  It  is  an  original  institution,  as  ancient  as  the  law  of  love
itself,  and,  like  that  l*\w,  is  intended  to  remain  in  force  until  mortality  is  swallowed
up  of  life,  until  the  earthly  Sabbath  gives  place  to  the  perpetual  and  uninterrupted
rest  of  the  heavenly  world.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  in  almost  all  nations  men
have  divided  time  into  septenary  periods,  or  periods  of  seven  days.  Josephus  says
(Against  Apion,  book  ii)  that  "  there  is  not  a  city  of  the  Grecians,  nor  any  of  the
Barbarians,  nor  any  nation  whatsoever,  whither  our  custom  of  resting  on  the  seventh
day  hath  not  come."

II  That  the  Sabbath,  when  re-enacted  from  Sinai,  was  not  enjoined  as  a  tem-
porary institution,  but  as  a  moral  duty.  The  law  of  the  Sabbath  holds  its  place
among  the  moral  precepts.  (See  Exod.  xx.  8-11.)  Engraven  by  the  finger  of
God  on  the  tables  of  stone,  and  deposited  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant — all  indica-
tive of  its  permanent  character  and  obligation.  As  a  moral  precept,  it  is  an
original  and  universal  duty,  belonging  to  Gentile  as  well  as  Jew,  to  the  Christian
dispensation  as  well  as  the  Levitical  economy.  Not  a  Jewish  ceremony,  but  a
moral  duty,  and  as  such  cannot  be  set  aside.  Christ  came  not  to  destroy  the  law,
but  to  fulfil  and  honour  it.  Command  repeated  many  times,  is  enjoined  in  text,
*'  Hallow  ye  the  Sabbath  day."

III.  The  Saviour  has  expressly  taught  that  "  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  ; "
and  not  for  man  in  any  particular  nation  or  age,  but  without  limitation  for  man ;
and,  therefore,  it  is  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation.  **  And  He  said  unto
them,  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath  "  (Mark  il  27).
**  For  man,"  as  a  duty  incumbent  upon  him  ;  "  for  man,"  as  a  privilege  conferred
upon  him.  Sabbath  was  made  for  all  men  without  distinction.  The  Levitical  law
was  designed  to  be  temporary  in  its  duration.  In  its  extent  it  was  confined  to  the
384


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


cExr.  XTH.


Hebrew  nation,  and  in  its  duration  was  limited  to  the  Jewish  dispensation.  But
the  Sabbath  was  not  made  merely  for  the  Hebrew  nation,  but  for  man,  without
distinction  or  restriction.  And  now  the  Levitical  economy  is  abolished,  it
continues  a  moral  law  binding  upon  the  conscience  of  the  Christian  in  all  parts  of
the  world.

IV.  Does  the  Christian  ask  what  are  the  ohligations  of  the  Sabhath
upon  him  ?

(a.)  Let  your  mind  be  established  with  a  thorough  conviction  of  the  Divine
authority  and  obligation  of  the  Sabbath,  and  let  your  sense  of  duty  be  based  on
this  conviction.

(6.)  Let  your  example  correspond  with  your  profession.  We  profess  to  be  God*s
people  ;  let  us  show  it  by  our  works.  Our  duty  to  God  requires  our  observance  of
the  Sabbath  as  a  part  of  our  obedience.

(c.)  In  addition  to  our  example,  our  influence  must  be  employed  to  promote  the
sanctity  of  the  Sabbath.  It  is  the  Lord's  day.  As  Eusebius  remarks,  "Before  our
Lord's  death,  it  was  always  called  the  first  day ;  but  now  it  was  called  the  Lord's
day."  To  us  it  is,  therefore,  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  our  God,  and  it  is  our  duty
to  keep  it  holy. —  William  Cooke,  D.D.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XVII.  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUOQESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  1.  Indelible  records  op  sin.
*'  Tlie  sfreat  stone  book  of  Nature  reveals
many  records  of  the  past.  In  the  red
sandstone  there  are  found,  in  some
places,  marks  which  are  clearly  the
imjiressions  of  showers  of  rain,  and
these  so  perfect  that  it  can  even  be  de-
tected in  which  direction  the  shower
inclined,  and  from  what  quarter  it  pro-
ceeded; and  this,  ages  ago.  Even  so
sin  leaves  its  track  behind  it,  and  God
keeps  a  faithful  record  of  all  our  sins.'*
— Biblical  Treasury.

'*  If  you  cut  a  gash  in  a  man's  head,
you  may  heal  it ;  but  you  can  never  rub
out,  nor  wash  out,  nor  cut  out  the  scar.
It  may  witness  against  you  in  his  corpse  ;
still  it  may  be  covered  by  the  coffin  or
hidden  in  the  grave ;  but  then  it  is  not
till  decomposition  shall  take  place  that
it  shall  entirely  disappear.  But  if  you
smite  a  soul,  the  scar  remains  ;  no  coffin
or  grave  shall  hide  it;  no  revolution,
not  even  the  upturning  of  the  physical
universe,  shall  obliterate  it ;  no  fire,
not  even  the  eternal  fires  of  hell,  shall
burn  it  out." — Dr.  Thomson.

Like  as  Queen  Mary,  when  she  died,
told  those  about  her  that  the  loss  of
Calais  had  so  impressed  her,  that  its
image  would  be  found  indelibly  en-
graven on  her  heart.

Ver.  9.  Falsity  and  foulness  of
THE  HEART.      "  I  am  more  afraid  of  my
own  heart  than  of  the  Pope  and  all  his
2b


cardinals.     I  have  within  me  the  great
pope — self." — Luther.

"  All  our  actions  take
Their  hues  from  the  complexion  of  the  heart,
As  landscapes  their  variety  of  light."

— Bacon,

**  A  soil  which  breeds
Or  Bweetest  flowers  or  vilest  weeds;
Flowers  lovely  as  the  morning's  lights
Weeds  deadly  as  the  aconite  ;
Just  as  his  heart  is  trained  to  bear
The  poisonous  weed  or  flow'ret  fair.**

— Bowring.

**  As  soon  as  we  are  born  and  receive
the  care  of  our  parents,  we  engage  in
all  kinds  of  depravity  ;  so  much,  that
we  seem  to  suck  in  error  with  our
nurse's  milk." — Cicero.

The  student  should  specially  consult
*' Secular  Annotations  on  Scripture
Texts,"  by  Francis  Jacox,  second  series,
p.  122.  Or,  "The  Heart  Inscrutably
Deceitful."

Ver.  10.  Searching  the  heart.

**  Who  made  the  heart,  'tis  He  alone
Decidedly  can  try  us;
He  knows  each  chord — its  various  tone,

Each  spring — its  various  bias  ;
Then  at  the  balance  let's  be  mute,

We  never  can  adjust  it ;
What's  done  we  partly  may  compute,
But  know  not  what's  resisted."

— Burns.

Ver.  17.  The  soul's  hope.  "Our
hope  is   not  hung   upon    such   an   un-


twisted thread   as   *  I


imagine   so,
385


or.


CBAP.  xvm.


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


*  It  is  likely  ;'  but  the  cable,  the  strong
rope  of  our  fastened  anchor,  is  the  oath
and  promise  of  Him  who  is  eternal
verity ;  our  salvation  is  fastened,  with
God's  own  hand  and  Christ's  own
strength,  to  the  strong  stake  of  God's
nnch angeable  nature." — Rutherford.

*'  Be  not  a  terror  to  me"  Let  me
have  fair  weather  overhead,  however
foul  soever  it  be  under  foot." — Trapp,

**  Hope  is  the  last  thing  that  dies  in  man."

— Diogentt*

"  Though  at  times  mj  spirit  fails  me.
And  the  bitter  teardrops  fall ;
Though  my  lot  is  hard  and  lonely,
Yet  I  hope — I  hope  through  all.*'

— Mrs.  Norton,

"  With  eyes  turned  upward,  whence  her  help
descends,
Hope  waits  expecting  till  the  tempest  ends.**

— Holmes,

Ver.  21.  Sabbath  REST.  "Had  not
Jeremiah  expressly  said,  *  Bear  no  bur-
den on  the  Sabbath  day  ?  "  Yes  ;  but
why  ]  Because  the  Sabbath  was  an
ordinance  of  mercy  intended  to  protect
the  underlings  and  the  oppressed  from  a


life  of  incessant  toil ;  because  it  was
essential  to  save  the  serfs  and  labourers
of  the  nation  from  the  over-measure  of
labour  which  would  have  been  exacted
of  them  in  a  nation  afflicted  with  the
besetting  sin  of  greed ;  because  the  set-
ting apart  of  one  day  in  seven  for  sacred
rest  was  of  infinite  value  to  the  spiri-
tual life  of  all." — Farrar.

Captain  Scoresby  remarks,  in  his
"Voyage  to  Greenland,"  on  the  good
effects  of  Sabbath-keeping  on  the  health
and  spirits  of  his  men  ;  "  That  if  others
who  did  not  so  sedulously  keep  it  gained
some  benefits  (as  in  fishing),  we  always
gained  extra  advantage*  over  them  in
course  of  the  week.  Independently  of
the  Divine  blessing,  I  found  tlie  re-
straint on  the  natural  inclinations  of
the  men  for  pursuing  the  fishery  at  all
opportunities  acted  as  an  extra  stimu-
lus on  their  exertions  when  next  sent
after  the  whales.  But  our  success,  who
refrained,  was  so  much  greater  than  those
who  indulged  fishing,  that  there  was  not
a  man  in  the  ship  who  did  not  considei
it  the  effect  of  a  Divine  blessing.*


CHAPTER  XVin

CliTiOAL  AKD  ExEOETiOAL  KoTSS. — 1.  Ohronology  of  the  Chapter.  Early  in  Jehoiakim's
reign  (see  Chronological  Note  on  section  19-27  of  previous  chapter).  Probably  about  two  yean
later  than  that  message  respecting  the  Sabbatli  in  chapter  xxvii,  19-27.  Naegelsbach  suggests,  bo-
fore  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim.     For  2,  3,  and  4,  see  Notes  at  the  head  of  previous  chapter.

6.  Creog^aphical  Heferences. — Ver.  14.  *^  The  snow  of  Lebanon  which  cometh  from  the  rock
of  the  field."  Lebanon  was  called  the  white  mountain,  because  of  its  perpetually  suow-clad
heights— especially  Hermon's.  The  words  should  read  :  "  Will  the  snow  of  Lebanon  e'easeirom.
the  rock  of  the  field  ?  Hitzig  suggests  that  ihe  waters  of  Gihon  in  Jerusalem  (the  rock  of  the
field,  cf.  xvii.  3,  xxi.  13),  which  never  were  known  to  fail,  were  probably  fed  by  the  melting
snows  of  Lebanon,  Henderson  is,  however,  nearer  the  interpretation  :  he  says.  The  rock  of
the  field  is  only  a  poetical  expression  for  Lebanon  itself  ;  the  melting  snows  from  which  supplied
numerous  perennial  rivers.  "Shall  the  cold  fiowing  waters  that  come  from  another  place  be
forsaken  f"  Read  the  words  thus  :  "  Shall  the  cool  flowing  rivers  that  come  from  afar  be  dried
vp?"  whicli  is,  doubtless,  another  form  of  the  foregoing  idea — the  streams  flowing  from
Lebanon  could  not  fail.

6.  Personal  Allnsicns. — (None)  ;  7.  Natural  History. — (See  Geographical  References,  supra.)

8.  Natural  Customs. — Ver.  3.  **  The  patterns  housCy  he  torought  a  work  upon  the  wheels:**
**The  potter's  field"  (Zech.  xi.  13,  Matt,  xxvii.  10)  lay  just  beyond  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  south
of  Jerusalem.  Two  wheels  :  the  lower  one  he  worked  with  his  feet ;  this  set  the  upper  wheel
in  motion.  The  lower  wheel  was  probably  stone,  the  upper  was  a  flat  disc  of  wood  :  on  this  the
potter  placed  the  clay,  and,  as  it  revolved,  the  potter  shaped  his  work.

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  3.  A  work  on  the  xoheels:  dual  ;  the  two  wheels.  Ver.  7.  At
what  instant :  ** at  what"  in  italics.  Lit.  once.  VJ^,  adr.  in  the  moment,  forthwith:  and
when  repeated,  as  vers.  7  and  9.  Now  .  .  .  again.  Ver.  8.  "  /  will  repent.^'  I  repent,  so
also  in  ver.  10.  Ver.  12.  *^  And  they  said,  There  is  no  hope  .***  Yet  they  are  saying:  the  con-
secutive perfect  form  of  a  Heb.  verb  implies  the  continuance  of  the  action.  **  Do  the  imagina-
tion:" practise  the  stubbornness.     Ver.   14.     "  Will  a  man  leave  the  snow  of  Lebanon?"  (see

386


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEHEMTAH.  chap.  xthi.


Oeogra'phiedl  Reference,  .nipra) :  lit.,  **  Doth  the  snow  of  Lebanon  fail  from — cease  to  flow  from
—the  rock  of  the  field  ?"  "  Or  shall  the  cool  flowing  streams  that  come  from  another  placet'*
DHT,  strange,  foreiyn^  i.e.,  whose  sources  are  foreign  (as  2  Kings  xix.  24,  so  Hitzig,  KeU,
and  Payne  Smith) :  but  Ewald,  Graf,  and  Bunsen  suggest,  that  hurry  along,  from  l^T,  to  presSf
urge,  i.e.,  flowing  through  narrow  gorges.  But  there  is  no  iufficient  proof  that  the  word  can
have  this  latter  meaning  :  the  former  is,  therefore,  better.  Ver.  15.  ^*  Becaust  My  people:*
Yet  My  people.  **  Vanity  and  they,'*  &c.  (see  Note  in  chap.  ii.  30).  **  Vain  gods,  and  i^ese  have
caused  them  to  stumble."  "/w  their  ways  from  the  ancient  paths,"  &c.  Or,  "  In  their  ways,
the  everlasting  paths  ;  to  walk  in  hyeways,  in  a  road  not  cast  up."  Ver.  21.  **  Pour  out  their
Hood  by  the  force  of  the  sword:**  lit.,  **  Spill  them  into  the  hands  of  the  sword  "  {cf.  Psa.  Ixiii.
10),  •.«,,  cast  them  out  to  slaughter.   ** Put  to  death:"  rather,  "slain  of  death."

EOMILETW  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OP  CHAPTER  XV III,

Sections    1-10.     The  Potter's  work  :  symbolic  of  God's  Sovereign  Power,
,,        11-18.     The  justice  of  threatened  ruin  vindicated.
„        19-23.     Imprecatory  prayer  provoked  by  hostility  to  God's  messages.

Section  1-10.     The  Potter's  Work  :    Symbol  op  God's  Sovereignty.

"  I  have  used  similitudes."  Th»  end  is  a  merciful  one — to  impress.  Particularly
calculated  to  impress.     Consider —

I.  The  right  of  the  Divine  sovereignty  which  is  here  claimed  by  Jehovah.
One  of  the  claims  most  frequently  urged  in  the  Word  of  God — He  claims  from
mankind  an  acknowledgment  of  His  power  and  right  to  do  as  He  pleases  in  the
affairs  of  men  and  angels.  Certainly  He  that  formed  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
the  sea  and  the  dry  land,  who  made  all  the  creatures  with  which  they  are  peopled,
who  by  Hii  power  and  His  might  sustains  them,  must  possess  both  the  power  and
the  right  to  regulate  all  their  affairs  and  all  their  movements.  None  so  fit  as  He
to  govern — to  choose  our  lot  and  to  regulate  our  ways.  His  understanding  is
infinite,  His  power  is  unlimited  and  wonderful,  and  His  goodness  equals  them
both.  The  angels  in  heaven  fully  admit  His  sovereignty,  and  His  right  to
exercise  it.     But  with  men  it  is  far  otherwise.     Observe —

1.  This  is  an  attribute  which  every  man  naturally  denies.  Sin  has  thrown  the
foundations  of  the  earth  out  of  course,  and  hence  man  refuses  one  of  the  most
reasonable  of  all  claims,  and  one  of  the  most  important  and  necessary  of  the  Divine
prerogatives.     This  attribute  is  denied —

(a.)  In  so  many  words.  There  are  the  infidel  deniers  of  Providence,  —  and
there  are  the  Pharisees  who  deny  it  in  their  creed.

(6.)  There  are  still  more  who  deny  it  in  practice.  What  does  that  man  do  who
neither  courts  His  favour,  nor  fears  His  anger?  What  are  you  doing  who  at  this
moment  refuse  to  obey  His  voice  in  the  great  matter  of  salvation  ?  Think  of  the
fallen  angels — they  denied  it — they  would  not  have  the  Lord  to  reign  over  them —
they  would  not  bend  to  His  authority  and  mild  dominion — and  they  are  crushed  by
His  vengeance.  How  will  they  face  the  Judge,  when  they  wake  up  in  the  eternal
world,  whose  authority  and  whose  sovereignty  they  have  denied?

2.  This  is  the  last  attribute  of  God  received  even  by  Christians  in  their  real  creed.
There  are  but  few  Christians  who  deny  the  doctrine  in  so  many  words;  but  it  is
one  thing  to  profess  belief  on  any  point,  and  another  one  to  believe  it  practically.

Hence  the  Armenian  scheme.

Hence  the  Antinomian — preaching  to  none  but  saints.

Hence  our  gloomy  discontent  in  affliction.

Hence  our  frequent  departures  from  the  directions  of  the  Word  of  God.

But  notwithstanding  all,  no  attribute  is  more  evident  in  its  exercise  than  this.
All  creation  proves  it.  All  nature  in  her  movements.  All  providence.  Especially,
hence  we  proceed  to  consider —

II.  The  manner  in  which  God  is  pleased  to  exercise  His  sovereignty  towards
the  children  of  men.  The  prophet,  by  Divine  command,  went  down  to  the  potter's
house,  where  he  received  instructions,  <fec.

S87


CHAP.  xvTii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


This  is  applicable  to  the  grand  and  important  things  of  eternity,  and  shows  that
man  in  God's  hand  is  as  clay  in  the  hand  of  the  potter,  and  that  He  has  power  over
them  to  mould  them  as  He  pleases,  and  that  he  actually  exerts  that  power.
Observe  —

1.  He  does  what  He  pleases  with  the  penitent.  And  this  in  every  way  according
to  mercy ;  yet  does  He  act  as  a  sovereign :

(a.)  In  the  gift  of  repentance  :

1.  In  giving  it  to  whom  He  pleases.

2.  In  the  means  employed  to  bring  them  to  repentance.

3.  In  rendering  it  effectual,

(h. )  In  pardoning  their  sins.  "  At  what  instant"  <kc.  In  that  He  pardons  through
His  Son — freely.  All  sins — past,  present,  and  to  come ;  and  is  pleased  to  make
the  pardon  hiown.  In  heaven  to  his  angels — they  rejoice.  To  the  believer  on
earth,  and  to  all  the  universe  in  the  world  to  come.  Are  you  penitents  1  Do  you
desire  to  be  such  ?     "  Ask,  and  you  shall  receive."

2.  As  ijo  the  impenitent.  The  purposes  of  heaven  must  stand.  Barren  and
contradictory  are  the  opinions  of  mankind  concerning  the  measures  of  God  towards
this  guilty  world,  but  He  pursues  His  own  unceasing  plan.  Many  deny  that
these  judgments  will  ever  take  place, — that  denial  will  not  alter  the  fact.  It
will  render  them  the  more  dreadful  to  the  hardened  infidel,  because  the  denial
increases  his  guilt.

Though  these  words  mention  kingdoms,  they  are  equally  applicable  to  in-
dividuals.  And  God  has  spoken  good  concerning  you.  Often  have  you
heard  the  Gospel.  But  if  you  are  impenitent — these  words  point  to  you.  He
will  do  as  He  pleases.  You  are  at  His  mercy.  What  have  you  to  expect
reasonably  1  He  threatens  to  punish.  You  are  not  certain  of  His  mercy.  You
must  repent  or  perish.  But  you  are  in  the  world  of  hope.  Oh !  then  seek  it.
With  such  a  prospect  before  me,  my  soul  shudders  for  you,  *' knowing  the  terrors
of  the  Lord,"  «fcc. — Nameless  MS.  dated  a.d.  1824.

See  further:  Noticeable  Topics  at  end  of  chapter;  also  Addenda:  "  GoD*8
Sovereign  Power."

Section  11-18.     The  Justice  of  Threatened  Kuin  Vindicated.

I.  God's  purpose  of  evil  avowed  (ver.  11).  "  I  am  framing  evil  against  you."
Evil  was  in  God's  purposes.

II.  An  interval  for  reformation  offered.  **  Return  ye  now,  every  one  from  his
evil."     Evil  was  in  God's  pur[>oses,  because  "evil"  was  every  one's  way.

IIL  Wilful  iniquityrepudiates  the  opportunities  of  grace  (ver.  12).  There
was  "  no  hope,"  but  only  because  there  was  no  compunction  for  sin,  and  a  resolve
not  to  reform.

IV.  Man's  reckless  guilt  justifies  God's  anger,  (vers.  13-17).

1.  Sms  against  grace  render  our  guilt  more  heinous  than  any  which  heathenism
can  furnish  (ver.  13).

2.  Desertion  of  God  estranges  refreshing  comforts  from  the  sinner  (ver.  14).

3.  Substitutes  chosen  instead  of  God  mislead  their  dupes  into  desolation  (ver.  15).

4.  Misery  entailed  by  irreligion  justly  awakens  amazement  (ver.  16).
6.   God  deserts  apostates  in  the  day  of  their  calamity  (ver.  17).

Or  thus :

I.  God's  operations  plainly  tend  towards  the  ruin  of  sinners.  "  Behold  I
frame  evil,"  (fee.  (ver.  11).  Your  conduct  towards  God  shows  you  deserve  it ;  His
dealings  with  you  show  that  He  designs  it.

n.  God's  warnings  and  threatenings  are  invitations  to  timely  repentance.
"  Return  ye  now,"  (fee.     God  may  turn  from  the  evil  He  purposes  to  do,  if  you  turn
from  the  evil  you  persistently  do.
3SS


HOMILETIC  COM\tENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ottAP.  XTilL

III.  Man's  o"bstinacy  towards  God  closes  the  door  of  hope  (ver.  1 2).  Mercy
is  conditional  upon  reformation ;  sinners  resolve  not  to  reform,  and  so  court
despair  and  ruin.      See  Addenda,  Dkspair.

IV.  Immovable  defiance  of  God  is  a  fact  of  awful  amazement.  Defiant
impenitence  is  a  startling  anomaly  (ver.  13),  a  ^^ very  horrible  thing"  in  itself ^
being  self-murder;  entails  the  loss  of  all  refreshing  comforts  (ver.  14);  shows
amazing  folly y  ancient  ways  being  deserted  for  byeways  (ver.  15)  ;  awakens  derision
(ver.  16) ;  and  brings  disconsolate  ruin  (ver.  17).

Section  19-23.  Imprecatory  Prayer  provoked  by  Hostility  to  God's

Messages.

All  their  virulence  turned  itself  upon  God's  prophet,  whose  righteous  soul  was
stirred  to  well-nigh  ungovernable  wrath  against  his  [)erseciitors  who  were  flagrant
enemies  of  God  and  scoffers  of  His  claims.  Matthew  Henry  suggests  the  following
homiletic  divisions  : —

I.  See  here  what  are  the  common  methods  of  the  persecutors.  We  may  see
this  in  Jeremiah's  enemies  (ver.  18).

1.  They  consulted  together  to  be  revenged  upon  him  for  what  he  had  said,  and
to  silence  him  for  the  future.

2.  They  pretended  a  mighty  zeal  for  the  Church,  which  was  endangered  by  his
preaching.     They  insinuated —

(a.)  That  Jeremiah  could  not  be  a  true  prophet,  because  neither  commissioned
by  the  priests,  nor  did  his  predictions  concur  with  other  prophets.

(6.)  That  the  matter  of  his  prophecies  could  not  be  from  God,  because  it  reflected
upon  the  priests  and  prophets.

3.  They  agreed  to  do  all  they  could  to  blast  his  reputation,  ".Smite  him  with
the  tongue."

4.  To  set  others  an  example,  they  resolved  not  to  heed  anything  he  said;  this
will  show  others  to  regard  his  utterance  merely  as  "  his  words,"  not  God's.

5.  That  they  may  effectually  silence  him  they  determine  upon  his  death
(ver.  23).

II.  See  here  what  is  the  common  relief  of  the  persecuted.  We  may  see  this
in  the  course  wliich  Jeremiah  took.

1.  He  referred  himself  and  his  cause  to  God's  cognisance  (ver.  19).  It  is  a
matter  of  comfort  to  faithful  ministers  that  if  men  will  not  give  '*  heed  "  to  their
preaching,  God  will  give  heed  to  their  praying.

2.  He  complains  of  their  base  ingratitude  to  him  (ver.  20).  To  render  good
for  good  is  human;  evil  for  evil  is  brutish  :  good  for  evil  is  Christian ;  but  evil  for
good  is  devilish.

(a. )  See  how  great  the  evil  was  that  they  did  against  him  :  "  digged  a  pit  for
his  soul."

(6.)  See  how  great  the  good  was  that  he  had  done  them:  **I  stood  before
Thee  to  speak  for  them."

3.  He  imprecates  the  judgments  of  God  upon  them  ;  not  from  revengeful  dis-
position, but  from  prophetical  indignation  against  their  horrid  wickedness  (vers.
21-23).

(a.)  That  their  families  might  suffer  famine.

(6.)  That  they  might  be  cut  off  by  the  sword.

(c.)  That  the  terrors  and  desolations  of  war  might  seize  them  suddenly  (ver,
22).

(c/. )  That  they  might  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  desert  of  this  inexcusable
sill  :  "  forgive  not  their  iniquity,"  <fec.

{e.)  That  God's  wrath  against  them  might  be  their  ruin:  "Let  them  be  over-
thrown before  Thee."

S89


CHAP.  XVIIL


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


Note: — This  was  not  written  for  our  imitation.  Jeremiah,  by  the  impulse  of
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  in  the  foresight  of  the  ruin  certain  to  come  upon  them,
might  pray  such  prayers  as  we  may  not.  If  by  this  example  we  think  to  justify
ourselves  in  imprecations,  we  *'  know  not  wliat  manner  of  spirit  we  are  of."  Christ
has  taught  us  by  His  example  to  bless  them  that  curse  us,  and  pray  for  them  that
despitefully  use  us.     Yet  this  may  teach  us —

i.  That  those  who  have  forfeited  the  benefit  of  the  prayers  of  God's  prophets
for  them,  may  expect  to  have  their  prayers  against  them.

ii.  That  persecution  is  a  sin  that  fills  the  measure  of  a  people's  iniquity  very
fast,  and  will  bring  sure  destruction  upon  them.

iil  Those  who  will  not  be  won  by  the  kindness  of  God  and  His  prophets,  will
certainly  at  length  feel  the  resentments  of  both.


HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XVIIL


Vers.  1-4.  Theme  :  Clay  in  the  pot-
ter's HANDS.

Suggestions  :  A  parabolic  representa-
tion impresses  the  mind  more  power-
fully than  simple  statement  or  teaching.
God  has  greater  power  over  men  than
a  potter  over  clay,  for  the  potter  is
not  the  creator  of  clay,  as  God  is
of  us.

I.  The  Almighty  yet  patient
worker.

1.  God  works.  He  does  not  arbitrarily
will  and  imperiously  effect  His  purposes ;
but  carefully  works  to  realise  them.
God  is  not  imperious,  not  arbitrary ;  not
a  mere  dominating  Will,  but  a  patient
Artificer,  taking  pains  in  His  work.

2.  God  works  for  definite  ends.  He
has  a  design — to  form  a  graceful  vessel.
He  does  not  make  marred  things  by  de-
sign ;  He  purposes  to  make  only  what
is  beautiful — "  would  have  all  men  to
be  saved."

II.  The  pliable  yet  perverse  mate-
riaL     It  must  not  escape  notice  that —

1.  The  material  is  base^  unclean,  un-
sightly. And  such  is  the  vile  material
from  which  God  would  make  us  into
vessels  of  honour  unto  sanctification.

2.  The  material  swiftly  changes  form.
Easily  takes  new  shape,  for  better  or
worse.

3.  The  material  works  into  wrong
shapes  most  perversely.  Though  the
Artificer  works  deftly  and  with  good
instruments  ("  wheels"),  yet  man  is  slow
to  assume  the  "  form  and  comeliness "
God  desires.

III.  The  various  products  of  God's
handiwork.

390


1.  The  marred  vessel.  This  was  not
through  imperfect  skill  in  the  Potter,  but
through  resistance  or  non-consistency  in
the  clay.  In  either  case  it  would  not
take  or  retain  the  shape  the  Worker  de-
signed. "  Ye  have  received  the  grace  of
God  in  vain."

2.  The  renewed  endeavour.  "  He
made  it  again."  Often,  after  renewed
operations  of  God's  grace,  the  once  resis-
tant soul  yields  itself  unto  God,  and
becomes  **  created  in  Christ  Jesus."
Then  the  man  is  "  renewed  in  the  spirit
of  his  mind."

3.  The  perfected  vessel.  This  perfec-
tion is  the  result  which  "  seemed  good  "
to  the  Potter,  and  for  which  He  pa-
tiently worked.  It  is  not  that  God  forms
marred  things  or  perfect  things  just  as
it  takes  His  caprice  ;  no.  Nothing
"  seems  good "  to  Him  but  the  perfect
work.

And  the  perfected  result  "  seemed
good  "  to  Him.  He  was  thereby  pleased
and  satisfied.  Nothing  less  satisfies
God  :  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even
your  sanctification."  "  He  saw  that  all
was  very  good  "  in  creation.  And  in  re-
demption, "  Ye  are  His  workmanship,
created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,
which  God  before  ordained  that  ye  shall
walk  in  them."  And  the  soul  which
fully  realises  His  aim  is  "  perfect  before
Him  in  love."

(a.)  Consider  the  long  patience  and
careful  efforts  God  extends  towards  us  in
His  gracious  operations  to  form  us  ac-
cording to  His  will.

(b.)  Consider  the  grace  and  comelinest
in  us  which  alone  satisfies  Him.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  xnom


Ver.  6.  Theme :  Man's  changeable

CONDITION.

A  practical  homily  :  Nothing  is  fixed
or  certain  in  this  world.  As  the  clay
assumes  variable  shapes,  and  passes
through  manifold  vicissitudes,  we  re-
cognise—

I.  The  multiform  possibilities  of
man.  He  may  become  a  "  marred"  or
perfected  thing ;  a  Judas  or  a  Stephen ;
a  Diotrepbes  or  a  John  of  Patmos !

1.  This  in  the  region  of  social  life.

2.  Equally  so  in  the  realm  of  moral-
ity and  intelligence.

3.  Manifestly  so  in  the  kingdom  of
grace.

II.  The  incertitude  of  worldly  posi-
tion. As  the  wheel  moves  round,  the
whole  shape  and  fortune  of  the  vessel
varies :

1.  God  can  change  our  condition  as
with  a  touch  :  can  cast  the  eminent  from
their  elevation,  can  mould  the  imperfect
into  graceful  forms  (Psa.  cxiii.  7).

2.  No  life  is  beyond  God's  formative
touch.  Judah  thought  herself  safe
against  catastrophe,  but  God  cast  her
down.  We  depend  wholly  on  God's
good-will  for  what  we  are  and  have.

III.  The  consolation  of  being  in
God's  hands.

1.  The  tranquillity  of  faith  is  well
founded.  "  He  doeth  according  to  His
will  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth"
— but  "  He  doeth  all  things  well " — and
**  we  know  that  all  things  work  together
for  good  to  them  that  love  God."

2.  Our  condition  is  secure  through
the  gratuitous  goodness  of  God.  And
being  all  of  grace,  it  depends  on  His
grace  that  we  remain  in  His  love  and
care.  And  none  that  trust  in  Him  shall
be  desolate.

See  further  :  Noticeable  Topics.  The
Potter's  work.

See  Addenda :  "  God's  Sovereign
Power."

Vers.  7-10.     Theme  :  Conditional

COVENANTS.

I.  God's  providential  dealings  with
men  are  conditioned  upon  conduct.

1.  There  are  penal  laws  which  only
act  as  they  are  violated.


2.  There  are  beneficent  comforUy  for
enjoying  which  harmonious  conduct  is
im{>erative.

II.  The  Scriptural  covenants  are
based  upon  liuman  behaviour.  Both
the  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  called
covenants :  were  created  and  given  to
the  world  on  specific  terms.

1.  Spiritually f  our  case  is  twtfi>xed  and
absolute.  We  may  depart  from  our  fidel-
ity, may  refuse  to  comply  with  the
revealed  terms  on  which  God's  love  and
salvation  are  made  to  depend.

2.  The  relationship  the  Scriptures  set
forth  is  dependent  upon  our  fidelity —
our  compliance  with  Divine  require-
ments.

III.  Individual  experience  is  accord-
ing to  this  conditional  rule.

1.  Specific  promises  m&y  he  forfeited,
and  specific  penalities  incurred  either  in
this  life,  accordingly  as  we  are  obedient
or  disobedient.

2.  Our  spiritual  salvation  is  depen-
dent upon  definite  conditions,  "Repent
and  believe  the  gospel."  "  Believe  on  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be
saved."

3.  All  Christian  gladness^  progress^
and  triumph  rest  upon  similar  terms.
We  have  "  exceeding  great  and  precious
promises,"  all  "  yea  and  amen  in  Christ
Jesus,'*  yet  only  ours  as  we  "  hold  fasi
the  beginning  of  our  confidence  stead-
fast unto  the  end."

Theme:    Comfort    and    warning.

The  threatenings  and  promises  of  God
are  given  only  conditionally.

i.  The  comfort  consists  in  this,  that  the
threatened  calamities  may  be  averted  by
timely  repentance.

ii.  The  warning  in  this,  that  the  pro
mises  may  be  annulled  by  apostasy.-—
Naeg,

Theme  :  How  we  should  be  moved
BY  God's  judgments  and  goodness.
That  each  should

i.  Turn  from  his  wickedness.

ii.  Should  reform  his  heart  and  life.
— Kapff,  in  Lange.

Ver.  11.   Theme:  GoD  devisino  TBT

DEPLORING  EVIL.

391


(MAT.  xvin.


nOMllETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


It  was  not  moral  evil,  but  physical,
national.  Special  to  Judah  and  Jeru-
salem. Yet  there  is  a  truth  for  all :
*'  Is  there  evil  in  the  city,  and  the  Lord
hath  not  done  it  1 "

The  word  ^^ frame*'  is  the  same  which,
as  a  noun,  means  ^^ potter"

I.  An  ominous  interval  —  ruin  is
preparing.

(a.)  The  evil  is  not  yet  shaped  nor
ready  to  devastate.

(b.)  Yet  God  is  busily  employed  in
devising  the  destruction.

(c.)  And  certainly  God  will  not  work
without  effect.

1.  The  opportunity  of  turning  aside
the  evil  is  with  us.

2.  That  opportunity  is  of  uncertain
duration.

3.  Salvation  may  be  found  during
this  interval.

II.  A  gracious  interval — Grod  is  ap-
pealing.

'   1.  While  He  works  out  His  devices  of
evil,  He  yet  desires  our  good.

2.  The  devices  of  evil  are  inevitable
only  in  consequence  of  man's  impeni-
tence.

3.  Prompt  reformation  would  arrest
the  impending  doom.

4.  God  urges  upon  man  the  diligent
use  of  the  auspicious  hour — "  Return
ye  now.'*

Comp.  Homiletic  hints  on  chapter
vii.  3.

Ver.  12.  Theme:  The  unreason-
ableness OF  DESPAIR.  "  And  they  said,
There  is  no  hope  :  but  we  will  walk  after
our  own  devices,"  (fee.

The  devil's  chief  artifices  are  to  pro-
duce either —

(a.)  False  security  irnd  presumption;
or  (6)  despair.

L  Despair  is  sinfuL

(a.)  In  itself.

(b.)  Because  it  is  the  parent  of  other
sins,  as  is  seen  in  the  cases  of  Cain,
Saul,  and  Judas.

XL  Despair  is  dangerous.

(a.)  It  paralyses  effort  after  escape  or
reformation.

(b.)  Allures  to  besotted  unconcern.

(c.)  Drives  to  recklessness  in  further
wrong-doing.  Thus  *'  heaping  up  wrath."
392


ni.  Despair  is  groundless.

(a.)  Because  we  still  enjoy  life  and
the  means  of  grace.

(b.)  Because  of  the  longsuffering  char-
acter of  God.

(e.)  Because  of  the  universality  of  the
scheme  of  redemption.

(t/.)  Because  of  the  Person,  character,
and  invitations  of  Christ.

(e.)  Because  of  the  many  instances  of
final  salvation. — Pay  son.

See  Addenda:  Despair.
See  further:  Noticeable  Topics :  Des-
peration Dangerous.

Ver.  \Z.  Theme :  "  A  very  horrible
THING."  See  Sectional  Homily^  chap,
ii.  9-13.  *'  Facts  for  Amazemevt —
Kecldess  desertion  of  the  Fount  of  Life."

I.  It  was  the  violation  of  all  the
lessons  of  experience.  After  having
known  so  much  of  God  and  His  grace,
and  tasted  so  much  of  His  goodness.
For  in  these  experiences  they  trans-
cended every  nation.

II.  It  was  criminality  surpassing
all  heathen  vices.  "  Knew  the  Lord's
will,  yet  did  it  not."

1.  Such  ingratitude  to  God.

2.  Such  depreciation  of  precious
benefactions.

3.  Such  insolent  disregard  of  the
Holy  One  of  Israel  (ver.  15).

III.  It  was  folly  of  the  most  ap-
palling magnitude.

1.  Deserting  the  cool  and  perennial
streams^  which  the  pure  and  perpetual
snows  of  Lebanon  fed.

2.  Coquetting  with  delusive  trifles:
**  burned  incense  to  vanity  "  (ver.  15).

All  this  is  wicked,  ^^very  horrible^**
an  outrage  on  human  nature  itself ;  a
violation  of  every  law  of  righteousness  ;
a  course  so  iniquitous  as  to  ensure  the
most  **  horrible  "  malediction  and  doom  I

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Deserting  ancient

PATHS.

i.  These  ancient  Paths —

1.  "Were  appointed  by  the  Divine  law.

2.  Had  been  walked  in  by  all  the
saints.

3.  Were  therefore  the  right  way  to
their  journey's  end.


EOMILETIC  COM  M  ENTA  R  T :  JEREMIAH.


ORxr.  ZTni.


4.  A  safe  wa}',  being  well  tracked ;
and  both  easy  to  bit  and  easy  to  walk
in.

ii.  The  by-paths  :  **  a  way  not  cast
up."

1.  Not  the  highway,  the  king's  high-
way.

2.  A  dirty  and  rough  way ;  in  which
they  could  but  "stumble."

3.  An  iniquitous  way  ;  as  is  the  way
of  idolatry  and  all  transgression.

4.  A  false  way;  full  of  falls  and
ending  fatally. — (Comp.  Henry ^

See  numerous  Homilies  on  chap.  vi.
16.  Especially  on  "  The  old  paths"
by  H.  W.  Beecher,  whose  sermon  is  on
the  two  texts,  vi.  16,  xxviii.  15.

Ver.  1 7.  Theme :  The  sinner's  doom.
"I  will  sliow  them  the  back  and  not
the  face,  in  the  day  of  their  calamity."

I.  The  cause  of  the  evil  threatened.
The  punishment  of  sinners  is  not  caused
by  the  Divide  purpose  alone,  but  in
conjunction  with  the  commission  of
gin.  A  sinner  is  the  author  of  his  own
miseries  (Jer.  ii.  17;  iv.  18).  The
children  of  Jadah  were  guilty  of

1.  Rejecting  the  Divine  government.
*'  We  will  walk  after  our  own  devices,"
<fcc.  (ver.  12).  Mu'titudes  regard  their
own  will  as  the  rule  of  action,  and  live
without  God  in  the  world  (Zech.  viL
5,6,11,12).

2.  Guilty  of  idolatry  (ver.  15,  comp.
Rom.  1.  22,  23).  Idolatry  is  the  great
sin  of  the  human  heart.  Man  worships
his  own  person,  his  natural  and  acquired
talents,  his  wealth,  his  honours,  the
creature,  this  evil  world.

3.  Rejecting  the  mercy  of  God.  Pre-
vious to  inflicting  His  wrath  He  offered
them  mercy  (see  ver.  11).  But  they
repudiated  it  (ver.  12).  So,  **  we  preach
Christ  crucified,"  beseech  men,  &c.,  but
"  who  hath  believed  our  report  1 "

4.  Their  conduct  was  characterised  hy
the  greatest  folly  {yQYs,.  13-15).  Common-
sense  taught  men  to  value  clear  waters,
which,  from  the  melted  snows  of  Leba-
non, were  purified  by  running  through
the  cavities  of  rocks,  <fec.  ;  but  Israel
had  forsaken  the  infinitely  glorious
Jehovah  for  worthless  idols.     And  for


what  do  sinners  now  part  with  God
and  holiness?  Not  for  an  equivalent,
but  for  what  dazzles  and  vanislies.

5.  Their  conduct  was  a  manifestation
of  basest  ingratitude.  And  so  is  the
conduct  of  every  sinner.

II.  The  nature  of  the  evil  thresi-
tened.  God  would  abandon  them.
The  "  light  of  His  countenance  "  is  the
joy  of  every  soul,  and  of  heaven ;  for
Him  to  show  His  back  is  woful.

1.  God  sometimes  shows  His  back
in  a  way  of  mercy  (Exod.  xxxiii.  23).
In  conipa'^sion  to  our  weakness  **  He
holdeth  back,"  (fee.  (Job  xxv.  9).

2.  But  this  threat  is  expressive  of
Divine  wrath.  (See  Levit.  xvii.  10,  xx.
3;  1  Pet.  iii.  12.  Comp.  Job  xxiil
8  ;  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  14,  xxii.  1.)  For  a  mo-
ment only  God  hides  Himself  from  His
people ;  but  it  here  means  the  angry
abandonment  of  the  wicked.

3.  The  wrath  of  God  is  retributive.
Sinners  turn  their  back  upon  God.  He
w^ll  "  show  them  the  back  in  the  day
of  their  calamity  "  (comp.  Ps.  xviii.  26,
27  ;  Jer.  ii.  27,  28,  xxxii.  33-35  ;  Deut.
xxxi.  17,  18).

4.  The  language  of  the  text  implies
a  final  departure.  '*  Ephraim  is  joined
to  idols,  let  him  alone  "  (Hos.  ix.  12).

III.  The  time  when  the  evil  shall
be  inflicted.  "  In  the  day  of  their
calamity."

Sometimes  it  may  be  seen  in  the  pr§-
sent  life  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  15;  Matt,  xxiil
27).

1.  In  the  time  of  adversity.  When
cold  poverty  is  on  them,  where  is  God?

2.  In  sickness.  The  wicked  have  no
refuge  in  distress.

3.  When  deserted  by  their  friends.
Cast  ojff  by  friends,  yet  no  God  !

4.  The  time  of  old  age.  Grave  opens,
yet  without  God  near  thee  !

5.  A  dying  hour.  '*  The  wicked  is
driven  away  in  his  wickedness."

6.  At  the  last  day  (Rev.  vi.  16,  17).
Application  :

{a. )  The  awful  state  of  the  unconverted ;
enemies  to  God,  and  doomed  to  everlast-
ing destruction.

(p.)  If  we  desire  to  be  at  peace  with
God,  the  way  is  prepared.  Reconciled
through  His  Son,

393


CHAP.  xvin.


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


(c.)  Blessed  is  the  prospect  of  all  true
Christians.  In  tlie  day  of  calamity  He
will  show  them  His  face.  **  I  will  never
leave  thee." — Helps  for  the  Pulpit.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  The  sinner's  doom.

So  inveterate  was  the  attachment  of
the  people  of  Israel  to  their  idols,  and
80  incorrigible  amidst  national  calamities,
that  God  at  length  determined,  not  only
to  bring  upon  them  the  threatened  cap-
tivity in  Babylon,  but  to  leave  them  in
the  hands  of  their  enemies  without
pity  or  compassion,  and,  like  a  friend
aggrieved,  would  utterly  forsake  them
in  the  day  of  trouble.     Consider —

I.  The  evil  threatened :  •'*  I  will  show
them  the  back  and  not  the  face."

Here  we  may  observe,

1.  God  sometimes  shows  His  back  in
a  way  of  m^rcy,  as  in  the  case  of  Moses,
when  He  caused  His  goodness  to  pass
before  him  because  he  could  not  see  His
face  and  live  (Exod.  xxxiii.  23).

2.  The  Lord  here  threatens  to  hide
His  face.  Note — His  face  is  either  the
most  delightful  or  the  most  dreadful  of
all  objects.  He  has  an  angry  and  a
frowning  face  when  sin  is  to  be  punished
(Lev.  xvii.  10 ;  xx.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  12);
and  an  approving  smile  and  regard  for
His  people  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  To  turn  His
back  upon  His  people — the  Jews — in
indignation  and  wrath.  The  Lord  may
hide  Himself  from  His  peoi)le,  and  be
wroth ;  but  towards  the  wicked  it  de-
notes His  total  abandonment  of  them  to
deserved  wrath  and  punishment — par-
ticularly when  the  Lord  says  "  He  will
show  them  the  back  and  not  the  face."
It  includes —

(a.)  The  withdrawment  of  that  pro-
vidential care  and  protection  which  was
to  be  the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  people
of  Israel  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9),  and  leaving
them  exposed  to  every  evil  and  danger.
Thus  He  dealt  with  the  apostate  Jewish
church :  He  broke  down  its  wall  that  it
might  be  trodden  under  foot  (Isa.  v.  5).

(6.)  A  direct  expression  of  His  dis-
pleasure; as  when  we  turn  our  back
upon  those  who  have  offended  us.  So
Christ  once  turned  His  back  upon  Peter,
because  he  was  an  offence  to  Him  (Matt
xri.  23).

394


(c.)  It  intimates  a  final  departure;
giving  them  up  to  walk  in  their  own
way,  and  to  follow  their  own  counsel.
To  be  abandoned  as  incorrigible  is  the
sorest  of  all  judgments  :  and  "  woe  unto
them  when  I  depart  from  them,  saith
the  Lord"  (Hosea  ix.  12).

n.  The  time  when  the  threatened
evil  shall  he  inflicted  :  "  In  the  day  of
their  calamity."

There  is  a  day  of  trouble  coming  upon
the  wicked,  an  appointed  day,  a  dark
and  gloomy  day.  Alas,  if  God  has  to
turn  His  back,  and  leave  the  sinner  to
his  fate  !  Yet  such  will  be  the  doom  of
the  finally  impenitent.

1.  A  little  of  this  may  be  seen  amidst
the  calamities  of  the  present  life.  What
was  the  condition  of  Saul,  when  God
had  departed  from  him  (1  Sam.  xxviii.)
Of  Jerusalem,  when  He  would  return
to  His  temple  no  more  (Matt,  xxiii.
37,  38).

2.  What  then  will  be  the  state  of  the
wicked  in  the  last  day,  when  God  shall
forever  disown  and  forever  forsake  them  1
That  will  indeed  be  the  day  of  their
calamity :  there  is  none  like  it,  and  all
entreaties  will  be  in  vain  (Rev.  vi  16,
17).

Lessons —

1.  Let  the  unbeliever  beware,  and  let
him  well  consider  what  he  shall  answer,
when  the  Lord  cometh  forth  to  punish
him  (Jer.  xiii.  21).

2.  If  a  Christian  finds  himself  for-
saken in  the  day  of  trouble,  let  it  cause
great  search ings  of  heart;  and  like  Israel,
let  him  lament  after  the  Lord  (1  Sami
viL  2).

3.  Let  all  remember  there  is  still  a
refuge  from  the  storms  of  life,  and  from
the  wrath  to  come  (Prov.  xviii.  10). —
The  Preacher.

Comments  :

Ver.  18.  "Devices  against  Jere-
miah." The  effect  of  the  foregoing  pro-
phecy upon  the  Jews  was —

i.  A  more  har^dened  and  desperate  an-
tagonism to  the  prophet.  '*  Smite  him
with  the  tongue."  Carry  malicious  re-
ports of  what  he  says  to  Jehoiakim,  and
BO  stir  his  anger.

ii  A  flattering  self-satisfied  repudia'


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xvhl


tion  of  his  messages^  '^  For  the  law  shall  "  Opposition  of  the  office  which  has

not  perish,"  &c.  ;  i.e.,  we  do  not  need  apparent   authority  to   that  which   has

this   prophet,   we    have    the    authorised  true  authority."

"  priest,"  the  "  law  "  of  Moses,  "  wise "  i.   The  basis  of  the  opposition.      The

men   to  give  us  "  counsel/'  and  "pro-  assertion  of  the  infallibility  of  the  former

phets"  to  declare  '*  the  word" — not  in-  oflfice.

deed  the  Jehovah  Word,  but  "smooth  ii.   The  mode  of  the  opposition,

thiniTs"  (Isa.  xxx.  10).  (a.)  In  not  being  willing  to  hear.

Ver.  20.  "Evil  recompensed  for     ,    (^O J"   t^e   attempt   to  destroy  the
„  latter  by  violence.

1°  'FaUhful    warnings    and    rebuke,         "'•  Thejemlt  of  the  oppoMon  U  nuga-

proved  the  prophet's  patriotism.     He  re-  f  *  .    „,,    '  t      -i  i  xi         •        t  ,y

fused  to  flatter  and  delude.     "  Faithful  («')    ^^«  ^^^,  ^^"^^  *^^  ^^^^«  «^  *^«

the  wounds  of  a  friend."  oppressors,  to  judge  them^^

ii.   Wilful  love  of  wrong-doing  rendered  (fO  He  gives  heed  to  His  servants  to

them  hostile  to  truth.     "  The  wicked  hate  P^^tect  them.

the  rit'hteous,  and  ernash  upon  him  with  rrr,,  .     .       .         .     i.  .i      ,     .        i

their  teeth  "  [This  treatment  of  the  text  makes  it

appropriate  to  all  occasions  when  secular

Vers.  18-20.  Theme:  Authority  ar-  or  ecclesiastical  power  is  invoked  to  sup-

BkYED  AGAINST  AUTHORITY.     TMs  ap-  press  the  Voluntary  movements  of  Christen-

peal  to  the  "  law  and  priest"  as  against  dom  ;  or  when  ike  authority  of  antiquity

Jerenu;ili    and    his   words,    is    used    by  is  urged  againd  any  new  development  of

Naegelsbach  (in  Lange)  as  the  basis  of  a  the  Christian  life,  whether  in  individuals

homily  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Refor-  or  churchsp,]
mation.     Thus : —

N0TICEABL2   ToPICS  JV  CHAPTER   XVIIL
Topic— "Vn^  PoTTER*8  Work  (vers.  1~6).

The  prophet  sees  a  man  engaged  in  a  task  to  which  he  is  devoting  all  his
thoughts.  The  potter  designs  to  make  some  clay  into  a  vessel  of  a  certain  shape ;
the  form  or  pa^ttern  j-s  present  to  his  mind,  he  is  fully  resolved  that  the  material
with  which  ne  is  working  shall  come  forth  in  that  form  and  no  other.

But  apparp>ntly  it  disappoints  him.  One  piece  of  clay  after  another  is  "  marred
in  his  bands : "  it  takes  a  shape  different  from  that  which  he  would  give  it ;  but
he  goes  on  perseveringly  till  he  has  done  the  thing  which  he  intended  to  do.

"  O  house  of  Israel,  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter  ?  saith  the  Lord.  Be-
lK)ld,  as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter's  hands,  so  are  ye  in  mine,  0  house  of  Israel."

Conmientators  have  no  doubt  what  this  means  !  God  could  do  as  He  liked  with
the  clay  ;  He  could  destroy  it  if  He  pleased  !  But  Jeremiah  was  sent  to  see  what
the  potter  liked.  And  he  saw  he  desired  to  make  a  vessel  of  a  certain  form,  and  for
that  enil  he  laboured.    The  analogy,  if  of  any  force  or  worth  at  all,  nmst  mean  that —

I.  There  is  a  form  according  to  which  God  is  seeking  to  mould  men  and
nations.  He  is  not  doing  any  single  act  arbitrarily,  or  without  reference  to  a
purpose ;  He  is  patiently  and  continually  working  for  the  accomplishment  of  this
purpose.

1.  Men  are  throughout  Scripture  assumed  to  have  wills y  upon  which  no  mere
blind  mechanical  power  can  operate,  but  upon  which  God,  a  living  Person,  is  ope-
rating by  gracious,  mysterious,  orderly  procebses,  that  He  may  make  men  in  His
own  likeness.

2.  Here  was  the  mystery  of  a  peopled  repentance.  If  they  acknowledged  this
Will  which  was  working  upon  them,  yielded  to  it,  and  desired  to  be  formed  by  it,
this  was  the  conversion  and  inward  change  He  was  seeking  to  produce.  Marvellous
that  persons  should  see  in  this  symbol  nothing  but  an  assertion  of  the  sovereignty

39j


CHAP.  xvin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


of  God,  when  the  whole  thought  is  the  order  of  God's  proceedings  with  men  to
produce  tliis  voluntary  obedience  !

II.  The  purpose  which  the  potter  cherished  was  at  the  last  fully  realised.
As  the  prophet  gazed  on  the  potter,  he  saw  how  one  piece  of  clay  after  another
was  marredy  and  yet  how  the  thing  he  designed  was  at  last  done,  the  whole  truth
of  the  symbol  came  upon  him  with  an  awful  vision  of  what  was  prepariiig  for  hit
land ;  yet  also,  with  a  bright  vision  of  what  must  ultimately /o/Zoii>  the  judgment,

1.  The  vessel  must  be  made,  not  after  some  different  type,  but  after  the  original
and  perfect  life  which  dwelt  not  in  the  dead  matter,  but  in  the  living  mind  of  Him
who  was  shaping  it.

2.  If  any  particular  race  must  be  cast  aside,  it  would  not  be  wilfully,  not  in
rage,  but  after  a  series  of  gracious  merciful  experiments  had  been  made  upon  it,
but  because  of  a  moral  incapacity  for  understanding  the  grace  of  its  Ruler,  and
for  exhibiting  any  qualities  but  those  most  opposed  to  His  grace,  most  hateful
and  destructive.

3.  Thus  the  destruction  which  Jeremiah  had  foreseen  to  be  approaching  his  la:id
justified  itself  to  his  conscience  and  heart.  He  shrank  from  it  through  tenderness  ol
nature,  through  patriotism ;  but  he  saw  that  one  generation  or  another  might  hav<»
to  be  broken  that  the  end  might  be  accomplished.

III.  Here  was  the  power  which  could  reform  individuals  and  society.

1.  2^he  strife  of  the  clay  with  the  Potter^  the  struggles  of  men  against  a  Divin«
Artificer  not  to  be  brought  Into  their  true,  reasonable,  healthy  condition  ;  not  to
be  at  peace  with  each  other  by  being  at  peace  with  Him  who  had  made  them  to
bear  a  common  image,  were  working  national  and  individual  desolation.  Hence,
therefore —

2.  The  threatened  captivity  and  destruction  would  form  a  method  of  reforma-
tion ;  God  would  bring  life  out  of  death.  This  marring  of  the  clay  was  a  fearful
sight;  but  the  patience,  longsuffering,  and  final  victory  of  the  Potter  was  a
glorious  one.

Take  then  this  simple  image  of  a  living  and  righteous  Being,  working  amidst  the
changes  of  times,  working  upon  human  wills  for  a  loving  and  gracious  purpose,  for
a  purpose  which  has  been  realised,  does  it  not  give —

IV.  An  elucidation  of  facts  which  were  left  unexplained,  and  felt  to  be
inexplicable  ?

1.  The  fall  of  greai  nations ;  2.  The  subjection  of  such  portions  of  the
kingdom  of  Christ  as  Jerusalem,  Constantinople,  Alexandria,  to  the  power  of  the
Crescent.

(a.)  Are  not  these  cities  proof s  that  the  clay  is  marred  in  the  new,  as  it  was  in
the  old  time,  wheii  it  resists  the  will  of  the  Artificer  f  And  what  is  there  in  the  clay
of  Italy,  Germany,  France,  England,  to  give  it  special  exemption  from  the  sentence
upon  that  which  is  unprofitable ?  It  is  written,  "If  He  spared  not  the  natural
branches,  take  heed  lest  He  spare  not  thee."

(b.)  But  we  know  that  whatever  happens  to  one  generation  or  another,  He  will
claim  human  clay  and  all  natural  things  for  Himself,  God  has  said  He  will  write
upon  human  hearts  His  own  name  and  the  name  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  His  holy
city.

(c.)  And  for  each  individual,  in  whom  dwells  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  it  will  be
realised  that  the  body  of  humiliation  will  be  made  like  to  Chrises  glorious  body  by
that  power  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself. — Contracted
from  Maurice's  Prophets  and  Kings.

Note  :  "  When  through  the  clay  not  being  of  a  proper  consistency,  or  otherwise
not  answering  to  the  potter's  will,  the  vessel  is  spoilt,  he  does  not  throw  it  away,
but  crushes  it  together,  dashes  it  back  upon  the  wheel,  and  begins  his  work  afreshj
till  the  clay  has  taken  the  predetermined  shape.  So  then,  it  was  God's  purpose
that  Judea  should  become  the  proper  scene  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Messiah,
306


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xvin.

and  iU  torn  he  fit  to  receive  the  Saviour's  teaching  and  carry  the  good  tidings  to  all
lands.  If,  therefore,  at  any  stage  of  the  preparation,  the  Jewish  nation  took,  in  its
free  will,  such  a  course  as  would  frustrate  this  purpose  of  Providence,  it  was  crushed
hy  affliction  into  an  unresisting  mass,  in  which  the  formative  process  forthwith  began
again" — Dr,  Payne  Smith.

Topic:  Desperation  Dangerous  (ver,  12).

Nothing  more  proves  the  perverseness  of  the  human  heart  than  its  unsuitable
entertainment  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  it;  especially  in  His  gracious  excite-
ments and  invitations  to  repentance,  conversion,  and  turning  to  Himself;  in  that
these  have  oftentimes  very  little  impression  upon  or  prevalency  with  it.  Nor  only
so,  but  now  and  then  it  proves  to  be  from  henceforth  the  more  confirmed  and
settled  in  evil.     This  is  the  case  here.

L  A  desperate  conclusion.     "  There  is  no  hope."

No  hope  of  us  ;  our  lusts  charm  and  master  us.  No  hope  in  regard  of  thee  and
thy  ministry  ;  thou  art  not  likely  to  do  any  good  amongst  us.  No  hope  of  favour
from  Him  ;  there  is  no  probability  of  any  mercy

i.  In  reference  to  themselves :  despair  as  to  their  own  amendment  or  reformation.
There  are  people  desperate  in  this  regard,  because  of —

1.  An  absolute  indisposition  and  averseness  to  all  kind  of  good  (Job  xxi.  11).  This
distemper  hath  sundry  grounds  and  causes  from  which  it  proceeds : —

(a.)  A  neglect  of  religious  duties  and  exercises.  (6.)  A  persisting  in  some  loose
course  of  life,  (c.)  A  walking  contrary  to  light.  (</.)  Worldliness  and  too  deep
an  iniplunging  into  secular  affairs.

2.  An  absolute  thraldom  and  subjection  to  all  kind  of  evil.  And  there  are  divers
grounds  for  this  also.  There  are  people  who  despair  of  ever  conquering  their  lusts
because  of — (a.)  Spiritual  laziness.  (6.)  Unbelief  of  God*s  promises,  (c.)  Carnal
confidence.     \d.)  Indifference  to  the  thing  itself.

ii.  In  reference  to  Jeremiah  and  his  ministry  :  despair  as  to  the  value  of  preaching
God's  messages  amongst  them.  There  are  fortifications  to  this  purpose,  which
men  raise  to  themselves,  to  hold  out  against  the  workings  of  the  ministry.  1.  Pride
and  selfconceitedness.  2.  Cavillings  and  wrangliiigs  against  the  word  of  the
ministry  (Acts  xiii.  45).  3.  Prosperity  and  outward  welfare.  It  is  because  people
are  so  much  hardened  against  the  ministry,  that,  let  the  prophets  say  what  they  may,
they  are  resolved  to  do  what  they  list,  that  there  is  no  hope.

iii.  In  reference  to  God  Himself.  They  despair  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  call  it
in  question  : — 1.  From  the  suggestions  of  Satan.  2.  From  the  infidelity  which  is
in  their  hearts.     3.  From  a  measuring  of  God  by  themselves.

Such  a  frame  of  spirit  as  this  is  most  dangerous  and  pernicious.

(a.)  It  is  against  ourselves.  (a.)  Our  grace — obstructing  it  and  uniting  evil
thoughts  and  habits;  and  (6.)  our  Comfort — opening  the  soul  to  horror  and  grief.

(b.)  It  is  against  God.  Despair  is  the  sin  which  opposes  Him  in  His  main
design  in  promulgating  the  Gospel,  and  denies  *'the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace"
in  Jesus  Christ.

IL  A  peremptory  resolution.  "  But  we  will  walk  after  our  own  devices,"  <fec.
Consider  this  determination —

i.  Simply  and  absolutely  in  itself,  they  declare  that  they  will  walk  after  their  own
devices.

1.  There  is  implied  here  :  That  the  nature  of  man  is  very  prone  and  subject  to
**  devices  ** — evil  devices.

2.  There  is  here  expressed:  That  there  is  in  men  an  affection  towards  these
devices.     Three  things  are  here  to  be  noticed —

(«.)  Their  obstinacy  and  perverseness :  *'  We  will  walk"  (comp.  chap.  ii.  25,  and
viii.  6).     (1.)  This  obstinacy  and  perverseness  is  grounded  upon  security  and  pre-

397


OHAP.  X.VIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


sumption  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  (2.)  It  proceeds  from  the  power  which  Satan  has  over
them  (Ephes.  ii.  2).      (3.)  They  are  not  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  God's  Word.

(6.)  Their  conspiracy  and  combination:  "We  will,  every  one,"  (fee.  It  was  a
set  ph)t  and  design  amongst  them  against  the  Lord  and  His  propliet.  All  were
agreed  :  and  this  makes  the  sin  an  aggravation,  as  being  the  more  malignant.

(c.)  Their  ivilful  transgression  and  sin  against  knowledge  :  **  We  will  every  one  do
the  imagination  of  his  evil  heart"  Not  we  will  do  what  in  our  judgment  we  think
best ;  but  knowing  their  ways  were  evil,  they  determined  on  "  evil "  still.

ii.  Reflexively  and  derivatively.     They  said  this —

1.  Said  it  expressly  in  so  many  words  :  were  not  ashamed  to  say  this.  So  much
impudence  is  there  upon  men's  spirits  as  that  they  blush  not  to  proclaim  their
wickedness  with  open  mouths.

2.  They  said  it  practically ^  in  that  which  they  did  :  persisting  in  their  evil  ways,
without  amendment  and  reformation.

Those  sins  which  were  single  before  admonition  come  to  be  double  afterwards,
and  the  judgment  is  so  much  the  greater  which  waits  upon  them  (John  xv,  22).
— Rev.  Thomas  Horton,  D.D.y  A.D.  1678.

See  Addenda:  Despaie.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XVIIL:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver  4.  God's  sovereign  powi^^g.

*'  Repine  not,  nor  reply  ;
Vitvr  not  what  Heaven  ordains  with  reason's

eye;
Too  bright  the  object  is,  the  distance  is  too

high
The  man  who  w^ould  resolve  the  work  of  fate,
May  limit  number  and  make  crooked  straight ;
Stop  thy  enquir}',  then,  and  curb  thy  sense,
Nor  let  dust  argue  with  Omnipotence."

— Prior,

"  God*s  patience  is  lasting,  but  it  is
not  everlasting." — Anon.

See  Dr.  Thomson^ s  ''The  Land  and
the  Book  "  on  this  passage.

Scripture  reference  to  "the  Potter:"
1  Chron.  iv.  23  ;  Isa.  xli.  25,  Ixiv.  8 ;
Jer.  xvlii.  3,  4 ;  Dan.  ii.  41 ;  Zech.  xi.
13  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  7-10  ;  Rum.  ix.  21.

Man  compared  to  ^''clay"  in  Scrip-
ture :  Isa.  Ixiv.  8  j  Jer.  xviii.  6.

Simeon  says,  in  his  Sermons  on  Rom.
viii.,  that  there  were  three  reasons  why
he  preached  the  doctrine  of  Election  ;
not  only  because  he  found  it  in  the
Scriptures,  but  because  it  laid  the  axe  at
the  root  of  (1)  pride,  (2)  presumption,
and  (3)  despair.


Ver.  12.  Despair.

Francis  Spira,  an  Italian  apostate,  died
in  the  most  awful  despair.  On  his
deathbed  he  exclaimed,  "  My  sin  is
greater  than  the  mercy  of  God.  I  have
denied  Christ  voluntarily  ;  I  feel  that
He  hardens  me,  and  allows  me  no
hope."

"All  hope  is  lost
Of  my  reception  into  grace  ;  what  worse  f
For  where  no  hope  is  left,  is  left  no  fear.
So  farewell  hope,  and  with  hope  farewell  fear.
Farewell  remorse,  all  good  to  me  is  lost :
Evil,  be  thou  my  good." — Satan's  Address:
Milton's  **  Paradise  Lost.**

"  Dreadful  is  their  doom,   whom  doubt  has

driven
To  censure  fate  and  pious  hope  forego  ;
Like   yonder  blnsted    boughs  by  lightning

riven,
Perfection,  beauty,  life,  they  never  know,
But  frown  on  all  that  pass,  a  monument  of

woe." — Beattie.

"  Despair  is  the  offspring  of  laziness,
fear,  and  impatience ;  it  argues  a  defect
of  spirit  and  resolution,  and  oftentimes
of  honesty  too.  I  would  not  despair
unless  I  saw  my  misfortune  recorded  in
the  Book  of  Fate,  and  signed  and  sealed
by  necessity." — Collier.


898


SOiilLETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  OHA».xnL


CHAPTER  XIX.

Cbittoal  and  Exegetical  Notes. — See  notes  to  preceding  chapter  for  Ohronology^  &c.
Vide  also  Introductory  Notes  to  chap.  xx.
Geographical  References. — Yer.   2.        **  Valley  of  the  Son  of  Hinnom,**  cf.  note  on  chap,

ii.  31.  "  The  East  gate,'*  margin  the  Sun  gate.  But  the  word  is  not  definite  ;  n-IDnnn  "IJ^K^.
Jerome,  Keil,  and  Henderson  susrgest  tlie  Pottery  gate  as  the  true  rendering  from  Oyi.  The  word
JJarsuth  occurs  nowhere  else,  and  probably  is  derived  from  the  fact  that  the  refuse  from
neighbouring  pottery  works  lay  about  there.  The  Targum  and  Kimchi  render  it  dung  gate.
But  the  word  Hanith  occurs  in  the  Talmud  for  potter's  clay.  The  situation  of  the  Pottery
gate  cannot  be  determined,  but  plainly  it  opened  into  tlie  Valley  of  Hinnom  (Josh.  xv.  8).
**  The  potters  there  formed  vessels  for  the  use  of  the  Temple,  which  was  close  by  {cf.  ver.  10-
14  ;  chap,  xviii.  2  ;  Zech.  xi.  13"). — Jamieson.  Ver.  5.  *^  High  -places  of  Baal:  "  cf.  chap.
vii.  31.  Ver.  11.  *'  Bury  them  in  Tophet  :**  cf.  Notes,  Geographical  and  Personal,  on  chap,
vii.  31.

Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  '^Ancients  of  the  people  and  ancients  of  the  priests.**  The
Sanhedrim  was  composed  of  seventy-two  elders,  taken  partly  from  the  priests  (2  Kings  xix.  2)
and  partly  from  the  other  tribes  (Num.  xi.  16 ;  Josh.  vii.  6  ;  1  Kings  viii.  1),  and  thus  repre-
sented the  nation.  This  great  council  presided  over  the  ecclesiastical  and  civic  aflfairs  of  the
wliole  people.

Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  5.  **  Burn  their  sons  with  fre :  **  cf.  chap.  vii.  31.  Ver.  13.
*'  Bouses  upon  whose  roofs  they  have  burned  incense.*'  On  the  flat  roofs  of  Oriental  houses
festivals  were  held  (Judges  xvi.  27),  booths  were  erected  at  feasts  (Neh.  viii.  16),  sacrifices
were  offereil  to  the  sun  and  planets  (2  Ivinijs  xxiii.  11,  12  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  29  ;  Zeph.  i.  6).

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  1.  *' Jl  potter's  earthen  bottle."  The  bottle  was  a  flask  with  a  long
narrow  neck,  and  called  pBf^S  from  the  gurgling  sound  made  when  being  emptied.  Ver.  7.
"  /  wdl  make  void,*'  The  word  "'n^p?,  is  used  playing  upon  the  symbol-word  pBpS  •  the  root
of  both  words  being  PJ23,  to  pour  out.  Ver.  8. — "Desolate** — an  astonishment.  **  Plaguet
thereof:*'  lit.  blows  :  plague  being  here  used  because  regarded  as  a  "blow"  direct  from  God's
hand.  Ver.  11.  "  And  they  shall  bury  them  in  Tophet,*'  &c. — these  words,  and  to  the  end  of
verse,  are  omitted  in  tlie  Septuagint  and  by  Hitzig,  as  interpolated  from  vii.  32.  Ver.  13.  **2)«-
filed  OS  the  place,  of  Tophet:  "  lit.  shall  be  the  defiled.  The  better  rendering  is  (as  Targum  and
Speaker* s  Com.)  shall  be  as  the  defiled  Tophet :  or  lit.,  shall  be  as  the  place  Tophet^  the  d^led.


HOMJLETIC  OUTLINE  ON  THE  ENTIRE  CHAPTER  XIX,
Vers.  1-15. — A  Symbolic  Prophecy  of  Doom.

God  bids  His  prophet  attempt  to  impress  this  obdurate  and  heedless  people
with  another  enacted  symbol,  which  was  derived  again  from  the  'potter^s  craft.
This  time  the  symbol  assumes  a  more  alarming  form.

1.  The  potter's  work  is  here  completed ;  the  vessel  is  in  this  instance  formed;
in  chap,  xviii.  it  was  a  vessel  in  the  process  of  being  moulded.

2.  The  destructive  work  is  here  irremediable.  In  the  former  symbol  the  clay
was  worked  again  and  again  till  perfected  ;  here  the  vessel,  being  completed  and
baked,  is  incapable  of  being  reshaped,  and  is  hopelessly  shattered,  destroyed,  and
abandoned.

What  are  the  different  meanings  of  these  two  pottery  symbols  1

1.  The  patient  working  upon  the  clay,  crushing  the  ill-formed  vessel,  and  skil-
fully remoulding  it  till  a  perfect  vessel  was  obtained,  symbolised  the  Divine  process
of  formation  by  whicli  God  was  moulding  a  pe<^ple  whom  He  would  not  abandon  till
His  design  in  them  was  realised.

2.  The  absolute  shattering  of  the  potter's  bottle  now  symbolises  the  complete
destruction  of  that  generation  of  the  Jewish  people,  as  ttseless  for  God's  purposes
and  contrary  to  His  mind.  This  vessel,  having  been  baked,  could  not  be  formed
anew,  vras  beyond  reformation,  and  so  must  be  destroyed.

This  prophetic  enactment  arranges  itself  into  three  stage*—
L  The  solemn  exMbition  of  the  doomed  vessel.

399


OH  AP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COM  MEN  TARY:  JEREMIAH.


1.  The  appropriate  spectators.  "  Ancients  of  the  people  and  ancients  of  the
priests."  They  represented  the  entire  tribes,  and  so  did  the  potter's  bottle  :  it
was  a  symbol  of  that  existing  generation.  The  vessel  which  was  typically  used
was  not  an  unfinished  piece  of  clay,  but  a  bottle  completed  and  duly  hardened ;
and  these  "  ancients  "  represented  a  nation  whose  usages  and  temperament  were
fixed  and  determined.

2.  The  scene  of  its  exhibition.  "  The  pottery  gate  "  (see  Geog.  ReferenceSj  supra).
The  place  where  refuse  was  cast.  That  gate,  opening  into  the  valley  of  Ben-
Hinnom,  looked  out  upon  the  scene  where  this  people  had  broken  every  law  of  God,
Ijoathsome  memorials  of  the  nation's  vile  criminality  lay  before  these  "  ancients."
It  thus  justified  the  doom  about  to  be  pronounced,  God  would  break  them  in  pieces.
Around  their  feet,  moreover,  as  they  stood  "  at  the  entry  of  the  gate,"  lay
shattered  fragments  of  pottery ;  suggestive  of  the  "  evil  "  (ver.  3)  God  would  *'  bring
upon  this  place  "  and  people  ;  and  the  degradation  also  which  impended.

3.  The  explanatory  message  of  woe.  (a)  All  classes  were  included  in  the  coming
woe  (ver.  3)  ;  (6)  the  doom  would  excite  general  amazement — "  Ears  tingle,"
(vers.  3,  8);  (c)  yet  the  justice  thereof  was  manifest  (vers.  4,  6)j  (d)  and  the  ruin
would  be  absolutely  desolating  and  complete  (vers.  6-10).

IL  The  irremediable  shattering  of  the  vessel.

1.  The  violent  met] iod  of  its  destruction,  (a.)  Not  by  accident  but  by  design  it
was  broken.  God  intended  it ;  man  performed  it ;  and  it  was  accomplished  with
violence,  (b.)  It  was  completely  shattered.  So  shall  Jerusalem — people  and  city,
the  entire  generation — be  broken  to  pieces  ',  none,  nothing  spared,  (c.)  The  de-
struction was  easily  and  irresistibly  effected.  They  would  be  powerless  to  avert
the  ruin.  All  *'the  counsel  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem"  (ver.  7)  would  have  no
utility  in  striving  to  thwart  God's  purpose  on  this  "  vessel  of  wrath  fitted  to
destruction."  (</.)  No  ingenuity  could  repair  the  ruin:  "cannot  be  made  whole
again."  How  dreadful  is  God's  work  when  He  destroys  !  "  None  can  stay  Hia
hand,  nor  say  unto  Him,  What  doest  Thou  ?  "

2.  The  suggestive  scene  of  its  destruction.  Josiah  had  swept  all  the  impurities
of  the  nation  into  the  valley  of  Ben-Hinnom.  It  was  a  scene  of  desecration  and
doom.  The  two  things  were  connected — desecration  and  doom.  And  this  people
had  become  a  desecrated  people  ;  therefore  should  they  fall  in  execrable  scenes.
Loathsome  as  Tophet  was,  it  would  become  more  horrible  still  as  '*  the  valley  of
slaughter"  (ver.  6).  The  bearing  of  the  case  is  this,  sin  explains  mans  destruction:
Tophet  testified  against  the  nation^s  violation  of  God's  claims :  Tophet  would
witness  violence  upon  the  offenders:  **  they  shall  bury  them  in  Tophet  till  there  be
no  place  to  bury  them  "  (ver.  11).

m.  The  reiteration  of  doom  in  the  temple  court.

1.  Proclaim  to  a  larger  audience.  *'A11  the  people"  (ver.  14).  In  this
assembled  the  greatest  crowd  (2  Chron.  xx.  5).  Thus  would  the  solemn  predic-
tions, founded  upon  the  symbolic  action  in  Tophet,  gain  currency  over  the  entire
country.  None  could  therefore  plead  ignorance  as  an  excuse.  Nor  can  we.  The
doom  of  iniquity  is  known — "  there  is  no  speech  nor  language  where  the  voice  is
not  heard."

2.  Uttered  within  the  very  house  of  God.  Where  messages  of  grace  had  often
been  delivered.  But  "judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God."  Men  must
not  think  to  escape  the  denunciation  of  sin  in  God's  house.

3.  Pronounced  upon  all  transgressors.  It  was  not  Jerusalem,  "  this  city,"  which
Alone  had  sinned,  but  "  all  her  towns."  Siimers  would  gladly  pass  over  on  to
others  the  crimes  God  denounces  :  but  here  all  are  included.  For  in  every
instance  there  had  been  wilful  rejection  of  God^s  Word :  **  they  have  hardened  their
necks  that  they  might  not  hear  My  words."  What  need  have  we  to  pray  to  be
kept  from  like  "hardness  of  heart  and  contempt  for  God's  Word  and  command-
ments ! "

400


riOMTLETIC  COMMENTAnr :  JEREMIAH,


CTRAP.  IZi


HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XIX,


Ver.  1.  The  "  earthen  bottle  "  was  a
humiliating  symbol  of

i.  Their  mean  origin  (Gen.  iii.  19;
Isa.  11  1).


idolatry.       (See    chap.    vii.    31,  32;   2
Kings  xxiii.  10.)

I.   The  earthen    vessel  broken  in
Tophet.    That  vessel  was  typical  of  Jeru-


ii.  Their  frail   existence  (Deut.  xxvi.  salem^  which  should  thus  be  destroyed.
5  ;  see  Homilies  on  chap,  xviii.  4,  <fec.).  Its  destruction  in  Tophet  was  accom-

panied by  the  declaration  that  the  place

Comments —  of  their  idolatry  should  be  the  scene  of

y&cZ.^*' 0  kings  of  Judah"    Spoken  their  slaughter.      The    inhabitants    of

in  the  plural,  because  the  message  (vers.  Jerusalem  would  be  slain  by  the  Chal-

3-9)  related  not  specially  to  the  reign-  deans,  and  the  scene  of  their  idolatrous

ing  king,  but  to  the  whole  royal  house.  worship  be  defiled  by  their  carcases,  for

Nokingof  David's  line  was  henceforth  to  there  would   be  no  sufficient  place  to

sit  upon  the  throne  till  He  came  whose  bury  them.     Comp.  vii.  32.
is  the  true  kingdom  (John  xviiL  37). —         II.  Judas  Iscariot  perished  in  the

Speakers  Com.  potter's  field      That  traitor  was  typical

Ver.  4.  See  ^omtY^^ on  chap,  xviii.  15.  of  the  Jewish  nation;    symbolising  its

Vers.  5,  6.   These  verses  repeat  chap.  rejection  of  Christ;  and  the  Psalmist  in

vii.  31,  32.      Vide  Notes  and  Homilies,  his  prophecies  concerning  Judas  extends


Ver.  7.  "  /  will  make  void^*'  *.«.,  "I
will  pour  out "  (see  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse).
Neumann  suggests  that  Jeremiah  car-
ried to  Tophet  the  bottle  full  of  water,
the  Oriental  symbol  of  life  (Isa*  xxxv.
6,  xli.  18),  and  at  these  words  emptied
it  in  the  presence  of  the  ancients.

Ver.  8.  See  chap,  xviii.  16.


them  to  the  Jewish  nation,  typified  by
him.     (See  Psa.  Iv.  7-22,  cix.  8-31.)

The  analogy  between  Judas  and  the
Jews  was  made  m(yre  awful  by  the  very
place  in  which  he  came  to  his  miserable
end — the  potter^ s  field  I  (Comp.  Acts  i
18,  19  with  Matt,  xxvii.  7  and  Zech.  xi.
12.)     There  is  reason  for  thinking  that


Ver.  9.  A  description   of  the   siege,      it  was  near  Tophet,   or  the  Valley  of


(comp.  xviii.  21).    For  the  fulfilment  see
Lamentations  ii.  20,  iv.  10.

Vers.   10-14.  Theme :  The  potteb'b

VESSEL  BROKEN  IN  TOPHET.

The  scene  of  the  people's  sin  will  also
be  the  scene  of  their  punishment.  In
the  time  of  the  good  king  Hezekiah,
Tophet  was  the  place  in  which  the
army   of    Sennacherib   perished,    when


Hinnom,  which  the  prophet  connects
with  the  potter's  house  and  the  potter's
gate  (ver.  2).  Both  Judas  and  the
potter's  earthen  vessel,  equally  types  of
the  Jews,  were  dashed  to  pieces  [the
vessel  by  God's  command]  in  that  place.

Here  is  subject  for  devout  reflection
and  solemn  meditation. — Wordsworth.

Vers.  14,   15.  "  Then  came  Jeremiah


Jerusalem  was  delivered  in  consequence  from  Tophet,"  <fec.

of  the   prayers   and   the  faith  of   the  Here   commences   the   record   of  an

king.  (See  Isa.  xxx.  33,xxxiii.  4,  xxxvii.  incident  which  runs  on  connectedly  with

36).  chap.  XXL,  and  should  have  formed  part

This  place,  signalised  by  the  merciful  of  the  chapter.     For  general  explana-

intervention  of  God   in  favour   of  Je-  tions  of  the  facts  lee  Introductory  Notes

rusalem,   was    afterwards  polluted  by  to  chap,  xxi


CHAPTER  XX.

Critical  and  Exeoetioal  Kotbs. — ^1.  Ohronology  of  the  Chapter.  With  ehap.  zz.  th«
first  section  of  this  book  closes.  Probably  this  was  Jeremiah's  last  public  prophecy  in
Jehoiakim's  reign,  and  formed  the  concluding  entry  in  the  "  roll  "  which  was  read  in  part
before  Jehoiakim,  and  which  Jehoiakim  **  cut  with  his  penknife  and  cast  into  the  fire  "  (chap.
xxxvi.  23).  To  that  "roll,"  which  seems  to  have  concluded  with  this  emphatic  prophecy  as
to  the  Babylonian  Captiyity  (c/.  XX.  4  with  xxxvi.  29),  **  many  like  words"  were  "added  be-
sides "  (xxxvi.  32)  ;  and  these  added  words  were  the  chapters  following  this  twentieth,
about  whose  dates  there  is  no  uncertainty,  for  each  prophecy  bears  a  special  heading  assigning
2o  iO\


CfiAP.  XX.  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


the  occasion  and  date  of  its  utterance.     This  prophecy  occurred  at  the  end  of  the  third  ot
beginniiis^  of  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  (8e<s  notes  on  chap,  xviii.).

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — The  events  came  closely  contiguous  to  the  records  in  2  Kingi
xxiv.  1  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6.

3.  National  Affairs,  and  4.  Contemporaneous  History  (comp.  notes  on  chap.  vii).  The  capture
of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  occurred  early  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim's  reign.

6.  Geographical  References.  —  Ver.  2.  ^^  The  high  gate  of  Benjamin.''*  There  was  the  City
gate  of  Benjamiu  on  the  city's  northern  side,  and  towards  the  territory  of  Benjamin  (ch.  vii.
2,  xxxvii.  13,  xxxviii.  7);  and  there  was  the  Temple  gate  of  Benjamin,  which  is  here  described
— "which  was  in  [not  hy\  the  house  of  the  Lord."  This  latter  was  called  the  "  High  gate"
because  situate  on  an  eminence,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  the  gate  in  the  city  wail.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  **  Pashur  the  son  of  Immer  the  priest."  Pashur  the  priest
was  head  of  the  sixteenth  course  of  the  priests  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  14).  /mmer  was  one  of  the
original  governors  of  the  Sanctuary,  of  whom  there  were  twenty-four,  sixteen  sons  of  Eleazar,
and  eight  sons  of  Ithamar  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  14).  **  Pashur'*  was  cA/e/ governor,  and  from  com-
parison of  xxix.  25,  26,  with  lii.  24,  it  appears  that  the  temple-governor  occupied  rank  second
to  that  of  the  high  priest ;  was  deputy  high  priest  (c/.  2  Kings  xxv.  18).  Pashur  was  head  of
the  twenty-four  "guards"  of  the  Temple,  and  had  the  right  of  apprehending  any  one  com-
mitting what  he  thought  an  outrage  within  the  precincts  of  the  house  of  God  ;  but  tlie  San-
hedrim alone  had  judicial  power  over  those  thus  apprehended  (comp.  xxvi.  8,  10,  16).  From
words  in  the  sixth  verse — "thou  ha,st  pi^ophesied  lies" — it  is  evident  that  Pashur  assumed
prophetic  functions  ;  and  most  probably  Pashur's  **  friends  "  (ver.  6)  formed  a  party  in  the  Jewish
state  who  clamoured  for  alliance  with  Egypt  in  order  to  resist  the  arms  of  Assyria,  and  of
whom  Pashur  was  the  moving  genius,  indulging  in  sanguine  predictions  of  security  and  suc-
cess {vide  chap,  xviii.  18,  and  v.  31).  Ver.  5.  *' King  of  Babylon."  Nabopalassar  wai
now  king  of  the  Babylonians.     {Vide  preliminary  note  on  Contemporary  History  to  chap,  i.)

7.  No  Natural  History  allusions  in  this  chapter.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  2.  "  Smote  Jeremiah  and  put  him  in  the  stocks ; "  "  Smote  **
— probably  inflicting  the  legal  "forty  stripes  save  one."     ** Stocks" —  np^HD^  an  instrument

of  torture,  from  "JJDn,  to  twist  or  rack.  The  body  was  held  in  a  crooked  position,  the  neck,
hands,  and  feet  were  secured,  and  much  pain  was  suflfered.  This  cruel  instrument  is  first
alluded  to  in  2  Chron.  xvi.  10,  and  there  rendered  "  prison-house,"

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  3.  *\Magor-missab{b."  (Vide  Lit.  Crit.  on  chap.  vi.  25.)
PcwAttr  l-in^Q  a  compound  word  ;  K^Q^  and  "lin*— probably  meaning,  though  derivation  is
uncertain,  **' security  (or  prosperity,  joy)  aroundJ*  Jeremiah  would  be  prone  to  play  upon  the
meaning  of  the  name  he  changed:  the  new  name  meant  **  Terror  on  every  side."  Jeremiah
uses  this  phrase  in  chap.  vi.  25,  xx.  3,  10,  xlvi.  5,  xlix.  29  ;  Lam.  ii.  22.

Ver.  5.  ^'^  Strength  .  .  .  labours:'*  Stores — provisions  laid  up  in  their  magazines  and
granaries  :  and  gains — fruits  of  industry,  the  profits  or  wealth  of  the  community.

Ver.  7.  "  ITast  deceived:*'  from  nri9.  Used  in  Piel  both  in  a  good  and  bad  sense;  to
persuade,  rendered  in  ver.  10  "  enticed."  He  was  unwilling  to  undertake  the  prophetic  office
(chap.  i.  7),  but  God  had  persuaded  him  with  promises  (i.  8,  17-19),  which,  however,  Jeremiah
had  misapprehended.     God  promised  no  immunity  from  abuse  but  that  he  should  "prevail."

"  Daily ; "  all  the  day  long.

Ver.  8.  "  For  since  I  spake^  I  cried  out/*  &c.  "  For  as  often  as  I  speak  or  cry,  I  must  cry
concerning  violence  and  ill-treatment." — Lange.  "Whenever  I  speak,  1  must  shout ;  I  must
cry  violence  and  spoil."  The  two  words  "  cried,  cried,"  are  not  the  same  in  the  Hebrew  :  the
first  means  to  complain^  the  second  to  call  out,  proclaim.  "  For  as  often  as  I  speak  1  must
complain  ;  I  call  out  violence  and  spoil." — Speaker^s  Com.

"  Word  of  the  Lord  was  made :  '*  is  made.     "  Daily  " — all  the  day  long.

Ver.  9.   "  Then  I  said But  his  word  was,*     Better  :  "And  when  I  say  I  will  not,  &c. —

name,  then  it  becometh  in  my  heart,"  &c.

"  /  was  weary  with  forbearing^  and  J  could  not  stay.**  I  weary  myself  to  hold  it  in,  but  can-
not (vide  chap.  vi.  11).

Ver.  10.  Read  the  verse  thus.  "  For  I  hear  the  whispering  (detraction,  Henderson)  of  many,
fear  on  every  side  [Magor-missabib,  again]  ;  (saying)  Report  ye,  and  we  will  report  him.  All
my  familiars^  [Lit.  the  men  of  my  peace  ;  Keil,  every  man  of  my  friendship]  watch  for  my  halting"
[my  fall — Henderson].     Perhaps  they  say  "he  will  be  enticed,"  &c.

Ver.  11.  **  A  mighty  terrible  one:  "  Rather,  a  formidable  warrior.

"Ashamedj  for  they  shall  not  prosper,'*  &c.  :  Rather,  ashamed,  because  they  have  not  acted
wisely;  with  an  everlasting  reproach  (disgrace)  that  shall  never  be  forgotten.

Ver.  12.   "  Opened  my  cause  ;  "  On  Thee  have  I  rolled  my  cause,  committed  it  (cf,  xi.  20),

HOMILETIG  OUTLINES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XX.

Section    1-6.  Persecution  of  the  faithful  prophet.

,,       7-13.   Complaining  prayer  merging  into  godly  confidence.
„     14-18.   An  extravagant  dirge  over  an  unhappy  life.

402


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JBREMTAB.  ohap.  XX.


Section  1-6. — Persecution  of  the  Faithful  Prophet.

L  Pashur's  unjust  displeasure  against  Jeremiah.

1.  The  impropriety  of  it.  Pashur  was  a  priest ;  and  Jeremiah,  being  also  of  the
priestly  order,  should  have  been  protected  by  him.  Moreover,  the  priests  of
Jehovah  should  have  been  prompt  and  zealous  to  second  the  work  of  a  prophet  of
Jehovah.

2.  The  malignity  of  it.  "  A  man's  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household."  Com-
pare the  action  of  Zedekiah  (the  false  priest,  1  Kings  xxii.  24)  ;  and  of  those  foul
priests  (M;itt.  xxvi.  67,  68).  '*  The  greatest  malignity  to  God's  prophets  was  found
among  those  that  professed  sanctity  and  concern  for  God  and  His  church."  Pashur
found  his  own  sanguine  prophecies  hereby  refuted,  and  was  wroth.  (See  Per-
sonal Allusions.')

3.  The  illegality  of  it.  **  Smote  him,"  perhaps  with  the  hand  or  staflF  of
authority,  as  afterwards  Paul  was  smitten  (Acts  xxiii.  2).  But  Pashur  had  no
right  to  administer  justice  (see  note  on  verse  under  Personal  Allusions).  But  rules
of  justice  are  set  aside  :  "The  enemies  of  piety  would  never  allow  themselves  to
be  governed  by  the  laws  of  equity."

4.  The  cruelty  of  it.  "  Put  in  stocks  : "  and  thus  confined  through  the  night
into  next  day,  exposed  to  public  derision.  "  The  best  men  have  met  with  the
worst  treatment.  It  may  well  rouse  pious  indignation  to  see  such  a  man  as  Pashur
on  the  bench,  and  such  a  man  as  Jeremiah  in  the  stocks  I  It  is  well  that  there  is
another  life  after  this,  when  persons  and  things  will  appear  with  another  face."

II.  God's  just  displeasure  against  Pashur.  Jeremiah  "  suffered  and  threatened
not ;  "  but  when  released,  he  came  with  a  special  message  from  Jehovah.

1.  Did  Pashur  aim  to  make  himself  easy,  by  silencing  one  who  told  him  his
faults,  and  which  endangered  his  reputation  with  the  people  1  He  shall  not  gain
his  point,  for

(a,)  Though  the  prophet  should  be  silent,  his  own  conscience  shall  make  him
uneasy.  "  Magor-missahih."  God  can  make  a  sinner  a  '*  terror  to  himself"  (ver.  4).
Persons  in  deep  melancholy  also  become  a  terror  "  to  all  their  friends^'  about  them.

(6.)  His  friends,  in  whom  he  put  confidence  and  studied  to  oblige  in  persecuting
Jeremiah,  shall  all  fail  him  (ver.  4).

(c.)  The  issue  shall  show  his  terror  to  be  not  causeless,  for  Divine  vengeance
awaited  him  (ver.  6).  Let  persecutors  read  the  doom  of  Pashur  and  tremble ;
tremble  to  repentance  before  they  be  made  to  tremble  to  their  ruin.

2.  Did  he  aim  to  make  the  people  easy  by  stopping  Jeremiah's  warning  pro-
phecies 1  It  appears  from  ver.  6  that  he  set  himself  up  as  a  prophet,  and  told
the  people  they  should  have  peace.     Yet  the  word  of  God  will  have  its  course.

(a.)  The  country  shall  be  ruined  :  "  I  will  give  all  Judah,"  <kc.  (ver.  4).

(6.)  The  city  shall  be  ruined  (ver.  5).  For  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  (1)  seize
their  military  stores,  "  the  strength  of  the  city ;  "  (2)  carry  off  their  wares  and
merchandise,  ^^ their  labours;"  (3)  plunder  their  fine  houses  of  their  **prca'ow«
things  ;  "  (4)  rifle  the  exchequer,  the  jewels  of  the  crown  and  "  all  the  treasures  of
the  kings  of  Judah.*'     In  part  taken  from  Matthew  Henry.

See  Addenda:  Persecution  of  God's  Servants.

Section  7-13. — Complainino  Prayer  Merging  into  Godly  Conpidencb.

There  are  two  interpretations  of  this  outburst  of  intense  emotion —

1.  It  might  have  been  the  result  of  feelings  wounded  by  the  indignities  of  the
public  smiting  and  a  night  spent  in  the  stocks.

2.  It  was  more  probably  the  outcry  of  mental  agony  occasioned  by  the  seeming
failure  of  his  ministry  to  recal  his  nation  from  ungodliness  and  ruin.

It  should  be  noticed  that  though  Jeremiah  bows  bef<yre  God  crushed  hy  distress  of
spirit,  he  betrays  nothing  of  this  before  the  people,  but  stands  before  the  multitude
with  heroic  valour,  warning  prince,  priest,  and  people  of  the  doom  their  sins  invoked,

403


OBAF.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMEXTAkY:  JEREMIAH,


I.  A  painful  misapprehension  of  his  prophetic  mission.

1.  In  reference  to  what  God  had  done  with  him.     He  avows  that  Jehovah  had
(a.)  Persuaded  him  into  His  service  by  assurances  which  had  failed.     He  mis-
read God's  promise  (chap.  i.  8,  18).

(6.)  Constrained  him  wholly  against  his  will  to  a  painful  mission*  His  timid
nature  shrank  from  hardship.

(c.)  Exposed  him  to  derision  by  deferring  the  fulfilment  of  his  predictions.
Jeremiah  was  in  too  great  haste  for  God  to  vindicate  His  word.

2.  In  reference  to  what  he  should  do  for  God.     He  was  tempted

(a.)  Temporarily  to  hold  back  from  further  witness  for  God.  Not  "  mention
His  name."

(6.)  Forcibly  to  suppress  the  prophetic  spirit  within  him.  But  it  proved  a
"  burning  fire  within  his  bones."

(c)  He  even  "  wearied  "  himself  with  the  silence  he  imposed  upon  himself:  but
the  word  of  God  was  mightier  than  his  resolutions.

IL  An  alarming  experience  of  abuse  from  his  people.

1.  Scornful  defamation  of  his  preaching  {yev.  10).  They  seem  to  have  summed
up  his  preaching  as  being  nothing  but  the  reiteration  of  the  words — *'  Magor-
missabiby  i.e.,  "  Fear  on  every  side,"  and  derided  him  with  it.  He  was  a  preacher
of  fear  !  The  same  appears  from  ver.  8 — *'  "Whenever  I  spake  I  proclaimed  violence
and  spoil."  And  the  people  laughed  at  him  as  a  persistent  croaker — prophet  of
evil.  They  whispered  among  themselves  against  him,  "  Here  is  '  Fear-on-every-side  '
preaching  again  I  "

2.  Virulent  conspiracy  against  his  person.  They  resolve  to  "  report "  his  words
to  the  authorities  and  the  king,  and  so  bring  him  into  odium  and  punishment.
Further,  his  "familiars"  joined  in  the  conspiracy,  and  while  feigning  to  be  "men
of  his  peace,"  yet  sought  occasion  to  betray  him.

in.  A  triumphant  assurance  of  Divine  protec  tion.

1.  That  Jehovah  would  defend  him  with  terrible  mightiness  (ver.  11).  He  knew
that  the  Lord  was  personally  "  with  "  him  :  on  his  side,  to  protect  him,  to  make
his  word  good,  to  ultimately  vindicate  him  against  "defamation  "  and  "  derision,"
and  to  smite  terror  into  his  antagonists.

2.  That  his  persecutors  would  be  defeated  with  terrible  disgrace.  Their  impotent
malice  and  crafty  designs  shall  fail  against  Jeremiah ;  while  their  own  overthrow
shall  involve  them  in  greatest  shame  and  perpetual  distress,

IV.  A  confident  surrender  of  his  cause  to  God.

1.  His  inmost  heart  was  opened  fully  to  Him  (ver.  12).

(a.)  God  knew  him  thoroughly  :  saw  all  the  thoughts  and  feelings  which  moved
within  him  ;  could  therefore  judge  him  righteously.

(b.)  To  God  he  entrusted  himself:  rolled  his  cause  on  Him.  He  sought  no  vindi-
cation or  help  elsewhere.

(c.)  God  would  right  him  with  his  traducers  :  "  Vengeance  belongeth  unto  God,"

2.  His  grateful  soul  poured  itself  forth  in  praise  to  Him  (ver.  13),

(a.)  It  was  the  triumph  of  faith  over  fear.  His  complaints  are  all  silenced  and
torned  into  thanksgiving.

(6.)  It  rose  from  the  realisation  of  experienced  Providence  :  "  He  hath  delivered
the  soul  of  the  poor,"  <fec  Memory  came  in  to  his  aid ;  and  hope  rose  like  the
dawn  upon  the  night-gloom  of  his  despondency.  "  Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shall
yet  praise  Him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance  and  my  God."

Section  14-18. — A  Passionate  Dirge  oveb  an  Unhappy  Life.

In  this  sudden  transition  of  trust  to  despair  we  see  a  revelation  of  the  inner
workings  of  Jeremiah's  heart,  consequent  upon  the  treatment  he  received  from  his
treacherous  friends  and  cruel  persecutors,  and  on  the  seeming  failure  of  his  pro-
phecies and  his  own  desertion  by  God  whose  prophet  he  was.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  obaP.  XX.


L  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  we  have  here  a  passionate  outbreak  of  humaii
-'nfirmity.     But  this  display

1.  Proves  that  there  has  been  no  reserve  practised  by  the  prophets  ;  and  thus  we
fjee  a  portraiture  of  Jeremiah  delineated  in  his  true  colours  by  his  own  hand.  This
\lso

2.  Inspires  us  toith  confidence  in  the  truth  of  the  narrative ;  and  also  excites  our
sympathy  with  Jeremiah  in  his  sufferings,  which  extorted  such  utterances  from
him.

Note^  that  as  it  was  with  Job  (iii.  3—26)  so  with  Jeremiah — he  was  purified  by
suffering.  After  the  passionate  utterances  in  this  chapter  we  see  no  more  evidence
of  weakness  or  impatience  in  Jeremiah.  On  the  contrary,  the  prophet,  who  now
was  weak  and  desponding,  afterwards  strengthened  and  encouraged  others  (see
chap.  xlvi.  1—5).

II.  Here  also,  from  these  impatient  ejaculations  of  Jeremiah,  we  have  provi-
dentially clear  proof  that  the  theory  of  some  Jewish  interpreters  is  groundless,  by
which  Isaiah's  magnificent  and  mysterious  prophecy  concerning  the  Messiah
(chap,  liii.)  is  made  to  refer  to  Jeremiah.

1.  How  could  one  who  was  compassed  with  infirmity  and  betrayed  into  sin  (as
Jeremiah  shows  himself  to  have  been)  have  been  accepted — as  these  anti-Messianic
theorists  would  have  us  believe — as  a  vicarious  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world  t

2.  In  his  sujferings,  Jeremiah  was  a  signal  type  of  Christ :  especially  in  the  cruel
and  shameful  usage  he  received  from  those  to  whom  he  preached,  and  whom  he
would  have  delivered  from  ruin  had  they  listened  to  his  preaching.  But  in  all
human  types  of  Christ  there  are  some  blemishes  which  separate  them  immeasurably
from  the  Divine  Antitype.

3.  Cltrist  always  excels  where  they  most  fail.  Jeremiah  fails  in  his  impatience
under  persecution^  in  repining  against  God,  and  in  murmuring  at  his  own  condition.
There  Christ  excels.  His  meat  was  to  do  His  Father's  will  (John  iv.  34) ;  and,  in
the  immediate  prospect  of  suffering,  His  language  was,  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  Man
glorified,  and  God  is  glorified  in  Him  "  (John  xiii.  31  ;  com  p.  Heb.  xii.  2).

III.  Here  we  have  evidence  of  the  greater  grace  given  after  the  Incarnation
than  had  ever  been  vouchsafed  to  those  who  lived  before  it.

Two  of  tlie  greatest  saints  and  sufferers,  Job  and  Jeremiah — one  the  saint  and
sufferer  of  the  Patriarchal  dispensation,  the  other  the  suffering  prophet  of  the
Mosaic  economy — are  so  perturbed  by  suffering  that  they  curse  the  day  of  their
birth.

But  (as  Chrysostom  observes  in  Horn.  iv.  on  the  patience  of  Job)  the  apostles  of
Christ  rejoiced  in  tribulation,  and  were  thankful  to  God  that  they  were  counted
worthy  to  suffer  for  His  name. — Arranged  from  Wordsworth.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XX.

Ver.   4.    Theme :  The  Wicked,  Ter-  are  fortified     in    their     self-confidence

EiFiED   AND  Terrifying.      "  For  thus  by   boastful    conduct   of     fellow-trans-

saith   the    Lord,    Behold,   I   will    make  gressors.

thee   a   terror   to    thyself    and    to   all         II.  A  guilty  man's  confidence  may

thy  friends."  be  turned  into  terror  and  amaze.

I.  A  guilty  man   may   enjoy   con-  1.  God  can  do  it,  does  do  it,  will  do

fidence,    and    inspire    confidence    in  it.     He    can   make    the    most   daring

others.     This  is  evident  here.      Unless  sinner  a  terror  to  himself,  and  will  find

so,  it  would  not  be  needful  for  God  to  a  way  to  alarm  him.
act  to  change  confidence  into  terror.  2.  Conviction   of  sin  arouses  terror.

1.  Sinners  live  an  in  easy  but  trail-  Example  :  John  Bunyan.  See  also
9ient  security,  his   Christian   before    Sinai,   in    "  Pil-

2.  The   ^^ friends**   of  ungodly    men  grim's  Progress,"

405


OBAP.  J.X.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


3.  Sudden  peril  of  life  or  risk  of
worldly  gains  startle  him  to  agonising
apprehensions.

4.  Death's  darkness  and  eternit'ifs
nearness  will  certainly  appal  him.
"  How  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swellings
of  Jordan?"

5.  On  the  Judgment  Day,  what  terror
will  seize  the  gnilty.  "  Rocks  fall  on
us,  and  hide  us,"  (kc.

ni.  A  guilty  man's  terror  will
alarm  his  friends.

1.  A  sinner  ivhose  hilarity  and  reck-
lessness have  changed  into  alarm  for
guilt  and  dread  of  doom,  is  like  an
apparition  at  the  feast  of  worldly
souls.  Banquets  ghost.  His  tremblings
and  terrors  alarm  them,  communicating
fear  to  their  souls.

2.  A  sinner* s  deathbed  has  often  filled
observers  with  awful  fears  for  themselves.

See  Addenda:  The  Wicked  a
Terror.

Comments —

**  Wherein  did  his  (Pashur's)  punish-
ment consist  ?  Probably  in  this.  He
was  one  of  the  leading  men  who,  in
encouraging  Jehoiakim  to  enter  upon
that  course  which  ended  in  the  ruin  of
Judah,  had  "  prophesied  lies."  When,
then,  he  saw  the  dreadful  slaughter  of
his  countrymen, — Jehoiakim  put  to
death,  his  young  son  dragged  into  cap-
tivity, and  the  land  stripped  of  all  that
was  best — his  conscience  so  condemned
him  as  the  guilty  cause  of  such  great
misery,  that  in  the  agonies  of  remorse
he  became  a  terror  to  himself  and  hia
friends." — Speaker^ s  Com.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Is  Got>  a  Deceiver  ?

The  word  "  deceived "  should  be
"enticed"  or  **  persuaded."  Com  p.  Gen.
ix.  27;  Prov.  xxv.  15;  Hos.  ii.  14,  in
which  last  text  the  word  is  rendered
"  allure."  God  can  induce  but  never
delude.

I.  God  has  approved  Himself  to  all
His  servants  as  a  faithful  Master.  He
has  never  decoyed  them  ;  never  deserted
them.

n.  Servants  of  God   may  deceive
themselves  in  His  service  by  sanguine
expectations.
406


1.  Jeremiah  misapprehended  God^s
words  of  promise  and  assurance.  The
words  (chap.  i.  10)  were  interpreted
by  him  in  a  flattering  sense.  He  ex-
pected general  homage  to  be  paid  him
as  God's  messenger.

2.  But  he  knew  the  condition  of
prophetic  work  in  all  ages.  All  God's
messengers  before  him  had  been  per-
secuted, and  he  had  no  reason  to  look
for  a  better  lot.

3.  Further,  God  emphatically  stated
that  princes  and  priests  woidd  treat  him
ill.  *' They  shall  fight  against  thee"
(chap.  i.  19).

4.  All  Christian  workers  are  cf*V
tinctly  forewarned  of  the  troubles  they
will  meet  (John  xvi.  1,  2).

III.  The  persuasions  of  God  over-
power our  natural  reluctance  and
fears.  **  Thou  wast  stronger  than  I,
and  hast  prevailed."

1.  His  pleas  were  refuted.  He  urged
that  he  was  under  age,  and  unequal  to
the  office.  God  took  all  reality  out  of
his  arguments  by  assuring  him  that  He
had  "  sanctified  "  him  to  this  work,  and
by  equipping  him  for  the  task  (chap.  i.  9).

2.  His  temerity  was  overruled.  He
was  afraid  of  facing  the  authorities
and  contending  with  them.  But  God
summoned  him  not  to  be  "dismayed
at  their  faces,"  and  made  him  "  a
defenced  city,"  <fec.

Even  so  out  of  weakness  God  makes
strong  "the  weak  things  of  the  world
to  confound  the  mighty."  He  is  able
to  make  all  grace  abound.  Thus  He
surprises  us  by  making  us  *'  able  to
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  we
think."  Yet  He  never  deceives  or
disappoints  a  soul.

Ver.  7.  Theme  :  MoCKiNG  AT  THE
Preacher.  "  I  am  in  derision  daily,
every  one  mocketh  me."

Two  forms  of  this  irritating  con-
tinually assailed  him.

I.  Official  ridicule.

1.  They  made  jest  of  everything  he
did  and  said.  They  treated  him  as  if
he  were  a  fool,  good  for  nothing  but
to  make  sport.     Thus  he  was —

(a.)  Continually, —  "  daily,"  liter-
ally "  all  the  day  long."


nOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XX.


(h.)  Universally  J  "  Every  one  mocks
me.

"  The  greatest  so  far  forget  their  own
gravity,  and  the  meanest  so  far  forget
miney

Thus  our  Lord  on  the  Cross  was
reviled  botli  by  priest  and  people.

2.  His  preaching  was  the  special
object  of  their  derision  (ver.  8).  That  for
which  they  should  have  honoured  and
respected  him  was  the  very  thing  for
which  they  reviled  and  reproached  him.

It  is  sad  to  think  that  though
Divine  Revelation  be  one  of  the  great-
est blessings  and  honours  ever  bestowed
on  the  world,  yet  it  has  been  very  much
turned  to  the  reproach  of  the  most
zealous  preachers  and  believers.

Two  things  they  derided  him  for —

(a.)  The  manner  of  his  preaching  :
**  Since  he  spake,  he  cried  out."  He
was  too  vigorous  and  loud  in  his  preach-
ing. Lively  preachers  are  the  scorn  of
careless  unbelieving  hearers.

{h.)  The  matter oi  his  preaching:  He
cried,  "  Violence  and  spoil."  He  re-
proved them  for  **  violence  and  spoil "
toward  one  another,  and  for  this  they
ridiculed  him  as  over-precise  ;  and  he
prophesied  of  "violence  and  spoil"  as
the  punishment  of  their  sin,  and  for  this
they  reviled  him  as  over-credulous.

IL  Personal  reproach.  Not  merely
did  they  laugh  at  his  ministry,  but  they
acted  a  more  S})iteful  part,  and  with
more  subtlety.

\.  They  spread  false  reports  of  him
(ver.  10).  They  represented  Jere-
miah as  instilling  *'  fears  on  every  side,"
so  to  make  them  uneasy  under  the
government,  and  disposed  to  rebellion.

Jerendah,  in  his  complaint,  makes
use  of  the  same  words  that  David  (Ps,
xxxi.  13)  had  used  before  him,  that  it
might  be  a  comfort  to  him  to  think  that
other  good  men  had  suffered  like  abuses
before  him.

2.  Flatterers  watched  his  words  for
an  occasion  of  accusation  against  him
to  the  government.  *'  My  familiars
watched  for  my  halting,"  &c.  Just  as
the  spies  came  to  Clirist  feigning  to
be  just  men  (Luke  xx.  20).  They
hoped  Jeremiah  would  be  led  on  and
enticed  to    say   something  which  they


might  seize  upon,  and  for  which  they
could  secure  his  condemnation  before
the  king  or  Sanhedrim.

This  malignant  treachery  found  full-
est illustration  in  Jeremiah's  Divine
Antitype,  Jesus  Christ,  against  wlidm
they  laid  wait,  and  "suborned  men"
for  the  purpose  to  "  entangle  Him  in
His  talk  that  they  might  accuse  Him
to  the  governor"  (Matt.  xxii.  15). —
Comp.  Wordsworth  and  Matthew  Henry.

See  Addenda :  Deriding  the
Preacher.

Ver.  9.  Theme:  The  Soul  under
Discouragement.

We  behold  here  the  struggle  between
grace  and  corruption  :  or  as  Paul  ex-
presses it,  "the  flesh  lusting  against
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the
flesh."  And  when  we  see  how  awfully
an  unhallowed  temper  prevailed  over
this  good  man  Jeremiah,  we  cannot
but  exclaim :  "  Lord,  what  is  man
that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him,"  &c.

In  the  conflict  here  expressed  we
behold

I.  The  effects  of  discouragement  on
a  pious  soul.

1.  In  our  labours  for  the  good  of
others.  Ministers  are  apt  to  complain
that  '*  they  have  laboured  in  vain  and
spent  their  strength  for  nought;"  and
under  these  feelings,  either  desert  their
post,  or  lament  that  they  have  not  been
more  profitably  employed.

Moses  thus  erred  (Exod.  v.  22,  23).
Joshua  also  after  his  entrance  into
Canaan  (Josh.  vii.  7).

Parents  likewise  mourn  over  their
children,  masters  over  their  servants,
teachers  over  the  poor  they  instruct,
&c.

2.  In  our  exertions  for  our  own
souls.  Persons,  when  first  "  enticed "
or  "  persuaded  "  to  embrace  the  Gospel,
fondly  imagine  that  they  will  go  for-
ward in  the  divine  life  with  ease.  Con-
flicts come,  and  slow  progress  is  made.
Then  they  complain,  "  my  way  is  hid
from  the  Lord,"  &c.  (Isa.  xl.  27).  Such
apprehension  is  most  enervating.

IL  The  effect  of  piety  on  a  dis-
couraged soul.  Jeremiah  attempted
for  a  season  to  execute  his  rash  deter-

407


OHAP.  XX.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


mination,  but  could  not  persist,  for  the
word  of  God  was  like  a  burning  fire  in
his  bones,  so  that  he  must  declare  it.

Thus  will  grace  work  in  every  soul
even  under  deepest  discouragements.

1.  To  shame  our  querulous  impatience.
When  David  had  given  vent  to  queru-
lousness,  he  corrected  himself  (Ps.  Ixxiii.
12-16,  Ixxvii.  7-10).  We  complain  of
our  non-success.  Prophets  and  apostles
have  done  so  before  us.  We  should  wait
(Heb.  ii.  3).

2.  To  revive  our  languid  hopes.  Grace
will  bring  to  our  view  God's  pro-
mises ;  assure  us  that  '*  His  arm  is  not
shortened/'  <fec.

3.  To  resuscitate  our  drooping  ener-
gies. Jeremiah  was  '*  weary  with  for-
bearing," even  more  than  with  execut-
ing his  mission.  And  if  grace  have  its
perfect  work  in  us,  so  we  shall  be.  Our
labours,  both  ministerial  and  personal,  will
be  renewed.  God  has  said,  "  Be  not
weary  in  well-doing,  for  in  due  season,"
&c.  And  depending  on  His  word,  we
shall  go  forward,  "steadfast  and  im-
movable, always  abounding  in  the
work  of  the  Lord."

(a.)  Expect  discouragements  in  every
part  of  your  duty.  They  are  God's
appointed  means  for  trying  our  faith
and  love,  and  for  increasing  every
divine  grace  in  us.

(6.)  Make  them  occasions  for  glorify^
ing  God  the  more.  If  we  have  "  fight-
ings without  and  fears  within,"  we
must  go  the  more  earnestly  to  God,
and  rely  the  more  firmly  on  His  pro-
mised aid.  Instead  of  sinking  under
discouragements,  we  must  say  :  **  Who
art  thou,  O  great  mountain  ?  Before
Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain.**
— Simeon,

Ver.  12.  Theme:  God  the  Heart-
Searcher.  See  Homilies  on  chap.  xi.
20,  xxvii.  10.

Ver.  13.  Theme:  The  Sonq  of
Redemption.

Immediately  he  had  "  opened "  or
committed  **  his  cause  '*  to  God,  he
could  sing  for  joy.

I.  Faith  grasped  a  fact  as  yet  in  the
ftiture.  Jeremiah's  outward  circum-
408


stances  were  still  disturbed  and  perilous.
But  he  now  realises  God's  sufficiency
and  fidelity,  even  as  before  (ver.  7)  he
had  distrusted  Him.

Faith  turned  his  tremblings  into
triumphs.

So  the  soul  when  Christ's  sufficiency
and  faithfulness  are  apprehended.  "  Lo  !
this  is  the  Lord,  we  have  waited  for
Him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in
His  salvation."

II.  Joy  filled  his  soul  over  God's
gracious  rescue.  His  soul  had  been
^*poor ;"  poor  in  courage,  poor  in  faith,
poor  in  grace.

**  Evil-doers "  had  his  soul  in  their
"  hand."

But  God  had  redeemed  his  soul  from
destruction.

III.  Songs  of  praise  silenced  sighs
of  complaint.  He  found  peace  imme-
diately he  could  leave  his  cause  in  faith
to  God.

Complaints  are  now  exchanged  for
thanksgiving,  when  once  the  soul  knows
its  Redeemer.

God's  loving-kindness  and  grace  over-
whelms the  soul  with  rejoicing.

We  may  appeal  to  every  soul  for
whom  the  redemption  of  Calvary  has
been  effectively  wrought  by  Christ,  and
which  is  offered  to  sinners  **  without
money  and  without  price  " — "  Sing  unto
the  Lord,  praise  ye  the  Lord."

**  0  for  this  love  let  rocks  and  hilla
Their  lasting  silence  break,
And  all  harmonious  human  tongues,
Their  Saviour's  praises  speak."

Vers.  14-18.  Theme :  Impreca-
tions ON  HIS  Birth.  See  Sectional
treatment,  supra.

The  Rev.  John  Owen^  in  editing
Calvins  Commentaries  in  this  place,
remarks —

**  The  greatest  difficulty  in  this
passage  is  its  connection.  That  Jere-
miah should  have  cursed  his  birthday
is  what  can  be  accounted  for  as  in  the
case  of  Job.  Nature^  even  in  the  best  of
men^  sometimes  utters  its  voice.  But  how
he  came  to  do  this  immediately  after
having  thanked  God  for  his  deliver-
ance seems  singular.  The  explana-
tion of  Calvin,  that  he  relates  what  had


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  CHAF.  XI.


passed  in  his  mind,  while  lie  was  con-  ought  every  one  of  us  to  watch  himself,  lest

fined  by   Pasluir,  is  plausible,  and  has  we  be  carried  away  by  a  violent  feeling,

been  adopted   by   G'roiius,   Henry,   and  so  as  to  become  intemperate  and  unruly,

others.     Scott  acknowledges  the  transi-  "  iii.   Yet  the  origin  of  his  zeal  was

tion     to    be    very    extraordinary,    but  right.     His  complaint  was  not  that  he

thinks  that  the  Prophet  describes  what  was  afflicted  with  disease,  <fec.,  but  be-

had  passed  through  his  own  mind,  and  cause  all  his  labour  was  lost  which  he

says  that  the  experience  of  good   men  spent   for    the  ivell-heing  of  his  people^

proves  that  such  sudden  changes  occur.  and  because  he  found  the  truth  of  God

*  An    experimental    acquaintance    with  loaded  with  calumnies  and   reproaches,

our    own    hearts,'    he    says,    *  and    the  Wlien   he  saw   the   ungodly  thus  inso-

variations  of  our  passions  under  sharp  lently  resisting  him,  and  that  all  religion

trials,    as  encouraging  or  discouraging  was  treated  with  ridicule,  he  felt  deeply

thoughts  occur  to  our  minds,  will  best  moved.

enable  us   to  understand   it.*     This  is  **  iv.  Yet  when  we  thus  become  weary

probably  the  right  view  of  the  subject,"  of  life,  with  all  the  light  and  blessings  of

*'  i    The    Prophet    teaches   us    here  God,  it  is  because  disdain  reigns  ivithin

that    he    was    not     only    opposed    by  tw,  or  that  we  cannot  with  resignation

enemies,    but  also   distressed   inwardly  bear  reproaches^  or  that  poverty  is  too

in  his  mind,   so  that  he   was   carried  grievous    for   us,  <fec.     Often  it  is  not

away,    contrary     to    reason    and    judg-  that   we   (as  with  Jeremiah)   are    influ-

ment,     by    turbulent    emotions    which  enced  with  zeal  for  God." — Calvin.
even  led  him  to  give  utterance  to  vile

blasphemies.  On  Ver.  15.    See  Introduction,    Part

"ii   We  may  learn  with  what  care  L — **  Parentage  and  Callingf*

NOTICEABLE  TOPIC  IN  CHAPTER  XX.
Topic  :  Existence  Regretted. — "  Cursed  he  the  day  wherein  I  was  horn  "  (ver.  14).

Job  and  Jeremiah  were  alike  in  wishing  they  had  never  been  born.  They  were
both  men  of  sorrow.  In  the  intensity  of  his  grief  Job  exclaimed,  "  Let  the  day
perish  wherein  I  was  born  ;  *'  and  Jeremiah  in  equal  mental  anguish  cries,  '*  Cursed
be  the  day,"  &c.     Certainly  this  was

L  A  preference  alike  irreligious  and  irrational.

1.  Good  men  should  not  for  a  moment  think  that  non-existence  is  preferable  to
life  and  being.  They  were  both  good  men,  children  of  God  ;  and  existence  was
therefore  a  blessing  to  be  prized,  not  an  evil  to  be  mourned  over.  Had  they  been
versed  in  the  design  and  results  of  Divine  dispensations^  as  was  Paul,  they  would
have  said,  "  Our  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,"  <kc.  With  such  a
destiny  before  them,  instead  of  cursing  the  day  of  birth,  they  would  have  blessed  it
as  the  dawn  of  an  eternal  existence,  to  be  hereafter  crowned  with  a  glory  that
fadeth  not  away.

2.  Ungodly  men  may  with  some  degree  of  reason  prefer  non-existence  :  because
in  trouble  they  have  no  Divine  support,  in  death  no  good  hope,  in  eternity  no
expectation  but  the  penalty  of  sin.  Such  men,  when  the  sorrows  of  death  encom-
pass them,  or  when  ushered  into  the  eternal  world,  have  good  reason  to  say,
"  Cursed  be  the  day  wherein  I  was  born."

II.  Non-existence  is  preferable  to  existence  unless  existence  possess  more
pleasure  than  pain.

1.  If  every  ungodly  man  lived  out  threescore  years  and  ten,  and  the  whole  was
spent  in  pleasure,  yet,  as  that  period  is  but  momentary  as  compared  with  his
eternal  existence,  and  as  that  existence  is  to  he  one  of  pain,  he  might  curse  the  day
of  his  birth.

2.  Existence,  eternal  existence  is  a  blessing  to  all  unfallen  ones,  and  also  to  such
fallen  ones  as  are   redeemed  by  the  death  of  Christ.     It  requires  no  stretch  of

40U


CHAP.  XX.  no  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


imagination  to  suppose  tliat  both  Job  and  Jeremiah  are  now  praising  and  blessing
God  for  that  very  day  \\  bich  in  the  time  of  their  earthly  sorrows  they  cursed.

3.  But  perpetuity' of  existence  can  be  no  blessing  to  the  '''' angels  who  kept  not
their  first  estate,'*  nor  to  those  of  the  human  race  who  by  impenitence  and  unbelief
reject  the  great  salvation,  and  bring  upon  themselves  the  double  condemnation —
the  condemnation  of  the  law  and  the  condemnation  of  the  gospel.

IIL  Hell  and  heaven  are  two  great  teachers ;  they  teach  lessons  which  are
not  learnt  on  earth,  and  wonderfully  alter  men's  views  of  Divine  dispensations  and
revealed  truths.

1.  Hell  teaches — the  folly  of  wickedness,  the  full  enormity  of  sin  in  the  penalty
it  has  entailed,  and  leads  all  its  victims  amid  the  consequences  of  their  depravity
to  curse  the  day  wherein  they  were  born.

2.  Heaven  teaches — the  wisdom  of  holiness,  the  full  benefits  of  redemption  in
the  felicity  it  has  secured,  and  leads  all  the  ransomed  to  bless  the  day  of  their
birth  as  the  morn  of  their  noontide  of  glory.

Here  we  "  know  in  part  "  and  can  "  prophesy  but  in  part."  Fuller  and  wider
disclosures  are  made  when  the  spirit  is  ushered  into  that  world.

Having  thus  seen  that  there  are  in  some  cases  reasons  for  cursing  the  day  of
one's  birth,  let  it  be  remembered  that

IV.  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  have  occasion  for  preferring  non-
existence.

1.  He  has  devised  and  carried  out  a  costly  plan  by  which  the  existence  of  fallen
ones  might  be  made  an  eternal  blessing.  This  plan  was  published  in  Eden,  fore-
shadowed in  type,  proclaimed  by  prophets,  and  consummated  in  the  death  of  Jesus
Christ.     On  the  cross  He  announced  *'  It  is  finislied."

2.  Every  man  who  now  wishes  for  a  glorious  existence  has  only  to  look  to  Jesua
and  be  saved.  Myriads  have  looked,  and  a  blessed  immortality  is  their  portion  ;
myriads  have  refused  to  look,  and  a  wretclied  immortality  is  their  inheritance.

Life  is  a  solemn  thing.    It  has  in  it  everlasting  perpetuity;  and  so  also  has  death,

**  It  is  not  all  of  life  to  Hve,
Nor  all  of  death  to  die."

Life  and  death  are  only  the  seed-time  :  a  harvest  follows,  that  of  bliss  or  woe.
Inspiration  answers  the  inquiry,  What  harvest  shall  I  reap  ?  thus — "  Be  not
deceived,  God  is  not  mocked  ;  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap :
he  that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  tlie  flesh  reap  corruption ;  he  that  soweth  to
the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting.'* — Arranged  from  Rev.  D,
Pledgees  "  Morning  and  Evening  Walks  with  Jeremiah.^*

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XX.     ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS-

Vers.  1-6.    Persecution   op    God's  [Contra  Arian\.     But   heretics   are   to

Servants.  be    stoned    with  Scripture  arguments ;

^^  Smote  Jeremiah:"  with  his  fist,  as  and    men  may  a   good  deal    sooner   be

Zedekiah   smote  Micaiah  (1  Kings  xxii.  cudgelled   into    a    treaty   than    into    a

24),    and  as  Bonner  did   Hawkes  and  tenet.

other  martyrs,  pulling  oflf  part  of   their  **  Put  him  in  the  stocks:"  "As  they

beards ;  or  with  a  staff  as  our  Saviour  afterwards   did    Paul   and   Silas    (Acts

was  struck   (Matt.    xxvi.    67);  and  as  xvi.)  ;  Clerinus  the  martyr,  mentioned

that  Popish  bishop,  degrading  a  martyr  in    Cyprian's   epistles ;  Mr.   Philpot  in

minister,    struck    him    so    hard    with  the  Bishop  of  London's  coal-house ;  and

his  crosier-staff  as  he  was   kneeling  on  that  good  woman,  who,  suffering  after-

the    stairs   at    St,    Paul's,    that  he   fell  wards  for  the  same  cause,  rejoiced  much

down  backwards  and    broke  his    head.  that  her  leg  was  put  in  the  same  hole

Atqui  lapidandi  su7it  hceretid  sacrarum  of  the   stocks  where  Philpot's   leg  had

literarum  argumentis,  saith  Athanasius  lain  before." — Trapp,
410


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAF.  ZS.


•*  And  when  religious  sects  ran  mad,
He  held,  in  spite  of  all  his  learning,
That  if  a  man's  belief  is  bad.

It  will  not  be  improyed  by  burning."

— Praed.

Ver.  4.  The  wicked  a  terror.

"  Such  terror  befell  Tullus  Hostilius,
king  of  Rome,  who  had  for  his  gods
Pavor  and  Pallor.  Dignissimus  sane
qui  deos  suos  semper  haberet  prcesentes^
saith  Lactantius  wittily  ;  i.e.y  great  pity
but  this  man  should  ever  have  had  his
gods  at  hand,  since  he  was  so  fond  of
them.  Our  Richard  III.  and  Charles  IX.
of  France,  a  pair  of  bloody  princes,  were
Magor-missabibs  in  their  generations,
as  terrible  at  length  to  themselves  as
they  had  been  formerly  to  others ;  and
therefore  could  never  endure  to  be
awakened  in  the  night  without  music  or
some  like  diversion." — Trapp.

**  Unnatural  deeds
Do  breed  unnatural  troubles  :  infected  minds
To    their  deaf  pillows  will   discharge  their
secrets. " — Shakespeare.

**  Here,  here  it  lies ;  a  lump  of  lead  by  day  ;
And  in  my  short,  distracted,  nis^htly  slumbers.
The  hag  that  rides  my  dreams." — Dryden.

**  He  that  hides  a  dark  soul  and  foul  thoughts.
Benighted  walks  under  the  mid-day  sun ;
Himself  is  his  own  dungeon." — Milton.

**  Horror  and  doubt  distract
His  troubled  thoughts,  and  from  the  bottom

stir
The  hell  within  him  ;  for  within  him  hell
He  brings,  and  round  about  him ;  nor  from

hell
One  step,  no  more  than  from  himself,  can  fly
By  change  of  place." — Byron.

Tiberius  declared  in  the  Senate  that
he  suffered  death  daily.


Ver.  7.  Deriding  the  preacher.

See  the  Life  of  John  Wesley  for  in-
stances.

**  The  cynics  said  long  ago  of  the
Megarians,  *  Better  be  their  horse,  dog,
or  pander  than  their  teacher,  for  better
should  he  be  regarded.'" — Trapp.

A  modern  rhyme  puts  the  case  thus —

**  Tickle  the  people  and  make  them  grin,
Tickle  them  more  and  you  will  win  :
Teach  the  people  ;  you'll  ne'er  grow  rich,
But  live  like  a  beggar  and  die  in  a  ditch,"

Ver.  14.  Jeremiah's  discourage-
ment.

"  What  was  the  cause  of  this  dis-
couragement ]  He  does  not  leave  us  in
the  dark  as  to  this  :  he  tells  us  that  he
*  heard  the  defaming  of  many  ' — *  My
familiars  watched  for  my  halting,'  <fec.
This  was  well  suited  to  dismay  a  man
of  Jeremiah's  temper ;  but  he  again
speedily  comes  back  to  his  trust  in  God  :
— *  But  the  Lord  is  with  me.'

"  It  is  possible  that  on  some  occasion
Jeremiah  had,  under  the  influence  of
such  feelings  as  he  so  often  expresses,
been  tempted  to  soften  or  to  suppress
some  part  of  a  message  entrusted  to  him,
deeming  it  likely  to  excite  that  violent
antagonism  which  was  grievous  to  his
peaceful  temper.  The  man  who  had
confessedly  purposed  not  to  speak  at
all,  might  think  of  withholding  part  of
the  words  he  was  commanded  to  speak.
This  supposition  would  give  added  force
to  the  injunction,  which  on  one  occasion
he  received  : — '  Speak  all  the  words  that
I  command  thee  to  speak  unto  them.
Diminish  not  a  word.'  So  here  also  he
found  that  there  was  no  discretion  left
to  him." — Kitto.


CHAPTEE  XXL

Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes.—I.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  Beginning  of  Zedekiah't
reign.  Vide  Notes,  and  especially  Personal  Allusio7i8  to  chap.  i.  Usher  dates  th<»  chapter  RO,
689  ;  Bales  B.C.  687.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptares. — 2  Kings  xxiv.  17 — xxv.  2.  Daniel  had  been  prophesying  at
Babylon  from  the  time  of  the  first  captivity  of  Judah  under  Jehoiakim,  and  his  book  runs  on
over  to  the  reign  of  Zedekiah.  Ezekiel  also  appears  as  a  prophet  (at  Babylon)  when  he  eat
among  the  captives  by  the  river  Chebar  (Ezek.  i,  1).

8.  National  Affairs. — Jehoiacliin,  son  of  Jeiioiakim,  was  deposed  by  the  Chaldean  kingafter
three  months'  reign,  Mattaniah  (named  by  Nebuchadnezzar  Z<  dekiah),  the  brother  of  Jehoiakim,
had  been  placed  on  the  throne  by  Nebuchadnezzar  as  his  vuifsal.     Against  this  Chaldean  power

411


CHAP.  >txT.  nomiETTO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Zedekiali  early  revolted  in  favour  of  Eaiypt,  then  growing  into  a  first-class  power.  Nebuchad-
nezzar thereupon  sends  invaders  against  Jerusalem  ;  and  apprehending  this  attack,  Zedekiah
sends  the  embassy  to  Jeremiah  recorded  in  this  chapter.

4.  Oontemporaiy  History. — Pharaoh-Hophra  reigned  in  Egypt :  Nebuchadnezzar  in  Babylon  :
Solon  at  Athens.  At  this  time  Jehoiachin  (his  other  names  were  Jeconiah  and  Coniah),  with
his  queen-mother  Nehushta,  and  the  highest  families  of  Judah,  pined  in  captivity  in  Babylon.
It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that  Zedekiah,  led  by  his  nobles,  revolted  against  the  Chaldean
power  wl)ich  now  dominated  from  Babylon  the  centre  ot  the  Chaldean  sway.

6.  Geographical  References.  —  Ver.  4.  *' Babylon  and  Chaldeans."  Chaldea  is  properly
only  the  southerly  division  of  Babylonia  ;  but  the  Chaldea  over  which  Nebuchadnezzar  was  king
comprised  the  entire  tract  of  country  which  lay  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  and  an
equal  breadth  of  country  on  the  Arabian  desert  side  of  the  Euphrates  capable  of  irrigation  from
that  river,  and  extending  along  the  course  of  the  Euphrates  for  over  400  miles,  and  measuring
in  average  breadth  100  miles.  Ver.  13.  **  Valley  and  plain  :  "  Vide  tlie  note  in  loc.  on  chap,
xvii.  3.  The  valley  means  that  which  ran  between  Mount  Zion  and  Mount  Moriah  ;  and  the
rock,  Mount  Zion  itself.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  "Zedekiah:*''  Fid«  note  above,  Mndi&r  National  Affairs^  and
also  Personal  Allusions  to  chap.  i.  "  Pashur  the  son  of  Melchiah:"  this  was  the  fifth  order  of
the  priesthood,  and  Pashur  was  the  head  of  this  order  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  9-14).  [This  is  not  the
Pashur  mentioned  in  previous  chap'er].  **  Zephauiah,"  &c.,  connected  with  the  twenty-fourth
priestly  family  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  18).  This  Zephaniah  was  afterwards  put  to  death  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar at  Riblah  (Jer.  Hi.  24).  Ver.  2.  **  Nebuchadrezzar."  This  is  more  nearly  the  Chaldean
spelling  of  his  name  than  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  was  the  son  of  Nabopolassar,  and  led  the  army
against  Egypt  and  conquered  it  at  Charchemish.  See  further  in  Literary  Criticisms  below,
Ver.  4.   *'  Chaldeans."     Vide  Geog.  Ref.^  supra.

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  14.  "  The  forest  thereof ,**  "A  city  is  a  forest  of  houses." — KeiL
A  reference  here  to  the  dense  mass  of  residences  and  edifices  built  of  the  cedar  trees  from
Lebanon  (com p.  Jer.  xxii.  7  with  Hi.  13,  and  2  Kings  xxv.  9).

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  12.  *'  Execute  judgment  in  the  morning.**  Kings  sat  in
judgment  at  this  time  of  the  day.  (Comp.  2  Sam.  iv.  5;  Job  xx.  27;  Psa.  ci.  8).  See  Lit.
Crit.  below.

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  2.  **  Nebuchadrezzar  :'*  a  noticeable  spelling  :  with  1  instead
of  y  Jeremiah  uses  this  form  twenty-six  times  ;  but  the  form  with  3  ten  times.  Jeremiah
used  the  more  correct  Chaldean  form  of  the  name  until  current  usage  among  the  Jews  settled
the  spelling  with  the  3  instead  of  with  the  1.  The  LXX.  write  the  name  thus,  TlSapovxoSoudcrop  ;
and  Berosus  thus,  Na^ovxoSovdcropos ;  the  recently  discovered  Assyrian  cylinders  thus,  Nabu-
Rudurri'Uzur.  Professor  Rawlinson  interprets  this  last  to  mean  Neho  protects  the  landmarks  ;
and  Schrader,  JVfifto,  7?ro<gci  thou  the  crown.  The  name,  interpreted  from  Persian  roots,  had
been  sup{)Osed  to  mean,  Nebo  deorum  princeps,  or  Nebo  deus  ignis.

Ver.  4.  "  /  will  assemble  them"  &c.  The  antecedent  of  them  is  doubtful,  whether  "  weapons"
or  "  Chaldeans  ; ''  but  the  latter  is  the  nearer  and  more  pi  obable  antecedent.

Ver.  7.  *'  And  such  as  are  left:**  Hfitl  •  the  Vaw  may  be  regarded  as  explicative — even  such
as  are  left,  namely,  of  the  people.

Ver.  9.  *'  His  life  for  a  prey  :  "  t.«.,  shall  make  his  escape  with  it.

Ver.  12.  *' /n  the  momingV  "Ip.S?  KeH  regards  as  a  distributive  adverb,  every  morning ;
while  Henderson  regards  it  as  here  used  idiomatically,  as  in  Psa.  xe.  14,  cxliii.  8,  where  "IpSS
means  early^  soon,  quickly:  implying  urgency  ;  for  the  opportunity  would  quickly  end,

SECTIONAL  SUMMARY  OF  CHAPTER  XXL
God's  Final  offer  of  Deliverance.

The  siege  of  Jerusalem  had  begun.  Zedekiah  in  alarm  sent  to  ask  of  Jeremiah
respecting  the  event.

I.  Times  of  distress  drive  men  to  seek  God's  servants  whom  amid  their
prosperity  they  despised.

1.  Apprehensive  of  evil,  ^/i^y  crave  counsel  and  prayers  (ver.  2).  Zedekiah  sent
two  of  the  priests  who  vi^ere  in  highest  oflSce  to  ask  Jeremiah's  interposition  with
Jehovah  !  What  a  humbling  of  their  arrogant  disregard  of  this  hitherto  reviled
prophet  !

2.  Yet  they  crave  counsels  and  prayers  only  to  avert  punishment  (ver.  2).  Their
sole  desire  was  that  Jeremiah's  prayers  would  prevail  with  God  to  thwart  Nebu-
chadnezzar. There  was  no  humiliation  for  the  sin  which  brought  this  visitation  on
the  nation.

See  Adienda:  Seeking  Counskl.
412


ffOMIL  E  TIC  COM  MENTAR  Y :  JEREMIA H.  ohaf.  ZH,


n.  Messages  of  wrath  will  meet  those  who  refuse  to  seek  God  except  in
times  of  distress.

1.  Professors  of  religion  may  presume  upon  their  outward  privileges  until  God  be
angered  and  wholly  alienated.  These  priests,  this  king,  and  indeed  the  whole
nation,  had  so  presumed  upon  their  being  God* 8 people;  but  their  presumption
would  now  be  checked  (ver.  5).

2.  Resources  of  self-reliance  will  he  rendered  powerless  in  the  day  of  adversity
(ver.  4).

3.  Overwhelming  disaster  shall  avenge  the  iniquities  which  have  long  called  for
Divine  punishment.  God  had  been  slow  to  anger  and  of  great  kindness,  but  the
time  for  mercy  was  now  irrecoverably  past  (vers.  6,  7).

The  messenger  of  God  has  woful  messages  to  declare  against  such  as  despise
His  gracious  warnings  and  weary  out  His  loiigsuffering.

III.  A  way  of  mercy  is  still  opened  to  such  as  will  regard  Divine  counsels.
The  king  and  princes  would  not  surrender  to  Nebuchadnezzar  :  they  trusted

their  own  counsels,  and  would  not  heed  God's  j  but  some  among  the  people  might
be  found  ready  to  heed  God's  word  and  thereby  secure  immunity  from  imminent  ruin.

1.  Even  to  the  latest  hour  salvation  is  offered  (ver.  8)  ;  although  the  enemy  was
at  the  very  gates.

2.  The  way  of  life  consists  in  trustfully  submitting  to  God's  directions  (ver.  9).
It  required  prompt  obedience,  and  the  performance  of  a  part  which  would  be
humiliating  and  seemed  joatw/w^ — *'  falleth  to  the  Chaldeans,"  whom  they  hated.

God  leaves  no  sinner  on  earth  without  '*  a  way  of  escape  ; "  but  it  depends  on
his  implicit  surrender  to  His  counsels  whether  he  be  saved.  Happily  now  we  may
find  a  more  gracious  salvation  than  was  offered  to  those  people.

IV.  To  those  eminent  in  sin  God  sends  special  warnings  of  doom.

1.  God  recognises  the  circumstances  which  aggravate  individual  disobedience.
There  was  special  heinousness  in  the  conduct  of  "the  king  of  Judah"  (ver.  11),
since  he  belonged  to  the  "house  of  David  *'  (ver.  12).

2.  A  final  appeal  is  made  to  even  greatest  transgressors  (ver.  12).

3.  Yet  God  will  show  no  further  mercy  when  His  warnings  are  rejected  Mitli  self-
confident  pride.  The  reply  of  the  king  (ver.  13)  virtually  was,  '*We  have  a
strong  city,'*  we  dwell  in  *'  the  rock  of  the  plain  ; "  he  boasted  in  his  security.
Further,  he  despised  the  forces  of  destruction  which  were  gathering — **  Who  shall
come  down  against  us  1  who  shall  enter  into  our  habitation  1 "  But  God  was  against
the  king  of  Judah;  and  therefore  no  hope  of  safety  was  left.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XXI.

Ver.   2.   Theme:  Wilful  inquirers  2,  They  declared  what  counsels  they

flEEEiNG  COUNSEL.  wished  to  receive.     Asking  Jeremiah  to

I.  In  what  mind  they  came.  **  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  them,"  they

1.   Their  own  counsels  were  determined  yet  specified  the  kind  of  reply  they  ex-

and  fixed ;  so  that  they  were  not  in  a  pected  to  be  returned — that  Nebuchad-

teachable  mood.     This  Pashur  belonged  nezzar  "  may  go  up  from  us;"  i.e.,  he

to  the  party  who  counselled  that  Nebu-  compelled   to    raise   the    siege,   and  so

chad  nezzar  be  resisted  by  force  of  arms,,  give   these    inquirers   the    gratification

for  he  endeavoured  to  persuade  King  they  sought.

Zedekiah  to  put  Jeremiah  to  death  as  a  This  is  not  inquiry  ;  it  is  dictation.

traitor  (chap,    xxxviil    1-4).       Zepha-  Such  inquiry  is  insolent  to  God.     All

niah    likewise    (from    Nebuchadnezzar  supplication  for  Divine  leading  which  is

having  slain  him  at  Riblah,  chap.   lii.  prompted  by  predetermination  and  wil-

24)  was  manifestly  hostile  to  any  sur-  fulness  is  self  delusive  in    the   inquirer

render  to  the   Chaldean    force.      Thui  and  offensive  to  God.

they  came  with  predetermined  opinions.  IL  In  what  delusion  they  reposed.

413


CHAP.  XXI.


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


**  If  so  be  that  the  Lord  will  deal
with  us  according  to  all  His  wondrous
works."

1.  Their  own  demerits  were  conveniently
ignored.  It  would  almost  seem  that
they  were  unconscious  of  their  flagrant
impiety  and  wickedness.  Certainly
God's  actions  towards  them  were  not  to
he  regulated  by  righteousness,  not  to  he
affected  by  their  crying  iniquities,  not  to
be  swayed  by  their  defiance  of  Divine
'pleadings  and  tvarnings,  but  only  "  ac-
cording to  His  wondrous  works."

2.  Their  exclusive  request  was  for
miraculous  interposition.  Not  that
God  would  exert  His  gracious  power  to
reform  tJuem;  but  that,  leaving  them
still  in  their  sins,  and  unpunished  for
their  sins,  He  would  exert  His  mira-
culous power  to  protect  them.  Panic
prayers,  such  as  these,  are  rarely  in-
spired by  sincere  contrition  for  sin,  but
rather  by  sudden  realisation  of  penalty.

Note :

i.  Sinners  often  have  clear  recollec-
tion of  God's  marvellous  works.  These
men  had.  At  the  prayer  of  Isaiah  God
delivered  Jerusalem  when  Sennacherib
besieged  it  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  20-21).
And  as  they  have  clear  recollections,
so  often  they  have

ii.  Strange  expectations  of  like  mer-
ciful interpositions  on  their  own  behalf.
Doubtless  these  messengers  anticipated
for  Jeremiah  a  similar  answer  to  that
which  Isaiah  gave  (Isa.  xxxvii.  6),
But

iii.  God  ahvays  keeps  vivid  recognition
of  men's  sinful  ways.  And  He  makes
a  difference  accordingly.  So  that  '*  His
wondrous  works "  are  not  repeated  to
men  who  deserved,  not  wondrous  de-
liverances, but  wondrous  judgments.

See  Addenda:  Seeking  Counsel,

Ver.  3.  Theme :  Intrepid  denun-
ciations. "Thus  shall  ye  say  to
Zedekiah."

Since  the  days  of  Jehoiakim,  under
whose  reign  Jeremiah  betrayed  much
fickleness,  temerity,  and  repining  ;  of
all  which  the  previous  chapter  (xx.)
furnishes  too  ample  proof — what  a
change  has  come  upon  God's  servant !
How  altered  now  is  the  tone  of  his
414


address.      Regard    this    reply   as   evi-
dence of

I.  Great  personal  courage.  Note
the  circumstances :

1.  He  is  confronted  with  men  of
higliest  state  dignity.  This  embassy
was  chosen  from  among  the  foremost
officers  in  the  ranks  of  the  priesthood,
so  that  Jeremiah  had  to  address  men  of
pride  and  power.

2.  He  has  to  send  a  message  direct
to  the  king.  His  words  are  "to  Zede-
kiah.'' He  is  under  special  tempta-
tion therefore  to  be  apprehensive  of
royal  disfavour,  and  concerned  to  be
conciliatory.

3.  He  is  for  the  first  time  sought  as
state-adviser.  Never  before  had  he
been  recognised  by  king  and  princes
in  this  special  manner  as  God's  vice-
gerent and  oracle.  They  had  hereto-
fore "derided"  him  (xx.  7,  8).  Now
he  is  treated  with  highest  respect :  an
embassy  of  marked  importance  is  sent
him ;  he  is  consulted  at  a  crucial
moment  on  a  matter  of  vast  serious-
ness— would  he  accept  the  flattery,  and
prize  the  sweet  gratification  so  highly,
as  to  lead  him  to  mild  speech  and  even
partial  suppression  of  his  message  ?
(Compare  xx.  9.)  No  :  he  spoke  out
all  God's  word,  forcibly  and  fear-
lessly, and  sent  back  these  powerful
messengers  to  the  king  with  burning
words  of  denunciation.

n.  Grand  prophetic  confidence,

1.  He  is  conscious  of  the  Divinity  of
his  inspiration.  Had  he  been  in  any
doubt  that  God's  Spirit  moved  him
as  he  spake,  he  would  certainly  have
spoken  with  more  deference  and  some
equivocation.  But  his  words  are  de-
cisive and  authoritative.  He  knew
that  he  had  God's  word  to  utter.  So
as  truly  do  preachers  of  Divine  truth.

Here,  too,  let  it  be  noted  that  the
coming  of  this  embassy  to  him  was
"  a  silent  testimony  and  tribute  to  his
inspiration'*  {Wordsworth).  They  ac-
cepted the  fact  as  undoubted :  and
came  to  ask  God's  word  at  his  lips.

2.  He  is  confident  of  the  certainty  of
his  prophecies.  The  moment  was  cri-
tical. The  Chaldeans  were  at  the
walls,  the  city  was  besieged,  the  mes-


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JBREMIAH,


OHAP.  ZZI»


sage  was  for  that  very  hour.  What  he
said  would  be  verified  or  refuted  forth-
with. It  was  different  when  a  pro-
phecy was  being  uttered  which  related
to  distant  days.  Yet  though  a  few
hours  would  suffice  to  prove  or  disprove
his  words,  Jeremiah  spoke  with  emphasis
and  confidence.  He  risks  his  credit  as
a  prophet  on  the  assurance  he  sends  back,
that  if  the  king  would  promptly  execute
judgment  and  justice,  the  besiegers
should  be  thwarted  (ver.  12).  We  have
reason  to  believe  that  had  Zedekiah
acted  on  Jeremiah's  counsel  he  would
have  been  saved  from  the  Chaldeans  as
Hezekiah  was  from  the  Assyrians.

Note  :

i.  This  progress  from  temerity  (chap,
i  6)  to  courage  was  the  progressively  of
God's  promise  of  qualification  for  his
work.  (See  chap.  i.  17,  18.)  It  was
only  progressively  fulfilled,  for  often  the
prophet  showed  a  craven  spirit  (xx.
7—9) ;  but  now  it  was  completelt/  ful-
filled. So  God's  words  of  promise  will
find  ultimate  vindication  in  us.

ii.  This  development  of  courage  and
confidence  marks  the  perfection  of  his
prophetic  equipment  Jeremiah's  sorest
testing  was  at  hand ;  in  the  travail  and
calamities  which  accumulated,  he  would
need  now  the  full  confidence  and  fear-
less courage  which  here  for  the  first  time
he  evinced.  God  knows  the  hour  when
we  need  largest  grace,  and  "  as  our  day
is,  so  shall  our  strength  be.'*

See  Addenda  :  Courage.

Ver.  8.  Theme:  A  Pitiable  di-
lemma. "  I  have  set  before  thee  the
way  of  life  and  death."

In  this  instance  how  different  the  cir-
cumstances amid  which  Jeremiah  made
this  appeal  from  those  amid  which  Moses
used  the  same  words  !  (Deut.  xxx.  19.)
Here  it  is —

I.  Not  a  gracious  contrast:  ''Life
and  death."

It  was  a  gracious  contrast  that  Moses
proposed  :  a  choice  between

1.  A  life  blessed  with  Jehovah's
favour ;  or

2.  A  death  in  sin  and  the  miseries
which  follow  disobedience.

But   that    propitious    hour   for    the


nation  was  gone  for  ever.  The  offer
could  not  be  made  on  those  beneficent
terms.  "  They  had  slighted  the  life  "
(says  Henry)  "  which  would  have
made  them  truly  happy ;  to  upbraid
them  with  which  the  prophet  uses  the
same  expression."

Note  :  The  same  offer  may  not  mean
the  same  when  it  is  renewed,  after  it  has
once  been  rejected.

II.  But  a  melancholy  alternative.

Here  the  choice  lay  between  two  possi-
bilities well-nigh  equally  distressing.

1.  A  life  only  saved  by  deserting  to
the  enemy,  and  to  be  spent  in  wretched
and  shameful  captivity  ;  or

2.  A  death  of  famine,  pestilence,  and
the  sword  within  their  own  city's  walls.

See  Addenda :  Opportunity.

Theme :     A     Faithful    minister's

APPEAL.

It  ought  to  be  possible  for  every  mes-
senger of  God  to  say  among  his  people
that  during  his  ministry  he  has  per-
sistently and  faithfully  "  set  before  them
life  and  death."

L  This  summarises  the  preacher's
work.

1.  The  alternative  which  God  offers
to  men  through  the  preacher — "  life
and  death."

2.  The  fidelity  which  marks  the
jyreacher's  messages  to  m£n,  "  I  have
set  before  you."  Not  engaging  you
with  speculative  theories,  but  solemn
truths  and  revealed  facts.

II.  This  indicates  the  hearer's  duty.

1.  A  free  choice  is  left  to  each  (Ezek.
xxxiii.  11).

2.  A  wise  choice  is  possible  with  each
(Prov.  viii.  36  ;  Luke  x.  42).

III.  This  narrows  the  sinner's  out-
look.

1.  There  are  but  two  possibilities
before  the  soul :  no  third  course.

2.  There  are  great  responsibilities
upon  the  soul  (John  xv.  22).

See  further:  Noticeable  Topics  at
end  of  chapter.

Vers.  11,  12.  Theme:  Counsel  to
A  kino.

Because  it  was  the  king  who  sent  the
message  to  him,  he  sends  a  particular
message  to  the  king.     He  advises  the

415


CHAP.  XXI.  HO  Ml  LET  10  OOMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


king  and  princes  to  reform,  and  to  make  direction  for   a    national    reformation,

conscience  of  the  duty  from  their  place.  The    princes  must   begin    and   set  the

"  Execute  judgment  in  the  morning " —  people  a  good   example.     He  reminds

carefully,   diligently,    promptly.     "  De-  them  that  they  are  of  the    "  house   of

liver  him  that  is  spoiled  out  of  the  hand  David,"  and  therefore   should  tread  in

of  the   oppressor" — if    you    would    be  his  righteous  steps,

delivered  from  the  Chaldeans  who  dis-  iii.   This  gives  them  some  encourage-

tress  you.  ment  to  hope  that  there  may  yet  be  a

i.   l^his    intimates   that   it   was  their  lengthening  of  their  tranquillity    (Dent.

neglect  to  do  their  duty  which  brought  iv.  27).     If  anything  will  recover  their

all    this    desolation    upon    the    people.  state  from  the  brink  of  ruin,  this  will.

The  "  evil  of  their  doings  "  kindled  the  — M.  Henry.

fire  of  God's  wrath.  See     Addenda :    "  Execute    Judo-

iL  This  directs  them  to  take  the  right  ment."

NOTICEABLE  TOPIC  IN  CHAPTER  XXI,

Topic:  God's  message  of  Life  and  Death  (ver.  8).

The  conduct  of  God  towards  Israel  is  the  model  of  His  conduct  towards  us  :
and  the  conduct  of  Israel  towards  God  closely  resembles  the  conduct  of  mankind  in
all  subsequent  ages.     Here  is  a  glass  in  which  we  may  see  ourselves  revealed.

When  Nebuchadnezzar  advanced  to  the  siege,  the  state  dignitaries  urged  Jeremiah
to  inquire  of  God  for  them  what  the  result  would  be.  He  did  so.  And  this  was  the
answer — Life  in  submission  to  the  Chaldeans  :  death  by  continuance  in  the  city.  The
result  was — they  despised  the  warning,  they  clung  to  their  own  devices — the  city
was  destroyed,  "*

(a.)  Many  learn  religion^s  worth  amid  threatening  or  actual  calamities.

(6.)  Many  prize  the  comfort  of  the  prayers  of  God's  people  who  never  pray  them-
selves.

I.  That  it  is  God's  prerogative  to  mark  the  path  in  which  He  would  have  us
go  for  both  worlds.     God  who  knows  our  wants  has  provided  for  their  supply.

He  has  '*set  before  us  life  and  death."

1.  In  Hisw7'itten  Word — i.  By  doctrinal  statements,    ii.  By  warnings  and  invitations.

2.  By  Providence  and  mercies  :  examples  and  instances.

The  way  to  heaven  is  faith  and  holiness,  the  way  to  hell  is  unbelief  and  sin.
Jesus  says  (Mark  xvi.  16).  John,  bearing  witness  to  the  Divinity  and  Messiah-
ship  of  Christ,  says  (John  iii.  36).  Our  Lord  also  declares  concerning  Himself  in
terms  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood  (John  xiv.  6).

It  is  evident  that  all  who  receive  Christ  by  faith — in  His  atoning  sacrifice  and
sanctifying  grace — are  in  the  way  of  life  :  and  all  those  who  reject  and  disown
Him — refuse  His  salvation  and  disobey  His  commands — are  in  the  way  of  death.

II.  That  the  path  to  life  is  clothed  with  many  attractions.

Our  Lord  speaks  of  "  the  strait  gate  and  narrow  way,"  and  the  "  few  that  find
it.*'  The  difficulty  arises  not  from  the  road  itself,  but  from  the  nature  of  those
who  walk  in  it.     It  is

1.  A  plain  way.  Tke  way  though  narrow  is  plain — the  way  to  the  wicket  gate
is  straight  as  a  line  can  make  it.  It  is  only  difficult  and  perplexed  to  those  who
are  reluctant  to  renounce  the  burden  of  their  sins  and  the  corruptions  of  this  evil
world,  or"  would  fain  invent  some  method  to  reconcile  the  discordant  claims  of  God
and  mammon,  earth  and  heaven.  But  though  the  first  entrance  may  be  difficult
to  the  awakened  sinner,  owing  to  the  abounding  evils  of  his  heart,  yet,  grace
enables  him  to  overcome  these  deep  workings  of  corruption  and  to  pass  by  true
repentance  and  humble  faith  through  the  strait  gate  towards  the  blessed  region  of
eternal  felicity.

Both  of  these  paths  have  numerous  travellers — but  the  broad  way  and  the
416


mMiLETW  COMMENTARt :  JBREMtAS.  OHAP.  XXI.

guilts,  have  had  a  fearful  majority  hitherto.  Yet  tlie  votaries  of  religion  have
not  boeu  /ew  in  reality,  though  few  as  compared  with  the  wi)rld — and  in  every  age
the  number  of  these  has  increased,  and  will  increase.    Of  the  path  to  heaven  observe

2.  That  it  is  an  old  way  and  well  trodden.  '*  Stand  ye  in  the  old  way,  inquire
for  the  good  paths."     From  Abel's  time.     "  The  way  the  holy  prophets  went."

3.  That  it  is  a  safe  way  :  for  though  much  contested  it  is  yet  divinely  guarded  :
**  No  lion  shisll  be  there."     "  No  weapon,"  &c.

4.  That  it  is  a  pleasant  way,  *' Wisdom's  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness."
"  The  way  of  tife  is  above  to  the  wise,"  &c.

III.  That  we  are  daily  advancing  in  one  or  other  of  these  paths.

There  can  be  amidst  the  diversities  of  the  race  but  two  broad  divisions  :  wise
and  foolish,  wheat  and  tares.

God  sees  how  you  forget  Him  and  your  latter  end,  and  how  light  you  make  of
everlasting  things :  how  bold  you  are  in  sin,  how  fearless  of  His  threatenings —
careless  of  your  sottls — doing  the  work  of  infidels  in  your  lives  while  the  creed
of  Christians  is  in  your  mouth.  He  sees  the  dreadful  day  near  at  hand  when
your  sorrows  will  begin.  "  Behold  the  judge  standeth."  Death  will  bring  such  an
argument  in  favour  of  truth  and  religion  as  you  will  never  be  able  to  answer,
and  then  you  will  be  an  unbeliever  no  longer.  There  is  nothing  but  a  slender
veil  of  flesh  between  thee  and  that  amazing  sight  of  God  and  eternity  which  will
silence  your  presumption  for  ever.  But  let  us  mark  the  contrast  between  tlie
righteous  and  the  wicked  in  present  life.

A  worldly  man  is  one  that  has  his  chief  treasure  upon  earth,  while  God  and
eternity  are  forgotten.  Though  he  does  not  say  that  earth  is  better  than  heaven,
and  sin  than  holiness,  he  acts  as  if  he  did  ;  and  if  he  could  have  enough  of  earth
and  time  he  would  let  go  heaven,  and  never  think  of  being  removed  thither — for  a
holy  God  and  a  holy  heaven  have  never  been  comprehended  within  the  circle  of
his  joys.  Whereas  the  Christian  is  one  who  has  been  converted  from  the  error  of
his  ways — his  mind  has  been  enlightened  to  discern  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  love
and  loveliness  of  Christ,  and  is  anxious  to  lay  up  his  treasure  and  hopes  in  heaven.

A  worldly  man  is  one  who  neglects  the  great  salvation,  who  never  truly  valued
the  mystery  of  redemption,  nor  truly  applied  to  the  Physician  of  souls,  nor  thank-
fully entertair^ed  in  his  heart  the  great  Redeemer ;  and  though  he  might  not  object
to  be  outwardly  religious,  he  was  never  concerned  to  be  inwardly  renewed,  neither
seeking  to  be  delivered  from  the  guilt  and  dominion  of  sin,  nor  to  be  conformed
to  the  image  and  likeness  of  God.  Whereas  the  Christian^  having  been  savingly
convinced  of  his  undone  state  by  sin,  and  apprehending  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,
thankfully  entertains  the  glad  tidings  of  redemption,  flees  to  Christ  for  pardon  and
salvation — desires  to  experience  more  the  daily  renewal  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

To  which  of  these  do  you  belong  ?  Think  thus ; — I  am  a  dying  creature,  on
the  verge  of  an  awful  eternity  ;  heaven  and  hell  are  before  me,  and  to  one  of
these  states  I  am  advancing  every  day  as  another  day's  journey.  Ask,  Whither  am
I  going  ?  What  reception  shall  I  meet  at  last  1  What  award  does  conscience  now
make  1  Have  I  believed  with  the  heart  unto  righteousness  1  Is  the  life  I  now  live
in  the  flesh  a  life  of  faith  1     Will  the  course  1  am  in  do  to  die  by  ^

IV.  That  the  doom  of  the  impenitent  will  be  aggravated  by  weighty  consi-
derations.

1.  That  the  path  of  life  and  death  was  clearly  set  before  you,  and  rejected  by
deliberate  choice.  It  will  be  eternally  true  that  Christ  was  set  forth  crucified,  that
you  were  invited,  summoned,  and  entreated  in  His  name  to  be  reconciled  to  God.
God  Himself  calls

2.  From  the  solemn  Providences  and  warnings  you  have  abused.

3.  From  the  vanity  and  worthlessness  of  pursuits  for  which  salvation  was  rejected,

4.  From  the  changeless  eternity  of  the  state  to  which  you  go.

— Samuel  Thodey^  a.d.  1845.
2d  417


CHAP.  XXII.


BOMJIETTC  COMMENTARY:  JEHEMTAB.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXL:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  2.  Seeking  counsel.

**  Consult  your  friend  on  all  things,
especially  on  those  which  respect  your-
self. His  counsel  may  then  be  useful,
where  your  own  self-love  might  impair
your  judgment." — Seneca.

"  Good  counsels  observed  are  chains
to  grace." — Fuller,

**  Mid  pleasure  plenty,  and  success,

Freely  we  take  from  Him  who  lends  *
We  boast  the  blessings  we  possess,

Yet  scarcely  thank  the  One  who  sends.

**  But  let  aflBliction  pour  its  smart,

How  soon  we  quail  beneath  the  rod  !
With  shattered  pride,  and  prostrate  heart,
We  seek  the  long-forgotten  God."

— Eliza  Cook,

Ver.  3.  Courage.

"  A  minister  without  boldness  is  like
a  smooth  file,  a  knife  without  an  edge,
a  sentinel  that  is  afraid  to  let  ofif  his
gun.  If  men  will  be  bold  in  sin,  minis-
ters must  be  bold  to  reprove."

— GurnalL

Think  of  that  Reformer,  who,  when
some  one  said  to  him,  "  The  whole
world  is  against  you,"  calmly  replied,
"  Then  I  am  against  the  world."

•*  This  is  true  courage,  not  the  brutal  force
Of  vulgar  heroes,  but  the  firm  resolve
Of  virtue  and  of  reason." — Whitehead,

*'  True  valour
Lies  in  the  mind,  the  never-yielding  purpose.
Nor  owns  the  blind  award  of  giddy  fortune,

— Thomson,


Ver.  8.  Opportunity.

**  The  mill  cannot  grind  with  the
water  that  is  past." — Proverb,

Herod — those  who  offered  to  follow
Christ  (Luke  ix.  67-62)  —  Felix—
Agrippa  —  Simon  Magus  —  how  many
characters  seem. to  flash  before  our  eyes
in  Scripture  as  having  been  visited  with
convictions  and  opportunities  of  grace,
but  only,  it  has  been  said,  "  like  ships,
which,  when  night  is  spread  over  the
sea,  emerge  for  a  moment  from  the
darkness  as  they  cross  the  pathway  of
the  moonbeams,  and  then  are  lost  in
utter  gloom."

Opportunities  are  importunities.

**  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men,

Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  for-
tune ;
Omitted,  all  the  voyage  of  their  life
Is  bound  in  shallows,  and  in  miseries  |
And  we  must  take  the  current  when  it  serres,
Or  lose  our  ventures.** — Shakespeare.

Ver.  12.  Execute  judgment.
"  What  is  justice  1     To  give  to  every
man  his  own." — Aristotle.

"  It  often  falls  in  course  of  common  life.

That    right  sometimes  is  overborne  of
wrong ;
The  avarice  of  power,  or  guile,  or  strife,
That  weakens  her,  and  makes  her  party

strong.
But  Justice,  tho*  her  doom  she  do  prolong,
Yet  at  the  last  will  make  her  own  cause
rife.*' — Spentar,


CHAPTER  XXIL

Critioal  and  Exeoetical  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.    Early  in  Jehoiakim's

reign  ;  contemporary  with  chap.  xvii.  See  Notes.  Dr.  Payne  Smith  places  this  prophecy
prior  to  Jehoiakim's  manifestation  of  the  violence  of  his  character  by  murdering  Urijah
(chap.  xxvi.  23),  and  thus  synchronous  with  chap.  xvii.  19-27.  Its  appeal  to  the  house  of
David  is  conditioned  on  the  fact  that  the  nation's  ruin  might  yet  be  averted.  The  chapter
divides  itself  into  four  chronological  sections.  Vers.  1-9  :  Early  in  Jehoiakim's  reign.  Vers.
10-12:  Immediately  following  the  deposition  and  captivity  of  Jehoahaz.  Vers.  14-19:
Jehoiakim's  reign  again  ;  but  towards  the  close  of  his  wicked  rule.  Vers.  20-30  belong  to
Jeconiah's  reign,  for  the  reference  (ver.  24)  indicates  him  as  the  then  reigning  king.  Cf.  Per-
sonal Allusions  below.

For  2.  Contemporary  Scriptures ;  8.  National  Affairs ;  4.  Contemporaneons  History,  see
Notes  on  chaps,  vii.  and  xvii.

5.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  6.  '^Gilead" — Vide  note  on  viii.  22.  '* Lebanon  *\^
the  loftiest  height  of  Lebanon  is  about  10,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Vide  note  on
xviii.  14.  Ver.  20.  ** Basfiany  and  the  passages:"  i.e.,  the  route  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.
•*  Passages  "  should  be  Abarim,  a  range  of  mountains  south  of  Gilead,  opposite  Jericho.  Those
mountains,  Lebanon^  Bashan,  and  Abarim^  overlook  the  course  the  captives  would  take.

6.  Personal  Allusions.— Ver.  11.  **Shallum,,  the  son  of  Josiah."     Shallum   is  the  same  as

418


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,  chap.  xxn.


Jehoahaz,  Josiah's  second  son.  Although  younger  than  Eliakim  (afterwards  called  Jehoiakim),
he  was  yet  raised  to  the  throne  by  the  acclaim  of  the  people  (2  Kings  xxiii.  30-36),  the  righti
of  primogeniture  being  disregarded  owing  to  the  evil  character  of  Eliakim.  (Comp.  Personal
Allusions  chap,  i.)  Shallum  reigned  only  three  months  :  for  Eliakim,  indignant  at  this
usurpation,  threw  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  Egyptians  ;  and  Pharaoh-Necho  deposed
Jehoahaz  and  placed  Jehoiakim  (Eliakim)  on  the  throne  as  tributary  and  dependent  king.
Shallum  was  thereupon  carried  into  Egypt,  and  from  that  time  is  heard  of  no  more.  (Comp.
2  Chron.  xxxvi.  1-i;  Ezek.  xix.  3-4.)

Ver.  18.  **Je?wiakimf  son  of  Josiah:"  see  note  above,  also  note  to  chap.  i.  (Comp.  2
Chron.  xxxvi.  5,  6.)  We  have  no  record  of  his  death  ;  but  from  this  prophecy  (repeated  in
chap,  xxxvi.  30)  we  may  suppose  that  he  died  soon  after  he  reached  Babylon,  died  under  his
chains,  probably  "of  pestilence  or  of  a  broken  heart"  {Payne  Smith),  a.nd  his  body  was
dragged  away  without  any  show  of  respect.  It  is  just  as  probable  that  he  was  slain  by
Nebuchadnezzar  on  his  retreat  to  Babylon,  and  that  his  corpse  was  left  unburied  by  the  way-
side outside  Jerusalem.     Certainly,  however,  he  perished  miserably,  and  at  the  age  of  thirty-six,

Ver.  24.  **Coniah,  son  of  Jehoiakim :  "  This  was  Jehoiachin.  He  reigned  only  three  months
and  ten  days.  He  was  eighteen  years  of  age  (according  to  2  Kings  xxiv.  8)  when  crowned,
but  only  eight  according  to  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9 — which  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  text.
He  remained  in  Babylon  a  captive  during  thirty-six  years,  the  lifetime  of  Nebuchadnezzar;
but  when  Evil-Merodach  succeeded  Nebuchadnezzar  he  was  considerately  raised  by  that  king
to  some  show  of  dignity  and  personal  regard  (2  Kings  xxv.  27-30;  Jer.  Hi.  31-34).  Ezekiel
dated  his  prophecies  by  the  year  "of  king  Jehoiachin's  captivity"  (Ezek.  i.  2,  viii.  1,  xxiv.  1,
&c.)  An  exciting  expectation  prevailed  among  the  Jews  four  years  after  Jeconiah's  removal  to
Babylon  (Jer.  xxviii.  4)  that  he  would  quickly  return  to  power  ;  but  this  was  probably  a  rumour
created  by  the  sanguine  hopes  and  conversation  of  the  Jewish  captives  at  Babylon.

Ver.  26.  **  Thy  mother  that  bare  thee."    Nehushta ;  see  chronological  note  to  chap.  xiii.

7.  Natural  History — none.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  10.  *'  TTeep  ye  not  for  the  deadj"  &c.  An  annual  lamenta-
tion had  been  celebrated  by  the  nation  for  good  king  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25).  This  custom
might  now  be  used  for  one  who  needed  the  bemoaning  more — his  son  Shallum.

Ver.  14.  "  Ceiled  toith  cedar  and  painted  vnth  vermilion."  Jehoiakim's  palace  was  gorgeously
idorned  with  "cedars"  of  Lebanon.  The  "vermilion"  was  not  like  ours,  a  preparation  of
red  lead,  but  a  compound  of  quicksilver  and  sulphur  ;  a  preparation  much  ralued  by  Orientals.

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  7.  "  J  will  prepare  destroyers:"  i.e.,  consecrate,  {Vide  note,
chap.  vi.  4.)

Ver.  14.  "  A  wide  house:'*  nHD  n^3  lit.,  a  house  of  extensions  :  (comp.  Numb.  xiii.  32  ;
Isa.  xIy.  14),  where  H^'^D  is  rendered  "stature" — men  of  large  proportions.  "  A  spacious
house."      **  Large  chamhers,*'  from  Hi"),  to  breathe:  airy  chambers.

*'  And  it  is  ceiled  with  cedars  : "  jiSD;  either  roofing  it  with  cedars  {Payne  Smith),  or  inlaying
it  {Hitzig,  Qraf.,  &c.)

Ver.  15.  "  C^o«g5«  thyself  tn  cec?ar."  Various  reading.  The  LXX.,  (7oc?ca;  .i^ca?,,  and  J^aW
give  viest  with  Ahaz :  for  Ahaz  did  build  the  palace  (1  Kings  xxii.  39).  But  the  literal  render-
ing of  received  text  is,  viest  in  cedar-work,

Ver.  19.  **  Beyond  the  gates" — afar  from.

Ver.  20.  "TAe  Passages.''*    See  Geog.  Ref.  supra,  Abarim,  a  range  of  mountains.

Ver.  23.  "  0  inhabitant  of  Lebanon :"  inhabi tress.  **  How  gracious  shall  thou  be  ;'*  how  wilt
thou  sigh  {Hitzig,  Ewald,  Oraf)  ;  how  wilt  thou  groan  {Lange,  Payne  Smith),  be  pitiable
{Gesenius).

Ver.  27.  *^  Desire  to  return  :^  lift  up  their  soul  to  return.  Our  English  equivalent  is  "  set
their  heart  upon."

Ver.  28.  "  ^  despised  broken  idol:"  lit.,  piece  of  work,  a  vessel,  a  piece  of  common  earthen*
ware  in  which  the  potter  has  no  interest.

V  HOMILETIC  SURVEY  OP  CHAPTER  XXIL

Theme:  The  Errors  and  the  Doom  of  Judah's  Kings.

The  chapter  separates  itself  into  four  prophetic  messages,  containing  sentences  of
judgment  on  Jehoahaz  (Shallum),  Jehoiakim,  and  Jeconiah.  Chronological  order
of  events  is  disregarded  in  the  grouping  of  these  prophecies  ;  but  similarity  oj
subject  rules.  Connecting  chapter  xxi.  11 — end  with  chap.  xxiL,  <Ae  last  four
kings  of  Judah  are  arraigned  for  judgment.  Each  is  proved  to  have  utterly  failed
in  righteousness^  and  on  each  is  pronounced  the  sorrowful  denunciation  which  his
impiety  invoked.

L  An  exhortation  to  righteous  reforms.  Addressed  to  Jehoiakim,  probably
quickly  after  his  accession  to  the  throne,  he  is  charged,  in  the  name  of  Jehovah

419


OBAP.  XXIL  nOMlLETW  COMMENT AR  Y  .  SEREMIAS.


(ver.  3) — himself,  his  ministers,  and  his  people — to  act  aright,  to  administer  justice,
and  eschew  all  wrong.  This  appeal  is  emphasised  with  an  encouraging  promise  of
'prosperity  upon  obedience  (ver.  4),  and  alarming  warnings  of  desolation  if  disre-
garded (ver.  5-9).

II.  A  mournful  instance  of  judgment.  The  prophet  cites  the  fate  of  Shall um
(Jehoahaz),  the  predecessor  of  Jehoiakim,  as  confirmatory  of  Jehovah's  warnings.
On  his  accession  Sliallum  assumed  the  name  "  Jehoahaz,"  meaning  "  Jehovah  sus-
tains," but  Jeremiah  refuses  to  call  him  by  that  name,  and  writes  him  down  in
irony  as  **  Shallum,"  meaning  "  retribution  " — which  had  verified  its  appropriateness
in  the  king's  fate — deposed  after  three  months'  reign,  and  now  a  captive  in  Egypt,
never  more  to  behold  his  native  land.  So  soon  may  a  king  he  dethroned ,  so  hope-
lessly may  an  exile  be  banished  (ver.  10-12).

See  Addenda:  Weep  not  for  the  dead.

IIL  A  rebuke  of  ambitious  tyranny.  Reverting  to  Jehoiakim  (ver.  13),  and
proceeding  openly  and  indignantly  to  name  him  as  the  criminal  (ver.  18),  God
denounces  him  for  his  vainglory  (ver.  14),  his  injustice  (ver.  13),  his  coveiousness
and  cruelty  (ver.  17).  Against  him  the  "woe"  (ver.  13)  is  uttered;  he  is
derided  for  his  false  confidence  (vers.  15,  16)  in  thinking  that  his  throne  is  secured
by  vaunting  display  of  splendour  rather  than  in  righteous  administration  ;  and  his
miserable  degradation  is  proclaimed  (ver.  18,  19).

IV.  A  lamentation  over  Judah's  ruin.  Jeremiah  1.  appeals  to  Jerusalem,
whom  he  personifies  as  a  sorrowing  woman,  to  ascend  the  mountains  which  over-
look the  route  her  captives  would  take  on  being  carried  into  Babylon,  and  bewail
her  calamity.  2.  Threatens  Jeconiah  (here  called  Coniah  as  if  in  contempt) ;
who,  although  he  was  idolised  by  his  people  (vers.  24-28),  would  nevertheless  be
treated  with  violence  (vers.  26-28),  carried  into  exile  (ver.  25),  and  with  him  would
end  the  royal  honours  of  his  house  (ver.  30).

GENERAL  TRUTHS  SUGGESTED  BY  THE  CHAPTER.

I.  Perpetuity  and  prosperity  are  conditional  upon  righteousness.  This  holds
good  for  nations  and  governments  (ver.  4),  cities  (vers.  8,  9),  individuals  (vers.  11,
19,  30).

"  The  most  effectual  way  to  preserve  the  dignity  of  the  government  is  to  do  the
duty  of  it." — Henry.  '*  God  does  not  spare  even  the  authorities,  for  though  He
has  said  that  they  are  as  *  gods,'  yet  when  they  do  not  rightly  administer  their
office  they  must  die  like  men  (Ps.  Ixxxil  6).  No  cedars  are  too  high  for  God.  No
splendours  too  mighty  ;  He  can  destroy  all  at  once,  and  overturn,  overturn,  over-
turn" (Ezek.  xxi.  27). — Cramer,  Sin  will  be  the  ruin  of  the  house  of  princes  as
well  as  of  meaner  men.  Even  in  this  world  God  often  makes  it  clear  that  He
destroys  neither  nations,  cities,  nor  persons,  except  for  sin  ;  and  it  will  be  made
clearer  in  the  day  of  judgment.

n.  Advantages  and  exaltation  secure  no  exception  from  doom.  '^  The  house
of  the  kings  of  Judah  "  enjoyed  historic  dignity  and  the  Divine  benignity  (ver.  6)  :
Jerusalem  also  (addressed  in  vers.  20-23)  had  enjoyed  ^^  prosperity  ^'  (ver.  21)  and
material  splendour  (ver.  23)  ;  whereas  Jeconiah  had  seemed  peculiarly  secure  and
honoured  (ver.  24).  Yet  that  house  of  Judah  became  a  desolation  (ver.  5) ;
Jerusalem  was  dethroned  (vers.  8,  9) ;  and  "  confounded  for  her  wickedness  "  (ver.
22) ;  and  Coniah  was  cut  off  from  royalty  (ver.  30).

"  See  how  easily  God's  judgments  can  ruin  a  nation,  and  how  certainly  sin  will
do  it." — Henry.  How  little  is  earthly  grandeur  to  be  depended  upon,  or  flourish-
ing families  to  be  rejoiced  in  !  Notwithstanding  the  privileges  of  a  man's  birth
(as  with  Coniah),  if  he  make  himself  unworthy  of  honour,  God  will  cast  him  oflT,
Yet  "  God  never  casts  any  off  until  they  first  cast  Him  off"  [Henry  on  ver.  9).
Here,  however,  may  be  seen  "  how  perverse  and  unjustifiable  is  the  illusion  that
420


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAff,  chap.  TtXL


6od*s  election  is  a  surety  against  His  anger,  and  a  licence  to  any  wilfulness." —
Naegehhach.

III.  Spoliation  and  punishment  are  varied  according  to  individual  sin.
Numerous  are  the  resources  of  Divine  judgment.  God  "  prepares  the  destroyers^
every  one  with  his  weapons  "  (ver.  7).  And  He  determines  the  form  of  desolation
upon  individual  transgressors.  Shallum  is  doomed  to  perpetual  bondage  :
Jehoiakim  is  punislied  with  an  unlamented  death  and  contemptible  burial — a  most
despicable  end  (vers.  18,  19).  Jec<miah^  whom  the  nation  had  idolised  and
cherished  with  "pleasure,"  should  become  despised  by  his  people  (28),  and  be
written  childless  (ver.  30).

They  expose  themselves  to  fearful  possibilities  and  perils  who  live  in  hostility
to  God.     No  life  is  secure  from  calamity  which  is  not  '*  hid  with  Christ  in  God."

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XXII,

Vers.  1-5.  Theme  :  The  conditions  L  Significant  imagery.     "  Thou  art  -

OF  CONTINUANCE  IN  PRIVILEGE.  Qllead  unto  me,  and  the  head  of  Lebanon."

Hereditary  rights,  royal  prerogatives,  i.  The  meaning  of  these  natural  metor

are  valueless  as  guarantees  of  prolonged  phors.     They  suggest

existence  and   prosperity   as  a  nation.  1.  Graceful  fertility.     "  Gilead "  was

Righteousness  alone  protects   and  pre-  the  poetic  symbol  of  this.     Dr.  Payne

serves  governments  from  overthrow  and  Smith  notes  that  it  is  "  extolled  for  its

peoples  from  extinction.  So  w  i  th  a  cAwrcA;  aromatic  plants  (chap.  viii.  22),  its  grassy

it  must  be  and  do  right,  or  Christ  "  will  uplands    where   the   goats    feed    (Song

remove  the  candlestick," «fec.    So  with  the  Sol.  iv.  1,  vi.  5),  and  one  district  of  it,

soul:  it  must  faithfully  serve  and  loyally  Basiian,  for  its  sheep  (Deut.  xxxii.  14),

follow  Christ,  or  it  forfeits  grace.  its  noble  breed  of  cattle  (Ps.  xxii.  12),

This  message  to  Jehoiakim  is  similar  its  general  fertility  (Isa.  xxxiii.  9),  and

in  import  to  that  sent  to  Zedekiah  (xxi,  especially  for  its  splendid  oak   forests

11-14).     See  Homilies  in  loc.  (Isa.  ii.  13;  Zech.  xi.  2)."

Matthew  Henry^s  arrangement  of  this  2.     Surpassing   magnificence,      **  Le-

section  is —  banon "   is   the   metaphor   of   this.     It

i.   Orders  given  to  Jeremiah  to  preach  is    the    frequent    figure   for    grandeur.

before  the  king.  "  It    is   praised  for   its    snows    (chap.

He  is  to  go  in  person  and  demand  the  xviii.     14),     its   firs    and    cedars    (Isa,

king's  attention  to  a  message  from  the  xxxvii.    24),    its    waving    forests    (Ps.

King  of  kings.  Ixxii.   16),  its  wealth  of  springs  (Song

ii.  Instructions  given  him  what  to  preach.  Sol.  iv.  15),  its  flowers  (Nahum  i.  4),  and

1.  He  must  tell  them  what  was  their  its  sweet  scents  (Song  Sol.  iv.  11 ;  Hos,
duty    (ver.    3).     (a.)   Do  all  the  good  xiv.  6,  7)."

they   can   with   the   power  they  have.  ii.   I'he  reference  of  this  metaphorical

(6.)  Do  no  hurt  with  it.  address,

2.  He  must  assure  them  that  the  faith-  1.  Primarily  to  theroyalhouseof  David.
ful  discharge  of  their  duty  would  advance  2.  By  analogy  to  the  ^^  royal  priest-
and  secure  their  prosperity  (ver.  4).  hood "    of     Christian     believers.       The

3.  Likewise  that  the  iniquity  of  their  Church  is  in  God's  esteem  "  the  perfec-
family  if  persisted  in  would  be  the  ruin  tion  of  beauty."

of  their  family,  though  it  was  a  royal  3.  By  direct  application  to  the  indi-

family  (ver.  5).  vidual  Christian.     "  We  are  unto  God  a

4.  He  must  show  how  fatal  their  sweet  savour  of  Christ."  Every  Christian
wickedness  would  be  to  their  kingdom  should  combine  in  himself  beauteous  fer-
as  well  as  to  themselves — to  Jerusalem  tility  and  incomparable  majesty — noble-
especially,  the  royal  city  (vers.  6-9).  ness  of  character  and  life.

IL    Startling    degradation.      '*Tet
Yer.   6.    Theme:   Beautt  and   MA-      surely   I  will  make  thee  a  wilderness,
JESTY  DEGRADED.  clties  which  are  not  inhabited."

421


OHAP.  XXII.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


1.  Its  inaedihility  necessitates  that
God  affirms  it  ivith  an  oath,  *'  Surely
I  will."  Literally  this  is,  "  If  I  make
thee  not,"  <kc.

1.  The  threatening  creates  an  involun-
tary recoil.  We  reply  to  it — "  Surely
it  can  never  be  so  !  "  The  old  Jews  re-
volted from  the  idea  that  their  royal
*'  house  of  David "  could  ever  become
"  a  desolation "  (ver.  5).  We  recoil
from  the  idea  that  on  a  Christian
church  there  could  ever  be  inscribed
"  Ichabod  !  "  Or  that  a  godly  soul,  a
privileged  disciple  of  Jesus,  could  ever
become  a  "cast-away."  Yet  God  cor-
rects our  "  Surely  it  cannot  be "  with
His  ''Surely  I  willl"

2.  The  threatening  seems  a  total  im-
possibility. The  Jews  believed  in  the
perpetuity  of  the  Davidic  line  and  the
continuance  of  their  national  prosperity.
So  we  think  of  a  church  and  of  our*
selves.  But  for  the  church  see  Lam.
i.  1,  and  Zeph.  ii.  15 ;  and  for  the
individucdy  1  Cor.  x.  12.

Vers.  8,  9.  Comp,  chapa,  xviii  15,
16 ;  xix.  8.

Ver.  10.  Theme:  Death  prefer-
able TO  LIFE.  "  Weep  not  for  the
dead,  neither  bemoan  him ;  but  weep
sore  for  him  that  goeth  away,"  <fec.

Less  reason  for  tears  over  Josiah,  the
righteous  father  who  is  dead,  than  over
Jehoahaz,  the  ungodly  son,  who,  though
alive,  is  yet  worse  than  dead,  being
banished  from  all  the  blessings  of  life  ;
and  who  goes  away  not  as  his  father
to  the  land  of  rest  and  joy,  but  to  cap-
tivity and  dishonour.

I.  Death  may  prove  a  gracious  goal.
It  was  to  Josiah.  Mors  janua  vitce:
"  Death  is  the  gate  of  life."  Of  course
only  to  the  godly.  Blessed  as  life  is
to  the  Christian,  yet  "^o  die  is  gain."
Here  is  a  test  which  divides  the  ranks
of  the  living.  To  which  of  us  would
death  be  an  advantage — knowing  as  we
do  wliat  awaits  souls  "after  death"?

1.  Death  terminates  much  that  makes
life  so  sad.

(1.)  Personal  sorrows  :  physical  weak-
nesses, earthly  deceits,  life's  cares,  strug-
gles with  adversity,  the  risks  and  delu-
422


sions  incident  to  all  effort  and  enterprise
here,  wearying  toils.

(2.)  Social  troubles :  misunderstand-
ings and  misinterpretations,  disappoint-
ments and  grievances,  the  anguish  over
wayward  children,  the  pangs  over  false
friendships  and  unrequited  kindness :
desolating  bereavements.

(3.)  National  distresses:  so  much
wounds  our  patriotism,  and  urges  the
outcry,  *'  0  for  a  lodge  in  some  vast
wilderness,"  &c.  (Jer.  ix.  2).

(4.)  Spiritual  anxieties  :  conflicts  with
"  besetting  sins,"  a  wayward  heart,  the
world's  seductions,  <kc.,  grief  over  dis-
obedience to  God,  forgetfulness  of
Divine  love,  <fec.

'*  I  would  not  live  alway."  "  I  would
hasten  my  escape  from  the  windy  storm
and  tempest."

2.  Death  commences  much  that  makes
life  so  glad.

(1.)  Heaven  won:  "  to  go  no  more
out."     "  Neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,"  &c.

(2.)  Deity  beheld  in  open  visten.
"  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."

(3.)  Earth^s  mysteries  solved.  "Now
we  know  in  part,  but  then  shall  we
know,"  &c.

(4. )  Lost  ones  regained.  "  I  shall  go
to  her,  but  she  shall  not  return  to  me."

(5.)  The  perfect  life  attained.  "I
ahall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  in  Thy
likeness."

II.  Life  may  prove  a  grievons  path.
It  would  to  Shallum.

1.  Its  pleasures  all  desolated.  Je-
hoahaz would  pine  in  captivity.  Think
of

(1.)  The  invasions  of  disaster  or  death.
Remember  what  pestilence  and  accident
have  done  for  once  happy  families.

(2.)  Young  lives  early  blighted  :  af-
flicted, crippled,  <fec.

(3.)  Hearts  ruthlessly  broken  :  by  fal-
sity of  lovers,  by  desertion  of  relatives,
by  disgraces  brought  upon  homes  through
recklessness  or  wickedness  of  fathers  or
sons.

(4.)  Losses  irretrievably  sufered.
Change  in  fortune :  children  hurled
by  reverses  into  penury,  <fec.

2.  Its  possibilities  all  devastated.

(1.)  Character  or  virtue  wrecked.  By
one  criminal  indulgence  or  act,  confidence


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  XXU.


may  be  forfeited,  the  door  of  promotion
be  closed,  and  honour  exchanged  for  a
career  of  shame.

(2.)  Powers  suddenly  smitten  or
withered.  The  right  hand  may  lose  its
cunning,  the  mind  its  balance,  (fee.

3.  Its  prospects  all  destroyed.

(1.)  An  irreligious  career^  life's  years
spent  in  practical  ungodliness,  destroys
the  soul's  prospects.  For  sin  darkens
the  soul,  and  divorces  it  from  all  pre-
sent peace  and  gracious  anticipations,
and  impenitence  shuts  out  the  soul
from  the  redemption  of  Christ  and  re-
conciliation with  God.

(2.)  An  atheistic  mindy  the  abandon-
ment of  revelation,  the  rejection  of  the
Bible,  the  denial  of  God  and  spiritual
things  :  these  cover  the  soul  and  its  out-
look with  a  dense  and  desolating  gloom.

Kather  than  such  a  life,  "  let  me  die
the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my
last  end  be  like  his."

Theme:    The  dead  less  moubned

THAN  THE  LIVING.

I.  Evil  times  enforce  this  truth.
They  are  *'  taken  away  from  the  evil."
When  war  or  desolation  come  upon  the
landf  or  disaster  upon  the  homCf  we
think  this.

n.  Wicked  careers  emphasise  the
truth.  The  living  Cain  more  a  grief
than  the  dead  Abel.  We  mourn  less
for  the  **  dead  "  though  we  loved  them
dearly,  than  for  the  living  who  violate  all
our  hopes,  and  fill  us  with  grief  and  shame.

III.  Divine  revelation  elucidates
the  truth.  For  "  blessed  are  the  dead
which  die  in  the  Lord,  they  rest  from
their  labours,"  <fec.  See  Scriptures  which
exhibit  the  future  of  the  redeemed,  as
contrasted  with  our  lot  on  earth.

See  Addenda :  "  Weep  not  fob  the

DEAD.'*

Note:

"  Dying  saints,"  says^ewrj^,  "  may  be
justly  envied,  while  living  sinners  are
justly  pitied.  And  so  dismal  perhaps
the  prospects  of  the  times  may  be,  that
tears  even  for  a  Josiah,  even  for  a
Jesus,  must  be  restrained,  that  they
may  be  reserved  for  ourselves  and  our
children  (Luke  xxiii.  28)."

See      Further,     Noticeable      Topics:


"Gbiep  foe  those  who   have  oonb
away  to  war."

Ver.  13.  Theme:  Rapacity  de-
nounced.

See  Addenda:  Covktousness.

"  He  who  builds  his  house  with  other
people's  property,  collects  stones  for  his
grave." —  Cramer.

'*  Sepulchri  immemor  struis  domos." —
fforat.

"  Though  impoverished  by  the  tribute
imposed  upon  them  by  the  king  of  Egypt
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  3),  the  inhabitants  were
cruelly  ground  by  Jehoiakim,  who  scrupled
not  at  the  adoption  of  any  measures  by
which  he  might  be  able  to  carry  on  the
building  of  a  large  and  splendid  palace."
— Henderson.

Not  only  did  Jehoiakim  tax  the
people  (2  Kings  xxiii.  25)  for  Pharaoh's
tribute,  but  also  took  their  forced  labour
without  pay  for  building  a  splendid
palace ;  in  violation  of  Lev.  xix.  1 3  j
Deut.  xxiv.  14,  15.

"  God  will  repay  in  justice  those  who
will  not  in  justice  pay  those  whom  they
employ." — Henry.

'*  Jehoiakim  lived  in  s[)lendour  amid
the  misery  of  the  nation,  amused  himself
with  building  palaces  when  the  whole
land  was  ground  down  by  heavy  taxa-
tion, and  miserably  perished  at  the  age
of  thirty-six,  so  little  cared  for  that  his
body  was  cast  aside  without  burial." —
Payne  Smith.

Vers.    15,   16.   Theme:  Jehoiakim's

DEGENERACY  FROM       HIS       FATHER'S

PIETY.

Jehoiakim's  character  given  (ver.  13
seq.)  He  a  young  prince,  son  of  pious
father,  degenerated;  hence  God  sent
awful  message  in  text  by  Jeremiah.
Woe  denounced  upon  him  for  pride,
<ko.,  when  nation  in  distress  (vers.  13,
14).  Then  God  expostulates  ;  wicked-
ness aggravated  and  inexcusable,  because
of  bright  example  of  piety  and  righteous-
ness in  his  father  (vers.  15,  16),

I.  God  remembereth  the  piety  and
usefulness  of  our  ancestors,  and  obser-
veth  how  far  we  resemble  them  (vers*
15,  16;  contrast  ver.  17).

1.     God   can   forget    nothing.     Past,

423


CHAP.  XXII.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


present,  **  all  naked  and  open."  (1.)
Remembers  piety  of  our  fathers.  As
Josiah.  Kind  remembrance  of  His
faithful  servants  after  left  this  world  :
''  not  unrighteous  to  forget,"  (fee.  (2.)
Instructive  to  observe  with  how  much
respect  God  mentions  those  who  have
been  upright  before  Him.  Thus
"the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteous-
ness ; "  treats  good  men  as  favourites.
(3.)  This  a  great  encow'agement  to  he
religious  :  enjoy  favour  while  here,  and
our  memory  precious  in  His  sight  when
forgotten  by  survivors.  (4.)  Motive  to
all,  especially  children  of  pious  parents,
to  reverence  the  memory  of  saints.

2.  God  takes  notice  how  far  we  resemble
them.  Charges  Jehoiakiui  that  trod  not
in  father's  steps.  (1.)  God  makes  just
estimates  of  our  religious  advantages
and  our  improvement  of  them.  (2.)
Observes  declension,  (3.)  Whether
our  hearts  be  right  as  our  father's
were,  e.g.^  Timothy  (2  Tim.  i  5),  or
whether  as  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  4—
6).  (4.)  An  incentive  to  utmost  caution:
not  cast  off  the  entail  of  religion,  lose
truest  hereditary  honours,  involve  Divine
displeasure.

II.  Young  persons  often  forsake  the
religion  of  their  fathers  through  pride
and  love  of  elegance,  pomp,  and  show
(ver.  15).  Pride  led  him  to  covet  splen-
dour and  practise  injustice.

This  sin  easily  besets  and  ensnares  the
young.  They  scorn  their  father's  lowli-
ness. Begin  with  extravagance  greater
than  where  their  wiser  fathers  ended.
(1.)  It  leads  them  to  forsake  their
father's  religious  profession.  Favours
and  preferments  of  the  world  are  not  on
that  side.  Count  their  father's  religion
narrow,  and  abandon  their  principles.
(2.)  Love  of  pomp  and  elegance  lead  to
the  loss  of  the  life  and  power  of  godliness.
Luxury  and  irreligion  (ver.  13),  prac-
tices their  fathers  would  have  abhorred.
Go  from  bad  to  worse  :  as  Jehoiakim,
oppressed  Jeremiah  and  slew  Uzziah
(Jer.  XX vL  21).  Won  an  ill  character
(Ezek.  xix.  6,  7).

To  the  young  :  Set  out  in  life
with  moderate  desires.  Be  content  with
your  rank.  Strengthen  religious  dis-
positions. "  Do  justice  and  mercy."
424


Humility  the  brighest  ornament ;   reli-
gion the  defence  of  the  soul.

III.  It  is  a  great  dishonour  and  re-
proach to  any  to  forsake  the  good  ways
of  their  fathers.  Jehoiakim  was  over
twenty  when  Josiah  died.  God  inti-
mates that  his  conduct  was  both  dis-
honouraVde  and  inexcusable.

\.  Religiously  trained  as  he  doubtless
was,  his  forsaking  religion  was  a  reproach.
The  good  example  of  our  fathers  aggra-
vates our  guilt  and  shame.  2.  Let  young
persons  consider  the  usefulness  and
honour  for  which  their  parents  were
eminent.  Was  it  not  "  well  with
them "  1  They  were  beloved  and  la-
mented (ver.  18).  3.  Consider  for
what  it  is  that  so  many  forsake  the
good  ways  of  their  fathers.  4.  Here
are  terrible  threatenings  from  God
against  this  wickedness  (ver.  19,  also
xxxvi.  30).  Forsake  religion  of  ances-
tors, it  will  be  your  shame.  "  If  thou
forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  thee  off  for
ever.'*

IV.  The  way  of  religion  is  the  way
of  wisdom,  honour,  and  happiness.

1.  Wisdom.  Jehoiakim  thought  him-
self wise  in  "  building,"  &c.  His  father
was  a  good  man  and  good  king,  and
'*  was  not  this  to  know  Me  ?  "  (ver.  16) ;
Ps.  cxi.  10  ;  1  John  i.  3,  4.  Bight  know-
ledge consists  in  being  religious.

2.  Ho)iour.  Josiah  universally  es-
teemed (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25).  Luxury
and  splendour  do  not  secure  honour
(Prov.  iii.  3,  4).

3.  Happiness.  "  Well  with  him "
(ver.  15) ;  repeated  (ver.  16).  Over
against  this  the  young  prinee  is  asked,
"  Shalt  thou  reign  because,  <fec.  ] "  (ver.
15).  Piety  and  righteousness  a  surer
foundation  and  defence.

Way  to  be  happy  is  to  be  and  do
good.  While  we  do  well,  it  will  be
well  with  us  (Ps.  xxxiv.  12  ;  1  Tim.
iv.  8).

(Abstract  of  Sermon,  by  Rev.  Job
Orton,  Kidderminster,  A.D.  1775).

Ver.  18.  Theme:  A  perverse  son.
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  Je-
hoiakim the  son  of  Josiah."

That  godly  men  should  have  ungodly
children   is   a   problem   hard  to  solve.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  xxn.


Josiah  had  both  a  Shallum  and  a
Jehoiakim,  both  wicked  men ;  David,
Absalom,  a  rebellious  son  ;  Eli,  Hophni
and  Pliineas,  "  both  sons  of  Belial  that
knew  not  the  Lord."

L  Parental  discipline  and  proper
training  are  suggested  as  lacking.  Stress
is  laid  on  tlie  proverb,  '*  Train  up  a  child,"
<kc.     But  this  assumes  without  proof

1.  That  in  these  instances  there  was
a  lack  of  parental  discipline  and  proper
training.

2.  That  piety  in  children  is  the  na-
tural result  of  parental  discipline  and
proper  training.

But  what  are  the  facts  of  the  case  1

(a.)  Piety  is  sometimes  found  in  the
children  of  godless  parents,  where  there
has  been  no  religious  training  at  all ;
whereas

(6.)  Impiety  will  sometimes  be  seen
in  the  children  of  godly  parents,  who
have  striven  to  bring  them  up  in  the
fear  of  the  Lord.

Such  facts  teach  that  youthful  piety
is  not  the  natural  result  of  early  train-
ing ;  and  the  mystery  of  the  entire  sub-
ject is  left  unsolved.

II.  Religious  education  does  not
always  form  a  religious  character.  Reli-
gious habits  may  be  formed  without  the
vital  principle  of  religion  possessing  the
heart.

What  is  the  reason  why  a  child  cannot
he  trained  to  he  a  Christian  ?

1.  Because  to  become  a  Christian  is  to
have  a  new  nature,  a  new  life^  which  no
training  can  originate.  Nothing  can  be
trained  except  what  has  life.  None  can
train  a  dead  vine  or  dead  tree.  Train-
ing supposes  life.

2.  No  child  has  hy  nature  religious
life,  but  only  mental  and  moral  life ;
and  a  child  can  only  be  trained  men-
tally to  think,  morally  to  act.

III.  It  is  God's  prerogative  to
quicken  our  children  to  newness  of  life.

Parental  duty  it  is  to  train  children  :
but  equally  their  duty  to  pray  that  God
would  impart  the  life  of  real  religion,
that  life  without  which  a  correct  creed
and  a  cold  morality  leave  the  soul  "  dead
in  sins."  If  parents  see  in  their  children
the  germ  of  the  new  life,  this  is  God*t
handiwork,  and  the  pledge  for  the  chil-


dren of  a  life  of  grace  and  a  glorious
destiny. — D.  Pledge.

Ver.    19.    Theme:  An   ionominioub

BURIAL.

The  end  of  some  men  is  very  different
from  what  might  have  been  expected,
considering  their  parentage,  education,
and  advantages.

Jehoiakim  was  the  son  of  a  king:
naturally  suppose  that  he  also  would  be
buried  with  the  pageantry  of  a  prince.

Also  the  son  of  a  pious  father :  might
have  hoped  his  death  had  been  the  death
of  the  righteous.

Sin  brings  men  to  an  ignominious  end.

1.  What  a  blighting  thing  is  sin  I
Blasts  every  fond  hope.  When  Je-
hoiakim was  a  youth  he  had  fairest
earthly  prospects ;  yet  what  degrada-
tion befel  him  !

2.  A  degraded  burial  is  not  the  worst
event.  Funeral  rites  have  been  denied
to  godly  men  and  faithful  witnesses  for
Christ.  But  the  burial  of  a  man  is  of
little  moment  :  that  is  not  the  end  of
the  man  :  Worse  issues  follow.

3.  Burial  affects  not  our  future  de-
stiny. Be  he  interred  as  a  brute,  or
amid  the  pomp  of  royalty,  the  destiny
of  a  man  depends  upon  life,  not  upon
death  and  burial.

4.  Piety  exalts,  while  wickedness  c?e-
bases  men.  Jehoiakim's  impiety  set
him  below  beggars.  Piety  raises  beg-
gars from  the  dunghill  and  sets  them
among  princes.  Piety  is  God's  high-
road to  heaven  :  impiety  is  Satan's
high-road  to  perdition. — Ibid.

See  Addenda :  The  Sinner's  Burial.

Ver.  21.   Theme  :  Eeoard  for  God

DEADENED  BY  PROSPERITY.

The  condition  of  life  most  coveted
may  be  most  harmful — "  prosperity.^*
Only  by  denials  of  our  wishes  are  we
kept  low  at  God's  feet.  We  can  recall
events  and  experiences  in  which  God
came  to  our  souls  and  arrested  them  in
falling  away  from  Him.  Yet  notwith-
standing all  He  has  done,  we  are  very
far  from  God.

If  so  far  from  Him  despite  all  He  has
done  to  keep  us  obedient,  what  would
have  been  our  case  had  He  never  crossed
our  wishes  by  afflictions  and  discipline  1

426


CTHAP.   XXII.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


We  should  be  grateful  that  He  has  de-
solated our  ^^  prosperity  ^^  and  reclaimed
us  from  disloyalty  to  Him.

Judah's  case  shows  :  A  people  suffered
to  advance  with  a  prosperity  that  becajne
fatal  to  their  spiritual  life.

It  reflects  the  state  of  a  church  which
through  "  prosperity "  declines  from
spiritual  fervour  and  zeal ;  of  the  saint^
who  through  "  prosperity ''  grows  in-
different :  of  the  sinner,  who  through
"  prosperity  "  becomes  reckless  of  God's
calls  to  submission  and  repentance.  "  I
spake  to  thee  in  thy  prosperity,"  <kc.

I.  The  voice  of  God  is  addressing
itself  to  the  souls  of  men.

Effects  prove  the  cause ;  and  in  the
sinner  alarmed,  the  backslider  arrested^
the  church  awakened,  we  see  evidences
that  God  has  spoken  and  made  His
voice  heard.

1.  In  what  ways  the  voice  of  God
utters  its  appeals.  Whatever  speaks  of
God  to  the  soul  is  the  agent  of  God.
"  Earthquakes,  fire,  or  still  small  voice."
Calamity,  pestilence,  death,  losses ;  con-
science, the  Bible,  the  preacher,  the
Spirit.  God  speaks  thus  in  various  voices
to  the  heart  of  man.

2.  To  what  extent  God  is  speaking  to
men.  To  all.  For  there  is  a  common  call
as  well  as  an  effectual  call  (comp.  ver.
29).

3.  For  what  purpose  God  addresses
men.  He  warns  against  sin,  ruinous
selfishness,  absorption  in  the  world,  for-
.i2;etfulness  of  God,  death  and  eternity.
He  appeals  to  men  to  repent,  be  recon-
ciled, "  flee  from  wrath  to  come,"  <fec.

II.  Man's  attention  to  God's  voice
is  influenced  by  his  circumstances.

"  I  spake  in  thy  prosperity,  and  thou
saidst,  /  will  not  hear."  We  take  no
heed  in  the  day  of  youth  and  health
and  ease.  But  trouble  is  a  good  teacher.
"In  their  affliction  they  will  seek  Me
early."

1.  There  is  going  on  in  every  heart  a
struggle  for  ascendancy.  Selfishness  is
at  war  with  conscience,  sin  with  Christ.
In  every  heart  there  will  be  a  supreme  :
and  if  our  pleasures  or  possessions  ab-
sorb our  affections,  then  the  spiritual
must  succumb.

2.  What  Iiolds  the  heart  supremely
426


subjugates  all  else.  If  any  one  ungodly
thing  sways  us,  then  God's  claims  be-
come ignored.  And  the  law  with  us,  as
with  the  universe,  is  advance.  No
affection  is  stationary.  It  strengthens
or  weakens.  Thus,  when  any  object
holds  our  affections  before  God,  or  in
opposition  to  God,  the  heart  becomes
turned  against  God,  and  we  repudiate
His  voice.

III.  Prosperity  in  life  deadens  our
soul's  susceptibilities  to  Divine  appeals.

1.  **  Pros /verity "  is  not  in  itself  an
evil.  The  Bible  honours  it.  There  may
be  commercial  pros[)erity,  social  pros-
perity, spiritual  prosperity,  church  pros-
perity :  and  all  may  be  good.  May
God  give  you  all  these  "  prosperities."

2.  But  while  in  itself  good,  and
coveted  as  a  good,  *^  prosperity  ^^  may
prove  the  souVs  snare.  It  may  be  bad
in  its  effect  on  us.  What  is  full  can
receive  no  addition ;  and  if  prosperity
fill  our  hearts,  Christ  has  no  place  there.
Thus  :  commercial  prosperity  has  made
many  spiritually  "  wretched  and  poor
and  miserable."  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat
and  kicked."  Few  can  carry  a  full  cup
with  a  steady  hand,  or  bear  the  world
on  their  shoulders  without  bowing  to
the  earth.

So  even  spiritual  prosperity  may  be-
get elation,  self-security.  The  success-
ful Christian  worker  may  be  ready  to
trumpet  his  successes,  "  Come,  see  my
zeal  for  the  Lord  ! "  Paul  found  danger
**lest  he  should  be  exalted  above  mea-
sure by  the  abundance  of  revelations."

There  may  be  less  of  Christ  in  a
numerically  prosperous  church,  than
where  there  is  "  little  strength : "  less
of  Christ  in  the  prosperous  soul  than  in
the  heart  desolate  through  darkness  and
non-success.  And  hence  "  I  dwell  with
the  humble  and  contrite."

IV.  Hindrances  to  our  regarding
God's  voice  He  will  remove.

Comp.  vers.  5,  also  8,  9.

1.  What  deadens  our  attention  God
dooms.  Be  it  pride,  health,  or  energy,
eagerness  after  success,  refuges  of  lies,
favours  and  privileges.  He  will  remove
them  far  from  us,  or  us  from  them.

2.  God's  voice  mtist  be  heard.  There
was  a  rich  man,  who  was  a  **  fool  "  ;  all


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CBAT.  xnL


God's  calls  were  disregarded.  But  God
made  His  voice  heard  at  last — in  terror,
in  scorn.

For  if  we  refuse  to  hear  through  life,
death  vnll  come  when  that  awful  Voice
will  drown  all  others,  and  in  judgment
it  will  silence  all  appeals  in  its  sentence
of  doom.

See  Addenda :  Prosperity.

Theme :  Influence  of  prosperity.

"  I  spake  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity,
and  tljou  saidst,  I  will  not  hear."

In  heaven,  the  more  abundantly  God^s
bounties  are  dispensed,  the  more  is  He
loved  and  adored;  but  on  earth,  the  richer
His  gifts,  the  more  will  He  be  neglected
and  disobe3^ed.  A  striking  proof  of
our  depravity,  that  constant  prosperity
hardens,  and  is  unfavourable  to  piety.

I.  That  abundant  earthly  blessings
do  tend  to  make  the  heart  rebellious
towards  God.

1.  Scripture  teachings  are  emphatic
on  this  matter.  The  Israelites  were
warned  (Deut.  viil  12-14).  A  frequent
metaphor  likens  men  to  beasts  luxuri-
antly fed  (Hos.  xiii.  6).  Agur's  prayer
was  prompted  by  distrust  of  himself
(Proverbs  xxx.  8,  9).

2.  Experience  confirms  Scripture,
David,  the  man  after  God's  heart,  when
exalted  became  a  polluted  murderer.
Solomon,  the  wisest  man,  was  trans-
formed into  a  besotted  sensualist.  Moses^
the  meekest  man,  spoke  contemptuously,
**  Hear  now,  ye  rebels,  must  we  fetch
water,"  <fec.  In  these  instances  we  see
that  the  highest  human  virtues  and
holiest  saints  of  God  were  unable  to
withstand  the  influence  of  prosperity.
They  could  endure  affliction  and  profit
thereby — as  certain  liquors  ripen  in  the
shade,  which  under  the  noonday  beams
turn  to  acidity  and  corruption.

Similar  instances  occur  now.  Many
a  religious  career,  which  began  with
fervour  and  zeal,  has  been  checked  by
worldly  prosperity  and  ended  amid  the
stupidity  and  sensuality  of  a  worldling.

3.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there  ever
was  a  single  instance  of  piety  which
could  pass  uninjured  through  the  ordeal
of  unmingled  prosperity.  Tone  of  reli-
gion is  lowered  amid  riches  and  honours.


Where  simplicity  and  humility  of  spirit
are  preserved  amid  prosperity,  it  is
owing  to  some  hidden  trouble,  which
like  the  cord  on  the  feet  of  the  aspiring
bird  keeps  the  proud  spirit  lowly  and
abased.

XL  If  then,  upon  the  highest  reli-
gious characters  worldly  prosperity  has
a  hardening  influence,  what  must  be  its
effect  on  those  who  have  no  religious
principle  to  counteract  it,  and  who  are
avowedly  lovers  of  the  world  and  its
pleasures  1

1.  They  will  not  heed  the  messages  of
God, .  In  the  chamber  of  sickness  and
among  the  afflicted  there  may  be  suc-
cess; but  none  among  the  children  of
prosperity  and  nurslings  of  vanity.

2.  Religion,  with  its  sober  realities,  is
despised.  Their  heart  is  set  upon  the
world,  wealth  invites  to  its  enjoyment.

3.  Those  favoured  of  fortune  are  the
most  pitiable  objects  in  the  world.  We
may  not  limit  God's  grace,  which  can
bring  the  soul  from  amid  unmingled
prosperity  to  bow  in  lowly  subjection
before  the  sceptre  of  Jesus.  Affliction
may  bring  down  the  soul,  or  it  may
become  surfeited  with  life's  good  things,
and  then  God's  message  will  be  heard  ;
but  those  who  are  "  full  "  and  "  laugh
now  "  too  often  inherit  only  the  Saviour's
"  woes."

III.  They  who  have  worldly  pros-
perity should  be  led  to  self-inquiry  as
to  its  effect  upon  themselves.

1.  In  no  country  like  our  own  are
there  so  many  who  have  risen  from  small
beginnings  to  great  estates  and  honours.

.Has  God  "granted  your  requests  but
sent  leanness  into  your  souls  "  'i  When
riches  increased,  have  you  set  your  heart
upon  them  1  Are  you  the  same  simple-
hearted  and  sincere  follower  of  Jesus  as
when  you  began  to  lay  the  foundation
of  your  worldly  exaltation  1  "  Remem-
ber from  whence  thou  hast  fallen."

2.  What  a  caution  is  here  to  those  who
are  seeking  prosperity  /  Can  you  dis-
cover a  means  of  preserving  a  lowly
spiritual  mind  amid  prosperity  1  Unless
so,  there  is  no  alternative  but  that  you
must  suff'er  adversity  to  keep  you
humble,  or  become  worldly  and  spiri-
tually hardened.

427


CHAP.  XXII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


3.  They  who  have  become  more  tw-
disposed  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  should
awake  to  their  peril.  Had  you  been
placed  amid  afflictions  and  deprivations,
it  might  have  been  better  for  your  soi|.l.
"  The  goodness  of  God  should  lead  th^e
to  repentance  ;  "  but  it  has  had  the  op-
posite effect,  and  led  to  greater  sin.
What  depravity  is  here  !  Is  not  that  a
brutish  nature  which  is  more  rebellious
to  its  owner  the  richer  the  pasture  he
provides  %  Is  this  the  spirit  of  a  reason-
able intelligent  creature  ?  Does  not  such
a  heart  need  a  change  ?

4.  Prospe7'ous  ones  map  well  regard
their  case  with  apprehension.  The  evil
days  will  come  when  they  will  say,  *'  I
have  no  pleasure  in  them."  Spare  your-
selves the  blow  by  renouncing  the  world
for  Christ.  Is  the  sacrifice  too  great  for
Him  who  gave  His  life  for  you  'J — W.
H.  Lewis,  D.D.,  *'  Sermons  for  the  Chris-
tian Year,**

Theme  :  Prosperity  baneful.

Scripture  uniformly  teaches  that  dis-
tance from  God  is  the  greatest  misery —
nearness  to  Him  the  greatest  good.
J/ell  is  the  extreme  point  of  distance
from  Him  ;  Heaven  is  the  perfection  of
nearness  and  resemblance  to  Him.  In
proportion  as  we  are  under  the  power  of
religion,  we  are  said  to  walk  with  God,
conforming  ourselves  to  His  will,  plac-
ing ourselves  beneath  His  eye,  and  re-
joicing in  the  proofs  of  His  acceptance
and  favour.  In  proportion  as  we  are
destitute  of  religion,  we  are  said  to  live
without  God  in  the  world — we  neither
are  solicitous  for  His  glory,  nor  are
mindful  of  His  friendship,  nor  are  dis-
posed to  listen  to  His  voice.  In  afflic-
tion we  do  not  bow  in  holy  resignation
to  His  will,  in  prospeyitt/  we  do  not  own
the  hand  from  whence  our  mercies  flow.
And  this  is  the  description  of  Israel  :
"  /  spake  to  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  hut
thou  wouldst  not  hear."

The  text  is  a  charge  brought  against
the  Jewish  nation ;  and  it  is  accom-
panied with  a  threat  of  the  removal  of
those  mercies  they  had  abused  by  a  long
and  mournful  captivity.  The  same
charge  is  applicable  to  most  men  in  a
greater  or  less  degree,
428


L  The  exactness  with  which  God
observes  all  that  relates  to  human
character  and  conduct.

The  text  is  the  language  of  regret,
A  father  weeping  over  a  child :  a  bene-
factor— a  Saviour  deploring  *'/  spake
in  prosperity,**

1.  All  our  relative  circumstances  are  im-
mediately before  His  eye;  and  He  notices
with  tender  and  faithful  scrutiny  the
various  effects  which  His  merciful  dis-
pensations have  upon  the  mind.  In
riches  and  poverty,  in  prosperity  and
adversity,  in  health  and  sickness,  in  joy
and  sorrow,  in  youth  and  age  :  and  He
traces  with  most  minute  inspection  the
different  effects  produced  with  a  view  to
the  development  and  progression  of
moral  character.  Not  with  angry  eye
merely,  but  with  kind  solicitude  and
regard  ;  as  a  father  a  child.

How  different  a  thing  is  life  in
human  and  Divine  estimation.  Man
thinks  what  shall  I  eat.  But  God  looks
to  growth  of  piety  and  principle.

2.  The  circumstances  of  human  life,
however  produced,  are  undoubtedly  W7ic?cr
the  guidance  of  Providence^  and  therefore
subservient  to  a  wise  and  perfect  design.
Each  man's  history  is  arranged  and  adapted
with  utmost  precision  to  the  growth  of
permanent  character.  When  theoutlineis
fully  sketched,  when  the  discipline  has
had  its  perfect  operation,  when  the  edu-
cation is  completed  not  to  our  concep-
tions but  to  the  eye  of  Deity,  we  no
longer  continue  here.  The  fruit  being
set,  the  winds  scatter  the  blossoms  ;  the
fruit  being  ri'pe,  the  sun  loses  its  power;
the  fruit  falling  or  being  gathered,  winter
is  at  hand.

God  marks  everything.  "  This  thy
manner  from  thy  youth.  Thou //ast  not
obeyed."     A  faithful  record  is  kept.

II.  The  tendency  of  unsanctified
prosperity  to  render  us  insensible  to
the  claims  of  religion  and  separate  us
still  farther  from  God.

Prosperity  and  adversity  relative
terms.

1.  Uninterrupted  comfort  tends  to
lessen  our  confidence  in  God :  to  form
in  the  mind  a  feeling  of  self-confidence :
a  security  nothing  can  shake  :  so  much
so  that  religion  can  make  no  entrance


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  xxn.


into  the  mind.  It  overcomes  tliat  feel-
ing of  humility  and  dependence  which
is  the  source  of  every  virtue,  and  conse-
quently weakens  the  hold  of  principle,
and  aims  directly  at  the  foundation  of
all  religion.

2.  Another  fatal  effect  of  it  is  to  har-
den the  heart.  God  would  have  every
temporal  blessing  raise  the  inquiry,
*'  Lord^  what  is  man  ?"  But  wicked  and
irreligious  men  are  only  concerned  for
enjoyment,  and  for  scope  for  their  am-
bition. They  feed  and  grovel  like  swine
beneath  the  oak,  without  looking  up  to
the  boughs  that  bore  the  fruit  or  the
hand  that  shakes  it  down.  Hence  pros-
perity is  but  a  bad  nurse  to  virtue,  a
nurse  which  is  like  to  starve  it  in  its  in-
fancy and  to  spoil  it  in  its  growth.  The
corrupt  affection,  which  seemed  dead  and
chill  under  the  winter  of  affliction,  is
like  the  serpent  warmed  into  life  and
venom  by  the  sun  of  prosperity.

3.  Then  comes  pride.  Hezekiah  shows
his  treasures.  Nebuchadnezzar  exclaims,
/*  not  this  Babylon  ?  Pride  and  pomp.
Then  God  is  forgotten :  prayer  neglected.
If  Jeshurun  wax  fat,  ten  to  one  he  kicks
against  Him  who  made  him  so.

4.  Leaves  a  dulness  and  lethargy  of
mind.  All  Divine  threatenings,  warn-
ings, promises  unheeded,

III.  Various  ways  in  which  God  re-
bukes this  tendency  and  humbles  men.

God  speaks  to  men  in  various  ways,
and  He  distinctly  marks  the  various
impressions  produced  upon  the  mind  by
His  communications.  He  speaks  to  us
by  His  Word  and  ordinances,  by  the  in-
structions we  receive  in  religious  educa-
tion, by  the  various  dispensations  of  His
providence,  by  affliction,  by  mercies,  all
are  the  voice  of  God  to  man.  *'  I  spake,"

The  externals  of  life  undeiirable.
*'  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches."

Affliction — its  design.

The  care  of  the  soul  is  "  the  one
thing  needful."

Immediately  apply  to  Christ.

— Samuel  Thodey,  A.D.  1828.

Sermon  to  the  Young.
**  This  has  been  thy  manner  from  thy
youth"  (ver.  21).

The  habits  formed  in  youth  generally


continue  in  future  life.  The  early  cus-
toms of  Judah  led  on  to  the  settled
condition  of  indifference  to  God's  calls
and  counsels.

I.  Mankind  generally  continue  to
live  according  to  the  habits  formed  in
youth.

There  are  some  exceptions.  Youths
who  were  profligate  have  in  after  life
become  godly,  <fec.  By  the  period  of
youth  I  mean  from,  say  twelve  to
twenty-five :  this  is  the  season  when
habits  are  formed.  And  the  words  of
the  text  will  apply  to  those

1.  Whose  life  is  given  to  the  luxury
of  pleasure.

2.  Who  pass  the  season  of  youth  in
indulging  in  gross  vices,  (a.)  To  the
Sabbath-breaker ;  (6.)  to  the  profane ;
(c)  to  the  drunkard.

3.  Equally  relevant  to  vices  of  the
mind,  (a.)  Selfishness;  (6.)  pride;  (c.)
malignity.

4.  So  also  as  regards  their  attitude
towards  religion,  (a.)  Those  who  pass
their  youth  in  a  merely  formal  regard
to  the  external  duties  of  religion  usually
become  formalists.  (6.)  Those  who
practise  guile  and  deceit  become  hypo-
critical, (c.)  Those  who  in  youth  slight
the  Gospel^  in  old  age  are  seen  to  be  un-
feeling and  hardened,  (d.)  Those  who
are  sceptical  frequently  become  confirmed
infidels.

Youth  is  generally  the  season  when
a  decision  is  made  either  in  favour  of
religion  or  against.

II.  Custom  in  any  course  generally
issues  in  confirmed  habits.  "This
has  been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth."

1.  The  commencement  of  a  course  in
life  is  often  attended  with  a  struggle
and  with  difficulties.  When  a  young
person  begins  a  sinful  course,  there  is
the  struggle  against  instruction,  remon-
strances of  conscience,  <fec.  So  also  in
a  religious  career.

2.  But  continuance  in  a  course  ren-
ders habits  congenial  and  easy.  So
difficult  then  is  it  for  those  who  have
accustomed  themselves  to  pursue  evil
ways  to  desist,  that  little  hope  is  enter-
tained for  a  change.  "  Shall  the  Ethio-
pian change  his  skin  '?  "  (fee.  "  This  has
been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth."

429


CHAP  XXII.


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


III.  Solemn  uses  to  which  these
truths  may  be  applied.

You  are  old  eiiou2;h  now  to  decide
your  future.  You  are  now  in  the  most
important  season  of  your  life.     Accept

1.  A  few  cautions,

(1.)  Guard  against  slighting  parental
instruction.  (2.)  Against  slighting  the
gospel.  (3.)  Against  slighting  the  Sab-
bath. (4.)  Avoid  also  ungodly  com-
panions.

2.  A  few  exhortations — founded  upon
the  fact  that  your  future  life  may  be
expected  to  correspond  with  the  habits
formed  in  youth.

(1.)  Accustom  yourselves  to  consider
your  accountability  to  God.  *'  Remember
now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy
youth  ; "  and  think  that  for  the  sins
and  habits  of  your  youth  He  will  re-
quire an  account  in  the  day  of  judg-
ment. (2.)  Study  the  Sacred  Book  by
which  your  future  should  be  directed.

(3. )  Decide  early  in  favour  of  religion.
This  will  be  the  best  security  from  the
evils  to  which  you  will  surely  be  exposed.
It  will  equip  you  to  be  useful  in  life.
It  will  ensure  your  future  happiness.
It  will  prepare  you  for  death.  There
is  another  world  beyond  the  present. —
Old  MS.

Vers.  20-23.     Theme:     Hastening

DESOLATIONS,

Judah  and  Jerusalem,  spoken  to  as  an
individual,  appear  in  a  threefold  char-
acter.

i.  Very  haughty  in  the  day  of  peace
and  safety  (ver.  21).  It  is  common  for
those  who  live  at  ease  to  live  in  con-
tempt of  the  Word  of  God.  This  is  so
much  the  worse  because  it  is  habitual —
**  thy  manner  from  thy  youth."

ii.  Very  timorous  at  the  alarms  of
trouble  (ver.  20).  When  **  thy  lovers"
idols  and  foreign  alliances,  fail  thee,
thou  wilt  ascend  the  mountains  and  cry
for  help  (ver.  20)  ]  but  all  in  vain  (ver.
22).

iii.  Very  tame  under  the  heavy  and
lasting  pressures  of  trouble  (ver.  22).
"  Ashamed  and  confounded,"  &c.  Many
will  never  be  ashamed  of  their  sins  till
they  are  brought  by  them  to  their  last
extremity.  She  was  proud  and  se.lf-
430


secure  in  her  prosperity  (ver.  23),
"  made  her  nest  in  cedars  :  "  but  in  her
humiliation  she  will  promise  God  to  be
humble  and  amend  her  ways  :  "how
gracious  wilt  thou  be,"  <kc. — Henry,

Ver.  24.    Theme:  The  punishment

OF  THE  IMPENITENT.

Such  punishment  is  both — (a)  inevit-
able :  (6)  justifiable.

I.  Awful  instances  in  which  God
has  verified  this  declaration.

I.  The  apostate  angels.  2.  Our  first
parents.  3.  Destruction  of  mankind  by
the  Flood.  4.  The  children  of  Israel.
5.  Moses,  David,  the  disobedient  pro-
phet. 6.  The  death  of  Christ  as  man's
substitute.

II.  Reasons  which  support  this  de-
claration.

1.  Not  a  disposition  to  give  pain :
nor  a  desire  for  revenge.  2.  It  is  the
nature  and  tendency  of  sin  to  produce
m  isery,  — Pay  son.

Theme :  Woe  to  Coniah.

Here,  in  this  malediction,  the  pro-
phet describes  Jehoiachin  under  three
similes : —

L  A  signet  plncked  from  God's
hand.  A  signet  was  like  the  ''great
seal"  of  England,  the  badge  of  office.
It  meant  the  loss  of  kingship  and  royal
authority.

1.  Plucked  off  by  God  Himself  {^ev.  24).
So  that  God  by  special  action  renounces
this  godless  king.

2.  Handed  over  to  the  Chaldean  tyrant
(ver.  25).  Thus  God  puts  him,  entirely
separated  from  Himself,  into  the  power
of  Nebuchadnezzar;  "without  God  in
the  world  " — given  over  to  the  foe  !

Zerubbabely  God*s  servant,  the  nephew
of  Jeconiah,  was  made  by  God  "  as  a  sig-
net "  (comp.  Hag.  ii.  23 ;  see  also  Gen.
xli.  42  ;  1  Kings  xxi.  8 ;  Esther  iii.  10,
viii.  2;  Dan.  vi.  17;  2  Tim.  ii.  19;
Rev.  vii.  3,  ix.  4).

Jeconiah  was  a  signet,  but  plucked
and  cast  away.  After  only  three  months'
reign,  he  was  carried  captive  to  Ba-
bylon.

Thus  God  can  "  put  down  the  mighty
from  their  seats,  and  exalt  them  of  low
degree"  (Luke  i.  51-63).


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CTlkJf.  TSXL


n.  A  cherished  idol  despised  (ver.
28).  Ooniah  was  once  idolUed  hy  the
Jews;  and  great  things  liad  been  ex-
pected of  him.  Indeed  it  was  hoped
he  woald  frustrate  the  Chaldean  power,
avert  or  bring  back  Judah  from  the  Chal-
dean captivity,  and  thus  falsify  Jere-
miah's sad  prediction.

He  had  also  been  exalted  hy  Jehovah
as  king  of  God's  favoured  and  covenant
people.

Henry  states  these  facts  thus  :

1.  Time  was  when  he  was  dignified^
almost  deified.  But  now  that  he  is
deposed,  he  is  despised.  "What  is
unjustly  honoured  will  be  justly  con-
temned; and  rivals  with  God  will  be
the  scorn  of  men.**

2.  Time  was  when  he  was  delighted  in.
But  now  he  is  "  a  vessel  in  which  is  no
pleasure,"  because  either  out  of  fashion
or  unserviceable.  Those  whom  God  has
no  pleasure  in  will  some  time  or  other  be
so  mortified  that  men  will  have  no  pleasure
in  them  (see  Psa.  xxi.  13;  Hos.  viii.  8).

III.  A  king  deprived  of  posterity
(ver.  30).  Jeconiah  was  not  literally
childless  (comp.  ver.  28  :  "  his  seed,"  1
Chron.  iii.  17,  18 ;  Matt.  i.  12)  ;  but  was
to  be  "  written  "  lineally  childless.  Mes-
siah was  only  lineally  descended  from
Jeconiah  through  Joseph,  who  though
His  legal  was  not  His  real  father.  The
succession  to  the  throne  failed  in  his
line  :  nevertheless,  the  promise  to  David
(Psa.  Ixxxix.  30-37)  was  revived  in
Zerubbabel,  and  consummated  in  Christ.

The  king  who  succeeded  Jeconiah
was  his  uncle  Zedekiah,  and  with  him
the  Hebrew  monarchy  as  a  visible  insti-
tution was  destroyed.

See  Addenda  :  Written  Childless,

EusehiuSy  the  historian  {Eccles.  Hist
iii.  20),  says,  **  Jeconiah  was  the  last
king  of  David's  line.  His  uncle  indeed
actually  reigned  after  him,  but  perished
with  hin  sons  long  before  Jeremiah's
death  (chap.  Iii.  10).  In  the  legal
genealogies  Salathiel  (Heb.  Shealtiel),
who  was  descended  from  David  through
his  son  Nathan,  is  counted  as  his  son,
but  neither  he  nor  Zerubbabel  pros-
pered so  as  to  sit  on  David's  throne.
And   gradually    their    descendants   be-


came so  insignificant  as  to  be  but  '  a
cut-down  tree '  (Isa.  xl  1),  and  *  a
dry  ground  '  (Isa.  liii.  2).  When /rom
this  uncrowned  lineage  Christ  had  come,
and  the  growing  strength  of  Christianity
had  aroused  the  jealous  fears  of  Domi-
tian,  he  caused  a  search  to  he  made  for
tlie  descendants  of  David;  but  when
they  were  brought  before  him,  they
proved  to  be  such  simple  country  people
that  he  despised  them  and  let  them  go."

1.  From  so  proud  an  ancestor  no
descendant  of  note  ever  rose  upon  the
notice  of  history.

2.  Yet  from  a  family  so  utterly  fallen,
came  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of
lords.

Ver.  29.  Theme:  Missionary  ser-
mon.    God's  call  to  the  world.

Judah  would  not  heed  or  helieve  God's
message  (ver.  19)  ;  so  God  appeals  to
the  world  to  record  His  denunciations
and  watch  their  fulfilment.  The  treble
repetition  of  "earth"  emphasises  the
appeal  :  it  is  therefore  urgent  that  earth
should  hear  God's  Word.  The  repetition
is  also  an  intensitive  form,  and  expresses
God's  earnestness  in  making  this  call  to
"  earth."

L  The  whole  wide  earth  engages
God's  solicitude.

1.  As  His  creative  product.  He
formed  the  world ;  and  peopled  it.

2.  As  His  undivided  possession.  Satan
may  deem  himself  "  god  of  this  world,"
but  it  is  only  a  temporary  and  delusive
occupancy.  *'  The  earth  is  the  Lord^s
and  the  fulness  thereof  ;  the  world,  and
they  that  dwell  therein"  "  All  souls  are
Mine."

3.  As  the  sphere  of  His  henignant  rule.
He  works  not  locally,  in  limited  terri-
tories, bounded  by  narrow  geographical
lines :  but  over  the  wide  world  His
Providence  works.  As  wide  as  the
light  of  His  sun  floods,  &c.,  so  is  His
rule.  "  He  doeth  according  to  His  will
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  world."
"  The  nations  are  but  as  a  drop  in  the
bucket,"  <fcc.  None  overlooked.  There
is  not  an  isolated  spot  on  earth  where
God  has  not  worked,  adorning  it  with
life  and  beauty.

4.  The  whole  round  world  is  maiC$

431


CHAP,  XXII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


%pliere  of  being.  And  *'  His  delights  are
with  the  sons  of  men.''  Tiiis  is  regard-
less  of  national  divisions.  "  God  hath
made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  for  to
dwell  upon  the  earth."

6.  God  is  intent  on  making  the  entire
globe  the  theatre  of  His  most  glorious
reign.  "  The  uttermost  parts  of  the
earth  "  are  to  share  in  His  glory.  "  All
men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him,  and  all
nations  call  Him  blessed."

II.  To  the  whole  wide  earth  God
addresses  His  messages.

1.  Under  Old  Testament  dispensations
there  were  world-wide  communications
which  overleaped  the  restrictions  of
Judaism.  The  Jews  would  have  kept
Jehovah  to  themselves,  and  all  His  re-
velations. But  many  grand  truths  were
gathered  into  the  Mosaic  code,  the
Jewish  Scriptures,  which  were  for  all
people.  The  Sabbath  was  not  for  the
Jews  alone,  but  a  law  for  all  nations
and  all  time.  God^s  character  declared
on  Sinai  was  a  revelation  for  every  one.
His  words  of  mercy  to  sinners,  "Come,
let  us  reason  together,"  *'  Let  the
wicked  forsake  his  way,"  <fec.,  were
without  any  Jewish  limitation.  **  In
every  nation  he  that  feareth  God  and
worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  of
Him  "  (Acts  X.  34,  35).

2.  Prior  to  the  Gospel^  God  gathered
the  whole  world  into  His  love.  The
Gospel  but  expressed  that  love.     "He


so  loved  that  He  gave  His  Son."  Glad
fact  that  the  love  of  God  is  older  than
the  Incarnation.  It  is  everlasting  love
— universal  love.

3.  Jesus  Christ  proclaimed  the  uni-
versal religion.  God's  message  to  sin-
ners. "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature."

4.  In  God^s  revelations  there  is  adapta-
tion to  and,  provision  for  the  ivhole  earth.
Warnings:  counsels:  invitations  :  plead'
ings:  promises.

**  Enough  for  each,  enough  for  all."

III.  Over  the  whole  wide  earth  His
Word  is  to  he  proclaimed.

1.  By  human  lips.  Jeremiah  is  the
speaker.  Men  who  know  the  "  Word
of  the  Lord  "  must  tell  it.

2.  With  impassioned  earnestness.
Pleading  and  appealing.  "  0  earth,  earth,
eartli  ! "     Enthusiasm  should  impel  us.

3.  With  restless  urgency.  "  Not  hold-
ing our  peace  day  or  night,  we  that  make
mention  of  the  Lord."

4.  With  dauntless  persistency.  Men
will  not  heed  the  first  cry — then  cry
again  ;  "  0  earth,  earth,  eaeth  1  '*

5.  With  universal  fulness.  Tell  a
Gospel  which  is  "  unto  all  people,"  to
"  all  people  ;  "  till  "  every  soul  shall
know  the  joyful  sound;"  till  "Christ
is  Lord  indeed."

See  also  Noticeable  Topics :  "  God's

VOICE  TO  MAN."


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XXII,

Topic:  Wae  Theme  :  Grief  for  those  who  have  gone  away  to  Wab.

(Ver.  10.)

For  those  who,  as  soldiers  or  seamen,  have  left  their  native  country,  there  is
more  occasion  to  mourn  than  for  "  the  quiet  dead."

Notice  some  of  the  Temptations,  Trials,  and  Dangers  to  which  they
are  exposed.

I.  Temptations  to  vice,  which  meet  those  who  leave  virtuous  homes  and
enter  the  camp  or  the  ship  of  war.  They  may  have  been  the  children  of  many
prayers,  <fec.  But  away  from  home  restraints — the  scoffer's  jest,  licentious  induce-
ments, the  gambling  table,  allure  them  from  Bible-reading,  Sabbath  reverence,
&c.,  and  they  go  down  to  graves  of  infamy  and  woe.     Of  how  many  such  is  it  true,

that

"  Doubly  dying,  they  go  down

To  the  vile  dust  from  whence  they  sprang,
Unwept,  unhonoured,  and  unsung."

n.  Exposure  to  sickness  and  death,  when  far  removed  from  home  and  those
432


HOM 1 LETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y  :  JEREMIA  H.  ohap.  XML

who  love  theni.  It  may  be  "easy  to  die  in  battle"  where  the  spirit  is  stirred
to  a  courageous  madness,  and

•*  Fame  is  there  to  tell  who  bleeds,
And  Honour's  eye's  on  daring  deeds.**

But  to  waste  away  by  sickness  through  exposure  to  drenching  rains  and  deadly
climate,  to  be  crushed  or  mangled  by  a  blow,  and  left  to  rude  attentions  until
death  ends  all !

III.  Ponder  the  horrors  of  captivity  to  which  battles  expose  soldiers  and
sailors.  The  crowded  prison-cell,  scanty  food  and  drink,  fiend-like  foes,  and  suf-
ferings and  cruelties  inflicted  on  the  conquered :  from  such  horrors  we  turn
away  in  bitter  indignation  and  anguish  ;  feeling  and  saying —

**  0  judgment !  thou  hast  fled  to  brutish  beasts.
And  men  hare  lost  their  reason  t  *'

IV.  The  horrors  of  the  battle-field.  Truly,  "  every  battle  of  the  warrior  is
with  confused  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood."  The  maimed  and  mangled
left  to  bleed  and  die  !  Or  turn  to  naval  battles,  where  are  bursting  shells,  shat-
tered masts,  gory  decks,  shrieks  of  anguish,  and  hea})s  of  slain  !

V.  Brutalising  effect  of  war  on  soldiers.  What  secret  theft,  open  and
violent  robbery,  the  outrages  on  virtue  and  humanity,  now  abandoned  to  the
heat  of  passion,  to  unbridled  lust,  <kc.

Such  is  war  :  cruel  and  relentless,  with  bands  of  violence  and  eyes  of
flaming  rage,  with  gory  locks  and  crimson  banners,  <fec.  The  rejoicing  of  nations
for  victories  won  is  mingled  with  the  wail  of  the  widow,  the  cry  of  the  orphan,
the  anguish  of  parents  bereaved.

All  this  should  constrain  us  to

1.  Do  all  we  can  for  the  spiritual  good  of  our  army  and  navy.  Succour
them  with  all  bodily  comforts  amid  the  miseries  of  battle,  but  write  them  per-
sonal letters  when  we  can,  and  also  send  them  messengers  and  ministers  of
sacred  truth.

2.  Pray  for  them  that  God  may  restrain  them  from  temptations  and  lead  them
as  good  soldiers  of  the  Cross  to  triumph  over  their  spir^itual  foes.  Thus,  should
they  die,  we  may  hope  they  would  gain  the  victor's  crown  of  life  on  high.

The  more  we  do  for  the  spiritual  good  of  our  national  defenders  the  sooner
may  we  hope  for  enduring  national  peace,  and  for  the  coming  years  of  universal
peace :  when

"  Ko  more  shall  nation  against  nation  rise,
Nor  ardent  warriors  meet  with  hateful  eyes,
Nor  fields  with  gleaming  steel  be  covered  o*er,
The  braren  trumpets  kindle  rage  no  more;
But  useless  lances  into  scythes  shall  bend,
And  the  broad  falchion  in  the  ploughshare  end."

— Rev.  Cha/rles  Rockwell^  New  York,  1864,

Topic:  God's  Voice  to  Man.     "  0  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord**  (ver.  29).

The  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  every  man  is  interested  in  its  contents.  It
Is  God's  own  message  to  His  own  world — a  message  transparent  with  light  and
warm  with  love.  It  brings,  as  we  believe,  its  own  evidence  of  its  truth,  the
credentials  of  its  Divine  original  in  every  page — for  the  best  argument  in  favour
of  the  Bible  is  the  Book  itself — in  the  grandeur  of  its  doctrines,  in  the  purity  of
its  precepts,  in  the  richness  of  its  promises  ;  in  the  faithfulness  of  its  warnings,
and  above  all  in  its  complete  adaptation  to  the  state  and  condition  of  guilty  man  ;
revealing  as  it  does  an  atoning  sacrifice  and  a  sanctifying  Spirit,  a  sacrifice  worthy
of  God  to  accept,  and  equal  to  the  salvation  of  a  fallen  world.  The  evidences  of
this  religion,  sustained  as  they  have  been  by  miracle  and  by  prophecy,  have  been
2e  433


•HAP.  xxn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


sufficient  to  satisfy  the  keenest  inquiry  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  men,  and  to  guide
countless  myriads  in  their  path  to  heaven,  who,  living,  have  owned  its  power,  and
dying,  have  rejoiced  in  its  grace.  We  may  go  round  to  all  the  varieties  of  this
world's  population  and  say,  0  earthy  earth,  earthy  hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord,
assured. of  finding  a  ready  echo  and  response  in  every  honest  and  penitent  mind.
The  great  doctrine  this  text  contains  is  the  importance  of  listening  to  the  Bible  as
the  voice  of  God.  Hear  the  Word.
L  Specify  some  respects  in  which  we  should  hear  God's  voice.

1.  In  the  still  small  voice  of  heavenly  mercy.

This  threefold  adjuration  supposes  great  indifference,  great  reluctance  on  man's
part  to  listen  to  God's  voice  of  mercy.  We  might  well  ask.  Are  the  inhabitants  of
the  world  dead  or  deaf  that  God  calls  the  cold  and  barren  earth  to  listen  to  His
Word  when  man  would  not  ?

The  Gospel  itself,  though  it  proclaims  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to  man,  is
coldly  regarded.  How  striking  that  announcement  of  the  angels,  "  ujito  you  is
born  a  Saviour ; "  to  you  men,  not  to  us  angels.  There  was  no  olive  branch  in
their  deluge  :  no  brazen  serpent  in  their  rebellious  camp  :  no  city  of  refuge  in  all
their  courts  :  no  star  of  Bethlehem  in  their  sky  :  no  "  mighty  to  save  "  travailed  in
the  greatness  of  His  strength  on  their  behalf.  When  angels  sinned,  justice  took  its
own  unfettered  course ;  but  when  Adam  fell,  a  Saviour  was  provided.

•*  Prom  heaven  the  sinning  angels  fell,
And  wrath  and  vengeance  chained  them  down|
But  man,  vile  man,  forsook  his  bhss,
And  mercy  lifts  him  to  a  crown."

It  is  under  this  last  best  dispensation  of  heavenly  truth  and  grace  that  we  are
living.     0  listen  to  the  still  small  voice  of  eternal  mercy.

2.  /n  the  loud  thunder  of  God's  providential  dispensation,

God  calls  attention  to  the  overthrow  of  Judea  and  its  monarchy.  It  is,  there-
fore, to  the  crash  of  falling  thrones  and  of  extinguished  dynasties  that  God  appeals,
to  teach  His  people  that  sin  is  a  great  destroyer ;  for  wherever  guilt  reigns,  the
pale  angel  of  retribution  is  sure  to  follow.  The  Bible  is  the  interpreter  of  Provi-
dence, and  Providence  is  the  best  interpreter  of  the  Bible.  The  Jews  have  a
saying,  "  That  God  spake  as  truly  to  Israel  by  His  ten  plagues  in  Egypt,  as  He  did
by  His  ten  words  on  Sinai."  We  are  exhorted  to  Jiear  the  Rod  and  Him  that
appointed  it ;  and  we  are  sure  that,  sooner  or  later,  they  who  will  not  hear  His
voice  in  His  Word,  must  be  made  to  feel  the  weight  of  His  Rod.

3.  In  your  personal  and  relative  afflictions,  God  speaks  and  demands  a  hearing.
The  various  methods  in  which  God  meets  with  man  and  causes  solemn  warnings

to  affect  the  heart,  form  a  striking  part  of  His  procedure;  and  every  such  appeal
rejected  will  constitute  a  fearful  item  in  our  last  account.  God  has  been  no  niggard
in  His  communications,  and  has  studied  economy  in  nothing  so  little  as  in  the
impressions  and  convictions  He  conveys  to  the  guilty  conscience.  Men  are  met,
day  by  day,  in  their  business,  in  their  families,  in  their  public  walks,  in  their
private  retirements,  in  the  exchange  of  merchandise,  in  the  temple  of  religion,  with
warning  voices  and  monitions,  of  which  God  is  the  immediate  author.  In  every
family  affliction,  in  every  sudden  death,  in  every  instance  of  wounded  affection,
or  disappointed  ambition,  or  ruined  hope,  and  in  the  overwhelming  dismay  created
by  the  prospect  of  poverty  on  the  one  hand,  or  by  the  removal  from  our  side  of
those  upon  whose  right  arm  we  leaned,  God  comes  very  near  to  us,  and  seems  to
say  in  accents  we  cannot  misunderstand,  "  Now  I  will  be  seen ;  now  I  unll  make
Myself  heard."  God  speaks  to  us  from  the  grave  of  a  friend ;  from  the  cradle
of  a  child  ;  from  the  death  of  an  enemy ;  and  from  the  great  changes  and  losses
always  going  on  in  the  troubled  theatre  of  human  affairs,  **  The  Lord's  voice  crieth
unto  the  city"  in  every  variety  of  accent,  "  0  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  Word  of
the  Lord."
434


ff OUTLET  IC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JBREMTA  E.  ckaf.  xm


It  has  often  been  remarked  that  in  the  time  of  the  great  plague  in  Florence,
in  Venice,  and  in  London,  those  who  escaped  became  more  dissipated  and  aban-
doned to  evil  than  ever,  acting  upon  the  libertine  sentiment,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drinks
for  to-morrow  we  die."     Affliction  where  it  does  not  soften,  only  hardens  the  more.

4.  In  the  ample  promises  and  encouragements  addressed  to  returning  penitents.

To  humble  the  sinner  and  to  exalt  the  Saviour  is  the  leading  design  of  the
whole  Record,  but  it  is  the  death  of  the  sin  and  not  the  death  of  tlie  soul  that  God
contemplates.  Truly  the  case  of  the  long-hardened  sinner  is  mournful  and
hazardous,  but  it  is  not  either  remediless  or  desperate,  seeing  that  there  is  a  great
sacrifice  provided  for  sin,  and  an  all-sufficient  Saviour  revealed  in  the  Gospel.

Yet  think  not  that  repentance  and  faith,  important  as  they  are  in  the  order  of
means,  can  be  in  any  sense  the  meritorious  conditions  of  salvation.  This  were  to
put  those  things  in  Christ's  stead,  which  are  only  the  stepping-stones  in  our  way
to  Him.  It  is  not  the  virtue  of  our  believing,  but  the  merit  of  Him  in  whom  we
believe  that  avails  for  acceptance  and  pardon.

Nor  is  it  to  the  strength  of  otir  faith  merely  that  the  promise  is  made,  but  to
the  reality  of  it.  The  weak  hand  of  a  child  may  hold  that  precious  pearl  which
worlds  want  wealth  to  buy ;  and  faith  which  is  as  a  grain  of  mustard- seed  has
power  to  remove  mountains.

Come,  upon  the  strength  of  His  own  invitation :  or  let  urgent  and  desperate
necessity  be  your  warrant,  for  you  must  perish  if  you  stay  away.  Let  the  accept-
ance which  others  have  found  induce  you  to  come ;  for  their  experience  is  your
encouragement.  Let  the  wonders  of  His  redemptive  work  urge  your  footsteps
towards  His  throne.  Return  to  Me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.  Every  leaf  of  His
Book  has  a  voice  to  say  return.  All  the  threatenings  and  all  the  promises  say
RETURN  ;  all  His  judgments  and  all  His  mercies  say  return.  The  whole  intelli-
gent universe  would  seem  to  have  but  one  voice.  Voices  from  heaven  and  voices
from  hell  say  return.  If  the  redemption  of  the  soul  be  precious,  return.  If  the
terrors  of  hell  be  awful,  if  the  joys  of  heaven  be  attractive,  return.  "  0  earth,
earth,  earth,  hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord"

XL  Enumerate  some  reasons  why  the  whole  earth  is  interested  in  these
communications.

i.  Because  the  Gospel  shows  the  only  plan  of  salvation,

iL  Because  the  progressive  improvement  and  advancement  of  the  race  is  connected
with  this  message.

Christian  nations  have  been  distinguished  by  intelligence.  The  spirit  of  science
rests  solely  with  them  :  in  dark  ages  it  burnt  in  secret.  Since  the  Reformation  the  pro-
gression of  knowledge  has  been  constant.  In  the  East  the  mind  has  lost  somewhat
of  its  capacity  and  power.  In  the  West,  under  the  auspices  of  Christianity,  men
appear  to  have  attained  a  vigour  in  intellectual  exertions.  An  impregnable  barrier
is  fixed  against  the  return  of  general  ignorance  and  barbarism.

iii.  Because  the  success  of  missionary  work  shows  the  practicability  of  diffusing  it,

iv.  Because  the  signs  of  the  times  are  in  direct  accord  with  the  promises  of  God,

— Samuel  Thodey.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXII.    ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.   10.  Weep  not  for  the  Dead.  weep  for  Jehoiakim,  for  he  died  at  once,

**  Weep   not  for  the  dead"  i.e.,  of  Je-  a  death  common  to  mortals,  but  should

hoiakim,  who  died  on  the   road  when  weep  for  Jehoiach in,  because  he  lingered

taken  captive.  in  wretchedness  and  dishonour,  and  never

"  Weep  for  him  that  goeth  away"  *.«.,  returned  to  his  beloved  country.
Jehoiachin,  who  was  a  prisoner  thirty-  So  enlarging  on  the  evils  of  the  Cap-
seven    years,    and    ultimately   died   in  tivity,  he  would  not  have  them  weep  for
captivity.  the  warriors  of  the  house  of  David  who

The   prophet  says    they  should    not  had  died  in  honourable  conflicts,  and  who

435


CHAP.  xxn.


HOMILFTIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMTAff.


bad  slept  in  sepulchres  of  their  ances-
tors, but  for  those  who  had  been  taken
captive,  and  died  away  from  borne.

The  ancients  in  the  Gemara  say,
•*  Weep  not  for  the  dead " — that  is
imraoderately :  three  days  are  allowed
for  weeping ;  on  the  seventh  the  obse-
quies are  performed  ;  after  which  they
dress  not  showily,  but  shave  and  anoint,
"  But  weep  for  him  that  goeth  " — that
is,  childless.  Our  sages  apply  this
moral,  that  in  our  feelings  we  should
combine  nature  with  Scripture;  mean-
ing, feel  as  mortals,  but  with  modera-
tion as  Israelites,  to  whom  it  was  for-
bidden to  indulge  in  the  excesses  of  the
heathen,  and  who  might  hope  to  meet  at
the  resurrection  of  the  dead.

The  ancients  apply  it  to  Abram  and
Esau  (Gen.  xxv.  34).  Esau  coming  in,
saw  Jacob  cooking  len tiles  —  asking
why  1  "  For  their  grandfather,  Abram,"
said  Jacob,  "it  being  food  for  mourn-
ers." Esau  said,  "  Is  it  possible  that
upright  man  was  included  in  the  pain  of
death  1  Then  there  is  no  reward  nor
resurrection,"  and  he  resolved  to  sell  his
birthright  as  useless  benefit.  Weep  not
for  dead,  *.«.,  Abram;  hut  for  him  that
goeth,  i.e.,  Esau,  who  went  and  despised
his  primogeniture.  Conciliator  :  By  B.
M.  Ben  Israel  {E.  H.  Linto.)

Yide  Kitto^s  Dailj/  Readings  :  "  Isaiah
AND  THE  Prophets,"  on  this  verse.

Ver.  1 3.  CovETOUSNESs.  *'  Some  men
are  so  covetous,  as  if  they  were  to  live
for  ever ;  and  others  so  profuse,  as  if
they  were  to  die  the  next  moment.*'—
Aristotle.

"The  covetous  man  lives  as  if  the
world  were  made  altogether  for  him,
and  not  he  for  the  world,  to  take  in
everything  and  part  with  nothing."—
South.

"  The  covetous  man  pines  in  plenty,
like  Tantalus  up  to  the  chin  in  water
and  yet  thirsty." — Adams.

BUILDETH  BY  UNRIGHTEOUSNESS.  Such

injurious  and  therefore  accursed  builders
were  the  pyramid-makers  in  Egypt.
Tarquinius  Priscus,  Caligula,  Nero,  Pho-
cas,  who  is  said  to  have  heard  this  voice
of  heaven — "Though  thou  shouldst
erect  thine  edifice  as  high  as  heaven,
43G


yet  sin  that  lieth  at  the  foundation  will
soon  overturn  all."  Bernard  inveigheth
against  some  in  his  time  who  did  with
great  care  and  cost  (erigere  murosy  negli-
gere  moros)  build  higli  manors,  but  not
amend  their  manners. — Trapp.

Ver.  19.  "  Burial  of  an  ass."  He
who  had  such  a  stately  house  in  Jeru-
salem should  not  have  a  grave  to  house
his  carcase  in.  Our  Richard  III.,  for
his  exactions  to  maintain  a  great  court
and  favourites,  lost  his  kingdom,  was
starved  to  death  at  Pomfret  Castle,  and
scarce  afforded  common  burial.  King
Stephen  was  interred  in  Faversham
monastery,  but  since,  his  body,  for  the
gain  of  the  lead  wherein  it  was  cof-
fined, was  cast  into  the  river.  Let
great  ones  so  live  as  that  they  meet  not
in  the  end  with  the  death  of  a  dog,  the
burial  of  an  ass,  and  the  epitaph  of  an
ox,  such  as  Aristotle  calleth  that  of
Sardanapalus — "  raZr  lyja  '£,<p(iyw  xai
t  <p  uj8^/tftf a,"  &c. — Trapp.

The  Sinnbr's  Bubial.
•*  Wrapt  in  a  Christless  shroud.
He  sleeps  a  Christless  sleep  ;
Above  him  the  eternal  cloudy
Beneath,  the  fiery  deep.

Laid  in  a  Christless  tomb,
There  bound  with  felon-chain.

He  waits  the  terrors  of  his  doom,
The  judgment  and  the  pain.

0  Christless  shroud,  how  cold  I
How  dark,  0  Christless  tomb  I

0  grief  that  never  can  grow  old  I
0  endless,  hopeless  doom.

0  Christless  sleep,  how  sad  1
What  waking  shalt  thou  know  f

For  thee  no  star,  no  dawning  glftd^
Only  the  lasting  woe  I

To  rocks  and  hills  in  vain
Shall  he  the  sinner's  call ;

0  day  of  wrath,  and  death,  and  pain.
The  lost  soul's  funeral  1

0  Christless  soul,  awake,
Ere  thy  last  sleep  begin  I

0  Christ,  the  sleeper's  slumbers  break;
Burst  Thou  the  bands  of  sin."

— Bonar,

Ver.  21.  Prosperity.  **It  is  the
bright  day  that  brings  out  tbe  adder."
"  Too  much  sail  is  dangerous." — Com"
mon  Proverbs.

"  No  sooner  does  the  warm  aspect  of


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  xxm.


good  fortune  shine,  than  all  the  plans  of
virtue,  raised  like  a  beautiful  frostwork
in  the  winter  of  adversity,  thaw  and
disappear." —  Warhurton.

"  Prosperity  is  the  blessing  of  the
Old  Testament."  [How  many  eminent
saints  from  being  poor  grew  rich,  as
Abraham,  Jacob,  Joseph,  David,  Daniel.]
*'  Adversity  is  the  blessing  of  the  New
Testament."  [As  we  see  in  Peter,
James,  John,  Paul,"  &c.]. — Lord  Bacon,

''  What  shall  I  come  to,  father,"  said
a  young  man,  *'  if  I  go  on  prospering  in
this  way  1 "  "To  the  grave  *^  replied  the
father.

*'  Men  are  usually  best  when  worst,
and  worst  when  best ;  like  the  snake
which  being  frozen  lieth  quiet  and  still,
but  waxing  warm,  stirreth  and  stingeth.
It  is  as  hard  to  bear  prosperity  as  to  drink
much  wine  and  not  be  giddy.  In  rest
we  contract  rust." — Trapp,

**  Who  feels  no  ills
Should  therefore  fear  them  ;  and,  when  for-
tune smiles,
Be  doubly  cautious,  lest  destruction  come
Kemorseless  on  him,  and  he  fall  un pitied."

'-'Sophocles,


"  More  ships  in  calms  on  a  deceitful  coast.
Or  unseen  rocks,  than  in  high  storms,  are
lost."  — JDenham^

**  Behold,  Sir  Balham,  now  a  man  of  spirit.
Ascribes  his  s^^ettings  to  his  parts  and  merit ;
What  late  he  called  a  blessing,  now  was  wit,
And  God's  good  Providence  a  lucky  hit.
Things  change  their  titles  as  their  manners

turn  :
His  counting  house  employed  the  Sabbath

morn :
Seldom  at  church  ('twas  such  a  busy  life),
But  duly  sent  his  family  and  wife." — Pope.

Ver.  30.  WiiiTTEN  childless.  "  As
to  succession  in  the  royal  dignity  as  well
as  to  success  in  his  reign.  This  God
would  have  to  be  written — put  upon
public  record  for  the  use  of  posterity.
Our  chronicles  tell  us  of  John  Dudley,
that  great  Duke  of  Northumberland  in
King  Edward  VI. 's  days,  who  endea-
voured by  all  means  to  engrand  his
posterity,  reaching  at  the  crown  also,
which  cost  him  his  head  ;  that  though
he  had  six  sons,  all  men,  all  married,
yet  none  of  them  left  any  issue  behind
them.  '  Be  wise  now,  therefore,  O  ye
kings;  serve  the  Lord  with  fear.'"— -
2Vapp,


CHAPTER  XXIIL

CRmcAL  AND  ExEOinoAL  NoTEs. — 1.  Chroiiology  of  the  Chapter. — The  chapter  is   an

epilogue  to  the  denunciations  of  the  three  kings  in  chap.  xxii.  It  must  have  been  written  and
proclaimed  about  the  beginning  of  Zedekiah's  reign,  for  a  warning  to  him,  from  the  examples
of  his  predecessors,  of  the  consequences  of  unrighteousness.     Cf.  notes  on  chap.  xxi.  11-14.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — 2  Kings  xxiv.  17-19  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  10-12.  Comp.  Jer.
lii.  1-3.

For  3.  National  Affairs,  and  4.  Contemporaneous  History.     See  notes  on  chap.  xxi.  11-14.

5.  Geographical  Eeferences. — Ver.  13.  **  Samaria :  "  here  alluded  to  as  the  territory  of  the
ten  tribes  of  Israel,  in  contrast  with  **  Jerusalem"  (ver.  14),  the  territory  of  Ephraimand  Judah.
Ver.  14.  ^^  Sodom  and  Gomorrah:^*  two  cities  "of  the  plain,"  standing  close  together,  in  or
near  the  vale  of  Siddim  (Gen.  x.  19,  xiii.  10);  overthrown  B.C.  2064,  for  their  atrocious
wickedness  (Gen.  xviii.  20  ;  Horn.  ix.  29).  Their  doom  is  held  up  as  a  warning  to  the  children  of
Israel  (Deut.  xxix.  23),  and  forms  a  standing  illustration  of  abandoned  iniquity  (Dent,  xxxii.  32  ;
Isa.  i.  9,  10  ;)  and  in  this  verse.  Josephus  states  that  the  Dead  Sea  now  fills  the  valley  in  which
these  "cities  of  the  plain"  stood  (Ant.  i.  9),  but  elsewhere  affirms  (War,  iv.  8,  4)  that  the  site
of  Sodom  was  not  submerged,  but  remains  a  burnt  and  charred  scene.  Pilgrims  to  Palestine
formerly  saw,  or  thought  they  saw,  ruins  of  towns  at  the  bottom  of  the  Dead  Sea,  not  far  from
the  shore.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  6.  *^  David."  Comp.  Homily  on  ver.  24  of  chap.  xxii.  for  the
lineal  royal  connection  with  David.

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  5.  "Branch.  *  This  word  Tsemach  occutb  a,\so  in  chap,  xxxiii.  15;
Zech.  iii.  8,  vi.  12,  and  denotes  a  springing  or  budding  plant— "a  sprout."  Dr.  Payne  Smith
remarks;  "A  tree  has  many  branches,  and  these  can  be  pruned  away  without  killing  tl»e  tree,
but  the  sprout  is  that  in  which  the  root  springs  up  and  grows,  and  which,  if  it  be  destroyed,
makes  the  root  perish  also.  For  its  use,  see  Gen.  xix.  25  ;  Isa.  Ixi.  11,  in  l)oth  which  places  it
•prings  directly  out  of  the  ground  ;  also  Ezek.  xvi.  7,  xvii.  9 ;  Hos.  viii.  7,  where  it  is  tranalalcd
either  bud  or  spring.**

437


CHAP.  xxnL  HOMJLETIC  COMMENT! 7? Y :  JEREMIA  H,


Ver.  15.  "  Wormwood  and  gnll ."  cf.  notes  on  cliaps.  ix.  15,  and  viii.  14,
Ver.  28.    *^  Chaff  and  wheat:*'  cf.  Homily  on  rerse  infra.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  25.  "/  have  dreamed,  I  have  dreamed:**  Professional
••dreamers']  early  appeared  (see  Deut.  xiii.  1),  for  superstitious  people  in  all  ages  have  given
ready  credulity  to  tiiese  false  visionists.

9.  Literary  Criticisms.— Ver.  5.  *'A  King  thaU  reign  and  prosper,"  Rather,  "He  shall
reign  as  king  and  prosper;  "  as  contrasted  with  chap,  xxiii.  30.

Ver.  6.  "  I/is  name  whereby  He  shall  be  called^  The  Lord  oub  Righteousness."  "  He  shall
be  called"  is  more  properly  ''he  shall  call  hiin:  *'  i.e.,  either  *'God  sliail,"  &c.,  or  **  he  shall " —
each  shall.  Several  MSS.,  however,  read,  ^^')\>\  plural,  *' they  shall  call  him,"  instead  of
^^l"?!  singular.  **The  Lord  our  Righteousness:**  Jehovah  Tsidkenu.  Criticism  has
attempted  to  make  "Jehovah"  the  nominative  of  "shall  call,"— "Jehovah  shall  call  him,
'*  our  Highteousness :*' thna  destroying  the  compound  name,  and  depriving  the  Messiah  of  the
title  of  Deity:  but  Henderson  affirms,  and  in  this  is  sustained  by  the  consensus  and  weight  of
modern  scholarship,  that  "  to  make  niil*  the  nominative  of  the  verb  {shall  call)  is  to  contradict
all  Hebrew  usage,  according  to  which  the  name  given,  and  not  the  person  who  gives  the  name,
immediately  follows  the  verb.

Ver.  15.  *' Profaneness  gone  forth** — profanation,  desecration.

Ver.  17.   "Imagination*' — stubbornness.

Ver.  19.   *'  Behold,  a  whirlwind^"  &c.     The  verse  should  read,  Behold,  a  tempest  (storm  wind)

of  Jehovah/  Fury  is  gone  forth  (or,  even  hot  anger  is  gone  forth) ;  and  a  whirltuind  (?V\r\r\ip  lyp,
a  tornado,  whirling  storm)  shall  be  hurled  (or  burst)  upon  the  head  of  the  wicked.

Ver.  29.  "/»  not  My  word  like  as  a  fire  f*  The  presence  of  the  word  113,  thus,  in  this  sen-
tence gives  rise  to  the  suggestion  that  formerly  it  was  PID,  strength  or  power.  The  Targum
reads  :  "  Are  not  all  My  words  strong  like  fire  ! "  Probably  this  suggested  the  word  in  Heb.  iv.
12,  "  quick  and  powerful."

Ver.  31.  "  That  use  their  tongues  and  say.  He  saithJ*  Not  nin*  D^^?,  Mith  Jehovah,  but  only
m^/'saUh.*'

"Ver.  33.  "  What  burden  t  **    The  LXX.  divide  the  words  N^^D-nDTlK,  What  burden  f  into

only  two  sections,  thus,  NCJ^DH  DHX,  Ye  are  the  burden  ;  and  with  this  reading,  which  is  more
rational,  the  following  words  accord  :  "  Ye  are  the  burden,  and  I  will  cast  you  away,  saith  the
Lord."     **  Forsaken  you,'*  should  be,  refused  you,  thrown  you  off.

HOMILIES  ON  SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XXIII.

Sections  1-8.  Judah's  restoration  under  Jehovah  Tsidkenu,
f,    9-40.  False  prophets  and  national  levity  denounced.

Section,  rerses  1-8.     Judah^s  Restoration  under  Jehovah  Tsidkenu.

Througli  the  dark  clouds  gathering  over  Jerusalem  there  broke  occasionally  gleams
of  sunshine.  The  judgments  which  the  prophet  foretold  were  so  terrible,  and  the
ruin  awaiting  Judah  so  overwhelming,  that  Jeremiah  and  the  small  remnant  of  the
true  Israel  remaining  might  have  abandoned  all  hope.

But  God  relieved  their  despondency  by  the  promise  that,  notwithstanding  the
judgments  and  calamities,  He  would  again  visit  and  redeem  His  people.

I.  The  prediction  assumes  that  all  the  calamities  which  the  prophet  foretold
would  overtake  Judah.  These  calamities  threatened  the  kingdom,  and  also  the
very  house  of  David:  for  the  expression,  *' I  will  raise  unto  Dcivid  a  righteous
Branch,"  conveys  the  idea  of  a  tender  sprout  springing  from  the  root  of  a  tree  cut
down  or  seemingly  dead.

IL  Yet  the  prediction  assured  them  that  the  promise  would  certainly  be  ful-
filled. The  positive  fulfilment  of  the  threatening  would  encourage  the  hope  in  the
sure  realisation  of  the  promise,  and  give  them  encouragement  amid  the  calaniities.

m  There  is  here  an  obvious  contrast  between  this  promised  King  and  all
who  ever  held  David's  throne.  He  was  to  be  righteous,  to  reign,  to  act  wisely.
How  different  from  all  kings  before  Him !  Their  impiety  and  folly  had  entailed
ruin  upon  the  people.

IV.  The  description  of  their  future  King  could  not  fail  to  astonish  them  It
began  by  comparing  Him  to  a  bud,  or  tender  shoot,  from  a  tree  cut  down,  and
438


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JEREMIAH.  ohaf.  XSIBU

onded  by  ascribing  to  Him  the  great  and  fearful  name  of  Jehovah  !     It  must  have
awakened  their  admirationy  reverencty  confidence  :  for —

1.  His  being  the  oflfspring  of  David  assured  them  of  His  tenderest  sympathy  in
the  well-being  of  Israel  and  Judah ;  and —

2.  His  being  Jehovah  gave  still  stronger  assurance  that  nothing  was  too  difficult
to  accomplishf  and  nothing  would  be  left  undone.     And —

3.  They  were  assured  that  His  righteousness,  power,  and  wisdom  would  be  made
available  for  securing  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  His  people^  as  He  was  to  be  their
Righteousness.

V.  This  promise  has  been  fulfilled,  and  its  hidden  meaning  unfolded.  To
God's  ancient  people  obscurity  must  have  hidden  the  true  character  of  their  king.
The  prophets  themselves  diligently  sought  a  "  private  interpretation  "  of  their  own
predictions.  The  Church  at  large  was  in  mystery.  But  to  us  the  mystery  is
all  revealed.

VL  The  great  principle  on  which  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  rests  is
here  stated.     ** Righteousness"

1.  It  is  only  on  the  ground  of  perfect  righteousness  that  God  can  accept  and
approve  an  intelligent  creature,

2.  Yet  a  sinner's  restoration  to  righteousness  was  impracticable  by  and  of  him-
self.    He  fell  under  the  power  as  well  as  condemnation  of  sin.

3.  The  two  conditions  of  man's  deliverance  were,  punishment  due  to  sin  already
committed  must  be  borne,  and  perfect  compliance  with  the  demand  of  the  law  must
be  rendered.     Man  was  wholly  incompetent.

4.  The  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is  seen  in  His  provision  of  what  seemed  impos-
•ible — perfect  righteousness.  "  He  shall  be  called  Jehovah  our  righteousness."
— Robert  Gordon^  D,D,^  F,R,tS,G, — **  Christ  as  made  known  to  the  Ancient
Church,**


Here  it

L  A  word  of  terror  to  the  negligent  shepherds  (vera.  1,  2).  The  day  is  at
6and  when  God  would  reckon  with  them  concerning  the  trust  committed  to  them.

1.  They  were  not  owners  of  tlie  sheep,  God  calls  them  **  the  sheep  of  My
pasture."

2.  They  had  neglected  the  sheep.     *'  Scattered  the  flock,"  <fec.

3.  They  would  be  visited  with  vengeance.  They  would  not  **  visit "  the  sheep ;
God  would  *'  visit "  upon  them  the  evil  of  their  doings.  See  Addenda  :  Negugent
Pastors.

II.  A  word  of  comfort  to  the  neglected  sheep.

1.  The  dispersed  people  should  be  gathered  happily  into  their  own  land,  and  nnder
good  government  (vers.  3,  4).

2.  Messiah,  the  good  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  would  be  raised  up  to  bless  and  be  the
glory  of  His  people  Israel  (vers.  5,  6).

3.  This  great  salvation  should  far  outshine  Israelis  deliver ajice  from  Egypt
(vers.  7,  8).

III.  An  illustrious  description  of  the  promised  Messiah.

1.  Christ  is  here  spoken  of  as  the  Branch  from  David.  Mean  in  appearance;
His  beginnings  small  j  His  rise  seemingly  out  of  the  earth,  but  growing  to  be
green,  to  be  great,  and  to  be  loaded  with  fruits.

2.  He  is  here  spoken  of  as  the  ChurcJis  King.  He  shall  reign  on  the  throne  of
His  father  David,  and  he  shall  prosper,  and  not,  as  the  degenerate  kings  had  done,
go  back  in  their  affairs.  He  shall  set  up  a  kingdom  in  the  world,  which  shall  be
victorious  over  all  opposition.  And  in  those  days  of  Christ's  government,  "Judah
shall  be  saved,"  &c.  When  He  reigns  uppermost  in  the  soul,  the  aoul  dwells  at
ease.

3.  He  is  here  spoken  of  as  The  Lord  our  Righteousness,     (1.)   Who  and  what  He

439


OHJJ-.  xxin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  J  ERE  MI  A  H.


ii.  As  God,  ''Jehovah;"  denoting  His  eternity  and  self-existence.  As  Mediator^
**our  Righteousness."  All  our  righteousness  has  its  being  from  Him;  and  we  are
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  (2. )  The  profession  and  declaration  of  this,
'*  This  is  the  name  by  whicli,''  <fec.  Not  only  shall  He  be  so,  but  He  shall  be  known
to  be  80.  God  shall  call  Him  by  this  name  :  and  Israel  shall  so  call  Him :
and  every  true  believer  shall  know  and  call  upon  Him  by  that  name. — Matthew
Henry,

Section,  verses  9-40. — Falsb  Prophets,  and  the  National  Levity

DENOUNCED.

Jeremiah's  deep  distress  under  the  necessity  of  declaring  the  dreadful  woes
which  God  bade  him  utter  (ver.  9).
L  Delusive  prophesyings.

1.  Criminal  teachers  (vers.  13,  14).  Their  wicked  teachings  had  led  to  apostasy
in  Samaria,  and  effrontery  in  Jerusalem.

2.  Deluded  hearers  (vers.  16,  17).  They  "  A^ar^e/iec? "  readily ;  were  rendered
**vain;"  grew  to  "despise*^  God;  and  still  expected  '* peace"

3.  A  demoralised  nation  (vers.  10,  11).  Abandoned  to  vileness  of  conduct;  to
profanity  of  speech;  perversity  of  life  ("  course  evil ")  ;  and  resolute  defiance  (*'  their
force  is  not  right ").

4.  God^s  revulsion  at  such  scenes  (vers.  13,  14).  The  conduct  of  the  Baal-priests
in  Samaria  stirred  God's  contempt ;  but  the  vile  corruptions  of  the  Jerusalem  priests
aroused  His  loathing  and  wrath.

5.  God's  remonsti^ance  with  the  nation  (ver.  16).  Though  men  mislead,  God
interposes  with  earnest  appeals  and  honest  counsels.

6.  God's  charge  against  the  prophets  (vers.  18,  21,  22).  They  had  neglected  ^^  the
counsel  of  the  Lord  "/  had  spoken  without  a  commission;  and  therefore  misled  God^t
people.

7.  Sin^s  cruel  seductions  (ver.  12).  God  gives  them  over  to  strong  delusions;  to
inherit  the  miseries  of  their  perversity.

8.  Fierce  anger  against  transgressors  (vers.  19,  20).  Mighty  forces  of  destruction;
working  furious  disaster  upon  the  wrong-doers ;  allowing  of  no  escape.

9.  Bitter  woes  against  the  prophets  (ver,  15).  Inward  bitterness :  enforced
bitterness :  God  would  fill  them  with  the  pangs  of  woe.

Note:

L  False  teachers  mil  taste  the  full  *'  bitterness"  of  their  wicked  delusions,
ii.    Wilful  sinners  shall  be  "  driven  on  "  in  the  slippery  ways  they  prefer,
iii.  iV^o  teachings  which  lead  men  to  sin  can  have  the  sanction  of  God,
n.  Frivolous  dreamers.

1.  False  pretenders  to  Divine  communications  (vers.  25-27).  These  dreamy
surmisings  are  (1.)  Traced  to  their  origin  ("the  deceit  of  their  own  heart");  and
(2.)  Their  baneful  purpose  is  exposed  ("they  think  to  cause  My  people  to  forget
My  name/'  <fec.).

2.  A  bold  distinction  between  God^s  messages  and  such  deceits  (vers.  2t^,  29).  The
"  dream  "  beguiles  to  delusions  ;  the  "  word  "  hums  all  conceits  and  breaks  all  false
confidences.

3.  An  all-observing  Eye  (vers.  23,  24).  Deceivers  are  watched.  Men  cannot
see  through  their  fallacies,  but  God  can.     None  deceive  Him.

4.  Stern  denunciations  of  lying  prophets,  (1.)  Their  sinful  practices ;  they  "  steal
God's  words"  horn  true  prophets  and  pervert  or  misapply  them ;  they  simulate
a  Divine  authority  for  their  false  words,  saying  "  He  saith ;  "  and  they  lead  God's
people  "to  err  by  their  lightness."  (2.)  God's  severe  remonstrance;  "I  am  against
the  prophets,"  and  the  "  dreamers  ; "  He  would  requite  them  for  their  deceptioni
and  for  the  consequent  errors  of  the  people,

440


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  xzm.


Note:

i.  Promises  of  peace  from  men  who  lead  us  astray  from  God  are  mere  ^^  chaff
which  the  wind  shall  drive  away.

ii.  The  ^'faithfulness'*  of  God's  Word  distinguishes  it  from  the  delusions  of  human
teachings.

III.  Profane  jesting.  This  charge  is  thrown  upon  the  whole  nation  (vers,  33,
34).     They  so  treated  the  messages  of  God's  true  prophet.

1.  Retorting  with  banter  and  levity.  Taking  up  Jeremiah's  solemn  words  with
derision,  and  tossing  them  about  as  if  it  all  were  a  jest.

2.  Trifling  with  messages  from  God  (vers.  35,  36).  Chaffing  one  another  with
being  bearers  of  God's  *'  burden  ; "  and  "  perverting  "  Jehovah's  **  words."

3.  Rejected  by  Jehovah  with  contempt  (vers.  39,  40).  God  had  forbidden  this
levity  (ver.  38);  and  now  would  *'cast  off"  the  nation  as  a  grievous  and  loath-
some burden  (ver.  39),  and  leave  them  to  the  "  lasting  shame  "  they  so  richly  de-
served (ver.  40).

Note:

i.  Jesting  with  God's  Word  indicates  the  most  daring  impiety,
ii.  Such  lightness  and  profanity  will  prove  a  woful  burden  to  the  sinner  and
his  everlasting  reproach.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XXIII.

Vers.  1-4.  Theme:  Faithless  pas-
tors :   FAITHFUL  SHEPHERDS.

I  Woful  neglect  of  the  flock  of
God.

1.  On  whom  God  charges  this  faith-
lessness. These  "  pastors "  were  the
secular  rulers,  the  unrighteous  kings,
mentioned  in  chap,  xxii.,  Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim,  and  Jeconiah.  Note,  the
responsibility  of  civil  rulers  to  God  ;  for
**  By  Me  kings  reign,"  <kc.  Hence  argue :
the  obligations  of  all  in  power ,  whether


the  pastors,"  "  I  will  visit  upon  you
the  evil  of  your  doings."  With  what
measure  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured
to  you  again.  The  ruin  of  the  flock
would  be  requited  by  the  ruin  of  the
shepherds.     (See  Ezekiel  xxxiii.)

IL  Benignant  promise  of  faithful
pastors.

Note  that  the  words  **  pastors "  and
** shepherds"  are  different  translations
of  the  Fame  Hebrew  word  (r6im).

1.  y'o  iitat  nation  this  was  fulfilled  in
that  power  be  royal,  civily  ecclesiastical^      the  raising  up  of  religious  and  righteous


or  pastoralf  to  rule  and  work  for  the
highest  good  and  the  spiritual  advantage
of  the  people.

2.  For  what  God  threatens  these
shepherds.  The  flock  was  '^destroyed;"
i,e.,  it  was  no  longer  *'  the  flock  of  God,"
for  the  nation  was  a  wilful  and  wicked
herd  of  goats ;  its  pastoral  simplicity
had  been  ruined.  And  the  flock  was
^'scattered ;"  driven  away  from  fidelity
to  God;  equally  from  His  nutritious
pasturage;  and  literally  from  the  fold


rulers,  Zerubbabel,  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and
the  Maccabees,  who  were  not  heredi-
tary kings  of  the  seed  of  David,  but
men  raised  up  by  God  to  govern  His
flock.

2.  To  the  spiritual  Israel  this  was
fulfilled  in  the  orders  and  ordinances  of
the  Christian  Church.  No  more  have
we  the  tyranny  of  secular  kings  within
the  Church  ;  but  Christ  Himself  is
King.  No  longer  have  we  the  impiety
of    priests   and    Pharisees   within    the


they  should  have  occupied^  the  land  they  Church  (as  in  the  Jewish  Synagogue) ;
should  have  continued  to  inhabit  (ver.  for  the  apostles  of  Christ  began  a  line
3).       Negligent    Shepherds    harm    the      of  earnest  teachers  and  preachers  who


people  temporally  and  spiritually ;  de-
spoil them  of  the  choicest  blessings  of
this  life — their  spiritual  comforts  and
heavenly  hopes.

3.    With  what  judgments  God  would
visit  such  faithlessness.      *'  Woe  be  to


minister  within  the  sanctuary  :  faitliful
pastors  who  love  and  tend  "  the  flock
of  God  over  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has
made  them  overseers."

3.   To  every  soul  within  the  Saviour's
fold    these    assurances    are    now    veri-

441


CHAP.  XXIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


fied  :  **  they  sliall  fear  no  more,  nor  be
dismayed,  neither  shall  they  be  lacking,
saith  the  Lord "  (ver.  4)  :  for  believers
in  Christ  have  Him  for  Shepherd  (Ps.
xxiv) ;  and  He  both  guards  His  fold
from  liarm,  and  nourishes  the  souls  of
His  flock.

"  Fear  no  more  :  "  it  pledges  a  sense
of  secui'ity.  Such  is  the  luxury  of
Christian  restfulness  within  the  fold  of
and  under  the  rule  of  Jesus  our  Lord.
Safe  in  Christ.

*^ Nor  be  dismayed:"  it  guarantees
protection  from  such  neglect  and  ex-
posure as  a  flock,  faithlessly  shepherded,
would  suffer.     Saved  by  Christ.

"  Neither  shall  they  be  lacking  :  "  this
means,  not  one  sheep  shall  be  missing.
This  is  therefore  a  prophecy  of  Judah*»
restoration  from  Babylon;  yet  its  ful-
ness of  significance  can  only  be  realised
in  the  final  restoration  of  both  "  Judah  "
and  "  Israel "  (comp.  ver.  6)  out  of  all
countries — a  prophecy  never  yet  accom-
plished. While  spiritually  it  fore-
shadows the  gathering  together  of  all
Christ's  redeemed,  under  the  One  Shep-
herd of  the  sheep.

See  Addenda :  Negligent  pastors.

Ver.  5.  Theme  :  The  kingdom  of  the
Messiah.

The  prophetic  writings  are  replete
with  appropriate  and  sublime  descrip-
tions of  the  personal  appearing,  redeem-
ing works,  and  mediatorial  offices  of  the
promised  Messiah.  The  text  describes
the  Redeemer  8  character,  as  assuming
human  nature  and  establishing  His
kingdom  of  grace ;  and  directs  our
attention  to  the  following  important
truths :

I.  The  person  of  the  Messiah.
"  Behold  the  days  come,"  <fec.  In  these
words  we  may  observe  three  things  rela-
tive to  the  coming  Messiah  : —

I.  His  human  incarnation,  **  A
Branch."  This  term  is  often  used  by
the  prophets  to  represent  Christ's
assumption  of  our  nature  as  "  the  seed
of  the  woman,"  according  to  the  Divine
promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  To  accomplish
this  and  similar  promises,  the  Lord
declares  in  the  text,  "  Behold  the  days
come  that  I  will  raise  unto  Darid  a
442


righteous  tranch."  The  Father  loved
the  world,  promised,  and  actually  "  sent
His  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,
that  we  might  live  through  Him."  Thus,
the  Lord  *'  raised  "  in  the  royal  house
and  lineage  of  David  "  a  Branch  ; "  as
it  is  written,  "  There  shall  come  forth  a
rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a
branch  shall  grow  out  of  His  roots."
The  scheme  of  redemption  rendered  it
necessary  for  Christ  to  "  take  on  Him
the  seed  of  Abraham,"  that  He  might
suffer  and  die  for  our  sins  (Heb.  ii.  10,

2.  His  personal  perfection.  "  A
righteous  branch."  In  His  essential
nature  as  God,  Jesus  Christ  was  in-
finitely pure,  holy,  just,  and  good.  And
in  His  human  nature  as  man  He  was
perfectly  righteous  and  sinless.  Had
not  Christ  been  sinless.  He  could  not
have  atoned  for  our  sins,

3.  His  sovereign  character.  "  A  King
shall  reign."  The  Jews  were  taught  to
expect  their  Messiah  as  an  illustrious
Prince  and  prosperous  monarch.  But,
in  general,  they  mistook  the  precise
meaning  of  the  prophets,  and  expected
Him  as  a  temporal,  and  not  as  a
spiritual,  sovereign.  He  possessed
every  qualification  requisite  for  the
dignity  of  His  character.  He  is  in-
finite in  wisdom,  righteousness,  power,
and  goodness.  He  is  not  only  a
Prophet  to  instruct,  a  Priest  to  atone,
but  also  a  King  to  rule  and  save  His
people.

II.  The  nature  of  His  kingdom*
"  A  King  shall  reign  and  prosper,"
(fee.  The  empire  of  Christ  is  of  a  com-
plex character,  and  comprehends  His
vast  dominion  over  all  things,  as  the
Creator  and  Preserver  of  mankind,  and
as  the  Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  them
that  believe.  In  this  extended  view
the  Messiah  possesses  : —

1.  A  universal  kingdom.  His  pre-
sence fills  all  space,  and  His  power  is
unlimited.  He  reigns  in  His  pro-
vidence over  all  His  creatures,  and  is
"  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."
He  is  the  sovereign  proprietor  of  all
things,  and  sways  His  sceptre  both  in
heaven  and  in  earth.  All  things  are
dependent  on  His  power,  and  subject


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  xznL


to  His  control,  "  who  is  over  all,  God
blessed  for  ever."

2.  A  mediatorial  kingdom.  This
refers  to  Christ's  official  character,  as
the  "mediator  between  God  and  man."
When  Christ  engaged  in  the  cause  of
our  redemption,  He  founded  a  kingdom
of  mediation  for  the  redemption  of
mankind.  The  Saviour  reigns  as  the
conqueror  of  all  our  enemies  as  **  the
Prince  of  Peace  and  the  King  of  Zion,"
in  His  redeeming  and  mediatorial
character  (Phil.  ii.  5-11).

3.  A  spiritual  hingdom.  The  king-
dom which  Christ  established  in  the
work  of  redemption  is  designed  in  its
personal  influence  to  destroy  sin,  that
**  grace  might  reign  through  righteous-
ness unto  eternal  life."  Our  Lord
declares  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within
you.  It  is  an  eternal  empire  of  grace,
producing  righteousness,  peace,  and
"joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."

4.  A  celestial  kingdom.  Heaven  is
often  denominated  a  kingdom,  and  is
the  promised  inheritance  of  the  Lord's
faithful  people  (Luke  xii.  32).  The
kingdom  of  grace  here  prepares  and
leads  to  the  kingdom  of  glory  hereafter.
Christ  waits  to  receive  and  welcome
His  followers  into  His  everlasting  king-
dom, that  they  may  participate  His
glory,  dwell  in  His  presence,  and  reign
with  Him  for  ever.

III.  The  character  of  His  reign.
**  A  king  shall  reign  and  prosper,"  <kc.

1.  Chrises  reign  is  legitimate.  He  is
no  impostor.  He  reigns  by  rational  and
eternal  right  as  Sovereign  of  the  uni-
verse ;  and  as  mediator  He  reigns  in
the  kingdom  of  grace  by  Divine
appointment^  authority,  and  sanction.
The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  founded  on
principles  of  sound  reason,  and  there-
fore all  rational  beings  ought  to  submit
to  His  government.

2.  Christ* s  reign  is  righteous.  He  is
a  merciful  and  gracious  Sovereign,  and
though  He  "  executes  judgment  and
justice  in  the  earth,"  it  is  in  mercy
and  love  to  mankind.

3.  Chrises  reign  is  prosperous.  What-
ever opposition  His  kingdom  meets  with,
"  He  shall  prosper,"  All  the  schemes  He
adopts,  and  the  means  He  employs,  are


devised  by  infinite  wisdom  and  accom-
panied by  omnipotent  energy ;  and  there
fore  His  reign  must  succeed.  His  per-
fections, declarations,  promises,  gospel,
and  Spirit,  secure  the  prosperity  of  His
cause  (Heb.  i  8 ;  Dan.  ii.  44 ;  John
xvi.  8).

4.  Christ*s  reign  is  everlasting.  All
other  kings  are  mortal,  and  there-
fore die  and  leave  their  dignities  to
their  successors.  All  temporal  king-
doms rise  and  fall,  and  will  ultimately
perish  in  the  wreck  of  worlds;  but
Christ  is  the  "King  eternal  and  im-
mortal, and  His  kingdom  is  an  everlast-
ing kingdom,  and  His  dominion  is  from
generation  to  generation."

To  improve  the  subject,  consider :
The  dignity  of  Christ's  person  and
character,  the  folly  and  misery  of  His
enemies,  and  the  duty  and  happiness  of
His  subjects. — Sketches  of  Serm>on$.

Theme:  The  naturk  and  pros-
perity OF  Messiah's  reign.

Christ  is  described  in  His  distinct
and  dissimilar  parts  of  His  character  by
Jeremiah :  "  A  branch"  to  denote  His
human  nature  and  origin  :  "  the  right-
eous branch"  to  denote  His  essential
righteousness  in  Himself,  and  the  source
of  righteousness  to  believers  :  and  their
*^  Kin^"  to  direct  attention  to  His
spiritual  dominion.

L  The  character  of  Christ.  There
are  three  things  we  look  for  in  a  king :

1.  Supreme  power  (Ephes.  i.  21  ;
Rom.  ix.  5).

2.  Legislative  authority,  Christ's
right  to  legislate,  as  being  proprietor  of
all  (John  L  10  ;  Col.  i.  16)  and  redeemer
of  all ;  for  He  "  bought  us  with  a  price."

3.  Righteous  administration.  There
must  be  wisdom,  or  the  monarch's  reign
would  be  one  of  folly ;  justice,  or  tolerate
licentiousness;  mercy f  or  be  despotic
(Matt.  xii.  20).

IL  The  nature  of  Christ's  reign.

1.  Spiritual,  Seat  of  His  govern-
ment is  in  the  human  spirit  (Luke
xvii.  20 ;  Rom.  xiv.  17).

2.  Equitable.  Prohibits  all  evil,  en-
joins  all  good  (Heb,  L  8).

3.  Benevolent,  Alexanders  and  C»san
were  "warriors  with  confused  noise  and

443


CHIP.  xxm.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


garments  rolled  in  blood  ;  *'  but  Christ
(Isa.  zlii.  2).

4.  Perpetual.  Earthly  kingdoms
may  rise  and  fall  (Isa.  ix.  7  ;  Heb.  i.  8).

m.  The  prosperity  with  which  His
reign  shall  be  attended.  To  prosper
as  king,  implies  :

1.  To  have  an  increase  of  willing
subjects.

2.  To  have  adequate  provision  for
supply  of  all  their  wants.

3.  To  secure  their  real  happiness
(Psa.  Ixxii.  7-8).

4.  To  subjugate  or  destroy  His
enemies  (Isa.  Ix.  12).

Observe:

1.  If  Christ  shall  reign  and  prosper,
how  great  is  the  folly  of  being  His
adversaries  !

2.  This  subject  should  inspire  the
Christian  with  joy  and  gratitude  (Acts
XV.  3  ;  Rev.  xix.  6,  7).

3.  We  should  do  our  utmost  to  ex-
tend the  Redeemer's  triumphs. — From

Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.

Ver.  6.  Theme :  A  bright  era  fob
MANKIND.  "  In  His  days  Judah  shall
be  saved  and  Israel  shall  dwell  safely."

Eagerly  we  scan  those  prophecies
which  open  a  gracious  future  for
humanity.  Especially  when  our  Lord
Jesus  is  predicted  as  being  the  author
of  that  blissful  change.  For  it  is  so
desirable  both  for  human  good  and  the
Saviour's  glory.

(a.)  The  present  prevailing  irreligion,
with  all  the  force  of  a  dark  contrast,
makes  the  outlook  alluring  to  contem-
plate.

(6.)  The  slow  progress  of  evangelisa-
tion gives  zest  to  the  anticipation  of
the  grand  success  which  shall  come  "  in
those  days"  through  the  direct  inter-
position of  Heaven.

Has  this  prophecy  been  fulfilled?
Does  it  allude  to  the  spiritual  salvation  of
the  spiritual  Judah  as  the  result  of  gospel
preaching  in  this  Christian  era  1  Or,
to  the  JiTial  gathering  together  of  Jews
into  their  own  land  ?  Or,  to  the
millennial  day  when  the  spiritual  Israel
will  be  made  triumphant  over  all  the
forces  of  evil,  and  reign  in  peace  and
safety  on  the  earth  ?
444


I.  An  age  anticipated  whicli  shall
belong  to  Christ.     Called  "  His  days."

1.  Have  those  days  been  realised  in
the  Christian  era  9  Certainly  Christianity
in  some  sense  has  fulfilled  this  prediction.
It  is  an  era  when,  not  Moses,  but  Christ
gives  the  impress  to,  and  dwells  supreme
in,  the  dispensation.  Jesus  is  now  **  the
Lord  our  Righteousness."  And  if  we
may  interpret  '* Judah  and  Israel"
spiritually,  then  He  has  "  saved  us."

But  the  ancient  people  of  God  are
here  literally  meant.  And  they  have
not  as  yet  come  to  call  Jesus  **  the
Lord  our  Righteousness  ;  "  they  do  not
"  dwell  safely,"  for  they  are  wanderers
upon  the  earth.  ThQ  promise  in  ver,  8
has  not  yet  been  fulfilled  even  in  a
spiritual  sense  :  Israel  has  not  been  all
won  to  Christ.

2.  Those  days  have  yet  to  davm.  For
when  they  come  Israel  shall  acknow-
ledge Christ.

(a.)  There  may  be  an  actual  fulfil-
ment of  this  promise  for  the  tribes  of
Judah  and  Israel.  And  who  would  not
welcome  it  %  for  they  have  been  a  sad
people  long  afflicted.  Yet  even  more
because  of  the  promises  which  attend
the  time  of  their  restoration  (Rom.  xL
11,  12,  15,  25,  26).

(6.)  But  the  allusion  may  be  to  the
millennial  age  :  when  (ver.  5)  the  "  King
shall  reign."  We  cannot  say  these  are
the  days  of  Christ ;  for  the  devil  rules
a  wider  dominion  !  But  "  the  kingdom
of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdom
of  our  God  and  of  His  Christ."  For
this  grand  future  pray^  ivork,  and  hope.

II.  The  days  of  Christ's  ascendancy
shall  be  distinguished  by  the  enjoy-
ments of  salvation.

(a.)  Oppression  and  destruction  marked
the  days  of  despotic  monarchies — the
Pharaohs,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Frederick
the  Great,  Bonaparte,

(6.)  Safety  has  not  hitherto  been  the
experience  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Every
age  finds  them  a  wronged  and  outraged
people.  But  when  Messiah  comes  they
will  be  molested  no  more.

(c.)  Neither  has  Israel^  spiritually
considered^  dwelt  safely.  The  souls  of
Christ's  people  are  always  imperilled
and  assailed  by  the  forces  of  evil


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JBRBMTAH.


OHAT,  xxm.


1.    What  do  ^* safety  and  salvation^'
here  mean  ? — If  the  Hebrew  interpreta-
tion be  correct,  it  means  deliverance  from
the  nations^  and  possession  of  their  own
country,  \\liere    tbey    would    dwell   in
peace.     If  the  spiritual  interpretation
be  correct,  it  means,  Christ's  followers
ransomed  from  the  enemy,  piety  victorious
over  sin,  earth  won  for  Christ.     Then
the  foe   disturbs   our  peace   no  more,
threatens  our  safety  no  more,  either  by
insinuating  doubt,  planning  temptation,
or  chilling  love.        What  days  those!
when  all  will   be    blessed    in    Jesus;
when  all   shall    know  the   Lord,    (fea,
and   the    Church    shall    be    happy   in
Jesus'  favour,  free  from  the  dread  of  ills  !
2.   In  the   individual   believer   these
promises  are  already  fulfilled.    He  is
"  saved,''     and     "  dwells    safely "    in
Christ.     But  that  personal  bliss  is  the
possession    of    few    now.        "Christ's
days"  shall  spread  it  far  and  wide —
to  Jew  and  Gentile.

III.  For  the  coming  of  Christ's  days
we  may  well  with  eagerness  yearn.

1.  They  are  desirable.  What  a  joyous
outlook  !  Ended  our  "  sowing  precious
seed  with  tears,"  our  grief  over  the
desolations  of  sin,  our  shame  for  the
scorn  and  rejection  of  Christ,  our  strug-
gles  with  evil  around.

2.  We  live  amid  danger  now.
Therefore  anxiety  and  watchfulness  :
therefore  peace  is  disturbed  and  joy
marred.  Then  shall  we  realise  rest
and  delight.  "How  long,  0  Lord,
how  longr'  Not  long,  if  we  speed  the
time  by  diligent  work— for  the  conver-
sion of  the  heathen  and  the  salvation
of  those  who  are  near.  jSTot  long,  if  we
speed  the  time  by  earnest  prayer.  "  Thy
kingdom  come."  Let  us  "give  Him
no  rest  till  He  arise  and  make  Jerusa-
lem a  praise  in  the  earth."

Ver.  6.    Theme :    "  The  Loed  omt
RIGHTEOUSNESS."  We  may  view  this  as-~

1.  An  announcement  of  an  impor-
tant truth.

^  L  Tlie  Lord  is  our  righteousness
inasmuch  as  the  purpose  and  plan  of
justifying  sinners  originated  with  Him.

2.  Inasmuch    as    He    Himself    has
alone  procured  righteousness  for  us.


3,  Inasmuch  as  it  is  through  His
grace  and  by  His  free  donation  that  we
receive  righteousness.

n.  An  utterance  of  personal  belief
and  confidence.

The  language  of  faith,  hope,  joy,
gratitude.

in.  A  directory  to  the  spiritual
inquirer.

Anxious  sinners  wish  to  know  the
way  of  acceptance  with  God.     The  text

is   a   brief   but  satisfactory  answer.

Dr,  W.  Lindsay-Alexander  (of  Edin-
burgh), "  The  Hive.'*

Theme:  Christ's  supreme  name.
Redemption  by  a  crucified  Redeemer
is  the  capital  theme  of  Divine  revela-
tion. It  is  completely  interwoven  with
the  golden  network  of  the  prophetic
page—for  to  Him  give  all  the  proi)hets
witness — whilst  the  evangelists  echo
and  re-echo  the  exhaustless  theme.

The  Gospel  is  not  known  as  a  system
of  promises  simply,  though  these  are
exceedingly  great  and  precious ;  not  as
a  system  of  morals,  though  its  morality
is  of  the  highest  kind ;  nor  as  a  system
of  legislation  simply,  though  it  contains
the  code  of  God's  moral  government ;
but  it  is  pre-eminently  known  as  a
system  of  reconciliation.

This  doctrine  forms  the  key  to  the
Christian  system.     To  this    one  work
all  dispensations  point.     This  all  sacri-
fices illustrate.     This  all  promises  em-
body.    This  all  Providence  is  bowed  to
subserve.    This  all  heaven  stoops  to  wit-
ness.    This  all  hell  resists  and  opposes.
This  all  bad  men  revile  or  neglect.    This
sMgood  men  venerate  and  love.    Surely
shall  one  say.  In  the  Lord  Jehovah  have
I  righteousness  and  strength.      "  This  is
the  name  by  which  He  shall  be  called,"  etc.
It  is  common   with  the  prophets  to
console  the  Jews  under  their  calamities
with  the  prospect  of  Messiah's  approach,
as  a  proof  that  if  the  Church  was  to  be
preserved  till  His  coming,  it  should  not
be   destroyed    in    its  present  exigency.
Here  the  transit  is  easy  from  the  corrupt
pastors  that  destroyed  Israel  to  the  true
Shepherd  who  should  redeem  it.     He
was    to  be    the   descendant  of    their
shepherd-king.

445


CHAP,  xxm


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


1.  Exhibit  the  delightful  character
tinder  which  Christ  is  portrayed.

2.  Specify  some  of  the  circumstances
that  put  an  emphasis  and  value  upon
the  redemption  He  has  achieved.

L  Exhibit  the  delightful  character
under  which  Christ  is  here  pre-
sented. The  Lord  is  our  righteous-
ness.

Every  title  which  Christ  bears  opens
a  source  of  consolation  to  His  people.
They  are  so  many  beautiful  notices  of
Himself,  and  shadow  forth  blessings.

i.  In  His  essential  dignity,  "  The
Lord."   Jehovah.    Incommunicableness.

We  are  thus  led  up  before  the  springs
of  Time.  **  His  goings  forth  have  been
of  old  from  everlasting.**  Before  the
dayspring  knew  its  place.  All  things
were  derived  from  Him ;  He  was  before
all  things  were;  He  shall  be  when  they
cease  to  exist.  The  message  to  the
seven  churches  begins  with,  "  Grace^
mercy,  peace,  from  Him  iviAT  is,  and
"WAS,  and  is  to  COME,  the  A  Imighty :  "
and  He  who  there  speaks  says,  **  /  am
Alpha  and  Omega.**  The  Jehovah  of
the  Old  Testament  is  the  Loed  of  the
New  :  the  seed  of  David :  over  all  God.

All  the  evidence  concurs  in  this,  that
the  Redeemer  of  the  world  was  to  be
Divine  as  well  as  human.  This  was
necessary  that  He  might  transact  our
salvation  on  equal  terms,  and  that  the
virtue  of  His  offering  might  be  avail-
able and  efficacious  on  our  behalf.  Take
away  His  humanity,  and  He  would
have  no  sacrifice  to  offer  :  take  away
His  divinity,  and  His  sacrifice  would
have  no  inherent  merit.  The  doctrines
of  Christ's  merit  and  of  Christ's  Divinity
are  inseparable,  for  if  the  one  be  re-
moved, the  other  must  fall,  of  course ;
and  with  them  the  whole  fabric  of  our
redemption.

ii.  His  mediatorial  office,  "Our  right-
eousness." So  important  is  this  that
our  Lord  takes  His  name  from  it.  It
is  the  title  by  which  He  loves  to  be
distinguished,  and  all  who  would  speak
to  His  honour  must  make  mention
of  His  righteousness.  It  was  no  un-
nsual  thing  for  the  warriors,  princes,
and  great  men  of  antiquity  to  take
their  names  from  the  countries  con-
446


quered,  or  the  exploits  they  had
achieved.  As  Scipio  from  his  con-
quest of  Africa,  and  Coriolanus  from
his  over  the  Corioli.  So  Christ  from
redemption.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  the
whole  Gospel  lies  hid.

The  necessity  for  this  scheme  of
substitution  arose  out  of  human  de-
pravity, and  the  inflexible  rectitude  of
the  Divine  government.  It  was  neces-
sary that  as  we  had  lost  our  righteous-
ness it  should  be  restored  in  Christ.
"  Die  HCf  or  justice  must.**  To  fulfil
the  high  condition  Jesus  interposed.
Here  was  glory  for  our  meanness,
suffering  for  our  ransom.  It  was
exacted.

Here  we  see  the  grand  reality  to
which  all  the  shadows  of  the  Jewish
law  pointed.     "  It  became  Him,"  etc.

iii.  In  the  spiritual  relation  in  which
He  stands  to  His  people — intended  in
the  term  *'  our  righteousness."

A  spiritual  union  is  presupposed
between  us  and  Him,  of  which  faith  is
the  connecting  link — in  consequence
of  which  the  penalty  we  incurred  is
borne  by  Him,  and  the  righteousness
He  wrought  out  on  Calvary  is  applied
to  us.  The  inheritance  was  to  be
redeemed  by  the  Goel  or  near  kinsman.
"  Both  He  that  sanctifieth,"  etc.

Rest  not  till  you  can  rest  in  Christ,
as  made  of  God  to  you  wisdom,  right-
eousness, sanctification,  and  redemp-
tion. It  is  the  personal  experience
and  the  personal  application  of  Christ's
benefits  which  we  need.  "  /  know
whom  I  have  believed,**  "/  know  my
Redeemer."

II.  Specify  some  considerations
which  put  an  emphasis  and  value
upon  redemption,  and  heighten  our
sense  of  its  importance.

i.  The  work  of  redemption  has  en-
nobled our  nature  and  shed  a  lustre
over  the  annals  of  our  world.  He  took
not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels — laid
not  hold  on  them.  Those  first-born
sons  of  immortality  were  left  in  their
sins.  No  "  mighty  to  save  "  appeared
for  them.  No  ark  in  their  deluge  :  no
refuge  city  in  their  land :  no  brazen
serpent  in  their  camp  :  no  star  of
Bethlehem  in  their  skj  I


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JSRBMIAB.


>.  xzni.


Christ  ennobles  all  with  which  He
comes  in  contact.  The  very  place  is
memorable.  "  Thou  Bethlehem  Ephrata"
The  times  are  memorable.  Jesus  fills  an
era  of  His  own.  "  In  His  days  Judah
saved."  We  date  from  His  death — we
memorialise  His  death — **  show  forth
the  Lord^s  death.^*

ii.  It  eclipses  and  throws  into  the  shade
the  greatest  of  the  Divine  works,  "  No
more  say  the  Lord  livetb,  who  brought
Israel  from  Egypt."  Babylon  was  to
eclipse  the  deliverance  from  Egypt —
and  Calvary  that  of  Babylon.

iiL  It  enhances  the  value  of  temporal
blessings  following  in  its  train .  "  Judah
shall  be  saved  " — when  God  is  known  as
her  righteousness.  ^

iv.  It  forms  a  permanent  bond  of
union  among  subjects  of  grace.  "Judah
and  Israel."

Finally,  judge  of  the  grandeur  of  the
work  by  the  doom  denounced  against
those  who  despise  and  reject  it.  "  Be-
hold, ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and
perish."  **  Of  how  much  sorer  punish-
ment," <fca--AS'.  Thodey,  a.d.  1838.

Vers.  6-6.  Them^:  The  Christian

CREED   SUMMARISED.

The  ancient  fathers  agreed  that  this
prophecy  was  not  fulfilled  on  the  re-
turn of  the  Jews  under  Zerubbabel,  but
is  accomplished  by  the  restoration  of
all  true  Israelites  in  Christ.

I.  The  manhood  of  the  Messiah  is
here  declared.  "  I  will  raise  unto
David  a  righteous  branch  "  (comp.  Isa.
xi.  1).

n.  Christ's  royal  majesty  and  judi-
cial authority  are  prophetically  an-
nounced. "And  a  King  shall  reign  and
prosper,  and  shall  execute  judgment
and  justice  in  the  earth."

III.  His  saving  power  and  love  as
our  Redeemer  are  also  affirmed.  "  In
His  days  Judah  shall  be  saved  and
Israel  shall  dwell  safely."

IV.  Here  is  a  clear  assertion  that  He
who  has  been  pre-announced  as  Very
Man  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  as  an
Eternal  King  and  Kighteous  Judge,
and  as  a  mighty  Saviour  and  Deliverer,
is  also  the  Lord,  Jehovah,  Very  God,
and,  being  Very  God  as  well  as  Very


Man,  is  Oxtb  KiGHTEOUSKBta — Bishop

Wordsworth.

Theme:  Christ's  bight  to  this  name

VINDICATED.

To  speak  of  a  person  as  "  Thb
Lord  Our  Rightneousness,"  and  to
say  that  His  name  was  to  be  called
Jehovah,  would  be  very  dangerous
unless  His  name  really  was  Je-
hovah.

I.  According  to  the  whole  teach-
ing of  the  Christian  Scripture,  it  can-
not be  predicated  of  Jehovah,
regarded  as  a  name  of  God  the
Father,  that  He  is  "our  righteous-
ness." On  the  contrary,  the  Father
is  our  righteous  Lawgiver  and  Judge,
and  we  are  liable  to  Him  for  the
punishment  of  our  sins.

II.  We  may  safely  predicate
"our  righteousness"  of  Christ,  who
is  here  called  "  the  Lord  our  righteous-
ness."

For  the  Apostle  has  expressly  taught
us  that  "  Christ  is  made  unto  us  right-
eousness "  (1  Cor.  i  30).  As  Man  He
was  able  to  suffer  for  us  :  as  God  He
is  able  to  reconcile  the  Father  to  us.

Not  only,  therefore,  may  Christ  "  our
righteousness  "  be  called  Jehovah,  but
by  being  also  called  "  OUR  righteous-
ness "  he  is  thereby  distinguished  from
God  the  Father,  and  becomes  our
Jehovah  and  our  righteousness  :  the
God-Man  consecrated  to  man's  redemp-
tion.— Comp.  Bishop  Pearson  on  thia
text,  Art.  ii.  p.  148.

Them^e:  "  Jbhova  Justitia  Nostra.*

This  name  is  compounded  of  these
three  words — all  of  them  essential  :
and  it  makes  a  "  threefold  cord  which
cannot  be  broken  ;"  which,  except  it
be  entire,  and  have  all  three,  it  loseth
the  virtue,  it  worketh  nothing.

i.  "Jehova."  Why  that  must  be
a  part  of  this  name.  David  shows  (Ps.
Ixxi.  16),  because  only  His  righteous-
ness is  worth  remembering ;  and  no
other  is  fit  to  be  mentioned.  For  our
own  "  righteousness "  is  odious  (Isa.
Ixiv.  6,  and  Phil.  iv.  8).

il  Justitia.  Why  ''righteousness*'
rather  than  "salvation"  or  "peace**!

447


cHap.  xxiil.


BOM  1  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAS.


Because  salvation  and  peace  are  the
fruits  wliich  grow  on  **  Righteousness  "
as  the  "  Branch  "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  7).

iii.  Jehova  Justitia.  Why  is
"  Jehovah "  here  associated  with
"  righteousness  "  rather  than  with  some
other  attribute,  as  of  "  power "  or
"  mercy  "  ?  Because  it  is  "  God  with
us  "  (Isa.  vii.  10),  chiefly  in  this  pro-
perty of  righteousness  as  above  all
other  Divine  properties.

David  calls  Him  Jehova  misericordia
(Ps.  lix.  17),  and  true  it  is  that  mercy  is
ours.  But  justice  is  against  us ;  and
except  "justice  "  also  be  made  "ours,"
all  is  not  as  it  should  be.  But  if  jus-
tice— that  in  God  which  only  is  against
us — might  be  made  for  us,  then  are  we
safe.  Tiierefore,  all  our  thought  is
how  we  may  get  ^^  mercy  to  triumph
over  justice"  (Jas.  ii.  13),  or  how  we
may  get  them  to  meet  and  he  friends
(Ps.  Ixxxv.  10).  Hence,  therefore,
neither  Jehova  potentia  nor  Jehova
misericordia  are  enough,  but  it  must
be  Jehova  justitia.

iv.  Nostra.  Without  this  "Jeho-
vah "  alone  doth  not  concern  us,  while
"  Jehovah  justitia "  is  wholly  against
u?».  But  if  He  be  not  alone  "  righteous-
ness," but  ours  too,  we  have  our  desires.
Verily  this  possessive  word  of  applica-
tion is  all  in  all. — Bishop  Andrewes
(Works,  vol.  V.  Sermon  5).  See  further
Noticeable  Topics.

Vers.  7,  8.  Repeated  from  chap.  xvi.
14,  15.  See  Homily  in  loc.  But  see
Noticeable  Topics  below :  "  The  Lost
Ten  Tribes."

Ver.  9.  Theme  :  Horror  over  faith-
less PROPHETS.  The  Prophet  seems
"  beside  himself  for  God''  as  Paul  was  ;
a  mad  enthusiast ;  "  like  a  man  whom
wine  hath  overcome."  He  had  suffi-
cient cause.

L  Intense  grief  over  false  teachers.
**  Mine  heart  within  me  is  broken  be-
cause of  the  prophets."  1.  Their
unckedness  in  teaching  delusions.  This
incensed  his  pious  soul.  2.  Their
ruinous  misleading  of  the  nation.  This
disturbed  his  patriotic  spirit.

H  Profound  terror  over  approach-
443


ing  disasters.  "  All  my  bones  shake,
I  am  like  a  drunken  man."  For,  1.
He  himself  clearly  knew  the  disasters
which  false  prophets  sought  to  obscure
and  hide.  2.  He  vividly  apprehended
the  agonies  into  which  his  nation  would
speedily  be  plunged.  See  Addenda:
Negligent  pastors.

III.  Deepest  awe  over  Grod's  ter-
ribleness.  "  Because  of  the  Lord  and
the  words  of  His  holiness."  1.  He
knew  with  whom  these  prophets  were
trifling.  "  And  knowing  the  terrors  of
the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  2.  He
realised  the  compulsion  of  God^s  holy
words.  God  never  threatened  willingly ;
but  when  necessity  led  Him  to  pro-
nounce doom,  it  was  appalling  to  think
of  what  it  meant.

Vers.  10-12.  Theme:  God's  wrath
over  national  vices.  Here  is  a  cata-
logue of  criminalities,  together  with
their  penalties.

L  Outrages  by  man  against  God.
Sin  has  manifold  names  and  shapes,  all
offensive.  Here  is  a  specification  of
some  especially  odious.

1.  Immorality.  "  Land  full  of  adul-
terers." Literal:  for  fornication  was
the  common  attendant  of  idolatry.
And  this  by  "  prophets,"  and  by  the
people  throughout  the  land,  who  were
encouraged  thereto  by  the  example  of
their  leaders.  Spiritual  adultery  also  ;
Israel  had  forsaken  her  Husband  for
idols  (Jer.  iii.  8-10,  20).

2.  Foul  speech,  ^^&vTQ2ixmg.^*  Margin,
cursing,  [This  interpretation  can  only
be  given  by  licence,  for  the  text  most
probably  means,  because  of  the  curse  {of
God)  the  land  mourneth].  Yet  Hosea
(iv.  2,  3)  warrants  the  use  of  the  text  as
it  stands  in  the  E.V.  God  hears  and
hates  blasphemous  language.

3.  Persistent  wrongdoing.  "  Their
course  is  evil,  and  their  force  is  not
right."  1.  The  current  of  their  life  is
bad.  Low  public  tastes  and  manners.
2.  The  intention  of  their  life  is  dis-
honourable ;  they  use  their  personal
powers  i^*" force  )  and  civil  powers  and
ecclesiastical  powers,  not  for  rectitude,
but  deceit  and  oppression  and  impiety.

4.  Sacrilege.       1.   Religious    officers


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


QBAf.  xxin.


tvere  tliemselves  "profane*^  (ver  11),
2.  Soli/  scenes  were  degraded  hj"itncked-
ness^

II.  Disasters  from  God  upon  man.
Sin  has  manifold  penalties  and  punish-
ments ;  her^  is  an  enumeration  of  some
especially  disastrous.

1.  Pleasures  all  desolated,  "Pleasant
places  of  the  wilderness  are  dried  up  *'
(ver.  10).  For  it  should  be  recognised
that  men  occupy  a  *'  wilderness.'^  Earth
is  not  naturally  fruitful  of  luxury  and
pleasure.  All  its  "  pleasant  places  "  are
God's  gifts,  specially  provided  for  us.
Therefore  He  can  easily  turn  its  plea-
sures into  drought,  and  He  will  do  so  if
we  abuse  His  grace.  Then  life  becomes
a  blank  waste,  and  the  heart  is  left
without  comfort.

2.  False  ways  made  fatal,  God
will  allow  them  to  pursue  *'  their  way  "
(ver.  12)  ;  give  them  up  to  their  heart's
desire ;  not  arresting  them,  simply
let  them  alone  to  become  befooled,
besotted,  benighted.  "  In  the  darkness  "
they  should  not  be  shown  their  peril  so
as  to  become  alarmed,  and  certainly
should  not  find  escape,  but  slide  down
into  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.

3.  Forces  of  evil  should  seize  them.  Sin
when  indulged  in  the  heart  and  habits
assumes  a  tyrannical  despotism,  and
**  drives  on  "  the  sinner  (ver.  1 2).  Once
sin  merely  pleaded  and  decoyed,  now  it
forces  and  masters  the  soul ;  and  the  sin-
ner shall  ''fall  "—where  ?  "  Therein,"
ie,,  into  the  depths  of  woe,  which  end
the  **  slippery  ways  of  darkness."

4.  God  Himself  will  visit  sinners  with
evil  (ver.  12).  Though  God  delays  the
judgment,  yet,  (1.)  There  comes  a  time  of
judgment,  "  even  the  year  of  their  visi-
tation, saith  the  Lord."  (2.)  Then  God
will  Himself  bring  evil  upon  them.  "  It
is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands
of  the  living  God."  "  Turn  ye  from
your  evil  ways,  for  why  will  ye  die  ?  *'
•'-'Comp,  Homily  on  chap.  xi.  26.

Vera.  13,  14.  Theme:  Comparative
SINFULNESS.  "Folly  in  the  prophets
of  Samaria,  ...  in  the  prophets  of
Jerusalem  an  horrible  thing."

I.  Sins  are  not  regarded  by  God  as
of  equal  magnitude.
2e


1.  Som^  evils  are  mistakes.  **  Folly,*
and  "  they  cause  to  err."

2.  Others  are  malignant,  "  Horrible
thing,"  **  wickedness."

IL  Sins  take  their  colour  and
degree  from  circumstances.

1.  The  location  of  our  life  affects  the
moral  qualities  of  conduct.  The  same
acts  done  *'  in  Samaria  "  had  less  wrong
in  them  than  when  done  "in  Jeru-
salem," because  there  was  more  religious
light  in  Jerusalem.

2.  Guilt  is  guiltiest  when  done  in  the
face  of  God.  It  was  stupidity  when
done  ''in  Baal,"  in  connection  with
Baal.  It  was  absolutely  "  horrible "
when  done  in  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem,
the  seat  of  God's  Holy  Throne  and
Shekinah  glory.  Thus  "exalted  unto
heaven,"  they  should  be  "  thrust  down
to  helL"

m.  Sins  involve  all  wrong-doers  in
pitiable  distress.

1.  Though  proportioned  to  the  degree
of  guiltiness,  yet  the  lightest  punishment
of  sin  must  be  appalling.  The  "  few
stripes  "  involve  banishment  from  God
and  heaven,  for  "  the  unclean  shall  not
dwell  therein."

2.  2'he  heaviest  woes  of  sin  are  terrir
fying  to  contemplate,  "They  are  all  of
them  unto  me  as  Sodom,  and  the  in-
habitants thereof  as  Gomorrah."  Over-
whelmed with  ruin,  and  destroyed  with
"  fire  and  brimstone."

Ver.    14.    Theme:    Str£nothenino

THE  HANDS  OF   THE  WICKED.       "  /  have

seen  also  in  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  an
horrible  thing.  They  strengthen  the  hands
of  evil-doers,  that  none  doth  return  from
his  wickedness,"

L  All  sin  is  horrible  in  its  nature.
It  is  contrary  to  the  character  and  will
of  an  Infinite  Being  —  a  Being  of
glorious  purity,  supreme  authority,  and
almighty  power;  a  Being  who  cannot
be  tempted  with  evil,  nor  even  look  on
iniquity,  <fec.

n.  To  strengthen  the  hands  and
hinder  the  repentance  of  sinners  is
to  oppose  the  great  plan  of  the  Divine
government.

Ill  It  tends  to  the  misery  of  man-
kind, and  is  the  reverse  of  that  bene*

449


CCtAP.  XXIlt.


MOM  I  LET tC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


volence  wMch  onglit  to  govern  ns  in
all  our  conduct.

IV.  It  is  to  operate  with  that  evil
spirit  who  works  in  the  children  of
disobedience.

V.  It  is  a  horrible  thing,  because
we  thus  become  partakers  of  their
sins.

VI.  It  is  directly  contrary  to  God's
commands,  and  marked  with  His
peculiar  abhorrence.

Application : —

To  teachers  of  religion;  to  Chris-
tians in  general ;  to  heads  of  families ;
to  the  young.  It  is  also  horrible  to
be  strengthened  in  evil-doing.  —  Dr*
Lathrop,

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Prbaohers  tested

BY  THEIR  HEARERS.

I.  False  preaching  may  be  dis-
covered.

1.  It  is  here  described,  "A  vision
of  their  own  heart/'  &c.  ;  entertain  with
/anciful  theories.

2.  It  may  be  detected.  "  They  make
you  vain  ;"  deceive  with  false  hopes.  In
ver.  17  their  preaching  is  further  de-
scribed.

(a.)  To  despisers  of  God  peace  is
promised.

(6.)  To  toilful  sinners  immunity  is
assured.

XL  Hearers  must  refuse  wrong
teaching.  The  Churchy  and  not  her
ministers,  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of
the  truth.

1.  The  exercise  of  the  right  of  *'  try-
ing the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God  "
has  its  perils  and  difficulties.  Ignorant,
misguided,  and  narrow-minded  men
may  make  a  preacher  **  an  offender  for
a  word.**  Timid  souls  may  take  quick
alarm.  Impatient  listeners  may  judge
in  haste  and  without  ample  reasons.

2.  Yet  the  non- exercise  of  this  right  is
a  grave  misdemeanour  on  the  part  of  the
Church.  God  commands  hearers  to
"  take  heed  how  they  hear,"  and  to
"try  the  spirits/'  <kc.  Not  to  do  so
indicates  spiritual  inertia,  intellectual
Indifference,  and  neglect  of  highest
trusts.  It  exposes  the  Church  to  the
grossest  misleading,  and  leaves  the
pulpit  to  reckless  adveuturera

450


m.  God's  truth  is  perceivable  by
the  common  people.  Home  and  arro-
gant priests  would  have  us  believe  that
hearers  are  to  receive  what  is  taught
them,  being  incapable  of  judging  their
teachers.

1.  The  doctrine  of  the  Law  was  suffi-
ctent  to  guide  Judah  concerning  the
teachings  of  prophets.  "  He  who  ran
might  read/*  if  he  sought  to  know.

2.  Certainly,  therefore,  the  doctrines
of  the  Gospel  are  plain  to  men's  under-
standing. "  God  hath  revealed  them
unto  us  by  His  Spirit."

Lessons —

1.  Seek  to  know  God's  truth  by  per-
sonal study.

2.  Suffer  no  authority  to  usurp  your
own  judgment.

3.  Challenge  any  teacher  who  speaks
not  according  to  God's  Word.

4.  Take  alarm  at  the  preacher's  mes-
sages which  continually  quiet  the  con-
science and  lull  the  heart

6»  Encourage  and  strengthen  the
earnest  and  outspoken  preacher  who
may  seem  to  "  become  men's  enemy
because  he  tells  them  the  truth."

6.  Make  no  truce  with  the  sins  which
an  honest  preacher  must  denounce.

Ver.  20.  Theme :  God's  anqbe  under-
stood AT  LAST.

I.  Because  sinners  will  not  duly
consider  their  wickedness,  therefore
they  misunderstand  God's  displeasure.

1.  God  sees  our  sin  in  its  most  awful
aspects.  '^  This  abominable  thing  that
I  hate."

2.  Sin  blinds  the  judgment  of  sinners
to  its  heinousness.

3.  Divine  anger  is  rightly  fierce  t«-
wards  conduct  which  would  ruin  thf
order  and  happiness  of  the  whole  intel-
ligent and  moral  world.

4.  Men  not  understanding  what  sin
is,  and  what  it  would  despoil,  think  God
harsh  in  His  denunciations,  and  its  penal-
ties unduly  severe.

IL  Because  sinners  defy  the  fore-
warning of  God's  anger,  therefore  it
will  overwhelm  them  at  the  last.

1.  God  may  defer  the  infliction,  yet
it  carmot  be  delayed  for  ever.

2.  Men  may  defy  the   threatenlngs^


SOMlLETiO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


efiAT.  XX  Hi.


yet  cannot  thwart  the  thoughts  of  the
Lord.

3.  The  full  purposes  of  God  upon
wrong-doers  will  be  ultimately  "per-
formed/*

4.  When  God  begins  with  punish-
ment, His  anger  will  not  stay  till  it
execute  fullest  vengeance.

III.  When  sinners  feel  the  final  woes
their  sins  deserve,  they  will  then  awake
to  their  just  deserts.

1.  With  this  nation  it  was  so ;  Jeru-
salem was  destroyed,  and  the  exiles,
taught  by  the  sore  adversity  of  capti-
vity, saw  then  how  their  sin  brought
woes  on  themselves  and  ruin  on  their
country,

2.  Even  in  this  world  God  makes
sinners  realise  that  their  guilt  is  the
cause  of  their  misery  of  heart  and  life.
As  in  perilous  illness,  or  sudden  cala-
mity,

3.  But  it  is  in  the  future  that  the
ungodly  will  learn  their  full  iniquity,
and  justify  the  ways  of  God  with  them.

Ver.  22.  Theme:  The  seoret  of  ▲
SUCCESSFUL  MINISTRY.  The  true  pro-
phet will  be  characterised  by  no  inde-
cent haste  (ver.  21)  in  assuming  his
oflSce ;  but  when  commissioned,  will
faithfully  perform  its  duties.

I.  God's  messenger  —  whence  he
gains  his  message.  ''Stood  in  My
counsel.'*  The  Hebrew  word  "  coun-
sel "  (sdd)  means  a  confidential  meeting
of  private  friends.  In  Psa.  xxv.  14  it
is  rendered  the  secret^  i.e.,  confidential
fellowship.

1.  The  preacher  in  private  converse
with  God.

2.  Coming  from  that  hidden  fellow-
ship with  a  message  to  men.

3.  Solemnity  and  grandeur  of  the
office.

4.  The  majestic  force  of  conviction
thus  sustaining  the  preacher  while  de-
livering his  message.

n.  God's  messenger  —  what  he
preaches  to  men.  ''  Caused  My  people
to  hear  My  words."

1.  Divine  truths  gained  from  Gtod's
mouth  (ver.  16).

2.  Messages  which  foster  no  deln-
sions  (ver.  17).


Si  Human  theories  (  "  visions,"  ver.
16)  kept  in  abeyance  that  only  God's
"  words  "  may  gain  heed.

4.  God's  utterances  preached  with  the
fervour  which  "  causes  "  the  **  people
to  hear."

III.  God's  messenger— what  effects
crown  a  true  ministry.

1.  What  is  the  Divine  preacher's
supreme  aim  ?  "  To  turn  men  from
their  evil  way,"  <fcc.

2.  What  are  the  Divine  teacher's
best  credentials?  That  his  preaching
does  accomplish  this  result.  "  Then
they  should  have  turned  them,"  <kc.

3.  What  are  the  Divine  preacher's
richest  rewards?  Not  worldly  favour
or  power,  but  sinners  turned  from  the
error  of  their  ways;  souls  won  for  Christ,
his  "  crown  of  rejoicing."

Ver.  23.  Theme:    God's  nbabnbss

EVERYWHERE.

Sinners,  amid  iniquitous  doings,  often
resort  to  atheistical  subterfuges,  **  God
seeth  us  not."  Needful,  therefore,  that
they  be  confronted  with  the  very  first
principles  of  religion — God's  omnipre-
sence and  omniscience.  National  reli-
gion affirms  these  attributes  of  Deity.
Revelation  confirms  and  enlarges  the
doctrine.  God  everywhere :  seeing  all,
near  all.

L  All  space  is  pervaded  by  God
Himself.  "  He  is  at  hand  :  "  but
equally  He  is  "  afar  off."  Near  us  on
earth,  as  He  is  near  those  in  heaven.

1.  J^ear  us  in  personal  presence,
God  "  stands  before  the  door."  "  Com-
passes our  path,"  &c.

2.  Near  us  in  minute  perception.
"  His  eyes  behold,"  &c.  "  Run  to  and
fro."

3.  Near  us  in  mighty  power.  "  Doing
according  to  His  will  among  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth,"  as  well  as  amid
the  "  armies  of  heaven."  "  No  place
can  either  mclude  Him  or  «a«jlude  Him."
(ffenry.)

II.  All  actions  are  performed  in
God's  full  gaze.

1.  The  thought  of  secrecy  is  a  delusion.
We  live,  move,  think,  act  in  the  full
blaze  of  the  searching  light  of  omni'
science,

451


oBAP.  xxm.


BO  Ml  LET  IG  COMMENTARY :  JERBMIAB,


2.  The  deeds  of  human  life  are
Divinely  scanned.  He  reads  them
through  and  through  —  motive  and
method,  all  keenly  and  completely
discerned.

3  The  judgments  of  God  are  based
upon  perfect  knowledge  of  facts.  This
is  consolatory  to  the  righteous — who
are  often  misrepresented  and  maligned.
This  is  admonitory  to  the  irreligious —
who  will  be  destitute  of  all  hope  of
excuse  or  covert  in  the  day  of  decision.

4.  Such  universal  knowledge^  from
personal  supervision  of  the  universe^
throughout  all  time,  is  both  necessary
to  a  proper  idea  of  a  God — the  world's
Ruler,  Sustainer,  and  Judge  ;  and  it  is
a  guarantee  of  rectitude  in  the  adminis-
tration of  Divine  providence  now  and  of
Divine  rewards  and  punishment  here-
after. He  will  depend  on  no  secondary
source  of  knowledge  of  us — not  even
on  the  reports  of  angel  ministers  :  "  all
things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the
eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."

ni.  All  scenes  are  equally  favour-
able to  revelations  of  God.

1.  In  heaven^  where  He  seems  locally
"  near,"  pure  and  redeemed  souls  may
look  upon  Him,  and  glory  in  His  cloud-
less presence.

2.  On  earthy  though  clouds  and
darkness  hide  Him,  and  we  think  of
God  as  "  afar  off,"  He  can  yet  make
Himself  known  to  our  souls.

3.  Even  in  hell,  the  scene  of  banish-
ment from  Him,  God  may — certainly
He  can — show  Himself  to  outcast  souls
whose  desire  it  will  be  to  "  hide  them-
selves from  the  face  of  Him  that  sitteth
upon  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath
of  the  Lamb." — See  Addenda  :  God's
Omnipresence.

Vers.  23-24.  Theme:  The  all-
present  God.

Always  present  and  everywhere  pre-
sent. Three  interrogations  are  here
submitted :  but  not  to  imply  a  ques-
tion or  doubt  as  to  the  facts  interro-
gated, but  to  emphasise  the  truths
brought  thereby  upon  attention.

L  The  sublime  fact  of  Qod^a  omni-
presence is  affirmed  (ver.  23);  God  is
near  at  hand,  and  i$  present  afar  ofL
452


ii.  The  co-ordinate  truth  of  God's
omniscience  (ver.  24).  There  are  no
secret  places  to  God.

iii.  The   spirituality   of   God  —  Hi#
immaterial  essence  is  likewise  affirmed:
— for  Hq fills  the  universe,  "  heaven  and
earth  ;  "  the  Great  Spirit  present  every-
where.

L  Verily  this  omnipresent  Spiri-
tual Being  is  worthy  of  human  wor-
ship. If  we  had  to  search  out  whom  to
adore  and  obey,  who  can  compare  vrith
God.

1.  Such  attributes  constrain  our
homage.

2.  Such  greatness  impresses  on  us
the  thought  that  it  is  well  that  we  he
reconciled  to  One  so  majestic  and
mighty.

3.  Such  a  God,  everywhere  near,  it
is  easy  to  worship  and  wise  to  trust.
He  can  know  all  things  on  our  behalf
and  do  all  we  need.

n.  Eqiually  clear  it  is  that  any
lower  object  of  worship  is  an  error.

1.  Idolatry  is  reprehensible.  It  ele-
vates inferiors  (even  if  idols  had  any
real  existence)  into  ascendancy.  It
wrongs  God  ;  it  gives  His  glory  to
anotlier  ;  and  it  angers  Him.

2.  Divided  affections  are  inconsistent
with  true  homage.  We  can  have  but
one  God.  He  will  not  be  placed  on  a
level  with  another  object  of  regard.
"  Beside  Me  is  none  else."

IIL  The  loftiest  reverence  and
truest  loyalty  become  us  in  relation
to  a  God  so  glorious.

1.  What  thoughts  and  feelings  can  be
too  elevated  as  we  think  of  Him.

2.  Wh>at  devotion  can  exceed  His
claims.

3.  What  a  privilege  to  be  permitted
to  hide  our  life  in  such  a  God  !  "  Hid
with  Christ  in  God."

IV.  Security  and  peace  are  assured
to  the  godly  soul  in  the  fact  of  the
Divine  omnipresence.

1,  God  will  guard  him  from  the
lurking  forces  and  subtleties  of  sin.
"Can  any  hide,'*  <fcc.  God  sees  His
saints  in  all  scenes  and  circumstances,
and  will  keep  them  safely.

2.  God  wUl  be  ever  near  him;  his
solace  and  sufficiency.     He  is  at  hand


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAp.  xxm.


to  cherish,  to  guide — in  life  and  death ;
till  the  redeemed  soul  reaches  Him  in
heaven.

Vera.  28,  29.  Theme:  Fidelity  re-
quired IN  MINISTERS.

"  He  that  hath  My  wordy  let  him  speak
My  word  faithfully.  What  is  the  chaff
to  the  wheat?  saith  the  Lord,"

No  order  is  more  influential  on  society
than  ministers.  The  old  prophets,  if
faithful  to  their  God,  diffused  incalcul-
able blessings  through  the  land ;  if
falsCf  hardened  the  people  in  their
wickedness.  Ministers  to-day  produce
like  effects.

I.  A  solemn  iDJunction  to  all  who
bear  the  office  of  the  ministry.

The  Word  of  God  is  put  into  our
hands,  and  a  dispensation  is  committed
to  us  to  preach  it.  This  office  we  must
execute  ''faithfully;"  we  must  speak
the  Word —

1.  Unreservedly  J  without  concealment
(Acts  XX.  20,  27).  Our  object  must  be
(Prov.  XL  30)  our  manner  (2  Cor.  iv.
2);  and  our  motto  (2  Cor.  ii.  17).

2.  Impartially^  without  respect  of
persons.  All  idea  of  pleasing  men
must  be  abandoned  (Gal.  i.  10).  We
must  follow  the  fidelity  of  Paul  (1  Thess.
ii.  3-6),  using  "great  plainness  of
speech''  (2  Cor.  iil  12,  13).

3.  Boldly^  without  fear.  The  pro-
phets were  so  enjoined  to  speak  (Jer.
i  8,  17;  Ezek.  ii.  6,  7).  We  must
expect  hatred  (John  iii.  19,  20) :  but
our  answer  to  opponents  must  be  (Acts
iv.  19,  20) :  and  we  must  account
suffering  in  this  work  our  glory  (Acts
V.  41 ;  Philip,  il  17,  18).

This  injunction  is  further  enforced
by~

II.  A  solemn  appeal  to  the  whole
world.

1.  To  our  judgment.  *'What  is  the
chaff  V  &c.  Of  what  use  were  the
assertions  of  false  prophets  1  They
only  deceived  the  people  to  their  ruin.
Contrast  with  this  the  labours  of  Moses,
David,  Elijah,  Paul.  So  the  true
minister  (1  Tim.  iv.  16 ;  James  v.  20).
God  declares  the  good  effect  of  faithful
teaching  (see  ver.  23).

2.  To  our  experience.     God's  Word,


if  faithfully  declared,  is  "quick  and
powerful"  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Let  any  who
has  observed  its  effects  say  whether  it
is  not  **like  firef"  which  dissolves  the
hardest  metal,  and  "like  a  hammer,"
&c.  Illustrate  by  Nineveh  (Jonah  iii.
4-10),  and  the  scene  at  Pentecost
(Acts  ii.  37,  (fee.)  Verily,  '*it  is  mighty
through  God"  (2  Cor.  x.  4,  5).

There  are  cogent  reasons  for  minis-
terial fidelity.  False  doctrines  save  no
man  ;  but  a  simple  preaching  of  "Christ
crucified  is  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation "  (1  Cor.  1,  23,  24 ;  Rom.  i.
1 6).  Many  are  thereby  "  turned  to
God  from  idols,"  <fec.  (1  Thess.  L  5,  9,
10).

i  Let  mtf  now  discharge  my  duty  to
you.  To  me  is  committed  the  Word  of
God  for  you,  and  woe  is  unto  me  if  I
preach  it  not  with  all  fidelity  (1  Cor.
ix.  16,  17;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  6-8).

ii.  Let  me  call  on  you  to  make  a  due
improvement  of  my  testimony.  Pray ;
seek  God's  blessing  on  the  word
preached,  that  it  may  prove  to  you
*'  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,*'  and  not  of
"  death  unto  death."  It  is  He  who
can  make  the  "  fire "  burn,  and  the
"hammer"  so  mighty  that  no  rock
can  withstand  its  force. — C,  Simeon.

Ver.   28.    Theme:   The  ohafp  and

THE  WHEAT.

"What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat t
saith  the  Lord."

We  may  regard  this  question  as
suggestive  of  the  superiority  of  the  real
to  the  superficial,  and  of  the  substance
to  the  shadow,  <fec.

L  There  are  those  who  make  more
of  the  ritual  and  ceremonial  in  religion
than  they  do  of  the  spirit  and  power.
But,  "What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?
saith  the  Lord."

II.  There  are  those  who  make  more
of  the  speculative,  theoretical,  mys-
terious, and  mystical  in  religion,  than
of  the  plain,  practical,  experimental,
and  useful.  But,  "  What  is  the  chaff! "
&c,

III.  There  are  those  who  make  more
of  the  name,  profession,  and  show  of
godliness  than  they  do  of  godliness
itself.     But,  "  What  is  the  chaff  1 "  <fec.

453


CHAP.  xxin.


BOUILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JBRBMIAB.


TV,  There  are  those  who  attach  more
importance  to  words,  style,  manner,
appearance,  and  persons  in  preaching,
than  they  do  to  the  truth  of  Scripture,
But,  "  What  is  the  chaflf  to  the  wheat  1
saith  the  Lord." — Lay  Preacher,

Ver.  28.  Theme  :  Lying  communioa-
TioNS  AND  God's  truth.

**What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?**

Jehovah  had  contrasted  the  godless
inventions  of  false  teachers  with  the
truth  of  His  own  assertions,  and  hav-
ing desired  that  each  message  might  be
stated  as  each  deserved  (ver.  28),  pro-
ceeds to  compare  the  lying  communi-
cations of  men  with  the  true  sayings  of
God.

In  the  corrupt  heart  within  us  there
exists  and  labours  so  perverse  and  de-
structive a  tendency  to  prefer  the  chaff
to  the  wheat,  as  to  incur  the  peril  of
choosing  the  false  rather  than  the  true.
Therefore  the  attempt  is  here  made  to
expose  some  of  these  misapprehensions.

I.  What  are  worldly  maxims  com-
pared with  the  Word  of  God,  but  as
the  chaff  to  the  wheat  1  The  whole
world  lieth  under  the  power  of  the
"  father  of  lies."

1.  Regard  the  conduct  of  men  of  the
world,  and  by  what  maxim  are  they
governed  t  to  what  authority  do  they
bow]  Of  Him  who  created,  sustains,
redeemed  them,  or  of  him  who  deceived
our  first  parents,  and  has  ever  since  been
spreading  snares  for  their  posterity  ?

2.  What  lessons  does  the  world  teach
its  disciples  f  To  be  lovers  of  pleasure
more  than  the  lovers  of  God  ;  to  wor-
ship the  creature  more  than  the  Creator ;
to  spend  the  precious  season  of  mercy
in  laying  up  deceitful  treasure  for  self ;
to  say  to  the  ensnared  soul,  "  Soul,  take
thine  ease,"  &c. ;  or,  '*  Let  us  eat  and
drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die.*'  Does  not
the  world  stigmatise  all  true  religion,
the  privileges  of  Christian  life,  &c.,  as
dreams  of  enthusiasm  and  inventions  of
hypocrisy ;  and  a  zealous  pursuit  of  "  the
one  thing  needful "  as  the  miserable
error  of  "  being  righteous  overmuch  1 "

"  But  what  is  tJie  chaff  to  the  wheat  f  "
— the  authority  of  the  world  compared
with   that  of    the    Supreme   Lord   and
454


King;  the  ridicule  of  the  world  with
the  indignation  of  God;  the  present
judgment  of  men  with  the  decisions  of
the  Book  which  shall  be  opened  at  the
last  day ;  the  world's  standard  of  mor-
ality with  Christ's  requirement  of  a  new
birth  1

There  are  vain  dreamers  (ver.  26).
Suffer  them  not  to  mislead  you  from  an
atoning  Saviour,  <kc  "  Love  not  the
world,"  <fcc.  :  but  heed  the  faithful  teach-
ings of  the  Word  of  God  which  liveth
and  abide th  for  ever.

IL  What  is  the  value  of  that  legal
righteousness  in  which  carnal  man  de-
lights, compared  with  the  righteousness
of  Christ  Jesus,  as  a  ground  of  justifica-
tion with  God  ?  "  The  carnal  man  is
at  enmity  with  God."  He  may  deem
himself,  "  as  touching  the  righteousness
of  the  law,  blameless,"  and  ask,  "  What
lack  I  yet  1 "  But  this  delusion  results
from  ignorance  of  the  spirituality  of  the
Divine  law.  Let  the  Spirit's  illumina-
tion come  to  him,  and  he  will  see  him-
self no  longer  "rich,  increased  with
goods,  and  in  need  of  nothing;  but
wretched,  miserable,"  <kc.

The  terrors  of  the  law  will  sweep  away
all  refuges  of  lies  in  which  the  sinner  has
sheltered  himself,  and  drive  him  to  the
righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  Bepenr
tance  for  sin  will  not  form  that  wedding
garment  which  fits  for  a  seat  at  the  mar-
riage supper  of  the  Lamb.  Nor  is  it
by  "  works  of  righteousness  which  we
have  done "  that  we  are  accepted  with
God.  Christ  alone  is  "made  unto  us
wisdom,  righteousness,"  &c.  "  In  Him
must  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified."
**  What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  t "
Who  that  knows  himself  to  be  a  sinner,
who  knows  anything  of  the  self-sufficient
salvation  of  Jesus,  would  hesitate  a  mo-
ment between  leaning  on  the  broken  reed
of  his  own  goodness,  and  coming  in  faith
to  Christ  Jesus  ?

III.  What  is  the  happiness  of  the
worldling  compared  with  that  of  a
child  of  God,  but  as  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?
*'  There  be  many  which  say,  Who  will
show  us  any  good,"  <fec.

1.  An  eager  desire  after  happiness  is
implanted  in  us  all.

2.  Men  pursue  phantoms  of  e-njoyment


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  xxin.


as  children  might  attempt  to  grasp  a
rainbow  which  has  allured  them.

3.  But  while  all  creature-joys  elude,
"  godliness  is  profitahlel*  <fec.  The  be-
liever has  a  "joy  which  no  man  taketh
from  him."  "  Say  ye  to  the  righteous
that  it  shall  be  well  with  him.**

IV.  What  are  the  present  pleasures
of  sin  compared  with  the  glories  of
heaven  ?

1.  This  glad  prospect  sinners  have
forfeited  for  the  mocking  indulgences  of
life.    "  Thou  hast  had  thy  good  things."

2.  Christ  Himself  will  effectually
forbid  heaven! s  joys  to  Chrisiless  souls,

"  His  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  will
thoroughly  purge/*  <fec.

Has  a  deceived  heart  turned  you
aside  1  Oh,  seek  the  Spirit's  illumina-
tion that  ye  may  escape  the  delusion  of
earthly  vanities  and  find  rest  in  the
Divine  love  now,  and  a  part  in  the  in-
heritance with  the  saints  in  light. —
Partly  taken  from  an  old  and  nameless
MS.

Vers.  28-29.  Theme:  Symbols  of
God's  Word.

"  Wheat— Fire — Hammer.**

I.  In  its  own  essential  properties
God's  Word  is  thus  manifold.

1.  A  vital  and  vitalising  substance:
"  Wheat."  (a.)  Life  inheres  in  it,  (6.)
It  nourishes  life  in  the  eater.

2.  A  refining  and  devouring  element :
**  Fire.*'  (a.)  It  imparts  warmth,  (6.)
It  purges  from  impurities,  from  dross.
(c.)  It  consumes  rubbish.

3.  A  subduing  and  destroying  force  :
"Hammer.**  (a.)  Beating  down  all  re-
sistance in  the  regenerate  heart.  (6.)
Crushing  and  destroying  the  hard  and
defiant  life.

II.  In  its  changeful  aspects  and
revelations  God's  Word  assumes  these
diversities.  It  comes  in  various  forms
to  mankind.

1.  Com  covered  with  husk.  The
Divine  truth  covered  with  the  human
exterior.  "We  have  this  treasure  in
earthen  vessels.*'  Also  the  God-given
message  and  doctrine  mingled  with  the
"chaff**  of  human  theories  and  inter-
pretations.

2.  Fire  in  its  various  forms  and


degrees.  Attractive,  as  the  domestic
fire  which  draws  us  around  its  genial
glow.  Beneficial,  as  the  warmth  to  a
chilled  traveller,  <fcc.  Terrible^  as  the
fiery  furnace  to  those  it  would  consume.

3.  A  Hammer  applied  to  different  uses
and  with  different  force.  Fastening  "  a
nail  in  a  sure  place,**  t.f.,  enforcing  Divine
truth  upon  the  conscience.  "  Breaking
in  pieces  the  rocky  vessel,"  i,e,,  crushing
the  alien  and  antagonistic  heart.

II,  In  the  ministries  it  effects,
God's  Word  needs  to  be  thus  diverse.

1.  Men,  to  whom  God's  Word  is
addressed,  are  in  such  utterly  dissimilar
conditions,  (a.)  Some  need  "  wheat  "
— nourishment;  food  to  sustain  the
Divine  life  within  them.  Men  are  as  soils
of  various  conditions,  into  which  the
wheat-grain  is  cast  by  the  sower.  (6.)
Others  are  as  metal — "  gold  and  silver,"
which  need  refining  ;  or  as  "  wood,
hay,  stuble,**  only  fit  to  be  burned,  (c.)
Others  are  as  the  rock — either  requiring
the  stroke  of  affliction  to  disclose  their
hidden  treasures  and  graces  ;  or  as
destined  to  the  stroke  of  destruction,
being  valueless  for  any  good  end.

2.  Men,  to  whom  God*8  Word  is
addressed,  must  respond  to  its  manifold
purposes.  For  God's  Word  is  to  be
utilised  in  all  its  various  forms  —
"wheat,  fire,  hammer."  (a.)  Cleanse
the  com  of  the  chaff,  and  eat  the  pre-
cious wheat.  (6.)  Welcome  its  purifying
mission f  and  live  in  its  warm  glow,  (c.)
Submit  to  its  strokes,  and  become  com-
pliant to  its  powerful  appeals.

Observe :

i  God's  Word  can  be  refused  as
**  wheat,"  but  cannot  be  evaded  as  "  fire,"
nor  resisted  as  "  a  hammer."

ii.  If  we  receive  not  the  life  it  can
bring  as  food,  we  must  feel  its  con-
suming and  destroying  force.

Theme :    God's  Wokd  akd    man's

WOED.

i.  7%e  former  is  life  and  power
(wheat,  fire,  hammer) ;  the  latter  pre-
tence and  weakness  (dream,  straw).

ii.  The  two  are  not  to  be  mixed  with
each  other.  Why  (add)  the  chaff  to  the
wheat  t  This  rendering  is  admissible.
— Lange,

465


OHAF.  xxnL


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


This  shows,

i.  Tlie  vanity  of  all  human  imagina-
tions in  religion,  (a.)  What  do  they
afford  to  man?  (b.)  How  much  do
they  hinder !

ii.  The  energy  of  spiritual  truth.
Let  us  entreat  God  that  our  estimate
may  be  practical. — Cecil,

Vers.  30-32.  Them^  :  God  the  anta-
gonist OF  FALSE  TEACHERS.  "  ^f-
hold^^  stands  in  front  of  each  of  the
three  declarations  :  it  commands  notice ;
the  subject  is  serious.

**  /  am  against  :  "  God  in  opposition
to  their  wicked  worTc,  to  their  baneful
influence,  and  to  their  very  persons.

I.  God  repudiates  stolen  teachings.
They  were  plagiarists  (ver.  30).  (1.)
They  stole  the  words  they  uttered  from
God's  true  prophets :  (2.)  They  stole
away  the  Divine  meaning  from  those
words  by  their  perverse  rendering  ;  and
(3.)  They  stole  one  another's  fictitious
messages,  thus  reiterating  and  propagat-
insj  lies.

II.  God  denounces  spurious  mes-
sages. Having  no  message  from  God,
the  second  class  used  the  solemn  for-
mula by  which  Jehovah  confirmed  the
validity  of  His  messages  through  His
own  prophets ;  but  in  using  it  they
misused  it :  only  employing  the  form
"  Saith,"  instead  of  ''■  Jehovah  saith."
(1.)  Yet  this  gave  emphasis  to  their
delusive  inventions  :  and  hypocrites
glibly  revel  in  such  free  use  of  solemn
asseverations.  (2.)  They  thereby  de-
ceived their  hearers  into  the  belief  that
God  said  what  they  uttered.  So  with
all  who  preach  human  fancies  and  theo-
ries instead  of  the  Divine  Word.

III.  God  contemns  lying  frivolities.
(1.)  They  acted  a  solemn  part  ivith
slmmeful  levity.  (2.)  They  caused  the
people  to  err  by  their  spurious  teach-
ings.

Notice  here :

i.  What  is  a  teacher's  qualification
for  his  work.  That  God  should  **  send  "
and  "  command  "  him.

ii.  What  is  the  test  by  which  to  try  aU
456


preaching.     If  it  "  profit  not,"  it  has  no
Divine  origin  or  authority.

Vers.  33-40.  Theme :  The  bubden
OF  THE  Lord  on  triflers.

**  Burden "  (Massa)  means  hear
oracle,  prophetic  discourse,  and  there
is  a  play  on  this  double  sense  of  the
Hebrew.

I.  Men's  scoffing  inquiry,  "  What  ia
the  burden  of  the  Lord  ?  "  (ver.  33).

1.  How  they  estimated  God*8  message.
Another  "  burden  " — oppressive  oracle.
So  are  all  God's  messages  and  demands
to  those  "  who  stumble  at  the  Word,
being  disobedient."  And  so  will  always
be  God's  prohibitions  and  threatenings  to
those  who  love  their  sins  and  rebel
against  reproof.

2.  How  they  reviled  God's  messenger.
A  mere  burden-bearer.  Not  a  messensrer
of  good  tidings — not  even  an  ambassador
from  God — not  greeted  with  respect  as
one  who  authoritatively  taught  them
their  duty.  No  !  he  only  brought  them
troublesome  words,  tidings  of  disaster :
and  they  taunted  him  therewith  (comp,
chap.  XX.  8-10  ;  see  also  Mai.  i.  1).

II.  God's  derisive  answers.  You
ask,  *'What  burden?"  '' Ye  are  the
burden"  (see  Lit.  Grit,  supra  on  ver.
33).  And  for  you  the  burden  shall
be  this  :

1.  God  tvill  ca^t  you  off  as  being  a
*'  burden  "  to  Him.  Or,  since  My  word
is  burdensome  in  your  eyes,  you  shall
have  no  more  of  it,  and  that  will  be  a
far  worse  "burden"  to  you — deserted
by  God  and  denied  His  prophetic
word  !

2.  God  will  deal  seriously  with  those
triflers  (ver.  34).  They  used  God's
word  in  derision,  but  it  would  prove
dreadfully  literal  in  its  fulfilment.
Whosoever  shall  in  mockery  call  the
Lord's  word  a  "  burden,"  shall  be  visited
in  wrath.

3.  God  will  turn  His  messages  which
were  intended  to  prove  blessings  into
burdens,  which  shall  press  heavily  on
every  man.

On  ver.  40  comp.  chap.  xx.  11,


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  tdbl


NOTICEABLE   TOPICS   IN  CHAPTER  XXIIL
Topic:  Jesus,  our  Lord  and  Righteousness.     (Vbb.  6.)

Christians  believe  these  words  fulfilled  in  Jesus ;  Jews  look  for  One  to  come.
All  acknowledge  they  refer  to  the  Messiah  :  and  we  may  form  a  judgment  from
this  description  as  to  what  religious  system  they  are  suited  best,  that  of  the  Jew,
the  Unitarian,  or  the  Christian.

i.  The  Christ,  or  Messiah,  of  the  Jew.  They  believe  a  man  of  admirable  wisdom
will  be  born,  descended  from  Royal  family  of  David,  shall  go  round  the  world  to
where  Israelites  are  now  in  banishment,  and  persuade  or  compel  Gentile  rulers  to
let  His  people  return  to  their  native  land.  There,  having  rebuilt  Temple,  and
re-established  ancient  worship,  they  will  be  exposed  to  envy  of  nations,  who  will
invade  and  make  war  upon  their  country ;  but,  at  last,  delivered  frona  all  their
troubles  under  the  anointed  Prince,  all  the  world  shall  become  Jews  like  themselves,
and  send  every  year  gifts  and  sacrifices  to  Temple  of  Jerusalem.

ii.  The  Messiah  of  the  Unitarians.  Already  come;  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the
Saviour,  foretold  by  ancient  prophecy.  But,  when  Christ  came,  He  was  nothing
more  than  a  man  ;  born  (so  many  argue),  not  of  a  virgin,  but  of  Joseph  and  Mary
his  wife ;  sent  by  God  to  preach  to  mankind  a  holy  life,  and  that  all  men  hereafter
should  be  raised  from  the  dead,  and  be  rewarded  according  to  their  works.

iii.  The  Messiah  of  Christians.  Jesus  ;  formed  as  man,  but  God  Himself,
eternally  one  with  Father ;  came  from  heaven,  preached  righteousness  and  resurrec-
tion, but  these  only  subordinate  ends  ;  by  His  obedience,  merits,  and  atonement  by
blood  to  take  off  from  the  world  that  curse  under  which,  since  Adam,  it  had  been.

Examine  meaning  of  language  in  text.

I,  This  prophecy  is  fulfilled  to  the  JewSy  who  expect  in  their  Christ  an  earthly
monarch,  and  to  Christians,  who  believe  that  Christ  is  a  Divine  and  heavenly
monarch.  Jews  suppose  Christ  will  be  man  like  ourselves,  prophet  like  Moses,
but  also  a  mighty  conqueror  and  king.  Christians  believe  that  Christ  from  all
eternity  has  been,  together  with  the  Father  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  Creator  and
Governor  of  the  world ;  that  He  now  sitteth  in  human  form  at  right  hand  of
Father's  glory  ;  will  be  Judge  of  world  at  last.  But  to  Unitarians,  with  whom
Christ  was  a  mere  prophet,  having  no  power  to  rule  world,  no  privilege  of  doing  good
to  His  Church,  how  can  this  prophecy  be  fulfilled  in  Christ?  On  earth,  and  in
human  nature.  He  was  very  unlike  a  *'  king ;"  and  if  He  were  nothing  beyond  man,
these  words  are  inapplicable  to  Him.

II.  This  prophecy  points  out  the  salvation  Christ  would  effect.  "  In  His
days,  saith  the  Lord,  Judah  shall  be  saved."  Jews  and  Christians  have  reasons,
though  different,  for  applying  prophecy  to  Messiah.  They  suppose  He  will  save
them  from  worldly  troubles ;  we  believe  that  He  saves  all  who  trust  in  Him  from
burthen  of  sins  and  wrath  of  God.  But  with  what  salvation  do  Unitarians
accredit  Christ  ?  They  answer  :  By  bringing  a  more  perfect  moral  law.  He  taught
us  to  avoid  sin,  and  tlius  saved  us  from  sin ;  that  by  teaching  resurrection  and
rising  Himself,  He  saved  us  from  fear  of  death  ;  that  by  abolishing  law  of  Moses,
He  saved  v^  from  burdensome  ceremonies.  In  answer  :  Morality  was  equally
enforced  under  Old  Testament;  resurrection  believed  in;  and  Christ  did  not
destroy  and  abolish  the  law.

in  This  prophecy  gives  a  Divine  title  to  the  Messiah :  "  The  Lord  our
Righteousness."  Both  Jews  and  Unitarians  must  be  perplexed,  since  neither
allow  the  Saviour  foretold  was  to  be  other  than  mortal  man.  But  the  word
*'  Lord  *'  is  in  Hebrew  Jehovah.  Accordingly,  we  accept  this  as  proof  that  the
Messiah  must  not  only  be  man  but  God.  This  is  not  refuted  by  the  attempt  to
show  from  chapter  xxiil  16,  that  it  is  not  the  Saviour  who  should  bear  this  awful
name,  but  Judah:  for  that  text  should  read,  '*  He,  who  calleth  Jerusalem,  is  the

457


CHAP.  xxin.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


Lord  our  righteousness  ; "  and  also,  in  this  present  verse,  hoik  Judah  and  Israel  are
united  in  blessing  by  Messiah  ;  so  that,  if  Judah  be  meant  by  this  title,  Israel  must
also;  and  the  word  should  be,  not  *^ He  shall  be  called,"  but  "<Aey  shall  be."
Turn  it  as  we  may,  this  passage  remains  unconquerable  by  those  who  deny  Jesus
to  be  God  and  Lobd  ;  for  it  is  allowed  He  is  Messiah,  and  Messiah  is  no  other
than  Jehovah.

IV.  This  prophecy  further  gives  to  Christ  the  title  of  "  Our  righteousness."
Jews  and  heretics  cannot  explain  this  away ;  they  deny  that  the  blood  of  Christ  is
a  sacrifice,  or  satisfaction,  for  the  sins  of  the  world ;  that  we  are  justified  by  His
death.  Yet  here,  the  Man,  Messiah,  is  not  only  Jehovah,  but  in  His  own  Person
He  is  "  our  righteousness."  But  how  can  man  or  God  become  the  righteousness  of
sinful  creatures,  unless  He  suffer  in  their  stead  the  punishment  of  their  sin,  and  in
their  stead  obey  and  fulfil  the  law  1  How  can  He  make  another  being  righteous,
except  by  proving  him  innocent  of  faults^  or  obeying  the  laws  on  behalf  of  the
offender,  hearing  the  faults  on  Himself ^  and  suffering  his  punishment  1  Hence  it  is
by  the  imputed  merits,  obedience,  and  death  of  Christ  that  we  are  cleansed  from
sin  and  made  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.

We  are  herein  called  to  acknowledge  in  Christ  a  mighty  God  and  most  merciful
Saviour  :  Advocate,  pleading  on  our  behalf  His  own  merits ;  High  Priest,  who  offered
up  His  own  life  for  us ;  Lamb,  whose  blood  washed  us  clean.  Let  us  by  every
action  and  affection  show  our  faith,  love,  and  thankfulness.  Remember  that  Christ
is  our  righteousness  alone  ;  no  merit  in  us ;  and  in  Him  is  the  sinner's  hope. — Con-
densed and  arranged  from  Bishop  Reginald  Heber,  a.d.  1838.

Topic:  The  Eeooyebt  of  the  Ten  Lost  Tribes  vbom  the  North  Country.

(Ver.  8.)

Israel,  or  the  Ten  Lost  Tribes,  were  carried  captive  into  Assyria  in  725  B.o.
Their  captivity  was  complete  in  number  and  time — to  this  day  they  have  not
returned.  The  captivity  of  Judah  in  688  was  partial  in  number  and  time ;  they
returned  and  remained  until  finally  scattered  about  the  year  70  A.D.  Now  they
are  all  in  exile,  but  they  are  to  return  again  to  their  own  land.  And  as  surely  as
the  Jews  now  say,  "  The  Lord  liveth  which  brought  up  His  people  out  of  Egypt,'*
so  will  they  by  and  by  say,  "  The  Lord  liveth  ivhich  brought  up  His  people  out  of  the
North  country,  and.  from  all  the  countries  whither  He  had  driven  them."

L  This  is,  and  has  been,  the  expectation  of  the  Church  for  ages.  From
earliest  centuries  this  has  been  a  prevailing  idea.  Six  years  after  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem,  as  foretold  by  the  prophets  and  the  Saviour,  a  child  was  born  who  in
his  life  was  to  confront  this  idea  in  prophecy,  Hadrian,  the  Roman  Emperor,
born  in  76  A.D.,  died  in  138.  He  hated,  with  a  deadly  hatred,  the  Jews  and  the
Christians.  What  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  standing  in  his  day  he  destroyed,
and  built  a  new  city  on  the  old  site  and  called  it  after  himself,  Elia  Capitolina.  Then
he  forbade  Jew  or  Christian,  under  penalty  of  death,  to  enter  the  same,  declaring
that  he  would  show  them  the  weakness  of  their  hope  and  falsity  of  their  prophets.

Again,  there  was  born  in  Constantinople  another  child,  Nov.  17,  A.D.  331,
who  died  June  26,  a.d.  363,  named  Flavins  Claudius  Julinug,  surnamed  Julian  the
Apostate.  He  said  that  he  would  make  God  a  liar  and  prophecy  false,  for  he
would  gather  the  Jews  and  build  the  Temple.  Some  of  the  Jews  he  did  gather,
and  he  began  to  build  the  Temple,  but  God  was  against  him  by  earthquake  and
by  balls  of  fire  out  of  the  ground,  so  he  ceased  to  fight  against  God.  Even
England  has  sought  to  bring  back  Israel  before  the  time.  Three  successive  times
she  has  conquered  Palestine,  and  given  it  over  to  the  Turks  for  keeping.  Nay,  for
a  time  the  whole  Christian  world  sought  to  force  Providence  in  this  matter.  You
have  read  of  the  wonderful  crusades ;  no  less  than  eight  of  them,  from  1095  to
1272  ;  the  time  was  not  yet,  but  it  will  come.
468


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMTAff,  CHAP.  nra.

n.  Let  us  remeraber  there  is  a  God — a  God  who  has  a  purpose  and  design
both  for  His  people  and  this  land  of  Palestine.  Hear  Him  speak  :  "  The  land
fihall  not  be  sold  for  ever,  for  the  land  is  Mine,  for  ye  are  strangers  and  sojourners
with  Me  "  (Lev.  xxv.  23).

1.  Men  write,  talk,  and  speculate,  but  they  leave  out  the  Divine  quantity  in  their
calculations.  It  is  this  that  has  confused  the  nations  and  the  press.  The  science
of  algebra  has  been  passed  by,  or  this  quantity  could  have  been  found.  There  is
in  nature  a  force,  or  something,  which  science  names  Catalysis.  It  is  the  name  for
the  presence  of  some  force  or  power  that  acts  on  other  things,  rendering  precision
in  the  chemical  laboratory  many  times  impossible.  How  much  this  catalytic
power  is  in  any  compound  or  combination  it  is  difficult  to  tell.  It  is  a  Divine
quantity.  It  is  present  in  the  analysis,  but  not  in  the  synthesis.  The  physiolo-
gist meets  it  everywhere,  but  the  anatomist  nowhere.  Science  can  pull  to  pieces,
but  cannot  put  things  together  the  same,  for  this  catalytic  power  escapes.

2.  Nations,  kings,  rulers,  and  governments  forget  that  the  earth  is  the  Lord's.
They  think  they  can  part  it  as  they  like,  but  they  cannot.  This  Divine  force  or
quantity  enters  and  vitiates  their  conclusion.  Listen  to  Jehovah  :  **  Remember
the  days  of  old,  consider  the  years  of  many  generations ;  ask  thy  father  and  he
will  show  thee;  thy  elders  and  they  will  tell  thee.  When  the  Most  High  divided
to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when  He  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  He  set  the
bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (Dent.
xxii.  7,  8 ;  comp.  also  Isa.  xliv.  7,  and  Acts  xvii.  26).

in.  But  when  will  Israel  and  Judah  return,  and  how  7  That  they  have  to
return  some  time,  surely  all  will  agree.     The  time  of  the  end  we  believe  to  be  near —

1st.  By  the  general  expectation,

2d.  By  the  grand  revelations  and  teaching  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  this  pillar  and
witness  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  xix.  19.  In  this  remarkable  structure  the  year  1882
is  very  significantly  denoted.  Many  great  facts  in  Israelis  history  have  been
incorporated  in  this  building  and  have  come  to  pass ;  so  for  Israel  something  is  in
reserve  for  1882 — perhaps  it  is  the  great  deliverance  spoken  of  in  the  text.  This
year  is  also  the  wonderful  prophetic  year.  The  "  time  and  times  and  dividing  of
time"  makes  1260  years,  which,  added  to  the  first  year  of  Mahomet,  is  equal  to
our  622,  which  added  makes  1882.

3d.  By  the  Church  witness.  For  the  Gospel  was  to  be  preached  as  a  witness
unto  all  nations  before  Israel  are  gathered.  This  sign  is  now  complete.  But  how  will
this  great  deliverance  be  brought  about — in  God's  own  way,  as  from  the  Egyptians  t
The  overthrow  and  destruction  of  Turkey  may  be  the  preparatory  cause.  The  Jews
now  feel  specially  moved,  for  at  their  late  council  in  New  York  they  had  letters
missive  from  Berlin,  Paris,  London,  on  how  best  to  promote  the  return  of  those  Jews
who  desire  to  return  to  Palestine. — Joseph  Wild,  D.D.,  Brooklyn,  A.D.  1878.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXIII.  .-  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Ver.  1.  Negligent  pastors.  By  action  and  by  word  j   and  round  him

"  Probably  many  who  are  called  Gos-  -,.    stood  ,.       ^

pel  ministers  are  more  chargeable  with  ^^''le^ge^^  *'^"'  ^"  ^'P"  '^P''*'°^  ^"^''-

concealing  truths  than  affirming  direct  .    '

error ;    with  not  properly  building  the  They  stood,  for  he  had  sworn,  in  face  of  God

house  than  wilfully  pulling  it  down." —  ^^^  ™*"»  *<*  ^®^^  sincerely  with  their  souls  ;

Dr,  Witherspoon.  To  preach  the  Gospel  for  the  Oospel's  sake.

"  Unfaithfulness  is  to  undo  our  own      Most  guilty,  Villainous,  dishonest  man  I
souls  as  well  as  our  people's.'* — Bridges*      Wolf  in  the  clothing  of  the  gentle  lamb  I

Dark  traitor  in  Messiah's  holy  camp  I
"  But  the  unfaithful  priest,  what  tongue        Leper  in  saintly  garb  1  assassin  masked
Enough  shall  execrate  I        ....         In  virtue's  robe  I     Vile  hypocrite,  accursed  I
By  solemn,  awful  ceremony,  he  I  strive  in  vain  to  set  his  evil  forth."

Was  set  apart  to  speak  the  truth  entire,  —Pollock,

459


CHAF.  XXIV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMTA  77.


Ver.  23.  God's  omnipresence.  old  man  replied,  "  Soldier,  where  is  Re

During  the  American  war  a   British  not?"

officer,    walking  out  at   sunrising,    ob-  The  question  was   once    asked  of  a

served  an  old  man  with  his  arm  upraised  little  boy,  "  How  many  gods  are  there  ]  "

as  if  in  adoration.      The  officer   inter-  "  One/'    be    replied.     "  How   do    you

fered  with  rude  disregard,  and  demanded  know  there  is  only  one  1 "    He  answered,

what  he   was   about.     The  old  native  "  Because   there   is   no   room   for    any

replied,  "  I  am  worshipping  the  Great  more ;  for  the  One  God  fills  heaven  and

Spirit."     The   officer   asked  derisively,  earth."
"  Where  is  He  !  '*     To  which  taunt  the


CHAPTER  XXIV.


Critical  and  Exeoetioal  Notes.     Vide  previous  chapter.     Cf.  2  Kings  xxir.  10-12.

Natural  History.  ** Baskets  of  Figs:*'  Vide  Natural  History  notes  on  chaps,  v.  17,  viii.  13.
The  *' first  ripe"  figs  (ver.  2),  called  here  bikJcarah  {cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  4  ;  Mic.  vii.  1  ;  Hos.  ix.  10),
denotes  the  early  or  spring  fig ;  and  is  still  called  boccore  in  Mauritania,  and  in  Spanish  alba-
cora.  The  usual  time  for  gathering  figs  is  August;  the  early  fig  gathered  in  June  is  a  rarity
and  delicacy.  It  is  easily  shaken  off  the  tree  (Nahum  ill,  12).  The  **very  bad  figs'*  (ver.  2)
were  probably  sycamore  figs ;  which,  unless  punctured  as  they  ripen,  turn  acrid,  and  "  cannot  be
eaten  "  (ver.  3) ;  or,  they  may  have  been  decayed  figs.  **  Baskets  of  Jigs  "  used  to  be  offered  tf
firstfruits  in  the  Temple.

EOMILETIC  SUMMARY  OF  CHAPTER  XXIV,

The  Baskets  op  Figs  :  a  Parable  and  a  Prophecy.

Kotes  : — i.  Those  who  are  amid  calamity  do  not  necessarily  deserve  worse  than  those
who  temporarily  escape.
ii  Those  who  temporarily  escape  calamity  may  be  destined  to  far  heavier

chastisements.
iii.  Among  those  whom  disaster  overtakes  there  may  be  eminently  good  men,

Daniel  and  Ezekiel  were  among  the  first  captives  !
iv.  Self-elation  over  immunity  from  adversity  will  only  invoke  more  hum-
bling providences.  Probably  those  who  remained  behind  thought
themselves  better  than  those  who  had  gone  into  captivity ;  but
heavier  judgments  came  in  due  time  upon  these  boasters.
▼,  Adversities  may  have  a  beneficent  design  and  beneficent  influence  (vera
5-8).

L  A  nation  rent  asunder — yet  arrayed  beneath  God's  eye.

1,  Separated  by  ordinance  of  God^s  providence.  God  had  permitted  the  captivity ;
and  He  bad  reserved  the  part  which  remained  behind.

(a.)  In  respect  of  location  they  were  widely  separated.  Babylon  lay  far  off  from
Jerusalem.

(6.)  In  respect  of  outward  advantages  they  were  widely  dissimilar.  Exiles  and
residents.     Yet  both  were  equally

2.  Present  under  the  eye  of  God's  omniscience.  One  part  was  captive  in  Babylon
(ver.  1)  ;  the  other  part  remained  in  Canaan  (ver.  8) ;  but  both  baskets  of  figs  were
"  set  before  the  Temple  of  the  Lord."  [The  word  'IPJ  implies  that  they  were
appointed  to  this  place  before  God's  Temple.]  Thus  the  exiles  in  Babylon  were
equally  present  to  God's  eye  as  those  at  Jerusalem.  Equally  under  His  eye  :  those
afar  as  tliose  near ;  those  amid  adversity  as  those  amid  advantages,

(a.)  Wherever  we  are  we  dwell  under  the  Divine  notice.  We  cannot  go  beyond
His  ken.  None  are  forgotten  by  God.  Those  "afar  off"  were  still  "set  before"
Him.

(6.)  Amid  our  adversities  we  do  not  lose  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  Even  though
"  sent  out  of  this  place  into  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  "  (ver.  4),  yet  God  declares,
460


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   JEREMIAH.  chap.  xxiv.


"  I  will  acknowledge  them ; "  and  "  I  will  set  Mine  eyes  U[)on  them  for  good  *•
(ver.  5).

IL  A  suggestive  comparison — indicating  vast  moral  dissimilarities.  Two
baskets  of  figs  :  in  the  one  were  *'  veiy  good  figs  j "  in  the  other  "  very  naughty
figs  " — "  the  good  figs,  very  good;  and  the  evil,  very  evil."

1.  Their  experiences  seemed  to  reverse  this  estimate.  It  surprises  us  to  find  that
those  carried  away  captive  were  accounted  "good,"  while  those  escaping  the
miseries  of  exile  are  pronounced  **very  bad."  Here  is  teaching  that  we  judge  not
character  by  circumstances ;  that  we  do  not  deem  those  who  most  suffer  to  be  the
greatest  sinners.  "Judge  not  according  to  the  outward  appearance;"  "judge
nothing  before  the  time ; "  "I  have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  power,"  &c.  The  facts
were  that  the  exiles  were  the  noblest  and  best  of  the  nation  ;  those  left  at  home  were
the  refuse.

2.  Their  separation  was  for  a  providential  purpose.  Those  of  the  nation  who
were  of  any  worth  at  all  were  called  out  and  sent  away  into  safe  keeping,  even
though  into  exile.  And  there  they  were  in  good  keeping.  Although  it  seemed
worse  to  be  in  captivity  than  to  dwell  at  home,  they  were  really  better  off  in
Chaldea.  Their  removal  to  Babylon  saved  them  from  the  calamities  which  befel
the  rest  of  the  nation.     "  Whom  God  loveth  He  chasteneth."

3.  Their  distinctive  qualities  was  emphatically  marked.  "  Very  good — very  bad."
Doubtless  those  who  remained  at  home  flattered  themselves  with  being  better  than
those  who  were  exiled,  and  more  pleasing  to  God  than  those  who  suffered  captivity.
They  showed  themselves  "  very  bad  '*  by  their  pinde  of  heart,  by  not  profiting  from
the  salutary  warning  of  the  calamity  which  had  come  upon  their  fellow-countrymen,
by  not  repenting  of  their  own  evils  and  amending  their  ungodly  lives.  The  exiles
showed  themselves  "good"  by  signs  of  regeneration  under  the  discipline  of  cap-
tivity. God  Himself  esteemed  them  more  favourably  (ver.  5),  and  saw  in  them
higher  excellences  and  mo7^e  hopeful  qualities  than  the  rest  possessed.  "  God  looketh
not  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  at  the  heart."

IIL  A  contrasted  destiny — according  with  their  merit  and  conduct.  The  good
figs  were  a  delicacy  (see  Natural  History  note  supra) ;  the  bad  were  obnoxious —
"  could  not  be  eaten."  There  was  a  reverse  destiny  for  them.  God  gave  this  vision
and  prophecy  to  Jeremiah  :  (a)  To  cheer  the  disconsolate  captives  with  a  hope  of
future  good  ;  (b)  To  check  the  vaunting  of  the  heartless  residents  by  menaces  of  their
impen'fing  doom,.

1.  The  gracious  destiny  of  (he  exiles.  (1.)  They  should  be  carefully  preserved
(ver.  6).  (2.)  They  were  favourably  regarded,  and  would  be  "acknowledged"  by
God  (ver.  4).  (3.)  Their  banishment  was  for  their  good  (ver.  5).  (4.)  Their
miraculous  rescue  was  pledged  thetn  (ver.  6).  (5.)  Spiritual  regeneration  should  crown
all  other  and  temporal  benefits  (ver.  7).  Thus  "  God  will  devise  means  whereby  His
banished  ones  shall  return  unto  Him."

2.  7%e  hopeless  desolation  of  the  disobedient.  They  had  refused  to  act  on  God's
counsel  (chap.  xvi.  8,  9) ;  and  now  boasted  of  their  prudence  in  remaining  in  the
city ;  probably,  too,  they  talked  scornfully  of  the  captives.  But  these  people
should  (1.)  Be  driven  asunder  over  the  earth  (ver.  9) ;  whereas  the  Babylonish
captives  were  altogether  in  one  scene;  companions  and  confederated.  (2.)  Their
calamities  would  work  ill  to  them — not  regenerating  them,  as  the  others,  but
hardening  and  alienating  them  the  more  (ver.  9).  (3.)  They  would  be  subjected  to
contempt  and  ridicule  (ver.  9).  (4.)  No  hope  or  possibility  of  restoration  would
be  granted  them  (ver.  10).  Whereas  their  exiled  fellow-countrymen  were  being
preserved  for  better  times,  they  were  but  reserved  for  greater  woes.  Neither  those
who  were  carried  into  Egypt  with  Jehoahaz  (ver.  8),  nor  those  who  should  flee
thither,  would  share  in  the  blessings  promised  to  the  Chaldean  exiles.  "According
to  their  deeds,  accordingly  He  will  repay"  (Isa.  lix.  19).     God's  administrations


CHAP.  XXIV.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


of  chastisement  or  punishment  are  regulated  by  what  He  discerns  are  our  dispod-
tioiis  and  possibilities.

See  Addenda  :  Chastened,  ybt  not  Abandoned.

Lange  supplies  the  following  homiletic  summary  of  tlie  chapter  i-^

Good  and  Bad  Fios — Emblems  of  Humanity.

Humanity  in  its  twofold  aspect :  well-pleasing  or  displeasing  to  God.

L  The  prisoners  and  broken-hearted  are,  like  the  good  figs,  well-pleasing  tO
God.  For  (1)  They  know  the  Lord,  and  turn  to  Him ;  (2)  He  is  their  God,  and
they  are  His  people.

IL  Those  who  dwell  proudly  and  securely  are,  like  the  bad  figs,  displeasing  to
God.  For  (1)  They  live  on  in  foolish  blindness ;  (2)  They  challenge  the  judgment
of  God.


HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XXIV,


Yer.  2.  Theme:  Delicious  and  re-
pulsive FRUIT.  *'  One  basket  had  very
good  figs,  even  like  the  figs  that  are  first
ripe ;  and  the  other  basket  had  very
naughty  figs,  which  could  not  be  eaten,
they  were  so  bad"

See  Natural  History  note  above,  on
the  varieties  of  figs  and  their  ripening
periods.

Analogy:  Men  show  varieties  in
temperament  and  character,  more  re-
markable than  the  varieties  among  figs,
and  more  numerous.  And  among  men
the  ripening  matures  at  difi"erent  periods :
some  being  early  ripe — children  and
youth ;  others  reaching  maturity  only
in  the  autumn  years  of  life;  others
only  in  the  winter  of  age.  But  the
differences  among  men  may  be  summed
up  thus :  good  and  bad.  Two  classes
only.  Gradations  there  are  in  each  class,
but  the  absolute  qualities  are  only  two.

I.  Growth  under  common  condi-
tions.     These   figs  were  all   Palestine

1.  Their  original  stock  was  the  same.
All  were  ^^figs ;"  and  grew  on  trees
which  were  identical  in  genus.  So  all
men,  whatever  their  nationality  or  in-
dividuality or  parentage,  spring  from
the  one  stock — humanity;  and  huma-
nity invested  with  its  qualities  and
possibilities  by  God,

2.  Their  advantages  were  the  same.
The  same  soil — Canaan;  under  same
fructifying  influences  —  religious  in-
fluences, Divine  teachings,  prophetic
counsels    and    warnings,    kc. ;  guarded

463


by  the  same  care — God  watched   over
both  :  He  the  Gardener.

II.  Maturing  under  gracious  in-
fluences. Both  the  "  good  "  and  "  bad  "
reached  maturity  and  ripeness.  They
could  not  resist  these  influences  working
that  result.

1.  Maturing  influences  which  com-
pelled development.  Probably  people
dislike  their  true  character  being  forced
to  decision  and  fruition ;  they  would
rather  remain  neutral.  But  the  ^^figs  **
could  not  escape  nor  resist  the  action  of
earth,  air,  and  sun.  This  Jewish  nation
could  not  escape  nor  resist  the  influences
of  prophetic  teaching  and  providential
discipline.  On  the  two  sections  of  the
people  there  had  acted  developing  in-
fluences :  exile  had  benefited  the  cap-
tives; whereas  exemption  from  captivity
had  hardened  those  who  remained  in
Judah.  So  on  all  m^n  providence,  reli-
gion, grace,  and  God's  Spirit  are  acting ;
compelling  the  development  and  mani-
festation of  their  temper  and  character.

2.  Maturing  influences  which  tested
their  true  nature.  The  figs  ripened  into
"good  figs"  and  '* naughty  figs."  The
maturing  processes  do  not  change  the
nature  of  the  thing  fructified,  but  only
bring  it  to  complete  development.  So
Jeremiah's  prophecies  and  God's  pro-
vidential dealings  did  not  make  them
"good"  or  ^' naughty  "  hut  tested  their
tendency.  Thus  life's  incidents  and
Gospel  preaching  test  us:  prove  our
spirit ;  try  the  state  and  inclinations  of
our  hearts,


HOMILMTW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XXIV.


III.  Resulting  in  the  completest
contrast.  '*  Very  good  figs,  even  the
figs  first  ripe  " — a  delicious  fruit ;  "  very
naughty  figs,  which  could  not  be  eaten,
so  bad  " — rotten  or  repulsive  fruit.

1.  Wholly  dissimilar  in  quality  and
character.  The  exiles  became  humble,
repentant,  reformed.  The  resident  Jews
became  insolent,  self-secure,  defiant.  The
former  became  a  delicacy  "as  the  first
ripe  figs;"  the  latter  obnoxiousy  *' could
not  be  eaten."  ''Good"  and  **  bad."
What  is  our  moral  quality  or  spiritual
cliaracter  1  Godly  or  ungodly  ;  sacred
or  sinful ;  with  Ciirist  or  against  Him ;
redeemed  or  reprobate  ?

2.  God  dealt  with  them  according  to
their  state.  Not  according  to  their  name;
both  fruits  were  "figs;"  and  both  sections
of  the  nation  were  "  Jews."  But  accord-
ing to  their  nature  and  quality  :  "  good  "
or  «'naughty."  The  '*  good  "—God  "  will
acknowledge"  (ver.  5),  and  make  better
(ver.  7).  The  '*  bad  " — He  would  reject
(ver.  9)  and  destroy  (ver.  10).  The  exiles
became  ripe  for  God's  mercy ;  the  resi-
dents became  rotten  and  repulsive — fit
for  nothing  but  rejection.

Ver.  7.  Theme:  Knowing  God  with
THE  HSABT.  ''  And  I  will  give  them  an.
heart  to  know  Me.**

God  has  often  kind  and  gracious  pur-
poses towards  men  when  they  least  ima-
gine it.  "  Truly  God  is  good  to  Israel."
We  are  very  imperfect  judges  of  the  cha-
racter and  design  of  Divine  dispensations.
*'  No  man  knoweth  good  or  evil  from  all
that  is  before  him."  The  good  figs,  mean-
ing the  best  and  most  spiritual  part  of
the  nation,  were  sent  to  Babylon  for  their
good  ;  and  the  bad  figs,  the  most  corrupt
among  the  Jews,  were  kept  in  Jerusalem
that  they  might  ripen  to  ruin.  Those  who
remained  in  Jerusalem  no  doubt  thought
that  they  were  special  objects  of  Divine
favour,  and  that  they  who  were  sent
first  to  Babylon  were  the  objects  of  God's
displeasure  :  but  the  reverse  was  the  fact.
This  may  teach  us  not  to  be  rash  and
hasty  in  our  conclusions  ;  not  to  judge
before  the  time ;  and  not  to  convert  cala-
mities into  judgments  (Luke  xiii.  1-5).

L  The  eminent  blessing  promised —
a  heart  to  know  and  love  God.


i.  It  is  inestimably  precious — "to
know  Him  " — know  Him  as  their  God.
All  knowledge  is  valuable  ;  but  Divine
knowledge  supremely  so.  By  this  is
meant  not  a  speculative  knowledge,
which  the  devils  have  in  greater  perfec-
tion than  ourselves,  and  remain  devils
still ;  but  a  spiritual,  experimental,  and
soul-satisfying  knowledge  of  God.  It
includes  a  knowledge  of  Him  in  His
revealed  character,  in  His  condescending
grace,  in  His  covenant  relations,  in  His
providential  government,  and  in  the  spe-
cial communion  with  the  souls  of  His
redeemed  children.  *'  The  Lord^  the  L(yrd
Gody  merciful  and  gracious" — gracious
in  making  His  promises ;  faithful  in  ful-
filling them.  God  known  in  the  heart
is,  in  effect,  to  have  the  Bible  opened,  the
Law  opened,  the  Gospel  opened,  Christ
opened,  heaven  opened,  the  covenant  of
grace  opened,  and  the  blessings  and  im-
munities of  the  spiritual  life  laid  opened
and  revealed.  But  without  this — with-
out Christ  and  the  knowledge  and  love
of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart,  our
religion  is  a  mere  name — like  a  husk
without  the  kernel,  like  a  casket  without
the  jewel,  like  a  body  without  the  inform-
ing spirit.

ii.  It  is  God's  special  gift.  "I  will
give."  He  claims  it;  He  only  is  com-
petent; He  delights  to  give  it.  This  is
not  a  natural  attainment,  but  a  Divine
communication  and  bestowment.  All
knowledge  is  essentially  from  God,  for
He  teacheth  the  husbandman  discretion,
and  taught  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel  how
to  accomplish  the  carved  work  for  the
tabernacle — but  this  spiritual  knowledge
is  pre-eminently  from  Him.

iii.  This  is  often  a  gradual  attainment:
begun  in  conversion,  carried  on  in  the  suc-
cessive developments  of  the  Christian  life.
He  who  impresses  Divine  truths  upon
the  mind,  at  first,  in  conversion,  opens
them  more  fully  afterwards — shows  their
importance,  harmony,  consistency,  and
power ;  removes  doubts  and  jealousies
and  suspicions  concerning  them,  and
renders  them  vitally  influential  upon  the
soul.  "  Then  shall  we  know^  if  we  follow
on  to  know,  His  going  forth  is  prepared
as  the  morning. "

One  beam  of  light  breaking  in  from

463


ohap.  xxttr.


HO  Ml  LETIC  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  J  ERE  Ml  A  ff.


the  Spirit  of  God  does  more  towards
confirming  and  establishing  the  mind  in
the  truths  of  religion,  than  a  thousand
arguments  of  the  most  subtle  disputers,
or  a  thousand  sermons  of  the  most  elo-
quent preachers.  Hence  we  read  of  "  the
demonstration  of  the  Spirit"

iv.  It  is  greatly  facilitated  by  sanctified
afflictions.  The  good  figs  must  be  re-
moved to  Babylon,  to  attain  a  higher
knowledge  of  God,  and  a  greater  ripeness
of  grace.  The  school  of  the  Cross  is  the
school  of  light.  In  captivity  it  is  given
them.      Afflictions  were  the  means  of  it.

II.  The  means  of  its  attainment.

i.  Plead  the  promise  in  prayer.  Oh,
how  much  need  have  we  to  wait  and
pray  for  its  accomplishment  in  our  own
experience  !  Some  are  weak  in  know-
ledge; slow  in  capacity,  like  the  dis-
ciples, who,  though  they  had  so  good  a
Master,  were  but  dull  scholars.  *'  Some
have  not  the  knowledge  of  God  :  I  speak
this  to  your  shame."  Like  the  Hebrews,
chap.  V.  12.  "  We  must  open  our  mouth
to  God  in  prayer,  that  He  may  open  our
eyes.  "  Open  Thou  mine  eyes."  "  Lord,
that  I  may  receive  my  sight. ''^  '*  Show
us  the  Father^  and  it  sufflceth  us."

ii.  Honour  the  methods  of  Divine
instruction  :  ordinances,  prcwidences.

iii.  Walk  by  the  light  of  the  truth  you
know.  If  you  have  any  saving  and
spiritual  knowledge,  be  thankful,  be
humble.  Do  not  abuse  the  light,  but
improve  it.  Live  under  the  power  of
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Resign  your-
self to  its  transforming  power.  Give
this  knowledge  room  to  work,  that  it
may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified  in
you.

iv.  Guard  against  all  the  obstructions
to  this  knowledge  :  against  sloth,  against
worldliness,  against  easily-besetting  sins.
"Ye  did  run  well,  who  hath  hindered
you  1 "  Some  men  know  much,  but  to
little  purpose.  Their  hearts  are  too
strong  for  their  light.  This  makes  them
more  skilful  hypocrites.  These  make
rents  and  divisions  in  the  Church.  They
employ  the  light  they  have  to  do  the
devil's  work.


III.  The  uses  to  which  this  know-
ledge is  subservient.

i.  To  our  happiness :  free  from  doubt.

ii.  To  our  holiness :  alienate  us  from
the  world  and  evil.

iii.  To  our  usefulness  :  makes  us  bold
for  God,  a  centre  of  light;  emboldens
us  to  act  and  suffer. — Samuel  l^hodey,
A.D.  1856.

See  Addenda:  Chast-^ned,  yet  not
Abandoned.  ^

Theme:  An  enlightened  heart  is
God's  gift.

"  Since  He  affirms  that  He  would  give
them  a  heart  to  understand,  we  hence
learn —

i.  That  men  are  by  nature  blind;  and
also  that,  when  they  are  blinded  by  the
devil,  they  cannot  return  to  the  right
way.

ii.  That  men  cannot  be  otherwise
capable  of  light  tban  by  having  God  to
illuminate  them  by  His  Spirit.

This  passage  also  shows —

iii.  2%at  until  the  sinner  bows  before
God's  tribunal  and  owns  Him  to  be  the
Judge,  he  will  never  be  touched  with
the  feeling  of  true  repentance.*' — Calvin.

Comments —

**  He  who  willingly  and  readily  resigns
himself  to  the  will  of  God  [as  the
exiles  did]  even  to  the  cross,  may  escape
misfortunes.  But  he  who  opposes
himself  to  the  hand  of  God  [as  the
residents  in  Jerusalem],  cannot  escape."
— Cramer.

"  The  captives  are  dearest  to  God.
By  the  first  greater  affliction  He  prepares
their  souls  for  repentance  and  radical
conversion,  so  that  He  has  in  them  again
His  people  and  inheritance.  Oh  the
gracious  God,  that  He  allows  those  who
on  account  of  sin  must  be  so  deeply
degraded  and  rendered  slaves,  even  in
such  humiliation^  to  be  His  people  I  The
captives  are  forgiven  their  opposition  to
God.  .  .  .  God  will  show  them  what
His  love  can  do ;  they  shall  return,  and
in  true  nearness  to  God  be  His  true
Is  rael. " — Diedrich,


iU


HOMILMTIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  xxiT.


NOTICEABLE  TOPICS  IN  CHAPTER  XXI?.

Topic,*  Jeremiah's  Vision  op  Figs.     Reflections  on  some  of  the  characteristics  of

the  age  we  live  in.     (Vers.  1-3.)

It  is  not  diflScult  to  see  the  force  and  application  of  this  homely  but  sententious
little  allegory.  Jeremiah  lived  in  those  days  of  declension  and  disaster  in  which
the  threatened  invasion  of  Judea  by  the  king  of  Babylon  actually  took  place.
Those  who  were  "carried  away"  comprised  the  best  of  the  population  with  regard
to  intelligence,  religious  feeling,  and  patriotism.  Their  sorrows  and  afflictions
humbled  them,  so  that  they  repented  of  their  idolatries  and  obtained  mercy  of  the
Lord.  They  also  found  favour  with  their  conquerors,  and  not  a  few  of  them  rose
to  high  and  influential  positions  in  the  court  and  kingdom  of  Babylon.  The  Jews
who  remained  at  home  with  Zedekiah  "and  his  princes"  revolted  against  God
more  and  more.  Their  heart  was  proud  and  unhumbled.  Year  after  year  they
sunk  deeper  into  misery,  profanity,  and  vice.  They  not  only  provoked  the  Divine
anger  increasingly,  but  awakened  the  fierce  disdain  and  hatred  of  their  Chaldean
masters,  so  that  at  length  they  were  so  wasted  and  ravaged  by  pestilence,  battle,
poverty,  and  exile  as  to  be  utterly  consumed  from  off"  the  land  wbich  God  had  given
to  them  and  to  their  fathers  (see  vers.  8-13).  These  were  the  evil  figs,  so  evil  that
they  could  not  be  eaten.  The  figs  ought  to  have  been  good,  but  were  not.  All  the
figs  were  figs  of  the  same  season — say  an  unusually  hot  and  dry  one — suiting  the
trees  in  certain  localities  pre-eminently  well,  whereas  in  other  localities  the  trees
were  blighted  and  withered,  and  the  figs  which  grew  upon  them,  dry,  dusty,  taste-
less, and  worm-eaten.

We  are  thus  led  to  think  of  A  season  for  fruit,  peculiarly  intense  and
ARDENT,  causing  it  to  come  to  pass  that  good  fruit  turns  out  remarkably  good,  and
had  fruit  remarkably  bad.  The  point  suggested  by  Jeremiah's  vision  is,  That  there
occur  periods  or  special  circumstances  in  the  religious  life  of  nationSy  which  tend  to
develop  and  force  the  maturation  of  character  with  unusual  energy  and  astonishing
rapidity.  In  such  times  you  do  not  find  people  merely  good  or  bad ;  but  the  good
are  very  good,  and  the  evil  very  evil.  Such  a  crisis  it  was  with  the  Jews  at  the
time  when  Jeremiah  prophesied.

We  live,  at  present,  in  a  kind  of  hothouse  atmosphere,  which  has  the  eff'ect
of  rapidly  developing^  as  well  as  mightily  intensifying,  all  the  moral  and  religious
elements  which  go  to  constitute  personal  character.  Must  not  the  good  be  very
goody  and  the  evil  very  evil  1

Suggest  some  of  the  circumstances  and  infiuences  which  invest  the  times  we  live
in  with  this  interesting  peculiarity,  and  point  out  a  few  of  the  instances  and  illus-
trations of  the  eff'ect  thereby  produced.

I.  Certain  peculiarities  of  our  times  and  position  may  be  noted.

1.  This  is  an  age  of  extraordinary  intellectual  and  social  activity.  It  is  an  age
of  many  books  and  much  reading ;  of  fearless  inquiry  and  frequent  discovery,  <fec
It  requires  a  great  effort  to  keep  the  mind  calm,  to  allay  the  frenzy  of  excited  feel-
ing, to  check  the  extravagances  of  new-found  liberty,  and  hold  fast  to  the  sober
requirements  of  sound  principle  and  acknowledged  truth.

2.  Another  thing  to  be  noticed  is  the  very  full  and  clear  religious  light  which  we
enjoy.  Compare  it  with  any  period  since  the  Apostolic  age  ;  the  Bible  was  never
more  closely  and  deeply  studied  than  now ;  never  were  its  great  cardinal  doctrines
so  fully  established  or  so  generally  acknowledged  among  all  sections  of  the  Church  ;
the  Gospel  was  never  preached  to  so  many  nations  as  now,  and  at  no  period  were
there  in  Great  Britain  so  many  preachers  of  evangelical  truth  as  now.  It  would
seem  well-nigh  impossible  for  any  man  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  the  things  of  God,
the  claims  of  Jesus,  and  the  way  of  salvation.

3.  There  is  also  a  corresponding  increase  of  activity  in  the  Church.    Certainly  no

2  a  465


CHAP.  XXIV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.


age  has  ever  surpassed  our  own  in  visible  earnestness,  in  pecuniary  liberality,  or
in  the  excitement  and  emulation  of  real  Christian  work,

Wliat  do  all  these  things  necessitate  on  our  part  individually?  Truly  potent
and  stimulating  agencies  are  in  operation,  calculated  to  arouse  us  to  repentance  and
godly  solicitude,  and  then  to  prompt  and  goad  us  on  to  vigorous  Christian  life
and  action.  What  bold,  what  tirm,  what  fruitful  Christians  we  must  become  if  we
enter  fully  into  "  the  spirit  of  the  times,"  considered  as  engaged  on  the  side  of
Christ  and  His  Gospel !  But  if  we  refuse  to  do  so,  if  we  set  ourselves  to  resist
these  powerful  influences,  how  strenuous  must  that  resistance  be  !  how  determined
and  resolute  and  how  self-conscious  that  action  of  the  will  which  still  fights  against
God  and  clings  to  worldliness  and  sin  1  It  seems  impossible  for  us  to  be  half-
hearted, undecided,  only  negatively  good  or  bad.  Truly  we  must  take  sides  openly,
one  way  or  the  other.  We  cannot  stand  neutral :  we  must  declare  ourselves  boldly
and  actively  either  for  Christ  or  against  Him.  Behold  the  two  baskets  of  figs ;  the
good  figs  must  be  very  good,  and  the  evil  figs  very  eviL

IL  Facts  are  in  harmony  with  these  reasonings.  Illustrations  abound  on
every  side.     In  this  earnest  age  you  find  earnest  men  both  for  good  and  eviL

1.  Was  ever  war  conducted  on  so  fearful  a  scale  as  we  have  lately  witnessed  it  1

2.  In  our  day,  we  have  also  seen  such  specimens  of  commercial  roguery  and
robbery,  conceived  on  so  magnificent  a  scale,  and  executed  under  so  clever  and
admirable  a  cloak  of  hypocrisy,  as  no  previous  age  has  ever  presented  to  the  world.
Never,  assuredly,  in  any  land — Sodom  and  Gomorrah  unexcepted — have  baser
things  been  done  than  have  been  discovered  in  our  land,  and  in  our  own  time.

3.  On  the  other  hand,  look  at  the  men  who  stand  foremost  in  the  van  of  religion
and  philanthropy.  These  are  God's  heroes;  worthy  of  comparison  with  the  spiritual
heroes  of  ancient  times,  in  regard  to  all  that  is  noble  in  faith,  self-denying  in  zeal,
munificent  in  giving,  or  abundant  in  labours.  These  are  among  the  good  figs,
which  by  God's  grace  are  very  good :  and  to  the  production  of  such  instances  of
exalted  and  matured  piety  the  present  times  are  not  in  the  least  unfavourable.

4.  One  might  speak  of  books  as  well  as  men.  We  defy  any  age  to  show  such
noble  and  masterly  treatises  as  are  now  written  by  men  of  sanctified  learning  and
genius,  either  in  exposition  of  the  Scriptures,  or  in  vindication  of  their  contents.
Here  again  the  good  figs  are  very  good,  even  as  the  evil  figs  are  very  eviL

5.  Then  there  are  public  institutions  and  societies  to  be  looked  at.  There  are  all
manner  of  good  institutions  set  on  foot,  it  is  true,  but  so  are  there,  also,  all  manner
of  evil  institutions  established  and  seen  to  be  flourishing.  The  kingdom  of  Satan
is  as  active  and  roused  up  to  new  exertions  as  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Enormous
sums  of  money  are  spent  in  the  cause  of  religion ;  but  far,  far  greater  sums  are
forthcoming  to  support  folly  and  wickedness,  to  build  temples  of  mammon-worship
and  of  pleasure,  and  to  uphold  the  reign  of  sensuality  and  impiety.

in.  One  or  two  practical  lessons  ask  our  attention.  We  live  in  stirring  times,
in  which  the  forces,  both  of  good  and  evil,  like  the  arts  of  material  warfare,  are
developing  unprecedented  resources,  and  putting  forth  unheard-of  and  most  gigantic
energies;  times  in  which  prodigies  abound,  both  of  wickedness  and  of  goodness;
times  in  which  the  "  good  "  figs  are  very  good,  and  the  "  naughty  "  figs  very  bad.
It  is  no  small  matter  to  live  in  England  in  this  nineteenth  century.  A  hotter,
more  crowded,  or  more  excited  moral  battle-field  was  never  known  in  the  history  of
the  world.     Therefore —

1.  Let  no  mans  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound ;  nor  let  any  one  think  that
he  can  remain  a  neutral  or  uninterested  spectator  of  the  conflict.  What  a  heavy
responsibility  rests  upon  those  who  live  in  such  a  century  as  this !  The  religious
and  moral  influences  which  bear  upon  us  are  mighty  beyond  all  that  has  gone
before  us.

2.  This  is  no  time  for  trifling.  Let  us  seek  to  be  good,  and  do  good  :  and  then,
behold  what  glorious  possibilities  beloui:  to  us  of  being  pre-eminently  holy,  blest,

466


BOMILETIC  COMMENTABY :  JERMMIAH,


OflAF.  XXIV.


and  useful !  Onglit  we  not  to  seek  this  higher  growth  in  grace  t  Should  we  not
desire  to  be,  among  the  lowly,  the  most  humble;  among  the  spotless,  the  most
pure ;  among  the  active,  the  most  toilsome ;  among  the  meek,  the  most  patient ;
and  among  the  kind,  the  most  charitable]  Let  us  be  " instant "  in  prayer ;  and,
like  Abraham,  "  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God."  Surely  this  is  a  worthy  and
noble  ambition ;  not  merely  to  be  a  Christian,  but  a  Christian  of  the  highest  order,
3.  Each  may  do  great  things  for  God.  His  talent  may  be  small ;  but  how  much
may  he  make  of  it  I  What  means  of  knowledge,  what  incentives  to  zeal,  what  faci-
lities for  usefulness  are  within  every  one's  reach  !  None  need  be  idle  or  half
employed.  Now,  if  ever,  may  the  *' good  figs"  be  "very  good,"  even  as  the
"naughty  figs"  are  very  "bad."  Now,  if  ever,  does  the  saying  of  Zechariah  apply
to  God's  Church  :  "  And  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David;
and  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as  God,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them."
Let  us  never  forget  that  he  who  would  have  God  on  his  side,  must  take  care  himself
to  be  always  on  the  side  of  God. — Rev.  T,  0.  Horton  (Wolverhampton),  in  *^  Chris-
tian World  Pulpit "  {summarised).


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXJV,:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUQQESTIfM

EXTRACTS,


Ver.  1.  Chastened,  but  not  aban-
doned.

Three  facts  should  be  here  noted : —
The  exiles  were  remembered  by  God,
as  this  vision  shows.  Also,  they  were
graciously  esteemed  by  Him — better  figs
than  those  who  remained  at  home.
Further,  God  intended  good  to  them.
So  that  when  we  seem  outcast  from
happiness  and  hope,  God  may  be  only
chastening  us  for  our  profit,  or  keeping
us  away  from  besotting  "  prosperity "
(chap.  xxii.  21),  in  order  that  we  may
be  prepared  for  spiritual  elevation  (chap,
xxiv.  7).

"After  the  storm,  a  calm ;
After  the  bruise,  a  balm  ;
For  the  ill  brings  good  in  the  Lord's  own  time,
And  the  sigh  becomes  a  psalm.

"  After  the  drought,  the  dew  ;
After  the  cloud,  the  blue ;
For  the  sky  will  smile  in  the  suu's  good  time.
And  the  earth  grow  glad  and  new."
— Mrs.  Crawford.

Trapp  remarks  that  "Jeconiah  was
a  wicked  prince,  and  therefore  written
childless.  Howbeit,  because  by  the  ad-
vice of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  he  sub-
mitted to  Nebuchadnezzar,  he  and  his
company  are  here  comforted,  and  pro-
nounced more  happy^  however  it  might
seem  otherwise,  than  those  that  con-
tinued still  in  the  land  ;  and  this,  say  the
Hebrews  (Rabar,  Hugo,  Lyra),  was  not
obscurely  set   forth  also   by  those   two


baskets  of  figs,  whereof  that  which  was
worst  showed  best,  and  the  other  showed
worst  till  they  came  to  be  tasted."

"  Winter  brings  blessings,  so  the  chill
Of  dark  adversity; — from  its  cold  grasp
The  soul  revives  reanimate, — more  strong,
And  better  armed." — F.  A.  MacTcay.

Winter  will  kill  vermin  which  the
summer  of  success  and  comfort  is  apt  to
produce  and  nourish.

"  Adversity  has  the  effect  of  eliciting
talents  which,  in  prosperous  circum-
stances, would  have  lain  dormant." —
Horace,

"  All-pitying  Heaven,
Severe  in  mercy,  chastening  in  its  love.
Oft-times  in  dark  and  awful  visitation
Doth  interpose,  and  leads  the  wanderer  back
To  the  straight  path,  to  be  for  ever  after
A  firm,  undaunted,  on  ward -bearing  traveller,
Strong  in  humility,  who  swerves  no  more."

— Joanna  Baillie.

(Comp.  Addenda  to  chap,  xxii.,  Fbos-
peeity.)

**  I  have  read  of  a  fountain  that  at
noonday  is  cold,  and  at  midnight  it
grows  warm.  So  many  a  precious  soul
is  cold  Godward  and  Heavenward  in
prosperity,  and  grows  warm  in  the  mid-
night of  adversity." — Brooks.

Ver.  7.   *'ThEY  SHALL  BE  My  PEOPLE."

"  This  falling  out  of  lovers  shall  but
be  a  renewing  of  love  betwixt  us.  God
must  sometimes  whip  His  people  to
duty,  and  gather  them  from  evil,  as  well
as  entice  tbeni." — Trapp,

467


OfiAP.xiv.  EOMILMTIC  commentary :  JEREMIAH.


CHAPTER  XXV.

Critical  and  Exeobtioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter:  **  Fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim*'  (ver.  1).  It  is  stated  the  third  year  in  Dan,  i,  1  ;  but  Hales  ("Sacred  Chron.")
shows  that  Jehoiakim  was  made  king  by  Pharaoh  Necho  of  Egypt  in  July  B.C.  607  ;  whereas
Nebuchadnezzar  mounted  the  throne  January  21,  B.o.  604:  and  thus  Nebuchadnezzar's  ^rs<
year  included  parts  of  both  the  third  and  fourth  of  Jehoiakim.  In  the  Chaldean  cylinders
[placing  all  chronology  back  by  twenty-two  years]  these  dates  are  B.C.  590  for  Jehoiakim's
accession,  and  B.C.  586  for  Nebuchadnezzar's.  Cf.  notes  in  loc.  to  chapters  vii.  and  x.  Tiiis
chapter  formed  part  of  Jehoiakim's  roll  {cf.  chap,  xxxvi.  29).

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — Dan.  i. ;  Jer.  xxxvi.;  2  Kings  xxiv.  1,  2;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.
5-7.

3.  National  Afiiairs. — Cf.  notes  in  loc.  to  chapters  vii.  and  x.  This  date  formed  a  momentous
crisis  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  Nebuchadnezzar,  having  defeated  Pharaoh
Necho  at  Charchemish,  came,  in  pursuit  of  the  Egyptian  fugitives,  to  Judah  ;  took  Jerusalem,
made  Jehoiakim  vassal-king,  and  carried  the  best  life  of  the  nation  away  into  Babylon — thus
i)eginning  the  seventy  years'  Babylonian  captivity,  which  Jeremiah  in  verse  11  foretells.  For
twenty-three  years  Jeremiah  had  now  been  Qod's  prophet  in  Judah,  calling  his  nation  to
repentance  and  reformation.  Jeremiah  was,  during  this  "fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,"  amid
his  most  energetic  labours,  persuading  Jehoiakim  from  reliance  upon  Egypt,  and  counselling,
both  as  a  matter  of  policy  and  of  religious  duty,  allegiance  with  Babylon.  This  incensed  the
king  against  Jeremiah,  and  led  him  angrily  to  burn  the  roll.

4.  Contemporaneous  History. — Nabopolassar,  king  of  Babylon,  being  old  and  decrepit,
entrusted  to  his  son,  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  war  against  Pharaoh  Necho,  who  had  penetrated  to
the  very  Euphrates  in  lust  of  empire.  He  won  supremacy  over  his  Egyptian  rival  by  a  vic-
torious and  decisive  war  at  Charchemish.  Cf.  notes  in  loc,  chapters  vii.  and  x.  **  The  mingled
people:  "  Ionian  and  Carian  settlers  in  Egypt,  to  whom  Psammetichus  had  given  territory.

6.  Geographical  Keferences. — Ver.  20.  *'  Uz:"  lying  between  Egypt  and  the  states  of  the
Mediterranean,  north  of  Arabia-Petrea,  between  the  sea  and  Idumea.  (Not  the  Uzof  Jobi.  1.)
In  this  geographical  survey,  after  reference  to  Pharaoh  of  Egypt,  first  we  have  mentioned  *'  the
races  of  Arabia  and  Philistia  that  bordered  on  Egypt  to  the  east  and  west  (ver.  20)  ;  then  the
Edomites,  Moabites,  and  Ammonites  to  the  east  (ver.  21) ;  the  Phoenicians,  with  their  colonies,
to  the  west  (ver.  22) ;  next  the  Arabian  tribes  of  the  desert,  extending  eastward  from  Palestine
to  the  Euphrates  (vers.  23,  24);  then  the  Elamites  and  Medes  in  the  distant  east  (ver.  25);
the  near  and  distant  kings  of  the  North  ;  and  last  of  all  the  king  of  Babylon  (ver,  26)." — Kiel.
Ver.  20.  *'Azzah:"  i.e.,  Gaza.  **  The  remnant  of  Ashdod :**  this  is  one  of  those  pregnant
sentences  which  none  but  a  contemporary  writer  could  have  used.  Psammetichus,  after  a  siege
of  tvrenty-nine  years,  had  captured  and  destroyed  Ashdod,  excepting  only  a  feeble  remnant
(Herod,  ii,  157). — Payne  Smith.  [Gath  is  not  mentioned,  for  it  was  destroyed  in  the  same  war.]
Ver.  22.  **  The  isles:"  properly  the  coastland  (sing.),  or  the  maritime  regions  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, where  the  Phoenicians  had  planted  colonies.  Ver.  23.  ** Dedan:"  North  Arabia  (Gen.
XXV.  3,  4).  **  Tema  and  Buz:^'  tribes  north  of  Arabia  (Job  xxxii.  2).  ** All  that  are  in  the
utmost  comers:*^  see  note  on  chapter  ix.  26.  The  tribe  of  Kedar.  Ver.  24.  *^ Mingled  people
that  dwell  in  the  desert :**  tribes  of  Cushite  origin,  such  as  Kenites.  By  intermarriage  these
tribes  liad  become  of  mixed  blood.  Ver.  25.  ** Zimri:"  unmentioned  elsewhere.  Zimran  was
the  eldest  son  of  Abraham  by  Ketura)5r(Gen.  xxv.  2).  This  was  probably  a  district  east  of
the  Arabian  desert  towards  Persia.  Ptolemy  mentions  a  Zabra  between  Mecca  and  Medina.
"Elam:"  west  of  Persia,  but  used  in  Scripture  for  Persia  generally.  Ver.  26.  ** Sheshach"
{cf.  chap,  li,  41),  Babylon.     See  Lit.  Crit.  on  word  below.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  *'  Jehoiakim  and  Josiah : "  see  notes  on  chapter  i.  **  Nehu-
chadrezzar :"  notes  on  chapter  xxi.  2.  Ver.  3.  **  Amon  king  of  Judah:"  son  of  Manasseh,
fifteenth  king  of  Judah,  and  father  of  Josiah.     For  his  character  seeZepli.  i.  4  ;  iii.  3,  4,  11.

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  34.  *^  Principal  of  the  flock"  (also  in  ver.  35)  :  means  the  best
and  fattest  of  the  sheep.  Ver.  38.  *' Forsaken  his  covert  as  the  lion:"  i.e.,  ventures  forth  in
quest  of  prey.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  10.  *'  Voice  of  mirth,  and  of  the  bride  :  "  cf.  notes  in  loc.  on
chapter  vii.  3  i,  xvi.  9.  ^^  Sound  of  the  millstones,  and  the  light  of  the  candle:  "  i.e.,  the  day's  indus-
tries, and  the  evening  social  fellowships  after  the  day's  toils  are  over.  See  Addenda  on  ver.  10.
Ver.  15.  *'  Take  the  wine-cup:"  the  metaphor  of  an  intoxicating  cup  is  commonly  used  in
Scripture  to  denote  affliction  or  misery.  Cf  Isa.  li.  17-22  ;  Jer.  xlix.  12;  li.  7  ;  Lam.  iv.  21,
&c.  Ver.  30.  '*  Oive  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread  the  grapes ;"  as  the  vintagers  trampled  the  grapes
they  raised  a  loud  song  or  cry.

9.  Literary  Criticisms. — General  remark  :  the  text  of  this  chapter  is  disfigured  by  numerous
interpolations,  some  of  which  are  absent  from  the  Septuagint.  Thus,  from  ver.  9  disappear
the  words,  *'  saith  the  Lord^  and  Nebuchadrezzar  the  king  of  Babylon,  My  servant."  In  ver,  11,
instead  of  **  shall  serve  the  king  of  Bahylm"  the  Septuagint  reads,  **  serve  among  the  nation*."

468


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.  o^ap.  xX^.


From  ver.  12  are  omitted  the  words,  *'<Ae  Tcing  of  Babylon**  and  ** and  the  land  of  the  ChaU
deans."  From  ver.  13  are  omitted  the  izloss  ^*  which  Jeremiah  hath  prophesied  against  all  the
nations.**  In  ver.  26,  **and  the  king  of  Sheshach  shall  drink  after  them**  are  left  out  in  th^
Septuagint.  All  these  interpolations  were  doubtless  inserted  by  a  copyist  from  the  later
prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  chapters  1.  and  li.

Ver.  26.  *' Sheshach:**  this  is  a  cypher  form  of  the  word  Babylon,  and  is  done  thus  : — Tlie
alphabet  letters  are  reversed  in  order,  and  instead  of  the  proper  letter  of  the  word  being  used,
its  number  from  the  beginning  of  the  alphabet  is  counted,  and  then  the  same  number-letter
reckoned  from  the  end  of  the  alphabet  is  inserted  in  its  place.  Thus,  3  is  the  second  letter
from  the  beginning  ;  so  K'  is  the  second  letter  from  the  end  of  the  alphabet ;  and  7  is  the
twelfth  from  the  beginning,  while  3  is  the  twelfth  from  the  end.  Babylon  is  in  Hebrew,  BaBeL  ;
but,  instead,  the  letters  are  altered  into  SHeSHaCH.  This  is  the  Cabalistic  system.  MichaeliSj
however,  explains  the  term  as  meaning  ** brazen-gated"  {cf  Isa.  xlv.  2) ;  others  suggest  *^ house
of  a  prince  ;**  Olassius  argues  that  it  comes  from  the  Babylonian  goddess  Sach,  by  reduplication
of  the  first  letter.  From  this  goddess  Misael's  name  was  altered  to  Me-shach.  Further,  the  term
Shace  was  applied  to  a  Babylonish  festival  alluded  to  in  chap.  li.  39,  57  ;  Isa.  xxi.  5.  It  was
(£m Wn^r  <At5/ea5i  that  Cyrus  took  Babylon  (Herod,  i.).  Thus  Jeremiah  mystically  denoted  the
time  of  its  capture  by  this  term.

Ver.  30.  "Mightily  roar  upon  his  habitation.**     nj3   means  both  habitation  and  pasture;

and  the  text  better  reads,  "roar  mightily  over  his  pasturage."

Ver.  87.  **  Peaceable  habitations.**    Here,  as  in  ver.  80,  habitation  shoald  be  pastures,

EOMILETIC  SURVEY  OF  CHAPTER  XXV.
The  Manifold  Judgments  of  God,

The  chapter  distributes  itself  into  sections  thus  : — JudaKs  captivity  (yers.
3-11);  Babylon  s  fall  {y em.  12-14);  The  wine-cup  of  fury  for  the  nations  (vera.
15-29) ;  Tribulations  throughout  the  world  (vers.  30-38).

Glancing  over  the  whole  chapter,  we  are  impressed  with  the  theme  of  the  Divine
dispensations  of  judgment  in  relation  to  individuals,  nations,  and  the  whole  world.
Lange  suggests  the  following :  We  can  speak  of —

I.  The  judicial  acts  of  God  according  to  the  conditions  of  their  manifesta-
tions.    They  are —

1.  Required  by  the  sins  of  men  (vers.  5—6).

2.  Deferred  by  the  love  of  Ood  (vers.  5-6).

3.  Driven  to  accomplishment  by  the  impenitence  of  mankind  (ver.  7,  seq.).

IL  The  judicial  acts  of  God  according  to  the  stages  of  their  manifestation.

1.  This  apiAies  to  cun-ent  preliminary  Judgments.  (1.)  In  the  \iie  ol  individuals,
(2.)  In  the  life  of  nations.  God  judges  continually  here  below,  both  single  individuals
and  entire  nations  (vers.  9-29).

2.  It  applies  to  the  final  judgment.  (1.)  In  so  far  as  it  has  already  begun  (vers.
9-11,  29;  1  Pet.  iv.  17;  Matt.  xxiv.).  The  theocracy  in  its  outer  relations  is
already  judged ;  in  this  sense  the  universal  *' judgment  has  begun  at  the  house  of
God."  (2.)  In  so  far  as  it  is  still  future.  Single  empires  have  already  been
destroyed,  as  well  as  single  men  ;  but  the  judgment  of  the  world  as  a  whole  is  still
impending  (vers.  30,  seq.).

Ill  The  judicial  acts  of  God  differently  represented  in  the  Old  and  New
Testaments.

1.  In  the  Old  Testament  they  are — (1.)  Represented  in  figures  (vers.  30,  31,  seq,
38).     (2.)  Limited  to  the  earth  (vers.  30,  33).

In  the  New  Testament  they  are  represented — (1.)  In  their  full  super- terrestrial
reality.  (2.)  As  extended  over  heaven  and  earth.  (Comp.,  in  contrast  to  this
passage,  Matt.  xxv. ;  1  Cor.  xv. ;  1  Thess.  iv.  ;  2  Pet.  iii.).

IV.  The  judicial  acts  of  God  differently  felt  according  to  the  inward  conditiona
of  men.

1.  As  destruction  on  the  part  of  the  godless  (ver.  7,  seq.).

2.  As  deliverance  on  the  part  of  the  pious  (vers.  11,  12).

469


OflAP.  xiY.  JBOMtLEfIC  COMMENTARY:  JSREMIAB.


TOPICAL  SURVEY  OP  CHAPTER  XXV.  HOMILETICALLY  ARRANGED.

Topic:  Prophets  and  their  Mission.     (Vers.  1-7,  13,  15,  30.)

"  The  word  of  the  Lord  hath  come  unto  me^  and  I  have  spoken  unto  you^  rising  early
and  speaking ;  hut  ye  have  not  hearkened.  And  the  Lord  hath  sent  unto  you
all  His  servants  the  prophets ^  rising  early  and  sending  them  '*  (vers.  3,  4).

This  is  the  first  place  in  the  book  where  Jeremiah  speaks  of  himself  as  "  the
prophet "  (ver.  2).  He  here  records  the  term  of  his  labours  (ver.  3),  and  alludes
to  the  changes  which  had  come  upon  his  nation  during  his  mission  among  them.

I.  A  survey  of  prophetic  work.

1.  His  vast  and  manifold  audience  (ver.  2).  2.  The  lengthened  period  of  his
ministry  (ver.  3).  Nineteen  years  under  Josiah,  three  months  under  Jehoahaz,  four
years  under  Jehoiakim.

IL  A  testimony  to  prophetic  fervour.

1.  His  own  persevering  activity  (ver.  2 :  "  For  three  and  twenty  years,  rising
early  and  speaking  ").  2.  A  succession  of  Divine  messengers  (ver.  3),  so  that  the
messages  and  expostulations  of  prophets  were  never  silenced.

III.  A  statement  of  prophetic  authority.

1.  He  prophesied  only  because  commissioned  by  God.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord
came,"  <kc.  (ver.  3).  Comp.  also  verses  15  and  30.  2.  The  prophets  were  divinely
constrained  to  their  work  and  witness  (ver.  4).

IV.  A  summary  of  prophetic  teaching.

1.  A  call  to  reformation  (ver.  5).  2.  A  promise  of  a  goodly  heritage  (ver.
5).  3.  A  warning  against  impiety  (ver.  6).  4.  An  exhibition  of  the  consequences
of  sin:  "do  you  hurt"  (ver.  6);  "provoke  Me  to  anger"  (ver.  7).  6.  Predictions
of  judgment  (vers.  15,  30).

V.  An  indication  of  the  variety  characterising  prophetic  labours.

1.  Preaching  (vers.  1-7).  2.  Writing  (ver.  13).  3.  Visiting  (ver.  15).  4.  De-
nouncing (ver.  30).

VI.  A  protest  against  prophetic  rejection.

1.  The  people  had  persistently  refused  to  hear  prophetic  messages  (vers.  3,  4,  8).
2.  They  had  shown  no  inclination  towards  the  messages  God  sent  (ver.  4).  Comp,
Addenda  on  ver.  4  :  "  Jehovah  hath  sent  to  you  all  the  prophets."

His  had  not  been  an  easy  ministry;  comp.  xv.  15-21  ;  xx.  14-18.  But  he  was
now  firmly  established  as  a  prophet,  and  had  become  "  unto  the  people  a  fenced
brazen  wall "  (comp.  i  18 ;  vi.  27  ;  xv.  20).  But,  alas  1  how  little  had  his  nation
benefited  I  Repudiating  such  a  messenger  of  God,  and  for  so  long,  their  sin  was
the  greater,  and  their  doom  righteously  severe.

Topic :  Nebuchadrezzar,  God's  Servant.     (Ver.  9.)

The  bestowment  of  this  title  by  Jehovah  is  both  rare  and  significant.  It  is  given
in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  emphatically  to  three  persons:  first  to  Moses
(Dent,  xxxiv.  5  ;  Josh.  i.  2),  as  the  Leader  and  Lawgiver  of  his  people ;  to  Nebuchad'
rezzar  (Jer.  xxv.  9  ;  xxvii.  6  ;  xliii.  10),  a^  the  Punisher,  yet  Preserver,  of  Judah ;
and  to  Messiah  (Isa.  lii.  13 ;  liii.  11),  as  the  Redeemer  and  King  of  Israel.  Note :
Cyrus  is  called  by  a  similar  name  (Isa.  xliv.  28  and  xlv.  1),  as  the  Liberator  and
Restorer  of  the  exiled  people.     See  Addenda,  ver.  9:  *' Nehuchadrezzar,  My  servant"

I.  A  discredited  and  astonishing  appointment.  Facts  seemed  to  refute  the
idea  that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  to  be  commissioned  and  empowered  to  conquer  the
nations  and  possess  the  heritage  of  Israel.  Egypt  had  been  the  Great  Power.
Pharaoh  Necho  it  was  who  had  slain  Josiah,  and  had  established  his  authority
between  Eejypt  and  the  Euphrates  (2  Kings  xxiv.  7).  And  now  Nineveh  was
470^


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  ohaf.  xxv.


captured  by  him,  the  Assyrian  empire  had  fallen,  and  Nabopolassar,  king  of  Babylon,
was  infirm  and  old.  Jehoiakim,  their  own  king,  was  a  vassal  of  Pharaoh.  All
these  facts  seemed  to  declare  that  Egypt  under  Pharaoh,  and  not  Babylon  under
Nebuchadnezzar,  was  destined  to  be  the  supreme  arbiter  and  ruler  of  nations.

But — 1.  God  purposed  othervnte;  and  "none  can  stay  His  hand,  or  say  unto
Him,  What  doest  thou  t  **

2.  God  was  preparing  anothery  who  was  merely  a  young  military  leader,  and  was
hitherto  unknown — Nebuchadnezzar.  '*  Things  despised  God  bath  chosen ;  and
things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  which  are,  that  no  flesh  should  glory
in  His  presence.**  That  very  year  in  which  Nabopolassar  died,  Nebuchadnezzar,  his
son,  succeeded  to  the  throne,  and  began  a  series  of  brilliant  victories  which  raised
him  to  the  highest  position  among  the  potentates  of  the  earth.

II.  An  unchallengeable  temporary  supremacy.  To  this  person,  whom  God
would  "  send  for  and  take,"  should  be  given  victory  over  Egyptian  arms  (at  Char-
chemish),  dominion  over  the  mighty  realm  of  Egypt,  over  the  destinies  of  God*s  own
people,  and  over  all  neighbouring  nations.  Verse  9  declares  that  (1)  God  will
gather  together  all  the  northern  nations ;  (2)  place  them  under  Nebuchadnezzar  as
sovereign  and  general ;  (3)  bring  them  against  Judah.

The  period  of  this  ascendancy  is  definitely  limited/  but  it  is  equally  definitely
determined;  nothing  can  prolong,  nor  can  shorten  it,

1.  God^s  omnipotence  decides  national  and  individual  ascendancy,  "  He  raiseth
up  one,  and  putteth  down  another."  Powerful  nations  are  weak  indeed  in  His  all-
powerful  hands ;  while  weakest  forces  can  be  made  "  mighty  through  God."

2.  God^s  omnipotence  is  thus  to  be  honoured  in  human  of  airs.  Because  Nebuchad-
nezzar failed  to  revere  God's  power  as  higher  than  his  own,  and  indeed  the  source
of  his  own,  therefore  he  was  degraded.  (See  Dan.  iv.  22,  26,  29-37 ;  also  Dan.  v.
18-23.)

in.  A  minister  of  God's  righteous  Judgments  (vers.  9,  11).

1.  Specially  employed  by  Jehovah  for  punishing  wrong.  Guilt  in  Judah  and  the
nations  had  to  be  scourged,  and  God  used  him  for  this.

2.  Unconsciously  employed  by  Jehovah  for  ends  he  did  not  appreciate.  Himself
no  worshipper  of  Jehovah,  no  willing  "  servant "  of  the  Divine  Master,  he  yet  did
God*s  behest  effectually.  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him  ; "  **  Men
are  Thy  hand."

IV.  A  guardian  of  the  covenant  natioxL

1.  Judah  was  to  be  chastised  for  its  idolatry,  yet  preserved  from  destruction.
Captivity  effected  both  ends.

2.  Judah  was  to  fulfil  Divine  prophecies  and  vindicate  God^s  faithfulness  to  His
covenants  before  the  world.  Prophecy  had  for  ages  threatened  captivity  as  the
penalty  of  idolatry ;  therefore  it  came.  Yet  prophecy  had  as  emphatically  guar-
anteed that  God's  people  should  be  restored  to  and  repossess  their  land  ;  therefore
their  exile  was  made  safe  to  them,  and  really  preserved  them  intact  as  a  nation,
while  it  also  disciplined  their  heart  and  prepared  them  for  return  to  Canaan.

God  has  His  own  methods  of  effecting  His  plans  ;  yet  His  plans  cannot  fail.  By
ways  and  agencies  we  should  not  select  He  works  our  "  good  "  (chap.  xxiv.  6).  Over
all  the  powers  and  projects  of  man  He  sways,  and  does  according  to  His  will
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.

(a.)  It  is  well  to  be  reconciled  to  so  great  a  God.  (h,)  We  are  safe  in  the  covenant
care  of  so  faithful  a  God,  (c.)  It  is  hopeless  to  resist  the  purposes  of  so  omnipotent  a
God,

Topic:  Sbvbhtt  Years'  Captivity.     (Vers.  11,  12.)

Rationalistic  criticism  is,  of  course,  offended  by  this  specification  beforehand  of
the  term  of  Babylon's  ascendancy  and  of  the  Jewish  captivity.  The  period  *'  seventy
years"  must  have  been  interpolated  after  the  captivity  was  over  and  the  time

47i


OHAP.  XXV.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


known  !  says  Hitzig.  "  Such  coincidence  of  history  with  prophecy  would  be  a
surprising  accident,^^  says  Hitzig  again.  Graf  thinks  that  the  prediction  of
Babylon's  destruction,  at  the  very  time  when  it  is  described  as  a  power  divinely
commissioned  to  execute  judgment,  is  somewhat  unsuitable  and  improbable.

To  this  the  reply  may  be  :  1.  As  the  Babylonish  ascendancy  began  with  the
year  of  this  prophecy,  the  fourth  of  Jehoiakim's  reign,  this  was  a  suitable  time  for
predicting  the  term  of  its  continuance.  2.  As  God's  judgments  on  tlie  nations  were
now  being  passed  before  the  prophet's  vision,  beginning  with  Jerusalem  and  com-
prehending all  the  earth,  Babylon  could  not  reasonably  be  omitted.  3.  Smce  the
futnre  of  Judah  in  captivity  was  so  bound  up  with  the  future  of  Babylon,  the  pre-
dict  1.071  of  the  term  of  exile  was  naturally  accompanied  unth  this  prediction  of  £aby~
Ion's  fall.  4.  Inasmuch  also  as  the  Jewish  captivity  now  began,  it  was  needful — in
order  to  save  the  exiles  from  despair,  to  encourage  their  submission  to  expatriation,
to  sustain  their  faith  in  God,  and  thus  to  keep  alive  a  religious  life  in  their  souls —
to  show  beforehand  the  limit  of  the  term  of  discipline.

I.  The  historic  reckoning  of  this  period.  These  "  seventy  years  "  began  with
"the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  and  tlie  first  of  Nebuchadrezzar"  (ver.  1),  when  he
first  captured  Jerusalem,  i.e.,  B.C.  606.  They  end  with  the  capture  of  Babylon
in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  B.C.  536  (Ezra  i.  1).
About  the  filling  up  of  those  years  in  Babylonish  history  there  seems  some  slight
difiiculty.  Nebuchadnezzar  reigned  forty-four  years  ;  his  son  Evil-Merodach,  two
years  ;  Neriglissar,  who  murdered  Evil-Merodach  (the  Nergal-Sharezer  mentioned  in
chapter  xxxix.  3-13),  Nebuchadnezzar's  son-in-law,  four  years  ;  his  infant  son,
Laborosoarchad,  nine  months,  he  being  then  murdered  ;  Nabonedus,  seventeen
years.  To  these  sixty-seven  years  and  nine  months  may,  however,  be  added  the
necessary  interval  until  the  Jews  were  really  in  repossession  of  their  country,
which  may  fully  account  for  the  literal  "seventy  years."

II  The  theocratic  purpose  of  this  captivity.

1.  The  assignment  of  His  people  to  captivity  was  intended  by  God — (a)  to  punish
their  apostasy  from  Him  ;  (6)  to  restore  their  fidelity  to  Him  ;  (c)  to  enlighten  them
concerning  the  true  and  only  God,  in  distinction  from  tlie  revolting  forms  of  idolatry
and  the  consequent  degradations  they  would  witness  in  Babylon  (chap.  xxiv.  5-7).

2.  The  limitation  of  the  term  of  His  people's  captivity  was  intended  by  God — {a)
to  declare  that  the  committal  of  Judah  to  Nebuchadnezzar  was  not  an  abdication  of
His  claim  to  them  and  control  over  their  destiny  ;  (6)  to  vindicate  His  power  over
the  mighty  monarchy  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  His  ''^  servant  *' vfhom  He  had  exalted  to
carry  out  the  Divine  plans  ;  (c)  to  foster  the  liope  of  restoration  in  the  hearts  of
His  people,  and  thus  dispose  them  to  accept  the  chastisement  and  renew  their  faith
in  Jehovah.  They  would  only  "  hang  their  harps  on  the  willows,"  not  cast  them
away  in  despair.

III  The  supernatural  termination  of  Babylon's  power.

1.  The  empire  rose  and  ended  within  the  2^^^determined  period  of  "  seventy
years."  A  short-lived  wonder ;  and  apparently  called  into  existence  only  for  the
temporary  expatriation,  and  therefore  preservation,  of  Judah.  Within  the  term  of
Judah's  exile,  Babylon  rose  and  fell.  Babylonia  and  the  captivity  were  synchro-
nous :  commenced  simultaneously,  closed  simultaneously.  This  suggests  the  vast
importance  Judah  assumed  in  God's  esteem.  For  her  He  created  Babylon  I  Nebuchad-
nezzar was  "  His  servant  "  to  punish  and  preserve  her,

2.  The  precision  with  which  God  limited  Babylon's  ascendancy  sublimely  vindi-
cates God's  supremacy  as  the  Governor  of  nations.  "  The  mighty  monarchy  of  Chaldea
was  under  the  control  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  He  who  made  it  flow  like  a  stormy
ocean,  and  overwhelm  the  nations  with  its  flood,  could  say  to  its  proud  waves,
Hitherto  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther." — Wordsworth.

3.  The  predicted  overthrow  of  Babylon  was  a  judgment  by  God  upon  the  lust
of  empire.     Although  the  Chaldeans  were  a  Divine  instrument  for  punishing  the

472  ^


HOMILETW  COMMENT  ART:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xxy.


Jews,  they  knew  it  not,  but  merely  gratified  their  cruel  passions  and  impious  greed
of  power,  thereby  contracting  guilt  which  in  its  turn  called  for  punishment  (ver.
12).  Under  Cyrus'  command  the  allied  Medes  and  Persians,  after  a  long  and  diffi-
cult siege,  captured  Babylon,  B.C.  538  ;  and  Darius  the  Mede  assumed  the  throne.
*'  The  empire  of  Babylon,"  says  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  **  was  practically  the  work  of  one
man.  After  Nebuchadnezzar's  death  it  continued  for  a  few  years,  during  which  its
history  is  a  series  of  murders  and  usurpations,  and  then  it  fell  for  ever,  and  its
ruins  form  its  only  lasting  memorial.  Contrast  with  this  the  promise  to  Judah  in
chap.  iv.  27."

Topic  :  Prophecy  Vindicated  in  Babylon^s  Fall.     *'  And  I  will  bring  upon  that
land  all  My  words  which  I  have  pronounced  against  it  "  (ver.  13).

The  fall  of  Babylon  proves  the  truth  of  prophecy,  and  prophecy  proved  attests  the
Divine  inspiration  of  prophets.  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  predicted  events  which  be-
fell mighty  empires  ;  they  must,  therefore,  have  been  moved  by  the  Omniscient
Spirit.  Man  himself  **  knoweth  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth  ; "  how  shall  he
foresee  the  fate  of  cities  and  destiny  of  nations,  and  at  a  time  when  nothing  could
indicate  such  events  ?     Consider —

I.  God  minutely  declared  His  prophetic  purpose  against  Babylon.  ''My
words  which  I  have  pronounced  against  it."

1.  He  pronounced  the  destruction  of  Babylon  by  the  Medes  and  Persians
(Isa.  xxl  2;  Jer.  li.  11).  History  fulfilled  this;  for  under  the  command  of
Cyrus,  who  was  announced  a  hundred  years  before  he  was  born,  Babylon  was
besieged  by  the  united  forces  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.

2.  God  declared  that  the  river  of  Babylon  should  be  dried  up  (Isa.  xliv.  27  ;
Jer.  i.  38).  This  river  was  two  furlongs  broad,  and  more  than  twelve  feet  deep ;
and  was  thought  to  be  a  surer  fortification  than  the  city's  massive  walls.  Prophecy
was  strikingly  fulfilled  ;  for  Cyrus  turned  the  course  of  the  Euphrates  and  drained
the  channel,  so  that  his  soldiers  crossed  and  entered  the  city.

3.  Further,  Jehovah  proclaimed  that  Babylon  should  become  a  desolation.  So
complete  should  this  desolation  be  that  the  Arabian  would  not  be  able  even  to
pitch  his  tent  on  the  site  (Isa.  xiii.  20).  All  this  came  to  pass.  One  part  of  the
country  was  overflowed  by  the  river  which  Cyrus  diverted,  making  the  land  a
boggy  marsh,  which  became  so  overrun  with  serpents  and  venomous  creatures  that
not  even  the  wild  Arab  could  dwell  near  it.

Comparing  history  with  prophecy,  in  every  minute  particular  God's  "  words
which  He  pronounced  against "  Babylon  are  seen  to  be  startlingly  verified.

II.  When  God  denounces  a  city  or  nation,  His  decision  is  not  arbitrary,  but
is  justified  by  some  foreseen  fact.  He  foresees  Babylon's  idolatry,  iniquity,  and
impious  pride,  and  therefore  determined  its  destruction.  Hence  this  overthrow
was  not  the  result  of  caprice  or  arbitrariness  on  God's  part ;  but  sin  was  the
cause  of  Babylon's  fall.      Sin  saps  the  foundation  of  cities  and  empires.

in.  When,  because  of  iniquity,  God  determines  the  destruction  of  a  city  or
empire,  nothing  can  save  it.  If  ever  a  city  appeared  impregnable,  it  was  Babylon.
Its  walls,  says  one  writer,  '*  were  above  300  feet  high,  87  feet  broad,  and  48  miles
in  compass."  In  addition,  the  river  Euphrates  appeared  an  insuperable  barrier  to
an  enemy  entering  the  city.  Yet,  notwithstanding  its  mighty  wall  with  its  hundred
gates  of  solid  brass,  notwithstanding  its  wide  and  deep  river,  Babylon  was  taken,
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.

Men  talk  of  impregnability — the  impregnability  of  walls,  forts,  and  bulwarks.
But  only  what  God  defends  is  impregnable,  and  nothing  can  stand  when  God
determines  its  fall.  Babylon,  Nineveh,  Tyre  and  Sidon,  all  illustrate  this — the
power  of  God  to  fulfil  Hia  counsel.  "Hath  He  said,  and  shall  He  net  do
itr

473


CHAP.  XXV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


IV.  The  fidelity  of  God,  in  the  execution  of  His  threatened  judgments,  is
presumptive  proof  that  He  will  fulfil  all  His  gracious  promises.  Hath
He  more  delight  in  punishing  the  wicked  than  in  blessing  the  righteous  1  Nay  ;
He  is  "  slow  to  anger,"  but  He  is  also  "  not  slack  concerning  His  promises."
Sure  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  threatenings,  certainly  '*  all  His  promises  are  Yea
and  Amen."

V.  Divine  threatenings  have  in  some  cases  been  recalled,  but  there  are  no
instances  where  Divine  promises  have  not  been  fulfilled.  The  sins  which
incurred  the  threatenings  have  been  repented  of,  as  with  Nineveh,  and  so  the
stroke  has  been  turned  aside.  But  all  God's  promises  spring  from  His  grace
and  love.  And,  while  man*s  sin  may  cease,  and  so  the  judgment  be  escaped,
God's  *'  love  never  faileth,'*  therefore  the  promises  can  never  be  recalled.  Promises
may  be  delayed,  but  Divine  love  and  faithfulness  are  guarantees  that  what  He  has
promised  He  will  assuredly  perform. — Arranged  from  Rev,  D,  Pledgees  "  Walks  mth
Jeremiah,**

Topic:  Thb  Winb-oup  op  Wejith.     (Vers.  15-29.)

A  bold  image,  and  not  infrequently  used  by  the  sacred  writers  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxv,  8,
Isa.  li.  22,  Lam,  iv.  21,  Rev.  xvi.  19,  <fcc.).  Dr.  Adam  Clarke  points  out  thsit  Plato
has  a  similar  idea  :  "  Suppose,"  says  Plato,  **  God  had  given  to  men  a  medicating
potion  inducing  fear,  so  that  the  more  any  one  should  drink  of  it,  so  much  the
more  miserable  he  should  find  himself  at  every  draught,  and  become  fearful  of
everything  both  present  and  future ;  and,  at  last,  though  the  most  courageous  of
men,  should  become  totally  possessed  by  fear  "  (De  Leg.  L,  near  the  end).  Homer
&\ao  (Iliad  Txiv.  527-533)  places  two  vessels  at  the  disposal  of  Jupiter,  one  of
good|  the  other  of  evil,  in  which  potions  are  ready  for  men  to  drink : —

•*  Two  urns  by  Jove's  high  throne  have  ever  stood ;
The  source  of  evil  one,  and  one  of  good  ;
From  thence  the  cup  of  mortal  man  he  fills,
Blessings  to  these,  to  those  distributes  ills  ;
To  most  he  mingles  both  :  the  wretch  decreed
To  taste  the  bad  unmixed,  is  cursed  indeed  ;
Pursued  by  wrongs,  by  meagre  famine  driven,
He  wanders  outcast  both  of  earth  and  heaven." — Pop6,

Henry,  in  general,  suggests  the  following : — "  The  cup  in  the  vision  is  to  be  a
sw(yrd  in  the  accomplishment  of  it  (ver.  16).  (1.)  The  just  anger  of  God  sends  His
judgment  (ver.  15  ;  comp.  Job  xxi.  20,  Rev.  xiv.  10).  The  wrath  of  God  in  this
world  is  but  a  "cup,"  contrasted  with  the  full  streams  of  it  hereafter.  (2.)  By
human  hands  the  judgment  was  to  be  executed.  Jeremiah  enforces  the  cup  (ver.
17)  j  Nebuchadnezzar  wields  the  sword.  (3.)  On  whom  the  judgment  should  fall :
all  the  nations  within  the  verge  of  Israel's  acquaintance.  (4.)  The  certainty  and
irresistihleness  of  the  coming  judgment  (vers.  28,  29).  They  will  not  only  be  loath
to  take  the  cup,  but  will  refuse  to  believe  the  judgment  will  ever  come ;  but  God
will  see  to  it  that  they  drink  it."     Suggestions : —

(i.)  There  is  a  God  who  judges  in  tJie  earth,  to  whom  all  nations  are  accountable,
and  by  whose  judgments  they  must  abide.

(ii.)  God  can  easily  bring  to  ruin  the  greatest  nations — the  most  numerous,
powerful,  and  secure.

(iii.)  Those  who  have  maltreated  God*s  people  will  be  certainly  reckoned  with
for  their  deeds.  The  year  of  recompense  will  come  on  all  who  have  vexed  and
afflicted  Israel.

(iv.)  The  predictions  of  God's  prophets  will  in  due  time  assuredly  be  accomplished.
Isaiah  had  long  before  this  prophesied  of  these  nations  (chap,  xiii.,  <fcc.),  and  now
at  length  these  predictions  will  have  complete  fulfilling.
474


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.  chap.  xxt.

(t.)  Those  who  are  ambitious  of  power  and  dominion  commonly  become  tlie  plaguea
of  their  generation.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  so  proud  of  his  might  that  he  became
lost  to  the  sense  of  right.

^vi.)  The  greatest  fomp  and  power  of  this  world  are  of  very  uncertain  continuance.
Before  Nebuchadnezzar's  greater  force  kings  themselves  must  yield  and  become
captives.      (See  Addenda  on  verse  15  :   The  Wine-oup  of  Fury.)

Topic:  **Sheshaoh:"  Babylon  Reversed ;  Babylon's  Fate.     (Ver.  26.)

I.  The  term  "  Sheshach ''  was  a  disguised  name  for  magnificent  Babylon.

1.  There  was  a  prudential  reason  at  this  crisis  for  concealment  of  the  reference  of
this  prediction.  This  prophecy  of  Babylon's  overthrow  was  one  sure  to  become
known  to  the  Chaldeans,  and  then  might  have  incensed  them  against  the  captives.
The  mention  of  "the  king  of  Babylon"  and  "the  land  of  the  Chaldeans"  in  verse
1 2,  was  doubtless  a  later  insertion  into  the  text,  and  has  no  place  in  the  Septuagint
(See  Lit.  Grit.j  supra,)  But  this  hidden  reference  would  not  be  understood  by  the
captors,  though  well  known  in  its  reference  by  the  captives.  Consequently  there
was  no  severity  shown  in  Chaldea,  either  to  Jeremiah  (chap,  xxxix.  11),  nor  those
of  his  nation  who  favoured  surrender  to  Chaldea  rather  than  to  Egypt.

2.  There  was  much  ingenuity  shown  in  the  literary  method  of  concealment.  (See
Lit.  Crit.y  supra^  on  the  inverted  letters  which  are  here  used  for  Babel.)  Also  (and
we  may  accept  the  further  idea),  since  Shace  was  the  name  of  the  festival  which
would  be  held  at  the  very  hour  of  Babylon's  overthrow,  the  name  would  indicate
to  the  exiles  not  only  the  city*s  fallf  but  the  actual  season  of  the  year  when  the
event  should  transpire.  Yet  the  Chaldeans  themselves  would  decipher  no  meaning
in  this  mysterious  term.  Nevertheless  this  dexterous  use  of  the  peculiarly  Chaldean
syllable  "  Shach**  (as  in  Me-«AacA),  would  suflfice  to  connect  the  name  with  the  city
in  the  hour  of  its  fall,  when  the  prediction  was  pointed  out  by  the  Hebrews  to  their
Babylonish  captors.

II.  The  term  ''  Sheshach"  became  a  significant  watchword  among  the  Jewish
exiles.

1.  Its  meaning  was  to  them  a  gracious  prophecy.  Among  the  exiles  it  became  a
pledge  of  deliverance.  It  counselled  patience,  animated  hope,  and  sustained  faith.
It  led  them  to  refuse  to  "  sing  the  Lord's  songs  in  a  strange  land,"  yet  to  preserve
their  silenced  and  suspended  harps  for  future  use.  It  disarmed  all  inducements
to  fall  into  Chaldean  idolatry,  for  it  reminded  them  that  as  their  Jerusalem  had
fallen  because  of  her  apostasy  to  idols,  so  would  Babylon  :  for  Jehovah  was  a
jealous  God,  and  His  glory  He  would  not  give  to  others.

2.  Its  suggestiveness  informed  them  of  the  issues  of  the  final  siege.  When  the
Medes  and  Persians  arrived  at  the  walls  of  Babylon  and  laid  siege,  the  Chaldeans
were  proudly  scornful  of  their  demands  to  surrender,  and  trusted  to  the  strength
of  their  walls,  the  splendour  of  their  fortifications,  the  resources  of  their  city,  and
contemned  the  daring  foe  !  But  Judah  "knew  the  time  of  her  visitation,"  and
^^ Sheshach"  became  the  watchword  which  sufficed  to  interpret  the  meaning  of  the
siege  and  forecast  the  issues  thereof  When  Cyrus  was  at  the  gates  of  Babylon,
the  festival  Sh<ice  was  being  held,  and  both  king  and  people  had  abandoned  them-
selves to  idolatrous  carousala  While  they  besotted  themselves,  the  exiles,  on  the
other  hand,  would  eagerly  scan  "  the  signs  of  the  times,"  praying  to  the  God  of
Israel  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  ardent  hopes,  that  the  "  set  time  to  favour  Zion
might  come,"  and  ^^ Sheshach**  would  be  whispered  among  them  as  indicating  their
confidence  as  to  the  nearness  of  the  end.  (See  Addenda  on  verse  26 ;  The  Kino
OF  Sheshach  shall  drink.)

III.  The  term  "  Sheshach,"  then,  held  a  definite  prediction  of  the  dtf^  fall.
1.  In  the  inversion  of  the  letters  ("  Sheshach  "  for  "  Babel")  there  was  signified

the  inverted  fortunes  of  the  city.     It  would  come  to  pass  that  the  pride  (tf  Babel

475


CHAP.  XXV.  EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


would  be  reversed ;  all  its  glory  should  be  changed,  and  its  lofty  name  be  covered
with  discredit.

2.  This  final  overthrow  of  the  conqueror  and  captor  was  required  in  order  to
vindicate  God^s  righteousness.  **  If  Judah  was  to  be  punished,  and  Chaldea  be
invested  with  universal  empire,  was  it,"  asks  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  **  because  the
Chaldeans  were  more  approved  hy  God  in  religion  and  morals  than  the  Jews  1  No.
They  were  simply  God's  scourge,  made  fit  to  be  so  by  the  vigour  of  one  man ;
and  at  his  death  punishment  will  befall  them  also /or  their  own  sins  ;  and  in  little
more  than  twenty  years  after  Nebuchadnezzar's  death,  their  empire  will  cease  for
ever.  They  existed  only  to  do  the  base  office  of  an  executioner^  and,  that  done,  they
will  be  laid  aside."

Topic:  God's  Controversy  with  Humanity.  **A  noise  shall  come  even  to  the
ends  of  the  earth;  for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the  naiio7is,  lie  will
plead  with  all  flesh ;  He  will  give  them  that  are  wicked  to  the  sword^  saiih  the
Lord'' (ver.  31).

Universal  disturbance  is  predicted.  It  would  come  in  this  instance  through  the
military  aggressions  and  devastations  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  would  march  over
the  nations  in  irresistible  conquests.  But  behind  Nebuchadnezzar's  armies  Jehovah
would  stand,  vindicating  the  laws  which  those  nations  had  violated,  and  punishing
the  wicked  with  the  sword.     (See  Addenda  on  verses  28  and  29.)

(i.)  In  world-wide  commotions  we  must  recognise  the  direct  action  of  the  Lord  God.
*'  When  judgments  are  abroad  "  there  is  evidence  that  God  has  arisen  to  "  shake
terribly  the  earth"  (Isa.  ii.  19).

(a.)  These  universal  commotions  occur  not  hy  haphazard,  {h.)  Natural  agencies
[as  now  Nebuchadnezzar's  armies]  are  supernatural  instrumentalities,  (c.)  There  is
a  purpose  and  a  providence  in  such  vast  and  solemn  commotions,  (d.)  Reverently
yield  to  these  ^^  pleadings  "  of  God  whenever  they  occur.

(ii.)  Great  crises  occur  when  God  places  humanity  in  arraignment.  He  may  send
out  war  over  the  earth,  or  pestilence,  or  fruitless  seasons,  or  paralysis  of  industries;
but  in  human  history  there  do  periodically  occur  such  grave  epochs  when  God  mani-
festly enters  into  controversy  with  His  creatures.

(a.)  Wrong,  which  is  in  the  world,  seems  at  definite  periods  to  culminate.  Ini-
quity gets  into  the  ascendant  everywhere,  and  requires  a  mighty  shaking  and  shat-
tering to  be  cast  down  again  into  shame  and  defeat.  (6.)  God  calls  humanity  to
answer  for  its  wrongdoing.  He  has  His  own  manifold  ways  of  doing  this — war,
disaster,  (fee.  (c.)  Judgments  sweep  over  the  earth  in  stern  protestations.  Calami-
ties are  God's  proclamations  of  displeasure.

A  controversy  implies  that  wrong  exists  which  God  will  have  set  right.

I.  There  is  just  cause  why  God  should  come  into  controversy  with  humanity.

1.  He  has  given  us  natural  revelation,  yet  we  have  misused  it  (Rom.  i.  17-20).

2.  He  has  made  Himself  and  His  will  known  in  human  history,  yet  we  have
ignored  Him  (Prov.  i.  24,  25).

3.  He  has  sent  His  messengers  to  the  world,  yet  we  have  repudiated  them  (comp.
ver.  4  with  Matt.  xxi.  35,  <fec.;  xxiii.  34,  to  the  end).

4.  He  sought  to  reconcile  humanity  to  Himself,  yet  we  have  refused  His  grace
(comp.  2  Cor.  v.  19  with  Heb.  ii.  3,  x.  28).

II.  Human  history  has  been  interrupted  by  epochs  in  which  God  has  pleaded
with  all  flesh.

1.  Kecall  to  thought  the  black  dates  which  have  become  marked  on  all  national
records.    Not  a  nation  has  been  without  them  ;  times  of  awful  solemnity  and  sorrow.

2.  Grave  crises  have  also  come  upon  many  nations  simultaneously.  International
calamities  and  wars  and  plagues,  by  which  countries  and  peoples  have  been  plunged
into  common  distress  and  amaze.

476


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XXT.


3.  Over  the  whole  habitable  world  great  controversies  have  gone  forth  from  God.
What  was  the  ancient  Flood,  what  the  first  preaching  of  the  Crossy  what  the  Re-
formatiorty  what  those  modern  evangelistic  and  revival  movements,  but  occasions
when  God  "pleaded  with  all  flesh"?

III.  A  delinquent  world  will  assuredly  be  brought  to  judgment  by  Jehovah.

1.  It  is  an  eternal  law  and  necessity  that  wickedness  shall  be  rebuked  and
punished  (comp.  2  Pet.  ii.  4-6).

2.  It  is  predetermined  that  the  lives  of  men  shall  be  brought  before  the  throne  of
God  for  judgment  (Acts  xvii.  31).

Application, — (a.)  God  now  "  pleads  **  with  us  for  Qnr  reconciliation  and  salva-
tion. (6.)  His  "  controversy  "  will  be  the  more  dreadftU  with  us  if,  by  rejecting  His
gracCy  we  compel  Him  to  "  plead  "  with  us  in  judgment.    (See  Addenda  on  verse  30.)


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXV.:  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.


Ver.  1.  "The  fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim."  This  date  was  the  turn-
ing-point in  Oriental  history.  The
armies  of  Egypt  and  Babylon  met  in
deadly  and  decisive  battle  at  Charche-
mish,  and  God  gave  the  ascendancy  to
Nebuchadnezzar.  Immediately  after
this  battle,  and  probably  before  Nebu-
chadnezzar and  his  victorious  army  ap-
peared in  Palestine,  Jeremiah  delivered
this  prophecy,  which  foretells  the  great-
ness of  the  Babylonish  empire,  mentions
the  countries  over  which  it  is  to  extend,
and  the  exact  term  of  its  duration.
During  this  year  Jeremiah  had,  in  vain,
been  seeking,  with  the  wisdom  of  a  states-
man and  the  fervour  of  a  patriot,  to
detach  Jehoiakim  from  Egypt  and  induce
him  to  accept  Nebuchadnezzar's  supre-
macy. This  led  Jehoiakim — a  year  later
— both  to  burn  the  prophet's  roll  (comp.
chap,  xxxvi.  32),  to  endeavour  to  slay
the  prophet  (ibid,  26),  and  thereby  to
silence  all  further  Divine  messages  to
him,  till,  at  the  close  of  his  reign,  the
Chaldeans  were  marching  upon  Jerusa-
lem.— Comp.  Speaker's  Commentary.

Ver.  4.  "Jehovah  hath  sent  to
YOU  ALL  His  prophets."  God  is  a
long-suffering  God,  who  desireth  not  the
death  of  a  sinner  ;  therefore  He  gives
the  first  world  one  hundred  and  twenty
years*  time  for  repentance  (Gen.  vi.  3).
Lot  preaches  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
more  than  twenty-five  years  (Gen.  xiiu
13,  xxix.  14).  Christ  preaches  repent-
ance three  and  a  half  years,  and  the
Apostles  forty  years,  before  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem.     But  dost  thou  not


know  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth
thee  to  repentance? — Cramer.

Ver.  6.  "  Turn  ye  every  one  from
HIS  evil  way."  Each  must  separately
repent  and  turn  from  his  own  sin.  None
is  excepted,  lest  they  should  think  their
own  guilt  extenuated  because  the  evil  is
general.  — Jamieson.

Ver.  9.  *'  Nebuchadnezzar,  My  ser-
vant." This  title,  so  remarkable  in  the
Old  Testament  as  the  especial  epithet,
first  of  Moses,  and  then  of  the  Messiah,
is  thrice  given  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and
marks  the  greatness  of  the  commission
intrusted  to  him. — Payne  Smith,

The  Jews  boasted  that  they  were  the
servants  of  Jehovah.  Yet  a  heathen
king  is  here  called  God's  servant,  as
being  more  His  se^^vant  than  they  were,
and  as  serving  God  in  destroying  them  I

Ver.  10.  "  Sound  of  the  mill-
stones." As  a  household  morning
employment,  all  the  mills  of  a  town
would  be  heard  together,  since  the  cus-
tom was  for  only  enough  corn  for  the
day's  need  to  be  ground  at  a  time.  The
labour  was  severe.

"  Light  op  the  candle,"  t.e.,  night-
light.  These  are  so  common  in  use  in
the  East  that  the  poorest  burn  candles
all  through  the  night.

Payne  Smith  suggest  beautifully  that
the  "  sound  of  the  millstones  "  was  the
sign  of  the  preparation  of  the  daily  mealy
and  that  the  *'  light  of  the  candle  "  was
the  sign  of  the  assembling  of  the  family
after  the  labonrs  of  the  day  were  over.

in


CBAF.  xrw.  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  JEHEMIAH.

Ver.  16.  The  wine-cup  of  fuby.    A  port  of  the  passage.     The  Apostle  uses

**  cup  *'  is  often   in  Scripture  put   for  the  same  argument  in  other  words ;  for

affliction,  and  "  wine  "  for  extreme  con-  after  having  said  that  judgment  would

fusion   and   wrath.       Here   the    figure  begin  at  Go<Vs  house,  he   immediately

indicates  stupifi/ing  judgments   (comp.  shows   how  dreadful  the  vengeance  of

chaps,  xlix.  12,11.  7.)    We  need  not  sup-  God  would  be  upon  His  open  enemies  (1

pose,    with    Michaelis,   that    Jeremiah  Pet.   iv.   17).  ...  It  is  better   for  us

actually   offered   a    wine  -  cup   to    the  that  God  should  begin  with  us,  as  at

ambassadors  of  the  nations  assembled  length  the  wicked  shall  in  their  turn

at  Jerusalem.     '*  Make  them  drink"  i.e.,  be  destroyed  ;  and  that  we  should  endure

by  denunciations  of  their  sins  and  pre-  temporal  evils,  that  God  may  at  length

diction  of  their  doom.  raise  us  up  to  the  enjoyment  of  His

paternal  favour.     And  for  this  reason

Ver.  26.   *'  The  kino  op  Sheshach  Paul  also  says  that  it  is  a  demonstration

SHALL  DRINK."      "  Belshazzar,  the  bez-  of  the  Just  Judgment  of  God  when  the

zling   king   of   Babylon,    whilst    he   is  faithful  are  exposed  to  many  evils  (2

quaffing  in  the  vessels  of  God's  house  Thess.  i  4,  6)." — Calvin,
to  the  honour  of    Sliat  (ShesaCy  id  est

poculum  loetiiicB  aut  vanitatisy  vel  seri-  Ver.  30.  "  The  Lord  shall  roab.*
cum  tuum),  the  Babylonian  goddess,  In  highly  poetic  language  the  judgment
whence  those  feast  days  were  called  of  the  Gentiles  is  described.  Jehovah
aaxeai  ^fJ^foaiy  being  like  the  Roman  has  risen  like  a  lion  from  his  covert,
Saturnalia.  Antichrist  also,  who  hath  and  at  His  roaring  the  whole  world  is
troubled  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  filled  with  terror  and  confusion.  Sheep
shall  himself  perish,  together  with  his  and  shepherds  roll  on  the  ground  in  con-
Babylon  the  great,  which  hath  made  the  sternation,  but  cannot  escape ;  for,  like
nations  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  a  storm-wind,  judgment  stalks  abroad,
fornications." — Trapp,  and  the   slain   of   the  land  cover   the

ground  from  one  end  of  the  earth  unto

Ver.    28.     **  Ye    shall    certainly  the  otherj  and  lie  unwept  and  without

DRINK."     No  effi)rt  of  theirs  to  escape  burial — Payne  Smith,

the  destruction  will  avail.  The  roar  was  first  to  go  forth  over

"  If  they  either  do   not  believe  thy  Judea,  wherein  were  **  the  sheep  of  His

threatenings,  or  else  disregard  them,  as  pasture  "    (Ps.  c.   3),   and  thence   into

thinking    themselves    sufficiently    pro-  heathen  lands.

vided  against  hostile  invasion,  you  shall  "  He  will  mightily  roar."  Pliny
let  them  know  that  the  judgments  de-  reporteth  of  the  lioness,  that  she  bringeth
nounced  against  them  are  God's  irre-  forth  her  whelps  dead,  and  so  they  re-
versible decree." — Lowth.  main  for  the  space  of  three  days,  until
*'The  destruction  of  the  heathen  the  lion,  coming  near  to  the  den  where
nations  was  fixed  and  certain.  Of  this  they  lay,  lifteth  up  his  voice  and
they  might  be  assured  by  the  fact  that  roareth  so  fiercely  that  they  presently
the  Jews,  who  were  Jehovah's  peculiar  revive  and  rise.  The  "  Lion  of  the  tribe
people,  were  not  spared."— JJieTic^crfiow.  of  Judah  "  will  roar  to  like  purpose  at

the  last  day ;  and  doth  afore,  when  He

Ver.  29.   "I  begin  to   bring  evil  pleaseth,  roar  terribly  upon  His  enemies,

ON  THE  CITY  WHICH  IS  CALLED  BY  My  to  their  utter  amazement  (Joel  iii.  16;

NAME."     "  If  God  spares  not  the  city  Amos  i.  2,  iii.  8). — Trapp,

in  which   He  has  chosen  a  temple  for  "The  strict  judgment  of  God  sounds

Himself,  and  designed  His  name  to  be  much  stronger  and  clearer  than  we  can

invoked,  how  can  He   spare   aliens  to  bear.      Hence  the  six  hundred  thousand

whom  He  has  never  made  any  promise,  men  were  so  terrified  when  they  heard

as.  He  regarded  them  as  strangers  f     If,  the  voice  of  God,  that  they  said,  ^  Let

then,  the  green  tree  u  consumed,  how  can  not    God  speak  with  us  lest  we  die '

the  dry  remain  safe  ?    This  is  the  im-  (Ezod.  xz.  19).  It  is  well  that  we  do  not
478


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohap.  xxvl


refuse  to  hear,  or  stop  our  ears  against  be  it  (a)  a  home;  (b)  the  Iieart;  (c)  a

the  sweet  sound  of  God's  voice  in  the  church.

sacred  office  of  the  preacher,  because  we  IL  Divine  displeasure,  if  provoked,

can  have  it  (Ps.  xcv.  8) ;  or  the  time  will  drive  us  into  homeless  desolation.

will  come  when  we  shall  be  obliged  to  (a.)  All  refuges  will  fail  to  shelter  us.

hear  its  awful  roaring,  which  God  for-  {b.)  Pleasant  scenes  are  vrrecked  if  God  be

bid.     For  when  the  lion  roars,  who  shall  angry,    (c.)  "  Peaceable  habitations  "  re-

not  be  afraid  1  (Amos  iii.  8.)" — Cramer.  quire j  for  their  very  existence,  tJiat  we  he

"  at  peace  with  God."

Ver.  37.  Theme :  Peaceable  habit  a-  HI.  Peace  and  safety  are  possible

TioNS  OVERTHROWN.     "  The   peaceable  to  those  who  live  in  Grod's  love.     All

habitations  are    cut   down,   because  of  others  will  be  homeless  in  the  evil  day,

the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord."  But  sudden  destruction  shall  not  come

I.  Wrath  destroys  the  peacefulness  upon  them.     Their  souls  shall  dwell  in

of  any  habitation  into  which  it  enters,  peace,  always  secure  and  at  rest.


CHAPTER  XXVL


Crittoal  and  Exeoetical  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  About  three  years  earlier
than  the  prophecy  of  preceding  chapter.  Cf.  chapter  vii.  with  this,  and  it  is  evident  that  they
are  synchronous.  Eyidently  this  narratire  records  the  dangers  to  which  Jeremiah  exposed
himself  by  the  delivery  of  that  faithful  protest  against  his  nation's  iniquity.  Jehoiakim  had
just  ascended  the  throne,  and  forthwith  inaugurated  a  course  of  public  apostasy  which  called
forth  from  Jeremiah  this  pungent  and  fearless  remonstrance.  Naturally  enough  it  greatly
incensed  the  "priests  and  the  prophets"  (ver.  8) ;  though  the  "princes'*  spoke  out  boldly  for
his  defence  (ver.  16) ;  and  through  the  interposition  of  Aiiikam,  Jeremiah  escaped  violence
(ver.  24).     Cf.  critical  notes  to  chapter  vii.

For — 2.  Contemporary  Scriptures ;  3.  National  Affairs ;  and  4.  ContemporaDeons  History,
cf.  chap,  vii.,  in  loc.

5.  Geographical  Beferences. — Ver.  6.  **ShUoh:" ef  note,  chap.  vii.  12,  in  loc.  Ver.  10.  "  The
entry  of  the  new  gate:  '*  i.e.,  the  gate  originally  erected  by  Jotham  (2  Kings  xv.  35),  **  the  higher
gate,"  and  now  recently  restored.  The  Targum  reads,  the  new  gate.  Ver.  20.  " Kirjath-jearim:'*
dr.  nine  miles  north  west  of  Jerusalem,  where  the  ark  rested  after  the  destruction  of  Shiloh,
on  its  return  from  Philistia.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  18.  '*  Micah  the  Morasthite:"  ef.  Micah  i.  1,  and  iii.  12.
The  text  here  is  iT'DD  Michayah;  the  full  form  of  his  name  meaning,  Who  it  like  Jahf  But
many  MSS.  omit  the  Yod,  and  read  simply,  HDp,  Micah.  His  native  village,  Moresheth  [Heb.
Morashti],  near  Elutheropolis,  in  Philistia  (Jerome).  He  was  contemporary  with  Isaiah  in
Judah,  and  with  Amos  and  Hosea  in  Israel.

Ver.  20.  **  Urijah  the  son  of  Shemaiah:'*  nothing  more  is  known  of  Urijah  than  is  here
recorded.

Ver.  22.  "Elnathan  the  son  of  Achhor :**  .icA&or  was  one  of  the  princes  sent  to  Huldah  by
Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii.  12).  Elndthan  was  father  of  Nehushta,  the  mother  of  King  Jehoiachin,
therefore  Jehoiakim's  father-in-law.

Ver.  24.  **Ahikam  the  son  of  Shaphan:**  one  of  Josiah's  messengers  to  Huldah  after  the
discovery  of  the  copy  of  the  law  in  the  Temple  by  Hilkiah  the  priest  (2  Kings  xxii.  12-14).
Hilkiah  made  known  the  discovery  to  Shaphan  the  scribe,  most  probably  this  Shaphan.  Ahikam
was  father  to  Gemariah,  who  lent  Jeremiah  his  room  for  the  public  reading  of  the  prophet's
roll ;  and  of  Gedaliah,  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  afterwards  made  governor  of  the  land  (chap.
xxxix.  14),  indicating  that  the  attachment  of  the  father,  Ahikam,  to  Jeremiah  was  inherited  by
his  sons.

7.  Manners  and  GuBtomg. — Ver.  2.  ** Stand  in  the  gate  of  the  Lord^s  house:**  see  Homiletie
Outlines,  preliminary  note,  p.  149.  "Unto  all  the  cities  of  Judah  which  come  to  worship:*'  at  one
of  the  three  great  yearly  festivals,  perhaps  that  of  Tabernacles,  which  was  the  greatest.

Ver.  9.  '*All  the  people  were  gathered  together  against  Jeremiah  :  "  properly,  " unto  Jeremiah,"
forming  themselves  into  a  court  or  congregation  to  take  part  in  his  trial.  Ver.  23.  "  Oraves  of
the  sons  of  the  people:**  see  chap,  xvii,  19:  ^* common  people."  Some  have  thought  the  Jews
had  a  cemetery  for  the  prophets  separate  from  that  of  the  people.  The  place  of  burial  for  the
eommon  people  was  in  the  Kidron  valley,

8.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  19.  ** Besought  the  Lord**  lit..  Soothed  by  prayer  the  face  of
the  Lord.    ^;jS"njt  H^H,  Stroke  the  face  [Keil].     Cf  Exod.  xxxii.  11.

479


OHAP.XXTI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Otneral  topic  of  the  chapter:  **  So  Fersbouted  they  the  Prophets.''

This  present  life  ia  often  one  of  severity  and  suffering  to  God*s  servants.  Yet  it
is  astonishing  to  find  earnest  and  holy  men  persecuted  and  slain  for  no  offence
other  than  that  of  calling  the  wicked  to  desert  their  sins  and  care  for  their  spiritual
good  I  We  may  well  ask,  "Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done?  "  For  "  a  good  work  "
surely  men  should  not  rise  in  hostility  to  a  man  of  God.  Wrong  may  deserve
punishment ;  but  too  often  right  is  persecuted  and  wrong  is  condoned.  So  perverse
is  the  human  heart.

L  Prevalent  sin  called  for  faithful  rebuke.  There  was  enough  wrongdoing
and  corruption  in  Zion  to  constrain  a  godly  soul  to  vehement  protestation.  God
sent  the  prophet  to  remonstrate.

1.  The  rebuke  of  a  prophet,  therefore,  should  be  accepted  as  an  appeal  from  God
(vers.  2-5).

2.  Such  faithful  rebukes  are  designed  to  avert  heavy  and  threatening  judgments
(vers.  6,  12,  13).

II.  Faithful  rebuke  aroused  violent  resentment.  In  Jeremiah's  protest  there
was  no  element  of  provocation.  His  message  was  delivered  in  no  rancorous  and
vexing  words,  yet  it  awoke  resentment.

1.  Sinners  love  their  sins  too  well  to  desire  disturbance,  even  though  such  disturb-
ance is  essential  to  their  salvation  (vers.  7-9).

2.  Warnings  of  impending  doom  created  violent  hostility/  to  God*s  messenger  (vera.
10,  11).  Angry  men  must  have  a  victim  on  whom  to  expend  their  hatred.  In-
censed at  God's  message,  they  would  avenge  themselves  on  His  innocent  messenger  !
This  explains  persecution.  Men  cling  to  their  sins,  and  hate  the  prophet,  as  Ahab
did  Elijah,  whose  faithful  words — **  trouble  Israel  " — disturb  them  in  their  evil  ways.

in.  Violent  resentment  faced  with  courageous  fidelity.  The  prophet  did  not
quail  before  their  violence.  "  The  righteous  is  bold  as  a  lion."  Yet  withal  there
was  no  corresponding  violence ;  rather  **  in  meekness  he  instructed  those  that
opposed  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  25).

1.  He  used  the  hour  of  his  arraignment  for  one  more  appeal  to  his  erring
persecutors  (vers.  12,  13).

2.  He  resigned  himself  to  the  consequences  of  his  fidelity,  knowing  that  God
would  requite  their  deeds  (vers.  14,  15).

Even  so,  when  our  Lord  **  suffered,  He  threatened  not ;  but  committed  Himself
to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously."     "Vengeance  is  Mine."

IV.  Godly  fidelity  incurring  persecution  and  death.  Jeremiah's  renewed
appeal  proved  effective  with  the  "princes"  (ver.  16)  and  "elders"  (ver.  17),  and
won  him  their  protection.     Yet —

1.  Fidelity  imperilled  Jeremiah*8  life  (ver.  24) ;  and  he  would  have  lost  it  but
for  Ahikam's  befriending.  Faithful  work  is  always  done  amid  peril  Men  become
our  enemies  when  we  tell  them  the  truth.  So  Jeremiah  found  it.  Micah  was  a
rare  exception  (vers.  18,  19).

2.  Fidelity  cost  Urijah  his  life  (vers.  20-23).  Such  unrighteous  and  iniquitous
deeds  against  God's  servants  assuredly  will  be  punished.  **  The  dead  shall  he
raised;"  and  then,  confronted  by  those  they  have  killed,  the  wicked  shall  be
judged.  There  is  a  judgment  to  come.  Men  may  silence  God's  messengers  in
death  now,  but  God  will  be  heard  in  the  day  of  judgment.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  VERSES  OP  CHAPTER  XXVL

Vers.  1  and  2.    See  Homily  on  chapi.  Neither  preacher  nor  prophet  is  the

Tii.  1,  2.  author  of  what  he  teachea    If  his  "  com-

mands "  are  his  own,  they  should  never
Ver.  2.  Theme  :  Preach  thb  wholb      be  uttered ;  for  he  has  no  right  to  tpeak
TEUTH.     '*  Diminish  not  a  word/*  aught  which  God  has  not  commanded,

480


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XX VL


and  no  permission  to  silence  auglit  wliicli
God  has  commanded.  *'  Speak  all  the
words  that  I  command  thee  to  speak
unto  them  ;  diminish  not  a  word."

I.  Inspired  commands  are  the  out-
come of  Divine  Wisdom  and  human
necessity.  Much  in  Scripture  we  do
not  care  to  hear,  or  do  not  think  wise
to  teach.  Doctrines  over  which  critics
stumble.  Some  severe  doctrines  do  not
seem  concordant  with  the  gospel  of
love,  <kc.     But —

1.  God^s  toisdom  frames  the  messages.
That  ought  to  check  our  solicitude  for
the  integrity  of  Revelation.  Critics
should  learn  that  **  the  foolishness  of
God  is  wiser  than  men."

2.  Man's  necessity  calls  forth  the
message.  God  sees  our  case,  our  need,
our  sins,  our  perils,  and  sends  the  com-
mands which  are  suitable.

Hence  every  word  of  God  is  important
and  imperative.

II.  Preachers  have  no  liberty  of
silence  or  selection.  If  any  haste  to
preach  without  a  Divine  commission,
God  will  put  them  to  silence.  But  if
God  has  sent  a  prophet  or  preacher,  He
must  ^^  speak  all"  <fec.,  and  ^*not  diminish
a  word."

1.  God's  messenger  may  not  silence
Divine  commands.

2.  God's  messenger  may  not  select
Divine  commands.  He  has  no  liberty
allowed  to  forbear  speaking ;  neither
has  he  liberty  allowed  to  choose  and
discriminate  between  the  commands,
taking  out  one  from  among  the  rest,
and  speaking  only  such  as  he  deems  fit
and  right.  He  has  to  "  declare  all  the
counsel  of  God."

Ill  Gods  messages  may  not  be
minimised  either  in  quantity  or  em-
phasis.    "  Diminish  not  a  word."

A  preacher  may  indeed  go  through
all  the  commands,  and  yet  by  frequent
reiteration  of  a  few  may  give  them  a
prominence  which  overshadows  the  rest,
and  thus  *^  diminishing  "  those  he  over-
shadows.

Or,  he  may  preach  some  with  more
emphasis  and  eloquence  than  others,
thereby  "  diminishing  "  the  others.

1.  This  may  be  through  prejudice  or
preference.      Then    he  makes   his  own


limited  mental  bias  the  test  of  the  com-
parative value  and  importance  of  re-
vealed truths !

2.  He  may  do  this  through  mistaken
solicitude  or  sentimental  charity.  There
are  preachers  who  cannot  allow  them-
selves to  speak  the  stern  teachings  of
Scripture ;  because  (in  their  poor  fancy)
they  disagree  with  the  tender  love  of
God,  and  the  sweet  grace  of  the  Gospel
of  Christ ;  because,  also,  they  wound  the
gentle  hearts  of  their  hearers,  and  make
appeal  to  fears  in  men  rather  than  filial
trust  and  love.

3.  He  may  do  this  fur  fear  or  favour
of  men.  Then  he  prostrates  God's  truth
before  the  time-serving  spirit  which  seeks
to  "  please  men."  This  is  sacrilegious  1
But  we  may  not  suppress  nor  soften  any
teaching  or  command  for  fear  of  giving
offence  ;  neither  may  we  set  forth  coldly
and  indij'ectly  what  can  only  by  forcible
statement  do  good.

God  says  :  ^^ Speak  all"  .  .  .  *^  dimi-
nish not  a  word."  Compare  Deut.  iv.  2,
xii.  32  ;  Prov.  xxx.  6 ;  Acts  xx.  27 ;  2
Cor.  ii.  17,  iv.  2;  Rev.  xxii.  19.

See  Addenda :  Preach  the  whole
Truth.

Vers.  3-6.  Compare  Homily  on  chap,
xviii.  7-10.  Theme:  Conditional
Covenants.

Ver.  6.  **  This  house  like  Shiloh."
Comp.  Homily  on  chap.  vii.  12-14.
**  Violated  sanctuaries  doomed,"

Ver.  8.  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die."
The  charge  against  Jeremiah  was  that  of
uttering  falsehood  in  Jehovah's  name,
an  act  punishable  with  death  (Deut.
xviii.  20).  The  tumult  against  him
was  raised  by  the  priests  and  false  pro-
phets.

Ver.  11.  "Spake  the  priests  and
the  prophets  unto  the  princes."  Jere-
miah was  both  a  priest  and  a  prophet,  and
should  therefore  have  received  generous
treatment  at  the  hands  of  "  priests  and
prophets  ; "  but  '*  a  man's  foes  are  they
of  his  own  household,"  while  **  Jealousy
is  as  cruel  as  the  grave."

The  ^'piinces^  were  members  of  the
H  481


CBAP.  XXVI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  J^RJSMIAB,


king's  household,  and  formed  part  of  the
Council  of  State.  Jeremiah  is  careful
to  discriminate  here,  and  to  record  that
he  received  acts  of  kindness  from  the
"  princes  "  and  also  from  the  *'  elders  "
(ver.  17),  who  were  rulers  of  the  whole
land.  In  like  manner  Luke  discrimi-
nates between  the  generous  conduct  of
Gamaliel  and  the  injustice  of  other
members  of  the  Sanhedrim  (Acts  v.  34).

Yers.  12-15.  Theme:  How  to  Answer
Cavillebs  and  Accusers.  The  prophet
was  arraigned  before  the  highest  tri-
bunal, charged  with  a  political  offence —
he  had  "  prophesied  against  this  city."
Here  it  will  be  noticeable  that  our  Lord
was  similarly  indicted  before  Pilate,
See  how  Jeremiah  bore  himself  in  this
scene  of  great  excitement  and  irritation,

I.  His  unfaltering  assurance  of  a
Divine  commission.  Cavil  though  they
might  against  his  message,  and  threaten
him  with  death  for  delivering  it,  yet —

1.  He  knew  that  God  had  sent  him  to
them  with  this  message.  **  The  Lord  sent,"
&c.  (ver.  12)  ;  *'  Of  a  truth  the  Lord  hath
sent  me,"  &c.  (ver.  15).

2.  He  knew  that  his  prophecy  had  been
faithfully  delivered.  He  had  uttered
nought  in  malice,  nor  suppressed  aught
through  timidity ;  but  "  all  the  words
ye  have  heard  "  (ver.  12)  were  literally
God's  words  through  him  to  them.
Thus  he  was  sustained  by —

(a.)  Assured  authority  from  Jehovah,
(6.)  Conscious  integrity  in  his  work.
IL  His  importunate  earnestness  in
pleading  with  his  accusers.  Having  thus
far  vindicated  himself,  Jeremiah  now —

1.  Seizes  the  opportunity/  to  plead  with
his  hearers  (ver.  13).  It  might  be  his
final  chance  of  a  direct  appeal  to  his
sinning  nation.  What  ardour  of  reli-
gious feeling  !  what  godly  patriotism  is
thus  manifested  !

2.  Fearlessly  exhorts  his  audience  to  re-
pentance and  reformation.  He  was  ar-
raigned because  he  had  charged  their
sins  upon  them.  Yet  now  even,  before
this  angry  assembly,  he  appeals  again  to
them  to  desert  their  sins,  and  thus  avert
God's  displeasure.  **  Reform  your  life,
and  liearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,
ftud  it  will  be  better  for  ^ou."    **  You  do

482


not  wisii  me  to  thunder  away  at  you ;
reform,  then,  and  I  can  let  it  alone." —
{Zinzendoif. )

III.  His  grand  resignation  to  the
consequences  of  fidelity.  His  faithful
pleading  might  incense  them  the  more ;
yet —

1.  He  is  ready  to  die  rather  than  keep
silence  (ver.  14).

2.  He  dare  not  let  any  concern  for  self
hinder  him  in  his  witness.  "  As  for  me  "
— as  if  what  became  of  him  were  wholly
unimportant  in  the  presence  of  his
nation's  perils.  It  equals  Paul's  martyr-
like spirit :  **  I  am  ready  to  die  also
at  Jerusalem ; "  *'  I  could  wish  myself
accursed  for  my  brethren."     Note —

(a.)  His  splendid  indifference  to  life
and  policy.  It  argues  possession  of
highest  religious  assurance,  conscious
safety  in  God,  and  blessed  hopes  of  a
future  world.

(6.)  His  all-absorbing  eagerness  for
his  people.  Self  cannot  have  a  thought
when  his  people  are  nearing  destruction.
Such  all-consuming  zeal  naturally  im
presses  and  conquers  hearts.  It  did  so
here  (ver.  16).

IV.  His  solemn  warnings  against
criminal  conduct  (ver.  15).

1.  Knowing  God  was  with  him  in  his
work,  he  realised  then  that  Jehovah  would
avenge  any  violence  done  to  him.

2.  Knowing  that  he  was  innocent  of
any  crime,  having  only  faithfully  dis-
charged a  Divine  commission,  he  re-
minded them  that  on  them  would  fall  the
curse  of  his  blood.

Note  :  Men  do  not  escape  the  punish-
ment of  sin  by  silencing  God's  preacher,
or  by  getting  rid  of  the  obnoxious  wit-
ness against  their  sins.  They  double  the
crime  by  such  conduct.

There  was  a  yearning  pathos  in  Jere-
miah's warning :  no  anger,  no  menacing;
but  '*  knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,
he  persuaded  men."  Thus  may  cavillers
be  silenced  and  adversaries  won.

See  Addenda  :  Fearlessness.

On  "  Amend  your  ways,"  see  Homily
on  chap.  vii.  3.

Ver.  16.  "This  man  is  not  worthy
TO  DIE."     Jeremiah's  address  secured—


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMlAB.


ottAt.  Min.


(i.)  Their  conviction  :  for  they  re-
cognised that  he  had  *'  spoken  to  them
in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Instead  of
convicting  Jeremiah,  "  the  princes  and
people"  unanimously  ccmvicted  the
*'  priests  and  prophets  "  of  falsely  charg-
ing him.

(ii.)  His  own  acquittal.  **  This  man
is  not  worthy  of  death."  Instead  of
condemning  Jeremiah,  they  sent  him
forth  from  the  tribunal  freed  from  all
charges.

Matthew  Henry  here  reflects  thus —

"  And  are  they  willing  to  own  that
he  did  indeed  speak  to  them  *  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,*  and  that  that  Lord
was  their  God  ?  Why  then  did  they
not  amend  their  ways  and  doings,  and
take  the  metiiod  he  prescribed  to  pre-
vent the  ruin  of  their  country  1  (Matt,
xxi.  25.)  Note  :  It  is  a  pity  that  those
who  are  so  far  convinced  of  the  Divine
original  of  gospel  preaching  as  to  pro-
tect it  from  the  malice  of  others,  do  not
submit  to  the  power  and  influence  of  it
themselves.*'

Vers.  17-19.  Theme:  A  precedent

JUSTIFYING  THE   PROPHET*S   ACQUITTAL.

Certain  elders  arose  and  put  the
audience  in  mind  of  a  former  case,  as
is  usual  with  us  in  going  to  judgment ;
for  the  wisdom  of  our  predecessors  is  a
direction  to  us.

(i.)  Was  it  thought  strange  that  Jere-
miah prophesied  against  this  city  and
the  temple  f  Micah  did  so  before  him,
even  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  that
reign  of  reformation.  (See  Micah  iii.
12.)

By  this  it  appears  that  a  man  may  be,
as  Micah  was,  a  true  prophet  of  the
Lord,  and  yet  may  prophesy  the  de-
struction of  Zion.  When  we  threaten
secure  sinners  with  the  taking  the  Spirit
of  God  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  away
from  them,  and  declining  Churches  with
the  removal  of  the  candlestick,  we  say
no  more  than  what  has  many  a  time  been
said  be/orCy  and  what  we  have  the
warrant  of  God*s  Word  to  say.

(ii.)  Was  it  thought  Jit  by  the  princes  to
Justify  Jeremiah  in  what  he  had  done  ?
It  was  what  Hezekiah  had  done  in  like
case.


(a.)  Was  Micah  impeached  for  his  pro-
pliecy  ?  No  ;  the  king  and  nation  took
the  vvaridng  he  gave  them.

(6.)  Hezekiah  got  good  by  the  preach-
ing, and  therefore  certainly  could  do  no
harm  to  the  preacher.

(c.)  It  is  good  to  deter  ourselves  from
sin,  by  the  consideration  of  the  mischief
we  shall  incur  thereby.  '*  Thus  might  we
procure  great  evil  against  our  souls."
Comp.  Matthew  Henry,

Vers.  20-23.  Theme:  Urijah's  Per-
secution AND  Death.  Doubtless  this
Urijah  came  some  time  after  Jeremiah ;
this  incident  is  added  to  the  foregoing
to  show  the  ferocity  of  Jehoiakim
against  faithful  prophets.

Note  :  Urijah  re- uttered  Jeremiah's
words  (ver.  20)  ;  he  ^'prophesied"  <fec.,
*^  accordi?ig  to  the  words  of  Jeremiah;"
and  this  repetition  determined  the  king
to  silence  the  prophets  at  any  cost.

I.  Guilty  men  hate  to  hear  Divine
denunciations.  Jehoiakim  grew  un-
controllably violent  when  Jeremiah's
words  were  repeated  (ver.  20).

IL  Earnest  preachers  of  God  fulfil
their  work  amid  dangers  (ver.  21).
They  expose  their  lives  to  the  violence
of  those  they  denounce.  He  who  pro-
claims against  men's  sins  provokes  their
antagonism.  "  Genuine  ministers  of
God  have  no  favour  to  expect  from
those  who  are  His  enemies." — (Clark.)

III.  The  courage  which  defies  perils
is  not  always  possessed  by  even  faith-
ful witnesses  of  God.  Urijah  fled  to
Egypt  (ver.  21).  Jeremiah  did  not  flee,
and  was  spared;  Urijah  hastened  to
protect  himself,  and  was  slain.  Our
running  and  anxiety  are  of  no  use.  It
is  better  to  act  faithfully  and  fearlessly,
risking  the  result.

IV.  Angry  men,  incensed  against
God's  witness,  will  take  great  trouble
to  avenge  themselves  (ver.  22).  Comp.
Ahab*s  efforts  to  find  Elijah.

V.  Death  and  degradation  may
prove  the  earthly  penalty  of  godly
work  (ver.  23).  It  was  so  with  the
Christian  martyrs;  and  is  now  sometimes
the  penalty  of  missionary  devotion.
But  such  sufferers  for  truth  and  right-
eousness are  canonised  in  God's  martyr*

483


CHAt.  XXVI.


BOMlLETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


ology,  and  "  great  is  their  reward   in
heaven."

See  Addenda  :  Persecution.

Ver.  24.  Theme :  Heroic  Friendship.
On  ^^  Ahikam"  see  Personal  References
at  head  of  cliapter.

Note  1.  Since  Ahikam's  son,  Geda-
liah,  showed  attention  to  the  prophet,
and  another  son  of  the  same  name  was
afterwards  made  governor  of  the  land  by
the  Chaldeans  (chap,  xxxix.  14),  we
may  suppose  this  family  agreed  with
Jeremiah's  political  policy  and  counsels.

Note  2.  The  son's  friendship  for  the
prophet  was  the  result  of  the  father's
(Ahikam's)  attachment.  Good  parents
hand  down  a  patrimony  of  generous
sympathy  to  their  children,  which
provokes  them  to  "  love  and  good
works."  Thus  the  good  deeds  of  the
father  reappeared  in  his  sons.

I.  Valorous  allegiance  with  a  per-
secuted prophet.  *'  The  hand  of  Ahikam
was  with  Jeremiah."  This  friendship
was —

1.  Open  and  avowed:  it  was  well
known  in  the  land  that  Ahikam  be-
friended Jeremiah.  Obadiah  (1  Kings
xviii.)  secreted  his  friendship.

2.  Influential.  For  Ahikam  had
sufficient  influence  at  court  and  in  the
country  to  counter-check  Jehoiakim's
malicious  designs  against  the  prophet.
God's  servants  have  not  been  without
powerful  friends.


3.  Resolute.  He  resisted  the  clamour
of  *'  the  people.^*  Thus  he  faced  king
and  country  fearlessly  as  Jeremiah's
friend.  All  this  showed — (a)  great
heroism;  (b)  noble  piety;  (c)  fearless
fidelity.  Such  friendship  is  not  fre-
quent, but  it  is  worthy  highest  praise.

II.  Valuable  attachment  to  God's
servant.  Ahikam's  friendship  proved
specially  helpful  to  Jeremiah.

1.  It  asserted  itself  in  a  perilous  hour.
He  who  flees  in  adversity  is  not  a  true
friend.

2.  It  prevailed  against  popular  cla-
mour. It  is  not  easy  to  become  un-
popular for  our  friends.  But  Christ's
servants  have  to  face  popular  contumely
for  His  sake  ;  and  many  disciples  have
had  to  brave  public  scorn  and  hate  for
their  attachment  to  Christ's  followers.

3.  It  preserved  to  the  nation  its  truest
benefactor.  Had  the  people  put  Jere-
miah to  death,  they  would  have  slain
the  man  who  gave  wisest  counsels,  and
proved  at  last  its  noblest  leader.  We
impoverish  and  harm  ourselves  by  anta-
gonism to  God's  messengers.  So,  in
withstanding  the  people's  clamour,
Ahikam  acted  as  the  nation's  friend,
as  well  as  Jeremiah's  champion.

Application. — Matthew  Henry  sug-
gests that  God  can  raise  up  great  men
to  protect  good  men  ;  and  this  should
encourage  us  amid  the  dangers  incident
to  duty.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  XXVI.:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,


Ver.  2.  Preach  the  whole  truth.
"  Luther,  of  whom  Richter  has  said  that
*  his  words  were  half  battles,'  when  he
first  began  to  preach,  suff'ered  unheard
agony.  *  O  Dr.  Staupitz,  Dr.  Stau-
pitz  !*  said  he  to  the  Vicar  General  of  his
order,  *  I  cannot  do  it,  I  shall  die  in
three  months ;  indeed  I  cannot  do  it.'
Dr.  Staupitz  replied,  *  Well,  Sir  Martin,
if  you  must  die,  you  must ;  preach,  man,
preach;  and  then  live  or  die  as  it
happens.'  So  Luther  preached,  and
lived ;  and  he  became  one  great  whirl-
wind of  energy  to  work  without  resting
in  this  world." — Spurgeon,

"An  iron  key  is  better  than  one
made  of  gold  if  it  will  better  open  the
484


dooTy  for  that  is  all  the  use  of  a  key." —
Augustine,

"The  words  of  a  preacher  ought
purgere  non  palpare,  to  prick  the  heart,
not  smooth  and  coax." — Jerome.

Somerfield,  just  before  his  death,
speaking  of  his  recovery,  said,  "Oh,  if
I  might  be  raised  again  !  How  I  could
preach  /  I  could  preach  as  1  never
preached  before.  I  have  taken  a  look
into  eternity/"

Vers.  12-16.  Fearlessness.  "What
can  I  fearl"  asked  Chrysostom  before
the  Pro-consul.  "  Will  it  be  death  t  but
you  know  that  *  Christ  is  my  life,'  and
that  I  shall  gain  by  death.     Will  it  be


HOMILETXC  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  Ml AU.


tfBAP.  XXTIL


exile  ?  but  *  the  earth  with  all  its  fulness
is  the  Lord's.*  Will  it  be  the  loss  of
wealth  ?  but  *  we  brought  notbing  into
this  world,  and  we  can  carry  nothing
out.'  Thus,  ail  the  terrors  of  the  world
are  contemptible  in  my  eyes,  and  I
smile  at  all  its  good  things.  Poverty  I
do  not  fear ;  riches  I  do  not  sigh  for ;
from  death  I  do  not  shrink  ;  and  life  I
do  not  desire  except  for  the  progress  of
your  souls."

Vers.  20-23.  Persecution.  Seeing
a  Christian  woman  go  cheerfully  to
prison,  an  observer  said  to  her,  "  Oh,
you  have  not  yet  tasted  of  the  bitter-
ness of  death."  She  as  cheerfully  ra-
phe 1,  *'No,  nor  ever  shall;  for  Christ
hath  promised  that  those  who  keep  Hia
aayinifs  shall  not  sea  death/'


Ver.  24.  Noble  Friendship.

**  Great  souls  by  instinct  to  each  other  turn,
Demand  allegiance,  and  in  friendship  burn.*'

— Addison.

**  Friendship  hath  a  power
To  soothe  affliction  in  her  darkest  hour."
— H.  KiRKE  Whitb.

"  Deliberate  in  all  things  with  thy  friend.
But,  since  friends  grow  not  thick  on  every

bougli,
Nor  every  friend  unrotten  at  the  core,
First  on  thy  friend  deliberate  wiih  thyself  ;
Pause,  ponder,  sift ;  not  eager  in  the  choice,
Nor  jealous  of  the  chosen  ;  fixing,  fix  ;
Judge  before  friendship,  then  confide  till

death.
Well  for  thy  friend,  but  nobler  far  for  thee:
How   gallant   danger   for   earth's   higheat

prize !
A  friend  is  worth  all  hazardg  we  can  ran.**

«— YOUKO.


CHAPTER  XXVII.

Cbitical  and  Exeqetioal  Notes.— 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — "Beginning  of  the

reign  of  Jehoiakim."  Tliere  is  authority  for  reading  **Zedekiah"  instead  of  "  Jehoiakina."
Henderson  substitutes  *'Zedekiah,"  and  appeals  to  chap,  xxviii.  1,  to  the  statements  in  verg.
3  and  12  of  this  chap,  xxvii.,  to  the  reading  of  one  of  Kennicott's  MSS.,  and  to  the  authority
of  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  versions.  Further,  Lowth,  Blayney,  Michaelis,  Rosenmiiiler,  Dahler,
Maurer,  Uuibriet,  Ewald,  Payne  Smith,  &c.,  sustain  this  change  of  names.  The  allusion  in
ver.  12  indicates  that  Zedekiah  is  the  king  meant,  for  both  sections  of  the  chapter  are
synchronous  in  time  and  identical  in  meaning.  Probably  the  reading  in  the  E.  V.  may  have
originated  from  chap.  xxvi.  1.  Calvin,  however,  takes  the  text  as  it  stands,  and  suggests  that
Jeremiah  kept  this  prophecy  long  secreted  in  his  bosom  ere  he  uttered  it.  If  the  true  nailing
is  "  Zedekiah"  then  **  the  fourth  year  '*  of  chap,  xxviii.  1,  agrees  with  **in  the  beginning  of  the
reign"  of  chap,  xxvii.  1,  on  the  theory  that,  as  Zedekiah's  reign  lasted  eleven  years,  it  was  «arZy
in  his  reign  when  the  prophecy  was  proclaimed  :  vide  chronological  notes  to  chap.  xxi.

For — 2.  Contemporary  Scriptures;  3.  National  Affairs;  and  4.  Contemporary  History,
vide  chap.  xxi.  in  loc.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  3.  **  Zedekiah** :  vide  notes  to  chap.  1  in  loc.  Ver.  20,
**Jeconiuh:"  vide  chap.  xxii.  24.  Ver.  7.  *' His  son,  and  his  son's  son.**  Nebuchadnezzar  had
four  successors,  Evil-Merodach  his  son;  Neriglissar  the  husband  of  Nebuchadnezzar's
daughter  ;  Laborosoarchad  the  son  of  Neriglissar;  and  Naboned  the  son  of  Evil-Merodach.  The
intermediate  two  successors  are  passed  over  in  this  prophecy,  and  only  the  direct  descendants,
"  his  son  and  son's  son,"  are  recognised.

6.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  9.  ** Prophets,  diviners,  dreamers,  enchantere,  sorcerers:'*
vide  on  chap,  xxiii.  25.  These  were  all  sources  of  prognostication  current  among  the  heathen
who  implicitly  rested  in  such  superstitions.

7.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  1.  The  entire  verse  is  absent  from  the  LXX.  Ver.  2.  **  Bondt
and  yokes."  DIDD  are  the  two  wooden  prongs  or  poles  of  the  "yoke,**  which  were  fastened
together  by  *' bonds,"  nnDID.

Ver.  9.  The  word  *' enchanters '*  is  by  some  interpreters  derived  from  py  cloud ;  cloud-
makers  or  storm-raisers ;  and  by  others  from  y}}^  eye,  gazers  at  the  stars  and  other  means  of
taking  omens  of  futurity.

Ver.  11.  "  Sei-ve  him.  .  .  ttU  it**  The  same  Hebrew  root  signifies  both  '*  serve "  and  "till,"
or  cultivate.    Serve  ye  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  the  land  will  serve  you  (Calvin).


iB5


cnAt.  xxvn,  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


TOPICAL  SURVEY  OF  TEE  CB AFTER.

Doubtless  the  five  kings  (ver.  3)  had  sent  ambassadors  to  Jerusalem  to  consult
with  Zedekiali  about  entering  into  a  defensive  covenant  against  the  threatening  and
alarming  Babylonish  power.  Jeremiah  has  to  meet  these  messengers  with  plain
and  emphatic  statements  as  to  the  sure  course  of  events,

I.  A  summons  to  submit  to  the  inevitable  ascendancy  of  Babylon.

Those  "  bonds  and  yokes  "  would  have  to  be  worn  (ver.  2).  And  what  God
said  to  these  five  kings  He  said  afterwards  specifically  also  to  Zedekiah  (ver.  12).

i.  The  inevitable  fact.  Nebuchadnezzar  must  be  supreme,  however  these  kings
might  think  to  resist  the  decree,

1.  Because  God  was  the  King  of  kings.  The  Almighty,  who  made  "  the  earth
and  man  and  beast,"  had  decisively  "  given "  dominion  over  them  all  to  the  one
monarch  they  dreaded  (ver.  5).  And  "  none  shall  stay  His  hand,  or  say  unto  Him,
What  doest  Thou  r*

2.  Because  Nebuchadnezzar  was  serving  the  will  of  the  Supreme  King,  Un-
consciously doing  this,  yet  none  the  less  doing  it.  He  was  God*s  *'  servant "
(ver.  6).  There  was  a  purpose  in  God's  mind,  and  He  had  chosen  the  Babylonish
king  to  fulfil  it.

3.  Because  a  defined  period  had  been  set  for  this  ascendancy.  The  "very  time  of
his  land  "  was  clearly  fixed  in  the  Divine  mind ;  its  beginning  and  its  end  (ver.  7).
Compare  Topic :  "Seventy  Tears*  Captivity,**  chap,  xxv,  11,  12,  infray  p,  471.

ii.  The  results  of  resistance.     See  ver.  8.

1.  Resistance  of  God's  purpose  would  be  marked  by  God,  He  would  carefully
note  '*  the  nation  and  the  kingdom  which  will  not  serve  the  same  Nebuchad-
nezzar." God  was  watching.  He  keeps  His  eye  on  the  conduct  of  kings.  The
Supreme  Ruler  "  looks  down  from  heaven  upon  the  earth  to  see  if  any  will  under-
stand." Having  made  known  His  will  to  these  kings,  He  will  observe  their  action;
for  resistance  of  God's  purpose  is  disobedience  against  Ilim.

2,  Severe  punishment  from  God  Himself  would  follow  their  disobedience.  He
had  other  agencies  at  His  command  besides  the  armies  of  Babylon,  and  would  let
loose  on  those  who  conspired  against  Nebuchadnezzar  "  the  sword,  the  famine,  and
the  pestilence ; "  and  the  destruction  these  should  effect  should  be  more  complete,
"  until  I  have  consumed  them."

"  Be  wise  now,  therefore,  O  ye  kings ;  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth :
serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling  "  (Ps.  ii.  10,  11).

II.  Warnings  against  the  delusive  flatteries  of  false  counsellors.

Evil  teachers  would  not  be  idle  at  this  crisis :  they  moved  among  the  people
boastful  of  a  higher  wisdom  and  a  finer  patriotism.  Their  object  was  to  throw
discredit  on  Jeremiah  and  lead  the  nation  into  a  policy  of  resistance  of  Babylon.

1.  Flattery  assumes  many  forms:  prophecy,  divination,  dreams,  enchantments,
sorcery  (ver.  9).  It  adopts  any  aspect  which  may  beguile  the  heart.  "  Evil
seducers  '*  are  fertile  in  resources.

2.  Flatterers  appeal  to  human  vanity.  Nothing  could  more  foster  the  natural
arrogance  than  this  statement :  "  Ye  shall  not  serve  the  king  of  Babylon."  Those
who  would  lead  us  to  disobey  God's  word  always  come  with  announcement  that
no  penalties  shall  follow.     *'  The  serpent  said,  Ye  shall  not  surely  die  *'  (Gen.  iii.  4).

But  God  here  points  out —

a.  The  direful  results  to  the  people  of  their  accepting  these  flattering  counsels
(vers.  10,  15).

6.  The  merciful  ameliorations  which  should  attend  their  regarding  God's  coun-
sels (vers.  11,  17).

IIL  Promises  of  preservation  and  restoration  conditional  on  a  wise  sub-
mission.

Although  Jeremiah  held  out  no  delusive  hope  of  speedy  restoration,  but  con^
486


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  XXTIL


fronted  the  false  prophets'  lying  words  with  condemnation  (vers.  16,  17),
nevertheless  he  gives  cheering  assurances  to  the  people  if  they  would  hear  God's
word.

1.  The  inevitable  conquest  would  not  he  disastrous.  The  "  city  "  would  not  "  be
laid  waste"  (ver.  17),  and  captives  with  sacred  treasures  would  be  safe  in  Babylon
(ver.  22).

2.  TJte  cherished  symbols  of  their  religion  would  he  preserved.  For  God  would
keep  tbem  from  destruction  even  in  Babylon  (vers.  19-22).  "  Both  priests  and
ueople  set  store  by  these  relics  of  a  bygone  magnificence  "  i^Payne  Smith).

3.  The  captivity  should  terminate  in  their  Divinely  effected  restoration,  "  Until
the  day  that  /  visit  them^  saith  the  Lord  j  then  will  I  bring  them  up  and  restore
them  to  this  place  "  (ver.  22).


COMMENTS  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXVII,


Vers.  2,  3.  Yokes  for  the  confede-
rate KINGS.

Notes:  The  symbol  was  appropriate,
inasmuch  as  their  intention  was  to  form
a  league  to  cast  off  from  themselves  the
"  yoke  "  of  Babylon.

Jeremiah  must  actually  have  worn  his
yoke  in  public  as  a  symbol  of  subjection
to  the  king  of  Babylon,  for  Hananiah
took  the  yoke  from  the  prophet's  neck
and  broke  it  (chap,  xxviii.  10,  11).  Con-
sequently we  must  infer  that  the  bonds
and  yokes  were  literally  given  to  these
*'  messengers  "  for  their  royal  masters.

These  '*  yokes"  were,  in  this  instance
(says  Henderson),  the  collars  placed  on
the  necks  of  slaves  to  which  chains  were
attached.

Jeremiah's  task  demanded  much  moral
courage  and  steadfast  faith  in  God  ;  for
his  act  would  seem  an  insult  to  these
foreign  ambassadors,  and  a  provocation
to  his  own  countrymen,  who  were  so
hopeful  of  resisting  Nebuchadnezzar's
aggression  by  this  conspiracy.
Note —
L    Unpopular  tasks  may  have  to  he

performed  by  God*s  servants.
ii  A  blow  struck  at  pride  m,ay  save

men  from  great  disasters.
iiL  Faithful  servants  of  God  may  have
to  imperil  themselves  in  averting
perils  from  others.  Jeremiah  had
to  bear  the  anger  bis  mission  in-
curred in  endeavouring  to  rescue
these  confederating  kings  from
their  ruinous  policy.


Ver.  5.  Theme:
LoED  OF  Kings.


God  the  Supreme


I.  God's  all-commanding  power  is  set

in  contrast  with  the  confederated  power
of  these  puny  kings.  Their  combination
would  be  futile  to  alter  events  which  He
had  ordained.

II.  God's  supreme  lordship  is  af-
firmed as  explaining  the  temporary  as-
cendancy determined  for  the  Babylonish
monarch.  It  was  not  for  his  mentSy  but
for  Jehovah*8  purposes.

IIL  God's  government  of  men  is
regulated  by  moral  aims  and  is  designed
for  the  vindication  of  righteous  laws.  He
was  now  eniploying  Nebuchadnezzar  to
chastise  pride  and  apostasy.

M.  Henry  remarks  here:  *'The  things
of  the  world  are  not  the  best  things,  for
God  often  gives  the  largest  share  of  them
to  bad  men,  that  are  rivals  with  Him
and  rebels  against  Him.  Dominion  is
not  founded  in  grace.  Those  who  have
not  any  colourable  title  to  eternal  happi-
ness may  yet  have  a  justifiable  title  to
their  temporal  good  things."

Ver.  5.  Theme:  Meetness  bkforb
God.

"  And  have  given  it  unto  whom  it
seemed  meet  unto  Me."  A  principle
rules  the  universe — the  absolute  sove-
reignty of  God.  Evils  come  of  acknow-
ledging this  in  theory  but  not  in  prac-
tice ;  much  loss  of  stability — repining —
waywardness — disobedience,  <kc.

I.  God  is  the  proprietor  of  alL  He
tells  all  the  kings  that  He  made  all  the
lands  and  gave  them  all  to  one,  because
"  it  seemeth  meet  to  Him."

1.  Man^s  forgetfulness  of  this  in  daily
life.    We  live  among  things,  all  of  which

487


OHAP.  XXTIL


BO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


have  an  Owner  higher  than  ourselves  I
We  do  not  trace  the  Father  in  the  gifts
He  surrounds  us  with.

2,  The  liarmony  of  man's  being  re-
quires  a  sense  of  dependence.  He  is  not
happy  till  he  realise  dependence  on  God,
Use  possessions  as  God's :  this  gives
pleasure  in  their  use.

3.  Depression  results  from  stopping
short  of  God,  We  are  satisfied  with
nothing  till  we  see  God  in  it.

IL  Wisdom  and  sovereignty  go  to-
gether. "  Unto  whom  it  seemed  meet
unto  Me.*'

1.  No  comfort  to  know  we  live  under
an  absolute  Sovereign.  Sovereignty
might  be  deleterious  to  us.  But  every
course  of  action  He  determines  on  is  so
determined  because  of  its  true  goodness  .*
it  is  not  arbitrary,  but  the  purpose  of
deliberate  wisdom.

2.  God  gives  according  to  seeming  fit'
ness.  Our  acting  on  this  principle  often
proves  a  mistake.  We  err.  But  God
sees  deeper  than  what  seems.

in.  The  unerring  mind  of  God :  i.e.,
concerning  *'  the  meetness  of  things."
The  thought  of  it  should  lead  us  to —

1.  Cultivate  an  adoring  spirit.  Avoid
what  the  natural  spirit  in  us  would
prompt  to,  viz.,  criticism  and  probable
discontent.  Cherish  the  song  of  Moses
and  the  Lamb — "  Just  and  true  are  Thy
ways,  Thou  King  of  saints."   .

2.  Rest  on  Him  in  simple  belief.  With
an  unveiled  intelligence  sometimes,  and
sometimes  in  darkest  nights.  We  are
hidden  in  clefts  of  a  rock  when  He
passes  by.  If  we  want  to  see  the  rea-
sons, or  to  reconcile  God's  ways  with
our  notions,  we  shall  remain  troubled  to
the  end.

3.  There  is  immense  comfort  for  us  in
reposing  in  God's  law  of  "  meetness."  It
takes  you  behind  all  fogs  and  mistakes.
Jesus  Himself  went  there :  "  Even  so.
Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in  Thy
siglit."  It  assures  us  that  right  prin-
ciples are  at  work.  It  affirms  that  He
can  do  for  us,  and  give  to  us,  and  keep
from  us,  as  He  knows  best  for  us.

4.  The  effect  of  contemplating  this
"  meetness"  will  be  submission,  grounded
on  the  consciousness  that  there  is  no
injustice  being  done  us  by  God.     And

488


we  shall  submit  (a)  from  a  wise  conscious-
ness of  the  uselessness  of  contending  with
the  mind  of  God  ;  for  what  seems  right
to  Him  cannot  be  changed.  We  shall
come  to  submit,  too,  (6)  from  the  con-
sciousness that  all  things  are  being
arranged  on  deeper  principles  than  we
can  investigate.  We  shall  quiet  repin-
ings  by  the  thought  that  my  Father  sees
meet,  and  therefore  I  leave  the  why  of
it :  there  will  be  resignation.

5.  So  with  permitted  evil.

6.  Equally  so  with  the  existence  of
some  mysteries — possibly  everlasting.

7.  The  satisfaction  of  the  heart  which
recognises  "  meetness."  For  so  "  the
peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under-
standing shall  keep  our  hearts  and
minds."  '*  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou
wilt." — Constructed  and  condensed  from
**  Breviates"  by  Rev,  P.  B.  Power,  M.A,

Ver.  5.  Theme:  The  Sovereignty
OP  God.

^^  I  have  made  the  earth,  the  man  and
the  beast  that  are  upon  the  ground,  by
My  great  power  and  by  My  outstretched
arm,  and  have  given  it  unto  whom  it
seemed  meet  unto  Me."

Divine  declaration  of  a  well-attested
fact,  i.e.,  the  supreme  power  of  God
and  the  impotency  of  man :  e.g.,  Sen-
nacherib (2  Kings  xix.  35-37),  "who
had  the  night  before  been  gathering  up
his  strength  like  a  proud  tower  to  dash
himself  against  the  towers  of  Zion.
When  the  morning  dawns  his  180,000
men  are  still  there,  with  sword  and  spear
and  helmet  and  streaming  banner  ;  but
these  banners  wave  over  a  silent  camp,
the  trumpet  lies  beside  silent  lips — it  is
a  camp  of  death.  Sword  and  spear  are
still  intact,  but  the  arms  that  wielded
them  are  impotent.  The  destroying
angel  has  descended  at  midnight  and
converted  the  Assyrian  camp  into  a
sepulchre ! "  Also,  e.g,f  destruction  of
Spanish  Armada  as  if  by  miracle.

I.  God  as  Creator.  "  I  have  made
the  earth,"  &c.  His  prerogative  to  rule,
to  govern,  and  to  direct.

Directing  all  the  operations  of  nature
to  their  proper  end.  All  things  hang
on  His  will  and  are  dependent  upon
Him.     The  starry  hosts  of  heaven  de-


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap,  xxtil


pending  upon  Him  for  their  course,  as  Dean  Stanley  suggests  that  Jeremiah's
well  as  the  meanest  moss  or  lichen  on  counsel  of  Zedekiah  and  Jerusalem  to
the  wall  for  its  growth.  Not  only  every  submit  to  Nebuchadnezzar  was,  on  his
flower,  but  every  portion  of  it — its  part,  an  act  of  political  'prudence  to  be
petals,  its  colour,  its  form,  its  odour —  imitated  by  Statesmen  and  Ecclesiastics,
are  distinct  witnesses  to  an  all-wise,  who  may  be  wise  in  making  large  con-
beneficent  Creator.  cessions  of  national  rights  in  times  of

II.  As    Creator   of    all.    He    is    the  public  emergency.

Father  of  all.  But  Bishop    Wordsworth  urges   that

Hence  as   Father,    He    ruleth    with  Jeremiah's  conduct  in  giving  these  direc-

autlioritij.     And  this   authority  is   ab-  tions  was  a  religious  duty  on  his  part,

solute.     All  men   do  not   accept   this,  since  God  had  revealed  to  him  that  the

Sin,  bold  and  impudent,  with  clenched  nation  was  given  into  the  hands  of  Nebu-

fist,  defies  the  Almighty,  and  with  bias-  chadnezzar,  "  His  servant,"  on  account

phemy  from  depraved  souls  defy  Him.  of  their  sins,  and  they  must  submit  to

The  FOLLY  of  it.    God  "breaketh  down,"  him  as  the  minister  and  viceregent  of

&c.  (Job  xii.  14),  as  an  absolute  Sove-  God.

reign;  man's  part  is  to  bow  to  His  un-  M.   Henry  remarks :   **  Many  might

changeable    decrees.     Pompey   boasted  have  prevented  destroying  providences

that  with  one  stamp  of  his  foot  he  could  by  humbling  themselves  under  humbling

rouse  all  Italy  to  arms ;    but  God  by  providences.     It  is  better  to  take  up  a

one  word  of    His  mouth  can  summon  light  cross  in  our  way  than  pull  a  heavier

the  inhabitants  of  heaven,  earth,  and  the  one  on  our  heads."
undiscovered  worlds  to  His  aid,  or  bring

new  creatures  into  being  to  do  His  will.  Ver.    14.    Thb   prophecy   OF   USB.

III.  God,  as  a  Father,  ruleth  also  in  Comp.  Notes,  <fec.,  on  chap.  xiv.  14.
love.    "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  chil-  Comments —

dren,  even  so  doth  the  Lord  pity  them  '*  The   devil  often  makes  God?8  Name

that  fear  Him."  God's  love  to  His  people  (ver.  15)  the  plea  for  lies  (Matt  iv.  6;

is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  vii.  22,  23),  the  test  by  which  to  know

Manifestations  of  His  love  abound  false  prophets." — Jamieson.

in  the  experiences  of  all.     It  is  peren-  "  As  many  wilfully  put  on  nooses  and

nial,  permanent,  and  complete,  provid-  ivish  to  be  deceived,  we  ought  to  notice

ing   not   only  for  bodily  and  physical  what  the  prophet  says  here,  that  it  is

requirements,  but  giving  to  the  soul  that  our  duty  to  distinguish  the  true  from

which   satisfies  its  intensest  yearnings  the  false.  .  .  .  We  see  how  sedulously

and  highest  aspirations.     He  held  back  and   prudently  we  ought  to  take  heed

not  His  Son.    "  Herein  is  love,  not  that  lest  the  devil  should  fascinate  us  by  his

we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  charms,  especially  when  the  name  of  God

sent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  is  pretended.   .  .  .    Yet  it  is  a  grievousi

our   sins."     The   cross   of   Christ — the  trial,  and  much  to  be  feared,  when  im-

noonday  of  everlasting  love,  the  meri-  posters  creep  in  and  boast  that  they  ares

dian   splendour  of   eternal  mercy, — A,  true  legitimate  prophets." — Calvin.

Taylor,  « It   is   one   sign    of    our   depraved'

natures  that  we  are  more  ready  to  be-

Ver.  9.  Heathen  auguries.  lieve  lies  than  the  truth.      For  when

"  The  enumeration  of  the  multifarious  Jeremiah   and  his  colleagues  preached,

means  and  methods  for  forecasting  the  no  one   believed.      But  no  sooner  did

future  is  designed  to  show  the  multitude  the  false  prophets  come  and  open  their

of  delusive  schemes  for  supplying  the  mouths,  than  all  their  discourses  must  be

lack  of  true  and  real  divine  inspiration."  spoken  directly  from  heaven  (Ps.  Ixxii.

— I^eil.  9).     _E.g.,  our  mother  Eve  :  what  Qod

said  was  of  no  account,  but  what  the

Ver.   12.    Submission   to  the  de&-  serpent  said  was  something  purely  ex-

TINED  CONQUEEOR.  <Jelleulf"~Cr0W«r_

4b»


CHAP.  xxviiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


Ver.   18.   Theme:  Prophecy  tested  ah!    though  a  deceiver — will    not    so

BY  PEAYER.     "  If  they  be  prophets,  and  hesitate  to  speak  to  men.

if  the  word  of  the  Lord  he  unth  tJiem,  let  II.  True  preaching  will  be  accom-

tJLem  now  make  intercession  to  the  Lord  panied  by  intercession.     No  prophet

of  Hosts"  &c.  of  God  will  fail  in  pleading  with  God.

A  scathing  test!     **If,'*  *^if'*     Yes,  1.  Solicitude  for  those  to  whom  he

there  were  two  uncertainties ;  but  both  prophesies  will  impel  him  also  to  prayer

would    be  settled    effectually   by  their  on  their  behalf.

attempting  the  task  of  intercession  with  2.  Success  as  a  preacher  depends  on

God.     If  they  made  the  effort  to  open  earnestness  in  prayer,

their  lips  to  God,  it  would   certainly  God*s  messengers  will  be  much  with

seal  up   their   lips   to  men ;   for   liars  Him  as  intercessors.

dare  not  pray  for  the  success  of  their  III.    The    twofold    direction  of  a

lies.  preacher's  words.

L  Preaching  is  easier  than  praying.  1.   Words  from  God  to  men.      For

In  some  sense  this  is  so  even  in  truthful  *'  if  they  be  prophets,"  and  it  is  equally

prophesying.     For —  so  with  preachers,  "  the  word  of  the  Lord

1.  The  hearer  is  less  searching.    Man  will  be  with  them."     They  have  some-
is  our  listener  in  prophesying  and  preach-  thing  to  say  from  God  to  their  fellows,
ing,  but  in  prayer  we  speak  to  God/  2.  Words  to   God  for    men.      *'Let
When,  therefore,  we  address  the  ear  of  them  make  intercession  to  the  Lord."
God,  our  words  falter  if  we  be  in  sin-  Note —

cere ;  and  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  under  1.  Being  put  in  trust  with  a  word  from

an   Eye  which   reads   us  through   and  God  makes  us  humble,  dependent,  and

through.     This  is  not  so  when  we  only  therefore  prayerful.

address  men,  who  may  be  deceived.  2.  Confidence  in  our  message  being

2.  The  act  is  less  daring.      There  is  true  renders  us  fervent  in  pleading  for
awfulness  in  an  address  by  a  sinner  to  its  fulfilment.

(Jod ;    whereas,  oh   the   blasphemy   of  3.   Insincerity  would  not  dare  adven-

consciously   speaking    a   lie    direct    to  ture  before  God  with  intercessions  for

Him !      Who   would   not  shrink   with  His  seal  to  our  words,  or  the  success  of

terror  1     But  a  man,  though  sinful —  our  prophesying.


CHAPTER  XXVIIL


Critioal  and  Exeoetioal  Notes. — Fur  Chronology  of  the  Chapter,  Ac,  vide  preceding
chapter.  The  words  (ver.  1).  "  In  the  beginning  of  tlie  reign,"  and  immediately  described  as
"in  tlie  fourth  year^'*  accords  with  the  common  mode  of  reckoning  by  dividing  a  term  into
two  halves.  And  as  Zedekiah  reigned  eleven  years,  this  date  was  in  the  first  half — at  **<Ae
beginning  "  therefore.

Personal  Allusions. — Ver,  1.  "ffananiah  the  son  ofAzur."  Nothing  known  of  him  ;  but  being
**of  Gibeon,"  one  of  the  cities  of  the  priests,  he  was  most  probably  of  the  order.

Geographical  Reference. — "Ver.  1.  **  Gibeon.**  A  priestly  city  (Josh,  xxi,  17  ;  1  Kings  iii.  4),
now  called  El-Jib,  and  situate  about  40  stadia  north-west  of  Jerusalem.

Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  10.  **  Eananiah  took  the  yoke  from  off  the  prophet  JeremiaKt
neck  : "  vide  notes  on  chap.  ii.  20 ;  v.  6.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver,  6.  **  Jeremiah"  Notice  that  the  name  appears  throughout  this
chapter  in  its  abbreviated  form,  H^DT  instead  of  •liT'DT.  Marked  specially  as  "Jeremiah  the
prophet  "  in  order  more  strongly  to  mark  the  distinction  between  him  as  the  true  prophet  of
God  in  contrast  with  "  Han  an  i  ah  the  prophet."

Ver.  8.  *'Evil"     Some  MSS.  give  tlie  reading  DVl,  famine,  instead  of  n^fl,  ealamityt  etiL

HOMILETIC  SURVEY  OP  THE  CHAPTER.

Lying  Prophecy  Distinguished  from  True.

Both  Hananiah  and  Jeremiah  are  styled  prophets.      Men  are  not  distinguished
from  each  other,  as  false  or  true,  by  f^  difference  of  titles,  but  by  a  difference  of
490


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xxvm.


deeds ;  and  it  is  the  responsibility  of  hearers  to  "  try  the  spirits  "  and  choose
between  the  counterfeit  and  the  true.

The  effrontery  and  offensiveness  of  Hananiah  in  selecting  such  a  scene,  and  when
surrounded  by  such  hearers  (ver.  1),  for  a  display  of  hia  pseudo-'pTO-phetic  mission  in
opposition  to  Jeremiah  (for  he  "  spake  unto  me;  "  it  was  a  kind  of  personal  attack
on  Jeremiah),  is  in  remarkable  contrast  with  Jeremiah's  meekness  (vers.  6—9).

I.  General  characteristics  of  false  messages.  Hananiah  illustrates  the
ministry  of  lies  by  which  arrogant  teachers  delude  the  people.

1.  Divine  authority  is  blasphemously  assumed.  Hananiah  prefixes  to  his  words
the  most  solemn  formula  by  which  inspiration  is  claimed.  Rome  equally  dares  to
speak  in  the  Name  of  God.  Lying  teachers  always  fortify  their  theories  by  an
imposing  seriousness  and  confidence  which  tends  to  deceive  the  simple.

2.  False  messages  are  usually  pleasant  to  their  hearers  (vers.  2-4).  Possibly
Hananiah  may  have  fostered  this  pleasant  prospect  within  himself  until  he  imagined
its  truth.  **  Deceiving  and  being  deceived."  Bad  men,  and  they  who  neglect
salvation,  who  wish  good  as  the  issue  of  a  life  of  evil,  find  it  possible  to  persuade
themselves  that  good  cometh.  And  false  prophets  are  always  at  hand  to  quiet
fear  and  lull  apprehension.

3.  Extreme  emphasis  is  needed  to  make  doubtful  messages  seem  7'eally  true  (vers.
10,  11).  A  lie  needs  strong  language  to  make  it  sound  like  truth.  Hananiah  had  to
act  with  startling  boldness  in  order  to  keep  up  his  delusion.  Deceivers  are  driven  to
great  daring,  in  word  and  deed,  in  order  to  encourage  the  credulity  they  entice.

4.  Defeat  ultimately  covers  the  false  prophet  with  shame.  The  lying  words  fail
in  fulfilment  (vers.  8,  9) ;  and  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  asserts  itself  in
their  personal  destruction  (vers.  15-17).

IL  Distinguishing  features  of  true  prophecy.  Jeremiah  represents  here  the
faithful  teacher  of  Divine  oracles  and  salutary  truths.

1.  The  peoples  present  good  is  tenderly  desired.  Even  though  the  pleasant  mes-
sage/? are  false,  he  would  gladly  say,  "Amen,  the  Lord  do  so,"  to  all  words  of
hope.  The  prophet  of  God  may  not  be  able  to  predict  good,  yet  he  would  fain
do  so  if  he  dared  )  for  he  wishes  only  the  well-being  even  of  those  against  whom  he
witnesses  in  God's  name.     (Comp.  chap.  viii.  21.)

2.  Yetf  no  delusion  can  he  permitted.  He  may  not  say,  "  Peace,  peace,  when
there  is  no  peace."  And  he  is  too  fully  convinced  of  the  falsity  of  alluring  hopes
to  sanction  them  (vers.  7-9).  If  houses  are  being  reared  on  sands,  he  must  foretell
the  destroying  storm.

3.  God^s  own  message^  however  unwelcome,  must  he  proclaimed  (vers.  12-14) ;  even
though  it  tell  of  "  yokes  of  iron  "  and  tyrannical  despotism.  To  soften  down  God's
terrible  messages  into  "  smooth  things  "  is  a  crime  against  fidelity  to  God  and  duty
to  man.

4.  Liars  must  he  refuted  hy  the  messenger  of  truth  (ver.  16).  This  is  no  task  to
be  coveted,  and  it  requires  courage ;  but  false  leaders  have  to  be  "  withstood  to  the
face,"  and  told  frankly  that  they  lie  !  Paul  thus  withstood  Peter,  and  Luther  thus
withstood  the  Pope  and  his  emissaries,  and  honest  believers  have  ever  since  had
like  services  to  perform.  Deceivers  must  be  met  in  personal  confutation  and  their
heresies  demolished.

5.  Vindication  is  on  the  side  of  truth  (ver.  1 7).  Jeremiah  thus  received  another
Divine  assurance  of  his  mission,  and  an  additional  encouragement  to  prosecute  his
work  with  confidence  and  boldness  as  the  prophet  of  Jehovah,

COMMENTS  AND  HOMILETIC  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXVIIL

Ver.  3.    Within  two  full  years.     Pro-      federacy  being  formed  would  within  that
bably  this  period  was  fixed  by  Hananiah      time  defeat  Nebuchadnezzar.
in  the  belief  that  the  international  con-

491


CHAP,  xxvni.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  11.  Theme:  Self  in  See  vice.
**  And  the  prophet  Jeremiah  went  his
way^

This,  compared  with  xxvi  14,  leads
to  the  same  truth ;  laying  aside  of  "  self  "
in  God's  service  when  called  upon  to
give  testimony  for  Him.  Hananiah
takes  the  yoke,  breaks  it,  thus  discredits
Jeremiah's  prophecy  in  the  presence  of
the  people,  yet  all  we  read  is — *'  Jeremiah
went  his  way."  Left  it  to  God  to  vindi-
cate His  own  honour;  which  He  soon
did  very  terribly.

So  before  the  princes  (in  xxvi.)  he
tells  out  uncompromisingly  all  the  truth,
though  he  knew  he  did  it  at  the  peril
of  his  life.  He  was  not  insensible  to
suffering,  still  himself — he  was  nothing.
He  tells  them  that  if  they  slay  him  they
will  bring  innocent  blood  upon  them,  and
there  leaves  the  matter.   This  suggests —

I.  The  complete  abnegation  of  self
in  service.

1.  There  is  a  period  in  the  Christian
life  when  the  existence  of  "self"  is
unsuspected.  Then  we  mistake  its  ener-
gies for  those  of  the  spiritual  life.  We
may  carry  on  the  Lord's  work  without
suspicion  as  to  the  principle  on  which
we  carry  it  on.

2.  Further  on,  there  occurs  a  partial
detection  of  "  self."  The  Spirit  of  God
has  led  us  onward  in  our  education,
partly  purified  our  mental  vision,  raised
our  standard,  made  ua  watchful,  dis-
trustful of  "  self."

3.  It  is  a  more  advanced  stage  when
we  see  "  self"  enough  to  dread  it  greatly  ;
see  it  to  be  ever  intrusive,  substituting
mean  and  low  motives.

4.  Yet  higher,  when  we  have  attained
to  such  knowledge  of  "self"  that  we
war  with  it  and  repress  ity  yet  know
that  we  shall  never  be  wholly  done  with
it  till  heavenly  life  be  gained.

IL  See  the  workings  of  "self"  in
service.  The  wrong  workings  of  "  self."
Much  we  do  may  be  from  mere  natural
feeling  ;  nothing  of  God  in  it ;  and  work
that  seems  earnest  and  true  may  be  the
gratification  of  natural  energy.  Allowing
"  self  "  thus  to  influence  ua,  we  shall  be
subject  to  its  disturbing  influences —

1.  Self-love  UfiU  be  easily  wounded  by
the  opposition  which  meets  us.
492


2.  Our  judgment  will  be  warped  hp
personal  feeling  and  our  self-interests
being  imported,

3.  ^^Self"  will  drive  us  too  far;  we
shall  not  know  when  "  to  go  our  way  ;"
we  shall  be  for  seeing  more  than  the
case  requires ;  for  passing  beyond  testi-
mony for  God  to  testimony  for  our-
selves ■;  wanting  to  secure  our  own
honour  and  importance.

We  cannot  separate  ourselves  from  our
service;  what  we  are  will  tell  on  it.
Failure  in  service  is  generally  the  conse-
quence of  failure  in  "  self."  And  "  self"
can  gratify  itself  upon  what  was  ori-
ginally God's :  because  His  message  i
rejected  we  look  upon  the  case  as  if  wt
were  rejected,  and  then  lose  sight  of  the
grievous  injury  done  to  God  in  the
apparent  one  done  to  us  !

All  denominational  rancour  comes  of
the  wrong  operation  of  "  self"  in  service.
It  leads  to  the  confounding  persons  with
principles.  And  our  imperfections  bring
the  cause  of  God  into  disrepute.

IIL  The  expulsion  of  "self"  firom
service.

1.  How  TO  BE  DONE  1  This  is  a  work
of  degrees.

(1.)  By  enlightenment  of  the  Holy
Ghost;  showing  a  man  himself,  and
where  *'  self  "  works  ill  results.

(2.)  By  sympathy  with  Christ,  This
will  make  "  self "  fall  out  of  prominence.

(3. )  By  learning  our  own  insignificance.
We  have  inflated  thoughts  of  our  own
self-importance.

(4.)  We  need  realisation  that  we  are
simply  instruments  ;  persons  to  be  used.
We  sometimes  act  as  if  all  were  by  us
and  for  us  j  the  cause  and  object  of  alh

2.  Happy  results  will  flow.

(1.)  We  shall  leave  things  without
undue  pushing.  Do  what  is  needful,  and
then  have  faith  in  truth  that  it  will  act
by  its  own  weight.  Truth  put  in  front,
we  shall  retire  avoiding  undue  promi-
nence of  ourselves,  which  often  offends
men  and  mars  our  work.

2.  We  shall  leave  our  sayings  and
doings /or  God  to  fructify.  Much  has
to  be  left  before  they  will  fructify ;  left
to  themselves  and  to  God.  As  with  the
sower,  seeds  spring  up  "  he  knoweth  not
how."


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  xxvm.


(3.)  Restlesmest  ofielfis  thus  quieted  ;
we  wait  the  order  of  events,  not  grasping
an  unripened  harvest.

(4.)  We  must  not  think  God^s  affairs
tufer  because  we  have  to  **  go  our  way.'*
When  we  have  gone,  He  remains.  O^ten
the  consciousness  of  having  borne  testi-
mony is  all  we  can  attain  to ;  all  we  can
do ;  all  we  are  required  to  do  :  we  may
"go  our  way."

IV.  ''Self*'  has  a  right  place  in
service.

1.  Our  energies  and  faculties  were
given  to  utfor  use.  Jesus  could  assert
Himself :  as  in  the  Temple  when  He
drove  out  the  money-changers.  Jeremiah
returned,  when  his  "  yoke  of  wood  "  was
broken,  with  a  **  t/oke  of  iron.**

2.  Yet,  in  all  the  energy  which  circum-
stances may  require,  the  action  of  mere
human  feeling  need  not  he  seen.  That
which  is  truly  for  God  will  commend
itself  as  such.  Consecrated  *'self,"  taught
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  show  that  there
is  a  time  for  every  purpose  under  heaven ;
a  time  to  keep  silence  as  well  as  to
speak,  a  time  to  act  and  testify,  and
also  a  time  "<o  go  our  way." — Con-
itructed  and  condensed  from  "  JBreviates,*
hy  Rev.  P,  B,  Power,  M.A,

Ver.  13.  Theme:  The  Two  Yokes.
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Thou  hast  broken
the  yokes  of  wood^  hut  thou  shalt  make
for  them  yokes  of  iron.**

Jeremiah  taught  by  symbols  :  hid  his
mantle  in  the  earth,  broke  earthen  pot,
&c  The  preacher  to-day  would  evoke
harsh  criticism  if  he  ventured  on  any
such  symbolic  action.

Opposition  of  false  prophets  assailed
him.  Always  so.  If  there  be  a  Christ,
there  will  arise  an  Antichrist;  if  a  Simon
Peter,  there  will  arise  a  Simon  Magus ;
if  a  Luther,  an  Eckius.  Yet  the  gates
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  the
Gospel,  mighty  though  the  sophistries  of
opponents  be.

L  Men  must  wear  some  yoke.  In
every  stage  of  life — childhood,  youth,
manhood ;  and  in  every  station  of  life —
servants,  masters,  <&c.

1.  God  has  made  and  sustains  us,
and  asks  that  we  submit  to  His  will.

2.  With   our   passions   and   propen-


sities, if  we  break  the  yoke  it  is  meet
we  should  wear,  and  do  not  serve
God,  we  at  once  bend  our  necks  to
another  yoke  and  serve  slavishly  our
own  selves.

II.  Christ's  yoke  is  an  easy  one  to
wear.     Only  as  a  "  yoke  of  wood."

1.  The  yoke  of  Christ  is  a  right  one.
Serve  Jesus  Christ,  and  it  is  found  that
the  Christian  law  is  perfection  itself.

2.  The  yoke  of  Christ  is  framed  in
our  interest.  To  believe  in  Christ  is
the  highest  wisdom  ;  to  repent  of  sin  is
the  most  delightful  necessity ;  to  follow
after  holiness  is  the  most  blissful  pur-
suit ;  to  become  a  servant  of  Christ  is
to  be  made  a  king  and  priest  unto  God.
His  is  a  blessed  life.

3.  Christ's  yoke  is  not  exacting.  He,
in  His  grace,  always  gives  us  of  His
bounty  when  He  asks  of  us  our  duty.
A  sinner  must  believe  ;  it  is  his  own  act ;
the  Holy  Spirit  never  believes  for  any-
body, yet  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  the
faith  which  the  man  exercises  towards
God.  He  must  repent;  yet  Christ  is
exalted  to  "  give  repentance."

4.  It  is  an  easy  yoke.  Never  did  a
man  wear  it  but  he  always  loved  to
wear  it.  The  life  of  a  Christian  is  not
chafed  and  galled  by  vexatious  prohibi-
tions. Though  the  duties  of  holiness
are  irksome  to  men  who  are  not  holy,
grace  makes  the  heart  rejoice  in  it.  See
Addenda:  " Christ's  Yoke  Easy."

5.  The  bright  example  of  Christ  makes
the  yoke  pleasant  to  bear.  He  Himself
has  carried  the  very  yoke  we  bear,  and
we  have  blessed  fellowship  with  Him
in  this.  See  Addenda  :  "  Chbist's  Ex-
ample."

6.  All  who  have  borne  Christ's  yoke
have  had  grace  given  equal  to  the  weight
of  the  burden.  Never  heard  a  com-
plaint of  aged  Christian  against  Christ
or  against  His  yoke.  Wolsey  regretted
that  he  had  not  "  served  God  with  half
the  zeal  he  had  served  his  king,"  but
none  has  ever  bewailed  the  zeal  with
which  he  followed  Christ  I

7.  Christians  who  have  borne  this
yoke  always  desire  to  get  their  children
into  it.  They  long  that  their  sons  also
may  serve  the  Lord.  Often  men  say,
"  X  do  not  want  my  sous  to  follow  my

493


CHAP.  XXVIII.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


trade,  it  is  wearying,  its  pay  is  small,"
kc,

III.  Those  who  refuse  Christ's  easy
yoke  will  have  to  wear  a  worse  one.
''  Yokes  of  iron."

Adam  wore  an  easy  yoke  in  Paradise:
he  broke  it,  and  himself  and  his  posterity
had  to  wear  "  iron  yokes  "  ever  since.

1.  Turning  from  the  right  road,  from
the  cry  of  rectitude,  because  it  threatens
shame  or  loss,  will  entail  vaster  after-
losses,

2.  Bachslidei'Sf  by  putting  off  the  yoke
of  Christianity,  have  not  improved  their
condition,

3.  They  who  refuse  the  Bible  and
follow  tradition.  Do  these  perverts  of
the  true  Christian  religion  get  an  easier
yoke  1  No ;  there  are  penances  and
mortifications,  &c.

4.  The  self-righteous  "who  attempt  to
work  their  own  way  to  heaven.  Self-
righteousness  is  an  iron  yoke  indeed.

5.  UnhelieverSy  who  will  not  believe
the  simple  revelation  of  God,  presently
find  themselves  committed  to  systematic
misbeliefs,  which  distract  reason,  op-
press the  heart,  and  trammel  the  con-
science.

6.  Lovers  of  pleasure.  Pleasure  often
means  lust,  and  gaiety  means  crime ;
and  self-indulgence  brings  beggary  and
degradation.

In  the  last  tremendous  day  of  Christ's
coming  to  judgment,  the  Christian's  yoke
will  be  as  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck;
but  sin,  pleasure,  will  be  as  an  iron  yoke,
a  burden  of  enslaving  woe. — (7.  H,
Spurgeon,

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Trust  Placed  in
Lies.  "The  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee;
but  thou  makest  this  people  to  trust
in  a  lie."

L  Vastness  of  individual  influence.
** Thou  makest  this  people"  <kc.  For
good  or  ill.

n.  Dastardly  cruelty  of  deception.
Like  the  leading  of  unsuspecting  children
along  a  flowery  path  to  a  precipice.
"  Makest  them  trust  in  a  lie  /  "

IIL  Perilous  readiness  to  rely  on

fair  words.     Not  merely  to  listen ,  or  to

find  pleasure  in  hearing,  but  to  ^' trust.'*

Man  is  stupidly  incautious.    The  syren's

494


song  charms  him,  so  he  trusts  her  lead-
ing, goes  after  her  even  to  death  !

IV.  Appalling  arrogance  of  falsity,
"  The  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee,  yet,"  (fee.
Without  any  Divine  commission,  never-
theless Hananiali  assumed  the  airs  and
wielded  the  influence  of  a  messenger  of
God.

V.  Conflict  of  falsehood  with  truth.
"  Thou  makest  them  trust  in  a  lie,
though  the  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee."

1.  It  was  war  against  the  true  word
of  God.

2.  It  was  successful  conflict  with  truth-
ful teaching.

3.  It  illustrates  the  lying  ministry
which  has  been  in  all  ages  active.

"A.    It   shows    the    hindrances   amid
which  God's  messengers  work.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  The  Solemn  Warn-
ing.    **  TJiis  year  thou  shalt  die,**

That  we  must  die  is  certain,  but  the
hour  is  hid.  Yet,  if  some  prophet  could
open  to  us  the  Divine  decrees,  it  is  quite
possible  one  or  other  of  us  would  see
this  sentence.

L  Possibility  of  this  event.  This
year  we  may  die.

1.  For  our  life  is  the  greatest  uncer-
tainty in  the  world  (James  iv.  13,  14).

2.  Because  thousands  have  died  the
last  year  (Eccles.  iii.  2,  "  a  time  to  die  "),

3.  Thousands  will  certainly  die  this
year,  and  we  may  be  of  the  number.

4.  Though  we  be  young ;  for  the
regions  of  the  dead  are  crowded  with
those  who  have  died  in  youth.

5.  Though  we  have  not  finished  our
education.

6.  Though  we  be  in  health  and
vigour.

7.  Though  we  be  full  of  business.

8.  Though  we  be  not  prepared  for  it.

9.  Though  we  deliberately  delay  pre-
paration.

10.  Though  we  be  unwilling  to  admit
the  thought.

11.  Though  we  may  strongly  hope
the  contrary,

12.  Though  we  promise  ourselves
many  years  of  pleasure  (Luke  xii.  19,  20).

II.  Important  consequences  should
we  die  this  year.

\.  If  we  die  unpardoned,  unrenewed,


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


OHAF.  IXTIIL


we  should  be  for  ever  cut  off  from  the
pleasures  of  this  present  life.

2.  We  shall  have  no  pleasures  to
substitute  for  those  we  lose,

3.  All  our  hopes,  as  to  the  present
life,  will  for  ever  perish.

4.  We  shall  be  deprived  for  ever  of
all  the  means  of  salvation  (Eccles.  ix.  10).

5.  All  our  hopes  of  heaven  will
eternally  vanish  (Prov.  xi.  7).

To  conclude —

i  How  awful  the  thought  of  dying  if
we  are  yet  in  our  sins  J  Let  us  use  the
interval  for  salvation.

ii.  How  pleasing  the  thought,  and
how  happy  the  consequences,  if  we  are
believers  in  Christ,  that  eternal  redemp-
tion is  so  near ! — Hannam.

Theme  :  On  the  New  Yeab.  "  ThU
year  thou  shalt  die."

The  unexpected  death  of  this  false
prophet  is  an  instance  of  the  extra-
ordinary interposition  of  the  Almighty.
But  the  event  holds  lessons  of  universal
extent  and  application —

i.  That  it  is  "  in  God  we  live  and
move  and  have  our  being.'*

ii.  That  the  period  of  death  of  each
individual  is  known  to  and  appointed
by  Him.

Observe —

I.  This  sentence  is  doubtless  expres-
sive of  the  decision  of  God  concerning
many  this  year.

1.  The  page  of  history  affords  no
record  of  a  single  year  in  which  death
desisted  from  his  work  of  destruction,  or
the  insatiable  grave  said,  "It  is  enough."
More  than  twenty  millions  die  every  year.

2.  The  last  year  of  many  is  now  com-
menced. The  aged ;  bowed  down  with
the  weight  of  years,  <fec.  In  the  meri-
dian of  life^  though  bound  to  earth  by
tenderest  associations.  Thousands  in
the  very  morning  of  life,  though  hearts
beat  high  with  hope,  (fee.


3.  Various  are  the  means  by  which
God's  design  will  he  executed:  through
the  failure  of  nature ;  sickness ;  acci-
dents ;  after  protracted  illness ;  sud-
denly and  without  warning;  retire  at
night  to  rest  but  called  into  eternity
before  morning  ;  or  leave  their  homes  in
the  morning  never  more  to  return  alive.

II  No  individual  can  be  certain
that  this  does  not  express  God's  decision
concerning  himself.

1.  Utterly  impos»ible  for  us  to  know
who  are,  or  who  a>e  not,  included  in
God's  appointments.

2.  The  circumstances  of  some  render
it  most  probable  that  this  year  will  be
their  last — the  old,  the  infirm,  (fee.

3.  Doubtless,  those  who  think  least
of  death,  and  confidently  reckon  on
future  years,  will  find  this  sentence
fulfilled.

III.  It  is  the  duty  and  interest  of
all  to  use  wisely  the  gracious  hours
they  enjoy.

1.  A  solemn  question  arises :  What
is  it  to  die  ?  Not  merely  to  (v^ase  from
cheering  scenes  of  earth,  <fec.,  but  to
pass  from  this  state  of  being  into  the
immediate  presence  of  our  Maker  and
Judge  to  "give  account"  (2  Cor  v.  10).
It  is  to  be  rewards'/I.  (Rev.  vil  14)  or
doomed  (Mark  ix   49).

2.  Surely  it  is  the  duty  of  each  to
ask.  Am  I  prepared  to  die  ?  The  word
of  God  declares  that  " except  ye  repent**
(fee.  (Luke  xiii.  3) ;  "tb^t  he  who  helieveth
not,"  (fee.  (Mark  xvi.  16)  ;  that  "  without
holiness,'*  <fec.  (Heb.  xxii.  14);  that
*'  except  horn  of  the  SpirU^J'  &c.  (John
iii.  5).  Let  each  ask.  Am  I  thus  pre-
pared ?

3.  Let  this  year  be  commenced  wiih
earnest  preparation.  Never  can  a  mor^
favourable  opportunity  present  .Hsrlf.— ••
J.  Bunter,  A.D.  1828.

See  Addenda:  The  Averaqf,  or
Life.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXVIII. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS'.
Ver.  13.  Christ's  YOKE  EASY.   Queen      told  her  it  would  not  be  heavy  when


Elizabeth  carried  the  crown  in  the  pro-
cession of  her  sister  Mary  at  the  coro-
nation, and  she  remarked  that  it  was
very  heavy  ;  but  some  one  standing  by


she  had  to  wear  it  herself.  So  the
precepts  which  some  meii  do  but  carry
in  their  hands  seem  very  heavy ;  but
when  a  man  comes  to  know  Christ  and

495


CHAP.  XXIX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMPAn.


to  love  Him,  those  very  precepts  become
light  and  easy. — Spurgeon,

A  man  shall  carry  a  b  icket  of  water
on  his  head  and  be  very  tired  of  the
burden  ;  but  the  same  man  when  he
dives  into  the  sea  shall  have  thousands
of  buckets  on  his  head  without  per-
ceiving their  weight,  because  he  is  in
the  element  and  it  entirely  surrounds
him.  The  duties  of  holiness  are  very
irksome  to  men  who  are  not  in  the
element  of  holiness;  but  when  once
those  men  are  cast  into  the  element  of
grace,  then  they  bear  ten  times  more  and
feel  no  weight,  but  are  refreshed  thereby
with  joy  unspeakable. — Spurgeon,

Christ's  example.  Have  you  never
read  in  Grecian  story  how  the  Grecian
soldiers  on  their  long  marches  grew
exceedingly  weary,  and  wished  that
the  war  were  closed,  they  felt  so
dispirited  1  But  there  was  a  man  whom
they  almost  adored  as  a  god — Alexander
himself,  and  they  saw  him  always  shar-
ing their  toil.  If  the  road  was  rough,
the  monarch  walked  with  them  ;  if  they
were  short  of  water,  Alexander  would
share  their  thirst.  At  the  sight  of  him
every  man  grew  strong.  Oh !  it  is
grand  to  the  believer  to  feel  that,  if
there  be  a  trial  or  a  di^culty  in  the
Christian  life,  Christ  has  borne  it,  and
Christ  is  with  us  bearing  it  still.


Ver.  16.  The  average  op  life.  "  The
average  of  life  has  altered.  If  a  man
now  lives  a  hundred  years,  we  go  miles
to  see  him.  There  is  but  one  apple
where  there  were  five  blossoms.  The
sexton  rings  the  bell  merrily  at  first ;  at
last  he  tolls  it.

"  Men  in  these  days  undergo  suffer-
ing, and  great  wear  and  tear  of  brain
and  physical  powers.  Not  one  of  the
hundreds  of  the  brainworkers  use  any
moderation.  Of  printerSj  few  ever  live
to  fifty.  The  watchmaker  shortens  his
own  life  as  he  measures  the  hours  and
minutes  for  otiiers.  The  chemist  breathes
in  death.  The  shoemaker  wears  out  his
life  at  the  last.  The  foundrj/man  breathes
in  filings.  The  miller  breathes  in  dust
as  he  toils  at  the  grist.  The  mason  digs
his  own  grave  with  his  trowel.  What
you  do,  do  quickly ;  *^for  this  year  thou
shalt  die." — T.  Be  Witt  Talmage,  i>.Z>.,
A.D.  1872.

The  past  is  a  dream,
The  future  a  breath,
The  present  a  gleam
From  birth  unto  death. — OrventaL

"  Men  should  strive  to  lire  well,  not  to  live
long." — Emi  of  Stirling.

"  Then  let  us  fill
This  little  interval,  this  pause  of  life,
With  all  the  virtues  we  can  crowd  into  it."

— AddUon,


CHAPTER  XXIX.

Critical  and  Exeqetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — This  letter  and  its
transmission  are  usually  dated  the  fourth  year  of  Zedekiah's  reign  (because  of  chap,  xxviii.  1),
but  ver.  2  of  this  chapter  rather  points  to  a  somewhat  earlier  date,  possibly  the  first  or  second
year  of  Zedekiah  ;  for  Zedekiah  himself  had  to  go  in  his  fourth  year  (chap.  11.  59),  and  it  is
probable  tlierefore  tliat  this  embassy  was  a  year  or  two  earlier.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — 2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14-21  ;  Ezek.  xvii.  11-21.

8.  National  Affairs. — An  embassy  sent  from  Zedekiah  to  the  king  of  Babylon.  Its  object
unknown  ;  but  not  unlikely  to  carry  the  tribute  he  was  under  bond  to  pay  Nebuchadnezzar
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13),  and  possibly  to  delude  him  by  renewed  pledges  of  obedience  when  he  was
conspiring,  witii  the  kings  of  other  nations,  to  rebel  against  him  (chap,  xxvii.  3).

4.  Contemporaneous  History. — See  notes  on  chap.  xxi.

6.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  3.  **  Elasah.'*  Most  probably  brother  of  Ahikam  (see  note
chap.  xxvi.  24),  and  would  consequently  be  favourably  received  at  the  Chaldean  court.  Ver.  4.
**  Oemariah  the  son  of  Hilkidh."  Hilkiah  was  the  priest  who  found  the  law  in  the  house  of  the
Lord  and  showed  it  to  Shaphan  the  scribe,  who  showed  it  to  Josiah  the  king  (2  Kings  xxii.  8).
Different  person  from  tiie  Gemariah  of  Jer.  xxxvi.  25.  Ver.  21.  **  Ahdbf  son  of  Kolaiah,  and
Zedekiah,  son  of  Maaseiah."  Two  false  prophets  who  traded  upon  the  wishes  and  credulity  of  the
Babylonian  captives,  provoking  them  to  revolt  against  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  were  therefore
cast  into  the  **  burning  fiery  furnace"  (comj).  Dan.  iii.  6).  Ver.  24.  ** Shemaiah  the Nehelamite.*'
This  Shemaiah  would  seem  to  have  been  the  leadi  r  of  these  false  prophets  at  Babylon,  for  he
wrote  the  letter  in  their  name  against  Jeremiaii.  Ver.  25.  *'  Zepkaniah  the  son  of  Maaseiah  **
(gee  on  xxi.  1).     He  was  the  "second  priest,"  the  pakid,  deputy  "in  the  stead  of  Jehoiada  tho

496


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xxtx.

priest"  (rer.  26),  and  in  this  office  he  controlled  the  civil  force  which  guarded  the  Temple.
Ver.  26,  **  Jehoiada  the  priest"  Supposed  by  some  to  be  the  same  conspicuous  and  influential
Jehoiada  of  king  Joash's  reign  (2  Kings  xi.  16  ;  2  Cliron.  xxiii.  16)  ;  but  as  both  Jehoiada  and
Zephaniah  are  in  this  Terse  called  "  officers  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  paklds,  deputy  high-
priests,  the  supposition  falls.

6.  Geographical  Beferences. — Ver.  24.  "  The  Nehelamite,'*  i.e.,  belonging  to  the  village  of
Nthlam.  A  place  of  similar  name  existed  somewhere  between  the  Jordan  and  the  Euphrates
(comp.  2  Sam.  x.  16,  17) ;  called  there  the  *'  Helam  "  or  Chelam,  and  here  Ne-chdam.

7,  Literary  Criticisms.— Ver.  2.  **  The  queen*'  Nehushta,  the  queen-mother  (comp.  xii.  18).
Ver.  11.  **  An  expected  end*'  HnnX,  lit.,  lustf  i.e.,  issue  or  future — "a  future  and  a  hope."
Ver.  12.  **  Te  shaU  go  and  pray  unto  Me.**  Probably  a  Hebrew  idiom  for  repeated  and  frequent
prayer  (Michaelis) ;  but  better,  going  to  the  place  of  prayer.  Ver.  17.  **  Like  vile  figs."  The
adjective  comes  from  lii)fy  to  shudder.  Ver.  18.  *'  Deliver  them  to  be  removed:**  vide  note  on
chap.  XV.  4,  p.  814.  Though  a  different  word  from  **  vile,"  shuddering,  there  is  a  play  on  the
sense  of  that  word  in  the  word  rendered  "removed"  (ver.  18),  "make  them  a  shuddering."

Ver.  22.  A  curse,  n??p.  Another  ringing  on  the  form  of  words.  This  "curse,*'  kelalah,
should  be  associated  with  the  conduct  of  **  the  son  of  Kolaiah  '*  (ver.  21),  Hv^p,  whom  Nebu-
chadnezzar "  roasted  "  D^'^^  kalam,  in  the  fire.  Ver.  24.  "  Nehelamite:  '*  in  margin,  dreamer;  but
this  is  an  error,  for  the  word  {vide  Geographical  Reference  above)  is  a  name  of  a  place,
though  it  closely  resembles  the  word  Chalam,  "  dreamer,"  which  Jeremiah  so  often  nses
(see  ver.  8).

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXIX,

A  Revolutionary  Epoch.

ZedekiaVs  was  certainly  an  uneasy  throne.  At  home  the  people  were  restless,
the  priests  and  princes  eager  to  revolt.  And  in  Babylon  (to  whose  monarch  he
was  tributary,  and  whither  the  flower  of  the  Jewish  nation  had  already  been
carried)  the  Chaldees  were  probably  irritated,  as  the  Romans  were  in  later  times,
at  the  determination  of  the  Jews  never  to  submit  quietly  to  a  foreign  rule ;  while,
also,  there  was  the  same  ferment  among  the  Jews  in  Babylon  as  there  was  among
those  in  Jerusalem.  To  quell  this  ferment  among  the  exiles,  he  sent  letters  assuring
them  that  the  captivity  would  continue  for  seventy  years,  and  urging  them  to
settle  down  calmly  and  wisely,  to  make  themselves  homes,  and  give  themselves  to
industry  and  commerce.  His  words  found  acceptance  there,  but  the  false  prophets
in  Jerusalem  did  their  utmost  to  thwart  Jeremiah's  aim,  and  to  stir  among  the
exiles  resistance  to  his  influence.

Ver.  1.  Theme :  Messages  to  Exiles,  is  to  them  a  source  of  permanent  en-

**  Now  these  are  the  words  of  the  letter  couragement.

Jeremiah  sent  from  Jerusalem  to  the  God  looks  after  His  afflicted  and  scat-
residue  of  the  elders  which  were  carried  tered  servants.  He  moved  the  Apostles
away  captives."  James  and  Peter  to  write  Epistles  to

This  was  a  letter  from  Jeremiah  to  the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad.  John,
the  captives  and  exiles,  far  from  Jeru-  when  banished  from  Epbesus  to  Patmos,
aalem  their  happy  home.  They  were  was  favoured  with  high  revelations  from
then  what  we  are  now,  strangers  and  God.  During  the  seventy  years'  cap-
pilgrims — exiles ;  and  the  directions  tivity,  Daniel  was  raised  up  to  be  a
given  to  them  may  be  fitly  applied  by  living  consolation  to  the  exiles ;  and
us.  The  captives  would  find  very  real  here  Jeremiah  is  directed  to  write  a
consolations  in  this  letter  from  the  pro-  letter  to  them  by  express  command  of
phet  whom  God  inspired  to  write  it.  God.      This  proves  to  us  that  in  the

I.  The  very  fact  that  a  message  was  severest  ways  of  justice  God  does  not

Bent  to  them  under  an  express  Divine  forget  His  own  children,   but   has  in

appointment   was   consolatory.     And  reserve   ample   consolations   for  them,

this  may  teach  us  that,  wherever  God's  when  they  lie  under  the  common  judg-

children  are  scattered,  the  written  word  ment.

2 1  49T


CHAP.  XXIX.


noMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAff,


A  man  would  have  thought  that  these
were  driven  away  from  God's  care
when  they  were  driven  out  from  the
sanctuary,  but  Ezekiel  tells  a  different
tale  (Ezek.  xi.  16):  ^^  I  will  he  a  little
sanctuary  in  all  countries  ivhither  they
comey  Tbey  at  Jerusalem,  it  seems,  had
the  Temple,  but  without  God ;  they  at
Babylon  shall  have  God,  but  without
the  Temple.  He  applies  seasonable
comforts  under  discouraging  provi-
dences, and  is  bent  upon  making  up
His  jewels  though  they  seem  scattered
and  lost.  God  gives  a  command  to
Moab  :  "  Let  Mine  outcasts  dwell  with
thee,  Moah"

II.  The  particular  Providence  of
God,  appearing  on  their  behalf  under
all  their  calamities,  was  a  source  of
consolation.

He  is  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  of  all  the
armies  above  and  below,  and  yet  is  the
God  of  Israel ;  and  though  He  permits
their  captivity,  He  does  not  break  His
relation  to  them — their  covenant-God
still,  though  under  a  cloud.

He  assumes  the  active  agency  in  their
dispersion,  *'  /  have  caused  them  to  be
carried  away."  Their  sins  were  the  pro-
curing  cause  of  their  dispersion  ;  Nebu-
chadnezzar was  the  instrumental  cause,
but  God  Himself  was  the  efficient  and
disposing  cause.  "  Is  there  evil  in  the
city  and  I  have  not  done  it  ? "  He
asserts  the  strictness  of  His  justice,
visiting  the  sins  of  His  own  people  upon
them.  Certainly  it  must  be  a  great  sin
which  induces  a  h)ving  father  to  cast
his  child  out  of  doors.  But  sin  is  a
great  scatterer,  and  is  always  followed
by  a  driving  away  and  a  casting  out.
It  drove  the  angels  from  heaven,  Adam
from  Paradise,  Cain  from  the  boundaries
of  the  visible  Church,  and  the  children
of  Israel  from  their  much-loved  dwellings
in  Zion.  Your  houses  will  be  weary  of
you  when  you  dishonour  God  in  them,
and  you  may  live  to  be  driven  from
those  comforts  which  you  abuse  to
excess.

Yet  the  fact  of  God's  being  the  agent
in  their  dispersion  is  referred  to  as  a
ground  of  consolation;  since  it  reconciles
us  to  our  troubles  to  see  the  hand  of
God  in  them,  and  to  truce  an  all-gracious
498


and  merciful  design  in  them.  "  /  was
dumb  because  Thou  didst  it"  "  He  that
scattered  Israel  shall  gather  himJ^

III.  The  promise  of  the  stability
and  security  of  their  social  and  do
mestic  interests  was  given.  They
were  promised  "peace  in  the  peace  of
Babylon,"  and  were  forbidden  to  plot  and
intrigue  against  its  political  interests.
They  were  not  to  be  known  as  agitators,
or  ringleaders  of  revolt,  but  as  peaceful
citizens.  And  it  is  a  fact  that  they  were
treated  more  like  colonists  than  captives;
"  He  made  them  pitied  of  those  who  car-
ried them  captive."  If  they  were  to  "pray
for  the  peace "  of  Babylon,  much  more
should  we  for  the  welfare  of  our  own
country.

The  permanence  and  maintenance  of
their  domestic  interests  were  provided
for.  "  Build  ye  houses  and  plant  gar-
dens;  take  wives  for  your  sons,  that  ye
may  he  increased  and  not  diminished"
This  is  just  contrary  to  God's  command
to  Jeremiah  (xvi.  3)  in  Jerusalem,  be-
cause then  the  country  was  on  the  eve
of  convulsion,  but  now  they  were  in-
formed of  a  long  captivity.  Had  God
given  the  hope  of  speedy  return,  their
minds  would  have  been  unsettled  and
uneasy;  they  would  have  applied  to  no
business,  taken  no  comfort;  but  they
were  given  to  calculate  on  long  absence
from  home.

Scripture  deals  honestly  by  us.  It
tells  us  that  through  much  tribulation
we  enter  the  kingdom.  "  In  every  place
the  Spirit  testifies  that  bonds  and  im-
prisonments  await  us.''  It  tells  us  where
comfort  cannot  be  found,  and  where  our
peace  is  securely  laid  up ;  *^  In  Me  ye
shall  have  peace."

IV.  The  prospect  of  a  certain  and
favourable  issue  to  their  trials.

"  Thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  evil  *'
(ver.  11).— aS'.  Thodey,  a.d.  1834.

Ver.  2.  Jeconiah's  Captivity.  Ne-
buchadnezzar, in  the  first  half  of  his
reign  (b.C.  606-562),  repeatedly  invaded
Judea,  besieged  Jerusalem,  carried  away
the  inhabitants  to  Babylon,  and  de-
stroyed the  city  and  Temple.  Two
distinct  deportations  are  mentioned  in
2    Kings  xxiv.    14    (including    10,000


IWMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :  jEHBMUff.


CHAP.  XXtX.


persons),  XXXV.  11;  one  in  2  Chr<>n.
xxxvi.  20  ;  three  in  Jer.  lii.  28-30  (in-
cluding 4600  persons)  ;  sind  one  in
Dan.  i.  3.  The  two  principal  deporta-
tions were —

i.  That  which  took  place  B.C.  598,
when  Jehoiachini,  with  all  the  nobles,
soldiers, and  artificers  were  carried  away;
and

ii.  That  which  followed  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Teniple  and  the  capture  of
Zedekiah,  B.C.  688. — *^  Captivities  of  the
Jews  "  {Dr.  Smith).

Ver.  7.  Theme:  Christian  Patriot-
ism. ^^  And  seek  the  peace  of  the  city
whither  I  have  caused  you  to  he  carried
away  captives^  and  pray  unto  the  Lord
for  it ;  for  in  tlie  peace  thereof  shall  ye
have  peacey

The  case  of  these  people  does  not
exactly  correspond  with  ours,  but  the
difference  should  heighten  our  obliga-
tions. Ought  we  not  to  seek  the  good
of  our  native  land — the  land  of  our
fathers*  sepulchres — the  land  where  we
are  protected  by  mild  and  wholesome
laws,  where  civil  and  religious  freedom
are  enjoyed  in  a  higher  degree  than  in
any  other  country  in  Europe ;  a  land
where  God  has  been  known  for  many
centuries  as  a  refuge ;  a  land  where
there  are  greater  opportunities  for  pro-
pagating the  Gospel,  at  home  and  abroad,
than  in  any  other  land  under  heaven  I

I.  Inquire  into  the  duty  of  religious
people  towards  their  country.  "  Seek
ike  peace  of  the  city.^^  The  word  "  peace  "
here  means  prosperity  in  general.

We  should  therefore  seek  our  nation's
welfare.     Then —

1.  We  shall  do  nothing,  and  join  in
nothing,  that  tends  to  disturb  its  peace  or
hinder  its  welfare  ;  e.g.f  conspiracies,  in-
flammatory speeches,  sow  discontent  and
disaffection,  depreciate  those  who  govern
in  a  way  so  as  to  bring  government  into
contempt.

2.  Do  everything  in  our  power  to  pro^
mote  its  welfare;  e.g.,  a  cheerful  obedience
to  the  laws,  respect  for  those  who  frame
and  execute  them,  ready  co-operation  in
beneficent  measures.

3.  That  we  pray  the  Lord  on  its  behalf.
Though  banished  from  their  Temple,


these  exiles  had  access  to  their  God.
All  our  dependence,  as  a  nation,  is  upon
God  ;  and  therefore  we  should  importune
Him.  Further,  there  is  a  load  of  guilt
upon  our  country,  and  we  should  there-
fore supplicate  mercy  on  its  behalf.

II.  The  motives  by  which  these
duties  are  enforced.

1.  The  interests  of  individuals  a7id
families  are  closely  connected  with  those
of  a  country.

2.  Our  interests  as  Christians  are
interwoven  with  the  well-being  of  our
country.  What  our  advantages  are  we
should  know  to  our  grief  were  we  once
to  lose  them.

3.  Should  the  young  be  called  upon
to  take  up  arms  for  our  country's  de-
fence, every  one  of  us,  parent,  wife,  or
friend,  will  (if  we  can  pray  for  anything)
importune  the  Lord  of  hosts  to  cover
their  heads  in  the  day  of  battle. — Bev,
Andrew  Fuller  (delivered  at  Kettering,
in  1803,  at  a  time  of  threatened  inva-
sion).

Theme:  The  best  Christians  thb
BEST  Citizens.

I.  They  know  that  the  prosperity  of
the  whole  is  their  own  prosperity.  They
do  not,  therefore,  selfishly  seek  their
own  advantage.

II.  They  actually  labour  with  all
diligence  for  the  furtherance  of  the
common  good.

III.  They  employ  for  this  end  the
power  of  Christian  prayer. — Naegelsbach.

Theme  :  The  Duties  of  Christians
to  their  Country.

L  What  are  the  things  absolutely
necessary  to  the  security  and  pros-
perity, the  true  glory  and  happiness,  of
our  country  ?

1.  The  true  honour  of  a  nation,  like
that  of  the  individual,  lies  in  character.
President  Quincy  affirms:  "Human
happiness  has  no  perfect  security  but
freedom ;  freedom,  none  but  virtue ;
virtue,  none  but  knowledge;  neither
freedom  nor  virtue  has  any  vigour  or
immortal  hope  except  in  the  principles
of  the  Christian  faith  and  in  the  sanc-
tions of  the  Christian  religion."

2.  The  security  and  prosperity  of  our

499


CHAP.  XlIX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


nation  are  inseparably  associated  with
the  advancement  of  religion  among  the
people.

IL  What  are  the  best  means  for
securing  those  things  which  are  essential
to  our  country's  highest  welfare  1

1.  General  diffusion  of  education.
"  Education  is  a  better  safeguard  of
liberty  thau  a  standing  army."

2.  Equally  essential  that  the  people
be  virtuous.  Knowledge  is  power,  but
unsanctitied  power  is  power  for  evil.

3.  The  general  distribution  of  the
Bible.  The  Bible  is  the  great  instru-
ment for  enlightening  the  conscience  and
purifying  the  heart.

4.  Preaching  the  Gospel.  Our  nature
is  a  wreck,  a  chaos,  which  the  cross  of
Christ  alone  can  adjust.

5.  Prayer.  See  2  Chron.  vii.  13,
14;  Ps.  cvi.  23;  Exod.  xxxii.  10,  <fec.
John  Knox,  the  great  Scottish  reformer,
prayed — "  Give  me  Scotland,  or  else  I
die."  Queen  Mary  said  she  feared  his
prayers  more  than  an  army  of  10,000
men !  (See  Addenda:  Prayer  for  one's
OWN  Country.)

IIL  What  arguments  may  enforce
the  duties  of  personal  and  combined
activity  in  seeking  the  highest  good  of
our  land  %

1.  Because  our  own  individual  good  is
intimately  connected  with  its  general
happiness  and  prosperity.  ''  For  in  the
peace  thereof  ye  shall  have  peace."

2.  We  shall  thereby  recommend  the
religion  we  profess.

3.  The  work  of  supplying  our  land
with  the  preached  Gospel  and  with
religious  institutions  is  the  most  im-
portant work  to  which  Christians  can
devote  their  energies.  —  Rev.  Samuel
Baker f  D.D.y  Philadelphia^  1864.

Vers.  8,  9.  Deceiving  Prophets.  See
on  chap.  xiv.  14;  xxiii.  21 ;  xxvii.  14,
16.

Vers.  10-14.  Theme:  Gracious
Purposes  op  Grievous  Punishments.
In  the  text  four  things : — The  certain
punishment  of  sin.  The  certain  fulfil-
ment of  God's  gracious  purposes.  The
certain  issue  of  sanctided  afflictions.
500


The  certain  acceptance  of  fervent  devo»
tions.

I.  The  certain  punishment  of  sin.
"  After  seventy  years  be  accomplished
in  Babylon  I  will  visit  you."  But
seventy  years  must  be  accomplished.  And
mark,  this  threatening  was  fulfilled  to-
wards the  most  pious  of  God's  people
among  the  Jews,  as  well  as  the  most
impious.  "  One  event  happeneth  to  all."
"  The  soul  that  sinnethy"  <fcc.

The  blood  of  Christ,  applied  by  faith,
delivers  from  the  curse  of  sin  hereafter,
but  the  consequences  of  sin  are  often
bitterly  felt  by  God's  people  here.  It  is
the  law  of  Divine  dispensations  that  sin
should  bring  sorrow ;  and  it  is  the
tendency  of  Divine  grace  to  make  sin
appear  exceeding  sinful.  Job  and  David
and  Hezekiah  and  Peter,  even  though
through  rich  grace  their  sins  were  for-
given and  their  hopes  were  restored,
found  that  it  was  "an  evil  thing  and
bitter  to  sin  against  God ;  "  and  in  the
text  the  pious  Jews  equally  with  their
irreligious  countrymen  endured  captivity
in  Babylon  seventy  years.

As  the  shadow  follows  the  body,  so
does  anguish  attend  upon  sin.  We  may
advance  towards  sin  with  pleasure  in  our
eye,  but  when  we  return  it  is  with  sorrow
and  repentance  in  our  heart.

II.  The  certain  fulfilment  of  God's
gracious  purposes.  "I  will  visit  and
perform  My  good  word.  For  I  know
the  thoughts,"  (fee.  The  **good  word"
was  the  word  of  promise  of  deliverance
from  captivity,  and  the  coming  and  reign
of  Christ.

It  is  the  mercy  of  the  penitent  sinner,
it  is  the  comfort  of  the  humblest  believer,
that  God  is  as  true  to  His  promises  as
to  His  threatenings — as  faithful  to  the
declarations  of  the  covenant  of  His  grace
as  He  is  to  the  sentence  of  His  holy
law — as  ready  to  listen  to  the  voice  of
the  blood  of  sprinkling  as  He  was  to
listen  to  the  voice  of  the  blood  of  Abel.
God  will  perform  His  good  word  to  the
humblest  spirit  that  has  sought  and
found  rest  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  No
sin  will  be  our  ruin  which  leads  us  to
Christ  for  salvation.  It  is  His  own
language.  '*/,  even  7,  am  He"  and
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason,"


HOMtLETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAt.  XXllL


**/  hiow  the  thoughts — thoughts  of
peace."  God  often  thinks  thoughts  of
peace,  when  we  suppose  He  thinks
thoughts  of  evil.  He  occupies  Himself
in  merciful  thoughts  concerning  their
spiritual  peace  of  mind  now  and  their
eternal  peace  hereafter.

The  issue  is  to  give  you  "  an  expected


end^"*  —  a    very    desirable    one.


The


Lord  will  perfect  thai  which  concerneth;^*
"  But  the  God  of  all  grace"  &c.

Apply  it  to  Christ,  the  expected
Messiah,  in  whom  all  God's  thoughts  of
peace  concerning  His  people  issue.  He
is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning
and  the  end  of  all  things.  Of  all  things
in  creation;  "for  all  things  were  made
by  and  for  Him."  All  things  in  Scrip-
ure:  prophecies,  promises,  types,  cere-
monies, sacrifices,  '^^  the  end  of  the  lav)"
Salvation  by  Christ  now  and  happiness
with  Christ  hereafter  is  the  end  of  all
God's  gracious  purposes  and  designs —
the  end  of  the  covenant  of  grace — the
end  of  God's  providential  dispensations
— and  the  end  of  the  toils  and  conflicts
of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  an  end,  an
issue,  contemplated  by  faith,  and  waited
for  by  believers;  "azi  expected  end"
*^ receiving  the  end  of  your  faith"  <fec.
And  it  is  freely  bestowed — thankfully
received — as  a  grace-gift.  "  By  grace
ye;"  *'  /  will  perform  My  good  word;"
*^  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away"  &c.

Ill  The  certain  issue  of  sanctified
afflictions  (ver.  12).  "Then  shall  ye
call  and  go  and  pray,  and  I  will  hearken."
We  caiiTiot  have  a  better  proof  of  sanc-
tified afflictions  than  when  a  spirit  of
prayer  is  poured  out — when  we  are
brought  to  our  knees  —  taught  the
futility  of  broken  dependencies — taught
to  find  our  happiness  and  all  in  God.
Distrust  of  ourselves — dependence  on
Christ — confidence  in  God — humility  in
His  presence — submission  to  His  will —
and  a  delight  in  communion  with  Him
— these  mark  growth  in  grace.

IV.  The  certain  acceptance  of  fer-
vent prayer.  **Seek  and  find  Me  .  .  .
whole  heart"  (ver.  13).  True  of  for-
giveness of  sin — support  in  trouble —
deliverance.  We  must  be  earnest  and
fervent,  or  shall  have  but  a  cold  answer.
He  that  asks  with  a  doubting  mind  and


wavering  lazy  desire,  begs  for  nothing
but  to  be  denied.  God  gives  His  people
what  they  ask,  or  better.  We  beg  for
removal  of  present  sadness  —  but  He
gives  that  which  makes  us  able  to  bear
twenty  sadnesses,  a  cheerful  spirit,  peace-
ful conscience,  joy  in  God,  the  antepast
of  eternal  rejoicings  in  His  kingdom.
Remember  how  great  a  God  you  go
to,  how  great  a  need  you  have,  how
great  a  thing  you  pray  for. — S,  Thodey,
A.D.  1827.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  God's  Gbacious
Thoughts.

Near  disasters  clearly  realised  (ver.
10) ;  yet  future  good  confidently  antici-
pated. As  God  would  be  in  their  cala-
mities, for  He  will  punish  sin,  so  He
designed  their  deliverance,  for  "  He  will
not  always  chide,  neither  keep  His  anger
for  ever."

I.  The  Lord  has  '* thoughts"  con-
cerning His  people.  Yes  !  "  Thoughts
of  peace  and  not  of  evil."  **  How
precious  also  are  Thy  thoughts/^*  True:
for  "  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the
earth,  so  are  Thy  thougJits  above  our
thoughts,"  (fee.     So  then —

i.  The  Most  High  hows  to  the  things
done  upon  the  earth.  Yes,  and  further:
He  forms  intentions  respecting  them.
And  specially :  He  attentively  regards
mankind  to  divide  between  His  people
and  their  adversaries ;  discerns  between
our  struggles,  alarms,  [)rayers,  tears,  <fec.,
and  the  scorn  and  oppression  of  those
hostile  to  us.

ii.  He  thinks  about  us  I  Is  not  in-
different, but  intently  concerned  ;  our
case  occupies  His  thoughts.  Benevolent
people  will  give  to  the  poor,  but  not
think  about  the  pleader.  But  God  takes
us  up  into  His  "  thcmghts."  *'  I  am
poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh
upon  me  /  "

1.  God  has  "  thoughts  "  of  our  present
condition.  *'  Remembers  us  in  our  low
estate."

2.  "Thoughts,"  too,  of  our  coming
calamities  (ver.  10).  "In  the  world  ye
shall  have  tribulation,"  (fee.

3.  But  "thoughts"  also  of  our/M^i/r«
deliverance  and  happiness.

II.  The    Lord's    thoughts  will  b«

501


CHaf.  1St».


nOMlimiC  COMMENTARY:  JEMMlAH.


wrought    out    into    accomplishment.
These  thoughts  of  God  were —

a.  Unrecogvised  hy  His  people^ s  foes.
They  act  as  it"  we  were  friendless.  God
is  not  in  their  thoughts.

b.  Unhindered  hy  the  world^s  designs.
What  foes  intend  against  us,  and  may
do,  does  not  alter  nor  impede  God'3
designs.

1,  God*8  *'  thoughts  "  were  not  Jcnotvn
to  us  till  we  were  enlightened.  His  mes-
sengers taught,  but  *' we  would  not  hear.'*

2.  How  then  should  aliens  know  the
thoughts  of  God  ]  Even  "  the  servant
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth  ; "  how
should  foes  ?  "  The  natural  man  under-
standeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of
God;»  &c.

in.  Adversaries  know  not  against
what  Divine  "thoughts"  and  in-
tentions they  strive.  When  they
would  injure  us  ;  "  He  that  toucheth
you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."
Often  they  conspire  against  us ;  but  "  if
this  thing  be  not  of  God  it  cannot
stand."  Gladly  would  hostile  powers
condemn  us ;  but  "  who  is  he  that
condemneth  %  Christ  hath  died,  yea,
rather  is  risen  again ;  who  is  even  at
the  right  hand  of  God."

Remember  how  ^^ Satan  stood  at  God's
right  hand  to  resist"  Joshua;  and  the
Lord  answered,  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,
Satan,"  (fee.

Think  of  Balaam,  whom  Balak  would
have  to  curse  Israel :  "  How  can  I  curse
whom  God  hath  blessed  ] "

1.  It  cannot  he  done.  Adversaries
intend  ruin  ;  but  God  has  preceded  their
malice  hy  His  grcu^ious  designs  /  Human
passion  cannot  reverse  the  Divine  pur-
pose.

2.  God^s  "  thoughts  "  shall  stand.  He
thinks  of  us  with  love;  and  *' I  am
persuaded  nothing  shall  separate  us  from
the  love  of  God,"  &c.  He  intends  our
redemption :  and  "  whom  He  called,
them  justified,  glorified."  He  means,
we  shall  have  a  glad  future :  and
"Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."

Hints :  Thoughts  of  Peace.     We
must  wait  for  their  realisation  ;  for  the
Lord    delays  this,  but   does  not   forget
it.  — Naeqflshach,
502


"  Whereupon  is  our  hope  of  peace
based  ?

1.  Objectively  upon  this,  that  the
Lord  Himself  has  thoughts  of  peace  con-
cerning us.

2.  Subjectively  on  this,  that  we  (a)
call  upon  and  seek  the  Lord  with  all  our
hearts,  (b)  patiently  wait  for  a  time  of
hearing. " — Naegelshach,

"  The  moral  malady  of  man  is  two-
fold :  at  one  time  vain  conjidencey  then,
when  that  is  disappointed,  despair.  So
the  Jews  first  laughed  at  God's  threats,
confident  that  they  should  speedily
return  ;  then,  when  cast  down  from  that
confidence,  they  sank  into  inconsolable
desp  onde  n  cy . " — Jamieson,

Ver.  12.  "  Te  shall  go  and  pray  unto
Me,  and  I  will  hearken  unto  you.**
Fulfilled  Dan.  ix.  3,  <kc.  When  God
designs  mercy.  He  puts  it  into  the
hearts  of  His  people  to  pray  for  the
mercy  designed.  When  such  a  spirit
of  prayer  is  poured  out  it  is  a  sure  sign
of  coming  blessings.

Ver.  13.  Theme:  Good  news  for  Teub
Seekers.  Some  lament  they  have
been  seeking  God  for  months,  but  are
still  unable  to  praise  Him.  But  always
conclude  that  if  a  particular  promise  of
God  does  not  turn  out  true  to  yen,  there
is  something  in  you  to  hinder  it.

I.  The  quality  required  in  every
true  seeker.  It  is  wholekeartedness :
"  Search  for  Me  with  all  your  heart."  In
order  to  this  there  must  be

1.  An  undivided  object  in  the  seeker* s
mind.  *'  Ye  shall  seek  Me  and  find  Me
when  ye  shall  search  for  Me^*  <fec.  Yes ;
"  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find
Him  !  "  Shake  off  all  attention  to  self.
No  reservation  must  be  made  for  the
gratification  of  pride.

2.  "  With  all  thy  heart "  means  with
the  entire  faculties  of  our  being.  Rouse
thy  understanding.  Use  memory  and  con-
science.    Bring  thy  will  into  the  effort.

3.  It  mainly  signifies  aroused  energy.
Getting  out  of  that  dull,  sluggish,  in-
different spirit  which  is  so  common ;
being  resolute,  importunate.

II.  The  reasons  for  this  whole-
heartedness  being  required —


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XXIX.


1.  In  every  other  piu^suit,  where  the
object  is  at  all  worthy  of  a  man's  efforts,
wholeht  artediiess  is  required.

2.  The  danger  from  which  we  need
to  escape  is  so  great  that  the  utmost
earnestness  is  none  too  much.

3.  Look,  moreover,  at  the  greatness
of  the  mercy  thou  art  seeking.

4.  Everybody  else  is  in  earnest :  Satan,
to  ruin  thee  ;  Clirist,  to  save  thee,  (fee.

5.  You  have  been  wholehearted  enough
%n  the  ways  of  sin.

6.  How  can  there  be  anything  true
about  your  seeking  if  it  be  not  whole-
nearted  ?

7.  That  which  you  seek,  if  you  obtain
rt,  is  a  wholehearted  thing,

8.  The  believer's  obedience  is  whole-
tiearted  (Ps.  cxix.  69).

III.  Hindrances  to  a  wholehearted
anarch.

1.  Presumption.  *'  Because  God  wants
lis  saved,  we  need  not  make  much  effort."
Or,  "  Salvation  is  so  simple,  any  day
wilj  do  to  attend  to  it, "  (fee.

2.  Remaining  self-confident.  They
think  there  is  at  least  a  little  good  about
themselves.

3.  Despair.  Some  do  not  believe
you  can  be  forgiven,  (fee.

4.  The  conduct  of  Christian  prof cssor 8,

—G.  H.  Spurgeon,  A.D.  1876.

Compare  Homilies  on  chap.  xxiv.  7.

Ver.  14.  Gathering  the  exiles
BOME.  See  on  chap.  iv.  1 ;  xxiii.  3  ;
xxiv.  5.

Vers.  15-19.  Comp.  xxiv.  8-10;
xvii.  13,  (fee.

Ver.  22.  '*  Whom  Nebuchadnezzar
roasted  in  the  fire."

Daniel's  record  of  the  punishment
threatened  against  all  who  refused  to
"  worship  the  image  Nebuchadnezzar  the
king  set  up,"  is  that  "  whoso  falleth  not
down  and  worshippeth  shall  the  same
hour  be  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  burn-
ing fiery  furnace  '*  (Dan.  iii.  6).


"  Here  was  the  warrant  for  that  iniqui-
tous barbarity — the  burning  of  heretia.
It  originated  in  Babylon,  *  The  Lord
make  thee  like  Zedekiah  and  like  Ahab,
whom  the  king  of  Babylon  roasted  in
the  fire.'  It  is,  at  least,  impressive  to
recall  how  Home  used  this  same  hate-
ful and  hellish  weapon  of  vengeance,
and  that  too  for  the  same  godless  pur-
pose, namely,  to  subject  the  souls  of  men
to  her  idolatry,  burning  as  heretics
those  who  refused  to  worship  her  image  ;
thus  emphatically  identifying  herself
with  the  '  Babylon  *  whose  cruelty  and
sins  the  Apocalypse  portrays,  and
against  whom  the  most  solemn  curses
of  Heaven  are  pronounced." — Crowds
of  the  Bible  (pp.  55,  56),  by  Rev.  W.  B.
Jellie.

Yer.  24,  seq.  Jeremiah's  second
LETTER  TO  THE  EXILES.  The  messen-
gers (ver.  3)  of  the  first  letter  brought
back  a  strong  protest  from  the  false
prophet  Shemaiah  directed  to  Zepha-
niah,  condemnatory  of  Jeremiah  for
pronouncing  the  captivity  "long"  (ver.
28),  and  reproving  the  authorities  for
their  supineness  in  not  apprehending
him,  urging  Zephaniah  to  put  him  "  in
prison  and  in  the  stocks  "  (ver.  27).

Zephaniah,  instead  of  lending  him-
self to  be  the  instrument  of  their  rage,
showed  the  letter  to  Jeremiah  (ver.  29).

Whereupon  Jeremiah  again  wrote  the
exiles,  **  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  in  which
Shemaiah  was  denounced  as —

1.  Falsely  assuming  to  be  Jehovah! s
prophet  (ver.  31).

2.  Misleading  the  credulotLs  hopes  of
the  exiles,  "  causing  them  to  trust  in  a
lie."  For  which  crime  there  is  pro-
phesied—

1 .  Punishment  from  God  upon  himself
and  his  seed,

2.  Complete  extinction  of  his  family
line,  "  because  he  hath  taught  rebellion
against  the  Lord."  See  on  chap  xxviii.
16.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXIX.  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUQQESTIVE  EXTRACTS,


Ver.  7.  Prayer  for  one's  own
COUNTRY.  John  Knox  used  to  be  in
such  agony  for  the  deliverance  of  his
country   that  he   could   not  sleep.      He


had  a  place  in  his  garden  where  he  used
to  go  to  pray.  One  night  he  and
several  friends  were  praying  together,
and,  as  they  prayed,  Knox  spoke,  declar-

503


OHAP.  ZXX.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


ing  that  deliverance  bad  come.  He
explained  that  he  could  not  tell  what
had  happened,  but  he  felt  sure  that  in
some  way  their  prayers  had  been
answered.  And  the  next  news  informed
them  that  their  enemy,  Mary  Queen  of
Scotland,  was  dead.

At  one  time  during  the  Lutheran  re-
formation, soon  after  the  conference  of
Augsburg  in  1530,  when  the  Reformer's
cause  looked  mournful,  Melancthon,  with
Luther  and  other  divines,  met  to  con-
sult about  the  situation ;  and,  after
spending  some  time  in  prayer  to  God,
Melancthon  was  suddenly  called  out  of
the  room,  from  which  he  retired  heavily
depressed.  While  absent  he  saw  several
elders  of  the  reformed  churches  with
their  parishioners  and  families ;  and
many,  young  and  old,  were  in  prayer
for  the  triumph  of  their  cause.  He
re-entered  the  room  with  a  joyous  coun-
tenance, which  astonished  Luther,  who


inquired,  **  What  now  has  happened  to
you,  Philip,  that  you  are  become  so
cheerful  ?  '*  '*  Oh,  sirs,"  replied  Melan-
cthon, "let  us  not  be  discouraged,  for  I
have  seen  our  noble  protectors,  and  such
as,  I  will  venture  to  say,  will  prove
invincible  against  every  foe."  *'  And
pray,"  returned  Luther,  thrilling  with
surprise  and  pleasure,  "  who  and  where
are  these  powerful  heroes  ?  "  "  Oh,"
said  Melancthon,  *'they  are  the  wives  of
our  parishioners  and  their  little  children,
whose  prayers  I  have  just  witnessed —
prayers  which  I  am  satisfied  our  God
will  hear ;  for  as  our  Heavenly  Father
and  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
has  never  despised  our  supplications,  we
have  reason  to  trust  that  He  will  not  in
the  present  alarming  crisis."  The  event
proved  that  Melancthon  was  not  mis-
taken. God  heard  their  prayers, — Coa^t
"  Life  of  Melancthon,**


CHAPTER  XXX.

Cbitioal  and  BxioETiOAL  NoTEs. — Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Though  withont  a  date,
yet  the  probahihty  is  that  it  was  *^ written  in  a  hook*'  (see  ver.  2)  in  the  tenth  year  of  Zedekiah;
and  that  this  date  [given  at  the  head  of  chap,  xxxii.]  applies  to  the  four  chapters,  xxx.  to  xxxiii.
inclusive.  Bat  it  is  open  to  dispute  whether  the  prophecies  contained  in  chapters  xxx,  and
xxxi.  were  not  delivered  at  a  considerably  earlier  date.  Naegeisbach  dates  these  two  chapters
as  "the  oldest  part  of  the  whole  book"  of  Jeremiah;  and,  carefully  comparing  their  subject-
matter  witii  the  prophecies  of  chapters  iii.-vi.,  declares  that  their  correspondence,  "both  in
general  and  in  particular,"  fixes  them  as  belonging  to  "the  same  period  ;"  specially  pointing
out  that  the  absence  of  all  mention  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  use  of  the  early  indefinite  phrase,
"the  north  country"  (xxxi.  8),  "is  a  sure  sign  of  its  composition  before  the  fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim."  Vide  Chronological  Notes  on  chaps,  iii.  and  vii.  Also  same  references  for
Contemporary  Scriptures,  National  Affairs,  and  Contemporary  History.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  5.  "For  thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  "  rather,  "Surety  thus,"  &c.  "Of
fear  and  not  of  peace;**  of  "  fear  and  no  peace."

Vers.  10,  11.  "  Therefore  fear  thou  not**  to  end  of  ver.  11,  are  omitted  by  the  LXX.,  Hitzig,
Movers,  and  Kuenen,  and  regarded  as  an  interpolation  from  chap.  xlvi.  27,  28.

Ver.  11.  "  Correct  thee  in  measure ;"  "  in  justice,"  vide  x.  24.

Ver.  13.  " Bound  up :  healing  medicines"  The  verse,  more  correctly  punctuated  and  ren-
dered, may  read  thus :  "  None  undertakes  thy  case  to  heal  thee  ;  for  binding  thy  wounds,  healing-
plaister  thou  hast  none."

Ver.  16.  "Thine  affliction:"  thy  breach.  "For  the  multitude,"  &e. ;  rather,  "Because  of
the  greatness  of  thine  iniquity,  because  thy  sins  are  innumerable,"  &c.

Ver.  18.  "  Her  own  Tieap  :**  blH,  elevation,  mound,  specially  of  ruins ;  it  may  refer  to  the  city,

heap  of  ruins.     **And  the  palace  shall  remain:"  rather,  "he  inhabited,"     "After  the  mxinner
thereof;**  t.c,  with  suitable  splendour.

Ver.  21.  "  And  their  nobles  shaU  be  of  themsdves."  An  important  alteration  nece8sar3^  Both
"l^'HS  and  ^^D  refer  to  one  person,  and  is  here  described  as  "their  Glorious  One"  and  "their
Rider."  Further,  He  is  "to  draw  near  and  approach  unto  Me;"  a  phrase  distinctively  used  of
<me  in  the  priestly  office  (Exod.  xix.  22;  Lev.  xxi.  21).  Yet  more,  it  is  asked  as  in  wonder,
**  Who  is  this  that  engaged  his  heart  to  approach  unto  Me?"  and  should  read,  "Who  is  He  that
hath  pledged  His  heart,"  &c.  ;  i.e.,  that  liath  risked  His  life  in  the  daring  approach  ;  for  dealh
sealed  that  action  (Numb.  viii.  19).  Tlie  combination  of  these  qualities — "  Glorious  One  and
RuUr,**  priesUy  approach  to  God  ;  and  exposure  of  His  very  life  in  His  zeal  for  His  people  ; — all
this  points  to  none  other  than  the  Person  and  ministry  of  the  MsssrAB.

504


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  ZXX.


SURVEY  OF  CHAPTERS  XXX.  AND  XXXI.

The  Glorious  Future  of  the  Peoplk  of  Israel  at  the  End  of  Days.

I.  General  Theivie,  xxxi.  3.
11.  The  Deliverance  of  Entire  Israel,  xxx.  4-22.

1.  The  great  day  of  judgment  for  the  world  and  deliverance  of  Israel,

xxx.  4-11.

2.  The  turn  of  affairs ;  Jevovah  for  the  chastised  against  the  chastisers,

xxx.  12-17.

3.  The  consummation  of  salvation,  xxx.  18-22.

IIL  The  Special  Distribution  of  Salvation  to  the  two  Divisions  of  the
Nation,  xxxi.  1-22.

A,  EphrairrCs  share —

1.  The  decree  of  restoration,  xxxL  1-6.

2.  The  execution,  xxxi.  7-14.

3.  The  threefold  turn,  xxxi  15-22.

B.  Judali's  share —

The  blessing  of  the  sanctuary,  xxxi.  23-26.
IV.  The  Entire  Renewal,  xxxi.  27-40.

1.  The  new  life,  xxxi.  27-30.

2.  The  new  covenant,  xxxi.  31-40.  — Naegelsbach  in  Lange,


HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXX,


Ver.  2.  Theme:  God's  Message  in
Writing.  "  Write  thee  all  the  words
which  I  have  spoken  to  thee  in  a  hook.^*
Tliis  was  in  distinction  from  messages
in  speech — oral  prophecy.

I  Written  words  travel  farther
than  spoken.  Absent  ones — Israel  scat-
tered abroad — ivere  to  receive  it ;  as  well
as  Judah,  who  was  within  the  hearing
of  Jeremiah's  voice.  The  prophecy  could
not  reach  them  unless  copies  were  distri-
buted in  the  different  countries  wherein
they  were  dispersed.

II.  Written  words  are  preserved
better  than  spoken.

1.  In  their  exactness.  Not  a  jot  or
tittle  falls.  But  memory  might  let
some  items  fail  if  left  unwritten.

2.  In  their  entirety.  Hearers  only
gather  half,  or  fractions,  of  a  message.

3.  In  their  significance.  Words  of
vast  meaning  require  to  be  studied  to
see  all  their  suggestiveness  ;  and  for  this
the  "  book  "  is  best.     .

III.  Written  words  fulfil  a  more
enduring  ministry  than  spoken.  These
"  words  "  were —

1.  For  every  nation  and  age  :  having
a  spiritual  purport  and  universal  value.

2.  And  they  would,  if  written,  prove
a  monument  to  prophetic  veracity.     This


would  strengthen  the  faith  and  assure
the  hearts  of  God's  people  in  every
emergency.

IV.  Written  words  fill  a  sphere
which  spoken  cannot  reach.

1.  They  go  into  privacy^  for  medita-
tion.

2.  Into  scenes  of  banishment  and
affliction  and  sorroiv,  for  comfort.

3.  Into  despised  and  neglected  scenes,
where  none  would  expect  to  find  inte-
rested hearers,  carrying  light  and  hope
to  the  abandoned  and  despairing.

As  the  people  went  into  exile,  they
could  carry  tliese  words  of  Jeremiah
with  them  to  be  their  consolation  and
strength  amid  coming  distress  and  trial,

Ver.  3.  Theme:  Exiles  Restored.
Comp.  on  chap.  xvi.  15,  <kc.,  and  xxiv.  6.
Specially  see  SectionalTreatmentof  chap,
iii.  pp.  58  to  60  supra.   Also  see  on  iv.  31.

Vers.  5,  6.  Theme:  Consternation
OF  TH E  Guilty.  Comp.  Sectional  Homily
on  vi.  18-26,  pp.  120,  121,  and  on  vi.
22-26,  p.  133.  Also  Homily  on  chap.
xxii.  20-23,  Hastening  Desolations.

Ver.  7.  Theme:  The  Great  Day.
"Alas !  for  that  day  is  great,  so  that  none

505


CHAP.  XXZ.


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


is  like  it."    The  day  of  judgment  for  the
world  :  *'  none  like  it."    For  it  will  be —

I.  A  day  of  anxiety  and  terror  for  all
the  world.

II.  A  day  of  deliverance  from  distress
for  the  children  of  God.

III.  A  day  of  realisation  of  all  the
happiness  set  in  prospect  before  us, —
Naegelshach.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Deliverance  from
Troublk.  '*  It  is  even  the  time  of
Jacob's  trouble ;  but  he  shall  be  saved
out  of  it."

Bacon  has  magnificently  remarked  of
some  of  the  prophecies  of  Scripture
that  they  have  '*  springing  and  germi-
nant  accomplishment^  throughout  many
ages,  though  the  height  or  fulness  of
them  may  refer  to  some  one  age."  This
is  true  of  many  of  the  prophecies  con-
cerning the  Jews ;  for  though  many
of  them  were  fulfilled  in  their  ancient
captivities,  they  still  continue  to  be
fulfilled  in  their  present  dispersion.

But  what  is  true  of  the  prophecies  is
eminently  true  of  the  promises  of  Scrip-
ture— they  have  a  springing  and  germi-
nant  accomplishment.  They  are  framed
with  such  an  exquisite  knowledge  of
human  nature,  and  so  accurately  accord
with  the  principles  of  the  Divine  govern-
ment, which  are  the  same  in  every  age,
that  they  are  adapted  to  all  the  circum-
stances in  which  Christians  can  be
placed,  and  receive  a  distinct  fulfilment
in  the  history  of  each  individual  believer.
Til  us,  "  instead  of  the  fathers  are  the
children."  As  the  troubles  of  God^s
people  are  similar,  so  the  supports  they
enjoy  are  similar — they  are  identical —
and  the  deliverances  of  one  age  form  the
hope  and  consolation  of  all,  "  It  is
even  the  time"  &c

I.  It  is  a  part  of  God's  merciful  dis-
pensations that  they  endure  trouble,

II.  It  is  equally  so  that  they  should
be  supported  in  and  delivered  from  it.

I.  It  is  a  part  of  God's  merciful  dis-
pensations that  they  should  be  called
to  endure  trial.  Like  their  Lord,  they
must  expect  to  be  made  acquainted
with  grief ;  and  like  Jacob,  in  the  text,
they  must  expect  to  have  their  time  of
trouble.

506


It  is  a  part  of  God's  dispensation ;
for  "  trouble  does  not  spring  from  the
dust."  Is  there  evil  in  the  city  and  the
Lord  hath  not  done  it?  And  it  is  a
part  of  God's  merciful  dispensation,
however  oppositely  it  may  appear  to  us;
^^for  He  doth  not  afflict  willingly."

Every  season  of  life,  and  every  period
of  the  Christian's  life,  has  its  trouble.

1.  The  time  of  conversion  is  a  time  of
Jacob's  trouble.  He  goes  forth  weeping.
Sorrow  for  sin  is  real  sorrow ;  doubts
of  his  acceptance  and  fears  of  his  rejec-
tion often  fill  him  with  dejection  and
alarm,  and  he  says, "  Oh,  that  I  knew,'  &c.
But  there  is  a  balm  for  his  sorrow,  there
is  a  remedy  for  his  grief  :  "  He  shall
be  saved  out  of  it,"  by  looking  to  the
cross.  "  Tea,  he  wept ;  he  found  Him
in  Bethel"

2.  The  time  of  spiritual  dejection,  and
darkness,  and  disconsolation,  is  a  time
of  Jacob's  trouble.  This  is  sometimes
produced  by  consciousness  of  sin,  with-
out sufficient  apprehension  of  the  power
and  willingness  of  Christ  to  save,  some-
times by  distrust,  sometimes  by  neglect
of  duties,  sometimes  by  a  constitutional
tendency  to  gloom  and  despondency ;
but,  from  whatever  cause  arising,  it  is
often  difficult  to  bear.  David  found  it
so  when  he  said,  **  Hath  God  forgotten  ?  **
&c.  ;  and  Hezekiah  when  he  said,  "  /
shall  go  softly  all  my  years;"  and  Daniel
when  he  ate  no  pleasant  bread;  and
Jonah  when  he  said,  *'  /  avi  cast  out"
yet,  "  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it ; "  "  /
have  seen  his  ways  and  will  heal ;  "  "  He
that  tvalketh  in  darkness,"  <fec.

3.  The  time  of  worldly  perplexities
and  disappointments — cares,  anxieties,
vexations,  reproaches,  are  the  Christian's
lot  here  ;  losses  in  business,  domestic
grievances,  straitened  circumstances,
actual  poverty,  are  the  means  which
God  employs  to  teach  the  Christian  this
is  not  his  rest,  to  draw  off  his  mind
from  the  vanity  of  life,  and  to  teach  him
that  his  final  hope  must  be  in  God.
What  was  true  of  Israel  is  true  of  us  :
"  God  led  them  by  the  right  way"  We
know  it  was  not  the  shortest  way,  nor
the  smoothest,  but  it  was  the  right  way.
And  God  leads  His  people  still  in  those
paths  best  adapted  to  try  character,  to


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


C&AP.  111.


develop  principle,  to  promote  sanctity
of  spirit  and  spirituality  of  mind.  '*  By
these  things"  says  Hezekiah,  '^men  livej
and  in  all  these  things  are  the  life."
Every  one  has  his  trial  fitted  to  his  state
of  mind.

(a.)  Some  have  a  resolute,  independ-
ent, self-willed  spirit.  God  suffers  them
to  be  wounded  with  reproach,  to  suffer
with  the  scourge  of  tongues,  and  chastens
them  with  the  rod  of  men ;  or  they
are  wasted  with  disease  and  visited
with  strong  pain.

(6.)  Some  are  ambitious,  and  aspiring,
and  sanguine,  and  given  to  enterprise  ;
but  as  they  climb,  so  they  fall.  God
unravels  their  schemes,  breaks  up  their
plots  and  purposes,  advances  them  to
poverty,  and  feeds  them  with  the  bread
of  tears.  Why  all  this  ?  Was  it  to  ruin
them  ?    No ;  but  to  save  them  from  ruin.

(c.)  Others  fix  their  affections  too
deeply  upon  the  creature,  upon  the
smile  of  friends,  the  love  of  parents,
the  endearments  of  family  connections.
God  removes  these  to  bring  them  nearer
to  Himself.  They  are  afflicted  in  the
creature,  and  the  time  of  their  trouble
is  the  time  in  which  they  witness  the
sorrows  of  tliose  they  love.

4.  The  time  of  death  is  the  time  of
Jacob's  trouble.

n  Whatever  their  calamity,  they
shall  be  supported  in  it,  carried
through  it,  delivered  from  it.  They
have  always  a  Resource  ;  the  Arm  that
upholds  the  universe  upholds  them ;  the
Wisdom  that  ordains  the  trial  guides
and  guards  them  through  it.  The  irre-
ligious has  no  refuge,  no  tower,  but
" the  name  of  the  Lord  is"  <kc.  Every
creature  hath  a  retiring-place :  the
conies  the  rocks,  the  lion  his  den  ;  the
foxes  have  holes  and  the  birds  nests,
but  the  wicked  no  hiding-place.

God  is  your  friend.  His  character  is
your  hope ;  His  promises  your  security  ;
His  heaviest  chastisements  are  your  en-
couragements.

1.  What  He  has  »aid  to  others  Hie  says
to  you  :  **  Fear  not,  Ahram;  "  "  /  am
God  all-sufficient ; "  " / wHl  not  leave"

2.  What  He  has  done  for  others  He
will  do  for  you.

3.  What  He  has  already  done  for  you


and  yours  should  warrant  hope  :  "  de-
livered in  six  troubles." — Bev,  8.
Thodey,  A.D.  1824.

On  verse  7.  For  similar  themes^  see
on  chap.  xvii.  1 7,  "  TJie  Soul's  Hope  in
the  Time  of  Terror  ;  "  and  chap,  xxiii.  6,
"  A  Bright  Era  for  Mankind"

Comments —

The  partial  deliverance  at  the  downfall
of  Babylon  prefigures  the  final  and
complete  deliverance  of  Israel,  literal  and
spiritual,  at  the  downfall  of  mystical
Babylon  (Rev.  rviii.  19). — Jamieton.

The  day  of  restoration  is  contrasted
with  the  day  of  destruction.  *'  In  that
day  "  the  yoke  of  Babylon,  which  Jere-
miah had  symbolised  by  his  own  act,  at
God's  command  (xxviii.  2-12),  will  be
broken  from  the  neck  of  Judah  ;  and  this
phrase,  "  that  day,"  doubtless,  is  to  be
extended,  in  a  larger  sense,  to  the  day  of
Christ's  coming,  when  all  Israel  would
be  delivered  from  a  worse  yoke  than
that  of  Babylon.  Comp.  Isa.  x.  27 ;
Ezek.  xxxiv.  27. — Wordsworth,

Vers.  8, 9.  Theme:  Slavery  Exchanged
FOR  Service.  **  Strangers  shall  no  more
hold  him  in  servitude  (Henderson's
rendering),  but  they  shall  serve  the  Lord
their  God  and  David  their  king,  whom  I
will  raise  up  unto  them."

I.  Tyranny  rules  over  men  with
grievous  severity.  "Yoke "and  "  bonds  "
are  symbols  of  despotic  oppression.

1.  National  and  political  despotism;  its
iron-handed  andiron-hearted  government

2.  Ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  despo-
tism; its  usurpation  of  all  natural  relation-
ships, social  ties,  and  religious  liberties.

Il/^ote. — The  shameful  selfishness  which.
prompts  despotism,  *'  serve  themselves  of
him  ; "  for  greed  of  power,  delight  in
securing  abject  submission,  spoliation
of  possessions,  <fec,,  are  the  lust  of  all
tyrants  over  the  lives  or  souls  of  men.

XL  Liberty  unbridled  will  prove  no
special  advantage  even  to  its  possessor.
**  If  all  '*  yokes  "  are  gone  and  "  bonds  "
broken  from  men,  without  any  healthful
control  being  substituted,  men  would
become  furious,  victims  of  their  own
passions  and  self-wilL

I.  Liberty fromtyranny  is  an  advantage

607


CM  A  I'.  XX.t.


ffOMlLETW  COMMBNTAnY:  JEkEUtAtt.


only  whtn  tha  control  of  God  is  substituted
and  accepted-  in  its  stead,  e.g.^  "  They
shall  serve  the  Lord  their  God,"  &c.

2.  This  subjection  to  God  is  better  and
safer  than  all  human  government  and
rule.  It  is  a  guarantee  of  good  when
God  becomes  our  Governor,  to  rule  us
and  care  for  our  safety.

III.  Divine  rule  is  exercised  through
the  kingship  of  Christ.  ''  Serve  the
Lord  their  God  and  David  their  king."

1.  God  will  not  govern  otherwise  tJian  by
His  Son.  Rejecting  Him  as  '*  king," —
Him  whom  God  has  set  over  us,  and
by  whom  God  would  have  us  governed —
we  shall  be  rejected  by  God.  It  is  not
God's  intention  to  rule  us  directly,
without  the  mediation  of  His  Son.  We
must  therefore  obey  Christ,  and  thus
serve  God.

2.  It  is  in  the  sway  of  Jesus  that  this
promise  is  fulfilled.  David  was  dead
when  Jeremiah  wrote,  he  never  lived
again  to  rule,  yet  God  promised  to  per-
petuate David's  throne  ;  but  no  king
ever  rose  subsequent  to  this  prophecy  to
rule  the  nation.  Zerubbabel  only  held
a  fleeting  and  precarious  dignity ;  and
only  Christ  has  realised  and  fulfilled
this  promise.  But  Jesus  does  rule — "  the
King  of  saints " — and  blessed  are  they
that  serve  Him.

IV.  All  our  gracious  liberty  in
Christ  must  be  traced  to  God.  "Whom
I  will  raise  up  unto  them."

1.  We  must  rejoice  in  Christ's  king-
ship as  God's  gift  of  grace  to  us.

2.  Christ,  and  all  blessings  which  flow
to  us  in  Him,  must  be  viewed  as  the
outflow  of  God's  great  goodness  to  us.
"  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave
His  only-begotten  Son."

Ver.  10.  Theme :  Recovery  of  Lost
Israel.  See  Homilies  indicated  under
ver.  3  of  this  chapter ;  also  see  Topic,
Recovery  of  the  Lost  Ten  Tribes^  chap,
xxxiii.  8,  on  pp.  458,  459.

On  "  He  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest^
and  be  quiet,**  see  Homily  on  chap,  zxiii.
1-4.

Ver.  11.    Theme:  Nations    Oblite-
BATED ;  Israel  Prbsrved.  "A  full  end  of
ftll  nations,  yet  not  a  full  end  of  thee."
508


We  have  here  ocular  proof  of  pro
phecy  accomplished  in  an  instance  with-
out parallel.  It  was  repeatedly  foretold,
both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,
that,  for  the  rejection  and  murder  of
their  Messiah,  the  Jews  should  be  dis-
persed into  all  the  countries ;  yet  that
they  should  not  be  lost  and  swallowed
up  among  their  conquerors,  but  should
still  subsist,  to  latest  times,  a  distinct
people.  By  Jeremiah  God  declared  "  He
would  make  an  end  of  all  nations,"  their
oppressors,  "but  He  would  not  make
an  end  of  them."  It  cannot  be  said
this  prediction  was  written  since  the
event ;  and  certainly  an  occurrence  more
singular,  or  improbable,  could  not  have
been  predicted.  In  the  course  of  human
aflairs,  who  hath  heard  such  a  thing?
Yet  so  it  is.  The  mighty  monarchies  of
Assyria,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome  are
vanished  like  the  shadows  of  the  evening,
or  the  phantoms  of  the  night.  Theii
places  know  them  no  more.  Nothing
remains  of  them  but  their  names.  Whilst
this  little  despised  people  j8tr!Lugelysec\iref
without  a  friend  or  protector,  amidst  the
wreck  of  empires,  oppressed,  persecuted,
harassed  always,  by  edict  and  execu-
tioners, by  murders  and  massacres,  have
outlived  the  very  ruins  of  them  all.  "Ex-
cept ye  see  signs  and  wonders  ye  will
not  believe."  Behold,  then,  a  sign  and
wonder  :  the  accomplishment  of  prophecy
is  a  standing  miracle.  Contemplate  the
sight  as  it  deserves,  and  be  not  faithless
but  believing. — Bishop  Home.

"  Not  make  a  full  end  op  XHEa"
See  on  chap.  iv.  27  ;  v.  18.

Also  for  Theme:  Lenient  Correc-
tion :  **  I  will  correct  thee  in  measure,"
<fec.     See  chap.  x.  24.

Vers.  12-15.  Theme :  Faithless
Healers  and  Vain  Remedies.     On —

*^ Bruise  incurable,*'  see  viii.  22  ;  also
xvii.  9.

"  Wound  is  grievous,  see  x.  19  ;  xiv.
17  ;  XV.  18.

^^  No  healing,'*  see  vi.  14;  viii.  II;
XV.  18.

" All  thy  lovers  have  forgotten  thee,*
see  iii,  1  ;  iv.  30 ;  xxii.  20,  22 ;  xxvii.
3.

"  Thy  sins  are  increased^**  see  v.  d.


UOMlLEna  COMMENTARY:  JEMMUSi,


CtiAP.  ill.


L  Helpless  :  "Incurable;"  "  wounds
grievous,''  ver.  12.

IL  Hopeless  ;  "  None  to  plead; "  "  no
healing  medicines,"  ver.  13.

III.  Deserted  by  man :  '*  Lovers  have
forgotten  thee  ;  seek  thee  not/'  ver.  14.

IV.  Smitten  by  God:  **  Wounded
thee ;  "  "  chastised  thee,"  ver,  14.

V.  Justly  suffering :  "  For  the  mul-
titude of  thine  iniquity  ;  because  thy
sins  are  increased,"  ver.  14.

VI.  Rejected  outcries  :  "  Why  criest
thou,"  (fee,  ver.  15.

VII.  Sins'  woes:  "Because  sins — 1
have  done  these  things  unto  thee."

VIII.  Remedy  implied  :  Cease  sins
and  escape  their  doom.

Ver.  13.  Thime :  Healing  Medi-
cines. "  Thou  hast  no  healing  medi-
cines." Doctors  abound  v«rho  undertake
the  cure  of  souls  ;  but  they  heal  not
their  maladies.  "  Ye  are  physicians  of
no  value."

L  There  are  healing  medicines
adapted  to  heal  all  the  maladies  of  the
sin-stricken  soul.  Though  "  thou  hast
them  not"  yet  such  there  are !

1.  They  are  found  in  Christ  '*  Wis-
dom, righteousness,  sanctification,  and
redemption."

2.  There  are  none  besides.  Though
professed  spiritual  healers  offer  other
remedies,  they  have  '*  no  healing  medi-
cines," if  they  offer  aught  else  but  what
the  Gospel  offers.

n.  There  are  cruel  delusions  prac-
tised. By  priests  and  ministers  of  the
sanctuary,  who  flatter  themselves  that
they  have  effected  a  cure,  and  deceive
their  patients,  ''  They  have  healed  the
hurt  of  the  daughter  of  My  people
slightly,  saying,  Peace,  peace,  when  there
is  no  peace."    Who  are  these  1 —

1.  Teachers  of  the  confessional  abo-
minations.

2.  Teachers  of  the  baptismal  regenera-
tion fallacies.

3.  Those  who  administer  the  Lord^s
Supper  to  the  dying  as  a  means  of  peace
with  God.

4.  Preachers  of  self-reliance  and  self-
Hghteousness  for  salvation.

It  is  one  thing  to  deaden  a  pain,
another  to  heal  a  wound  1


III.  For  mourners  over  sin  there  is
efficient  healing.  On  no  other  truth
can  there  be  explained —

1.  2%e  angels*  joy  over  penitent
sinners.

2.  The  Saviour* s  gladness  in  reclaim-
ing the  guilty.

3.  The  remonstrances  of  Scripture  over
the  unhealed  (chap.  viii.  22).

4.  The  assurance  of  the  blessedness
following  true  sorrow,  "  Blessed  are
they  that  weep,  for  they  shall  be  com-
forted."

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Ip  God*s  People
Suffer,  shall  His  Foes  Escape  )
*'  Therefore  all  that  devour  thee  shall
be  devoured  ;  and  all  thine  adversaries,
every  one  of  them,  shall  go  into  cap
tivity,"  <kc.

I.  Though  evil  men  seem  now  to  pre-
vail against  Israel^  their  day  of  woe  is
coming.

II.  Though  God  may  use  our  adver-
saries for  our  chastisement  because  we  sin^
they  shall  bear  the  iniquity  and  punish-
ment of  their  deeds.

IIL  Though  for  a  while  the  judgment
of  God  spares  the  wicked  while  afflicting
the  righteous,  yet  the  very  afflictions  of
His  people  are  a  prophecy  and  gua-
rantee that  the  heavier  woes  pro-
nounced against  the  guilty  will  in  due
time  fall  on  them.

IV.  Though  mercy  rules  the  afflictions
of  God^s  people,  softening  their  sorrows,
and  working  all  for  their  good,  judgment
without  mercy  shall  sweep  down  on
"  every  one  "  of  God's  and  His  people's
adversaries.

V.  Though  from  the  "  devourer,"  the
^^  captivity,"  and  the  ^^  spoil, '^  there  will
be  sure  escape  for  banished  Israel,  yet
from  the  doom  coming  upon  the  foes
of  God  and  Israel  there  shall  be  no
alleviation  or  escape.

Ver.  19.  Theme:  How  God  Regards
TBE  Treatment  Shown  to  the  Jews.
**  This  is  Zion,  whom  no  man  seeketh
after."

Was  man  justified  in  despising  them,
because  they  were  under  chastisements
from  an  offended  Godt  Thongl)  the  .Jews
were  the  authors  of  their  own    misery,

609


CHaI".  ixX.


noMliEflC  COMMENfAkt:  jEkEMtAB.


the  contempt  poured  upon  them  by  their
adversaries  He  wiil  [)miisli.

L  What  is  the  treatment  almost
universally  shown  to  the  Jewish
people  ?  Tlie  liistoiic  view  of  the  con-
duct of  different  nations  specially  since
their  dispersion  by  the  Romans.

Cruelties  inflicted  upon  them  by
different  potentates  of  Europe,  not  ex-
cepting those  of  our  own  country.  Cite,
in  example,  the  clamour  raised  through-
out our  land  against  the  Act  for  removing
Jewish  disabilities.  Nor  is  this  civic
intolerance  all :  their  religious  interests
are  disregarded  and  neglected.

The  serious  fact  is,  not  that  we  per-
secute them,  or  even  neglect  them,  but
this — the  self-vindication  which  we  cherish
in  the  midst  of  this  neglect,  and  the
eagerness  with  which  we  catch  at  any-
thing by  which  we  may  Justify  that
neglect.

II.  The  light  in  which  such  conduct
is  viewed  by  God.  This  contempt  of
others  leads  Him  here  to  declare,  by  way
of  recompense,  that  He  would  restore  to
His  favour  the  people  so  contemned.

1.  Mark  the  inhumanity  of  it.  Jews,
no  less  than  ourselves,  have  immortal
souls  ;  yet  we  make  no  effort  for  their
salvation  !  Note  Deut  xxiii.  3,  4.
Yet  we  hold  from  them  the  Bread  of
Life,  (fee.

2.  The  injustice  of  it.  Gospel  to  be
preached  to  "  every  creature,"  beginning
at  Jerusalem  (see  Rom.  xl  30,  31).  We
are  debtors  to  them  (Rom.  xv.  26,  27).

3.  The  ingratitude  of  it.  Jews — the
Apostles — laboured  for  Gentiles ;  should
not  we,  in  return,  for  them  ?  (Phil,  ii,
17,  18.)

4.  The  imj)iety  of  it.  Christ  became
**  a  curse  "  for  us ;  surely  it  is  our  reason-
able service  to  do  all  we  can  for  His
glory.     Alas  !     Ezek.  xxxiv.  6.

III.  The  explanation  of  this  sinful
negligence  towards  the  Jews.

1.  Ignorance  of  the  prophetic  writings
which  so  generally  prevails.

2,  Indifference  to  all  spiritual  interests
which  prevails — even  about  your  own
souls.  Too  many  of  us  have  never
sought  salvation  for  ourselves;  how,  then,
be  concerned  for  others  ?  —  Rev.  C.
Siineon,  M.A.

610


See  Comments,  <fec.,  on  chap.  xv.  4,  5.

Theme  :  Healing  Promised.

i.  Statement  of  our  case  :  "  The  whole
head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint ;
there  is  no  soundness  in  us,"  <fec.  (Isa.
i.  5).

ii.  Prayer  of  the  consciously  sick:
*'  Lord,  be  merciful  unto  me,  heal  my
soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  Thee"
(Ps.  xli.  4).

iii.  Promise  from  God :  **  I  will  restore
health  unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of
thy  wounds''  (Jer.  xxx.  17).

Believe  in  your  sickness.  Believe  in
the  Divine  Physician.  Believe  in  His  pro-
mise,  and  pray.


Vers.  18-20.  Zion  Rbpeoplbd.
on  chap.  xvii.  25,  26.


See


Ver.  21.  Theme:  Iseael's  OWN  Glo-
Bious  King.     See  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse.

The  words  should  read :  "  And  his
Glorious  One  shall  spring  from  himself
[Israel];  and  his  Ruler  shall  go  forth  from
his  midst ;  and  I  will  cause  Him  to  draw
near,  and  He  shall  approach  unto  Me  ;
for  Who  is  this  that  hath  pledged  Hig
heart  to  draw  near  unto  Me  ?  "

1.  This  verse  emphatically  repudiates
a  foreign  and  alien  kingship  ;  for,  after
the  return  from  exile,  Israel's  Glorious
Ruler  is  to  be  a  native  Prince  springing
^^from  the  midst "  of  the  people  them-
selves.

2.  Next,  Jehovah  will  cause  Him  to
draw  near,  i.e.,  to  Himself ;  in  like
sacred  access  to  that  exclusively  per-
mitted to  consecrated  priests  in  the  ful-
filment of  their  solemn  office.  So  that
He  is  to  fulfil  a  Sacred  Office  us  well  as
to  possess  personal  Royalty.

3.  Then,  He  pledges  I/is  very  life  i/i
approaching  God,  i.e.,  He  will  carry
His  life.  His  *'heart,"  into  the  efi'urt  of
mediation  with  God.  And  Messiah  alone
has  made  His  life  res[ionsible  as  a
Surety  (Heb.  vii  22,  ix.  1 1-15),  in  order
to  gain  access,  not  only  for  Himself,  but
for  us  to  God.  "  Heart  "  is  here  put
for  "  life,"  in  order  to  express  the
courage,  the  intense  purpose  required,  to
undertake  so  tremendous  a  suretyship.
This  question  therefore  implies  admira-


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XXt.


tion,  astonishment  at  One  being  found
ready  and  competent  for  tlie  task.

I.  In  origin:  Messiah's  humanity,
and  His  affiliation  with  us.

He  springs  from  '*  our  midst;"  is  a
native,  born  of  us  and  amongst  us.

II.  In  Person:  Messiah's  dignity,
and  His  superiority  over  us.

He  is  indeed  0/ Israel,  but  far  tran-
scends man  in  His  own  natural  majesty.
He  is  Israel's  "  Glorious  One."  Standing
alone  in  His  dignity ;  the  Crown  of  hu-
manity ;  the  '*  One  "  who  is  *'  Glorious."

III.  In  office:  Messiah's  royalty,
and  His  priesthood  for  us.

He  is  our  **  Ruler ;  "  and  He  **  draws
near  "  God  as  a  priest.

IV.  In  suretyship  :  Messiah's  self-de-
votion ;  His  approach  to  God  for  us.

And  who  but  He ;  who,  in  nature
Divine,  "  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be
equal  with  God,"  yet  made  Himself  of
no  reputation,  could  possess  ^^  the  heart"
—of  courage,  consecration,  and  love —
to  approach  God  as  man's  Representative
and  Redeemer  f

Comments —

Lowth  says :  **  The  Hebrew  word
is  in  the  singular  number,  and  liter-
ally signifies  their  "  Mighty  One,"  a
title  given  to  God  Himself  (Ps.  xciii.
4),  and  to  a  mighty  Angel  (Isa.  x.  34),
probably  the  Word,  or  Son  of  God,
He  shall  have  near  attendance  upon  Me
(*  I  will  cause  Him  to  draw  near ') ;  for  I
will  make  Him  a  Priest  to  Me  as  well
as  a  King,  according  to  the  prophecy
concerning  the  Messiah  (Ps.  ex.  4).  *  For
who  is  this,*  <kc., — who  is  there  but  the
Messiah  that  is  so  entirely  devoted  to
My  service  f  See  Ps.  xl.  8  ;  John  iv.
34,  xiv.  31."

Henderson  remarks  :  *'  Who  this  illus-
trious Governor  is,  has  been  disputed.
Michaelis  and  Scholz  think  it  may  have
been  John  Hyrcanus;  Grotius  and
others,  Zerubbabel.  But  with  neither
of  these  will  the  predicates  properly
agree.  That  the  person  spoken  of  was
to  be  a  prieit  is  generally  allowed ;  but
though  Hyrcanus  was  hereditarily  high-
priest  and  ruler,  yet  there  was  nothing
80  peculiar  about  him  or  his  office  to
CftU  for  the  declaration  that  he  should


*  approach  unto  *  Jehovah  ;  for  this  all
his  predecessors  had  done  in  the  w;iy
which  he  did  ;  or  to  warrant  the  pointed
and  emphatic  interrogatory,  *  Buttvho  is
he  ? '  (fee.  The  question  is  put  as  some-
thing altogether  unique.  Such  an  ap-
proach had  never  been  made  before."

Diedrich  (in  Lange) ;  "  This  Church
of  God  will  own  a  Prince  ^  from  its
midst' — Jesus,  of  our  flesh  and  blood
through   the   Virgin    Mary.      And  He

*  approaches  God*  as  no  other  can ;  for
He  is  God's  image,  God's  Son ;  and  at
the  same  time  the  perfect,  holy  in  all
His  sufferings,  the  only  obedient  Son  of
man.  This  King  is  Mediator  and  Re-
conciler with  God ;  He  is  also  High-
Priest,  and  fulfilled  all  righteousness,
as  was  necessary  for  our  propitiation.
What  glory  to  have  such  a  King,  who
brings  us  nigh  to  God  1  And  this  is
our  glory,"

Ver.  21.  Theme :  Engaging  the
Heart  in  Religious  Service.  "  For
who  is  this  that  engaged  his  heart  to
approach  unto  Me,  saith  the  Lord  1 "

The  promises  of  God  in  times  past
become  the  encouragement  of  the  Church
in  times  to  come.

Because  these  promises  are  ratified  in
Christ.     **  Yea,  and  Amen."

Because  the  dispensations  of  God
proceed  upon  fixed  and  settled  prin-
ciples.

The  promises  here  respect  recovery
from  Babylon.

The  immediate  reference  of  the  text
may  be  to  Nehemiah.

I.  The  nature  of  religion  described.

II.  The  motives  that  it  suggested.

I  The  nature  and  requisites  of  re-
ligion described.

*'  Engaging  the  heart  towards  God."
Without  this  all  profession  is  false  and
all  worship  vain.

It  supposes  the  free  choice  of  God's
service,  and  a  full  and  heartfelt  con-
secration to  it.      God's  service  chosen —

i.  Deliberately^  without  rashness.  "  If
the  Lord  be  God,  serve  Him  ;"  "As  for
me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the
Lord  ;  "  "  Choose  ye  this  day."

God  will  not  accept  a  blind   faith,

Oil


en  \r.  xxT.


no  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


Aaron  was  to  light  the  lamps  h^f-Te  he
offered  incense.  Solomon  first  pre-
scribes, "  Know  thou  the  God  of  thy
fathers"  and  then  adds,  ^^ Serve  llim."
God  made  the  heart  that  He  might
dwell  in  it.

ii.  Sincerely,  without  hypocrisy.  Serve
Him  with  a  perfect  heart ;  because  you
choose  such  a  Master  as  is  at  once  the
Heart-Maker  and  the  Heart- Searcher.
Now  therefore,  as  Joshua  tells  Israel,
*'  Fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  Him  in  sin-
cerity and  truth.^^  As  if  he  had  said,
If  you  intend  to  serve  Him,  you  must
serve  Him  in  uprightness,  or  you  do  not
serve  Him  at  all.  God  requires  good
aims  as  well  as  good  actions  :  and  He
abhors  that  service,  though  ever  so
costly,  if  the  aim  of  him  who  serves
Him  be  not  good.  This  is  the  diflfer-
ence  between  the  service  of  God  and  of
man.  Man  can  but  see  the  outside,  and
can  only  punish  outward  disobedience
and  defects ;  but  God  unveils  motive.
**Ood  is  a  spirit.'*

iii.  Cheerfully,  without  constraint
Serve  the  Lord  with  **  gladness."  A
bad  omen  when  the  victim  struggled
at  the  altar.  God  loves  a  cheerful  giver
and  a  cheerful  worshipper  (2  Chron.
XV.  U).

iv.  Constantly,  without  end.  In  all
things^  in  all  places;  in  private  as  in
public ;  in  all  times,  prosperity  and  ad-
versity, life  and  death ;  and  with  all
faculties.  As  the  Dutch  minister  said
to  (Ecolampadius,  Let  God  speak,  and
tlwugh  we  had  six  hundred  necks,  yet  we
will  make  them  all  stoop  in  obedience  to
Him.

II.  Motives  to  induce  this  choice
of  God's  service.

L  From  God's  rightful  claim  to  it.
God  made  man  to  serve  Him  and  to
seek  his  own  happiness  in  God's  ser-
vice ;  his  own  honour  in  God's  glory.
We  are  His  workmanship,  and  it  be-
comes us  to  improve  our  gifts  and  capa-
cities to  Him  from  whom  we  receive
them,  as  all  rivers  return  to  the  ocean
"whence  they  come.  As  Aulius  Fulvius
said  to  his  son,  when  he  found  him  in
conspiracy  with  Catiline,  You  were  not
born  for  Catiline,  but  for  your  country
^^[Non  ego  te  Catitince  genui,sed patriae'*^.


So  God  says,  /  did  not  give  thee  soul  and
body  to  serve  the  world  and  sin,  but  to
serve  Me  withal.

Consider  the  infinite  excellences  which
reside  in  God,  as  a  motive  to  His  service.
The  lustre  of  His  perfections  fills  heaven
and  earth.

Consider  the  rich  mercies  you  re-
ceive. So  many  mercies,  so  many  mo-
tives. In  creation,  in  providence,  in
redemption.  We  are  therefore  *'  de-
livered out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies,
that  we  should  serve  Him  withoict  fear."
God  makes  tlie  deliverance  from  Egypt
a  motive  for  keeping  the  ten  command-
ments :  **  /  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  who
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,
therefore  thou  shalt  keep  holy  the  Sab-
bath." Much  more  may  we  argue  from
redemption  :  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."

*'  Render  to  Ccesar  the  things  that  are
Coesars,  and  to  God  the  things  that  are
God*s.'*  If  service  be  not  due,  do  not
give  it  Him ;  but  if  it  be,  it  is  sacrilege
to  withhold  it.

ii.  From  His  grcwious  acceptance  of
it.  "  Who  is  willing  ? "  He  speaks
with  wonder  and  delight,  shewing
that  God  notices  all  hearts.  There
is  no  service  any  man  does  or  desires
to  do,  but  God  marks  and  registers
it.  God  noticed  Abraham's  willing-
ness to  offer  Isaaa  Christ  noticed
every  circumstance  connected  with
Mary's  anointing  His  head  and  washing
His  feet.  God  holds  up  the  obedience  of
Job  to  Satan  :  "  Hast  thou  considered  ?  "

iii.  From  happiness  consequeiit  upon
it,  "  His  service  perfect  freedom."  "A
day  in  Thy  courts."  "  Ethiopian  went
his  way,"  <fec.  God's  service  is  a  type  of
heaven.  We  have  communion  with  the
"  God  of  all  consolation" — with  the
Spirit,  the  Comforter,

God  alone  can  fill  the  heart.  In  His
service  you  have  encouraging  promises,
examples,  providences,  experiences,  pros-
pects,

iv.  From  consequences  of  not  serving
Him  (vers.  23,  24).

Ill  Hints  of  direction.

i.  To  those  tvho  have  engaged  their
hearts  to  God.      Walk  worthy.

Study  to  attain  a  temper  of  mind
more  and  niore  spiritual,


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XXX.


Strictly  guard  the  avenues  of  the
inward  man.

Bear  yourself  as  the  inhabitant  of  a
better  country.

Comprehend  the  entire  frame  of  that
holy  rectitude  in  which  the  image  of
God  consists.

Converse  with  the  Word  of  God.
Occupy  your  thoughts  with  God.

"Delight  tiiyself  in  Him."

ii.  To  those  who  have  not.  Take  care
you  do  not  carry  the  controversy  into
another  world.

By  how  much  nature  revolts,  by  so
much  seek  grace.

Ver.  22.  "  Ye  shall  be  My  'people^  and
Iwill  be  your  God.^^  Comp.  chap.  xxiv.  7.

Vers.  23,  24.  "  The  whirlwind  of  the
Lord."  Comp.  chap,  xxiii.  19,  29,  and
XXV.  32.

Ver.  24.  Theme:  Consideration.
**  In  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it"

After  denouncing  the  Lord's  judgments
upon  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  and
looking  l^eyond  to  a  time  of  restoration
and  peace,  Jeremiah  rebukes  their  present
carelessness  and  indifference  by  assuring
them  that,  in  that  better  time  to  come,
they  will  look  back  with  very  different
feelings  upon  their  present  conduct  as  a
nation.

I.  There  comes  a  closing  period  of  a
course  of  action  or  conduct,  when  it  can
all  be  looked  back  upon,  and  the  effects
are  seen  and  the  results  experienced.

The  great  practical  point  is  to  urge
upon  us —

1.  The  necessity  of  closely  examining
cur  own  heart  and  life,  with  especial
reference  to  the  light  in  which  they  will
appear  even  to  ourselves  hereafter.     For

2.  The  crisis  wUl  a7-rive  when  we
shall  reap  that  which  we  have  sown  ;  or,
above  all,  when  we  shall  come  to  cast  (me
long  look  behind,  as  our  feet  totter  on
the  borders  of  the  grave.

II.  It  may  seem  difficult  thus,  by  due
consideration,  to  realise  at  one  time  of
life,  or  at  one  station  in  the  course  of
action,  the  point  of  view  which  seems  to
belong  to  another.  But  the  attainment
ig  not  difficult.

1.  It  is,  in  fact,  easy  to  those  who  wish


for  it  and  strive  for  it.     It  is  simply  the
true  point  of  view.

2.  Our  case  would  be  hard  if  the
Lord  had  not  provided  for  our  guidance
into  all  truth,  not  only  of  doctrine,  but  of
life  and  conduct,  at  every  period  of  our
course.

3.  We  have  in  the  Scriptures  a  sure
and  certain  light  unto  our  path ;  and  he
who  has  been  careful  to  store  his  mind
with  its  holy  teachings,  will  never  be  at
a  loss  to  decide  upon  his  conduct,  or
upon  any  course  of  conduct  he  contem
plates.

4.  If  a  man  hears  these  words,  whether,
at  the  time,  he  heeds  them  or  not,  re-
ceives them  or  not,  they  fail  not  to  Judge
him  in  his  own  consciousness  (John  xil
48),  not  only  at  the  last  day,  but  in
his  "  latter  days  " — those  great  days  of
decision.

III.  Such  a  standard  of  invincible
truth  should  be  erected  in  the  mind,
constraining  man  to  become  his  own
judge,  and  enabling  him  to  decide
between  the  accusings  and  excusings  of
his  conscience.

1.  Tiierefore,  minds  should  be  filled
with  a  knowledge  of  Scripture,  even
though,  at  the  time,  those  minds  enter-
tain no  adequate  impression  of  its  saving
power.

2.  The  mind,  earnestly  desirous  of
realising  this  most  true  latter-end  view
of  things,  may  obtain  them  through  the
gentle  teachings  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  who
has  never  yet  denied  them  to  any  who
sought  them  in  singleness  of  heart.

IV.  With  these  essential  and  sure
guides  to  wise  consideration,  we  are
without  excuse  if  we  neglect  the  duty,
and  brutal  if  we  despise  the  privilege.

1.  Who  is  there,  looking  back,  but  can
discern  grievous  stains,  fearful  short-
comings, distressing  faithlessness — dis-
honouring to  Christ,  defiling  to  his  own
soul,  and  burdensome  to  his  conscience —
and  compelled  to  exclaim,  "  Oh,  that  I
had  considered,  that  I  had  given  one
thought  to  God  and  the  latter  end,  be-
fore I  took  this  burden  on  my  soul !"

2.  The  longer  this  habit  of  "con-
sideration "  is  postponed,  the  mxyre  bur-
densome it  becomes.  There  is  much  in
a   heart-searching   retrospect,  over    the

K  513


OHAF.  XZXI.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


earliest  and  most  innocent  period  of  life,
to  awaken  compunction  and  regret ;  but
if  the  wholesome  check,  which  the  habit
of  considering  the  latter  end  imposes,
be  not  found  in  good  time^  the  blacken-
ing horror  of  the  later  and  more  ad-
vanced period  makes  that  early  time
seem  bright  in  the  comparison,  and  gives
birth  to  feelings  which  have  found  ex-
pression in  such  words  as  these —


**  Lost  days  of  3'outh  !     Oh,  holy  days,
When  joy  was  blest  with  prayer  and  praise-
When  this  sad  heart,  now  deeply  dyed
With  many  a  thought  unsanctified,
Trembled  at  every  venial  stain.
And  shrunk  from  sin  as  now  from  pain  •

Oh,  not  that  even  in  that  hour

Of  early  reason's  dawning  power.

My  soul  was  pure  from  thoughts  of  sin  |

But  now  so  dark  the  past  has  been,

That  those  first  stains  from  young  offence

Bear  the  bright  hue  of  innocence."


CHAPTER  XXXI.

Critical  and  Ezbobtical Notes. — Vide  on  chap.  xxx.  These  two  chapters  form  an  unbroken
prophecy,  **a  triumphal  hymn  of  Israel's  salvation."  The  former  chapter  pledges  the  recovery
from  captivity  of  both  "  Israel  and  Judah  ; "  this  addresses  "afl  the  families  of  Israel,"  then  dis-
tinctively the  ten  tribes  ;  and  finally  returns  with  separate  assurances  to  Judah,  then  to  Israel  and
Judah  together.

Geographical  References. — Ver.  15.  *'  Voice  heard  in  Ramah^^  a  city  of  Benjamin,  near
where  Rachel,  the  mother  of  Joseph  and  Benjamin,  was  buried.  Ver.  38.  "ZTiM  Oarebfto
Goath."  "Gareb  "  means  the  hill  of  lepers,  and  must  have  been  outside  the  old  walls  of  Zion,
towards  the  south-west.  "  The  tower  of  Hanamed^*  was  at  the  north-east  corner  of  Jerusalem.
Of  "  Goath  "  nothing  is  known  ;  the  Targiim  translates  it  cow-pod.  Ver,  40.  "  Valley  of  the
dead  bodies,*'  &c. :  i.e.,  the  valley  of  Ben-hinnom.

Personal  Allusion. — Ver.  1 6.  "  Rahd  weeping  for  her  children. "  As  the  mother  of  Benjamin,
Ephraim,  and  Manasseh,  Rachel  is  here  regarded  figuratively  as  weeping  for  the  scattered  ten
tribes  of  Israel.

Natural  History. — Ver.  5.  "Vines  upon  the  mountains  of  Samaria."  The  mountainsof  Samaria
produced  specially  good  vines;  see  Judges  ix.  27.  Ver.  12.  "For  wheat,  and  wine,  and  oily**
Ac:  suirgestive  of  the  fertility  and  richness  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Ver.  29.  "Eaten  a  sour
grape.""     A  proverb;  see  Ezek.  xviii.  2.

Maimers  and  Customs. — Ver.  4.  "  Adorned  with  tabrets.**  Usual  for  the  women  to  go  forth
with  timbrels  and  daucing  in  times  of  public  joy  and  festivity  (Exod.  xv.  20;  Judges  xi.  34,
&c.).  Ver.  19.  "  Smote  upon  my  thigh : "  an  action  indicating  extreme  astonishment  and  sorrow
(Ezek.  xxi.  12).  It  is  represented  as  having  this  significance  by  several  classic  authors.
Ver.  24.  *'  Husbandmen  and  they  that  go  forth  vnth  flocks."  Referring  to  the  pastoral  life  of
their  ancestors,  when  every  one  was  literally  a  '*  husbandman  "  and  **  shepherd  "  in  consequence
of  the  allotment  of  land  which  he  was  forbidden  to  alienate.  They  should  return  to  a  similar
pastoral  life  of  simplicity  and  security.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  2.  **  The  people  left  of  the  sword."  This  description  points,  not
back  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  for  it  would  not  describe  their  condition  then,  for  they
were  not  then  *'  a  people  left  of  the  sword  ; "  but  to  Israel  in  captivity,  after  **  the  sword  "  of  those
who  now  carried  tiiem  captive  had  ceased  its  destructive  work.  How  then  interpret  ^*  found  grace
in  the  wilderness"  ?  what  "  wilderness  "  ?  Their  Babylonish  captivity  may  well  be  described  as  a
wilderness  condition.  Or  the  allusion  may  be  to  the  desert  lying  between  Assyria  and  Palestine,
And  K)fD  may  be  taken  as  a  prophetic  future.  And  the  words,  "  When  I  went  to  cause  him
to  rest"  do  not  really  point  to  past  time ;  for  the  verb,  ^PH,  is  the  infinitive  absolute,  lit.,

a-going.  It  has,  howerer,  the  force  of  an  imperative  :  Let  me  go;  or,  **I  wHl  go  to  cause  Israel
to  rest."

Ver.  3.  "  Of  old."  Henderson  urges  that  p^mp  expresses  here  distance  of  time  not  of
place;  but  most  commentators  prefer  the  latter;  "from  afar."  See  xxx.  10.  To  a  Jew's
thoughts,  God's  dwelling  was  in  Zion  ;  and  hence,  when  His  mercy  reached  them  in  Assyrian
exile,  it  came  from  tJar  (2  Chron.  vi.  20,  38).

**  With  loving-kindness  have  I  dravm  thee."  '«I^ID  is  rendered  as  prolonged^  continued  (Psa.
xxxvi.  11,  cix.  12);  *' I  have  prolonged  loving  Mndness  to  thee.**  But  Hitzig,  Fuerst,  and
Naeselsbach  prefer  rendering  it  respited  :  ''in  loving -kindness  have  I  respited  thee."

Ver.  5.  *•  Eat  them  as  common  things  :  "  ratlier,  ''  shaRfredy  enjoy  the  fruit;  "  no  injunction
being  placed  upon  the  enjoyment.     See  Lev.  xix.  25  ;  Deut.  xx.  6.

Ver.  7.  ''Shout  among  the  chief,"  dec.  :  rather,  '*  shout  because  of  the  chief  of  the  nationi.**
<.«.,  Israel.

5X4


HO  Ml  LET  W  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XXXI.


Ver.  8.   *'  A  crreat  company  sliall  return  thither:*^  no,  hither.    Not  to  exile,  but  to  Palestine.

Ver.  18.   "A  huUoclc  unaccustomed  :"  \\t.,  an  untrained  calf.

Ver.  22.  "^  woman  shall  compass  a  man.''*  Variously  rendered.  Dr.  Payne,  Dr.  VVette,
Umbreit,  &c.,  Tlie  feinali,  jhaU  protect  the  strongman.  Ewald,  "  The  wowAin  shall  be  changed
into  a  man.**  Isaegelsbach,  "  TAe  woman  shaU  turn  the  man,**  becoming  the  stronger  of  the
two.  Wordsworth,  with  the  Fathers,  see  in  these  words  a  hint  of  the  miraculous  conception  of
Christ.  But  Henderson  gives  tlie  sense  that  Jehovah  would  make  the  fe^jlest  of  them  [the  tooman]
more  than  a  match  for  the  most  powerful  of  tiieir  foes.

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXXI.


Ver.  1.  Theme:  The  God  of  Families.
**  At  the  same  time  will  I  be  the  God  of  all
the  families  oflsraeV

There  is  one  solid  Rock  on  which  the
hope  and  happiness  of  the  moral  uni-
verse may  rest  amidst  all  the  vicissitudes
of  time  ;  and  that  whatever  dark  appear-
ances may  surround  the  interests  of  the
Church,  like  clouds  which  obscure  the
face  of  the  heavens,  the  sun  shall  yet  shine
forth  again  with  unquenched  lustre  and
unabated  strengtli.  "  The  mountains  may
depart^  the  hills  must  be  removed^  but
God*8  loving  kindness  never  shall  depart,
the  covenant  of  His  peace  can  never  be
broken."

To  this  topic  Jeremiah  had  recourse
in  the  troublous  times  in  which  he  lived,
when  he  was  called  to  deplore  the  fallen
greatnessof  the  Church,  andto  witness  the
dissolution  and  the  breaking  up  of  the
Jewish  state  and  monarchy.  He  looks
back  upon  what  God  did  for  His  Church
in  the  captivity  of  Egypt,  as  the  pledge
and  pattern  of  what  He  will  do  for  it
in  the  captivity  of  Babylon  (vers.  2,  3).
So  David  teaches  us  to  argue  from  the
same  principles  when  he  says,  "  Oh,  how
great  is  Thy  goodness  which  Thou  hast  laid
up  for  them  that  fear  Thee,  which  Thou
hast  wrought  for  them  that  fear  Thee.'*
What  is  laid  up  in  God's  promises,  and
what  is  laid  out  for  them  in  God's  pro-
vidences, form  an  equal  ground  of
encouragement  and  hope.  Paul  in  like
manner  ascends  up  before  the  springs  of
time  :  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father,
who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual
blebsingsy  according  as  He  has  chosen  us
in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world
that  we  should  be  holy."

I.  Some  of  the  truths  which  this
promise  implies.

II.  Some  of  the  encouragements  it
presents.

JIJ.  Some  of  the  duties  it  involves.


I.  Some  of  the  truths  which  this
promise  implies.  *'  I  will  be  the  God
of  all  the  families  of  Israel.*'  Not  of
the  two  tribes  only,  Judah  and  Benja-
min, the  royal  tribes,  but  the  ten  tribes.
Not  of  the  house  of  Aaron  only,  and  the
families  of  Levi,  but  of  all  their  families ;
not  only  of  their  state  in  general,  but
their  particular  families.

1.  A  deep  interest  in  their  welfare.
That  God  takes  a  deep  interest  in
family  religion,  and  delights  to  see  the
succession  of  piety  kept  up  in  the
dwelling-places  of  the  righteous,  is  evi-
dent both  by  the  tenor  of  His  promises
and  by  the  train  of  His  dispensations.
No  sight  is  more  pleasing  to  man  than
that  of  a  well-ordered  family.  The
safety  and  well-being  of  a  country  must
necessarily  depend  upon  the  moral  train-
ing of  the  families  of  which  it  is  com-
posed. No  less  important  is  it  to  the
well-being  of  the  Church.  Families  are
the  nurseries  of  the  Church.  God  there-
fore, in  determining  upon  the  stability
of  the  Church,  looks  with  watchful  and
tender  eye  upon  the  prosperity  of
families.

God  delights  to  speak  of  Himself  as
st.inding  in  a  domestic  relation  :  *^  Like
as  a  father."  The  image  most  frequently
used  :  "  If  ye  being  evil  .  .  .  your  hea-
venly Father,"  <fec.

2.  He  calls  your  children  His  children.
He  makes  distinguishing  promises  to
them.  The  very  first  promise  was  made
to  Eve's  offspring.  The  covenant  with
Abraham  incorporated  his  children's
name  as  well  as  his  own  :  "  /  will  be  a
God  to  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee.*'  He
promises  to  David,  "  Instead  of  the
fathers,  the  children;"  to  Isaiah,  **  7'his
is  the  covenant  I  make  mth  thee :  I  will
pour  out  My  Spirit  on  thy  seed."

3.  Remember  that  Jesus  Himself  be-
came a  little  child.     He  rose,  not  like

515


cnAP,  XXXI.


ROM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


A(^;im,  ill  the  fulness  and  meridian  of  His
strength,  but  passed  through  tlie  inter-
mediate states  of  infancy  and  childhood.
Wlien  the  wise  men  came  from  afar
'•^they  saw  the  young  Child  and  Mary
His  mother."  He  did  this  that  He  might
consecrate  the  state  of  infancy  as  well
as  the  state  of  manhood ;  and  assure
parents  that  He  can  sympathise  with  the
weakness  and  infirmities  of  childhood
and  youth,  as  well  as  those  of  riper  years.
He  was  a  lover  of  children  (Mark  x.
13-16;  Matt,  xviii.  3-1 4).

4.  Do  not  omit  to  remark  what  a
gracious  aspect  all  this  has  upon  the
salvation  of  infants;  and  what  com-
fort it  affords  those  who  have  lost
their  offspring,  that  they  are  gathered  to
the  fold  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  In  God's
world  there  is  no  waste  of  existence.
^^  Millions  of  infant  souls  compose  the
family  above."  David  said,  in  reference
to  the  loss  of  his  child,  "  I  shall  go  to
him,  but  he  shall  not  return  to  me."
And  if  he  reasoned  thus  under  the  dark-
ness of  that  dispensation,  surely  our
faith  need  not  be  less  strong  under  the
brightness  of  this.  "  If  that  which  was
done  away  was  glorious^  much  more  that
which  remaineth  is  rather  glorious."

II.  This  promise  encourages  Chris-
tian parents  in  their  endeavours  to  train
their  offspring  in  the  nurture  and  admo-
nition of  the  Lord.

Great  duties  devolve  upon  you  ;  great
anxieties  perpetually  occur  in  connection
with  your  own  responsibility  ;  and  great
consolations  are  furnished  in  the  Word  of
God.

1.  No  greater  inducement  can  be  fur-
nished to  avail  yourselves  of  all  means
for  their  religious  improvement  than  the
thought  that  God  sympathises  with  you
both  in  the  affections  you  cherish
and  in  the  difficulties  with  which  you
are  surrounded.  If  it  be  true  that  God
takes  so  deep  an  interest  in  the  progress
of  religion  in  families — is  concerned
for  the  salvation  of  the  young — if  it  be
true  that  He  builds  up  HisCliurchchiefly
from  the  families  of  His  people,  then  it
follows  that  great  duties  devolve  on
parents  and  heads  of  families,  and  it  be-
comes them  to  seek  the  grace  and  bless-
ing of  God.
$16


2.  These  promises  should  be  earnei^tJy
pleaded  in  prayer,  should  encourage
watchful  effort.  They  are  not  given  as
a  premium  to  indolence,  but  as  an  iji-
ducement  to  the  faithful  discharge  of
known  duty.

3.  God  has  made  the  love  of  parents
to  their  children  proverbially  strong  ;  for
moral  objects,  that  their  interests  for  both
worlds  may  be  secured.  There  never  was
a  Christian  parent,  touched  with  tlie
love  of  God,  who  was  not  anxious  for  his
children,  anxious  to  lead  them  to  the
Saviour  he  loved  and  the  heaven  he
sought ;  anxious  that  they  who  are
partakers  of  all  their  ho{)es  on  earth
should  be  partakers  of  all  their  joys
in  heaven.

4.  Education  is  the  great  care  with
which  you  are  entrusted.  If  negligent,
on  you  as  well  as  them  the  reproach  and
misery  will  fall.  You  may  be  regardless
of  your  son's  morals,  but  you  may  live
and  die  miserable  from  his  want  of
them.

Think  of  the  happiness  of  meeting
them  in  a  future  world.  Guide  them
to  Christ.  Endear  the  Bible,  and  the
Sabbath,  and  the  Saviour  to  them.

Remember  the  temptations  they  are
exposed  to,  and  how  many  fall  into  the
snares  of  the  wicked.

III.  Some  of  the  duties  this  promise
involves —

1.  Prayer  for  early  conversion  of  chil-
dren.

2.  Training  of  families  in  godliness
and  faith.

3.  Public  dedication  of  our  children
by  baptism,  to  God.

4.  Recognition  of  God's  laws^  and
providence,  and  honour  in  all  family
plans.

5.  Consecration  by  young  persons  of
themselves  to  God.

6.  Maintain  domestic  worship  around
the  family  altar,

7.  Let  families,  in  their  entirety,
come  together  to  God's  sanctuary^  and  be
united  in  the  fellowship  of  the  Christian
Church.

See  Homilies  on  chap,  iil  18.

Ver.  2.  Theme:  "Spared  Through


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


OEkT.  XX  XL


Grace.  "The  people  left  of  the  sword
found  grace  in  the  wilderness."

L  Spared,  though  others  perished.

Many  were  cut  otf  for  their  iniquities;
some  by  the  Amalekites  (Exod.  xvii.  8),
some  by  the  hands  of  their  brethren
(Exod.  xxxii.  28).

The  destroyed  around  us  witness  to
our  like  deserts.

II.  Spared  through  sovereign  grace.

1.  To  God's  praise.  "The  living,
the  living,  they  shall  praise  Thee,  as  we
do  this  day."

2.  Witnessing  to  His  compassion  and
jpatience.

Ill  Spared  to  inherit  favours.

1.  Conducted  by  Him  into  the  pro-
mised land  of  rest.

2.  Spared  to  enjoy  all  the  fulness  of
covenanted  privilege.

3.  Blessed  with  prolonged  realisation
of  Divine  goodness  and  bounty.'

See  Homilies  on  chap,  il  2.

Ver.  3.  Theme:  Progress  op  Man's
Salvation.

A  condensed  view  of  the  origin,  pro-
gress, and  consummation  of  man's  salva-
tion.

I.  The  feeling  with  which  God  regards
each  of  His  people :  "I  have  loved
thee."

IL  The  kind  of  love  with  which  God
has  regarded  His  people  :  "  Everlasting
love."

III.  The  visible  operation  and  effect
of  this  love  :  "  I  have  drawn  thee."

(a.)  A  change  of  position  or  state.

ip.)  A  change  accomplished  by  God  :
"/have  drawn  thee."

(c.)  A  change  not  accomplished  with-
out resistance :  ^*  Drawn"

IV.  The  means  which  God  employs
in  drawing  His  people  :  "  Loving-kind-
ness."— Rev.  James  Stewart,  Aberdeen,
1862.

See  Addenda :  Everlasting  Love.

Theme:  Drawn  with  Everlasting
Love.

God  has  often  "appeared"  to  man.
In  ffis  visible  creation  He  reveals  Him-
self, lavishing  the  wealth,  garniture,  and


beauty  of  nature  upon  a  sinful  race.  In
His  daily  providences  He  appears  to
mail  ;  fresh  fountains  of  mercy  spring
up  at  my  feet.  But  especially  God
appears  in  tlie  mystery  of  grace  awl
redemption^  showing  the  fulness  of  His
mercy  in  Christ  Jesus.

Thus,  in  Creation  we  discern  the  print
of  His  footsteps ;  in  Providence  we
behold  the  operations  of  His  gracious
hand ;  but  in  Redemption  we  are  allowed
to  see  the  very  movements  and  purposes
of  His  all-gracious  heart.

1  View  this  love  of  God  in  its  far-
reaching  compass  and  largeness.  '^  Of
old"  as  to  time ;  but  more  correctly
*^from  afar,^  as  to  place,  God's  love
reaches  out  to  the  exiles  far  removed
from  Zion»

1.  To  the  banished  ones — captive  and
exiled — removed  "  afar."

2.  To  those  estranged — spiritually  at
a  distance,  "alienated  from  the  life  of
God,"  wilfully  "afar."

3.  To  men  everywhere.  Gathers  in
all  with  a  world-wide  embrace.

II.  View  this  love  of  God  in  its
absolute  directness  and  inalienable
purpose.     **  Tea,  I  have  loved  thee."

1.  Its  positiveness.  "  Tea,  I  have  "
Not  equivocal,  and  conjectural,  or  condi-
tional.

2.  Its  intensity,  "  I  have  loved."
Great-hearted  affection.

3.  Its  personality.  "7  have  loved
thee.'*  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that
are  His."

4.  Its  conscious  reality.  God  Himself
felt  and  realised  that  He  had  loved  Israel.
It  was  a  conscious  passion  to  God  Him-
self. He  yearns  with  strong  ardour  over
the  objects  of  His  great  affection.

m.  View  this  love  of  God  in  its  cease-
less constancy.  "  With  everlasting
love.**

1.  In  retrospect  it  is  "  everlasting.*
Not  recent,  but  vastly  remote  in  its
origin.

2.  In  covenant  fidelity  it  is  "  ever-
lasting."    Not  vacillating,  not  insecure
as  was  theirs  /

3.  Amid  their  changeful  history  it  is
"  everlasting."  Whether  they  were  in
Zion,  or  "  afar  "  in  exile  ;  whether  they
as  a  nation  maintained  His  worship,  or

517


CHAP.  XXXL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JERBMtAH.


became  **  lost  "  to  their  own  identity  and
to  their  holy  religion,  He  loved  and
would  cherish  them  still.

4.  Throughout  all  future  ages  it  is
"  everlasting."  God's  nature  is  not  ''vari-
able ;  "  "  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  are
to  all  generations.*'

IV.  View  this  love  of  God  in  its
gracious  action  and  powerful  attrac-
tiveness. "  Therefore  with  loving-kind-
ness have  I  drawn  thee."

1.  Hence,  with  God  begins  the  work  of
alluring  souls  into  reconciliation.  It  is
not  the  sinner  who  commences;  God's
grace  "  draws  '*  him,  and  thus  he  is
"  made  willing,'*  "  made  nigh."

2.  The  force  which  draws  the  soul  is
"  love."  As  all  the  coin  of  the  kingdom
bears  the  image  of  the  sovereign,  so  all
the  blessings  of  salvation  bear  the  stamp
of  love.  "  With  loving-kindness  have  I
drawn  thee."

3.  When  the  heart  rests  in  God's
love,  it  finds  its  own  love  for  Him  to  be
the  result  of  and  response  to  His  love  for
us.  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first
loved  us."

4.  All  drawings  of  God  should  be
yielded  to  with  gratitude,  wonder,  alac-
rity, and  joy.

Note —

(a.)  This  is  a  most  touchino  and
SUBLIME  ASSURANCE.  When  we  look
at  ourselves  we  wonder  that  God  can
love  us  at  all.  And  if  His  love  had  to
be  caused  by  anything  in  us.  He  could
never  find  occasion  for  His  love.  But
the  love  which  God  has  for  us  comes  not
from  us  to  Him,  but  from  Him  to  us.
He  loves  us,  not  because  we  are  lovahle^
but  because  He  is  loving.

(b.)  This  "  everlasting  love  "  is  A  most
STUPKNDOUS  THOUGHT  TO  GRASP.  Before
we  had  any  objective  existence ;  before
we  stood  out  as  individuals  of  the
human  race,  He  loved  us.  The  moment
we  were  born  into  the  world,  that
moment  we  began  to  live  in  the  love  of
God,

The  ray  of  light  from  a  star  has  been
running  down  the  measureless  path  of
space  long^  long  centuries  before  earth
was  peopled  by  man ;  but  before  the
wave  (which  made  the  starlight  shine  in
518


the  heavens)  was  started  in  the  ether
by  the  pulsations  from  that  distant  star,
God  was  loving  me.  Oh,  that  vast  eternity
of  love  !

If  that  love  was  from  everlasting,
shall  it  not  be  to  everlasting  1     Yes.

(c.)  There  is  a  prophetic  sweep  Of
HOPE  IN  THIS  PACT.  Can  that  end  which
had  no  beginning?  Shall  we  fear  that
a  fountain  which  flows  perennially  and
freely  can  at  some  far-off  age  run  dry  i
Ages  have  not  exhausted  it.  It  is  "  ever-
lasting love."  Surely  this  both  win$
and  shall  hold  our  love  to  God.

"  Infinite  Goodness  !  Thou  art  dear
To  Thy  poor  creature's  heart ;
It  blesses  Thee  that  Thou  art  Qod,
That  Thou  art  what  Thou  art"

Theme :  Everlasting  Jjove,

I.  Sovereign  in  its  character,

II.  Costly  in  its  manifestatiotL

III.  Glorious  in  its  results,

Ver.  6.  Theme:  The  Watchmen's
Call.  "  There  shall  be  a  day  that  the
watchmen  upon  Mount  Ephraim  shall
cry,  "  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion
unto  the  Lord  our  God.'*

L  God's  heralds.  "  Watchmen,"  «to-
tioned  on  eminences  (not  on  one  mountain
only,  but  the  whole  mountainous  region
of  the  ten  tribes),  see  the  auspicious  houVy
call  to  the  alien  and  exile  tribes.  Type
of  the  preacher  of  the  Gospel : — (1.)
Elevated  above  the  people ;  (2.)  Dis-
cerns their  gracious  opportunity;  (3.)
Summons  the  wanderers  and  outcastis
home.

II.  Rennion  in  Zion.  The  ten  tribes
are  here  called  to  go  up  to  the  annual
feasts  at  Jerusalem,  and  there  join  with
the  tribes  of  Judah  in  keeping  the  ap-
pointed festivals  of  Zion.  The  schism
between  the  twelve  tribes  was  healed,

1.  Those  who  were  estranged  one  from
the  other  become  united  in  fraternity
and  fellowship  in  Zion,  See  Isa.  zi
13.

2.  The  sacred  festivities  and  privi-
leges  of  the  Church  of  Christ  cast  all
human  divisions  and  diflferences  into
oblivion.  Many  members,  but  one  body.
Many  nations,  but  one  kingdom.  The
world  gets  back  to  unity  again,  away


BOMtl^flC  COMMENT iJiY:  JEREMIAH,


osap.  XXtl.


from  its  feudd  and  strifes,  when  it  gets
into  and  becomes  tlie  Church.

III.  God  sought.  "  Unto  the  Lord
our  God."

1.  From  whom  we  formerly  revolted.
Now  again  **  our  God ; "  accepted,  de-
sired, and  sought.

2.  In  whom  we  again  unite.  "  The
Lord ; "  none  but  He.  No  rival  deity ;
"  God  all  in  all"  "All  one  in  Christ
Jesus,**

Note--

Cowles  remarks :  "  God^s  grace  loves
to  triumph  over  the  most  inveterate  pre-
judices. No  words  could  represent  a
greater  or  more  benign  change  in  national
feeling  than  these :  Samaria  saying,
through  her  spiritual  watchmen,  Let  us
go  up  to  Zion  to  worship,  for  our  God
is  there."

Vers,  7-9.  Theme:  Bestoration  of
THE  Jews.  God's  command  that  the
males  of  all  the  twelve  tribes  should  go
up  thrice  a  year  to  worship  the  Lord  at
Jerusalem.

We  may  conjecture  what  such  a  con-
course will  take  place,  in  due  season,
from  every  quarter  of  the  world.

In  reference  to  the  restoration  of  the
Jews,  we  have  here —

L  A  command  to  us.  God  enjoins
us —

1.  To  take  an  interest  in  the  welfare
of  His  people,  "  Sing  with  gladness  for
Jacob,"  &c.  We  ought  to  keep  in  view
God's  gracious  designs  respecting  them,
80  as  to  have  our  hearts  filled  with  joy
in  the  contemplation  of  the  blessings
awaiting  them.

2.  To  express  thai  interest  in  every
suitable  way.  "  Publish  it "  to  Jew  and
Gentile  alike  :  ^* praise  ye  "  God  for  it,
and  in  fervent  prayer  seek  God  on
their  behalf.  Say,  "  O  Lord,  save  Thy
people,"  <fec.

n.  A  promise  to  them.  This  pro-
mise includes —

1.  Their  restoration  to  God  (ver.  8),
however  distant  they  are  from  Him,
or  however  discouraging  their  circum-
stances. "A  great  company  shall  re-
turn thither."

2.  The  manner  in  which  it  shall  be
ejected  (ver.  9).      "  With  weeping*^  <fec.,


as  in  Zech.  xii  10.  Under  gracious
Divine  leading :  "  I  will  cause  them  to
walk  by  rivers,**  Ac.  He  will  guide
them  by  His  counsel,  strengthen  them
by  His  grace,  and  comfort  them  by  His
Spirit,  till  He  bring  them  in  safety  to
His  glory.

3.  The  pledge  that  it  shall  be  surely
accomplished.  "  For  I  am  a  Father  to
Israel,"  &c.  When  Moses  urged  Pharaoh
to  liberate  Israel,  he  enforced  his  request
by  the  plea  that  they  were  **  God's  first-
born.** In  this  light  He  still  regards
them,  and  will  prove  Himself  their
"  Father  "  (ver.  37,  with  Isa.  liv.  9,  10).

Application —

1.  Look  well  to  it  that  you  are  your-
selves restored  to  God.

2.  Endeavour  to  help  forward  the
restoration  of  others. — C»  jSimeon,  M,A,

Ver.  9.  Theme:  Pilokihs  to  Zion.
"  They  shall  come  with  weeping,"  &c.

The  text  unites  the  dispensation  of
God  to  His  people  with  the  affections
which  they  cherish  towards  God.  It
refers  to  the  deliverance  of  the  Church
from  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  and  to
the  feelings  which  they  cherished  on
their  return ;  and  the  same  principles  are
developed  in  the  experience  of  all  who
are  born  of  God  and  bound  for  glory.
Zion's  pilgrims  are  distinguished —

L  By  the  various  emotions  which
they  cherish.     **  Come  with  weeping."

n.  By  the  safe-conduct  under  which
they  journey  :  "  I  will  lead  them."

III.  By  the  high  alliance  they  are
permitted  to  claim.     "  I  am  a  father."

IV.  By  the  prosperous  issue  of  their
eventful  pilgrimage.     "  Sing  in  Zion."

L  The  various  emotions  which  they
cannot  hut  cherish.  "  Weeping  and  sup-
plication "  not  unmixed  with  joy.  The
return  from  Babylon  was  a  season  of  joy
and  congratulation,  yet  productive  of
mixed  feeling — they  came  with  weeping
and  supplication.  Great  events  in  life
often  produce  opposite  emotions.  The
moment  of  transition  is  a  critical  one
— calls  up  many  recollections  of  the
past,  many  anticipations  of  the  future.
The  prisoner  has  been  known  to  sigh  at
leaving  his  dungeon ;  the  bride  tremblei

519


atiAt>.  rixi.


UoMllLTlC  COMMENTAUt:  JMkBMlAti.


at  the  altar ;  the  prince  receives  the
crown  not  without  emotion ;  the  Chris-
tian takes  upon  him  the  vows  of  God
under  mingled  impressions.  Tears  and
prayers  do  well  together.  There  is  no
entrance  into  the  path  of  life  but
through  the  valley  of  weeping ;  and
repentance  characterises  the  Christian
all  his  journey  through.  TertuUiaii  said
of  himself  that  he  was  horn  to  nothing
hut  repentance.  It  was  the  saying  of  a
godly  minister  that,  if  he  were  to  die  in
the  pulpitf  he  should  like  to  die  preaching
repentance  ;  and  if  out  of  the  pulpit^  he
would  ivish  to  die  practising  repentance.
This  is  always  needful,  and  especially
when  we  go  to  seal  a  covenant  with
God,  or  to  seek  tiie  witness  of  the
Spirit  with  oura  When  did  Jacob  find
God  in  Bethel  but  when  he  wept  and
made  supplication  %  When  did  Mary
meet  with  Christ  but  when  she  sought
Him  sorrowing  1  When  did  angels
minister  to  Christ  but  after  strong  cry-
ing and  tears  in  the  garden  ?  Behold
the  print  of  the  footsteps  of  all  the
cloud  of  witnesses  in  this  road.  '*  They
come.^

They  weep  and  pray  under  the — 1.  Con-
sciousness of  their  sins.     Unprofitable.

2.  The  remembrance  of  their  captivity.
Remembering  afldiction  and  misery.

3.  The  difficulties  of  their  course.  A
rough  journey,  many  impediments.

3.  The  sorrows  of  those  with  whom  they
are  associated.     Sympathy.

5.  I'he  mourning  over  those  they  have
left  behind  in  Babylon,  It  was  only  a
remnant,  two  tribes  at  most  came  from
Babylon.  They  were  attached  to  Baby-
lon, had  many  connections,  and  filled
important  posts  there,  and  Zion  in  her
ruins  was  forgotten.  The  Christian  is
not  careless  of  the  state  of  his  relations
and  friends  yet  strangers  to  God.  Bun-
yan  makes  it  a  heavy  part  of  Christian's
sorrow  that  he  could  not  persuade  his
wife  and  children  to  travel  with  him.

It  is  to  mourners  that  promises  are
made :  *'  Com^  unto  Me*^  The  influences
of  the  Spirit  are  quite  as  likely  to  pro-
duce contrition  as  joy.

IL  The  safe-condnct  under  which
they  journey.  "  I,"  says  God,  "  will
lead  them  ; "  or  they  would  never  attain
520


their  journey's  end.  ^^  I  will  gather  them;^^
or  they  would  never  be  collected.  "  /
will  cause  them  to  walk;**  or  they  would
never  have  the  inclination.  God  brings
us  into  the  way  of  truth,  God  protects
us  in  it,  God  furnishes  us  with  adequate
support,  and  God  brings  us  to  the  termi-
nation of  our  career  in  peace.  We  may
doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  our  religion,
but  if  we  are  conscious  of  possessing  it
we  cannot  doubt  to  whom  we  owe  it
"  Who  hath  saved  us."

Tiie  guidance  of  mortal  spirits  into
the  paths  of  holiness  and  to  the  perfec-
tion of  heavenly  rest  has  been  a  favourite
object  with  God  from  the  beginning.
He  teaches  "to  walk  in  a  strait  way"
— preserves  from  falling — going  back—
^^ keeps  feet**

^^ By  the  rivers  of  water** — not  with-
out refreshment — not  without  happinesa
— not  without  a  constant  sense  of  obli-
gation. It  denotes  both  refreshment
and  supply,  and  these  are  granted  where
least  expected,  and  to  those  who  could
not  perform  the  journey  without  guid-
ance and  assistance  not  their  own — "  the
blind  and  lam^e,"  Grace  triumphs  over
all  obstacles.

Ill  The  high  alliance  they  are  per-
mitted to  claim.  ''I  am  a  father.''
This  wandering  band,  outcasts  to  the
world,  may  call  the  Sovereign  of  the
universe  a  Friend  and  Father.  This  title
indicates  the  richness  of  Clod's  conde-
scension and  the  Principle  whence  salva-
vation  flows.

IV.  The  happy  issue  of  their  eventful
pilgrimage.  "Height  of  Zion  "  (ver.  12).

"  Cowwj  to  Zion.*'  1.  BlisafuL  2.  Rest-
ful.    3.  Fruitful.

Application —

1.  Strangers  to  prayer  and  penitence
are  not  on  the  path  to  heaven.

2.  Those  who  trust  their  own  re-
sources may  expect  to  wander,  to  faint,
or  to  fall— >&  Thodey,  1825.

See  Addenda :  Tsars  of  Penitence  ;
and  also  Homilies  on  chap.  iii.  21,  22.

Vers.  10-14.  Theme:  God's  Peocla-
MATioN  op  Grand  Purposes  for  His
People.  Jehovah  would  have  the  nations
know —


MOMIlETiC  COMMBNtAJtt:  JBR^MtAS,


(JiiAh  ttlt


I.  How  He  guards  His  people  with
fostering  care.  Though  He  chastises
them  —  "  scattered  tliem  "  —  yet  He
cherishes  and  fosters  them  with  watch-
ful care  and  purposes  of  restoration  ;
and  will  suffer  no  harm  or  loss  to
them,  for  He  "  shepherds  *'  them  con-
stantly.

II.  How  mightily  He  has  wrought
for  His  people's  redemption.

Ver.  11.  "  With  outstretched  arm,**
"  travailing  in  the  greatness  of  His
strength,  mighty  to  save."

1.  Fast  rescues.  These  have  proved
God's  almightiness  and  all-sufficiency,

2.  Fledge  of  future  redemption.  No
foe  can  "stay  His  hand."

ni  How  luxuriant  are  the  blessings
with  which  He  will  crown  and  enrich
their  future  (ver.  12).

1.  Religious  and  ecclesiastical  privi-
leges,   *'  To  the  heights  of  Zion."

2.  Divine  beneficence.  "  To  the  good-
ness of  the  Lord."

3.  Abounding  fulness  of  enjoyment,
"Sing;"  " for  wheat,"  <fec.

4.  Sadness  lost  in  blessedness.  "  Their
soul  as  a  watered  garden  ;  "  and  sorrow
no  more  at  all.

IV.  How  all-inclusive  shall  he  these
sacred  delights  of  the  Church.

1.  Every  sex  and  age  shall  have  full
share  of  holy  bliss  (ver.  13).

2.  Friests  and  people  alike  "satisfied  "
with  the  "  goodness  "  of  the  Lord  (ver.
14).  "  Both  he  that  soweth  and  they  that
reap  shall  rejoice  together,"

Ver.  12.  Theme:  The  Future  of
Believers,  "And  their  soul  shall  be
as  a  watered  garden  ;  and  they  shall  not
sorrow  any  more."  What  is  to  be  the
future  of  the  true  Israel  of  God  ?

I  One  of  spiritual  faultlessness  and
perfection.  Beautiful  as  a  "  garden  ;"
fertile,  well  graced,  rich  in  fragrance
and  fruit.

n.  One  of  boundless  resources.  Of
joyj  for  they  shall  sorrow  no  more.  Of
satisfaction,  for  no  inward  lack  shall
give  them  distress.  Of  rest,  amid  the
blessedness  of  happy  employ.

ni.  One  of  vast  possessions.  So
that  their  "soul"  is  filled  with  the
treasures  of  spiritual  good;  filled  as  a


"  garden  "  stored  with  choicest  blossoms,
fragrant  with  richest  perfume.

Ver.  12.  Theme :  Soul  Fertility.
"  Their  soul  shall  be  a^  a  watered
garden."

This  was  really  fulfilled  in  the  Jews,
who  returned  to  Jerusalem  after  the
miseries  they  had  suffered  in  Babylon ;
many  of  whom  (see  Ezra  and  Nehemiah's
records)  were  men  of  eminent  piety  and
zeal  for  God.  Having  rebuilt  the  Temple,
and  thus  opened  "the  wells  of  salva<
tion,"  they  drew  thence  the  waters  of
consolation  and  spiritual  life.

But  in  the  Gospel  times  we  see  these
words  fulfilled  in  every  pious  soul  when
in  a  flourishing  and  prosperous  state.

I.  Thoughts  suggested  by  a  comparison
of  a  pious  soul  with  a  garden.

1.  A  garden  is  a  spot  of  ground  upon
which  extrax>rdinary  cultivation  is  em-
ployed.  Thus  the  souls  of  believers  are
"  the  garden  of  the  Lord  " — the  objects
of  His  peculiar  care  and  cultivation  (Isa.
y.  1,  2).

2.  A  garden  is  generally  stored  with
productions  of  either  a  useful  or  orna-
mental order.  So  from  the  soul  springs
up  every  Christian  virtue  and  heavenly
grace  which  is  either  pleasing  to  God
or  useful  to  man  (Isa.  xli.  19,  20 ;  Iv.
13).

3.  A  garden  does  not  arrive  at  its  full
perfection  and  glory  at  once.  Th.i  Chris-
tian's course  is  progressive.

II.  Consider  those  Divine  influences
by  which  this  spiritual  garden  is
watered.

1.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God
are  imparted  to  every  real  Christian,
and  produce  effects  that  resemble  those
which  warm  and  refreshing  showers  pro-
duce upon  a  garden  (Isa,  Ixiv.  3).  If
these  are  withheld,  how  does  the  garden
droop  !  It  is  the  ofi&ce  of  the  Holy  Spirit
to  "  shed  the  love  of  God  abroad  in  our
hearts,"  <fec.

2.  These  influences  are  enjoynd  and
conveyed  to  the  soul  by  the  means  of  God's
Word  and  ordinances  (Isa.  Iv.  10,  11).
It  is  in  the  exeicise  of  reading  and
hearing  God's  Word,  and  in  prayer,  that
the  communications  of  God's  Spirit  are
enjoyed.

621


CBaP.  XsXI.


MOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  JSRBMIAM,


III.  Mark  how  this  happy  state  and
those  enriching  influences  are  to  be
desired  by  every  soul.

1.  Till  we  attain  these,  we  are  in  a
desolate^  wild  condition  (ijeb.  vi.  8).

2.  It  is  only  by  attaining  this  state
that  we  can  arrive  at  true  happiness
either  here  or  hereafter  (Heb.  vi.  7).

3.  Unless  we  are  iu  this  state  we
cannot  glorify  God^  nor  he  useful  to  our
fellow-creatures,  as  we  ought.  When
we  are  "  fruitful  iu  every  good  word
and  work,"  God  is  pleased  with  us,
<bc.

Learn  :  The  need  we  have  daily  to  ask
for  Divine  influences. — Rev,  J.  Sewell,
Thaxted,  a.d.  1842.

Ver.  13.  Theme:  God  cub  Com-
FORTKR.  "And  1  will  turn  their  mourn-
ing into  joy,  and  will  comfort  them  and
make  them  rejoice  from  their  sorrow."

In  Greenland,  when  a  stranger  knocks
at  the  door,  he  asks,  Is  God  in  this
house  ?  And  if  they  answer  "Yes,"  he
enters.

Let  me  knock  at  the  door  of  your
hearts  and  inquire,  Is  God  in  this  house  ?
Are  you  frequent  at  His  throne  ?  Do
you  love  and  belong  to  Christ  ?  Are  you
living  in  the  daily  exercise  of  faith  and
repentance!  Do  you  sorrow  for  sin?
Are  you  aspiring  to  heaven  1  If  so,  you
are  the  persons  to  whom  this  promise  is
made.

I.  The  particular  chaxacter  which
God  here  assumes.  The  Comforter.  I
**  will  comfort  them."

Not  only  after  it  but  "  from "  it.  Their
joy  takes  a  lustre  from  previous  sorrow,
as  the  brightness  of  morning  from  the
darkness  of  night.

1.  This  is  a  much-needed  office,  for
there  are  many  mourners.  The  voice  of
weeping  is  often  heard  in  our  land.
Our  earth  teems  with  mourners  who
are  seeking  a  sad  asylum  from  the
sorrows  of  life  in  the  darkness  and
silence  of  the  grave.

Many  mourners  here.  Some  under
the  afflictions  of  life;  some  under  the
disappointment  of  their  hopes  of  happi-
ness from  the  world  ]  some  under  the
baseness  of  deceitful  friendship  ;  some
under  the  loss  of  near  and  dear  connec-
522


tions;  some  under  the  straits  and  diffi-
culties of  a  trying  path  ;  and  some  under
the  burden  of  sin.

Spiritual  sorrows  are  specially  referred
to  in  the  text.  "  They  shall  come  with
weeping"  The  Christian  life  begins
with  sorrow,  ends  with  joy.  Some
^^ sorrow  after  a  godly  sort:"  over  evil
habits ;  weakness  of  faith  j  decline  of
hope.

2.  This  is  an  office  to  which  God  only
is  equal.  As  when  the  sun  is  set  none
but  God  can  cause  it  to  rise  again  ;  so
when  hope  is  lost  and  comfort  gone,
none  but  God  can  restore  it.  Hence
David  prays,  **  Restore  to  me  the  joy,"
<Scc.  Jeremiah  could  not  do  it.  He
could  only  speak  the  comfort  to  others
which  God  spake  to  him ;  but  God  can
convey  the  consolation  direct  to  the
heart.

God  speaks  of  Himself  as  "  the  Hope
of  Israel  and  the  Consolation  thereof,"
Jesus  is  described  as  ''Hhe  Consolation
of  Israel."  The  Holy  Spirit  is  "  another
Comforter,"  Thus  all  the  Persons  in  the
Godhead  conspire  in  this  most  needed
and  most  delightful  work.

God  only  can  do  it,  because  He  only
knows  what  the  trial  is — how  heavily  it
presses — and  how  to  apply  to  the  bur-
dened spirit  the  needed  relief.

All  creatures  might  shrink  from  the
task  and  say,  "  Am  I  in  Gods  stead  f  "

3.  7^his  is  an  office  which  God  delights
to  exercise,  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."
It  is  His  nature  and  property  always  to
have  mercy.  It  is  not  more  natural  for
the  sun  to  shine,  or  for  the  fountain  to
pour  forth  its  streams,  than  for  God  to
show  compassion.  He  is  *Uhe  Father
of  mercies"  '*  the  God  of  all  consolation,"
*'As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth"  &c,

4.  It  is  an  office  in  which  the  Father
of  m^des  has  had  large  experience.  All
the  tears  wiped  from  human  faces  have
been  removed  by  His  hand.  All  the
hopes  awakened  in  penitent  bosoms  have
been  inspired  by  His  mercy.

n.  Some  of  the  methods  He  employs
for  this  purpose.  The  instrumentality
is  various,  the  Agency  is  One.  Sometimes
by  friends,  sometimes  ministers,  some-
times ordinances,  sometimes  by  strangers,
sometimes  by  enemieai     But  God  is  the


itOMlLETW  COMMBNTARt:  JiRSMlAH.


o^AP.  xtii.


Source  of  all  tliese  streams.    He  "  makes
us  rejoice  from  sorrow."

1.  By  the  application  to  the  mind  of  the
tense  of  pardon  and  acceptance  hy  Christ.
Tljus,  by  Nathan,  He  le.stored  to  David
the  joy  of  His  salvation  :  "  The  Lord
hath  put  away  thy  sin."  Thus,  by  Isaiah,
He  comforted  Hezekiah.  Thus,  by
Ananias,  He  comforted  Paul.

In  various  ways  He  enlarges  our  per-
ception of  the  fulness  and  freeness  of
redeeming  love,  shows  us  His  covenant,
teaches  us  out  of  His  law,  enables  us  to
apply  the  promises.  ^^  My  thoughts  are
not  your  thoughts^

2.  By  the  teaching  and  influence  of
His  Spirit.  We  read  of  the  "  comfort  of
the  Holy  Ghost ; "  and  we  caimot  doubt
that  that  blessed  Agent  has  direct  access
to  the  human  mind,  in  stirring  us  up
to  prayer,  in  strengthening  holy  pur-
poses and  resolutions,  in  giving  efficacy
to  religious  ordinances  and  especially  to
the  Word  received  and  preached.

3.  By  the '  agency  of  His  providence,
in  removing  afflictions  when  their  end
is  answered — as  in  bringing  Israel  out  of
Egypt  and  back  from  Babylon.  So  He
can  turn  again  our  captivity,  raise  up
friends,  make  our  path  straight,  disperse
the  clouds.

4.  By  translating  the  soul  from  earth
to  heaven.

III.  The  course  of  conduct  we  should
pursue.

1.  Seek  consolation  hy  prayer.

2.  Avoid  whatever  tends  to  bring  the
tpirit  to  bondage.

3.  Be  comforting,

4.  Cherish  hope — happy  thoughts.
Seek  to  be  acquainted  with  higher

rules  of  self-denial,  and  charity,  and  mor-
tification of  sin,  than  you  have  yet
known.  Beg  of  God  to  teach  you  what
you  know  not  of  the  spirituality  of  the
law  and  exactness  of  the  rule.

Ver.  14.  Theme:  The  Satispyino
Nature  of  God's  Goodness.  ^^  And
My  people  sJiall  be  satisfied  with  My  good"
ness,  saith  the  Lord."

Our  subject  contains  a  striking  predic-
tion of  the  ingathering  of  the  Jews,  and
the  joyous  events  which  should  distin-
guish the  occasion.   A  mong  the  rest  this  is


one,  that  "  they  should  be  satisfied,"  <kc.
The  text  is  capable  of  a  general  applica-
tion, and  belongs  equally  to  all  the
household  of  faith  and  family  of  God.
Let  us,  then,  consider —

L  The  character.  **My  people."
God's  people  were  not  always  such.
"  1  have  made  you  a  people,"  <fec.  Once
afar  off,  aliens,  &c  They  became  God's
people  by  the  attractive  power  of  the
Gospel,  by  the  influence  of  the  grace  and
Spirit  of  God,  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  They  repented  of  sin,  and  fled
by  faith  to  the  hope  set  before  men  in
the  Gospel.  Many  are  the  distinguish-
ing features  of  God's  people.

1.  They  are  separated  from  the  woj-ld.
Not  "of  the  world,"  "Come  out,"  <fcc
Thus,  too,  they  are  united  to  His  Church.
"We  will  go  with  you,"  <kc.  "This
people,"  (fee.  They  profess,  and  confess
Christ  before  men.

2.  They  reflect  the  image  of  the
Saviour  ;  are  "  partakers  of  His  nature
and  spirit ;  and  hence  are  likeminded
with  Christ,  renewed  into  His  holy  and
blessed  likeness.

3.  They  are  obedient  to  ChrisVs
authority.  "As  His  sheep,"  &c  As
His  pupils,  <fec.  They  follow  Christ,
and  hear  His  commandments  to  do
them.  They  call  Him  Lord,  and  do
the  things,  &c.  "Whoso  doeth  the
will  of  My  Father."

II.  The  declaration.  "Shall  be
satisfied,"  &c.  Sin  began  by  dissatis-
faction. This  is  one  of  the  constant
exhibitions  of  evil  in  the  world.  The
general  inquiry  is,  "Who  will  show,"
<fcc  The  soul  in  the  midst  of  the
riches,  honours,  pleasures,  &c.,  is  still
unsatisfied;  formed  for  an  infinite  good,
God  alone  can  meet  its  desires ;  but
God  is  holy  and  just,  and  the  soul
trembles  and  flees.  God's  goodness,
then,  comes  down  to  the  capacities,  <fec.,
of  the  soul.    The  soul  is  satisfied  with —

1.  GodPs  goodness  in  tlie  dispensations
of  His  grace,  G  od's  love  in  Jesus  Christ,
infinite  and  overflowing.  The  soul  is
melted  by  it,  constrained,  subdued,
saved  ;  exclaims  with  rapture,  "  Who
loved  me,"  <fec.

2.  God^s  goodness  in  the  arrangements
of  His  Providence,     This  is  ever  con-

^23


CHAP.  xxxr.


BOM  I  LET  J  C  COMMENTARY:  JEREMlAU.


iiected  with  the  other.  We  are  first
reconciled,  and  then  admire  His  doings,
w  orks,  and  ways.  It  is  the  same  good-
ness in  both  providence  and  grace.  It
never  fails  nor  changes.  It  is  always
"  goodness,"  in  adversity  as  well  as
prosperity,  in  sickness  and  health,  in
sorrow  and  joy.  It  is  always  rich,  free,
and  adapted.

3.  GoiVs  goodness  in  the  consummation
of  glory.  '*  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I
awake  with  Thy  likeness."

Application. — 1.  Are  we  the  char-
acters %  2.  Have  we  the  satisfaction  ?
3.  It  is  our  privilege. — /.  Burns^  D,D.

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Rachel's  Lamen-
tation. "A  voice  was  heard  in  Ra-
mah,  lamentation  and  bitter  weeping :
Ilahel  weeping  for  bar  children,  and
refused  to  be  comforted  for  her  children,
because  they  were  not.'*

L  A  poetic  figure  representative  of  the
woes  of  the  exiled  tribes  of  Israel
Jeremiah,  foreseeing  the  coming  cap-
tivity of  bis  people  and  destruction  of
iheir  national  life,  vividly  and  dramati-
cally represents  Rachel  (as  if  stirred  from
her  grave  by  the  tearing  of  her  children
from  their  natal  soil)  weeping  for  her
offspring  about  to  be  slain  by  the  Chal-
dean sword.  As  the  mother  of  Benja-
min, Ephraim,  and  Manasseh,  she  is
alluded  to  as  if  to  her  belonged  all  the
ten  tribes.

1.  A  mother's  grief  over  her  slaugh-
tered sons.

2.  Exile  from  Zion  and  God  is  an
evil  as  dreadful  as  if  they  were  slain.
"  They  were  not !  "  (chap.  ix.  1).

3  A  mother's  heart  has  no  room  for
'*  comfort  "  when  her  children  are  perish-
ing from  life — and  from  the  living  God.

IL  A  prophetic  vision  of  the  massacre
of  the  Bethlehem  children  at  the
Savlou7-*s  birth.  Its  primary  fulfilment
was  the  murder  of  Rachel's  children  by
the  Chaldeans.  Its  typical  significance
received  realisation  in  Herod's  slaughter
of  the  Innocents  (Matt.  ii.  17,  18).

1.  TJie  inhumanity  of  man  brings
destruction  on  innocent  victims  and
anguish  upon  tender  hearts.

2.  In  God's  foreseeing  gaze,  all  deeds
of  outrage  on  those  He  loves  (^Israel  audi

524


children)  are  kept  in  faithful  record.
*'  Whoso  toucheth  them  toucheth  the
apple  of  His  eye."

3.  Qui,  of  eventSf  woeful  and  cruel^
purposes  of  good  are  divinely  evolved,
Rachel's  children  were  carried  into
exile,  yet  God  wrought  redemption  for
His  captive  people.  Bethlehem  children
were  slaughtered  by  Herod,  yet  the
Divine  Babe  was  at  hand,  to  become
the  Redeemer  of  humanity,  and  to  fold
all  childhood  life  within  His  arms  and
raise  children  into  eminencein  His  earthly
and  heavenly  kingdom.

Vers.  16,  17.  Theme:  Consolations
AND  Hopes.  "Refrain  thy  voice  from
weeping :  there  is  hope  in  thine  end."

Two  points  in  this  connection  :  Rachel
weeping  for  her  sons,  and  Ephraim  weep-
ing for  his  sins  ;  and  to  both  classes  the
voice  of  sympathy  and  commiseration  is
addressed.

The  history  refers  to  the  captivity.
Rachel  was  the  common  mother  of
Benjamin  and  Ephraim  —  Benjamin
representing  here  the  two  tribes  of
Judah  and  Benjamin,  which  were
united  into  one  under  the  house  of
David ;  and  Ephraim  the  ten  tribes,
commonly  called  Israel.  Rachel's  tomb
was  in  Ramah,  confines  of  both,  on  the
border  of  Judah  or  Benjamin^-on  the
border  of  Ephraim  or  Israel

By  a  beautiful  figure,  the  sorrows  of
the  captivity  are  described  as  raising
Rachel  out  of  her  grave  to  weep  for  the
desolations  of  her  sons.  At  Ramah
Nebuzaradan  called  a  council  of  war,
and  brought  before  him  the  captives.  It
seems  to  have  been  the  first  halting-place
in  the  journey  to  Babylon.  Jeremiah  was
present  and  witnessed  the  grief  of  the
mothers  of  Israel ;  and,  with  the  eye
and  imagination  of  a  poet,  calls  Rachel
from  her  grave  to  join  the  general  grief,
and  ministers  to  them  support  and
consolation  by  the  promise  of  their
return.  And  as  their  grief  (parent-like)
was  more  for  their  children  than  them-
selves, so  the  promise  particularly
respects  their  restoration  and  return.
**  l^hy  children  shall  come  again,"  if  you
do  not ;  just  as  though  the  fathers  fell
in  the  wilderness,  the  children  entered


HO  M I  LET  W  COMMENTARY:  JBHBMIAH.


CHAP.  XXXI.


Canaan.        "  There    is    hope     in     thy
posterity."

I.  The  consolations  which  the  Gospel
aflfords  in  this  world.

I I.  The  hopes  which  it  furnishes  for
a  better.

I.  The  consolations  which  the
Gospel  affords  in  this  world.

1.  It  is  a  world  of  weeping y  of  dis-
appointment, vicissitude,  and  trial ;
and  afflictions  are  sent  by  God,  not
from  severity  and  harshness,  but  to
produce  results  nothing  else  could.  It
is  the  death  of  the  sin,  and  not  the
death  of  the  soul,  God  contemplates.

2.  The  Gospel  only  furnishes  con-
solation. The  world  cannot.  All  the
sounds  of  sympathy  and  tenderness
come  from  another  world.  The  only
available  consolation  must  bear  this
inscription,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."
I  said,  Rachel  was  described  as  weeping
for  her  sons,  and  Ephraim  for  his  sins:
these  two  constitute  the  great  divisions
of  the  sorrows  of  life:  worldly,  spiritual

i.  Under  worldly  calamity,  the  Gospel
provides  consolation.     Losses,  crosses.

1.  The  God  that  sends  the  trial  sends
the  support  with  it,  and  often  propor-
tions the  consolation  to  the  distress.
When  He  sends  Rachel  into  captivity
He  gives  her  a  promise  to  carry  in  her
bosom.

2.  The  doctrine  of  God's  providence
is  a  greater  support,  and  especially
when  we  view  the  system  of  Providence
as  part  of  the  plan  of  grace.

3.  The  promises  of  grace  afford  con-
solation, and  show  how  minutely  ob-
servant of  the  interests  of  His  children
God  is.

4.  The  Christian  is  assured  that  there
shall  be  no  more  suffering  of  any  kind
under  the  Divine  government  than  is
absolutely  necessary  to  the  well-being
of  His  people.  "ZTe  doth  not  afflict,"
etc.  While  to  the  eye  of  bystanders  the
siillerer  seems  to  have  reached  the
extremity,  an  unseen  Hand  assuages  the
grief  with  unsuspected  mitigations.

ii.  Under  spiritual  distress.  The
Borrow  for  sin,  "I  have  heard  Eph-
raim," &c.  No  one  else  heard  him  or
would  have  noticed  him.  But  God  did.
Ephraim  felt   himself   unobserved  and


alone.  The  sin  that  was  heaviest  upon
his  heart  was  the  non-improvement  of
God's  afflictive  dispensations.  We  are
first  turned,  and  then  repent.

Under  these  apprehensions  the  Gospel
brings  relief,  by  leading  us  to  Christ,
the  sin-atoning  Lamb.  "  Behold  the
Lamb  ;  "  *'  Who  is  a  God  like,"  &c.  The
Gospel  proclaims  pardon,  reveals  a  full
and  ample  relief.

IL  The  hopes  the  Gospel  furnishes
of  a  better  life.  "There  is  hope  in
thine  end."  As  Israel  was  delivered
from  their  captivity,  so  we  shall  be  from
ours.  '*  The  ransomed  shall  return,"
The  Gospel  ministers  largely  to  hope.  It
tells  us  the  hour  of  conflict  is  succeeded
by  eternity  of  triumph.  Here  we  are
in  a  state  of  exile  and  bondage.  .  .  .
Heaven  is  complete  deliverance —

i.  From  the  captivity  of  sin.  Here
we  are  often  in  bondage  to  the  power
of  evil ;  there,  sin  shall  have  no  more
dominion.  A  state  of  perfect  holiness
and  perfect  love.

ii.  From  the  captivity  of  Satan,
Wicked  are  led  captive.  Christians
are  exposed  to  his  temptations ;  feel
the  mark  of  chain  and  fetter.  Christ
conquered  Satan  for  us  on  the  cross,
shall  dispossess  him  finally  at  death.

iii.  From  the  captivity  of  sorrow.  All
tears  wiped  away.

iv.  From  the  captivity  of  death. — Anon,

Ver.  18.  Theme:  Discipline.  "I
surely  heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  him-
self thus :  Thou  hast  chastised  me,
and  I  was  chastised,  as  a  bullock  un-
accustomed to  the  yoke ;  turn  Thou
me,  and  I  shall  be  turned :  for  Thou
art  the  Lord  my  God."

There  are  chastisements  in  life  which
cannot  be  classed  amongst  great  afflic-
tions. There  are  little  checks,  daily  dis-
appointments, irritations,  defeats,  and
annoyances — shadows  which  chequer
what  else  would  be  a  sunny  way — things
which  themselves  cannot  be  treated  with
dignity,  yet  they  tease  and  wear  the
heart.

I  Human  life  is  established  upon
a  disciplinary  basis.  There  is  a  "yoke  "
everywhere — in  sin,  in  repentance,  in
grace.      No  one    can    have    everything

525


CHAP,   XXXL


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAM,


just  as  he  wants  it.  Man  is  made  to
feel  that  there  is  somebody  in  the  world
besides  himself.  He  conceives  a  plan,
and  is  laughed  at  for  his  pains  ;  he  tells
his  dream,  and  men  suspect  his  vanity ;
he  points  out  his  high  tower,  and  whilst
his  finger  is  lifted  the  mocking  wind
hurls  the  boasted  masonry  to  the  ground.
So  we  are  jostled,  pulled  back,  and  mor-
tified. We  are  made  to  feel  that  our
very  life  is  a  vapour,  and  that  every
respiration  is  but  a  compromise  with
death.  We  should  ask  ourselves  the
meaning  of  these  things.  Discipline
touches  the  whole  scheme :  boy  at
school,  going  from  home,  bodily  afflic-
tion, oversights  and  miscalculations,
losses,  <fec.

IL  The  value  of  discipline  depends
upon  its  right  acceptance.  We  may
become  desperate  under  it :  *'  as  a  bul-
lock unaccustomed  to  the  yoke."  Men
may  mourn,  complain,  rebel ;  they  start
arguments  against  God ;  they  justify
themselves ;  they  become  lost  in  second-
ary agencies  and  incomplete  details.

Then  there  is  a  better  way.  "  Ephraim
bemoaned  himself,"  repented  before  God,
and  said,  "Turn  Thou  me,  and  I  shall
be  turned."  In  this  state  of  mind  see —
(1.)  Self-renunciation.  (2.)  Devout  and
joyful  confidence  in  God's  sovereignty
and  graciousnesSi

Application —

1.  There  is  a  yoke  in  sin»  **  The  way
of  transgressors  is  hard."

2.  There  is  a  yoke  in  goodness.  It
is  often  difficult  to  be  upright,  noble,
holy.

3.  God  helps  the  true  yoke-bearer :
"  My  yoke  is  easy."  We  must  bear  a
yoke  J  say,  shall  it  be  the  bad  yoke,  or
the  yoke  of  Jesus  Christ? — Dr,  Joseph
Parker  ("  Pulpit  Notes  ").

Ver.  18.  Theme:  On  Chastisement

KESITLTINO  IN  PENITENCE.

L  These  words  contain  an  acknow-
ledgment. *'  Thou  hast  chastised  me,"
<&c.

1.  This  expression  we  conceive  to
denote  the  inefficacy  of  former  correo-
tions,

2.  Though  corrections  are  calculated
to  produce  amendment,  though  such  is

52(5


their  tendency  and  design,  it  is  evident,
from  observation  and  experience,  they
often  fail  in  accomplishing  the  effect.

3.  Ephraim  is  here  represented  as
reflecting  upon  it.  (Proximate  causes  of
the  inefficacy  of  correction  by  itself).

4.  Inattention  to  the  hand  of  Godf
and,  as  a  natural  consequence,  their
neglecting  to  pass  from  the  contemplation
of  their  sufferings  to  their  sins.  Religion
begins  with  consideration.

5.  In  the  serious  purpose  of  a  religioui
life,  formed  under  afflictive  dispensations,
too  many  depend  entirely  upon  resell^
tions  formed  in  their  ovm  strength.

To  such  purposes  may  be  applied  the
beautiful  image  of  Nahum  :  "  And  at
the  great  grasshoppers,  which  camp  in
the  hedges  in  the  cold  day,  but  when
the  sun  ariseth  they  flee  away,  and  their
place  is  not  known."

n.  The  prayer.  "Turn  thou  me.*
This  may  be  enforced  by  such  arguments
as  these —

1.  The  plea  of  necessity.  There  is  no
other  resource.

2.  To  entreat  God  to  turn  is  not  to
ash  an  impossibility.  The  residue  of  the
Spirit  is  with  Him.

3.  It  is  worthy  of  His  interposition.
The  turning  of  the  heart  is  a  fit  occasion
on  which  Omnipotence  may  act.

4.  The  plea  may  be  enforced  by
precedents.  It  implies  no  departure
from  His  known  methods.

5.  We  may  force  it  by  a  reference  to
the  Divine  mercy. — Robert  Hall.

Ver.  18.  Theme:  Ephraim  Bemoan-
ing Himself.  Heathen  described
their  fabled  deity,  Jove,  as  sitting
far  aloft,  regardless  of  the  common
affairs  of  this  lower  world.  Not  such
is  Jehovah :  **  I  have  surely  heard
Ephraim ! "

Conceive  the  nearness  of  God  to  every
mourning  soul.  He  is  the  greatest  of
Comforters,  and  also  the  most  approach-
able. '*  He  will  regard  the  prayer  of
the  destitute,  and  not  despise  their
prayer."     See  here —

I.  A  sinner  bemoaning  himself.

1.  He  was  bowed  down  with  a  pecur
liar  grief.  Not  as  Rachel  *'  for  her
children;"  for  nothing  outside  of  him-


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.


CHAP.  XXXL


self,  but  "bemoaning  himself J^     Inward
Borrow,  true  repentance.

2.  Such  godly  sorrow  is  well-founded
sorrow.  Over  guilt,  outrage  on  God*s
goodness  and  grace,  <fec.

3.  This  sorrow  is  humble  soirow.
Not  excusing  himself,  or  flattering  him-
self, or  making  new  resolutions  ;  but
"  bemoaning  himself."  Self-abhorrence.
"  I  have  sinned  !  "

4.  A  thoughtful  sorrow.  For  Ephraim
reviews  his  past  life  :  "  Thou  hast  chas-
tised me."  What  came  of  it  ?  "I  was
chastised,"  and  that  was  all  !  See,
hence,  that  affliction,  providences,  &c.,
will  not  save  your  soul ;  you  need  effec-
tual grace.

5.  A  hopeless,  yet  a  hopeful,  sorrow,
Ephraim  says,  Lord,  it  is  useless  to
chastise  me,  I  only  get  worse  ;  but  do
Thou  turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  turned.**

Then  think  of—

U  The  Lord  observing  him.  Some
hide  yourselves  when  pricked  in
your  consciences.  But  the  Lord  finds
you  out.  Mothers  1  how  quickly  you
find  out,  even  in  the  night,  if  your  child
is  ill.

\.  God  heard  all  Ephraim  had  to
say.  It  may  be  but  a  stammering
cry ;  but  broken  prayers  are  the  best
prayers.

2.  God  delights  in  the  broken  heart
and  contrite  spirit.  "  I  have  surely
heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself.^*  If
He  should  not  hear  the  music  of  heaven,
He  certainly  would  hear  the  prayers  of
penitents.

3.  Our  God  is  full  of  compassion.
He  gave  Ephraim  what  he  asked.  "  Ye
shall  not  seek  His  face  in  vain."

IIL  The  Lord  working  in  His  effec-
tual grace.

1.  The  only  turning  in  the  world  that
is  saving  and  divine,  is  the  turning  of  tlie
heart,

2.  The  Lord's  way  of  turning  men
varies  in  each  case —

(1.)  A  distinct  sight  of  wrath  to  come
Btops  a  sinner.

(2.)  Or  the  awakened  conscience  is
led  to  see  tlie  real  nature  of  sin.

(3.)  The  grand  turning-point  is  a
sight  of  Christ  on  the  cross.

(4.)  One  of  the  inost  blessed  ways  by


which  God  makes  a  sinner  turn  is,
ffe  manifests  His  everlasting  l(yve  to
him.

!a,)  Are  you  bemoaning  yourself  i
b.)  Breathe  the  prayer,  **Turn  me,  O
Lord."— (7.  H,  Spurgeon,  1867.

Ver.  18.  Theme:  True  Repentance.
'*  I  surely  heard  Ephrai^i,"  <fec.

L  What  feeling  it  expresses  on  the
part  of  the  returning  penitent.

1.  Mark  the  depth  and  intensity  of
his  penitential  emotions.

2.  His  total  absence  of  all  attempts  ai
self  justification,

3.  The  promptitude  and  decision  with
which  he  acts  up  to  his  own  convictions
(ver.  19).

4.  His  concern  to  surrender  himself  to
those  Divine  influences  to  which  he
already  owed  so  much  ;  *'  Turn  Thou
me."

IL  What  illustrations  it  exhibits
of  God's  revealed  character.  It  accords
with  other  Scriptures  :  "  I,  even  I,  am
He  that  blotteth  out,"  <fec. ;  "  As  I  live,
I  have  no  pleasure,"  <fec.

1.  The  essential  and  inherent  com-
passion of  the  Divine  nature.

2.  His  knowledge  of  the  constitution
of  the  human  mind :  attracted  by  kind-
ness ;  repelled  by  severity.

3.  His  minute  and  condescending  re-
gard to  the  growth  and  progress  of  re-
ligious emotion.     *'  I  have  heard."

4.  His  infinite  readiness  to  receive
and  pardon  the  returning  sinner,

5.  He  reinstates  the  penitent  in
those  privileges  which  sin  had  for-
feited.

Vers.  18-20.  Theme:  A  Penitent's
Reflections  and  God's  Reflections
OVER  Him.

A  wide  difference  between  ostentation
and  true  piety.  The  sincere  [)enitent  de-
sires privacy.  God  here  declares  how
acceptable  is  such  repentance.

I.  The  reflections  of  a  true  penitent
over  himself.

1.  The  beginning  of  his  repentance.
He—

(1.)  Reflects  on  his  incorrigihlenes^
in  the  ways  of  sin.


CHAP.    XXXI.


H0MTLET1C  COMMENTARY :  JBREMIAff.


(2.)  Pleads  with  God  to  turn  and
tonvert  his  soul.

2.   The  progress  of  his  repentance.

(1.)  He  reflects  upon  the  advancing
distress  of  his  soul.  Amazed — "  smote
on  thigh  ;  "  then  **  ashamed  ;  "  then
"  even  confounded."

(2.)  But  he  gives  the  glory  of  his  ad-
vancement to  God  alone.  It  all  resulted
from  the  fact  that  "  I  was  turned."

II.  The  reflections  of  God  over  a
true  penitent.  The  penitent  finds  no
words  too  severe  against  himself  ;  but —

1.  God  accounts  no  honour  too  great
for  such  a  person.  He  owns  him  to  be
**  a  dear  and  pleasant  child."

2.  He  expresses  His  compassionate  re-
gard for  him»  "My  bowels  are  troubled
for  him."

3.  He  grants  him  all  he  himself  could
desire.  *'I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon
him,  saith  the  Lord."

Can  God  testify  of  us  as  of  Ephraim  ?
If  not^  we  must  expect  shame  and  con-
fusion (Matt.  xiii.  49,  60).  If  He  can,
happiness  will  be  ours  here  and  here-
after (Ps.  cxxvi.  6,  6).  —  Glanders
Simeon.

Vers.  18-20.  Them^:  The  Stubborn
Sinner  Submitting  Himself  to  God.

I.  A  description  of  the  feelings  and
conduct  of  an  obstinate,  impenitent
sinner  while  smarting  under  the  rod
of  affliction.  He  is  rebellious  —  till
subdued.

II.  The  new  views  and  feelings  pro-
duced by  affliction  through  Divine
grace.

(a.)  Convinced  of  guilt  and  sinful-
ness ;  (6)  praying ;  (c)  reflecting  on  the
eflfects  of  Divine  grace  in  his  conver-
sion.

III.  A  correcting  and  compassionate
God  watching  the  results,  &c.

(a.)  As  a  tender  Fnther,  mindful  of
His  penitent  child  ;  (6.)  Listening  to
his  complaints  and  petitions  ;  (c.)  de-
claring His  determination  to  pardon. —
Payson,

See  Addenda :  Confession.

With   vers.    18,   19,  Gomp.   Homilies

pn  chap.  iii.  21-25,
^^8


Notes  on  vers.  18-20.

i  "  Thou  hast  chastised  me,  and  I
WAS  CHAStiskd."  In  the  first  clause
the  chastisement  itself  is  meant ;  in  the
second,  the  beneficial  effects  of  it — in
teaching  the  penitent  true  wisdom.

ii.    "  As  A   BULLOCK  UNACCUSTOMED  "

(cf.  **  stiffnecked  "  Acts  vii.  51  ;  Exod.
xxxii.  9),  an  image  from  refractory  oxen.
Before  my  chastisement  /  needed  the
severe  correction  I  received,  as  much  as
an  untamed  bullock  needs  the  goad
{cf.  Acts  ix.  5,  where  the  same  figure
is  used  of  Saul  before  he  was  cor^
verted).

iii.  "  Turn  thou  mk,  and  I  shall
be  turned  ; "  by  Thy  converting  Spirit
(Lam.  V.  21).

But  why  does  E[)hraim  pray  for  con-
version,  seeing  that  he  is  already  con-
verted? Because  we  are  converted  by
progressive  steps,  and  need  the  same
power  of  God  to  carry  forward,  as  to
originate,  our  conversion  (John  vi.  44,
65 ;  cf.  Isa.  xxvii.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i.  5 ;  Phil,
i.  6).

iv.  "After  that  I  was  turned  I
repented."  Repentance  in  the  full
sense  follows,  not  precedes,  our  being
turned  to  God  by  God  (Zech.  xii.  10).
Repentance  is  the  tear  that  flows  from
the  eye  of  faith  turned  to  Jesus.  Him-
self gives  it ;  we  give  it  not  of  ourselves,
but  must  come  to  Him  for  it  (Acts  v.
31).

V.  "After  I  was  instructed,  I
SMOTE  UPON  MY  THIGH."  Made  to  learn
by  chastisement.  God*s  Spirit  often
works  through  the  corrections  of  His
providence.  *'  Smote,"  <fec.  (Ezek.  xxi.
12)  :  a  token  of  remorse,  shame,  and
grief  because  of  past  sin.

vi.    "I    DID    BEAR   THE   RKPROACB    OF

MY  YOUTH."  The  punishments  I  bore
were  the  just  punishments  of  my
scandalous  wantonness  against  God  in
my  youth  ;  alluding  to  the  idols  set  up
at  Dan  and  Bethel  immediately  after
the  ten  tribes  revolted  from  Judah.  His
sense  of  shame  shows  he  no  longer  de-
lights in  his  sin. — Jamieson.

Ver.  20.  Theme:  God's  Tender
Memory  of  the  Sinner.  **  Is  Eph-
raim   My  dear   s(m1   is  he  a  pleasant


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.   ZXXI*


child  1  For  since  I  spake  against  liiin,
I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still.
Therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for
him :  I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon
him,  saith  the  Lord."

See  Homily  on  chap,  ii.  2  :  "  An
Unforgotten  Past,'*  pp.  41,  42,  and
Noticeable  Topic,  Early  Piety  the
Beauty  of  Youth,  p.  50.

These  questions — "  Is  Ephraim,"  <fec.
— imply  that  a  negative  reply  might
naturally  follow.  Oh  !  who  could  have
imagined  that,  after  all  this  undutiful-
ness,  the  Father  could  still  regard  him
as  a  '^pleasant  child  "?

I  Our  sin  is  enough  to  estrange  the
heart  of  God  from  us.

n.  Yet  the  Divine  heart  is  tena-
cious of  its  cherished  child.  "How
can  I  give  thee  up?"  "I  do  earnestly
remember  him  still."

IIL  Human  alienation  from  God  is
not  ohlivion  with  God.  E[)hraim  might
be  indifferent  to  the  God  he  had  revolted
from  and  wronged  :  "  God  not  in  all  his
thoughts  ;  "  but  God  could  not  forget —
"  I  do  earnestly  remember."  God  cannot
bury  in  forgetful ness  the  child  He  loves.
He  "  so  loved  the  world,"  <fec.

IV.  Infinite  grace  is  intent  upon
the  recovery  of  the  alien  child.

1.  '*  My  bowels  are  troubled."  God's
restless  yearning  for  his  return.

2.  **  I  do  earnestly  remember."
"  While  he  was  yet  a  great  way  oflf
the  father  saw  him."

3.  "  I  will  surely  have  mercy."  Quick
to  relent  the  moment  he  repents.  God
is  in  no  doubt  as  to  how  He  will  receive
the  sinner.  "  The  father  ran^  and  had
compassion  upon  him,  and  kissed  him."

Ver.  21.  Theme :  Shewing  Exiles
THE  Way  Home.     "  Set  up  way-marks."

Keep  the  lights  burning.  Lift  up  the
cross  !  Preach  the  Gospel  still.  Declare
the  precious  promises.

I.  "  Way-marks  "  would  he  needed.
For  they  should  return  from  exile.

It  is  a  prophecy.  Souls  who  go  astray
may  return  ;  many  shall.

IL  "  Way-marks  "  would  he  helpful.
For  their  long  banishment  might  obli-
terate the  path  and  obliterate  their  re-
memhranQe.     For  long  absence  from  God


does  make  the  way  of  right  difficult  to
find.

IIL  "  Way-marks  "  would  be  remem-
brancers, testimonies  that  God  promised
their  return;  for,  seeing  these  "way-
marks,"  they  would  recall  His  promises
and  rejoice  in  His  faithfulness  and  grace,

Ver.  21.  Theme:  A  Rightly  Directed
Purpose.  **  Set  thine  heart  toward  the
highway."

L  There  is  hut  one  way  hack  to
God.  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  truth,  and
the  life ;  no  man  cometh  to  the  Father
but  by  Me."

IL  Misleading  paths  decoy  the  steps
astray.  "  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth
right  unto  a  man,"  <fec. ;  ways  of  self
reform^  sacramental  effix^a^y,  <fec.

nL  A  heart  intent  upon  the  way
marked  out /or  our  return  to  God,

Determined  to  tread  it.  Resolute  to
walk  in  none  other.  Earnest  to  be  found
therein  quickly,

Ver.  22.  Theme:  A  New -created
Wonder  :  The  Miraculous  Concep-
tion OF  Christ.  "The  Lord  hath
created  a  new  thing  in  the  earth:  a
woman  shall  compass  a  man."

For  other  interpretations  of  the  words,
see  Lit.  Crit.  supra.

The  words  naturally  and  easily  read
thus  : — Why  longer  "  go  about^^  looking
everywhere^  anywhere  for  helpers,  as  if
crying,  **  Who  will  show  us  any  goodi"
leaning  on  any  helpful  contingencies
which  may  perchance  offer  themselves  ?
Stay  your  hopes  on  Jehovah;  for  He
has  not  exhausted  His  wonderful  re-
sources for  Israel  and  humanity.  A
new  era  approaches — of  grace  in  Christ
Jesus.  A  new  creation  shall  mark  that
era — the  Incarnation  of  Christ;  when
the  Virgin  Woman  shall  compass  a
Man,  and  give  birth  to  **  the  Man  Christ
Jesus."

The  ancient  Jews  acknowledged  this
interpretation,  and  applied  the  words
determinately  to  the  Messiah.

Augustine  and  most  of  the  Christian
fathers  regarded  the  verse  as  predicting
the  event  of  the  Virgin  Mary  compassing
Christ  in  her  womb.

i  The  event  was  to  he  WHOLLY  unprk-
h  629


CBAT.  XXXI.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JBREMIAff.


CEDKNTED.  "  A  new  thing  in  the  earth,"
and  a  special  Divine  "  creation."  Thus
Mary  "  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy
Ghost"  (Matt.  i.  18-20).  It  was  an
event  out  of  the  ordinary  course  of
nature.

ii.  Prophecy  harmonised  vdth  the

fact   described.       The    first    evangelical

promise  described  Christ  as  "  the  Seed

of  the  woman^  not  of  man.     So  Isa.  vii.

14,  "  ^  Virgin  shall  conceive."

iii.  There  is  a  specific  personality
in  the  words ,  "  A  woman — a  man,"
Both  distinct ;  not  ani/  "  woman,"  not
an  ordinary  "  man ; "  but  definite,  so-
litary. The  Hebrew  rendered  here
"  woman  "  means  an  individualy  and  is
not  the  word  for  "  woman  "  collectively
and  in  plurality.  So  the  Hebrew  ren-
dered **man"  is  properly  "mighty  man,"
the  Geber;  and  Christ  is  called  in  Isa.  ix.
6,  M  Gibbdr,  (See  also  the  word  in
Deut.  X.  1 7 ;  Zech.  xiil  7 ;  and  cf.  Ps.
xlv.  3.)

iv.  The  localisation  of  the  event
helps  this  interpretation.  "  A  new  thing
in  the  earth ;^*  literally,  in  ^' the  land"
viz.,  of  Judah,  where  Christ's  conception
occurred  {cf,  Luke  i.  39,  41).

V.  An  occult  allusion  to  the  Slaugh-
ter op  the  Innocents  in  Bethlehem
associates  this  prediction  with  the  In-
carnation.    See  on  ver.  14.

vi.  Such  a  Messianic  promise  more
fully  explains  the  longing  of  the
exiles  to  return  to  their  land,
because  Emmanuel  should  be  born
there.

vii.  The  prophets  vision  is  through
all  these  verses  directed  on  to  the
Gospel  age,  when  "  the  new  covenant "
(ver.  29  seq.)  shall  dawn  upon  the  world,
of  which  the  Incarnate  Christ  should  be
the  *' Alpha  and  the  Omega."

Vers.  23,  24.  Comp.  Homily  on
chap.  iii.  17,  18.

Ver.  25.  "  Satiated  the  weary  soul."
Comp.  ver.  14.

Ver.  26.  Theme:  Sweet  Visions  of

Human  Good.     *'  My  sleep  was  sweet

11  n to  me."     "  My  sleep" — my  prophetic

4^ earn.      It  was  a  rare  experience  with

530


Jeremiah  to  have  visions  so  *'  sweet ; "
for  usually  his  messages  concerning  *'  the
Divine  intent"  were  pensive  and  sad.

i.  Happy  outlooks  for  a  woestricken
world  are  sweetest  to  the  Divine  seer.

ii.  There  are  gleams  of  day  glory  break'
ing  the  grim  night  of  the  worldts  distress,

iii  It  is  in  God^s  purposes  of  grace^
as  distinct  from  man^s  conduct  of  sinful-
nesSf  that  these  glad  visions  of  good  are
possible.

Vers.  29,  30.  Theme:  Eating  Soub
Grapes:  Personal  Responsibility.

Popular  sentiments,  though  crystallised
into  proverbs,  may  be  misleading.  There-
fore "prove  all  things,"  <fec.  Both  Eze-
kiel  and  Jeremiah  mention  this  as  ft
proverb  in  currency.  See,  with  ver.  29,
Ezek.  xviiii.  2-4.

A  law  on  Sinai  that  God  would  "  visit
the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  their  chil-
dren."

In  distinction  from  the  old  covenant f
a  new  dispensation  was  coming  in  which
individual  responsibility  should  pre-
vail as  the  law.

I  Facts  in  the  Divine  economy  and
procedure  warranting  this  prevailing
sentiment.  "The  fathers  have  eaten
a  sour  grape,  and  the  children's  teeth  are
set  on  edge."

1.  Man^s  inherited  misery  through
Adam's  fall  (Rom.  v.  12-14,  18,  19).

2.  Great  calamities  were  allowed  to
engulf  the  children  in  the  ruin  merited
only  by  the  fathers.

The  Deluge  j  overthrow  of  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  ;  destruction  of  "  families "
of  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  together
with  themselves.  So,  for  David's  sin  in
numbering  the  people,  70,000  of  his
subjects  were  slain,  himself  spared.  Ma-
nasseh  (2  Kings  xxiii.  26,  27;  xxiv.  3,  4),
On  the  Jewish  nation  too  (Matt,  xxiii.

3.  In  civil  and  social  relations  the
conduct  of  governors  and  parents  casts
its  results  on  the  children.

II  A  spirit  of  sinful  repining  which
cast  blame  upon  God.  The  Jews  in-
tended to —

1.  Exonerate  themselves  for  their  mis-
fortunes. They  implied  that  for  r\o  |f^
of  their  own  \vere  they  suffering,


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY  :  J  ERE  Ml  AH.


CHAP.  Tra.


2.  Reflect  on  the  tvisdom  and  Justice  of
God.  But  surely  God  punishes  us  less
than  our  iniquities  deserve  (Ezra  ix.  13).
Even  the  lost  souls  must  own  God  just
(Rev.  xvi.  7).  And  the  day  of  retribu-
tion will  prove  itself  to  be  "  a  revelation
of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God "
(Rom.  ii.  5).

III.  A  new  era  announced  of  indi-
vidual responsibility  and  judgment.

1.  God  declares  what  shall  be  His
settled  rule  of  procedure  (ver.  30).
(1.)  National  and  all-embracing  judg-
ments shall  cease.  (2.)  Ea^h  soul  shall
stand  on  its  oton  merits  and  bear  its  own
responsibility.

2.  This  law  of  individuality  is  to  be
verified — (1.)  In  this  life  (Gal.  vi.  5)  ;
(2.)  In  the  future  world  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).

IV.  The  awful  burden  of  inevitable
personal  guilt.

1.  Every  man  must  give  account  of
himself  and  meet  his  just  condemnation.
For—

2.  There  is  none  who  can  stand  before
God  witjiout  sin.     And

3.  Every  sinner  shall  die  his  due
death  (ver.  30).

4.  Can  there  be  found  no  Sin-Bearer  9
Yes  verily ;  Christ  died  "  the  Just  for
the  unjust "  (1  Peter  ilL  18) ;  was  "  made
sin  for  us  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  And  so  we
lose  our  individual  curse  in  the  atone-
ment and  substitution  of  Calvary.

Vers.  31-34.  Theme:  Salvation
Taken  into  God's  own  Hands.  "  Be-
hold, the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that
I  will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the
house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  house  of
Judah  ;  not  according  to  the  covenant
that  I  made  with  their  fathers,  in  the
day  that  I  took  them  by  the  hand,  to
bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,
which  my  covenant  they  brake;  though  I
was  a  husband  unto  them,  saith  the
Lord  ;  but  this  shall  be  the  covenant
that  I  will  make  with  the  house  of  Israel:
After  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will
put  My  law  in  their  inward  parts,  and
write  it  in  their  hearts  ;  and  wUl  be  their
God,  and  they  shall  be  My  people.  And
they  shall  teach  no  more  every  man  his
neighbour,  and  every  man  his  brother,
Baying,  I^nqw  the  V>rd  ;  f<>r  they  slijijl  all


know  Me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto
the  greatest  of  them,  saith  the  Lord  ;  for
I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I  will
remember  their  sin  no  more.*'

It  is  useful  to  contemplate  the  duties
devolving  on  us  as  agents,  and  the  hopes
arising  from  the  agency  of  God.  Our
text  refers  to  the  latter.  The  old  cove-
nant was  made  with  the  Hebrews  at
Sinai,  the  covenant  of  grace  under
types  ;  not  an  absolute  but  a  conditional
covenant,  and  in  this  it  resembled  the
law.  As  a  consequence,  it  is  added,
"  which  covenant  they  brake."  But  it
pleased  God  to  promise  a  new  covenant.
In  this  He  shows  His  own  agency  on
the  heart,  and  takes  salvation  into  His
own  hands  to  accomplish  it  Himself:
*'  They  shall  be  My  people  and  I  urill  be
their  God."  Had  a  covenant  of  works
been  held  out  offering  salvation  upon
perfect  obedience,  or  a  covenant  offering
pardon  to  man  unassisted,  none  would
have  been  saved.  Both  were  tried,  in
Eden  and  at  Sinai.  The  covenant  made
with  Abraham  still  exists.  Let  us  show —

L  According  to  the  plan  of  gra^e  re-
vealed in  the  Gospel^  God  has  Taken  the
Work  of  Salvation  into  His  own
Hands.

IL  This  Lays  the  only  Founda-
tion FOR  HOPK

I.  According  to  plan  of  grace  in
Gospel,  God  has  taken  the  work  of
salvation  into  His  own  hands.  The
great  design  originated  in  the  mind  of
God,  it  was  His  own  choice  and  purpose,
induced  by  a  regard  for  His  own  glory
and  compassion  for  a  sinful  world.  He
organised  the  plan  alon^.  Eternal  ages
before  man  wa^,  the  covenant  of  redemp-
tion between  the  Sacred  Persons  was
formed,  and  all  circumstances  relating  to
the  salvation  of  the  world  were  settled.
Man  was  then  made,  and  fell ;  when  an
intimation  of  the  purpose  was  made
to  him.  Jesus  Christ  came  in  due  time
to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him-
self. He  rose  from  the  dead  for  our
justification.  All  this  was  done  by  God
independently  of  His  creatures.  The
Holy  Spirit  was  sent  out  to  subdue  as
many  as  the  Father  had  given  Christ.
Through  human  instrumentality  the
world  Wits  enlightened  by  the  preaching

531


CHAP.  XXXT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMTAE.


of  tlie  Word.  The  creation,  care,  support,
and  enlargement  of  the  Christian  Church
was  undertaken  by  the  Trinity.  In  like
manner  God  takes  the  salvation  of  every
believer  individually  into  His  own  hands.
IL  That  God  has  taken  the  work  of
delivering  His  own  people  into  His  own
hands,  is  the  only  foundation  of  human
hope.  Til  is  doctrine  is  sweet  to  the
Christian,  but  opposed  by  the  proud ;
for  had  not  God  contrived  and  executed
this  plan,  no  provision  could  have
been  made  for  the  salvation  of  man  ;  and,
beset  as  he  is  from  without  and  within,
he  can  only  find  help  from  the  God  of
his  salvation.

1.  The  Christian  who  feels  his  own
iveaknesSj  and  discerns  the  power  of  his
enemies y  resorts  to  this  truth  as  the  only
ground  for  hope.  '*  The  salvation  of  the
righteous  is  of  the  Lord,"  and  they  feel
that  God  can  shield  them  from  eve7'y
enemy.

2.  Those  who  would  rather  trust  them-
selves than  Gody  reject  this  truth;  while
the  only  encouragement  for  Christians  to
"  work  out  their  own  salvation  ''  is  that
'*  God  worketh  in  them."

3.  This  doctrine  also  affords  encourage-
ment to  the  Church  generally.  While
looking  upon  the  many  who  know  not
God,  we  can  be  sustained  by  nothing
but  the  trust  that  the  work  of  saving
men  is  God*s  work  alone.  In  commend-
ing our  loved  ones  to  God,  we  feel  peace  in
the  knowledge  that  "  God  has  taken  their
salvation  into  His  own  hands."  Ministers
of  God's  people,  be  content  to  leave
their  salvation  there  ;  it  is  His  work  and
His  cause.  Pious  and  trembling  ones,
dwell  upon  this  truth  to  your  comfort ;
and  to  the  unrenewed  I  would  say,
remember  you  are  in  God's  hands.  Return
unto  the  Lord,  for  He  will  have  mercy
upon  you,  and  to  our  God,  for  He  will
abundantly  pardon. — Ancient  MS.

Ver.  32.  **  Which  covenant  they  brake ^
although  I  was  a  husband  unto  them."
Comp.  Homily  on  chap,  iii  14.

Ver.  33.  The  new  covenant.  Comp.
Homily  on  chap,  iii  16.

Ver.  32.  Theme:  Ts  the  Old  Cove-
nant   Abant)»>nkd'/      "Not  according

r>33


to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their
fathers."

I.  The  covenant  God  made  at  the
first  with  His  people  is  not  contra-
dicted and  destroyed  by  the  new.

1.  God  had  not  changed  His  purpose^
as  if  he  had  forgotten  His  faithfulness.
The  first  covenant  with  Abraham  was
inviolable.

2.  The  law  was  a  confirmation  of^  and
based  upon,  that  covenant.  Consequently,
God  can  make  no  new  law  inconsistent
with  the  old.

3.  Christians,  under  the  new  covenant,
are  partakers  of  that  old  and  original
Abrahamic  covenant,  are  called  "chil-
dren of  Abraham  ; "  will  be  "  gathered
into  Abraham's  bosom ; "  and  shall
"come  from  the  east  and  west,"  (kc,
"and  sit  doivn  with  Abraham"  &c.

These  considerations  show  that  God
never  abrogated  the  covenant  made  with
Abraham  and  confirmed  by  and  to  Moses,

II.  In  what  sense  God  has  made  a
"  new  covenant "  with  His  people.
Here  premising  that —

1.  The  substance,  or  doctrine,  remains
the  same ;  for  God  in  the  Gtospel  brings
forward  nothing  but  what  the  law  con-
tains.    But —

2.  In  the  form,  or  expression  of  the
doctrine,  all  is  new.  Thus  Christ,  as
substitute;  Holy  Spirits  renewing  grace  ;
and  the  whole  method  of  teaching  men
God's  will :  these  are  new.

(a.)  Thus,  God  made  a  new  covenant
when  He  accomplished  through  His  Son
what  had  been  foreshadowed  forth  under
the  law.

(b.)  Further,  it  was  a  new  thing  that
God,  by  the  regeneration  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  made  the  covenant,  not  only
strike  the  ear,  but  penetrate  the  heart.

(c.)  The  outward  mode  of  teaching  is
also  new  ;  for,  comparing  the  law  with
the  Gospel,  we  find  that  God  speaks  to
us  openly  now,  as  it  were  face  to  face
(2  Cor.  iii.  13)  ;  for  the  veil  is  removed,
and  God  in  the  face  of  Christ  presents
Himself  to  be  seen  by  us. — Arranged
from  Calvin.

Ver.  33.  Theme:  "  Mt  Law  in  Their

Hearts."

^o  longer  a  Sinaitic  code  of  morals,


nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  JEKEMJAn,


CHAP.   XXXT.


external  to  man  and  enforced  upon  him ;
but  an  inner  force,  an  inspiration  of
love,  constraining  the  soul  into  sweet
consent.  The  serinon  on  the  mount  is
the  old  Mosaic  law — but  transfigured
by  love :  speaking  to  the  very  heart  of
inan  in  tones  of  mighty  tenderness.

L  If  God's  commandments  are  to
sway  the  whole  being  oi  a  man,  they
must  move  the  inmost  affections.

1.  '*  Laws,"  which  only  speak  to  the
ear,  and  demand  an  unwilling  attention,
can  affect  men  but  feebly.  But  the
voice  of  God  is  powerful  in  a  soul  when
it  finds  its  way  inward  to  the  affections,
and  speaks  in  tones  which  stir  the
keenest  and  strongest  emotions.

2.  The  "  new  covenant "  laws  are
voices  of  love  from  God,  full  of  infinite
tenderness  and  grace,  and  go  deeper
into  the  soul  than  commandments;  they
are  more  penetrating  than  a  mother's
words.  God  speaks  to  the  heart  in  the
Gospel.

3.  These  laws  of  love — "  Thou  shalt
love  the  Lord,"  &c.  ;  for  *'  God  is  love  "
— which  constitute  the  Gospel  covenant,
do  rule  the  soul  from  within  by  the
impulses  and  affections  which  they
awaken.  **  We  love  Him,  because  He
first  loved  us."  His  laws  are  impressed
upon  our  very  hearts.

IL  If  man's  obedience  to  God  is  to
be  complete — the  obedience  of  a  willing
soul,  glad  to  obey — the  inmost  affec-
tions must  move  him  thereto.

1.  ^*Duty"  is  cold  and  hard  as  an
inspiration  to  conduct.  It  awakens  no
enthusiasm,  no  delight,  no  eager  volition
in  the  souL  It  enforces  itself  upon  us,
not  awakens  response  within  us.

2.  But  "  laws  '*  (interpreted  and  em-
phasised as  they  are  in  the  life  of  Jesus
— calling  us  to  obedience  for  love  of  Himy
and  inspired  with  grandeur  as  they  are
in  the  cross  of  Christ — declaring  the
infinite  importance  to  the  sinner  that
he  should  not  sin,  but  should  obey  and
live) — laws  of  God  thus  enforced  cast
their  pathos  upon  the  heart  of  even  the
disobedient  and  stir  to  response.

3.  The  affections  won  by  Christ's
personally  obedient  example  and  substi-
tutionary death  for  man^s  disobedience,
|)ronjpt  the  soul  to  willirig  anxious  Qon-


cern  to  do  the  will  of  God  with  fervour
and  delight.  His  laws  are  obeyed  from
the  heart.

m  Hence,  love  awakened  within
a  soul  is  a  grander  force  and  a  surer
guarantee  of  full  obedience  to  law  than
the  sense  of  duty  however  majestically
enforced.

1.  The  cross  raised  on  Calvary  is
therefore  a  grander  motive  than  the
tables  of  stone  given  on  Sinai.

2.  Humanity  can  be  drawn  into  alle-
giance to  God  more  effectually  and  surely
by  the  allurements  of  love  than  by  the
demands  and  threatenings  of  law.

3.  The  new  covenant,  therefore,  super-
sedes the  reign  of  penalty ,  with  its  appeals
to  duty  and  fear,  by  the  reign  of  grace,
in  which  the  heart  is  won  to  glad  obedi-
ence, inspired  by  gratitude  and  love.

Ver.  34.  Theme:  Universal  Know-
ledge OF  THE  Lord.  "  And  they  shall
teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbour,
and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Know
the  Lord ;  for  they  shall  all  know  Me,
from  the  least  of  tliem  unto  the  greatest
of  them,  saith  the  Lord."

1.  Its  primary  application  is  to  the  enr
lightenment  of  Israel.  They  shall  know
Christ  as  the  Lord  (Isa.  liv.  13).

2.  Its  secondary  reference  is  to  all
believers,  who  come  to  see  Christ  for
themselves  as  their  Saviour,  Lord,  and
God  (John  vi.  45  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10  j  1  John
ii.  2,  20).

3.  Its  widest  meaning  is  the  ingather-
ing of  all  people  to  the  "  one  faith  "  (Ps.
il  8).

I.  By  a  Divine  plan  of  instruction
men  shall  be  taught.

1.  It  is  slow  and  feeble  work  this
winning  men  by  man!s  teaching.

2.  Not  that  the  office  of  teaching  will
cease  under  the  Gospel  dispensation.

3.  But  the  Divine  Spirit  will  become
the  world's  Teacher,  showing  Christ  to
n^en.

4.  And  a  purer  light  will  by  that
Spirit  shine  in  upon  the  human  con-
science, revealing  to  the  sinner  more
clearly  his  state,  his  need,  and  the
remedy  of  the  cross.

II.  With  an  all-embracing  inclusivo-
Qess  men  shall  be  taught.

633


CHAP.  XXXI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


1.  National  harriers  and  distinctions
shall  no  longer  limit  the  spread  of  true
religion.  The  Gospel  shall  be  "  unto
all  people."

2.  Social  and  educational  divisions
shall  he  utterly  disregarded  m  the  Divine
diffusion  of  light.  "Things  despised"
will  be  equally  blessed  with  Divine  light
— "the  least  of  them"  as  "things
mighty  " — "  the  greatest  of  them."  For
"  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons."

3.  Childhood  shall  gather  under  the
lustre  of  Christian  knowledge  as  much
as  maturity  ;  for  Christ  shall  enfold
the  lambs,  and  the  "  little  ones  "  shall
be  in  "the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — "the
least  of  them,"

IIL  Into  a  clearer  knowledge  of
God  men  shall  be  led.  "All  shall
know  Me,''*

1.  Sinai's  revelations  and  Prophecy's
dim  teachings /aiYeo?  to  reveal  God  fully
to  the  soul.  They  were  but  faint  gleam-
ings  (Exod.  xxxiii.  23).

2.  The  Person  of  Christ — His  life,
teachings,  character,  and  death — unveils
God  clearly  to  man  (John  i.  18).

3.  Bi/  the  Spirit's  illumination  a
familiar,  happy,  and  satisfactory  realisa-
tion of  God  is  brought  to  each  believing
soul  (1  John  ii.  27).

Vers.  35-37.  Theme:  God's  Guar-
antee TO  His  Church.  In  prophecy
we  see  the  purposes  of  God  unfolded,
and,  comparing  past  and  passing  events,
see  God  so  ordering  every  incident
for  the  fulfilment  of  His  purposes.
Note—

i.  With  what  majesty  and  glory  the
Almighty  describes  Himself/

ii.  With  what  solemnity  He  enforces
His  declarations,  equivalent  even  to
oaths !

iii.  And  all  this  in  order  to  assure
His  people  of  His  exhaustless  and  ina-
lienable mercy  !

I.  Contemplate  the  grandeur  of  these
assurances  of  Jehovah  to  His  people.

1.  In  their  historic  reference  to  Israel
literally.

(1.)  Their  imperishable  security  ;  they

shall    always  be   under   His  care.     So

that,  while  other  nations  have  become

QDiiterated,  they  shall  never  bf,     Though

0U


their  sins  provoked  Him  to  utterly  cast
them  off,  they  should  be  restored  to  His
favour  as  of  old,

(2.)  God's  infinite  resources  on  their
behalf  '*  The  Lord,  which  giveth  the
sun,"  &c. ;  the  almightiness  of  Jehovah ;
"  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  His  name."

(3. )  The  inviolability  of  God's  covenant
with  them.  If  impossibilities  can  be,
"  the  heavens  be  measured,"  <kc.,  then
this  impossibility  may  happen,  that  God
would  sever  His  people  from  Himself,
the  people  He  betrothed  in  an  everlast-
ing covenant !

Note  : — History  confirms  these  ancient
asstirances  of  God  to  Israel,  During
their  captivity  in  Babylon  the  nation
kept  its  nationality  intact,  and  were
restored  to  Canaan.  And  even  now,
though  for  1800  years  Israel  and  Judah
are  scattered,  God  preserves  them  **a
peculiar  people ; "  and  signs  are  not
wanting  that  the  "lost"  ten  tribes  are
still  in  distinct  existence.

They  are  still  "  beloved  for  the  fathers*
sake  ;  "  and  God's  "  gifts  and  calling
are  without  repentance  "  (Isa.  liv.  7-10),

2.  In  their  larger  application  to  the
Church  of  God  spiritually.

(1.)  Guarded  by  the  unfailing  care  of
the  Lord.  "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not
prevail;"  "Not  one  of  them  shall  be
lost."

(2.)  All  the  guarantees  of  Deity  are
pledged  to  its  security.  "  My  Father
who  gave  them  to  Me  is  greater  than
all,  and  none  shall  pluck  them  out  of
My  Father's  hand  :  I  and  My  Father
are  one !  "

(3.)  With  inviolable  fidelity  Christ's
people  are  bound  to  Him,  Not  a  jot  or
tittle  of  His  word  shall  fail :  "  Heaven
and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  word
shall  not  pass  away."  "  Lo,  I  am  with
you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the
world,"

IL  Ponder  the  value  of  these  assur-
ances of  Jehovah  to  His  people.  To
Israel  indeed  literally  belongs  these
"  covenants  and  promises  ;  "  yet  Chris-
tians have  a  joint  heritage  in  them  ;  for
Paul  assures  us  that  "  God,  willing  more
abundantly  to  show  unixi  the  heirs  of
promise  the  immutability  of  His  counsel,
coiiSrroed  it  b^  d^v  Qftth    that  by  two


MOMILETIC  COMMENTAHt:  JMEMIAB,


OflAP.  xxif.


immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  im-
possible for  God  to  lie,  we  might  liave  a
strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for
refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before
tt5"  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18).

1.  By  whorriy  then,  may  these  assur-
ances be  appropriated  ?  *'  All  the  pro-
mises of  God  are  in  Christ,  Yea ;  and
in  Him,  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by
us."  Only  those  who  are  "  in  Christ  "
themselves  can  **  inherit  the  promises  "
which  are  assured  in  Him.

2.  For  what  purposes  should  these
assurances  be  appropriated  ?  For  our
enduring  consolation  amid  all  distresses,
persecutions,  <fec.  (Rom.  viii.  35-39);
yet  not  for  delusive  self-security  and  pre-
sumption. Unless  we  keep  ourselves  dis'
tifict  from  the  world,  as  do  the  Jews  as
a  nation,  but  distinct  for  our  piety  (2
Cor.  vi.  17;  James  i.  27),  we  forfeit  all
part  in  the  assurance  that  God  will  keep
us  perpetually  before  Him  as  His  people.

3.  Jn  what  spirit,  then,  should  these
assurances  be  appropriated  ?  With  faith
in  God's  word  (John  xiv.  1) ;  with  Joyous
hope  (Rom.  v.  2)  ;  with  lowly  watchful-
ness (Rom.  xL  20).

Compare  with  the  above  Sim^onU  Out-
line,  on  which  this  is  based.

Vers.  38,  39.  Theme:  The  Rebuild-
ing OF  Jerusalem,  both  Literaxly  and
Spiritually.

Wordsworth  here  points  out —

L  The  city  is  here  said  to  he  built  to
the  Lord  (ver.  38).  It  is  dedicated  to
Him.  The  Church  (xu^iaxrj)  is  the
house  of  the  Lord.  It  is  called  by
His  name,  consecrated  to  His  glory
and  service.  Its  name  is  Jehovah
Shammahy  "  The  Lord  is  there  "  (Ezek.
xlviii.  35).

n.  Taken  in  its  literal  sense,  this
prophecy  foretels  that  Jerusalem  shall
be  rebuilt  in  all  its  extent,  from  the
tower  of  Hanameel,  on  the  north-east
(see  Neh.  iii.  1 ;  xiL  39)  to  the  gate  of
the  corner,  on  the  north-west  (2  Kings
xiv.  13;  2  Chron.  xxvl  9).  Comp.
Zech.  xiv.  10.  This  was  effected  by
Nehemiah.

m  But  this  was  figurative  of  tJie
greater  rebuilding^  when  Jesus  Christ
built  up  the  ruins  of  our  fallen   nature.


and  raised  up  the  walls  of  the  spiritual
Jerusalem,  His  universal  Churcl).

1.  The  names  Hanameel  and  Gate  oj
the  Corwcr  have  a  symbolical  sense,  suited
to  this  fulfilment.  "  Hanameel  "  =  y?'rt-
ciously  given  by  God.  Tlie  building  of
the  spiritual  Jerusalem  (so  Jerome  sug-
gests) begins  with  the  free  grace  of  God
(Titus  ii.  ll-H;  iii.  4-8),  and  extends
to  the  gate  of  the  Corner,  Christ  being
the  elect  "  Corner-stone ;  "  for  He  is  the
"  Corner "  in  which  the  walls  of  both
peoples — Jew  and  Gentile — meet  in  one,
cemented  together  in  Him  (Ps.  cxviii.
22;  Isa.  xxviiL  16;  Matt.  xxi.  42;
1  Peter  iii  6).

2.  Similarly  the  names  "  hill  Gareb
and  GocUh'^  have  a  symbolical  signi-
ficance. These  names  are  nowhere  found
in  Scripture,  and  have  no  actual  localisa-
tion ;  the  reason,  therefore,  for  the  choice
of  such  names  is  that  we  should  not  look
to  the  letter  but  to  the  spirit  [!]  Mystical
names  were  thus  sometimes  used  by  pro-
phets (Cant,  ii  17,  vi  12;  Jer.  xxv.  26 ;
Ezek.  xxxix.  11,  <fec.)

But  "  Gareb*^  means  a  lepery  and
leprosy  was  a  type  of  sin  ;  while  "  Goath  '*
is  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  same  as
Golgotha  or  Calvary.  Leprosy  is  the  ban
of  death  ;  but  Christ  by  death  "  abolished
death"  whereas  on  Calvary  was  opened
"  the  fountain /or  w»,"  and  so  sin  and
death  found  a  remedy  in  Christ.

Thus  the  Christian  Church,  which  has
its  origin  and  centre  in  Zion,  extends  its
walls  with  a  living  and  gracious  energy
to  enfold  the  hill  Gareb,  and  even  Goath
itself.

rV.  Further,  in  ver.  40,  it  is  affirmed
that  "  the  whole  valley  of  the  dead  bodies  "
— the  loathsome  and  idolatrous  valley
of  Hinnom,  and  even  "  all  the  ^elds  unto
the  brook  Kidron" — to  which  all  the
abominations  of  idolatry  were  brought
and  burned  (2  Kings  xxxii  4-6),  i.e.,  all
things  most  unclean  by  nature  and  by
human  corruption,  will  be  purged  from
all  impurity,  and  cleansed  by  the  blood
of  Christ  and  the  outpouring  of  the
Spirit  of  holiness  in  the  Christian
Church,  and  so  be  made  "  holy  unto  the
Lord"  (Zech.  xiv.  20,  21  ;  Joel  iii  17;
Isa.  Hi.  1,  (fcc.)

'rhis   has   been   fulfilled,   nnd   is   in

535


on  A  p.  xxxt.


BOMILETtG  aOMMENTARY:  JERBMIAB,


couise  of  fulfilment  in  the  transforma-
tion of  heathen  basilicas  and  temples  (as
tlie  Pantheon  of  Rome  and  the  Parthenon
of  Theseus  at  Athens)  into  Christian
Churches,  and  the  conversion  of  heathen
cities  and  nations  unto  Christ.  The
cross  of  Christ  stands  in  the  Colosseum,
where  Christian  martyrs  were  formerly
cast  to  the  lions ;  and  it  surmounts  the
obelisks  of  Egypt ;  and  human  nature,
once  the  stronghold  of  Satan,  has  now
become  the  shrine  of  Deity  by  the  incar-
nation of  the  Son  of  God. —  Wordsworth^ s
Commentary,

Note. — Dr,  Payne  Smith  remarks  :
"  The  main  point  in  Jeremiah*s  descrip-
tion of  the  New  Jerusalem  is  not  its
great  extent,  though  it  would  have
covered  somewhat  more  space  than  the
old  city,  and  much  more  than  Nehe-
miah  included  within  his  walls,  but
that  it  took  in  and  consecrated  spots
which  previously  had  been  unclean.  If
we  compare  this  with  Zech.  ii.  4,  the
conclusion  seems  evident  that  Jeremiah's
words  are  to  be  spiritually  understood.
His  city  is  one  that  renders  what  was


before  unclean  *  holy  unto  Jehovah.*
(Comp.  with  this  John's  New  Jerusalem,
especially  Rev.  xxL  27.)"

Ver.  40.  The  Perpetuity  of  the
Spiritual  Jerusalem.  "It  shall  not
be  plucked  up  nor  thrown  down  any
more  for  ever."

Calvin  comments :  **  The  promise  of
perpetual  favour  is  added  ;  for  it  would
not  be  sufficient  to  have  God's  mercy
promised  us  for  a  short  time.  The  city
indeed  was  again  destroyed  by  Titus,
and  at  length  wholly  demolished  by
Adrian ;  but  God  gave  some  taste  of
His  favour,  in  the  external  aspect  of  the
city,  till  Christ  came;  but  after  Christ
was  manifested,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem
became  the  object  to  be  sought,  and
then  all  types  and  shadows  ceased,

"  Tliis  promise  pledges  the  perpetuity
of  the  Church  ;  for  though  God  may  per-
mit it  to  be  terribly  shaken,  and  Satan
and  all  the  world  may  daily  threaten  its
ruin,  yet  the  Lord  will  preserve  it  to
the  end,  so  that  it  shall  never  perish.''


ADDENDA   TO  CHAP,   XXXI,:  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS,


Ver.    3.    Everlasting    Love.       A
father,  whose  affluence  was  considerable,
mourned   over   a   reckless    son,    whose
misconduct  brought  shame  upon  himself
and  family.     From  home  the  prodigal
went  into  another  country,  and  for  years
he  was  lost  to  his  relatives.     A  chance
occurring,   he    sent    by   a    friend   this
message,    should     he    meet    his    boy,
"  Your  father   loves  you  still,"      The
bearer  sought  him  long  and  in  vain.    At
last  he  saw  him  enter  a  house  of  vice,
and  called  him ;   and   there,   at  a  late
hour    of    evening,    he    delivered    this
message.     The  dissolute  gambler's  heart
was    touched.       The    thought   that   his
father  still   loved   him,  and  wished  to
forgive  him,  broke  the  spell  of  Satan.
He  abandoned    his    profligacy   and   re-
turned to  his  father.     Oh!  the  power  of
such  a  message  of  inalienable  love  from
God!

•*  Could  we  with  ink  the  ocean  fill.
Were  the  whole  world  of  parchment  made,
536


Were  every  single  grass  a  quill,
And  every  man  a  scribe  by  tradet

To  write  the  love

Of  God  above
Would  drain  the  ocean  dry,

Nor  could  the  scroll

Contain  the  whole,
Though  stretched  from  earth  to  sky."

"Not  as  the  world  loves  doth  God
love.  They  love  to-day  and  hate  to-
morrow, wearing  their  friends  like
flowers,  which  we  may  behold  in  their
bosoms  whilst  they  are  fresh  and  sweet,
but  soon  they  wither  and  then  are  laid
aside.  Whereas  the  love  of  God  to  His
people  is  everlasting,  and  He  wears  them
as  a  signet  upon  His  right  hand,  which
He  will  never  part  with." — White,

Ver.  9.  Tears  of  Penitence.  A
saint's  tears  are  better  than  a  sinner's
triumphs.  Bernard  saith,  Lachrymoe
poenitentium  sunt  vinum  angelorum:
"  The  tears  of  penitents  are  the  wine  of


7


angels.  "-


-Seeker,


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMlAB,


cbap.  xxxn.


Ver.  18.  Confession  :  *'  Bemoaning
himself."  If  I  am  working  beside  h
man,  and  I  see  that  he  tries  to  shirk
his  work  upon  me,  I  am  angry  with
him.  But  if  he  says  to  me,  "I  am  ill
and  cannot  work,"  then  the  thought
comes  to  me  at  once,  **  You  shall  not
work;  I  will  help  you."  And  so,  if  a
man  says  to  us,  "  I  know  I  did  wrong,
but  I  am  weak ;  blame  me  as  little  as
you  can,  but  help  me  out  as  much  as


you  can  " — the  very  confession  disarms
us,  and  we  think  better  of  him  than  we
did  before.  Therefore  it  is  that  God  so
exhorts  us  to  confess  our  sins  to  Him.
— H.  Ward  Beecher,

"  All-powerful  is  the  penitential  sigh

Of  true  contrition ;  like  the  placid  wreaths
Of  incense,  wafted  from  the  righteous  shrine
Where  Abel  ministered,  to  the  blest  seat
Of  Mercy,  an  accepted  sacrifice,
Humiliation's  couacioas  plaint  ascends.*'

— Hayet.


CHAPTER  XXXII.

Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — "  Tenth  year  of  Zede-
kiah  king  of  Judah,  and  eighteenth  of  Nebuchadnezzar  "  (ver.  1).  Cf,  note  on  chronology  of
chap.  XXV.  :  "this  eighteenth  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar"  was  about  B.C.  585  ;  or,  according  to
the  Chaldean  cylinders,  B.C.  564,

2.  Contemporary  Scrip|tures. — Chaps,  xxxix.,  xl.,  lii.  4,  5,  &;c.  ;  1  Kings  xxv. ;  2  Chron.
XXX vi.  17,  scq.  ;  Ezek.  xxiv.

3.  National  Affairs. — The  siege  of  Jerusalem  began  in  the  tenth  month  of  the  ninth  year  of
Zedekiah's  reign,  and  was  now  going  on  ;  but,  on  the  approach  of  Pharaoh's  army  from  Egypt,
the  siege  was  temporarily  raised  (chap,  xxxvii.  6).  Jeremiah  made  an  attempt  to  leave  the  city
during  this  crisis  (xxxvii.  13),  and  was  arrested,  being  afterwards  kept  prisoner  till  the  siege
was  over.  Many  in  Jerusalem  hoped  that  Egypt  would  prevail  over  the  Chaldean  power;  but
Jeremiah  declared  that  the  Chaldeans  must  be  supreme  ;  and,  as  being  distrusted  for  his  anti-
Egyptian  prophecies,  was  kept  in  tlie  prison  of  the  king's  house.

4.  Contemporaneous  History. — The  Chaldeans  besieged  Jerusalem  the  year  preceding  the
date  of  this  chapter.  For  a  brief  while  this  siege  was  interrupted  by  the  arrival  at  Jerusalem  of
the  succour  of  the  E<ryptian  forces,  then  resumed  with  increased  vigour.  This  Egyptian  army
was  led  by  Pharaoh-Hophra  (see  chap.  xliv.  30),  the  Apries  of  Herodotus  (ii.  116,  iv.  159).  He
was  an  ally  of  Zedekiah  against  "Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of  Babylon"  (vers.  2,  3)  ;  we  learn
this  from  Ezekiel  xvii.  15,  but  the  alliance  was  fruitless,  and  this  attack  upon  Nebuchadnezzar's
besieging  army  ended  in  either  the  withdrawal  of  the  Egyptian  forces  or  their  defeat  by  the
Chaldeans.

6.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  7.  **  Anathoth;"  and  Ver.  8.  **Anathothin  the  country  of
Benjamin  :  "  cf.  Geographical  References  on  chap.  i.  It  was  a  sacerdotal  city,  and  so  had  1000
cubits  of  suburban  fields  outside  the  walls  attached  to  it  (Num.  xxxv.  4,  5).  These  fields  might
not  be  sold  out  of  the  Levitical  tribe  (xxv.  34).  Ver.  35.  **  JJigh places  of  BadLin  the  valley  of
Hinnmn  :"  cf.  notes  on  chaps,  vii.  31,  xxix.  5.

6.  Personsd  Allusions. — Ver.  7.  **  Sanameel  the  Bon  of  Shallum  thine  uncle.*'  Jeremiah's
first  cousin  ;  nothing  more  known  of  him.  Ver.  12.  **  Baruch  the  son  of  Neriah."  Jeremiah's
amanuensis  and  asrent  (xxxvi.  4,  &c.),

7.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  7.  "The  right  of  redemption  is  thine"  On  the  failure  of
the  owner  it  fell  to  the  next  of  kin  to  redeem  it  (Lev.  xxv.  25  ;  Ruth  iv.  3-6).  Ver.  9,
**  Weighed  him  the  money,'*  &c.  Coined  money  was  not  then  in  use,  therefore  "  weighed  "  as  in
the  days  of  Abraham  ((Jen.  xxiii.  16).  The  ^* seven  shekds  and  ten  of  silver**  (as  it  literally
read8)  =  £2,  28.  6d.  of  our  money  ;  but  its  purchasing  value  raay  be  estimated  by  remembering
that  David  bought  Araunah's  threshing  floor,  oxen,  and  implements,  for  "  fifty  shekels  ;  "  while
**  thirty  shekels  of  silver"  purchased  the  potter's  field  (Matt,  xxvii.  7).  Ver.  11.  *^  The
evidence  of  the  purchase,  both  thai  which  was  sealed  according  to  the  law  and  custom,  and  that  which
was  open."  So  that  there  was  one  purcJiase-deed  du\y  sealed  and  closed  up — the  legal  document,
and  a  copy  for  "  open  "  reference.  Ver.  24.  **  2%c  mounts  are  come  unto  the  city;  "  mounds  of
earth,  batteries,  or  breastworks  for  the  besieging  army,  behind  which  they  employed  their
engines.  Ver.  29.  '*  Upon  the  roof  they  have  offered  incense  to  Baxd  :  "  ef.  chap.  xix.  13,  Ver.  33.
"  Turned  the  hack  and  not  the  face:  "  cf.  on  chap.  ii.  27.

8.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  10.  '*  /subscribed  the  evidence:*'  Heb.  I  wrote  (the  facts  of  the
purchase)  in  the  deed.  Ver.  25.  "  For  the  city  is,"  &c.  ;  rather,  **  Whereas  the  city,"  Ac.  Ver.  40.
"  A  covenant  with  them  to  do  them,  good.**  Omit  comma  after  "  not  turn  away  from  them,"  and
read  on,  "  not  turn  away  from  them  to  do  them  good  ;"  i.e.  never  cease

d37


chAV.  iiiti.


MOMlUrr/O  COMMENtARt:  JEUBMIAB,


SUBJECT  OP  CHAPTER  XXXII.

A  Parabolic  Purchase,  signifying  and  predicting  Israers  sure  repossession  of  the
land  from  which  tliey  were  to  be  for  a  time  exiled.

i.  The  account  of  the  transaction  ;  executed  with  publicity^  and  the  trust-deed  care-
fully preserved  (vers.  1-15).

ii  Jeremiah! s  confession  of  misgivingsy  notwithstanding  his  assuring  purchase  (vera.
16-25).

iii  God!s  explanation  of  the  course  of  events,  and  promises  of  the  certain  restoration
of  Israel  (vers.  26-44).

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXXII,


Ver.  2.  Jeremiah  Imprisoned.

He  was  there  "in  the  tenth  year  of
Zedekiah  "  (ver.  1) ;  but  was  put  there
in  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah.  The
facts  occurred  thus :  As  a  punishment
for  foretelling  the  capture  of  the  city
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  Jeremiah  was  put
into  the  kings  prison  (xxxiv.  1-7).
At  the  interruption  of  the  siege  by
Pharaoh-Hophra,  Jeremiah  was  about  to
depart  the  city  for  Benjamin,  when  he
was  cast  into  the  '* dungeon;"  but  he
obtained  leave  to  be  removed  again  into
the  court  of  the  prison  (xxxvil  12-21).
On  the  second  advance  of  the  Chal-
deans to  the  siege,  Jeremiah,  from  the
king's  prison,  urged  the  Jews  to  save
themselves  by  submission  to  Nebuchad-
nezzar (xxxviii  2,  3)  ;  and,  in  conse-
quence of  this,  the  princes  instigated
the  king  to  have  him  cast  into  a  miry
dungeon  (xxxviii.  4-6).  Again  he  was
removed  to  the  court  prison  at  the  inter-
cession of  Ebed-melech  the  Ethiopian
(xxxviii.  7—13),  where  he  remained  till
the  capture  of  the  city  (xxxviii.  28),  when
he  was  liberated  (xxxix.  11 ;  xl.  1),  <fec.

Ver.  3.  Theme :  Opposition  to  God's
Messenger.  See  similar  topic  in  chap,
zxvi.  9 ;  with  Homilies.

Vers.  4,  5.  Zedekiah's  Punish-
ment. "  His  eyes  shall  behold  his  (Ne-
buchadnezzar's) eyes"

Adroitly  Jeremiah  keeps  back  the
calamity  which  is  here  half  suggested.
Ezekiel  declares  (prophesying  at  the  same
time,  but  in  Babylon  among  tiie  captives
of  the  same  event)  that  Zedekiah  should
be  brought  to  Babylon,  but  should  "  not
see  it "  (Ezek.  xii.  13).  The  explanation
is  given  bv  Jeremiah  (xxxix.  6,  7).
538


Ver.  5.  God's  Ameliorating  Meroy
TO  Zedekiah.  "  Until  I  visit  him,
saith  the  Lord."

Jerome  points  out  that  these  words  are
enigmatical,  for  "  visitation  means  both
consolation  and  punishment"

Already  the  prophet  had  hidden  the
harder  fate  which  should  so  soon  befall
the  king ;  for  *'  it  is  not  the  business  of
prophecy  necessarily  to  aggravate  human
suffering  "  (Dr.  Payne  Smith).

And  in  chap,  xxxiv.  4,  5,  we  find
some  warrant  for  the  hope  that  the  blind
king,  in  his  exile,  was  not  treated
with  severity  by  his  captors ;  whereas  he
was  held  in  honour  by  the  Jewish  exiles^
who  paid  tenderest  homage  to  him  at
his  death  and  burial.

Ver.  5.     Theme:  A  Predicted  De
FEAT.     **  Though  ye  fight  with  the  Chal-
deans f  ye  shall  not  prosper. "

i.  The  will  of  the  Lord  decides  all
battles.  It  matters  not  however  great
the  army,  disciplined  the  troops,  valiant
the  men,  heroic  the  officers,  skilful  the
commander  ;  nor  though  the  navy  be
powerful,  her  ships  ironclad,  her  guns
of  greatest  calibre,  <fec.  If  God  says,
**Ye  shall  not  prosper,"  neither  power
of  the  army  nor  prowess  of  the  navy  will
command  success  and  secure  victory.
**The  great,  the  mighty  God,  the  Lord
of  Hosts  "  (ver.  18),  can  so  derange  the
best-arranged  plans  that  the  battle  shall
not  be  to  the  strong.  He  giveth  the
victory  to  whomsoever  He  please.

ii.  As  with  nations  so  with  men.
Though  they  "rise  up  early  and  sit  up
late,"  if  God  says,  "  Ye  shall  not  pros-
per," failure  shall  follow  every  effort
and  scheme.  Nothing  can  set  aside  the
decisions  of  His  will.


BOMILETW  COMMSNTART:  JMREMIAS,


CHAP.  XXttt.


L  What  ar€t  the?!,  the  conditions  of
success  in  life's  undertakings  l  Philo-
sophers would  reply,  that  the  means  be
adapted  to  the  end,  that  there  be  wisdom
and  skill  in  using  those  means,  and  that
provision  be  made  for  all  contingencies.

This  would  probably  ensnre  success
were  there  no  presiding  Power,  whose
interposition  may  frustrate  all  human
purposes.

This  Power  existing,  it  is  evident  that
success  depends,  not  simply  on  well-
adapted  plans,  but  on  the  will  of  God.

Everything  then,  from  a  military  cam-
paign to  a  prosperous  journey,  depends
on  God's  will.  "  Though  t/e  fight  ye
shall  not  prosper."  **  Making  request,
if  I  may  have  a  prosperous  journey  hy
the  will  of  God^

n.  God's  will  should  he  consulted,
and  His  hlessing  sought,  in  all  our
undertakings.  "  In  every  thing,  by  prayer
and  supplication,"  &c.

1.  There  is  no  request  which  man  can
make  to  God  but  He  can  answer  it,
** Nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord"
(ver.  27).  Indeed  notliing  is  hard,  nothing
M  difficult.  With  Him  it  is  as  easy  to
crush  an  empire  as  a  moth,  &c.  His
power  knows  no  limit.

2.  While  the  power  of  God  is  un-
limited. His  power  is  regulated  hy  His
wUL  '*  Whatever  He  pleaseth  that  doeth
He."  His  will  is  the  dictate  of  His
infallible  wisdom.  No  caprice ;  no  arbi-
trary determinations.

TTT  A  mid  failure  of  human  plans,
God  is  working  all  things  with  wisdom
and  for  a  beneficent  purpose.  If  "  in
wisdom  He  m,ade"  all  things,  in  equal
wisdom  He  governs  all.

1.  Though  in  ways  mysterious  to  us,
yet  He  works  wisely.  Men  who  love
God  may  **  fight  with  the  Chaldeans"
and  lose  the  battle  ;  may  be  "  diligent  in
business,"  yet  unsuccessful ;  yet,  though
all  things  seem  against  them,  God  is  mak-
ing all  things  promote  their  real  welfare.
"  All  things  work  together  for  good,"  &c.

2.  Nor  forget  that  out  of  darkness
God  can  bring  forth  light ;  out  of  chaos,
order ;  out  of  evil,  good.  In  the  midst
of  our  darkness  and  confusion  we  may
"  hang  our  harps  upon  the  willows ; "  but
when  we  see  all — in  eternity,  we  put  on


immortality,  we  shall  shout,  "Victory
through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ! " —
Arranged  from  "  Walks  with  the  Prophet
Jeremiah"  hy  Rev.  D.  Pledge,

See  Addenda :  Help  from  God.

Ver.  8.  Theme:  Prescience  Sealed
BY  ExpERiENOB.  "Then  I  knew  that
this  was  the  word  of  the  Lord."

Did  Jeremiah  distrust  the  Divine  voice
within  him  beforehand?

L  The  prophetic  inspiration  did  n^
always,  co-exist  with  personal  conviction
in  the  prophet  himsel£  The  two  were
essentially  distinct.

Prophets  did  not  always  understand
their  own  prophecies.  **No  prophecy
was  of  private  interpretation."

Messengers  from  God  carried  tidings
which  seemed  often  to  them  incredible.
The  prophecy  of  repossession  of  their
land  seemed  incredible  to  Jeremiah  (see
vers.  24,  25).

XL  Divide  assurances  may  he  accepted
hy  us  without  strong  and  vivid  realisa-
tion of  their  certainty.  We  take  them
as  "  the  word  of  the  Lordy"  and  in  some
vague  sense  bold  them  to  be  true,  and
that  they  will  prove  themselves  true.

But  we  do  not  **know"  them  to  be
"  the  word  of  the  Lord  : "  there  lacks  in
us  firm  apprehension  of  them,  as  the  very
utterance  of  God  who  is  true  and  faithful

So  that  God's  words  may  be  accepted
without  our  perfect  and  rejoicing  confi'
dence  in  their  being  fulfilled.

in.  Our  human  weakness  and  suscepti
bilities  confuse,  at  times,  the  clear  re
cognition  of  a  Divine  message  to  ua.
Jeremiah's  wishes  or  reluctanx^e  in  this
matter  of  purchasing  the  field  tended  to
confuse  the  sense  of  God's  word  in  him«
Our  feelings  and  desires,  our  reluctance  or
eagerness,  does  much  to  make  us  unduly
eager  to  interpret  our  wishes  as  a  sense
of  God's  word  in  us,  or  to  interpret  our
disinclinations  as  being  God's  word  in  ua.

The  apprehension  of  the  inutility  of
any  course  of  conduct  leads  us  to  mistrust
the  word  of  God  in  us.  It  seemed
eminently  useless  to  Jeremiah  to  pur
chase  that  field.  He  was  nearly  sixty
years  of  age,  and  the  captivity  was  to  be
for   seventy  years,   how   could  he  ever

63d


cn.vr.  xxxil.


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JERBMIAU.


reoccupy  the  field  he  purchased  ?  Much
that  we  feel  God  wishes  us  to  do  seems
to  us  useless.  Omv  judgment^  as  well  as
our  disinclination^  may  cloud  the  Divine
word  ill  us.

IV.  When  the  confirmation  of  God's
Word  comes  to  us  in  its  actual  fulfil-
ment, conviction  is  complete.  And
"  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  does  literally
vindicate  itself.  '*  Behold  Hanameel
shall  come  unto  thee "  (ver.  7) ;  "  So
Hanameel  came  to  me  "  (ver.  8).

Such  fulfilments  are  the  common  ex-
perience of  all  God's  servants.  Not  pro-
phets alone.  "  Not  one  good  thing  of  all
which  the  Lord  hath  spoken  hath  failed."

Yet  faith  should  not  wait  for  such
verification.  "  Because  thou  hast  seen
Me,  thou  hast  believed  ;  blessed  are  they
which  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  be-
lieved."    See  Isa.  1.  10.

Ver.  9.  And  I  bought  the  fieW^  Floras,
the  Roman  historian,  records  that  during
the  days  when  Rome  was  being  besieged
by  Hannibal,  the  very  ground  on
which  he  was  encamped  was  put  up  for
sale  at  Rome,  and  found  a  purchaser )
thereby  indicating  the  strong  confidence
of  the  ultimate  issue  of  the  siege  which
animated  the  Roman  people.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Prayeb  the  Solace
OF  A  Perplexed  Soul.  Jeremiah  obeys
God's  command :  purchases  the  land
which  seems  so  useless,  parting  with
money  which — in  the  emergencies  of  a
siege — seemed  so  invaluable.  In  a  mis-
giving mood,  he  carries  his  perplexity
to  God's  throne,  and  in  prayer  seeks
rest  of  mind  and  soul.  Conviction  in
him  was  at  strife  with  God's  command.

I.  The  soul  in  prayer  rises  to  majes-
tic thoughts  of  God  (vers.  17-19).

His  almightiness  (17)  ;  gradousness
(18);  righteousness  (19).  Such  thoughts
prove  like  clear  shiningsfrom  heaven  on
our  dimness  and  doubt.

IL  The  soul  in  prayer  gathers  up
memories  of  God's  wondrous  deeds.
Oh,  how  the  recollection  of  His  mercies
and  deliverances  flood  the  soul  while  we
kneel!  (vers.  20-22).

IIL  The  soul  in  prayer  realises  the
appalling  unworthiness  of  man  com^e-
510


quent  upon  his  sin  (ver.  23).  It  is
when  near  the  throne,  and  looking  up
into  the  Divine  face,  seeing  visions  of
God's  great  love  and  redeeming  mercy,
that  we  feel  man's  criminality,  and  cry
for  ourselves,  **  I  am  a  man  of  unclean
lips,  for  I  have  seen  the  King  the  Lord
of  Hosts."

IV.  The  soul  in  prayer  ventures  to
lay  all  its  misgivings  upon  God.
"  Behold  the  mount  !  "  (ver.  24).  The
difficulties  oiinterpreting God's  dealings,
and  of  faith  in  God's  words.  The
soul  grows  strong  and  confident  when
near  Him,  feels  it  may  and  must  lay  all
its  fears,  and  wonderments,  and  troubles
upon  a  God  so  tender  and  wise.

Jeremiah  could  not  reconcile  God*$
prophecies^  through  himself,  that  He
would  destroy  the  land,  with  this  com-
mand  to  him  to  purchase  soil  as  if  it
were  a  sure  and  inalienable  possession.

V.  The  soul  in  prayer  finds  relief  in
the  freest  and  fullest  unburdening  of
itself  before  the  Lord.  There  is  no
reserve.  Tells  God  it  cannot  see  the
consistency  of  His  own  action  I  "  Behold
Thou  seest  it "  (ver.  24) ;  the  ruin  Thou
declarest  should  come  is  at  hand  ;  yet
**  Thou  hast  said,  Buy  thee  the  field  ! "

And  that  is  the  occasion  of  human
anxiety,  when  God  does  not  seem  to  us
consistent  with  Himself.  Thus  Abraham,
when  called  to  offer  Isa«ic,  in  whom  the
promises  centred.  And  even  our  Lord,
though  the  beloved  Son,  cried,  "  My
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken
Me?"

Then,  in  the  mystery  the  soul  learns
resignation  ;  and  in  resignation  it  enters
into  rest.

See  Addenda  :  Solace  of  Prayer.

**  Forone  thing  only,  Lord,  dear  Lord,  I  plead—
Lead  me  aright,
Though  strength  should  falter,  and  thoagh
heart  should  bleed.

Through  Peace  to  Light.

I  do  not  ask,  0  Lord,  that  Thoo  shouldit
shed

Full  radiance  here :
Give  but  a  ray  of  peace,  that  I  may  tread
Without  a  fear.

I  do  not  ask  my  cross  to  understand,

My  way  to  see  ;
Better  in  darkness  just  to  feel  Thy  hand.

And  follow  Thee.


MOMILUTIG  OOMMEHTARt :  JEREMIAtt,


OttAP.  ULllt


Joy  is  like  restless  day  ;  but  Peace  Divine

Like  quiet  night !
Lead  me,  0  Lord,  till  perfect  day  shall  shine,

Through  Peace  to  Liglu."

N.B. — With  this  outline  should  be
connected  the  outline  on  ver.  27  :  God's
Reply,  &c.

Note. — M.  Henry  observes  :  Prayer  is
the  salve  of  every  sore,  and  points  out  that
"  before  Jeremiah  went  to  prayer  he  de-
livered the  deeds  that  concerned  his  new
purchase  to  Baruch,  which  may  intimate
to  us  that  when  we  are  going  to  worship
God  we  should  get  our  minds  as  clear  as
may  be  from  the  cares  and  encumbrances
of  the  world."

Ou  ver.  17,  see  Noticeable  Topics  at
end  of  chapter :  Creation — an  Argu-
ment FOR  Faith.

Ver.  17.  A  Bewildered  Soul.  See
Sectional  Homilies  on  chap.  xii.  1-6,
p.  246,  and  on  ver.  1,  p.  248.

Vers.  17-25.  Theme:  Divine  Pro-
mises OUR  Best  Consolation  in  every
Affliction.

i.  There  are  promises  of  Divine  help
for  every  kind  of  distress  in  human  life.

ii.  These  promises  often  sound  very
wonderful  (24,  25).

iii.  Their  fulfilment  on  the  part  of
God  is  guaranteed  by  the  perfection  of
the  Divine  nature  (17-19).

iv.  Their  fulfilment  is,  on  our  part,
conditioned  by  faith. — Naegelsbach.

Ver.  19.  Theme:  The  Greatness  op
God's  Wisdom  and  the  Abundance  of
His  Power.  Proved  from  His  nature :
*^Great  in  counsel  and  mighty  in  work  "  &c.

I.  God  has  the  power  of  making  the
deepest  affliction  of  Bis  children  pro-
duce their  highest  happiness.

IL  The  contrivances  of  tyrants  to  op-
press the  Church  procure  its  establish-
ment.

IIL  The  triumphs  of  Satan  turn  to
the  destruction  of  his  empire. — Saurin^
ill  Lange.

Ver.  19.  Tlieme:  God's  Eyes  upon
THE  Paths  of  Men.  "  For  Thine  eyes
are  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons


of  men.''  This  serious  and  important
fact  should —

I.  Shake  us  and  awake  us  from  our
security.  What  if  some  of  our  "  ways"
are  sinful,  and  such  as  the  Lord  must
disapprove  1

II  Humble  us  if  we  are  under  the
discipline  of  God's  Spirit.  For  though
avowedly  being  *'  led  by  the  Spirit  of
God,"  we  may  yet  be  turning  to  our
own  self-made  courses,  and  may  not
have  allowed  a  fixed  and  sure  heart  to
be  imparted  to  us.

III.  Comfort  and  encourage  us  when
we  are  led  in  dark  and  difficult  paths.
For  we  often  are :  and  ai  e  led  by  Him
whose  eyes  are  "  open"  though  our  eyes
are  dim. — J.  M,  Mueller,  in  Lange,

See  Homily  on  chap.  xvii.  10 :  God'b
Rule  of  Judgment.

Vers.  20,  21.  God's  Wonders  in
the  Past.  See  Homilies  on  chap.  xL
7,  XXX.  18.

Ver.  22.  Covenanted  Blessings.
See  Homily  on  chap,  xl,  sec.  1-8,  p.
232,  and  on  ver.  1,  p.  234.

Ver.  27.  Theme :  God's  Reply  to  a
Perplexed  Soul.

I.  He  confirms  the  pleader's  faith
in  Himself  "/  awi,"  &c.  (ver.  27).
Therefore  thy  foes  (vers.  28,  29)  work
My  will,  and  nothing  exceeds  My  power
to  fulfil  my  promises  of  Israel's  repos-
session of  the  land  (ver.  37).

II.  He  explains  the  occasion  of  His
just  displeasure.  *'  This  city  hath  been
to  Me  as  a  provocation  of  Mine  anger,"
&c.  (ver.  31).  Observe  that  (jod  re-
iterates the  words,  *'  provoke  Me  to
anger,"  ^vd  times  (vers.  29,  30,  31,  32,
37).

III.  He  protests  against  the  abuse
of  His  graciousness  (ver.  33).

IV.  He  afl^ms  the  grand  purposes
of  mercy  He  cherishes  (vers.  37-41).
Here,  therefore,  note —

i.  It  is  in  strengthening  the  soul's
trust  in  God*s  all-sufficiency  for  all  occa-
sions that  He  allays  fear  (ver.  27).

ii.  It  is  in  vindicating  the  righteous-
ness of  His  displeasure  that  He  silences
our  muimurings  (ver.  31).

541


cnw,  xtiit.


UDMILP:T1l   COMMEf^TARt:  JSMMTAff.


iii.  It  is  ill  reminding  us  of  grace  ex-
tended to  us  in  vain  that  He  teaches  us
how  patient  and  longsuffering  His  nature
18  (ver.  33).

iv.  It  is  in  inspiring  clear  hopes  of  a
merciful  issue  out  of  distress  that  ffe
ends  our  questionings  and  leads  us  into
loving  trust  (vers.  37-41).

Ver.  27.  Theme  :  God's  Account  of
Himself.  This  is  God's  account  of
Himself —

I  *'  I  aw  ; "  Individuality.

n.  "I  am  the  Lord : "  Dominion,
majesty,  <fec.

Ill  "The  God  of  all  flesh:"  Uni-
versality; condescension; — not  only
the  God  of  mighty  spirits,  but  the  God
of  infirm  and  dying  flesh.

IV.  "  Is  anything  too  hard  for  Met "
Distrust  rebuked,  prayer  encouraged,
completeness  guaranteed— completeness
of  council,  and  completeness  of  execution.

Application  :  Every  word  of  this  is  a
terror  to  evil-doers.  Every  word  of  it
is  inspiration  to  the  true  and  noble. —
City  Temple.

On  ver.  29.  Jekusalem's  Ruins,  see
chap.  xxi.  10.

On  ver.  30.  Evil  Done  from  Youth,
see  Homilies  on  chap.  ii.  7  ;  iii  25  ;  vii.
22-26  ;   xxii.  21.

On  ver.  33.  Turning  thb  Back  on
God,  see  Homilies  on  chap.  ii.  27  ;  vi.
24 ;  and  on  God's  Earnestness  in  Deal-
ing WITH  Sinners,  "  Rising  up  early,"
Ac,  see  Homily  on  chap.  vii.  13.

On  ver.  34.  '*  Abominations  in  Mine
House,"  see  Homily,  '*  Violated  Sanctu-
aries Doomed,^'  chap.  vii.  12-14.

On  ver.  37.  Israel  Gathered  Again,
see  Homilies  on  chap,  xxiii.  3-6,  <fec.

Vers.  37-40.  Theme:  The  Future
Conversion  of  the  Jews.

I.  What  blessings  God  has  in  re-
serve for  His  chosen  people.

1.  A  restoration  to  their  own  land
(ver.  37).

2.  A  renewed  acknowledgment  of
their  relation  to  Him  (ver.  38).


3.  A  spirit  of  piety  poured  out  upon
them  (ver.  39).

n.  What  security  they  have  for  the
final  possession  of  these  hlessings.

1.  The  veracity  of  God  (ver.  40).

2.  The  power  of  God.  "  I  will  not
turn  away  from  them  to  do  them  good  "
(ver.  40).

Learn  to  realise  these  glorious  expec-
tations, to  labour  for  the  desolate  and
outcast  children  of  Israel. — Charles
Simeon,

On  ver.  38.  **My  People,"  see  on
chap.  xxiv.  7 ;  xxx.  22.

On  ver.  39.  A  Heart  Given  by  God,
see  Homily  on  chap.  xxiv.  7.

On  ver.  40.  A  Changeless  Covb-
NANT,  see  on  chap.  xxxi.  31,  33.

On.  ver.  41.   Compare  xxxl  28.

Theme :  Israel's  Kestoration
WHOLLY  engaging  God.  **  Assuredly
with  My  whole  heart  and  with  My  whole
soul.''

I.  God's  purposes  of  grace  move  His
own  nature  to  deepest  sympathy.  He
is  not  coldly  occupied  in  calculating  up-
on them,  but  fervently  moved  by  them.
His  *'  whole  heart  and  soul "  is  stirred.
'*  God  so  loved."

n.  God's  oversight  of  His  people
engages  His  most  earnest  and  tender
solicitude.  He  is  no  indifferent  spec-
tator of  their  career.  His  '*  whole  heart
and  soul "  are  in  their  welfare.

III.  God's  glorious  designs  animate
Him  with  unceasing  delight.  He
^^  rejoices  over  them  to  do  them  good —
with  His  whole  heart,"  <fec.      Hence

1.  The  Churches  joy,  in  times  of  great
and  God-given  blessedness,  is  faint  as
compared  with  God's  deliglit.

2.  The  souVs  gratitude  for  restoration
to  the  favours  sin  forfeited  is  only  a
reflection  of  the  joy  God  feels  in  his
redemption.

3.  The  bliss  of  the  ransomed  in  heaven
is  a  prospect  which  fills  the  "  whole  heart
and  the  whole  soul"  of  God  Himself
with  sympathetic  delight.


542


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIA  II.  chap,  xxxil


NOTICEABLE  TOPIC  IN  CHA  PTER  XXXII.

Topic:  Creation — an  Argument  for  Faith.  Text:  **  Ah,  Lord  God/  behold^
Thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth  by  Thy  great  power  and  stretched-
out  arm,  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Thee'*  (ver.  17).

When  Jeremiah  came  into  his  chamber  alone,  it  is  possible  that  he  began  to
question  himself  as  to  what  he  had  been  doing,  and  troubled  thoughts  rolled  over
his  mind  : — "I  have  been  purchasing  a  useless  possession,"  said  he.  See  how  he
refuses  to  indulge  the  thought.  He  gets  as  far  as  saying,  "  Ah,  Lord  God  ! "  as  if
he  were  about  to  utter  some  unbelieving  or  rebellious  sentence,  but  he  stops  himself,
"Thou  canst  make  this  plot  of  ground  of  use  to  me;  Thoa  canst  rid  this  land  of
these  oppressors  ;  Thou  canst  make  me  yet  sit  under  my  vine  and  my  fig-tree  in  the
heritage  which  I  have  bought ;  for  Thou  didst  make  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and
there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Thee."  This  gave  a  majesty  to  the  early  saints,  that
they  dared  to  do  at  God's  command  things  which  were  unaccountable  to  sense,
and  which  reason  would  condemn.  They  consulted  not  with  flesh  and  blood ;  but
whether  it  is  a  Noah  who  is  to  build  a  ship  on  dry  land,  an  Abraham  who  is  to
offer  up  his  only  son,  or  a  Moses  who  is  to  despise  the  treasures  of  Egypt,  or  a
Joshua  who  is  to  besiege  Jericho  seven  days,  using  no  weapons  but  the  blasts
of  rams*  horns, — they  all  act  upon  God's  command ;  they  act  contrary  to  all  the
dictates  of  carnal  reason ;  and  God,  even  the  Lord  God,  gives  them  a  rich  reward
as  the  result  of  their  obedient  faith.  I  would  to  God  we  had  in  the  religion  of
these  modern  times  a  more  potent  infusion  of  this  heroic  faith  in  God.  When
Edward  Irving  preached  that  memorable  sermon  concerning  the  missionary,  who
he  thought  was  bound  to  go  forth  without  purse  or  scrip,  and  trusting  in  his  God
alone,  to  preach  the  Word,  a  howl  went  up  to  heaven  against  the  man  as  a  fanatic.
They  said  he  was  visionary,  unpractical,  mad,  and  all  because  he  dared  to  preach  a
sermon  full  of  faith  in  God.  If  once  again  we  could,  like  the  world,  be  hanged
upon  nothing  but  the  simple  power  and  providence  of  God,  I  am  sure  we  should
find  it  a  blessed  and  a  safe  way  of  living,  glorious  to  God,  and  honourable  to  our-
selves.

It  is  my  business  to  conduct  you  to  Jeremiah's  place  of  confidence.  Seeing  that
his  case  is  hopeless,  knowing  that  man  can  do  nothing  at  all  for  him,  the  prophet
resorts  at  once  to  the  God  that  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  he  exclaims,
"Nothing  is  too  hard  for  Thee.*'  Use  the  text  to  stimulate  the  evangelist;  to
encourage  the  inquirer  ;  and  to  comfort  the  believer,

I.  To  stimulate  the  evangelist.  And  who  is  the  evangelist?  Every  man
and  woman  who  has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  There  should  be  no  dumb
tongue  in  all  our  host ;  we  should  have  no  idle  hand  in  the  harvest  field  here,
here  is  your  encouragement :  the  work  is  God's,  and  your  success  is  in  the  hand
of  Him  who  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  Let  me  refresh  your  memory  with
tlie  old  story  of  creation  : —

1.  Remember  that  the  world  was  created  from  nothing.  You  have  often  said,
"  Mine  is  a  very  hard  task,  for  I  address  myself  to  men  in  whom  I  see  nothing
hopeful.  I  batter  against  a  granite  conscience,  but  it  is  not  moved  ;  I  thunder
forth  the  law,  but  the  dead  and  callous  heart  has  not  been  stirred ;  I  talk  of  the
love  of  Christ,  but  the  eye  is  not  suff'nsed  with  tears  ;  I  point  to  hell,  but  no  terror
follows  ;  and  to  heaven,  but  no  holy  desire  is  kindled  !  there  is  nothing  in  man  that
encourages  me  in  my  work,  and  I  am  ready  to  give  it  over."  Come  back  with  me
tt)  the  world's  creation.  Of  what  did  God  make  the  world?  Was  there  any  sub-
stance ready  to  His  hand  out  of  which  to  mould  this  round  globe  ?  Naught  was
there  anywhere,  and  yet  He  spake  and  it  was  done  ;  He  commanded,  ;ind  it  stood
fffcSt-      The  ease  of  the  sinner  is  a  parallel  one.     You  say  there  is  nothing  in  the

vH3


CHAP.  XXXII.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.

sinner.  Ay,  then,  there  is  room  here  for  a  re-creating  work ;  for  the  Eternal  God
to  come,  and  with  His  outstretched  arm  to  create  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit,
and  put  His  grace  where  there  was  none  before.  If  you  had  to  convert  the  sinner,
then,  indeed,  your  task  were  as  hopeless  as  to  create  new  orbs  out  of  nothing;  but
He  who  hath  created  all  this  marvellous  earth,  and  had  nothing  to  begin  with,  can
give  life,  and  fear,  and  hope,  and  faith,  and  love,  where  there  were  no  heavenly
ingredients  upon  which  He  might  work.

2.  But  you  have  none  to  help  you  or  go  forth  in  your  work  with  you.  When
God  made  the  world — and  the  same  God  is  with  thee — He  worked  alone.  '*  With
whom  took  He  counsel,  and  who  instructed  Him  ? "  No  archangel  bowed  his  head
and  offered  advice  to  the  Most  High,  for  the  archangel  himself  is  but  a  creature.
Cherubim  and  seraphim  might  sing  when  the  work  was  over,  but  help  in  the  work
they  could  not.  Look  ye  to  the  heavens  above  or  to  the  deeps  beneath,  where  see
ye  the  impress  of  any  hand  but  God*s,  and  that  hand  a  solitary  one  ?  Roll  thee,
then,  thy  burden  on  thy  God  if  thou  be  alone,  for  alone  with  Him  thou  hast  the
best  of  company.     With  Him  thou  shalt  prevail  though  all  men  forsake  thee,

*•  When  He  makes  bare  His  arm,
What  shall  His  work  withstand  ?
When  He  His  people's  cause  defenda,
Who,  who  shall  stay  His  hand  ? "

Let  not  this,  then,  trouble  thee;  that  thou  art  alone.  **Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,
Thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth  by  Thy  great  power  and  stretched-out
arm,  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Thee."

3.  But  you  reply,  "  My  sorrow  lieth  not  so  much  in  that  I  am  alone,  as  in  the
melancholy  fact  that  I  am  very  conscious  of  my  own  weakness,  and  of  my  want  of
adaptation  for  my  peculiar  work.  I  am  not  sufficient  for  these  things ;  but  rather
I  feel  like  Jonah,  that  I  would  flee  into  Tarshish,  that  I  might  escape  from  the
burden  of  the  Lord  against  this  Nineveh."  Ay,  but  cast  thy  thoughts  back  again
upon  creation.  The  Eternal  needed  no  instruments  in  creation.  What  tools  did
God  use  when  He  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth?  Had  He  ought  beside  His
own  hand  ?  Are  not  the  heavens  the  works  of  His  fingers,  and  the  sun  and  the
moon  Hia  handiwork  %  See,  then,  if  God  can  work  without  instruments  in  the
creation  of  a  world,  He  can  surely  work  with  a  poor  and  a  mean  instrument  in  the
conversion  of  a  sinner.  If  the  Lord  take  in  His  hand  but  a  smooth  stone  out  of
the  current,  yet  when  He  hurleth  it  from  His  sling,  it  shall  pierce  even  a  giant's
brow.  He  saveth  not  by  man's  strength,  nor  by  human  learning,  and  eloquence,
and  talent.  It  is  His  strength,  and  not  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  instruments
to  which  we  must  look.  Therefore  say,  with  Paul,  *'  I  glory  in  infirmities,  that
the  power  of  God  may  rest  on  me ; "  and  let  this  be  thy  song — "  We  have  this
treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and
not  of  us."  "  Ah,  Lord  God  I  behold.  Thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth  by
Thy  great  power  and  stretched-out  arm  ;  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Thee ; "
Thou  canst  do  wonders  even  by  the  meanest  instrument.

4.  Dost  thou  still  complain,  and  say — "  Alas  !  it  is  little  I  can  say  !  When  I
speak,  I  can  but  utter  a  few  plain  words — true  and  earnest,  but  not  mighty.  I  have
no  power  to  plead  with  souls  with  the  tears  and  the  seraphic  zeal  of  a  Whitfield.
I  can  only  tell  the  tale  of  mercy  simply,  and  leave  it  there."  Well,  and  did  not
God  create  all  things  by  His  naked  word?  Was  there  any  eloquence  when  God
spake,  and  it  was  done  1  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  there  was  light.  At  this  day,
is  not  the  Gospel  in  itself  the  rod  of  Jehovah's  strength  1  Is  it  not  the  power  of
God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  ?  And  doth  not  Paul  constantly
insist  u[)on  it,  that  it  is  not  with  wi^idom  of  words,  nor  with  fineness  of  speech,  lest
the  excellency  of  the  power  should  not  be  of  God,  but  of  man  ;  and  lest  man's  faith
should  stand  in  the  wisdoni  of  man,  and  not  in  the  power  of  the  Most  Hight

044


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxil.


5.  Another  pleads,  "  You  are  not  aware  of  the  darkness  of  the  district  in  which
I  labour.  I  toil  among  a  benighted,  unintelligent,  ignorant  people.  I  cannot
expect  to  see  fruit  there,  toil  as  I  may."  Ah  !  brother,  and  while  you  talk  so  you
never  will  see  any  fruit,  for  God  giveth  not  great  things  to  unbelieving  men.  But
for  the  encouragement  of  thy  faith,  let  me  remind  thee  that  it  is  the  God  that  made
the  heavens  and  the  earth  on  whom  thou  hast  to  lean,  and  what  is  that  which  was
written  of  old  ?     *'  The  earth  was  without  form  and  void,  and  darkness  was  upon  the

face  ofthedeepV  How  dense  that  darkness  was  ;  that  primeval  darkness  which  had
never  been  stirred  by  a  single  ray  of  light ;  that  dense,  thick,  sevenfold  Egyptian
darkness  that  had  never  known  a  sun  or  moon,  and  had  never  been  pierced  by
light  of  star !  And  dost  thou  think  the  darkness  of  thy  hearers  is  thicker  than
this  ancient  darkness  of  the  everlasting  night?

6.  Further,  and  still  to  press  the  same  argument.  "  Ay,"  saith  one,  "  but  the
men  among  whom  1  labour  are  so  confused  in  their  notions^  they  put  darkness  for
light  and  light  for  darkness  ;  their  moral  sense  is  blunted ;  if  I  try  to  teach  them,
their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing  and  their  hearts  are  given  to  slumber.  Besides,  they
are  full  of  vain  janglings  and  oppose  themselves  to  the  truth  ;  I  endure  much  con-
tradiction of  sinners,  and  they  will  not  receive  the  trutli  in  the  love  of  it."  Ay,
then,  I  bid  thee  go  back  to  the  old  creation  that  thou  mayest  be  comforted  concern-
ing the  new.  Did  not  the  Holy  Spirit  brood  with  sha< hiving  wings  over  the  earth
when  it  was  chaos  ?  Did  He  not  bring  out  order  from  confusion  1  Then  the  earth
stood  out  all  fair  and  glittering,  for  God  had  done  it ;  disorder  yielded  to  law  ;
darkness  gave  place  to  light;  chaos  turned  to  glorious  order  in  His  sight.  The
same  marvels  can  be  wrought  in  your  case.

7.  "  Ah,"  say  you,  ''they  are  all  so  dead,  so  dead  !  '*  Ay,  and  remember  how
the  waters  brought  forth  life  abundantly  ;  and  how  the  earth  brought  forth  the
creeping  thing,  and  the  cattle  after  its  kind  ;  and  how,  at  last,  man  was  made  out
of  the  very  dust  of  the  earth.  Oh,  God  can  readily  give  life  to  the  dead  nature  of
evil  men ;  thou  hast  but  to  rely  on  Him,  the  quickening  influence  shall  descend,
and  thou  shalt  live.

8.  See  how  fair  and  glorious  this  earth  is  now  /  Well  might  the  morning  stars
sing  together,  and  the  sons  of  God  shout  for  joy  !  And  dost  thou  think  that
God  cannot  make  as  fair  a  heart  in  man,  and  make  it  bud  and  blossom,  and  teem
with  hallowed  life?  Thinkest  thou  that  Christ  cannot  make  the  angels  sing  even
a  nobler  song  of  joy  over  a  soul  that  is  washed  in  blood  and  a  spirit  robed  in
white  that  shall  praise  God  and  the  Lamb  for  ever  ?

n.  To  encourage  the  inquirer.  Many  really  desirous  to  be  saved  are  full  of
doubts,  and  diflficulties,  and  questionings.

Remember  that  the  question  about  your  salvation  is  not  whether  you  can  save
yourself,  for  that  is  answered  in  a  thundering  negative  from  God's  throne —  You
cannot  /  *'  By  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified."  The
question  is — Can  God  save  you  ?  Can  God  save  you  1  That  is  the  question.  Your
unbelief  will  suggest  the  difficulty  that —

1.  Your  mind  is  so  dark.  "  I  cannot  see  Christ,"  says  one  ;  "  I  feel  benighted  ;
it  is  all  darkness,  thick  as  night  with  me."  Yes,  but  then  there  is  the  question.
Can  God  roll  this  night  away  1  And  the  answer  comes,  He  who  said,  **  Let  there
be  light,"  and  there  was  light,  can  certainly  repeat  the  miracle.

2.  Another  of  your  doubts  will  arise  from  the  fact  that  you  feel  so  weak.  You
cannot  do  what  you  would.  You  would  leave  sin,  but  still  fall  into  it;  would  lay
hold  on  Christ,  but  cannot.  Then  comes  the  question,  Can  God  do  it?  And  we
answer.  He  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth  without  a  helper,  can  certainly
gave  thee  when  thou  canst  not  help  thyself

No  part  of  the  world  helped  its  own  creation.  No  mountain  uplifted  its  own
head  ;  no  star  appointed  its  own  path  of  brightness.  No  flower  can  say,  *'  I
created  my  own  loveliness ;"  no  eagle  that  cuts  the  air  can  say,  '*  I  gave  myself  my

2  M  545


OHAP.  xxxn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


Bearing  -wing  and  my  piercing  eye."  God  hath  made  them  all ;  and  so,  sinner,
troubled  because  of  thine  impotency,  He  wanteth  no  power  in  thee.  **  He  giveth
power  to  tlie  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."
Kest  thou  upon  God  in  Christ,  and  cast  thyself  on  Him,  and  He  will  do  it  alL
(See  Addenda  :  Human  Inability.)

3.  "  Ay,"  sayest  thou  again,  *'  but  I  am  in  such  an  awful  state  of  mind  ;  there
is  such  a  confusion  within  me;  I  cannot  tell  what  is  the  matter  with  me ;  I  know
not  what  I  am  ;  I  cannot  understand  myself,"  Was  not  the  world  just  so  of  old,
and  did  not  all  the  beauty  of  all  lands  rise  out  of  this  dire  confusion  1  Cannot
God,  then,  do  this  for  thee,  and  give  thee  a  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding!
Trust  thou  in  Christ,  despite  it  all,  for  He  can  hush  the  hurricane  to  slumber  and
lay  the  storm  to  sleep.

4.  There  is  more  hope  in  thy  case  than  there  was  in  the  creation  of  the  world,
for  in  the  creation  there  was  nothing  done  beforehand.  The  plan  was  drawn,  no
doubt,  but  no  material  was  provided  ;  no  stores  laid  in  to  effect  the  purpose.  But
in  thy  case  the  work  is  done  already,  beforehand.  On  the  bloody  tree  Christ  has
carried  sin  ;  in  the  grave  He  has  vanquished  death  j  in  resurrection  He  has  rent  for
ever  the  bonds  of  the  grave ;  in  ascension  He  has  opened  heaven  to  all  believers  ;
and  in  His  intercession  He  is  pleading  still  for  them  that  trust  Him.  '*  It  is
finished,"  remember,  so  that  it  is  easier  to  save  thee  than  to  make  a  world,  for  the
world  had  naught  prepared  for  it.

5.  Yet  again,  God  has  done  something  more  in  thee  than  there  was  done  before  He
made  the  world.  Emptiness  did  not  cry  "O  God  !  create  me."  Darkness  could
not  pray,  "  O  Lord  !  give  me  light."  Confusion  could  not  cry,  "  0  God  !  ordain
me  into  order."  But  see  what  He  has  done  for  you  !  He  has  taught  you  to  cry^
*'  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  He  has
made  you  plead,  *'  Lighten  my  darkness,  0  Lord,  lest  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death."
He  has  taught  you  to  say,  "  I  have  gone  astray,  like  a  lost  sheep  ;  seek  Thy  servant."
See,  friend,  the  grass  cannot  pray  for  dew,  and  yet  it  falls ;  and  shall  you  cry  for  it
and  God  withhold  it  %  The  thirsty  earth  hath  no  voice  to  ask  for  showers,  and  yet
they  descend  ;  and  will  God  let  you  cry  and  not  answer  you  % — you  !  made  in  His
own  image,  will  He  let  you  cry  and  not  hear  you,  when  He  has  Himself  said,  "  As
I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but
would  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  Me  and  live  "  ?

6.  It  was  in  God's  power  to  make  the  world  or  not,  just  as  He  pleased.  No
promise  bound  Him  ;  no  covenant  made  it  imperative  upon  Him  that  His  arm
should  be  outstretched.  Sinner,  the  Lord  is  not  bound  to  save  thee  except  from
His  own  promise,  and  that  promise  is,  **  He  that  calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord
shall  be  saved."     He  cannot  withhold  saving  thee  if  thou  callest  npon  Him.

7.  It  is  certain  that  there  is  more  room  in  your  ca^efor  God  to  glorify  Himself
than  there  was  in  the  making  of  the  world.  In  making  the  world  He  glorified  His
wisdom  and  He  magnified  His  power,  but  He  could  not  show  His  mercy.  He  could
have  no  mercy  upon  floods  and  mountains,  upon  cattle  and  flying  fowl  There  was
kindness,  but  no  mercy,  for  they  had  not  sinned.  Now,  here  in  your  case,  there  is
room  for  every  attribute  of  God,  for  His  loving-kindness.  His  faithfulness,  His  truth,
His  power.  His  grace.

in.  To  comfort  "believers.  You  are  greatly  troubled  are  you  ?  It  is  a  common
lot  with  us  all.  And  you  have  nothing  on  earth  to  trust  to  now,  and  are  going  to
be  cast  on  your  God  alone  ?  Happy  trouble  that  drives  thee  to  thy  Father  1
Blessed  storm  that  wrecks  thee  on  the  Rock  of  ages  !  Glorious  billow  that  washes
thee  upon  this  heavenly  shore  I  And  now  thou  hast  nothing  but  thy  God  to  trust
to,  what  art  thou  going  to  do  ?  To  fret  ?  Oh,  do  not  thus  dishonour  thy  Lord  !
Show  the  world  that  thy  God  is  worth  ten  thousand  worlds  to  thee.  Show  rich
men  how  rich  thou  art  in  thy  poverty  when  the  Lord  God  is  thy  helper.  Show
the  strong  man  how  strong  thou  art  in  thy  weakness  when  underneath  thee  are  the
046


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxiii.

everlasting  arms.  Now,  now  is  thy  time  to  glorify  God.  There  was  no  room  for
courage  before,  but  now  there  is  space  for  feats  of  faith  and  valiant  exploits.  Be
strong  and  very  courageous,  and  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  certainly,  as  surely  as  He
built  the  heavens  and  the  eartli,  glorify  Himself  in  thy  weakness,  and  magnify  His
might  in  the  midst  of  thy  distress.  The  Lord  help  us  to  lean  wholly  on  Him,  and
never  on  ourselves,  and  let  His  name  be  had  in  remembrance  while  the  earth
endureth.     Amen. — Condensed  from  Sermon  by  G.  H.  Spurgeon^  A.D.  1862.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXXIL  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.

Help  prom  God.  '*  His  heart  began  to  boil  with  un

Fhilip    Henri/   thus    wrote    upon    a  belief  and  carnal  reasonings;  he  there-

Btudying  day  :  "  I  forgot  when  I  began  fore  setteth  himself  to  pray  down  those

explicitly   and   expressly  to   crave    help  distempers.      As  a   man   may  sleep  out

from  God,  and  the  chariot-wheels  drove  his  drunkenness,  so  he  may  pray  away

accordingly."  his  perturbation." — Trapp.

'*  Angels  know  the  happiness  of  power ;
we,  the  happiness  of  weakness."— Zaciy  Human  Inability.

Powerscourt.  **I  would,  but  canH  repentf

Though  I  endeavour  oft ;
ir       lis    o^^  .«™  ^«  i>^  .^»«  This  stony  heart  can  ne'er  relenL

Ver.  16.  Solace  op  Prayeb.  Tin  j.^^^^  ^^.^es  it  soft.

"Thy  love,  O  Lord,  restores  me  «        ,j  •.    x  ^ »

From  sighs  and  tears  to  praise;  ^  ^^"^^'  ?"*  ^^'V'*  ^^'  T^•  •

And  deep  my  soul  adores  Thee,  ^  Though  woo  d  by  love  Divine  |

Nor  thinks  of  time  or  place  :  No  arguments  have  power  to  moTt
I  ask  no  more,  in  good  or  ill,  ^  8°"^  ««  ^^^^  ^^  "^^"e*

But  union  with  Thy  holy  will.  I  would,  but  cannot  rest
.m.    ,,    ,     ,  .  ,        ,             X  In  God's  most  hoi V  will ;

»Ti8  that  which  m^kes  my  treasure,  j  ^now  what  He  appoints  ii  best

'Tis  that  which  brings  my  gain  ;  Yet  murmur  at  it  still.

Converting  woe  to  pleasure,

And  reaping  joy  from  pain.  Oh,  could  I  but  believe/
Oh,  'tis  enough,  whate'er  befall.  Then  all  would  easy  be ;

To  know  that  God  is  All  in  all."  I  would,  but  cannot — Lord,  relieve  ;
— Madame  Guyon,  My  help  must  come  from  Thee  1 "


CHAPTER  XXXIIL


CritioaL  AiH)  ExEaETiCAL  NoTES. — This  chapter  is  in  date  and  subject  essentially  linked  to
Chapter  xxxii.     For  Notes,  therefore,  see  previous  chapter.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  3.  "Mighty  things:"  altering  3  into  3,  making  the  word
nilVJ,  the  better  statement,  **hidden  things  wliich  thou  Jcnowest  not"  is  gained,  and  this
is   probably   the  correct  reading.      Or   retaining  the   word    nnVZl   unaltered,  which  means

fortified,  it  may  be  understood  as  impenetrable  things,  inaccessible  things,  and  hence  **secre$
things  which  thou  knowest  not.*'

Ver.  4.  •*  Houses  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  mounts  : "  or  against  the  mounts ;  for
in  sieges  the  enemy,  as  he  encroached  upon  the  city,  pulled  down  houses  as  materials  for  his
inner  fortifications.     "  And  by  the  sword  ;  "  rather  axes,  so  rendered  in  Isa.  xxii.  10.

Ver.  5.  "Thet  come  to  fight."  The  only  nominative  seems  *^th£  houses"  of  ver.  4.  But
this  is  meaningless;  so  that  for  "they"  we  must  read  "the  Jews."  Probably  the  ending  of
ver.  4  might  be  joined  to  the  beginning  of  ver.  5,  and  read  thus:  "And  by  the  sword  they
[the  Jews  understood,  or  "  the  kings  of  Jvdah  "  mentioned  in  ver.  4]  come  to  fight  with  the
Chaldeans."

Ver.  6.  " / wiU  bring  it  health  and  cure"  i.e.  the  city  ;  ** and  wiU  cv/re  them,"  t.e.  the  people,
Liu  **  I  will  place  upon  it  a  ba/ndage  (chap.  viii.  22,  xxx.  17)  and  healing ;"  a  healing  bandage.

Ver.  16.  **  She  shall  be  called  the  Lohd  our  Righteousness."  For  explanation  of  this
feminine  reference  of  Messiah's  name,  see  Critical  Note,  following  Homilies  on  the  verse.

Vers.  14-26.  This  section  is  entirely  omitted  in  the  LXX.,  hence  some  of  the  German  critics,
such  as  Michaelis,  Hitzig,  and  Movers  (opposed,  however,  l»y  Graf  and  Ewald),  have  treated  this
section  m  an  addition  by  a  later  writer,  the  constantly  iiuagiued  second  Isaiah.

047


CHAP,  xxxin.


ROM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


SURVEY  OF  CHAPTER  XXXIII,

I.  While  Jerusalem's  ruin  is  actually  occurring^  its  "  houses  "  being  demolished  by  the  Chaldean

engines  of  war  (ver.  4),
II.  God  promises  its  rebuilding  (ver.    6),  so  as  to  become    **a  name  of  joy"    (ver,  9)  ;  and
assures  to  its  inhabitants  future  prosperity  and  peace  (vers.  9-14).

III.  In  Mesoiah's  advent  (ver.  15)  shall  Israel's  future  blessedness  (ver.  16)  be  culminated  ;  and

IV.  In  the  perpetuity  of  Christ's  spiritual  reign  (vers.  17-26)  the  sacred  privileges  "  covenanted  "

to  Israel  shall  be  ceaselessly  and  universally  enjoyed.


HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXXIII,


Vers.  1-9.  Theme:  A  Divine  Mes-
sage SENT  INTO  A  PfiisoN.  There  are
four  or  five  most  fertile  suggestions
which  arise  from  tliese  verses —

I.  A  true  child  of  God  and  an
honoured  prophet  in  disgrace  and
aflBLiction  (ver.  1).

Jeremiah^s  affliction  came  upon  him
because  of  his  fidelity  to  God,

Let  not  the  child  of  God  think  that
his  sorrows  are  always  because  of  his
sins.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have
tribulation,"  <fec.

II.  Though  despised  of  man,  the  pro-
phet was  honoured  of  God  (vers.  1,  2).

1.  To  receive  communications  from
the  Divine  mind  is  the  highest  honour.

2.  He  whom  God  honours  and  owns  as
His  child  need  not  fear  what  man  can  do.

III.  Divine  consolation  to  an
afflicted  servant  (ver.  3).

1.  The  most  precious  of  all  privileges j
that  of  prayer  :  '*  Call  unto  Me."

2.  The  most  marvellous  of  all  assur-
ances :  "  And  I  will  answer  thee."

3.  The  most  encouraging  of  all  pro-
mises: "I  will  ....  show  thee  great
and  mighty  things."

IV.  The  adversity  and  prosperity
of  nations  are  under  the  control  of
God  (vers.  4-7).

1.  It  is  impossible  properly  to  construe
the  history  of  a  nation  without  reference
to  the  moral  government  of  God.

2.  National  prosperity  or  adversity
has  always  been  in  the  line  of  national
vii'tue  or  vice.

V.  The  essential  conditions  of  na-
tional as  well  as  individual  healing
(vers.  8,  9).

1.  It  is  essential  that  God  come  to  do
the  work,     "  I  will  cleanse,"  <kc.

2.  It  is  essential  that  God  work  upon
our  moral  natures.  "  I  will  cleanse  ih^m.
from  all  their  iniquity,^*

648


3.  It  is  essential  that  God  work  upon  our
moral  natures  by  the  assurance  of  the  for-
giveness of  sin.     "  I  will  pardon  all,"  &c.

4.  This  moral  and  spii'itual  cleandng
and  pardon  are  essential  for  the  apprecia-
tion of  the  Divine  goodness  :  "  And  they
shall  fear,"  itc.

5.  This  spiritual  healing  shall  manifest
forth  the  glory  of  God:  "  It  shall  be  to
Me  a  name,"  (kc. — Rev.  D.  G.  Hughes.

Ver.  3.  Theme:  Peayer  by  God's
Afflicted  Servant  Encouraged  by
Gracious  Assurances.  "  Call  unto
Me  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  show
thee  great  and  mighty  things  which  thou
knowest  not."

The  most  eminent  men  have  been
found  in  the  school  of  affliction  :  David,
Jeremiah,  <fec.

I.  The  privilege  encouraged,  **  Call
unto  Me."

II.  The  season  specified,  "  While  in
the  court  of  the  prison."

III.  The  assurance  given,  ''  I  will
answer  thee."

L  The  privilege  encouraged,  "Call  un-
to Me."  The  importance  of  this  appears —

1.  From  the  gracious  condescension  that
enjoins  it.  God  says,  *'  Call  unto  Me,"
not  for  His  own  sake,  but  for  ours.
Not  so  much  the  injunction  of  duty,  as
the  revelation  of  privilege.

God  would  have  the  intercourse  be-
tween earth  and  heaven  continually  kept
up  and  renewed,  because  of  the  benefit
that  accrues  to  the  Cliurch  from  this
exercise.  If  we  had  no  sins  to  be  par-
doned, no  wants  to  be  supplied,  enemies
to  be  subdued ;  if  we  were  as  sinless  as
the  first  Adam  and  as  all-sufficient  as
the  Second,  it  would  still  be  our  highest
duty  and  privilege  to  '*  call  upon  G"d,"
and  to  keep  up  an  unbroken  intercourse
between  earth  and  heaven.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  ZXXIII.


2,  From  the  examples  that  encourage
U,  The  conduct  of  our  Lord,  who,
though  He  received  not  the  Spirit  by
measure,  but  held  the  worlds  of  nature
und  of  grace  at  His  own  command,  yet
continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God.
He  knew  prayer  prospers  allj  and  He
would  undertake  nothing  without  prayer.
When  about  to  enter  upon  His  public
ministry  by  baptism,  we  are  told,  As
Jesus  "  was  praying  the  heavens  opened^
and  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  on  Him^
with  this  voice,  Thou  art  My  beloved
Son.^^  When  He  would  commission  and
send  forth  His  disciples  to  preach  His
Gospel,  He  first  sets  His  disciples  pray-
ing, *^Fray  ye  the  Lo7'd  of  the  harvest;**
and  He  Himself  went  out  into  a
mountain  to  pray  (Matt.  ix.  38  ;  Luke
vi.  12).  And  when  He  was  to  engage
in  His  last  encounter  with  the  prince
of  this  world,  ^^  He  prayed  the  more
earnestlyy  with  strong  cryings  and  tears,
to  Him  tJuU  was  able  to  save  Him  from
death,  and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared,"
80  that  He  won  the  field,  though,  like
Sampson,  he  lost  His  life — the  spoils  of
which  glorious  victory  the  Church  shall
divide  and  enjoy  to  all  eternity.

3.  From  the  endless  misery  that  must
ensue  without  it.  If  Paul  says,  "  Pray
without  ceasing,"  what  must  be  the
danger  of  those  who  never  pray  1  A
prayerless  heart  may  be  considered  as  a
defenceless  citadel  lying  open  and  ex-
posed to  every  foe.  Whereas  the  heart
of  one  truly  devout  is  like  a  castle  in
which  the  Lord  dwells,  and  which  is
garrisoned  with  the  Divine  presence.

II.  The  suitableness  of  prayer  in
times  of  trial ;  for  it  was  *'  while  he  was
yet  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison."

He  who  bore  the  burden  of  our  sins
is  ready  to  bear  the  burden  of  our
sorrows.  Care  is  a  burden  ;  but  that
may  be  cast  on  God.

Though  shut  out  from  communion
with  men,  he  was  not  shut  out  from
communion  with  God.

Prayer  is  the  privilege  of  all  times.
We  need  it  in  prosperity  to  prevent  our
table  from  becoming  our  trap  and  our
snare ;  but  it  is  our  special  relief  in
adversity.  James  says,  "  Is  any  afflicted?
let  him  pray."     Men  have  great  need


for  prayer,  then,  when  trial  abounds,
when  temptations  multiply,  and  when
the  energies  of  the  mind  are  unequal
to  the  vicissitudes  of  life.  We  should
pray  for  support  under  them,  for  im-
jirovement  by  them,  and  for  deliverance
from  them,

1.  For  support  under  them,

Paul,  when  he  was  buffeted  by  Satan,
besought  the  Lord  thrice,  and  obtained
the  relief  he  most  needed,  "  My  grace
shall  be  sufficient  for  thee,"

Moses  promised  the  Israelites,  "  The
eternal  God  is  thy  Refuge,"  (fee.

2.  For  improvement  by  them,  that
they  may  now,  or  afterwards,  *'  yield  the
peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them
that  are  exercised  thereby."

Affliction  is  often  an  instrument  of
improvement,  but  it  requires  grace  to
make  it  so ;  and  prayer  is  the  appointed
means  of  drawing  down  the  blessing.

Some  are  hardened  by  affliction  and
separated  farther  from  God  ;  some  are
softened  by  affliction  and  thus  made
more  like  Him.  These,  '*6y  the  sadness
of  the  countenance,  find  the  heart  made
better,**  This,  however,  does  not  arise
from  the  necessary  and  independent
nature  of  adversity,  but  from  the  kindly
and  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy
Spirit  of  God.  Pharaoh  hardened  him-
self more  and  more  under  the  plagues  of
Egypt  till  He  was  finally  given  over  to
a  reprobate  mind.  Job  was  made  more
humble  and  holy  by  his  calamities  be-
cause God  was  with  him  through  them.

Pray  for  gracious  influences  under
humbling  trials.

3.  For  deliverance  from  them,
Jeremiah  did  not  die  in  the  prison,

but  was  brought  out  of  it.  He  always
remembered  the  Divine  communion  he
enjoyed  there.

III.  The  promise  annexed —

1.  Of  a  gracious  audience.  *'  I  will
answer  thee."

God  always  hears,  though  He  does
not  instantly  answer.  He  heard  and
answered  Jeremiah,  though  He  did  not
immediately  release  him  from  the  dun-
geon.

We  often  think  that  our  prayers  are
not  lieard  because  they  are  not  answered
in  the  time  and  the  way  that  we  should

549


CHAP.  XXXIIL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


prefer  and  expect.  Yet  the  prayer  is
really  answered  if  there  be  a  gradual
preparation  of  events  for  our  benefit,  and
a  gradual  preparation  of  our  hearts  and
minds  to  bear  and  do  God's  holy  will.
If  we  pray  against  unbelief,  the  prayer
is  answered  if  our  faith  is  silently
strengthened.  If  we  pray  for  patience,
the  prayer  is  answered  if  we  are  kept
from  sinking  into  despair  under  the
trouble.  If  we  pray  for  holiness,  the
prayer  is  answered  when  we  are  enabled
to  "  resist  even  to  blood,  striving  against
sin."  If  we  pray  for  deliverance  from
trouble,  the  prayer  is  answered  by  God's
raising  up  friends  who  may  support  and
comfort  us,  and  finally  be  the  means  of
our  security  and  our  rescue.

2.  Of  special  Divine  illumination.  "I
will  show  thee  great  and  mighty  things,
which  thou  knowest  not."  Hidden  things.

TJie  school  of  the  C7'0ss  is  the  school  of
light.  God  shows  His  people  great
and  mighty  things  concerning  Himself,
**  the  secret  of  the  Lord;*'  concerning
the  interests  of  the  Church  ;  concerning
the  kingdom  of  Christ  (vers.  14-16). —
S.  TJiodey,  1849.

Ver.  3.  Theme:  Prayer  Encouraged.
Such  words  must  have  been  as  a  gleam
of  light  shining  through  the  bars  of  the
prophet's  dungeon.

L  The  invitation  to  prayer.  *'  Call
upon  Me."

1.  Whence  came  the  invitation  ?  '*  The
word  of  the  Lord  came"  (ver.  1).  His
voice  it  is  we  hear  inviting  us,  *'  l^he
Lord  "  (ver.  2).  How  should  every  ear
be  attentive  when  Jehovah  speaks  and
bids  His  creatures  *'call,"  <fec. !

2.  To  whom,  does  He  address  these
words  ?  A  lonely  prophet,  in  his  soli-
tary dungeon.  And  it  is  to  all  who  are
*'  prisoners  of  hope  "  this  invitation  is
given.

3.  Observe  the  single  Object  of  our
worship.  "  Call  upon  Me.**  Vain  is  all
other  refuge,  insuflScient  all  other  sources
of  consolation.

4.  But  wlien  may  we  call  on  God  ?
There  is  no  limit  as  to  time,  or  circum-
stance, or  state  of  mind  we  are  in.

5.  The  mann<T  in  which  we  should
pray.       "  Call   upon  "  denotes   earnest-

55Q


ness,  fervency,  perseverance.  If  our
petitions  breathe  the  spirit  of  earnest
supplication,  if  they  are  the  language  of
want,  sorrow,  sin,  or  of  devout  adora-
tion and  thanksgiving,  they  are  equally
acceptable.

6.  He  who  asks  us  to  pray  has  prth
mised  His  grace  to  teach  us  how  to  pray
(Rom.  viii.  26).

II  Exceeding  precious  encourage-
ments annexed  to  the  invitation.

1.  The  promise  is  as  general  and  un-
limited as  the  invitation.  "  I  will  answer
thee."  Nothing  said  as  to  the  mode^
time,  or  place,

(a.)  Sometimes  **  before  they  call,**
<fcc.  (Isa,  xlv.  24),  as  in  Acts  xii.  5.

(6.)  Sometimes  He  "  makes  as  though
He  heard  not,*'  though  they  knock.
Temporary  denial  adds  zeal  to  the  sup-
pliant, and  sweetens  the  blessing  when
it  is  vouchsafed.

(o.)  Sometimes  in  a  manner  wholly
different  from  our  expectations.  Thus
Paul  "  besought  the  Lord  thrice "  for
the  thorn  to  be  removed,  but  God  an-
swered by  making  "grace  sufficient."
We  ask  deliverance  from  trials,  <fec.,  but
God  opens  only  "a  way  of  escape  that
we  may  be  able  to  bear  it*'  We  pray
for  spirituality,  to  be  weaned  from  the
world,  and  "  He  takes  away  the  desire
of  our  eyes  with  a  stroke."

2.  But  the  assurances  here  go  beyond
simple  answer  to  prayer.  "  I  will  show
thee  great  and  mighty  things,**  <fec.  Some
of  these  are  enumerated  in  the  follow-
ing Verses,  and  clearly  point  to  spiritual
blessings  and  to  Christ  Himself.

1.  Healing  from  the  wounds  of  the
enemy  (ver.  6).  He  is  the  great  Phy-
sician.

2.  Liberty  from  the  bondage  of  sin
(ver.  7).

3.  Entire  purification  and  justification
(ver.  8).

4.  The  wonders  of  redeeming  grace
and  love  (ver.  14),  <fec.

Notably    is     promised     here     STILL

PURTHER     AND      FULLER     REVELATION,
AND     DEEPER    EXPERIENCE     OP    DrVINB

THINGS.     **  I  will  show  thee,*'  <fec.

(a.)  So  that,  whatever  has  been  al-
ready enjoyed,  there  are  more  glorious
and    delightful   things    to  he    attaine<Jl


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB.  chap,  xxxttl.


(John  L  50).     New  wonders  sliuU  meet  frequently  God  calls  us  to  Him  in  Scrip-

the    eye    of    faitli  ;    more    ''  abundant  ture  than  we  find  there  our  sinfuhiess

peace  "  (ver.  6)  shall  fill  the  heart,  <fec.  denounced  !

(6.)  If  it  is  not  so — and  alas  !  many  4.  Nor  by  the  commands  of  the  Bible

believers  decline,  in  their  experience  and  alone  are  we  summoned  to  prayer,  but

privilege,  instead  of  advancing,  crying,  by  the  motions  of  His  Holy  Spirit.

**  Oh  that  it  were  with  me  as  in  times  EL  An  answer  promised,

past!" — it  is  because  they  do  not  maintain  1.  God^s  very  nature,  as  revealed  in

earnest  prayer,     "  Ca/^  upon  Me,  and  /  Jesus  Christ,  assures  us  that   He  will

will  shoWy*'  <fec.  accept  us  in  prayer.

(c.)    How  many  great  and  gracious  2.    Our  own  experience   leads   us  to

things  the  Lord  is  waiting  to  reveal  to  believe  that  God  will  answer  prayer  je.^.,

us  I  Blessed  they  who  *'go  from  strength  the  conversion  of  many  a  child  has  been

to  strength,"  who  "follow  on  to  know  an    answer   to  parents'   pleadings  with

the  Lord."  God.

Let  us  all  examine  ourselves —  3.  Yet  God  does  not  always  give  the

i.  Not  to  **  call  upon  God  "  is  to  for-  thing  we  ask.

feit  the  name  of  Christian.    The  Apostle  Lord  Bolingbroke  said  to  the  Countess

uses  the  descriptive  phrase  of  believers,  of  Huntingdon,  "  I  cannot  understand,

as  '*  those  who  in  every  place  call  upon  your  ladyship,  how  you  can  make  out

the  name  of  the  Lord."     To  live  with-  earnest   prayer   to   be    consistent   with

out  prayer  is  to  live  without  Christ  and  submission  to  the  Divine  will"

without  hope.  **  My  lord,"  she  said,  "  that  is  a  matter

ii.  Let  those  who  profess  to  cultivate  of  no  difficulty.     If  I  were  a  courtier  of

the   duty   of   prayer   consider  well   the  some  generous  king,  and  he  gave  me  per-

character  of  their  devotions.    The  prayers  mission  to  ask  any  favour  I  pleased  of

of  many  are  lamentably  cold,  formal,  him,  I  should  be  sure  to  put  it  thus  :

and  unbelieving.     Hence  these  blessings  '  Will  your  majesty  be  graciously  pleased

here  assured  are  so  rarely  enjoyed. —  to  grant  me  such  and  such  a  favour;

Anonymous  MS.,  dated  a.d.  1836.  but  at  the  same  time,  though  I  much

desire  it,  if  it  would  in  any  way  detract

Ver.  3.  Theme:  The  Golden  Key  OF  from   your   majesty's   honour,  or  if  in

Prayer.     God's  people  have  always  in  your  majesty's  judgment  it  should  seem

their   worst    conditions   found   out   the  better  that  I  did  not  have  this  favour,  I

best  of  their  God.  shall  be  quite  as  content  to  go  without

Rutherford  has  a  quaint  saying,  that  it  as  to  receive  it.'     So  you  see  I  might

"when  he  was  cast  into  the  cellars  of  earnestly  offer  a  petition,  and  yet  might

affliction,  he  always  remembered  that  the  submissively  leave  it  with  the  king."

great  King  kept  His  wine  there,  and  he  IIL    Encouragement  to  faith.      "  I

at  once  searched  for  the  wine-bottles  and  will  show,"  <fec.

drank  *  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined.' "  1.   Promised  to   God's  prophet,   this

Those  who  dive  into  the  sea  of  afflic-  specially  applies  to  every  teacher.     The

tion  bring  up  rare  pearls.  best   way   for   a    teacher    or    learner   in

L  Prayer  commanded.  Divine  truth  to  reach  the  "  deeper  things

1.  This  is  great  condescension.  So  of  God*^  is  to  be  much  in  prayer.  How  did
great  is  the  infatuation  of  man  on  the  J)iime\  find  out  Nebuchadnezzar  s  dream?
one  hand,  which  makes  him  need  a  com-  Set  himself  to  prayer.  When  John  saw
mand  to  be  merciful  to  his  own  soul,  the  hook  was  sealed,  "he  we[)t  much,'*
and  so  marvellous  the  condescension  of  and  those  tears  were  his  liquid  prayers ;
God  on  the  other  that  He  issues  a  com-  then  "the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah
mand  of  love.  opened  the  book."

2.  Our  hearts  so  despond  over  our  Luther  says,  ^^  Bene  <yrare  est  bene
unfitness  and  guilt,  that  but  for  the  studuisse" — To  have  prayed  well  is  to
cc-mmand  we  might  fear  to  approach.  have  studied  welh

3.  It  is  remarkable  how  mv^h  more  2.    The  saint  may  expect  to  discover

5dX


efiAf.  itxiii.


SOMilEftC  COMMEh'fAltt:  jnttEMtAtt,


deeper  experience  and  to  know  more  of
the  higher  spiritual  life,  by  being  much
in  prayer ;  e.g.,  Jacob  wrestling  for  the
blessing  and  name.

3.  It  is  certainly  true  of  the  sufferer
under  trial;  if  he  waits  on  God  he
shall  have  greater  deliverance  tlian  he
ever  dreamed  of  (Lament,  iii.  57).

4.  Here  is  encouragement  for  the
worker.  We  know  not  how  much  capa-
city for  usefulness  there  is  in  us.  More
prayer  will  show  us  more  power.

5.  This  should  cheer  us  in  intercession
for  others.  *'  The  Lord  turned  the  cap-
tivity of  Job  when  he  prayed  for  his
friends."

6.  Some  are  seekers  for  your  own
conversion.  Pray,  and  see  if  God  will
not  "  show  you  great  and  mighty
things." — (7.  H.  Spurgeon,  a.d.  1865.

Ver.  3.  Theme :  Truths  Great  and
Mighty.  We  know  but  in  part.  With-
out Divine  teaching  we  should  have
known  nothing  essentially  "  great."  Sup-
pose God  had  taught  us  nothing  by
revelation  or  inspiration,  we  should  have
known  nothing  which  relates  to  our
highest  interests.

I.  By  His  Word  God  has  already
shown  us  great  and  mighty  things  which
we  knew  not  and  could  not  have  known :
incarnation,  redemption,  regeneration,
resurrection,  and  man's  final  destiny.

IL  Yet  though  these  great  and  mighty
things  are  known,  they  have  not  been
"  shown "  to  men  in  their  reality  and
supreme  importance.

But  when  God,  who  brought  light  out
of  darkness,  shines  into  the  dark  mind,
that  mind  sees  "  the  great  and  mighty  "
truths.  The  Spirit's  teaching  differs
from  the  teaching  of  revelation  in  this
— giving  to  the  mind  a  due  appreciation
of  the  truths  revealed.

in.  Scientific  truths  are  what  they
are  whether  man  understands  them  or
not ;  but,  till  instructed,  men  understand
not  their  value.  So  the  truths  of  re-
velation are  what  they  are ;  but,  till
men  are  enlightened  by  the  Divine
Spirit,  they  are  not  understood  in  their
essential  greatness  and  importance.

The  Spirit  "  takes  the  tilings  of  Christ
lUid  reveals  them  "  unto  us — such  things
552


as    **  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,"
(fee.

IV.  In  value,  importance,  and  results
they  infinitely  transcend  all  other
things.

What  have  the  "  great  and  mighty "
truths  of  science  and  philosophy  done
for  the  world  or  for  man,  compared  with
the  greater  and  mightier  truths  of  the
Gospel  ?  Have  they  answered  the  ques-
tion, "What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"
healed  a  broken  heart ;  led  men  to  con-
tentment with  their  lot ;  taught  them
how  to  live  or  die?

V.  Yet,  there  are  greater  and
mightier  truths  to  be  known,  even  by
us  who  have  sat  at  Jesus*  feet  and  learned
of  Him.  There  are  yet  "deep  things
of  God  "  which  are  to  us  unknown.  If
there  are  mysteries  which  "  angels  desire
to  look  into ; "  so  there  are  things  our
feeble  minds  cannot  comprehend  and
our  partially  sanctified  hearts  cannot
undeistand.

VI.  The  deeper  our  consciousness  of
this  fact,  the  greater  will  be  our  desire
for  more  light.  To  obtain  which  there
must  be  fervent,  earnest  prayer,  **  Call
upon  Me,"  <fec.

And  also  a  holy  walking  with  God.
"  He  gives  to  the  man  that  is  good  in
His  sight,  wisdom,  and  knowledge,  and

joy."

Thus,  to  the  prayerful  and  holy,
God  makes  revelations  of  "great  and
mighty  things,"  of  which  men  of  greater
talent  and  higher  culture  are  left  in
ignorance.  "  Father,  I  thank  Thee  that
Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise
and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto
babes."

VIL  That  is  a  poor  philosophy  which
leaves  men  nnacauainted  with  those
'^ great  and  mighty  things"  essential
to  their  eternal  welfare ;  which  leaves
them  to  grope  on  in  darkness  through
life's  pathway,  and  then  to  die  and
perish  in  their  sins.

That  is  the  trtie  philosophy  which
"  brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,"
and  then  leads  the  soul  on  to  the  full
realisation  of  bliss  when  the  shadows
of  time  have  passed  away.

Does  any  man  lack  this  wisdom  t
''Let  him  ask  of  God/'  <&c.


tlOMttEfW  COMMENfAitt :  JEREMtAS,


OBAf.  XlXtlt


Many  mistake  mere  knowledge  for  this
"  wisdom  which  is  from  above."  Learn-
ing may  prevail,  knowledge  may  abound,
wit  may  be  common,  but

"  Wisdom  is  rare^  Lorenzo,**

But  it  belongs  to  them  who  are  "  taught
of  God,"  and  "  learn  of  Jesus." — Kev,  D,
Pledge^  **  Walks  with  Jeremiah."

Ver.  6.  Theme:  The  Gospel  a  Sure
Remedy.  A  promise  to  the  unhappy
nation  of  the  Jews  of  blessings  yet  in
store  for  them.  Let  us  apply  the  pas-
sage for  our  own  edification — as  con-
taining a  beautiful  representation  of  the
Lord's  dealings  with  tbe  souls  whom  He
redeems.  Three  stages  of  His  gracious
operations  as  the  Great  Physician —

L  He  visits  His  poor  patients
with  an  all-sufficient  remedy  in  His
hand.

n.  Applies  that  remedy.  Not  only
**  brought  near,"  but  applied.

in.  Confers  great  blessings  in  con-
sequence on  the  healed  ones.  "Abund-
ance of  peace  and  truth.''

(1.)  Privileges  of  the  redeemed  sinner:
«*  peace  "  with  God  ]  "  truth  "  of  His
grace,  His  covenant,  His  promises.

(2.)  Character  acquiied  by  the  re-
deemed sinner  in  consequence  of  his
faith  :  a  peaceful  spirit ;  walking  in  the
truth.  "  An  Israelite  in  whom  is  no
guile."

Have  you  sought  healing  ?  — Rev,
Arthur  Roberts,  M,A,,  "  Village  Ser-
mons" vol.  ii.

Vers.    6-9.    Theme:    Israel    Inoa-

THERED — A  MATTER  OP  IMPORTANCE  TO

God  and  Man.  "  I  will  cause  the  cap-
tivity  of  Israel  and  Judah  to  return,"

This  passage  has  never  yet  been  ful-
filled ;  not  only  because  the  ten  tribes  of
Israel  have  not  been  combined  with  Judah,
but  because  the  ejects  here  ainiounced  of
that  event  were  never  produced  by  their
return  from  Babylon  ;  for  the  nations  of
the  earth  have  never  been  made  to  "  fear
and  tremble  "  by  reason  of  the  goodness
and  prosperity  of  the  Jewish  nation.

L  The  event  predicted.  God  pro-
mises them  here —


1.  A  discovery  of  ffis  will.  In  their
whole  civil  and  ecclesiastical  condition
they  are  *'sick,"  <fec.  (Isa.  i.  6,  6).  But
God  will  "  restore  health"  <kc.  They  are
in  "  blindness "  and  "  ignorance,"  but
God  will  "  reveal  unto  them  abundance
of  peace  and  truthj*

2.  A  manifestation  of  His  favour.
"  Will  build  them  as  at  the  first  "  (ver.  7,
also  in  ver.  11).  All  shall  be  renewed
to  them  with  tenfold  advantage  (chap.
XXX.  18,  20).

3.  A  communication  of  His  grace.
Sins  cleansed  (ver.  8)  ;  iniquities  cast  to
oblivion  (Micah  vii.  19  ;  Jer.  1.  20)  ;  re-
newed natures  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  24-27).

II.  The  vast  importance  of  this
event.  If  we  contemplate  only  the  happi-
ness of  that  people,  the  temporal,  spiritual,
and  eternal  happiness  of  those  living  and
those  yet  to  live,  how  important  the
event  here  predicted !  But,  limiting
attention  to  the  text,  mark—

1.  The  interest  God  Himself  has  in  it,
*'  It  shall  be  to  Me  a  name  of  joy"  <fcc.
(ver.  9).  Comp.  also  Isa.  Ixv.  18,  19 ;
Zeph.  iii.  17 ;  and  Isa.  Ixii.  4,  5.

It  will  also  greatly  honour  God.  He
is  glorified  in  His  works  of  creation  ;  but
how  much  more  when  "  all  the  nations  of
the  earth  shall  hear"  (ver.  9)  of  God's
recovery  of  His  people — it  shall  be  "  a
praise  and  an  honour*'  Comp.  Isa.  Ix.
20,  21;  Ixi.  1-3;  Ixii.  3.

2.  The  interest  of  the  whole  world
involved  in  it.  At  this  wonderful  sight
will  *'all  the  nations  of  the  earth  fear
and  tremble"  At  their  rescue  from  Egypt,
a  somewhat  similar  efifect  was  produced
(Exod.  XV.  15,  16)  ;  and  the  like  terror
shall  be  created  then  (Micah  vii.  15-
17).

But  others  will  regard  the  event  with
a  grateful  awe,  "  will  fear  and  tremble
for  all  the  goodness  and  prosperity  that
God  hath  procured  unto  His  peo[)le."

Indeed  this  shall  incite  beholders  to
conviction  and  faith  (Zech.  viii.  23).
To  this  Paul  alludes  ;  "  If  the  fall,"
(fcc,  "  what  shall  the  receiving  of  them
V)e  but  life  from  the  dead?"  (Rom.  xi.
12,  \5.)—Chas.  Simeon,  M.A.,  a.d.  1828.

On  vers.  10,  11.  Desolation  of
Joy ;  Joy  Restored;  see  Ht'iniiies,  &c.

663


ctiAp.  xxjcm.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEttEMlAB.


on  cbap.  vii.  34;  xvi.  9;  xxv.  10,  11  ;
and  also  xvii.  26.

^^ Praise  the  Lord  of  Hosts;  for  the
Lord  is  good ;  for  His  mercy  endureth
for  ever."

It  was  the  customary  form  of  litur-
gical thanksgiving  (Ps.  cvi.  1  ;  2  Chron.
V.  13;  vii.  3,  6).

They  were  actually  used  by  the  Jews
at  their  restoration  (Ezra  iii.  11).

On  vers.  12,  13.  Imagery  of  Shep-
herds and  their  Flocks^  see  on  chap,
xxxi.  24.

On  the  words  in  ver.  13,  "  The
fiocks  pass  again  under  the  hands  of
Him  that  tklleth  them,"  see  Milton's
line  ill  L Allegro  —

**  While  the  ploughman,  near  at  hand.
Whistles  o'er  the  furrowed  land  ;
And  the  milkmaid  singeth  blithe;
And  the  mower  whets  his  scyth© ;
A  nd  every  shepherd  teUs  his  tale
Under  the  hawthorn  in  the  dale — **

i.e.,  counts  the  number  of  the  sheep
he  has  in  charge,  so  the  Good  Shep-
herd '*  calleth  all  His  sheep  byname"
(John  X.  3).  And  in  3  John  14,  the
Apostle  says,  "  Greet  the  friends  by
name."

On  ver.  14.  '*  The  good  thing  I
have  promised ;  **  see  chap,  xxiii.  6  ;
zxix.  10.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  The  Branch  op
Kighteousness.  This  verse  is  the
exact  repetition  of  chap,  xxiii.  5.  See
Homilies  on  that  verse,  pp.  442,  443,
444 :  "  The  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  ;  "
"  The  Nature  and  Prosperity  of  Messiah^ 8
Reign/*

Ver.  16.  Theme:  A  Bright  Era
FOR  Mankind.  "In  His  days  Judah
shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell
safely."

Same  words  in  chap,  xxiii  6.  See
Homily  there.

Them^ :  The  Lord  our  Righteous-
ness.    See  Homily  on  chap,  xxiii.  6 ;
also,  "  Christ^ s  Supreme  Name;  "  "  The
Christian    Creed    Summarised ; "    and
654


**  Jehovah  Justitia  Nostra,**  pp.  444-
448.

See  specially  sermon  on  Sections  1-8
of  chap,  xxiii.

Judah's  Restoration  under  Je-
hovah TsiDKENU,  pp.  438,  439,  by
Robert  Gordon,  D.D.,  and  Noticeahle
Topic:  Jesus  our  Lord  and  Right-
eousness, by  Bislwp  Reginald  Heher,
pp.  458,  459.

Vers.  14-16.  Theme:  Jesus  Christ
AS  King.

I.  From  what  a  noble  royal  stock
did  He  proceed  I  Raised  by  God  ;  de-
scended from  David  ;  both  by  His  Deity
and  His  humanity  heir  to  the  throne.

IL  How  well  has  he  exercised  His
rule  !  "  With  judgment  and  righteous-
ness." He  Himself  is  *'  The  Lord  our
Righteousness. "

III  How  widely  does  His  dominion
extend  !  From  Jerusalem  to  the  ends
of  the  earth.

IV.  How  safely  does  His  people
dwell !  Kept  by  Him  in  security  and
peace. — Naumann,  in  Lange,

Ver.  16.  Theme:  The  Lord  our
Righteousness.  Deep-wounding — from
views  of  Christ  pierced  by  our  sins,
precedes  deep  peace — from  views  of  His
righteousness.  Originally  spoken  to
Judah  and  IsraeL

I.  It  is  the  sight  of  a  Divine  righteous-
ness. Jehovah  has  made  the  atone-
ment.

II.  It  is  a  living  righteousness.
Jehovah  is  the  righteousness.  A  living
One  gives  it.  He  is  exalted  to  give  it
He  comes  to  you  with  the  oj'er  of  it.

III.  It  is  an  appropriated  righteous-
ness. "  Our"  It  would  not  give  me
peaM  to  see  the  whole  world  clothed  in
Christ,  if  /  were  notl  No  delight' to
me  except  I  am  sitting  under  His  shade
myself — under  the  rock.

The  joy  of  Paul  was,  "  Christ  is
made  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness,"
<fcc.  ;  of  Thomas,  "  My  Lord  and  my
God  I"

Application —

1.  The  rest  of  a  believer  consists  in
knowing  that  Jehovah  is  his  righteous-
ness.


eOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


ohaK  txxtit


2.  The  folly  of  those  who  rest  in
seeking  is  evident — *'  ever  learning,  yet
never  coming,"  <fec.

3.  We  see  the  misery  of  unbelievers.
There  is  a  glorious  Divine  righteousness
that  TVGuld  make  the  blackest  fair.

It  will  be  your  eternal  torment,  that
so  glorious  a  righteousness  was  offered
you,  and  you  died  without  it. — R,
Murray  M^'Cheyne,  1844.

Critical  Note  (ver.  1 6).  "  She  shall
be  called  The  Lord  our  Righteousness."
In  xxiii.  6,  the  name,  "  The  Lord  oue
Righteousness,"  is  given  to  Christ ;
it  is  "  the  name  whereby  He  shall  be
called."  In  this  verse  the  name  is  given
to  her  J  n^,  i.e.,  to  Jerusalem.

Henderson  alters  PI  J  to  ^*  a  not  un-
common masculine  form  in  the  Hebrew;
and  reads  the  verse  "  whereby  He  shall
be  called  "  (as  in  chap,  xxiii.  6).     And

the    Syriac   and   Targum   point   H?  as
a    masculine ;    the   Vulgate    also    has

But  Wordswoi'thj  retaining  the  femi-
nine, comments  thus :  **  This  is  to  be
explained  by  the  union  of  the  Church
with  Christ  (see  Rom.  xii.  4,  5 ;  1  Cor.
X.  17,  xii.  12;  Ephes.  i.  22,  iv.  12,
15,  16,  25,  vi.  23,  30;  Col.  i.  18,  24);
so  that  what  belongs  to  Him  is  com-
municated to  her.  (So  Calvin  and  others. )
Thus,  by  virtue  of  her  mystical  union
with  Christ,  and  by  the  importation  of
His  merits  and  the  infusion  of  His
Spirit,  the  name  of  the  Church  may  be
said  to  be  *  The  Lord  our  Righteous-
ness;' she  hides  herself  in  Him,  and  is
seen  by  God  as  in  Him ;  she  is  clothed
with  Christ  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  (see
Rev.  xii.  1),  and  is  accepted  in  the
Beloved  (Ephes.  i.  6)."

Dr.  Payne  Smith  says:  The  name  *'is
here  given  to  Jerusalem,  i.e.,  to  the
Church,  because  it  is  her  business
mediately  to  work  on  earth  that  righteous-
ness which  Christ  works  absolutely.
The  Church  justifies  men  only  because
its  ordinances  bring  men  to  Christ"
Comp.  Ephes.  i.  23.

Jamieson  remarks  :  "  Jerusalem  is
called  by  the  same  name  as  Messiah,
by    virtue    of    the    mystical    oneness


between  her  (as  the  literal  representative
of  the  spiritual  Church),  and  her  Lord
and  Husband.  Thus,  whatever  belongs
to  the  Head  belongs  also  to  the  members
(Ephes.  V.  30,  32).  Hence  the  Church
is  called  '  Christ '  (Rom.  xvi.  7  ;  1  Cor.
xii.  12).  The  Church  hereby  professes
to  draw  all  her  righteousness  from
Christ  (Isa,  xlv.  24,  25).  It  is  for  the
sake  of  Jerusalem,  literal  and  spiritual,
that  God  the  Father  gave  this  name
{Jehovah  Tsidkenu)  to  Christ."

Vers.  17, 18.  Thevfve:  Perpetuity  of
David^s  Reign  and  of  the  Levitical
Priesthood.  The  literal  sense  of  these
words  is,  that  there  shall  be  an  abso-
lute perpetuity  of  the  Davidic  and
Levitical  succession.  These  words  ac-
cord with  2  Sam.  vii.  16  ;  1  Kings
ii.  4 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  4,  29,  36 ;  Num.
XXV.  12.     But—

L  Historic  events  refuted  the  literal
interpretation.

1,  As  to  David.  No  lineal  descendant
of  David  occupied  the  Jewish  throne
after  Zedekiah,  "  the  Asmonsean  princes
being  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  while  Herod
was  not  a  Jew  at  all  but  an  Idumaean."
— Henderson.

2.  As  to  the  Levitical  priesthood.
Although  after  the  captivity  the  Levitical
priesthood  attained  great  power  for  a
time,  indeed  until  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem  by  Titus,  yet  since  then  it
has  absolutely  ceased.

n.  Prophecy  itself  foretold  their
literal  cessation.  Indeed  Jeremiah
himself  thus  announced  their  failure —

1.  As  to  the  Davidic  kingdom  (Jer.
xxii.  30,  XXX.  21).

2.  As  to  the  Levitical  priesthood  (Jer.
iii.  16,  xxxi.  33).

III.  Their  literal  fulfilment  cannot  be
associated  tvith  the  future  restoration
of  the  Jews  to  Palestine.  Tlie  Davidic
reign  and  Levitical  priesthood  cannot
then  be  restored.     For —

1.  Their  genealogical  tables  have  been
irrecoverably  lost.

2.  Nothing  short  of  a  miracle  would
be  required  to  distinguish  then  between
who  are  descendants  of  David  and  who
those  of  Levi. — Henderson.

IV,  New  Testament  teaching  declares

555


CHAP.  xxxm.


BOM  1  LET  I  a  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH.


the  absolute  supercession  and  substitu-
tion of  the  spiritual  for  the  literal
royalty  and  priesthood.  Its  teachings
are  that —

1.  No  king  of  the  family  of  David
shall  reign  hut  the  Messiah;  and  the
seat  of  Ills  government  is  not  an  eartlily,
but  a  heavenly  throne  (Luke  i.  32,  33).

2.  The  Levitical   services  have   been
for  ever  abrogated  by  the  unchanging  and
unceasing  piiesthood  of  Christ  (Heb.  vii.
12-28).

V.  What  explanations  remove  the
seeming  error  of  these  predictions  ?

1.  The  Davidic  kingship  and  Levitical
priesthood  are  symbols,  which  represented
to  the  Jew  all  that  was  most  dear  to  his
heart  in  the  state  of  things  under  which
he  lived — his  national  existence  and  free-
dom from  foreign  oppression  (which  was
bound  up  in  the  thought  of  David's
perpetual  kingdom),  and  his  religious
privileges  and  hopes  (associated  insepar-
ably with  the  perpetuity  of  the  Levitical
ministries).  Their  restoration  was  there-
fore synonymous  with  the  restoration  of
his  national  and  spiritual  life.  But
neither  was  so  restored  as  to  exist  per-
manently. But  that  was  given  instead
of  which  both  were  types :  the  Church,
whose  Head  is  the  true  Prophet,  Priest,
and  King. — Dr,  Payne  Smith.

2.  The  spiritual  interpretation  :  its
application  to  the  Messiah  in  His  regal
and  sacerdotal  offices.  The  throne  of
David  is  the  spiritual  throne,  which,  as
his  descendant,  Messiah  is  to  fill  for
ever  (Isa.  ix.  6  j  Luke  i.  32,  33).  And
as  David's  reign  is  thus  carried  forward
spiritually,  so  the  Levites  may  be  said
never  to  "  want  a  man "  to  present
sacrifices,  inasmuch  as  **  the  man  Christ
Jesus "  "  ever  liveth "  to  present  the
merits  of  His  own  sacrifice. — Henderson.

3.  These  pledges  of  perpetuity  find
their  fulfilment  in  the  royalty  and  priest-
hood  of  all  Christian  souls;  called  a
"royal  priesthood"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5-9);
*'  kings  and  priests  unto  God  "  (Rev.  i.
6  ;  V.  10)  ;  "  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,
who  shall  reign  "  (Rev.  xx.  6). — Heng-
itenburg.

4.  Interpreting  the  promised  per-
petuity of  the  Levitical  priesthood,  Bishop
Wordsworth^  following  Lowth^  urges  that

556


the  ministry  of  the  Christian  Church  is
the  complete  realisation  of  all  that  was
done  in  the  offices  of  the  high  priests,
the  priests,  and  the  Levites  in  the  Taber-
nacle and  the  Temple.  So  that  the
promise  here  that  the  Levites  will  never
want  a  man  to  stand  before  God  to
execute  priestly  functions,  is  a  declara-
tion that  "there  shall  never  fail  a  succes^
sion  of  men  set  apart  to  God's  service  to
perform  the  public  offices  of  religion."
Accordingly,  Paul  proves  the  rights  and
privileges  belonging  to  the  ministers  of
the  Gospel  from  the  prerogatives  given  to
the  Jewish  priesthood  (1  Cor.  ix.  13,
14).  And  Trapp  interprets  it  as  mean-
ing ^^  the  continuance  of  an  evangelical
m.inistry  iip  the  Church  to  the  xvorld^s  end  "
(Matt,  xxviii.  20;  Eph.  iv.  11-13).

5.  In  proof  that  these  predictions
were  to  have  no  mere  Jewish  fidfUment,
but  point  to  a  dispensation  in  which
national  distinctions  disappear  amid
spiritual  qualifications  and  experiences,
we  have  the  definite  promise  tliat  Gentiles
are  to  become  priests  and  Levites.  Fur
in  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  there  shall
be  some  among  them  ordained  to  be
ministers  in  Christ's  Church:  "I  will
also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for
Levites"  (Isa.  Ixvi.  21  ;  see  also  Ivi.  7,
Ixi.  6;  Mai.  i.  11,  iii.  3).

Vers.  20-22.  Theme:  Great  Pro-
mises Grandly  Guaranteed.  "  The
unchangeableness  of  God's  laws  in  nature
is  the  pledge  that  His  promises  in  grace
are  equally  immutable." — Dr.  Payne
Smith,

"  The  richest  promises  are  confirmed
by  the  strongest  assurances." — Cowles.

"  God  has  hitherto  kept  promise  with
nights  and  days  that  one  shall  succeed
the  other ;  and  will  He  not  keep  touch
with  His  people  ?  " — Trapp.

Vers.  24-26.  Theme:  Speaking
Contemptuously  op  God's  People.

These  *'  two  families  "  are  either  Israel
and  Judah  ;  or  else  **  the  seed  of  Jacob  "
(ver.  26)  to  whom  the  birthright  was
given,  and  the  seed  of  ^^  David  "  (ver.  26)
to  whom  the  promise  was  subsequently
confirmed,  that  of  him  the  Messiah
should  spring.


HOMILBTW  COMAfENTARY:  JEUnMIAB,


OHAP.  xxrir.


Who  were  they  who  spake  thus  of
God's  people?  Either  the  Clialdeans
without  the  walls,  or  the  unbelieving
Jews  within.

I.  The  utterance  0/ defiance  and  scorn
it  from  the  Chaldeans.  They  spoke  con-
tent ptuously  of  the  Hebrews  us  being
abandoned  by  their  God.  Implying  on
the  part  of  Israel's  foes —

1.  Exultation  over  the  rejection  of
God's  [)eople  from  His  care  and  favour.
"  Aha,  so  would  we  have  it !  "

2.  Execration,  expressing  their  pur-
pose to  destroy  them.  **  If  it  had  not
been  that  the  Lord  was  on  our  side,
when  men  rose  up  against  us,  then  had
they  swallowed  us  up  quick."

3.  Contempt,  They  despised  them
as  a  forlorn,  friendless,  feeble  folk.  So
Sennacherib :  "  What  do  these  feeble
Jews  ?  "

II.  The  utterance  of  desolate  de-
spair by  the  Jews  themselves.  They
spoke  depreciatingly  of  themselves  and
their  prospects.  Implying  on  Israel's
part  that  they  were —

1.  Paralysed  by  nearing  disaster.
The  Chaldeans  were  encroaching  on  the
city  ;  capture  was  inevitable.

2.  Abandonment  of  all  hope  in  God,
He  had,  as  they  supposed,  now  rejected
Judah,  as  already  He  had  Israel.

3.  Depreciation  of  themselves  in  their
relation  to  God  as  His  covenant  people.


judging  that  their  national  existence
was  now  \\  ell-nigh  closed.

Notes —

DiEDRiCH  comments :  **  In  the  first
instance  they  would  not  be  warned;
now  they  will  not  be  comforted.  The
true  prophet,  however,  announces  death
to  sinners  according  to  the  law,  but
afterwards  grace  for  renovation  and  for
life.

Despair  is  blasphemy,  God's  king-
dom stands  and  will  be  perfected,  but
the  faint-hearted  will  not  enter  it.

God  answers,  So  long  as  heaven  and
earth  are  preserved  by  Me,  it  is  for  the
sake  of  My  kingdom,  and  as  a  pledge  that
it  will  not  fail.  Israel,  or,  what  is  the
same  thing,  David's  seed,  shall  be  a
royal  seed,  and  the  captivity  which  the
people  must  now  endure  is  transient.
It  is  impossible,  however,  for  the  worldly
to  understand  this,  who  perish  in  carnal
repose  as  though  no  God  could  punish
them  ;  and,  again,  in  affliction  are  so
despondent  as  though  there  were  no  God
to  help  them  any  more."

Henky  remarks :  "  Deep  security
commonly  ends  in  deep  despair ;  whereas
those  that  keep  up  a  holy  fear  at  all  times
have  a  good  hope  to  support  them  in
the  worst  of  times."

"  This  is  (ver.  26)  a  complex  pro-
mise," says  Trapp,  *'  and  better  than
money  which  answereth  all  things,"


CHAPTER  XXXIV.

Cbitioal  and  Exeqetioal  Notes  :— 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.    Section  I.,  vew.  1-7,

is  in  subject  connected  with  chap,  xxxii.  1-5.  These  verses,  however,  seem  slightly  to  antedate
tliat  chapter,  for  observe  the  words  (ver.  2),  *'  Go  and  speak  to  Zedekiah,"  implying  that  Jere-
nnaii  liud  not  yet  been  imprisoned ;  whereas  in  xxxii.  2,  Jticmiah  is  *'  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the
prison."  This  section  must  date  at  the  very  beginning  oi  the  Chaldean  invasion,  and  follows
closely  upon  the  records  in  chap.  xxi.  (see  notes  in  loc).  Further  observe,  in  ver.  7,  that  Lachish
and  Azekuh — stron^;:  cities  of  defence — were  as  yet  not  captured  by  the  Chaldeans ;  and  these
(urg(8  \)v.  Payne  Smith),  lying  in  the  plain  towards  Egypt,  must  be  taken  before  the  Chaideea
could  march  u})on  Jerusalem,  as  otherwise  an  Egyptian  army  might  collect  under  their  cover
and  fall  upon  the  Chaldeans.  Zedekiah  was,  therefore,  at  this  time  in  a  position  for  making
good  tei  ms  with  Nebuchadnezzar.  Thus  the  date  is  early  in  the  ^th  year  of  Zedehiah's  reign —
the  da  e  when  the  Chaldean  army  ^approached  Jerusalem.  Section  II.,  vers.  8-end,  shows  that  the
bondservants  were  released  as  the  siege  drew  imminent;  hut  when— in  tJie  summer  of  tlie  same
year — the  Chaldeans  were  drawn  aside  temporally  from  the  siege  by  the  arrival  of  the  Egyptian
army  to  the  rescue  of  the  Jews  (ver.  21),  their  masters  at  once  forced  the  liberated  slaves  back
again  into  their  service.

2.  National  Affairs. — See  above  on  Chronology  of  chapter.  Jeremiah  had  informed
Zedekiah,  through  his  messenger,  of  the  approaching  Chaldean  siege  (see  on  chap,  xxi.)  ;  the
Bicge  is  now  begun,  and  Jeremiah  goes  to  him  in  person  and  appeals  to  him  to  submit  (vers.  2,
3).     Before,  however,  the  Chaldeans  had  taken  the  fortified  cities  of  the  plain  (for  they  were

657


CHAr.  xxYnr.  nOMILSTJC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JKREMtA  ff.


still  warring  against  tliem,  rer.  7),  and  hence  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  siege  of
Jerusalem,  the  king  '*made  a  covenant  with  all  the  people"  to  liberate  their  servants,  hoping
to  inspire  these  servants  with  patriotic  attachment  to  defend  the  city  against  the  Chaldean  army.
But,  immediately  the  Egyptian  army  appeared,  these  servants  were  forced  back  again  into
bondage.

3.  Contemporary  History. — See  on  chap.  xxi.  and  xxxii.  ;  also  compare  chap,  xxxvii.
5-10.

4.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  7.  **  iMchish  and  Azekak.*'  See  2  Chron.  xi.  5-9.
Both  in  the  lowlands  of  Judali,  to  the  south-west  of  Jerusalem.  "  Lachish  "  wasa  strong  defensive
lowu  (Josh.  X.  31-33),  afterwards  fortified  and  garrisoned  l)y  Rehoboam  ;  it  lay  between
Phoenecia  and  Eg^ypt ;  reoccupied  by  the  Jews  after  their  captivity  (Neh.  xl.  30);  its  exact
site  not  known.  *'  Azekah*'  (see  1  Sam.  xvii.  1  ;  and  Josh.  x.  10, 11).  Also  situate  in  the  plain
towards  Egypt  from  Jerusalem,  but  its  present  site  is  not  known.

5.  Manners  and  Customs. — Vers.  8,  9.  **  Proclaim  libei'ty  unto  man-aervant  and  maid-aervant.**
According  to  Jewish  laws  a  Hebrew  bondservant,  having  served  for  six  years,  had  to  be  set  free
on  the  seventh  (Kxod.  xxi.  2  ;  Deut,  xv.  12).  The  last  year  of  Zedekiah's  reign  was  the  Sab-
batical year  (Vide  supra.  National  AflEairs).  Ver.  5.  **  Bum  odours  for  thee:"  spices  burned
upon  pites  of  faggots  customary  at  royal  funerals  (2  Chron.  xvi.  14  ;  xxi.  19).

Ver.  18.  *  *  Out  the  calf  in  twain  and  passed  between  the  parts. "  it  was  customary,  on  entering
into  a  covenant,  for  the  contracting  parties  to  slay  and  divide  an  animal,  and  pass  between  the
parts,  indicating  tlieir  deserving  and  readiness  to  be  so  treated  if  they  violated  the  contract
(Gen.  XV.  10-17).

6.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  1.  '*  Kingdoms  of  the  earth  of  His  dominion'*  No  art.  before
^K^  and  liv.  "all  the  kingdoms  of  land  the  dominion  of  his  hand,"  i.e.  land  subject  to  his
hand.

Ver.  6.  "  With  the  burnings  of  thy  fathers."    Many  MSS.  have  niSliiJ^Dp^,  according  to  the

burnings,  not  l-l,  toith.

Ver.  17.  "  Will  make  you  to  be  removed"  &c.  ;  *^for  a  removing  "  (Margin),  "for  a  horror"
(Naegelsbach),  **give  you  up  to  agitation"  (Henderson).     Vide  note  on  chap.  xxix.  18.

TOPICAL  SURVEY  OF  CHAPTER  XXXIV.

Soetion  1-7.     Zedekiah's  opportunity  and  its  aJtemative  issue,
„      8-22.  The  people's  perfidy  and  punishment.

Topia :  Vers.  8-11.     Hypocritical  repentance  distinguished  from  true  converaiom.
Vers.  15, 16.    Violation  of  tJu  law  of  liberty.

Vers.  1-7.  Opportunity  and  its  Issues.

The  statements  in  these  verses,  that  Zedekiah  should  "die  in  peace"  and  be
honoured  with  royal  obsequies,  seem  at  variance  with  history.     Explanation —

I.  Inevitable  events.  Verses  2  and  3  are  declared  as  irrevocable  facts.
Zedekiah  was  Nebuchadnezzar*s  vassal,  sworn  to  obedience  and  allegiance  to  the
king  of  Babylon.  Instead  of  fidelity  to  Babylon  he  had  courted  Egyptian  succour,
and  conspired  with  petty  neighbouring  kings  (xxvii.  2,  3)  against  Nebuchadnezzar.
Incensed  at  this  conspiracy,  the  king  of  Babylon  was  now  besieging  Jerusalem.
Zedekiah  must  now  face  his  royal  master.  From  this  there  was  no  escape.  And
verse  3  specifies  the  inevitable  incidents:  1.  Capture;  2.  Brought  face  to  face  with
the  conqueror;  3.  Carried  into  Babylon,

II.  Mitigating  assurances.  Verses  4  and  5  oflfer  an  alleviating  picture  :  1.
Life  spared  of  a  violent  end  ;  2.  Royal  honours  at  death  ;  3.  Reverent  lamentations
of  his  nation  in  exile.

JJL  Opportunity  and  its  alternative  issues.  For  so  must  we  regard  these
verses.     The  "  mitigating  assurances  "  are  not  pledged  absolutely  but  conditionally,

1.  The  final  opportunity  offered.  "Go  speak  to  Zedekiah"  (vers.  2,  3).  This
message  left  him  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  result  of  the  Chaldean  siege,  although  the
Egyptians  came  to  the  succour  of  Jerusalem.  This  absolute  message  of  what  should
befal  the  city  and  the  king  ought  to  have  shown  Zedekiah  the  wisdom  of  propitiat-
ing Nebuchadnezzar  by  his  voluntary  submission  and  surrender  of  the  city.

2.  Conditional  ameliorations  promised.  For  in  this  sense  we  must  read  verses
4  and  5.     The  condition  on  which  these  ameliorations  are  pledged  is  this :  "  Yet

558


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxjt.


hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  Zedekiah  ; "  it  is  an  appeal  to  ^*heed^^  the  message;
and  means,  how  to  God's  purposes,  submit  to  the  Babylonian  yoke,  for  God  so
designs  it  shall  be.

The  ameliorations  promised  are  these :  Obey  and  submit,  and  thy  life  shall  he
spared,  thou  shalt  die  in  peace  at  Jerusalem,  and  be  buried  with  royal  honours  in
the  sepulchre  of  thy  fathers;  for,  doubtless,  Nebuchadnezzar  would  have  preserved
Ztdekiali  as  his  reigning  vassal  had  he  been  still  submissive  to  Babylon.

IV.  The  historic  sequel.  Zedekiah  refused  his  opportunity,  was  taken  face  to
face  with  Nebuchadnezzar ;  *'  his  eyes  beheld  the  eyes  of  the  king  of  Babylon  ;  "
and  then  his  sons  and  nobles  were  slain  before  him ;  following  this  harrowing
spectacle,  he  himself  was  deprived  of  sight ;  he  was  dragged  to  Babylon  in  chains^
and  there  cast  into  prison  where  lie  languished  till  his  death  (chap,  lii,  10,  11).
Comp.  Homily  on  chap,  xxxii.  1-5.

Vers.  8-22.     Perfidy  and  Punishment.

Zedekiah  summoned  his  people  to  a  general  release  of  the  bondservants  of
Jerusalem.     This  act  was  according  to —

L  Covenant  obligations  (vers.  13-15).  A  Levitical  law  enacted  that  owners
of  slaves  of  Hebrew  blocd  should  set  them  free  after  six  years'  service  (Exod.
xxi.  2).  Later,  this  law  was  extended  to  females  (Deut.  xv.  12).  Parents  could
sell  their  children  into  this  limited  slavery,  which  was  no  more  than  a  modern
apprenticeship  (Exod.  xxi.  7  ;  Neh.  v.  5),  and  the  poor  could  so  sell  themselves.
It  was  a  contract  of  service,  absolutely  restricted  in  duration.

On  no  plea  could  owners  of  slaves  refuse  the  liberty  which  was  their  divine
right  at  the  end  of  their  period  of  service.  And  God  had  enacted  that,  at  the  close
of  the  contracted  term,  masters  should  send  their  slaves  away  generously  provided
with  necessaries  and  comforts  (Deut.  xv,  14).     This  contract  arrangement  made —

1.  Servants  faithful.  2.  Masters  considerate.  3.  Cla^s  relationships  mutually
helpful  and  safe.

IL  Prudential  observance.  The  king,  disobedient  to  God's  messages  through
Jeremiah,  would  not  be  likely  now  to  act  from  any  religious  or  conscientious  motive
in  his  covenant  with  the  people  to  proclaim  liberty  (vers.  8,  9).  His  policy  was  to
bind  the  freedmen  to  the  defence  of  the  besieged  city.

Albeit,  "  the  people  ivho  entered  into  the  covenant "  (ver.  1 0)  may  have  responded
under  a  sense  of  danger^  for  the  enemy  was  near  their  gates;  and  may  even  have
risen  to  something  of  patriotic  enthusiasm ;  but  the  motive  was  not  religious.
There  was  no  reverence  for  God  in  their  act,  neither  magnanimity  to  their  slaves.

1.  Good  acts  may  have  had  motives.  2.  A  godless  heart  is  not  likely  to  prompt
noble  purposes.

in.  Execrable  perfidy.  Scarcely  had  the  slaves  been  set  free  than  the  Egyptian
forces  appeared  against  the  Chaldean  besiegers  and  drew  Nebuchadnezzar  for
awhile  off  from  the  siege  (ver.  21).  Elate  with  mad  joy,  the  masters  at  once
forced  back  their  servants  into  renewed  bondage,  thus  violating  all  faith  and  out-
raging every  instinct  of  generosity  (vers.  10,  11,  and  16).

1.  To  break  faith  with  man  is  villanous  in  itself.  2.  It  engenders  worst
feelings  in  those  who  are  wronged.  3.  It  invokes  the  dire  displeasure  of  God ;  for
"with  what  measure  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."

IV.  Parallel  punishment  (vers.  17-25).  Ye  were  "  brought  out  of  the  house
of  bondmen  "  in  Egypt ;  why  destroy  the  bridge  for  others  over  which  you  passed
yourselves  ?

1.  God's  awful  liberation  of  wrong-doers.  "  Behold,  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  "
(ver.  17)  :  abandon  you  as  your  Guardian  and  Lord.

2  Sinners*  appalling  doom.  "  I  will  make  you  to  be  removed  "  (ver.  17) ;  i.e.^
**  to  be  a  hoTfor  "  (see  Lit,  Qrit.)


CHAP.  XXXIT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Then  follow  definite  declarations  of  misery  :  national  disaster  (vers.  19,  20) ;
royal  degradation  and  woe  (ver.  21);  ruin  on  the  laud  {yer.  22).  Having  deceived
their  slaves  with  a  vain  hope  of  liberty,  so  they  now  deceived  themselves^  in  thinking
themselves  saved  from  the  Chaldeans  because  they  had  temporarily  withdrawn.
God  will  **  liberate'*  them  from  all  further  connection  with  Him,  to  pass  under  the
terrible  bondage  of  other  taskmasters.  The  breakers  of  covenants  with  God  will  be
cut  in  pieces,  as  the  calf  between  whose  parts  they  passed.  Doom  swiftly  came.
**  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord  !"

Vers.  8-11.  Hypocritical  Repentance  Distinguished  from  Tbui

Conversion.

i.  The  occasion  may  be  the  same  in  both  ;  f.f.,  external  distress  (comp.  e,g,  Isa.
xxviii.  19  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  32 ;  Titus  ii.  12).

ii.  The  inward  disposition  entirely  differs.  In  false  penitence  the  mind  and
heart  remain  unchanged  ;  in  true  conversion  man  turns  inwardly  with  pain  and
sorrow  from  evil  and  to  God.

iii.  The  duration  is  the  test  of  its  character.  False  penitence  lasts  as  long  as
the  outward  need  ;  true  repentance  is  a  permanent  condition  of  the  heart ;  and,
notwithstanding  single  backslidings,  advances  to  a  more  complete  subjugation  of
the  old  self. — Naegelsbach.

Hypocrites,  when  they  show  repentance,  do  it —

i.  Not  from  faithy  but  from/ear  of  distress  and  danger^  in  which  they  are  at  the
time.

ii.  They  do  not  cease  all  disobedience  to  God,  but  only  make  some  ethical  reforms^
as  here  in  observing  the  jubilee  year,  as  if  there  were  no  other  reforms  to  be  made.

iii.  They  specially  select  such  lines  of  conduct  as  are  ostentatious  ;  as  will  attract
public  attention  and  win  regard  ;  as  in  this  act  of  manumission  of  the  slaves,
which  would  loose  the  rabble,  make  a  great  noise  and  show.

iv.  Meanwhile  there  are  none,  or  few  thoughts  of  faith^  love,  fear  of  God,  hope,
and  thanksgiving.

V.  Such  penitence  does  not  last  long,  but  as  soon  as  the  distress  finds  a  hole  the
devotion  goes  with  it. — Cramer.

**  As  Zedekiah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  on  finding  themselves  besieged,
set  at  liberty  their  Hebrew  servants,  and  pretended  they  would  observe  the  law  of
God ;  but  afterwards,  imagining  they  liad  nothing  to  fear,  changed  their  minds,
and  made  slaves  of  their  brethren  ;  thus  sintiers  pretend  to  humble  themselves,
and  seem  disposed  to  repentance,  while  they  are  threatened  and  the  danger  is  near  ;
but  as  soon  as  their  fears  are  over,  they  break  their  promises  and  return  to  their
sins.  Jeremiah's  reproaches  and  threatenings  of  the  Jews  for  their  impious  and
unjust  proceedings  show  that  a  repentance  and  a  reformation  which  is  but  of  short
duration,  instead  of  pacifying  God,  only  provokes  Him  the  more  ;  and  that  those
who  violate  His  covenant  and  their  own  promises  shall  not  escape  the  punishment
which  their  infidelity  and  hypocrisy  deserve." — Ostervald.


'*  Like  the  detested  tribe
Of  ancient  Pharisees,  beneath  the  mask
Of  clamorous  piety,  what  numbers  veil
Contaminated,  vicious  hearts !     How  many
In  the  devoted  temple  of  their  God,
With  liypocritic  eye,  from  which  the  tear
Of  penitential  anguish  seems  to  flow.
Pour  forth  their  vows,  and  hy  affected  zeal
Pre-eminent  devotion  boast ;  while  vice
Within  the  guilty  breast  rankles  unseen  !  "

— Hayes.

/560


**  Hypocrisy,  detest  her  as  we  may

(And  no  man's  hatred  ever  wronged  her  yet).
May  claim  this  merit  still  :  that  she  admits
The  worth  of  that  she  mimics  with  such  care,
And  thus  gives  virture  indirect  applause."

— Cowper.

**  No  man's  condition  is  so  base  as  his.

None  more  accursed  than  he ;  for  man  esteems
Him  hateful  'cause  he  seems  not  what  he  is ;
God  hates  him  'cause  he  is  not  what  he
seems."  — Quarrel.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxiv.


Violation  of  the  Law  of  Liberty.

"  Ye  had  done  right  in  My  sight,  in  proclaiming  liberty  every  man  to  hu  neighbour;
bvi  ye  turned  and  polluted  My  name  "  (vers.  15,  16).

CicerOf  when  commending  humanity  and  kindness  towards  servants,  urged,  Let
them  not  be  treated  as  slaves,  but  as  those  who  are  hired  [Of.  i.)

These  Jews,  in  neglecting  the  legal  manumission  of  their  servants,  and  holding
them  in  unjust  bondage,  in  vain  complained  of  oppression  by  the  Chaldeans  or
Assyrians ;  for  they  themselves  were  acting  the  tyrant's  part.  But  we  recoil  from
enduring  the  suflFerings  we  inflict.     Here  observe  tliat  God —

L  Recalls  their  history  and  experience  (ver.  13).     Hence  for —

1.  Their  own  freedom  from  tyranny  they  were  indebted  to  God*s  gratuitous
mercy  and  mighty  power.

2.  Their  experience  of  such  Divinely  secured  liberty  should  have  led  them  to
cherish  the  freedom  of  their  dependants.  It  was  God's  will  that  they  whom  He
had  redeemed  should  retain  the  blessings  of  freedom ;  and,  that  a  memorial  might
exist  amongst  them,  of  both  their  own  bondage  and  emancipation,  He  covenanted
with  them  that  servitude  should  be  temporary.

n.  Reproves  the  national  neglect  of  His  law.

1.  They  knew  this  Divine  law,  yet  held  back  liberty  from  their  bondservants
(vers.  14,  18).     Note  how  our  Lord  condemns  such  disobedience  (Luke  xii.  4).

2.  Though  they  had  at  length  set  their  bondmen  free,  it  was  not  in  voluntary
recognition  of  God's  established  law,  but  in  obedience  to  an  edict  of  Zedekiah
Observe  the  word  in  ver.  10,  ^*  they  obeyed" — reluctantly,  but  perforce.  Where
God's  word  is  clearly  made  known,  there  is  no  excuse  for  neglecting  it  (Isa.  xlv.
19).  But  its  neglect  is  consequent  upon  our  ^^  hearkening  not,  nor  inclining  our
ear"  (ver.  14).

IIL  Commends  their  present  ohservance  of  the  covenant.  "  Ye  were  now  (lit.,
to-day)  turned,  and  had  done  right "  (ver.  15).

1.  Though  reformation  came  tardily,  yet  God  approved  it  when  eflfected,  "To-
day" after  so  long  a  time;  yet  ye  "  turned."

2.  Bi^fht  deeds  are  pleasing  to  God,  per  se,  apart  from  the  motives  of  their  doers.
He  ap[)roves  fidelity  and  righteousness  wherever  He  sees  them,  even  though  He
who  searcheth  the  heart  sees  there  is  no  love  of  righteousness  there.  Jewels  are
precious  things  even  though  worn  by  the  vulgar.  But  God  commended  their
temporary  repentance  and  reformation  only  to  show  how  detestable  was  their
falsity  in  doing  insincerely  what  they  did,  and  returning  so  quickly  to  iniquitous
oppression.

IV.  Denounces  their  base  hypocrisy  of  heart.  **  Ye  made  a  covenant  before
Me  in  the  house"  <kc.  (ver.  15).

1.  Their  after  conduct  only  exhibited  their  falsity  in  making  the  "covenant."
Their  intentions  went  not  with  their  vows  made  before  God.  All  they  did  there-
fore, in  His  house,  was  a  pretence ;  they  acted  a  lie  before  God.  They  trifled
with  God  !

2.  To  use  the  solemnities  of  religion  insincerely  is  guiltiest  profanation.  "  Ye
polluted  My  name"  (ver,  16).  It  was  evident  that  they  were  lost  to  all  sanctity
of  feeling  and  shame  for  their  baseness  and  wrong,  that  they  could  thus  abuse  an
oath  made  before  God,  taking  "  God's  name "  in  vain,  and  defile  God's  temple,  by
acting  a  lie  within  its  solemn  precincts.

Notes —

1.  Their  promptitude  in  manumitting  their  slaves  was  generously  commended  by
God;  but  by  doing  this  in  bad  faith  they  treated  God  with  mockery.

2.  It  is  an  intolerable  profanation  of  God's  name  when  thus  falsely  appealed  to;
it  is  perjury  allied  to  sacrilege.

2n  661


OT  AF.  xxxT.  HOMJLETIC  COMMBNTAR  Y :  JEREMIA  H.


3.  Rebellion  against  God  becomes  even  more  hose  when  a  pretence  is  made  of
obedience  and  reform,  as  these  men  perfidiously  acted  in  giving  liberty  to  their
fclave*,  and  then  forcing  them  into  subjection  so  soon  afterwards.

4.  lo  this  perjury  and  profanity  was  added  inhumanity;  for  they  ^^ brought
them  into  subjection "  (ver,  16),  the  word  meaning  to  employ /orce.  It  was  an
act  of  unbridled  tyranny.  And  **  he  shall  have  justice  without  merc^f  that  showeth
no  mercy."


CHAPTER  XXXV.

CBrriOAL  AND  ExEOBTiOAL  NoTES. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  Seventeen  years  earlier
than  the  preceding  narrative  of  the  manumission  of  the  slaves  ;  about  the  fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim'a  reign.  From  ver.  11  we  find  tiiat  these  Rechabites  were  driven  from  the  desert-
Bcenes  they  inhabited  into  Jerusalem  for  shelter,  consequent  upon  the  conquests  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar. These  conquests  began  with  the  victory  at  Charchemish  ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  same  year
as  that  decisive  battle  against  Egypt,  he  invaded  Judea,  in  order  to  quell  Jehoiakim'a  revolt
(com p.  2  Kings  xxiv.  1,  2).     Cf.  Notes  on  chaps,  vii.  and  xx.

2.  National  Affairs.  The  defeat  of  the  Egyptians  at  Charchemish  had  produced  on  all
surrounding  nations  a  sense  of  insecurity.  These  Rechabites,  apprehensive  of  peril,  took
refuge  within  Jerusalem,  pitching  their  black  tents  on  the  open  spaces  inside  the  city*8  walls, —
a  remarkable  and  admonitory  sight !

3.  Personal  Allusions.  Ver.  2.  See  infra  on  **  Rechabites.*^  Ver.  3.  "Jaazaniah:^'  un-
known except  from  tliis  reference.  **  Son  of  Jeremiah  :  "  not  the  prophet  Jeremiah  j  it  was  a
frequent  name.  **  Habaziniah  :**  apparently,  from  the  form  of  this  allusion  to  him,  the  chief
of  the  Rechabites  at  this  time.  Ver.  4.  *'  Hanan:"  being  called  here  '*a  man  of  God,"  leads
some  to  connect  him  with  Hanani  (2  Cliron.  xvi.  7,  xix.  2).  ^* Igdaliah:"  the  Hebrew  form,
Yigdalydhuy  is  more  commonly  contracted  into  Gedaliah.  Ver.  6.  "  Jonadab,  son  of  Rechab,"
belonged  to  the  Kenites  (1  Chron.  ii.  55),  the  Arabian  tribe  which  entered  Canaan  with  the
Israelites.  He  was  an  Arab  chief,  and  created  a  semi-Jewish  religious  sect,  whicii  we  here  find
in  existence  nearly  three  hundred  years  after.

4.  Manners  and  Customs.     Vers,  6,  7.     *'  Brink  no  toine"  &c.     See  infra  on  "  Rechabites."
6.  Literary  Criticism.     Ver.  2.     **  The  house  of  the  Rechabites : "  not  tlie  dwelling 'house,  for

they  had  none,  they  lived  in  tents  ;  bat  **  house  "  in  the  sense  of  family.

TOPICAL   SURVEY   OF  CHAPTER  XXXV,
The  Rechabites*  Vow  of  Abstinencjb.

•*  Give  them  wine  to  drink  "  (ver.  2) ;  "  We  unll  drink  no  wine  **  (ver.  6).

For  nearly  three  centuries  these  descendants  of  Jehonadab  had  abstained  from
intoxicants.  God  sent  Jeremiah  with  a  test  of  fidelity  to  their  vow  ;  not  a.command
to  violate  it.  They  avowed  their  unfaltering  purpose  to  stand  faithful  to  their
habit  and  pledge  of  abstinence.

Habitual  abstinence  from  intoxicants  may  be  urged  therefore  as —

L  Founded  on  precedent.  Reverence  for  their  ancestor  kept  them  loyal  for
so  long  a  period.  Such  an  example  has  its  influence ;  awakening  respect  for  him
who  sets  it ;  urging  the  duty  of  imitation  upon  others.

XL  Approved  by  utility.  Had  drinking  wine  been  permitted,  it  would  have
entailed  the  culture  of  the  vine,  and  that  would  require  settled  residence.  But
Jonadab  wished  to  maintain  among  his  followers  the  purer  morality  and  manlier
habits  of  the  desert,  as  contrasted  with  the  laxity  and  effeminacy  of  city  life.
Abstinence  would  keep  thena  independent  of  decoys  to  luxury^  and  out  of  the  reach
of  city  allurements  and  influences.

ILL  Desirable  for  safety.  Character  is  safer  if  abstinence  is  practised.
Simplicity  of  life  is  less  open  to  contamination  if  the  company  of  wine-drinkers  is
shunned.  Mental  perceptions  and  moral  obligations  are  less  likely  tO  b^  obs(mre4
and  obliterated  in  abstainers,  as  this  chapter  ^mph^tic^Uy  proves.

Bee  Addenda :  A|{STINENPK,

m


HOMILBTW  COMMENT  ART:  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xxxt.


The  Rkchabites*  Constancy.

"  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab,  our  father,  commanded  us  "  (ver.  6).   "  We  have  obeyed
and  done  according  to  all  that  Jonadab  our  father  commanded  us"  (ver.  10).

I.  Obedience  to  man  and  disobedience  to  God  contrasted  (vers.  12-15).

1.  For  three  hundred  years  (cf.  2  Kings  x.  15)  the  sons  of  RecJiah  implieitly
obeyed  the  injunction  of  their  father  Jonadab.

(1.)  Obedience  to  this  injunction  required  great  self-denial,  singularity  of  con-
duct, and  many  privations.

(2.)  Notwithstanding  these  requirements,  the  sons  of  Rechab  are  the  most
illustrious  examples  of  filial  obedience  the  world  has  ever  known.

2.  The  Jewish  nation^  called  the  children  of  God,  have  never  continued  for  one
hundred  consecutive  years  obedient  to  their  Father  in  heaven.

(1.)  Not  because  God  had  not  given  them  plain  and  earnest  injunctions
(ver.  15).

(2.)  Not  because  they  could  not  obey  (ver.  16,  loc.  cU,)

3.  This  contrast  is  a  sad  one,  and  is  true  in  our  day.

IL  God  sets  His  seal  of  approval  on  filial  obedience  (vers.  16-19).

1.  The  surest  and  mightiest  agency  we  have  for  the  establishment  of  righteousness
an  the  earth  is  filial  obedience  to  that  which  is  good.

2.  TJie  reflexive  power  of  filial  obedience  is  a  mighty  force  in  the  establishment
of  true  character.

III.  The  peculiar  injunction  of  Jonadab  in  respect  to  total  abstinence  from
intoxicants  is  worthy  the  careful  study  of  parents  and  statesmen,  as  well  as
that  of  the  Church  of  Christ  (Jer.  xxxv.  6).

1.  Can  anything  short  of  total  abstinence  ensure  our  youth  and  nation  from
drunkenness  and  all  its  fearful  consequences  ?

2.  Can  there  be  any  valid  argument  offered  against  this  form  of  self-denial  t

3.  Would  not  the  domestic,  social,  and  national  benefits  accruing  from  total  absti-
nence amply  repay  every  Christian  parent  and  patriot  for  its  practice  ?

— Rev.  D.  C.  Huohk8,
See  Addenda :  Pebmanencb  of  the  Recha bites.

Vers.  18,  19.  Obedience  to  Traditions  op  Ancestobs,

Rechabites  originally  Kenites  (Judges  i.  16;  1  Chron.  ii.  55).  Attached  to
Moses  by  a  near  and  dear  connection  (Exod.  ii.  21)  ;  and,  agreeing  with  Israelites
in  worship  of  Jehovah,  the  Kenites  followed  them  to  Canaan,  where  they  dwelt
peacefully.  God  cared  for  their  safety  (1  Sam.  xv.  6) ;  and  hundreds  of  years
after  we  find  them  still  a  distinct  people,  held  up  by  God  as  example  to  Jews  for
their  attachment  to  customs  of  ancestors,  and  honoured  by  Him  with  gracious  and
remarkable  promise  of  perpetual  endurance  of  their  family.

Told  little  of  Jonadab,  though  in  honour  of  him  the  Kenites  changed  their
name  to  Rechabites  (com p.  this  chapter  with  2  Kings  x.)  Evidently  a  man  of
high  character  and  popularity,  for  Jehu  paid  him  extraordinary  respect  and  atten-
tion ;  and  we  may  guess,  from  the  manner  in  which  Jehu  commends  his  own  zeal,
that  he  had  been  remarkable,  in  those  evil  nnd  irreligious  times,  for  fidelity  to
God,  notwithstanding  the  threats  and  enticements  of  Aliab  and  Jezebel,  and  the
bad  example  of  Israelitish  nation.  Great  influence  over  his  clan  ;  for  two  hundred
years  after  his  death  we  find  them  here  observing  his  injunctions.  God  contrasts
this  with  Jews'  indifference  to  ordinances  of  Divine  authority.  We  cannot  fix  on
any  clan  of  the  Kenites  in  whom  this  promise  has  been  fulfilled;  yet  doubtless,
(hough  hayjnff  forgotteii  their  owi>  fiHcestrVj  they  are  divinely  preserved  among

563


CHAP.  XXXV.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


the  wanderinoj  tribes  of  those  wildernesses  where  Rechabites  dwelt.  From  this
example  may  be  inferred —

I.  How  well-pleasing  in  God's  sight  is  obedience  to  parental  authority,
respectful  attention  to  the  discipline  and  traditions  of  former  times,  when  these
are  recommended  to  us  by  the  example  and  authority  of  good  and  honourable
ancestors.  (1.)  Where  the  institutions  of  society  are  preserved,  the  permanence
of  the  society  is  greatly  secured.  (2.)  God  here  gives  promise  of  perpetuity.
(3.)  The  specific  reason  given  (ver.  18),  because  they  adhered  to  the  rules  of  their
ancestors.  Yet  these  rules  were  not  divinely  imperative ;  they  related  to  things
strictly  indifferent,  abstain  from  wine  and  live  in  tents.  Hence,  God  regards  with
no  common  approbation  adherence  to  customs  and  traditions  of  forefathers  (Prov.
xxi.  24).

There  are,  however,  limitations  to  this  rule —

1.  The  precept  or  custom,  if  it  be  not  good  in  itself,  must  at  least  be  a  matter
of  indifference.  What  at  first  was  evil  cannot  become  good  by  lapse  of  time.  No
precedent  can  make  lawful  what  God  has  forbidden,

2.  If  this  ordinance,  though  in  itself  harmless,  should  produce  any  breach  of
Gk)d's  laws;  if  it  should,  in  time,  become  so  applied  as  to  become  mischievous,  the
commandment  of  God  must  not  he  made  of  none  effect  hy  our  tradition.  Where  two
authors  are  at  variance,  God  must  be  heard,  not  man  (Matt.  xv.  5,  6 ;  Mark  vii,
11-13).     The  custom,  in  order  to  be  binding,  must  be  lawful.

3.  It  must  proceed  from  competent  and  authoritative  persons.  Jonadab  was
probably  a  chieftain,  but  his  regulations  had  continued  for  two  hundred  years;  this
origin  and  antiquity  gave  force  to  his  rules.  But  the  rules  of  human  wisdom,  and
those  absolutely  and  universally  binding,  given  by  God  Himself,  must  be  distin-
guished. Must  not  "teach  as  c?oc^rme5  the  commandments  of  men."  Thus  the
Rechabites  did  not  violate  God's  moral  code,  as  though  inferior  in  importance  to
the  laws  of  their  society ;  and,  though  a  breach  of  those  laws  in  their  community
could  be  punished  with  expulsion,  they  did  not  count  others  accursed  who  enjoyed
moderately  indulgences  they  forbade.  Jeremiah  drank  wine  before  them  yet  they
treated  him  with  respect  and  deference.

4.  There  may  be  cases  of  necessity  for  the  repeal  or  suspension  of  such  human
and  ceremonial  customs  or  laws.  Thus  here  they  fled  to  houses  for  protection  from
Assyrian  invaders  (ver.  11).  So  our  Saviour  "profaned"  the  ceremonial  rules
about  the  Sabbath  (Matt.  xii.  7).  But  for  no  ends  must  God's  laws  be  violated,
however  good  we  deem  them.  The  Ruler  of  heaven  and  earth  has  no  need  of  our
insolent  and  impious  interference.

n.  With  these  restrictions,  obedience  to  existing  laws  and  institutions  is  pleasing
to  God,  and  here  received  a  very  marked  approbation.     Hence —

1.  The  falsehood  of  their  opinion  who  think  that  laws  merely  human  have  no
sanction  except  in  the  punishments  they  inflict.

2.  A  caution  in  times  of  change^  when  novelties  are  sought  with  frantic  eager-
ness.    Taught  reverence  for  ancient  precedent.

Fondness  for  change  is  displeasing  to  God;  for — (1.)  It  is  a  symptom  and  stimulus
to  a  lightness  of  mind  unfriendly  both  to  happiness  and  piety.  (2.)  New  customs,
or  systematic  departure  from  ancient  habits,  arise  almost  always  from  vanity,  or
something  worse.  (3.)  Where  a  rule  is  harmless,  it  is  almost  always  advantageous  ;
increases  our  habits  of  obedience,  and  therefore  not  without  inherent  grace.

Hence  it  is  necessary  to  obey,  not  only  for  wrath  but  also  for  conscience*  sake ;
the  wisest  of  men  exhorts  us  not  to  meddle  with  those  who  are  given  to  change,
Jeremiah  commands  us  not  to  exchange  old  ways  for  new  ones  ;  and  a  Divine  blessing
rests  on  those  who  reverence  ancestral  institutions.

m.  Tf  human  regulations  are  observed^  though  burdensome,  can  we  reflect  with-
out shame  on  our  continued  disobedience  to  Divine  commands?  (vers.  13,  14.)
peep  ccntrition  and  alarm  shall  awake  within  us.     We  need  God's  forgiveness  for


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xxxv.

former  provocations ;  and  that  He  may  not  call  on  us  in  vain  hereafter,  we  need
hearts  subdued  by  the  searching  graces  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  merits  and
mediation  of  our  Saviour. — Condensed  and  arranged  from  Bishop  Reginald  Meherj
A.D.  1838.

See  Addenda:  Obedience  to  Ancestors.

The  Rewards  of  Obedience.

"  The  words  of  Jonadab^  the  son  of  Rechab^  tJmt  he  commanded  his  tons  not  to  drink
wine,  are  performed ;  for  unto  this  day  they  drink  none,  but  obey  their  fathe?'^ s
commandment :  notwithstanding  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  rising  early  and
speaking  ;  but  ye  hearkened  not  unto  me  "  (ver.  14).

The  historical  circumstances  first  demand  attention.

The  family  of  the  Rechabites  were  descendants  of  Jethro,  father-in-law  of  Moses  ;
came  into  Canaan  with  the  Israelites,  and  settled  in  southern  part  of  Judea ;  were
worshippers  of  the  true  God,  but  did  not  conform  to  Jewish  rites.  It  has  ever
been  deemed  a  great  difficulty  in  political  economy  to  maintain  "  an  empire  within
an  empire ; "  but  this  little  tribe  solved  the  problem  ;  for  it  preserved  an  indepen-
dent existence  among  the  Israelites  for  nearly  one  thousand  years,  and,  though
neither  acknowledging  their  worship  nor  their  laws,  was  suffered  to  remain  undis-
turbed by  ambition  or  religious  persecution.

They  accomplished  this  result  thus  : — About  five  hundred  years  after  their  settle-
ment in  Canaan,  lived  that  Jonadab,  a  very  distinguished  man  among  his  people ;
is  said  to  have  assisted  Jehu  in  rooting  out  idolatry  from  Israel.  He  saw  that  his
people  were  but  a  handful  among  a  more  powerful  people,  and  likely  soon  to  be
swallowed  up  by  their  neigiibours,  and  he  hit  upon  a  happy  method  of  preserving
their  independent  existence.  1.  He  enjoined  them  "not  to  drink  wine;"  this
was  to  save  them  from  luxury  and  intemperance,  which  would  prey  upon  them  from
within,  and  make  them  ripe  for  destruction.  2.  Also  commanded  them  '*  not  to
till  the  ground,  nor  to  have  any  houses,  nor  to  dwell  in  cities;  "  this  was  in  order
that  they  might  have  no  riches  to  tempt  others  to  make  war  upon  them  ;  and  thus,
to  use  his  own  words,  "  they  might  live  many  days  in  the  land  wherein  they  were
strangers."  Luxury  and  wealth  are  the  bane  of  nations,  and  by  keeping  his  tribe
a  simple,  pastoral  people,  pure  in  their  habits,  and  destitute  of  property,  he
acconiplislied  his  wishes  for  them.

L  Notice  the  obedience  of  the  Rechabites,  contrasted  with  the  disobedi
ence  of  Israel  to  God.  An  ancestor  of  that  family,  dead  nearly  three  hundred
years,  had  issued  his  commands,  and  they  were  still  obeyed;  but  the  living
God  had  spoken  repeatedly  to  Israel,  by  His  prophets,  yet  they  would
not  hear.  The  commands  of  Jonadab,  too,  were  very  arbitrary.  There
could  be  no  sin  in  cultivating  the  fields,  or  in  living  in  houses,  whatever
moral  worth  there  may  have  been  in  the  precept  to  drink  no  wine ;  but
still,  because  Jonadab  commanded  it,  they  obeyed.  Compelled  by  necessity  to
disobey  him  on  this  occasion ;  for  when  the  Chaldeans  invaded  the  land,  they
were  obliged  to  go  and  dwell  in  Jerusalem  for  protection.  And  here  occurred
the  trial  of  their  obedience  by  Jeremiah.  He  called  the  family  together,
and  set  wine  before  them,  inviting  them  to  drink,  not  tempting  them  to  break
their  pledge,  but  knowing  that  they  would  keep  it,  and  meaning  thereby  to  reprove
the  Israelites.  They  refused  the  wine,  and  pleaded  the  command  of  Jonadab  as
their  excuse.  How  pointed  was  then  the  rebuke  of  the  prophet !  Jonadab  was
obeyed.  But  the  Israelites — who  had  reasonable,  not  arbitrary,  laws  from  God,
not  from  a  frail  mortal ;  from  the  living  God,  who  had  loaded  them  with  benefits,
and  could  still  reward  them  ;  not  from  a  dead  ancestor  who  had  done  little  for  them,
and  could  do  nothing  more — had  rebelled  against  their  Maker,  and  would  not
hearken  unto  Him,

£166


CHAP.  xxxr.  HO  Ml  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


The  complaint  of  God  has  still  an  application.

It  is  a  fact,  that  among  sinners,  any  and  every  law,  precept,  ortradition,  of  mere
human  authority,  is  better  obeyed  than  the  laws  of  God  Himself.  No  matter  who
speaks,  if  he  has  gained  credit  among  his  fellowmen ;  no  matter  how  absurd  the
law  or  usage,  if  it  has  been  sanctioned  by  custom  or  a  good  name,  there  is  obedi-
ence such  as  God  cannot  win.  "  I  am  come  in  My  Father's  name,"  said  our  Lord,
"  and   ye  receive  Me  not ;  if  another  shall  come  in   his  own  name,  him  ye  will


receive."


See,  in  a  few  instances,  how  this  has  been  verified.  Mahomet  arose,  a  sensualist,
an  adulterer,  a  breaker  of  treaties,  and  a  robber,  and  issued  his  commands,  which
for  centuries  have  been  religiously  obeyed.  At  the  cry  of  the  muezzin,  and  the
hour  of  prayer,  every  follower  of  his,  whether  in  the  desert,  on  board  the  ship,  in
the  city,  or  the  field,  suspends  his  labour,  his  pleasures,  and  even  his  griefs,  and
casts  himself  upon  his  knees  in  prayer.  No  scoffing  looks  of  those  of  another  creed
can  make  him  forego  this,  no  distance  from  home  leads  him  to  forget  it ;  but
whether  he  be  in  gay  Paris  or  his  own  Stambonl,  he  omits  not  his  ablutions  or
devotions.  But  the  blessed  Jesus,  pure,  peaceful,  and  glorious,  speaks,  and  even
those  who  acknowledge  Him  as  Lord  over  all,  and  own  the  goodness  of  His  com-
mands, can  listen  to  such  words  as,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me,"  and  obey
them  not.

The/oMrtc/er  of  some  monkish  order,  again,  has  enjoined  upon  all  his  fraternity
certain  rules  and  austerities,  and  he  is  obey«'d.  Day  after  day,  and  year  after  year,
the  same  tedious  round  of  ceremonies  is  gone  through  with,  as  though  salvation
depended  upon  it,  and  the  deluded  ones  will  rise  at  the  midnight  hour  to  inflict
stripes  upon  themselves  or  to  offer  prayer.  But  Christ  may  enjoin  the  reasonable
duty  of  praying  to  our  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  multitudes  can  suffer  days
and  years  to  pass,  and  pray  not.

The  commander  of  the  order  of  Jesuits  can  place  his  inferior  priests  in  any
country  of  the  world,  and  whether  the  mandate  be  to  act  as  father-confessor  in
some  palace,  or  to  penetrate  to  China  or  Paraguay,  there  is  no  more  resistance  nor
apparent  regard  for  the  sacrifices  to  be  made  than  in  the  machinery  which  is  moved
by  mechanic  power.  Christ  commands  His  disciples  to  *'  go  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature,"  but  only  here  and  there  one  goes  forth.  The  Rechabites  of
modern  times,  and  Sons  of  Temperance,  may  institute  a  vow  of  temperance,  and  it
is  kept ;  or  command  one  of  their  number  to  minister  to  the  sick,  and  it  is  done  ;  or
provide  well  for  their  poor ;  but  Christ  says  that  "  no  drunkard  shall  enter  heaven,"
and  enjoins  charity  to  the  sick  and  the  destitute,  while  many  heed  Him  not.

Caution: — 1.  Because  religion  is  less  powerful  than  something  else  to  enforce
obedience,  we  are  not  to  think  less  of  its  truth.  Said  an  infidel,  *'Tem[)erance
societies  are  better  than  Christianity,  because  they  can  produce  reforms  which
your  boasted  religion  has  failed  to  achieve."  But  temperance  societies  were  origi-
nated by  Christians,  and  have  achieved  the  good  they  have  done  through  Christian
influence.

2.  The  lack  of  power  to  compel  obedience  does  not  prove  the  lack  of  I'ight  to
claim  it.  Heathenism  is  not  better  than  Christianity,  because  it  can  speak  and  be
so  literally  obeyed  ;  nor  Popery  than  Protestantism,  because  the  commands  of
pope  or  priest  are  received  with  a  more  implicit  deference  ;  nor  Mahometanism
better  than  our  faith,  because  its  followers  so  strictly  heed  the  false  prophet's  pre-
cepts. When  God  speaks  there  is  always  a  reason  why  His  commands  are  dis-
obeyed— Men  speak  and  are  obeyed,  because  they  do  not  command  an  utter  re-
nunciation  (f  sin,  they  only  enjoin  some  external  duty  or  moral  obedience  which
may  leave  the  heart  to  sin  in  otlier  matters  as  it  pleases;  while  God  demands
holiness  in  everything,  and,  therefore,  fails  of  receiving  obedience.  What  a  proof
have  we  hence  of  tjie  nec^tjsity  of  a  new  heart  I  Wh?it  4  moUye  to  pray  for  sqcU
§  change  !

m


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEilEMtATt.  chap.  ixtt.


II.  The  rewards  of  obedience.  That  family  of  Recbabites  remained  an  inde-
pendent community  for  about  one  thousand  years,  that  is,  during  all  the  time  tliat
the  Israelites  continued  in  their  land.  God  promised,  as  reward  for  their  filial  piety,
temperance,  and  contempt  of  luxury,  *'  that  Jonadab,  the  son  of  Rechab,  should
not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  him  for  ever."

Modern  travellers,  moreover,  state  that  the  Recbabites  are  still  in  existence.
Mr.  Wolf,  the  famous  Jewish  missionary,  asserts  this  as  bis  belief.  **  And  anotlier
traveller  who  visited  a  tract  to  the  south  of  Judea,  which  has  been  unexplored  for
centuries,  met  there  a  native  who  claimed  to  be  a  Rechabite,  and  when  an  Arabic
Bible  was  shown  to  him,  turned  to  this  chapter  and  read  from  it  the  description  of
his  people,  and  said  that  it  was  still  true  of  them,  and  that  they  still  kept  the
precepts  of  Jonadab  their  father.  Over  three  thousand  years  have  passed  away
since  that  family  of  the  Kenites  came  with  Israel  into  Canaan,  and  for  two  thousand
years  no  traces  of  them  were  preserved  ;  but  now,  after  so  long  a  lapse  of  time,
recent  discoveries  have  brought  them  to  light,  retaining  their  name,  and  glorying
in  their  independence.  Though  surrounded  by  Mahometan  Arabs,  they  conform
to  the  law  of  Moses,  yet  maintaining  that  they  are  not  Israelites ;  and  are  much
hated  by  the  Mussulman."  This  account  was  given  by  a  traveller  so  late  as  1832,
and  is  confirmed  by  English  residents  at  Mocha,  and  from  other  sources.

Note. — We  have  here  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  accomplishments  of  prophecy
on  record.  A  little  handful  of  people,  not  larger  than  one  of  our  Indian  tribes,
has  kept  upon  the  same  spot  for  about  one  hundred  generations,  while  all  the  neigh-
bouring nations  have  undergone  change  and  dissolution.

No  doubt  every  promise  of  God's  Word  is  as  abundantly  fulfilled.  We  may  not
always  be  able  to  trace  out  their  literal  accomplishment  as  strikingly  as  in  this
case,  but  we  never  could  prove  one  promise  in  all  the  Bible  false ;  and  the  more
light  we  have  the  more  abundantly  do  we  see  that  all  have  been  "  yea  and  amen."
Let  us  rest  upon  God's  Word.  Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  are  given
to  us  in  the  sacred  book.  They  are  like  good  notes  from  a  prompt  paymaster,
falling  due  at  different  times.

And  all  the  preciotts  promises  of  eternity  shall  yet  be  realised  by  God's  people  :
about  "  the  golden  city,"  and  "  the  harpers  with  their  harps,"  and  "  the  innumerable
company  of  saints  and  angels,"  and  "  the  glory  of  God  filling  the  temple."  The
unchangeable  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  declarations  is  a  most  delightful  theme  to
a  Christian.     It  is  the  rock  on  which  he  rests.     God  has  promised ;  he  believes.

Happy  the  man  who  has  these  precious  promises  for  his  own,  and  can  use  them
and  rely  upon  them  ! — Hev,  W.  S.  Lewis,  D.D.,  Brooklyn^  1871.

OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XXXV.

Ver.  4.  Theme:  "A  Man  of  God."  2.  Y^very  holy  duty  he  loves :  prayer^
Between  a  man  of  God  in  the  Old  praise,  <kc.
Testament  and  a  Christian  in  the  New,          3.   His   love  of  holy  men  is  notice-
no  difference  j  convertible  terms  :  alike  able :  the  "  holy  brethren  "  of  whatever
in  all  that  relates  to  moral  character  Church.

and  religious  faith.     Called  "  a  man  of         II.  He  is  the  wisest  of  men.
God'^  because   he   is    God^s   workman-  1.  His  wisdom  is  seen  in  the  provi-
ship:  He  made  him  what  he  is,     '*  By  sion  he  makes  for  his  everlasting  future,
the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  2.   He  is   prepared  for  all  the  con-
He  is  the  noblest  of  God's  works;  the  tingencies  of  time:  for  storms,   he  has
highest  type  of  man,  anchorage;  for  temptations,  "the  whole
L  He  is  the  holiest  of  men.  armour  of  God,"  <fec.
1.  Every   holy   thing   under   heaven          IIL   He  is  the  best  of  men.
he   admires:  holy  Bible,  holy  Sabbath,  1.   He   has   been  ** created  after  the
Sanctuary,  Supper,  Ac.  image    of    Him    who    created     him. "

567


CfiAl'.  XXXV,


nOMILSTiC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


And  be  is  the  best  who  is   most  God-
like.

2.  He  is  best  adapted  to  promote  the
glory  of  God.

IV.  He  is  the  richest  of  men.

1.  His  wealth  is  of  the  highest  kind:
spiritual  riches.

2.  His  wealth  he  can  never  lose  :
durable  riches.

V.  He  is  the  most  honoured  of  men.

1.  To  him  belongs  the  honour  of
sonship.

2.  Oi  priesthood,

3.  Of  dailt/  converse  with  God.

4.  Of  being  clothed  with  the  garmenU
of  salvation,

VL  He  has  the  fairest  prospects  of
all  men.

1.  Of  an  "  abundant  entrance  into  tlve
everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."

2.  Of  a  deathless,  felicitous  existence.

3.  Of  association  with  the  purest^
noblest,  highest  of  beings.

4.  Of  "ail  inheritance  incorruptible,
undefiled,"  ike.

Who  would  not  wish  to  be  "a  man
of  Godi'"\  —  Rev.  D.  Pledge,  ''Walks
with  the  Prophet  Jeremiah."

Note.  —  Trapp  observes  that  this
"  man  of  God  "  was  a  priest  and  prophet,
or  teacher  of  the  people.  So  in  the
New  Testament  others  are  called  God's
children,  His  servants,  and  His  people ;
but  ministers  only  are  called  *'  God's
men"  (1  Tim.  vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ill  17).

Ver.  15.  Theme:  God's  Earnestness
IN  Dealing  with  Sinners.  "  Rising
up  early,"  &c.

See  Homily  on  chap.  vii.  13.

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Sinners  Admo-
nished TO  Return  to  God.  '^  Return
ye  now  every  man  from  his  evil  way,  and
amend  your  doings;  and  go  not  after
other  gods  to  serve  them,  and  ye  shall
dwell  in  the  land  which  I  have  given
to  you  and  to  your  fathers. "

The  Israelites  were  a  rebellious  people  ;
but  He  "  sent  His  servants  the  prophets,
rising  up  early,"  <kc.  God  desires  not
the  death  of  a  sinner.  To  save  men
from  present  and  eternal  ruin,  He
appointed  Christ  as  the  Mediator.  He
5G8


has  sent  His  servants  to  proclaim  this
mercy,  and  to  invite  sinners  to  return
to  the  enjoyment  of  His  favour.  And
what  is  the  design  of  the  Gospel  ministry
now  ?  It  is  "  to  turn  men  from  dark-
ness to  light,  and  from  the  power  of
Satan  to  God,"  &c.  (Acts  xxvi.  18).

I.  What  the  exhortation  presup-
poses.

1.  That  there  has  been  a  departure
from  God.     "Return  ye."

2.  This  departure  is  universal.  "Every
man."  *'  For  all  have  sinned,"  <fec.  (Rom.
iii.  10,  19-23).

3.  This  departure  is  flagrantly  wicked.
"Evil  way."  (a)  Evil  in  its  nature;
(6)  evil  in  its  influence;  (c)  evil  in  its
consequences.

II.  To  what  reforms  the  exhorta-
tion points.     "  Return  ye,"  &c.

1.  Deep  conviction  of  the  evil  and
dangerous  nature  of  a  wicked  career.

2.  Contrition  of  heart,  and  confession
of  sin  to  God.

3.  The  renunciation  of  every  evil  way.

4.  Supreme  love  and  loyalty  to  God.
IIL  Compliance  with  this  request

is  urgent.  "  Return  ye  now,^^  because —

1.  Life  is  short  and  uncertain.

2.  Sin  is  hardening  and  deceitful.

3.  You  will  escape  the  greatest  evils
and  realise  the  most  exalted  pleasures.

4.  The  longer  you  delay  the  less  pro-
bability  there  is  that  you  will  ever  return.

5.  The  present  is  the  only  time  in
which  we  are  authorised  to  tell  you  you
can  be  saved.

IV.  The  happy  result  of  returning
to  God.     "  Ye  shall  dwell  in  the  laud."

1.  The  land.  The  Israelites  entered
Canaan.  But  Canaan  a  faint  type  of
heaven  to  which  believers  are  called.

2.  It  will  be  the  residence  of  God*8
people.  "  Ye  shall  dwell  "  there  in  ful-
ness of  joy,  and  at  God's  right  hand.
Your  "  sun  shall  no  more  go  down."

— Helps  for  the  Pulpit,

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Sinners  Summoned
TO  Self- Improvement.  ''Amend  your
doing  s.^^

See  Homily  on  chap,  vil  3.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  True  Obbdienob
Shown  in  the  Cohtrasted  Conduct


HOMILBTW  COMMENTAUY:  JEREMIAH,


OBAP.  XXXV,


of  Israel  and  the  Rechdbites.  "  But  this
people  hath  not  hearkened  unto  Me."

The  Rechabites*  obedience  to  their
ancestor's  command  is  in  itself  praise-
worthy and  exemplary.  It  is  perfectly
accordant  with  the  Fourth  Command-
ment.

Were  the  Rechabites  equally  con-
scientious in  their  observance  of  the
Divine  commands  ?  Would  not  a  custom
contrary  to  the  Divine  command  have
been  retained  with  equal  tenacity  on  the
authority  of  their  chief?

Still—

I.  The  Rechabites  put  Israel  to  shame,
in  so  far  as  they  obey  the  command  of
their  earthly  ancestor,  while  the  latter
does  not  obey  the  Lord's  command.

IL  The  obedience  of  the  Rechabites
to  the  command  of  their  earthly  ancestor
is,  however,  no  pledge  of  their  obedience
to  the  commands  of  God.

III.  Obedience  to  God's  commands  is
guaranteed  only  among  the  spiritual
Israel,  i.e.,  among  those  who  by  the
Holy  Spirit  have  become  members  of  a
higher  order  of  nature,  in  which  the
will  of  God  is  written  in  the  hearts  of
all,  and  has  consequently  become  the
innermost  principle  of  life.

Or  thus —

L  In   respect  to  legal  obedience,  the


Jews  are  surpassed  by  the  Rechabites.
Note  the  difference  between  Israel  and
the  Rechabites  in  this  respect.

II.  The  obedience  of  the  Rechabites
to  their  ancestor  does  not  guarantee
obedience  to  God.  Note  the  equality  of
Israel  and  the  Rechabites  in  this  respect.

III.  Only  spiritual  Israel  bears  in
itself  the  guarantee  of  obedience  to  God.
Note  the  higher  status  of  the  spiritual
Israel  over  the  Rechabites.  —  Comp.
Naegelshach  in  Lange,

Ver.  19.  Theme:  Permanence  op
THE  Rechabites.  "  Of  so  great  a  price
in  the  sight  of  God  is  the  virtue  oi  filial
duty  and  obedience,  that  it  seldom  fails
of  its  reward  even  in  this  world.  The
law  which  enjoined  it  had  a  pr-omise  of
long  life  attached  to  it  (Exod.  xx.  12) ;
and  it  is  distinguished  by  the  Apostle
as  '  the  first  commandment  with  pro-
mise '  (Ephes.  vi.  2).

"  And  by  this  history  of  the  Recha-
bites we  may  learn  that  the  surest  way
to  entail  a  blessing  on  our  children,  and
to  perpetuate  our  names  and  families  in
a  numerous  and  virtuous  issue,  is  to
reverence  and  obey  our  own  parents." —
Wogan.

See  Addenda :  Permanence  op  thb
Rechabites.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXXV.  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Obedience  to  Ancestors.  M^  xaXhv
x^htiv  evavria  roT(  OioTg^Tar^i  x.ai  didagKaXtft,
— Arts.  Rhe.  "  It  is  not  good  for  a  man
to  dissent  from  the  gods,  from  his  father,
and  from  his  teacher."

We  read  of  a  king  of  Poland  who
carried  the  picture  of  his  father  in  a
plate  of  gold  about  his  neck;  and  when  he
was  entering  upon  any  great  business  he
would  kiss  the  picture  and  say,"  God  grant
I  may  observe  my  father*s  cliarge,  and
do  nothing  unworthy  of  him." — Trapp.

Absalom's  pillar  (2  Sam.  xviii.  18)  is
still  standing,  according  to  Sandys  ;  and
the  Turks,  whenever  they  pass,  throw  a
stone  at  it,  in  token  of  their  horror  at
his  unnatural  conduct  against  his  father.

Abstinence.

**  Against  diseases  here  the  strongest  fence
Ig  the  defensive  virtue  Abstinence."

— R,  Herrick,


**  Though  I  look  old,  yet  I  am  young  and  lusty;
For  in  my  youth  I  never  did  apply
Hot  and  rebellious  liquors  in  my  blood."

— Shakespeare.

"  Thou  sparkling  bowl !  thou  sparkling  bowl!
Though  lips  of  bards  thy  brim  may  press,
And  eyes  of  beauty  o'er  thee  roll,

And  songs  and  dance  thy  power  confess —
I  will  not  touch  thee  ;  for  there  clings
A  scorpion  to  thy  gide  that  stings."

— /.  Pierpoint.

Diodorus  tells  us  that  theNabathgeans,
for  the  preservation  of  their  wandering
habits  and  therefore  of  their  liberty,
forbade  any  one  "  either  to  sow  corn,  or
plant  fruit-trees,  or  drink  wine,  or  build
a  house."

Permanence  op  the  Rechabites.
Information  on  this  remarkable  fact  may
be  obtained  from  Dr.  Wolff's  "  Journal
of  his  Travels  in  Yemen  and  Mesopo-
tamia," pp.  388,  389 ;  and  ♦'  Travels,"

569


(MA^.  iXXVI.


JtOMlinTiC  COMMMTAkV:  jEAEMtAB.


ii.  pp.  298-300;  and  Pusey  on  "Daniel,"
p.  268.  lu  Kitto's  Daily  Bible  Illus-
trations, Evening  Series,  *'  Isaiali  and
the  Prophets,"  will  be  found  most
helpful  information  on  the  "  Moder-n
Jiechabites."

Dr.  Wolf*8  account  is  this  : — At
Jalovha,  in  Mesopotamia,  a  Rechabite
was  pointed  out  to  him.  "  I  saw  one
standing  before  me  dressed  and  wild  like
an  Arab,  the  bridle  of  his  horse  holding
in  his  hand.  I  showed  him  the  Bible
in  Hebrew  and  Arabic  :  he  read  both
languages,  and  was  rejoiced  to  see  the
Bible ;  he  was  not  acquainted  with  the
New  Testament.  After  having  pro-
claimed to  him  the  tidings  of  salvation,
and  made  him  a  present  of  the  Hebrew
and  Arabic  Bibles  and  Testaments,  I
asked  him —

**  *  Whose  descendant  are  you  1  *
**JI£ousa  (that  was  his  name),  with  a


loud  voice,  *  Come,  I  show  to  you  ;  *  and
then  he  began  to  read  Jeremiah  zxxv.
5-11.

'*  Wolf.  '  Where  do  you  reside  T
"  Mousa  (recurring  to  Gen.  x.  27).
*  At  Hadoram,  now  called  Samar  by  the
Arab  ;  at  Usal,  now  called  Sanaa  by
the  Arabs  ;  and  (Gen.  x.  30)  at  Mesha,
now  called  Mecca,  in  the  deserts  around
those  places.  We  drink  no  wine,  and
plant  no  vineyard,  and  sow  no  seed,  and
live  in  tents,  as  Jonadab  our  father
commanded  us.  Hobab  was  our  father
too.  Come  to  us :  you  will  find  still
60,000  in  number ;  and  you  see  thus
prophecy  has  been  fulfilled.  *  Therefore,
thus  saith  the  Lord,  Jonadab,  the  son  of
Kechab,  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand
before  Me  for  ever.*"

"And  saying  this,  Mousa  mounted  his
horse,  and  fled  away,  and  left  behind
him  a  host  of  evidence  of  Sacred  Writ.**


CHAPTER  XXXVI.

Cbitioal  and  Exsqbtioal  Notbs. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — **F<mrth  of  Jehoiahim.**
See  Note  on  chap.  xxv.

2.  National  Affairs. — Jehoiakim  was  at  that  time  vassal  of  Pharoah-Necho  ;  but  Nebuchad-
nezzar invaded  Jerusalem,  carried  off  a  few  prisoners  and  some  of  the  Temple  treasures  (Dan.
i.  1,  2),  and  compelled  Jehoiakim  to  become  his  vassal,  thus  subjugating  the  nation  to  Babylon
instead  of  Egypt.  This  was  a  sore  pang  and  degradation  to  Jehoiakim  ;  and  when  Jeremiah
prophesied  (ver.  29)  that  "the  king  of  Babylon  wovld  again  come  to  destroy  the  land  and  nuikema/n
and  beoit  cease  from  it"  the  king's  wrath  became  ungovernable.

In  this  critical  condition  of  the  nation,  invasion  begun,  conquest  sure,  and  captivity  imminent^
it  became  urgent  that  Jeremiah  should  coUect  aU  his  prophecies — covering  a  period  of  twenty,
three  years — into  "a  book"  (ver.  2),  for  their  preservation  as  a  witness  of  God's  pleadings
and  warnings  with  the  nation.  This  writing  was  completed  in  "the  ninth  month:"  our
December.

For  Contemporaneous  Scriptures  and  Contemporaneous  History,  vide  Notes  in  loe,  on
chap.  XXV.

8.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  2.  "Take  thee  a  roll  of  a  booh  and  turtle.**  It  was  a  roll
of  parchment  skins.  Ver.  9.  "Proclaimed  a  fast"  The  ordinary  fast  was  in  the  seventh
month  (Lev.  xvi.  29)  ;  but  this  was  "the  ninth  month**  (ver.  9),  and  was  therefore  an  extra  and
special  fast.  Keil  thinks  this  fast  was  to  commemorate  by  a  national  humiliation  the  capture
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  the  previous  year.  Ver.  22.  "  The  king  sat  in  the  tdnter-house.**
A  separate  portion  of  the  palace  specially  used  in  the  colder  season  (Amos  iii.  15).  "Afire  on
the  hearth"  lit.  "  the  fire-pan  burning  before  him  ; "  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  was  a  brazier
in  which  the  fire — charcoal — burned.

4.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  4.  "5antcA"  (see  on  chap,  xxxii.  12);  Ver.  10.  "Gemariah:*^
not  the  Gemariah  of  chap.  xxix.  3,  but  brother  of  Ahikam  (xxvi.  24).  Ver.  11.  '*  Michaiah :**
grandson  of  **  ShaphoAfh"  of  whom  see  2  Kings xxii.  3.  Ver.  12.  *' Elishama  :"  a  court  prince,
perhaps  the  same  as  mentioned  xli.  1,  2  Kings  xxv.  25.  "Elnathan:"  already  had  acted  aa
an  evil  agent  of  the  king's  (xxvi.  22,  23).  **  ZTananwA,"  the  false  prophet  (xxviii.  10-17).
Ver.  14.  "  Jehudi  ;"  doubtless  of  a  good  family  from  his  ancestry  being  so  carefully  recited  ;  but
his  office  is  unknown,  Ver.  26.  "  Jerahmed  the  son  of  Hammdech  ;"  query,  the  son  of  the
king  ?  But  Jehoiakim  had  then  no  grown-up  son.  Yet  he  might  have  been  one  of  royal  blood.
"  Seraiah"  &c,,  courtiers  or  princes.

6.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.   7.  "  It  may  be  they  vnll  present  their  suppUcaiion  before  the

Lord."    Tlie  words    ilDnn  npDD  mean  to  allow  a  petition  to  be  laid  at  the  feet  of  a  superior  :
Ut.  "it  may  be  their  supplication  will  fall  before  Jehovah."     Ver,  18.   ^^  He  pronounced  all  these
570


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxvl


words**  &c.      VBp  X*l|?j  definitely — he  recited  from  his  mouth;  not,  read  from  a  book:  oral

dictation.      **Ink:"  the  only  occurrence  of  the  word.      Vl,  inky  may  come  from  n**^  to  be

black.    Ver.  23.     "  Cut  it  vnih  the  joenhnife  ;  "  ie.  the  scribe's  knife  with  which  he  trimmed  his
reed  for  writing.


yote. — Chapters  xxxvi.-xliv.  form  a  Historic  Eecord  of  Events  (gathered  up
into  a  volume  by  express  Divine  command),  ranging  from  the  fourth  year  of
Jehoiakim  to  the  close  of  Jeremiads  ministry.  These  records  divide  themselves
thus —

A.  Chaps.  xxxvi.-xxxviii.     ^veni^ preceding  the  Chaldean  capture  of  Jerusalem.

B»  Chapters  xxxix.-xliv.     Events  succeeding  that  capture.


Subject  op  Chapter  xxxvi. — Jeremiah's  prophecies—

1.  Committed  to  writing  by  Baruch  (vers.  1—8).

2.  Rehearsed  to  all  the  people  (vers.  9,  10).

3.  Read  to  the  princes  (vers.  11-19).

4.  Read  in  part  to  Jehoiakim^  then  burnt  by  the  king  (vera.  20-26).

5.  Jehoiakim's  heavy  denunciation  (vers.  27-31).

6.  The  second  roll — prophecies  rewritten  (ver.  32)

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXXVL

Vers.   2,  3.  Theme  :  Kevelation  in  cations  of  having  come  from  God,    Oura

Writing.    **  Take  thee  a  roll  of  a  book,  is   a  documentary  religion — more   sure

and  write  therein  all  the  words  that  I  than  miracle — "  a  more   sure  word  of

have   spoken  unto  thee  against  Israel,  prophecy."     If  ye   believe   not  Moses"

and  against  Judah,  and  against  all  the  <fec.

nations,  from  the  day  I  spake  unto  thee,  2,   The  time  and  the  manner  in  which

from  the  days  of  Josiah,  even  unto  this  this  word  comes  to  a  people.     It  is  dis-

day.     It  may   be    that   the    house    of  tinctly  marked  by  God   Himself  as   a

Judah  will  hear  all  the  evil  that  I  pur-  great  crisis  in    their  religious   history,

pose  to  do  unto  them ;  that  they  may  God  dates  from  this  event.     Good  men

return  every  man  from  his  evil  way,  that  date  from  it  too.

I  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  their  3.  The  Book  can  never  leave  us  as  it

sin."  finds  us.

Ours  is  a  documentary  religion ;  and  II.  The  gracious  design  of  the  Scrip-
it  is  a  great  advantage  to  have  the  tures.  To  bring  us  to  faith,  to  re-
principles  of  our  faith  in  a  defined  and  pentance  and  reconciliation  to  God  (vers,
a  written  form.  The  prophefs  pen  sue-  3-7) ;  not  to  condemn,  but  to  save.  It
ceeded  his  breath.  is  to  show  us  our  danger  and  our  refuge.

An  abstract  of  Jeremiah's  preaching  Full  of  Christ,
for  twenty-three  years  was  thus  recorded.  IIL  The  settled  hostility  it  excites

Baruch  was  to  read  it.     It  excited  a  great  (vers.  22,23).  Men  of  corrupt  minds  love

sensation.     The  princes  conveyed  it  to  not  the  truth.     Popery  hates  it.     Many

the  king  :  it  was  read  in  his  presence :  false  Protestants  dislike  it  too.     They

he  took  his  penknife,  cut  it  in  pieces,  who  do  not  take  the  penknife  to  destroy

cast   it   in  the  fire.     But  another  was  it,    employ  their  pens  to   pervert  and

written  with  this  awful  addition  :  Say  extinguish  it.
to  Jehoiakim  (vers.  30,  31).  IV.  The  righteous  retribution    its

Upon  this  account  remark —  rejection   incurs   (vers.    29-31).     The

I.  The  Divine  authority  of  the  book.  Gospel  has  a  condemnation  of  its  own

•*This  word  came  to  Jeremiah.**  as  well  as  the  law.

1.  It  bears  evident  marks  and  indi-  Comp.  also  Homily  on  chap.  xxx.  2.

571


CHAP.  XXX7I.


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ver.  2.  Theme :  '*  Litera  Soripta
Manet."  The  object  of  the  writing  was
not  alone  that  the  word  written  might
remain,  but  also  to  collect  all  the  single
lightning  strokes  into  one  grand  prophe-
tic tempest.

The  written  word  was  of  special  use —

i.  To  contempor'aries.  For  it  rendered
possible — (1.)  Continued  study  ;  (2.)
quiet  contemplation  ;  (3.)  careful  com-
parison.

ii.  To  posterity/,  (1.)  The  mouth
speaks  only  to  those  present ;  the  pen  to
the  absent,  (2.)  The  mouth  speaks  only
to  present  hours  and  times ;  the  pen  to
centuries  future.

Comp.  Exod.  xxxiv.  27  ;  Deut.x.  4,  5,
xvii.  18;  Isa.  xxx.  8;  Hab.  ii.  2.

— Naegelsbach  and  Cramer,

Also :  The  blessings  of  the  written
word,

i.  That  which  it  has  in  common  with
the  spoken  word.  Preparation  of  the
heart  for  the  reception  of  salvation
(ver.    ).

ii.  That  which  it  has  in  distinction  horn
the  spoken  word,  (a)  It  is  present  for
every  one  ;  (6)  it  is  present  at  every
time  and  every  place ;  (c)  it  is  present
in  all  its  parts  (for  comparison).

— Naegelsbach.

See  Addenda :  Revelation  in  Writ-
ing.

Ver.  3.  Theme:  "It  May  Be."  "It
may  be  that  the  house  of  Judah  will  hear
all  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to  do  unto
them;  that  they  may  return  every  man
from  his  evil  way ;  that  I  may  forgive
their  iniquity  and  their  sin,"

Jeremiah's  ministry  may  be  regarded
as  typical  of  God*s  dealings  with  man
in  all  ages.     "  It  may  be."

L  This  word  shows  us  the  heart  of
God.  Words  are  the  servants  of  things.
Language  is  imperfect,  but  it  is  the  chief
interpreter  of  thought.  What  has  been
said  of  man,  may  be  said,  with  reverence,
of  God  :  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the
heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  When  God
Bays,  "  It  may  be,"  we  must  not  imagine
that  there  is  anything  like  doubt  or
ignorance  with  Him,  It  is  said  that  He
072


speaks  as  a  man  to  men.  How  wonder-
ful that  He  should  thus  condescend  to
our  weakness  and  necessities !  He  not
only  employs  human  agents,  but  human
speech,  to  reveal  His  will  to  us.  Diffi-
culties may  be  easily  raised  as  to  the
form  of  speech  here,  but  there  can  be
no  question  as  to  its  spirit.  The  words
breathe  love,  and  not  hate.  God  is
indeed  displeased  because  of  sin,  but
He  longs  to  show  mercy  to  the  sinner.
His  heart  yearns  over  His  rebellious
children,  as  the  father  over  his  prodigal
son.  Judgment  is  His  strange  work.
Mercy  is  His  delight.  He  welcomes
the  penitent.  He  blesses  the  obedient.
All  His  counsels  and  warnings,  His
promises  and  threatenings,  are  for  good.
Mark  the  words  of  Moses  (Deut.  v.  29-
33,  xxxii.  44-47)  ;  of  the  prophets  (Isa.
L  18-20 ;  Jer.  viiL  7-11  ;  Ezek.  xii.  3,
xviii.  31 ;  Hosea  xi.  1-8) ;  of  Jesus
Christ  (John  iil  16,  17;  Luke  xix.  10,
41,  42).  And  so  it  is  still.  What  John
said  of  his  Gospel  may  be  said  of  the
whole  Bible,  and  indeed  of  all  God's
dealings  with  us  in  grace — "  These  are
written,  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus
is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  that
believing  ye  might  have  life  through  His
name."

IL  This  word  reveals  the  grand
possibilities  of  human  life.  Loc^king
on  waste  moorland,  we  may  say,  this  will
soon  be  reclaimed.  That  soldier  stand-
ing in  the  ranks,  beside  thousands  more,
may  yet  rise  to  high  command.  That
speaker,  who  has  failed  in  his  first  effort,
may  yet  lead  the  House  of  Commons.
That  child,  over  whose  cradle  his  mother
bends  in  fond  anxiety,  may  yet  hold  a
foremost  place  among  men.  He  who
was  the  joy  of  his  mother's  youth  may
be  the  pride  and  the  stay  of  her  old
age.  These  and  such  like  possibilities
lie  hid  in  the  future.  As  yet,  all  is
uncertain  ;  we  can  only  say,  "  It  may
be."  But  can  there  be  such  uncertainty
with  God  ?  No.  To  His  infinite  mind,
all  the  possibilities  of  time,  and  space,
and  circumstance,  are  not  matters  of
doubt,  but  of  certainty  (Isa.  xlvi.  9-11).
Yet  here,  as  often,  He  speaks  as  if  it
were  otherwise.  For  our  sakes  He  puts
aside  the  must  be  of  the  Divine  and  the


BOM  I  LET W  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.   XIXTL


absolute,  for  the  may  he  of  the  human
and  the  contingent.  His  dealings  with
Israel  are  spoken  of  as  an  experiment.
The  gracious  purpose  is  plain,  but  the
result  is  hidden.  It  depends  upon  causes
not  yet  in  full  operation.  It  will  be
manifested  in  due  time,  in  the  free  act-
ings and  choices  of  men.  So  it  is  with
the  ministry  of  grace  in  every  age.  Men
are  put  upon  trial  (Deut.  viii.  2 ;
Luke  ii.  34).  Mark  the  grand  possi-
bilities.

1.  Earnest  attention  (ver.  3).  Tliis
is  absolutely  necessary.  God*s  Word  is
truth.  If  He  threatens,  it  is  because
there  is  just  cause.  His  laws  must  be
upheld.  Wrath  must  come  to  the  utter-
most on  the  impenitent.  If  men  con-
sidered this,  surely  it  would  awaken  a
holy  fear  of  God's  judgments.  The  tale
of  what  God  purposes  to  do  to  the  sinner
may  well  make  the  ears  of  every  one
that  heareth  it  to  tingle  (1  Sam.  iii.  11).
"  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  living  God."

2.  Penitential  prayer  (ver.  7).  **  It
may  be  they  will  present  their  supplica-
tion before  the  Lord,  and  will  return
every  one  from  his  evil  way."  God  can-
not change.  It  is  the  sinner  who  must
retrace  his  steps.  He  has  forsaken  God,
and  turned  to  his  own  evil  way,  and  he
is  bound  and  besought  to  return.  Prayer
is  the  first  step  to  a  true  amendment  of
life.  It  is  when  we  look  upon  God  as
"He  has  revealed  Himself  in  Christ  that
we  are  melted  to  penitence,  and  that  the
cry  of  hope  rises  from  our  hearts  (Isa.
ixvii.  4,  5,  Iv.  6,  7).

3.  Moral  reconciliation.  The  hind-
rances to  peace  are  not  with  God,  but
with  us.  Mark  the  touching  words,
"that  I  may  forgive."  God  pities  the
sinner,  but  He  cannot  deal  with  him,  in
the  way  of  absolution,  till  he  has  come
to  himself  and  is  in  earnest  about  salva-
tion. God  is  willing  to  give,  but  the
sinner  may  not  have  the  heart  to  receive.
On  the  other  hand,  when  there  is  a  real
turning  from  sin  unto  God,  how  quick
is  the  response!  how  complete  and  joyous
the  reconciliation !  (Luke  xv.  20-24 ;
John  i,  .')-»9.)

III.  This  word  holds  out  encourage-
ment to  all  true  workers  for  Christ.


Hope  is  the  spring  of  all  activity.  What
we  deem  impossible  we  do  not  attempt.
Reason  forbids.  But  what  we  know  to
be  both  possible  and  good,  we  can  strive
for  with  all  our  strength.  Duty  is  ours,
results  belong  to  God.  For  three-and-
twenty  years  Jeremiah  had  laboured  in
Judah.  His  work  seemed  in  vain.  But
he  must  not  cease.  The  mercy  of  God
is  great.  Another  effort  must  be  made.
New  methods  must  be  tried.  The  Word
must  be  written,  and  brought  to  bear  in
all  its  force  upon  the  people,  the  princes,
and  the  king.  "It  may  be  they  will
hear."  The  command  given  to  Jere-
miah and  Baruch,  is  just  the  same  in
substance  as  that  which  was  afterwards
given  to  the  apostles  and  ministers  of
Jesus  Christ  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20  ;  Acts
v.  20,  xviii.  9,  10).  <'  It  may  be,"  im-
plies faith,  and  love,  and  hope.  It  holds
out  encouragement  to  prayer  (David,  2
Sam.  xii  22)  ;  to  holy  endeavour  (Paul,
Phil.  iii.  8-14,  iv.  13) ;  to  benevolent  and
missionary  enterprise  (Eccles.  ix.  1-6  ;
Rom.  i.  16).  In  all  that  is  for  good,
friend  helping  friend,  parents  training
their  children.  Christian  men  and  women
labouring  for  the  advancement  of  the
Gospel,  we  may  say  as  Jonathan  did  to
his  armour-bearer,  when  summoning  him
to  a  deed  of  high  courage  and  daring,
"  Come  :  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  work
for  us  "  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6).  Nay,  we  may
do  more.  We  may  say  to  ourselves,  as
Haggai  to  Zerubbabel,  and  to  Joshua,
and  to  all  the  people  of  the  land,  "  Be
strong  and  work,  for  I  am  with  yoUy
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts"  (Haggai  ii.
4,  5).  Our  labour  shall  not  be  in  vain
in  the  Lord.  For  the  humblest  worker,
as  well  as  for  the  great  Master  Himself,
the  word  is  true,  "  He  shall  see  of  the
travail  of  his  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied."
— Rev.  W,  Forsyth,  from  **  Homiletic
Quarterly."

Ver.  7.  Theme :  An  Open  Door  op
Hope.  "It  may  be  they  will  present
their  supplication  before  the  Lord,  and
will  return  everyone  from  his  evil  way;
for  great  is  the  anger  and  the  fury  that
the  Lord  hath  pronounced  against  this
people."

I.  Menacing  doom.

673


CHAP.  XXXVL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


1.  Definite  in  its  direction.  "  Against
tliis  people."

2.  Terrible  in  its  character,  **  Great
is  the  anger  and  the /wry."

3.  Ominous  as  to  its  origin,  **  That
the  Lord  hath  pronounced."

4.  Positive  as  to  its  announcement,
^^  Hath  pronounced."

IL  Possible  escape.     "  It  may  be."

1.  Doom  tarries  till  all  conditional
exigences  are  expended.  God  holds
back  the  stroke  till  every  possibility  of
averting  it  is  exhausted.  He  is  "  slow
to  anger. ^*

2.  Sinners  have  the  power  of  arresting
their  own  doom.  Though  it  has  been
•*  pronounced  "  against  them.  As  Nine-
veh.

3.  Threatenings  of  God  are  designed
to  act  as  appeals  to  men  to  avert  them.
They  are  stein  voices  of  love.  His  men-
aces are  severe,  and  will  eventually  be
fulfilled  if  not  averted ;  but  He  makes
them  severe  in  order  to  arouse  us  to
seek  reconciliation  and  escape.

IIL  Conditions  of  deliverance.

1.  Not  Jiard  to  comply  with.

2.  Not  beyond  the  absolute  necessities
of  the  case.     They  are —

(a)  Penitential  prayer.  "Present
their  supplication."

(6)  Individual  reformation.  "  Return
every  one  from  his  evil  way."

Note, — This  was  urged  "  upon  the  fast'
ing  day^'  (ver.  6).  So  thsit  fasting  w&s
not  enough  of  itself  (see  Isa.  Iviii.  3,  6 ;
Zech.  V.  6,  7).  And  this  appeal  followed
the  reading  of  the  roll  (ver.  6).  Thus  read-
ing Scripture  and  self -mortification  should
be  added  to  penitence  and  reformation.
All  which,  in  this  Gospel  age,  become  sum-
med up  in — (a)  *^  Search  the  Scriptures,
for  they  testify  of  Me ;  "  (b)  Take  up  thy
cross  daily  and  follow  Me ; "  (c)  "  Re-
pentance towards  God;"  and  (d)  "Lay-
ing aside  every  weight  and  the  sin
that  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  let  us  run,
looking  unto  Jesus  I "

Vers.  11  and  13.  Theme:  The  Hearer
BECOMES  A  Preacher.  "  When  Micha-
iah  had  heard  out  of  the  booh  all  the
words  of  the  Lord,  he  went  down  to  the
king's  house  .  .  and  declared  unto  [the
princes]  all  the  words  he  had  heard"  &c.
574


I.  A    hearer's    responsibility.     To

carry  tidings  to  absent  ones.  "  Let  him
that  heareth  say,  Come."  If  the  Lord's
words  are  good  for  him,  they  are  also
good  for  others.

n.  A  hearer's  opportunity.  He
can  reach  an  audience  from  which  the
preacher  is  excluded.  Family  circleSf
official  circles  [as  in  this  case]  may  be
brought  to  hear  God's  truth  by  one  per-
son reciting  what  he  has  heard.

in.  A  hearer's  prompt  anxiety.
What  he  heard  was  urgent,  was  ominous.
Others  were  entailed  in  the  messages  of
God's  Word.  It  was  not  right  for  him
to  be  silent.  The  doom  or  salvation  of
others  depended  on  his  telling  what  he
had  heard.  Forthwith  he  went,  and
faithfdly  he  recited  the  facts  of  warn-
ing and  counsel  from  God.

(1.)  He  became  thus  a  herald  from
God  to  his  friends.

(2.)  He  opened  the  way  iov  Jeremiah* s
roll  to  be  read  in  their  hearing  (ver.  15).

(3.)  He  brought  them  under  very
solemn  convictions  (ver.  16).

(4.)  He  won  for  God's  servants  influ-
ential friends,  who  protected  them  from
the  anger  of  the  king  (vers.  19,  25),

**  Can  we  whose  souls  are  lighted
With  wisdom  from  on  high.
Can  we,  to  men  benighted,
The  light  of  life  deny?"

Ver.  20.  Theme:  Reading  God's
Word  to  a  King.  These  princes
showed  a  gracious  mind  toward  Baruch
and  Jeremiah ;  for  they  did  not
force  Baruch  into  the  angry  king's
presence.

Yet  they  showed  also  a  timid  and
half-hearted  sympathy;  for  if  they  thought
the  "  words  of  the  Lord  "  urgent  and
important,  why  did  they  not  boldly  go
in  to  the  king  and  plead  with  him  to
heed  the  message  ?

Had  they  been  true  patriots,  and  loyal
to  God's  truth,  they  would  have  acted  a
more  emphatic  part  than  they  did.

But  they  secured  this :  the  king  heard
God's  word.

L  An  involuntary  hearer.  They  seem
all  together  to  have  gone  in  and  recited
what  they  had  heard  (ver.  20).  Jehoiakini
was  thus  taken  by  surprise — ^stormed  in


BOMILBflO  COMMENTARY:  jmEMTAII.


CHAP.   XXXVI,


his  unsuspecting  ease.     Often  God  sends
messages  to  and  against  us —

1.  Without  our  wishing  to  have  them.

2.  Without  our  power  to  prevent  them.

3.  In  a  manner  wholly  unexpected,

II.  An  inquisitive  hearer.  The  frag-
mentary recital  of  "the  words  of  the
Lord"  by  the  princes  excited  him  to
desire  to  hear  from  the  roll  itself.  So
(ver.  21)—

1.  There  may  be  an  inquisitiveness
horn  of  doubt  Jehoiakim  may  have
questioned  whether  they  repeated  the
words  correctly.

2.  Or  an  inquisitiveness  prompted  by
anxiety.  He  may  have  felt  disturbed
by  what  he  heard,  and  wished  to  know
the  matter  more  fully.

3.  Or  an  inquisitiveness  f*uickened  by
hope.  Possibly  these  princes  stated  only
the  dark  side  of  things :  if  he  heard  more
it  might  be  less  menacing.

4.  Or  an  inquisitiveness  actiiated  by
scorn.  So  far  from  his  being  alarmed
by  the  eager  words  of  the  princes,  he
was  quite  ready  to  hear  more — let  him
hear  it  all :  it  mattered  not  to  him  !

III.  An  infuriated  hearer.  There
"burned  before  him  a  fire"  (ver.  22)  ;
and  it  but  represented  the  fury  which
burned  within  him.

1.  He  burned  with  mad  impatience.
Stopped  the  reading :  could  not  sit  out
the  reading :  heard  only  *'  three  or  four
leaves  "  (ver.  23).

2.  He  burned  with  impotent  rage.
Became  violent:  paid  no  heed  to  the
"intercessions"  (ver.  26)  of  the  three
princes  :  wanted  Jeremiah  apprehended
(ver.  26)  :  issued  a  mandate  then  and
there  to  Baruch  that  the  prophet  should
be  "  taken."

3.  He  burned  with  silly  revenge.  He
would  destroy  "  the  roll ; "  so  "  cut  it
with  a  penknife  " — venting  his  malice  on
the  innocent  parchment !  and  then  cast
the  roll  into  the  fire,  gratifying  his
ridiculous  animosity  by  watching  its
consumption !  (ver.  23.)

See  Addenda  :  Infuriated  Hearers.
I^ote —

1.  Fires  can  consume  books,  but  they
cannot  consume  truths/

2.  God's  enemies  who  m^ke  fires  may
one  day  feed  tfiem  /    "  The  fire  shall  try


every  man's  work."     "  He  will  burn  up
the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire,^^
See  Addenda :  Burning  Bibles.

Ver.  23.  Theme :  The  Reckless
Penknife.  "  When  Jehudi  had  read
three  or  four  leaves,  he  cut  it  with  a  pen-
knife,**

We  look  in  upon  a  room  in  Jeru-
salem. Two  men  there  :  Jeremiah,
walking  the  floor,  agitated,  in  the  spirit
of  prophecy.  Baruch,  writing  out  the
scathing  words  of  the  Almighty  against
the  city.

It  is  winter.  Jehoiakim  sits  in  "winter
house."  Silence  among  his  lords,  princes,
while  the  parchment  is  read.  Every  eye
is  fixed  ;  king  frowns,  cheeks  burn ;
foot  comes  down  with  thundering  indig-
nation ;  seizes  penknife,  and  lashes  it
into  the  parchments.

Was  the  book  destroyed?  Did  the
king  escape?  In  a  little  while  Jehoia-
kim's  dead  body  is  hurled  forth  to
blacken  in  the  sun,  "  buried  with  the
burial  of  an  ass,"  while  Baruch  again
writes  the  terrible  prophecy  which  Jere-
miah anew  dictates.

It  would  take  more  penknives  than
cutler  ever  sharpened  to  hew  into  per-
manent destruction  the  Word  of  God.
Yet  that  Oriental  scene  has  been  often
repeated  :  there  are  thousands  of  Jehoia-
kims  who  cut  the  Word  of  God  vrith  their
penknives.

L  The  first  to  be  mentioned  is  the
man  who  receives  a  part  of  the  Bible,
but  cuts  out  portions  and  rejects
them.

But  the  genuineness  of  the  entire  Bible
is  established,  and  there  may  be  no
cutting  out  of  books  against  which
cavillers  rail.  If  any  part  of  the  Old
Testament  had  been  uninspired,  Christ
would  have  said,  "  Search  the  Scrip-
tures, except  the  book  of — Jonah  or
Esther."  And  with  all  the  Christian
world  watching,  and  our  enemies  also,
you  might  as  well  attempt  to  insert  an
entire  canto  in  Milton's  Paradise  Lost
as  a  fresh  page  into  the  New  Testament.

A  man  dies ;  people  assemble  to  hear
the  Will  read.  One  interrupts :  "  I
reject  that  passage."  But  they  must
take  the  will  as  a  whole,  or  not  at  alL

575


CHAP.  XXXVt.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  jmEMIAH,


Remove  one  orb  from  this  constellation
of  Bible  books  that  revolve  in  splendour
about  Jesus,  the  central  Sun,  and  heaven
itselt  would  weep  at  the  catastrophe.

II.  He  who  runs  his  knife  through
the  Bible  from  Genesis  to  Revelation
and  rejects  everything.

The  hostility  in  the  *' winter  house"
exists  yet.  Enemies  of  this  Book  have
tried  to  marshal  on  their  nde  chemist's
laboratory,  astronomer's  telescope,  geo-
logist's pry,  mineralogist's  hamnxer,  <fec.
With  the  black  hulk  of  their  priestcraft
they  have  tried  to  run  down  this  Gospel
ship  speeding  on  errands  of  salvation.

Men  strike  their  knife  through  this
Book  because  they  say  that —

1.  The  light  of  nature  is  sufficient
Have  the  fire-worshippers  of  India,  the
Borneoian  cannibal,  &c.,  found  it  so  ?
The  pagodas  of  superstition,  the  infanti-
cides of  the  Ganges,  the  gory  wheels  of
Juggernaut,  declare  it  is  not  sufficient.
A  star  is  beautiful,  but  it  pours  no  light
on  the  midnight  of  a  sinful  soul.
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "
Sweltering  nations  have  knelt  at  the
foot  of  the  Himalayan  mountains  for
ages  asking  the  question ;  but  the  moun-
tain made  no  response.  The  cry  has
gone  round  the  world,  but  the  stars
were  dumb,  and  the  Alps  were  silent,
&c.

2.  That  the  Book  is  cruel  and  in-
decent But  show  one  man  made  cruel
or  obscene  by  the  Bible.  Thousands
have  been  lifted  by  it  out  of  their  sin.

3.  That  it  is  «o  full  of  unexplained
mysteries.  What !  will  you  believe  only
in  what  can  be  explained  ]  Gravitation  ?
Your  finger  nails;  how  do  they  grow?
I  would  know  that  thb  heiglits  and
depths  of  God's  truth  were  not  very
great  if  I  could,  with  my  finite  mind,
read  everything.

4.  An  infidel  strikes  his  penknife
through  the  Bible  because,  he  says,  if  it
were  God*8  Book,  the  whole  world  would
liave  it.  He  pleads  that  if  God  had
anything  to  say  to  the  world.  He  could
not  say  it  to  only  a  small  part  of  the
race.  But  how  is  it  God  gives  oranges
and  bananas  to  only  a  small  part  of  our
race  ?  There  are  millions  who  have
never  seen  an  orange  or  a  banana  !     If

576


all  the  human  race  had  the  same  climate,
harvests,  health,  advantages,  then,  by
analogy,  you  might  argue  God  should
give  the  Bible,  if  at  all,  to  the  whole
world.

5.  Objectors  cut  the  Bible  because
they  urge  that  other  hooks  have  in  them
great  value  and  beauty.  True :  Confucius
taught  kindness  to  enemies ;  the  Shaster
has  great  affluence  of  beauty ;  the  Veda
of  the  Brahmins  has  ennobling  senti-
ments ;  but  what  is  proved  thereby  1 —
that  after  searching  all  lands,  and  ages,
and  literature,  there  has  been  found  but
a  portion  of  the  wisdom  and  beauty
which  God's  Book  contains  !  Let  Vol-
taire come  on  with  his  acute  philosophy,
and  Hume  with  his  scholarship,  and
Gibbon  with  his  one-sided  statements,
and  Hobbes  with  his  subtlety  ;  and  the
band  of  mountain  shepherds  and  Galilee
fishermen  will  beat  all  back  with  the
cry  of  "Victory,  through  our  Lord  Jesus
Ciirist ! "

III.  No  better  proof  of  the  Divinity
of  this  Book  can  be  desired  than  that  it
has  withstood  this  mighty  and  con-
tinuous attack,  and  come  down  to  us
without  a  chapter  effaced,  a  miracle
injured,  or  a  promise  scarred.

No  other  book  has  passed  through
such  hostility.  Yet  this  Book  to-day
is  foremost.  In  Philosophy ^  it  is
honoured  above  the  works  of  Descartes,
Bacon,  Aristotle,  and  Socrates.  In  His-
tory, it  wins  more  respect  than  Hero-
dotus, Thucydides,  and  Xenophon.  In
Poetry y  it  outshines  the  Iliad  and
Odessey,  the  Inferno  and  Paradise  Lost
It  has  been  published  in  more  than  two
hundred  languages;  the  earth  quakes
with  the  quick  revolutions  of  its  printing-
press.

One  verse  of  this  Book  above  the
throne  of  tyranny,  and  it  shall  fall;
above  the  temples  of  superstition,  and
they  shall  crumble  ;  above  the  wilder-
ness, and  it  shall  bloom  as  the  Garden
of  the  Lord.  Thou  Prince  of  Books,  we
hail  thee  to  thy  coronation  !  the  wheeling
earth  thy  chariot  !  the  bending  sky  thy
triumphal  arch  !  the  great  heavens  thy
star-studded  banner  1

1.  We  have,  then,  many  rtatonsfcr
believing  the  Bihle,


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


ouAF,  xxxn.


2.  Raise   the   Book   higher  in   your

estimation.

3.  Take  it  to  your  hearty  your  house.
Though  you  seem  to  get  along  very  well
witljout  the  Bible  in  your  prosperity,
there  will  come  a  time  when  your  only
consolation  will  be  this  blessed  Gospel.

A  blind  girl  had  been  in  the  habit  of
reading  the  Bible  with  raised  letters ;
by  an  accident  her  fingers  lost  their
sensitiveness.  In  her  sorrow,  she  raised
the  Book  to  her  lips,  to  kiss  it  a  fare-
well. As  she  did  so  she  felt  the  letters
with  her  lips — "  Tiie  Gospel  according
to  Mark."  "Thank  God!"  she  ex-
claimed, '•  I  can  read  my  Bible  with  my
lips  ! "

Oh,  in  our  last  hour,  when  the  world
goes  from  our  grasp,  press  this  precious
Gospel  to  our  lips,  that,  in  the  dying
kiss,  we  may  taste  its  sweet  promises.
-De  Witt  Talmage,  1870.

Ver.  23.  Theme  :  Laborious  Service
Wasted.  ^^  All  the  roll  was  consumed
in  the  fire."

I.  A  vast  and  toilsome  task.

i.  It  occupied  a  coiisidei^able  time
in  preparation:  doubtless  "the  nine
months,"  at  least,  of  the  fifth  year  of
Jehoiakim  (ver.  9).

ii.  And  it  was  undertaken  at  God^s
command  (ver.  2).

iii.  It  had  an  urgent  and  solemn  aim
in  view  (ver.  3).

iv.  It  was  performed  with  anxious
jlddity  (ver.  4).

v.  It  occupied  the  energies  of  two
devoted  and  gifted  servants  of  Jehovah
(vers.  4,  17,  18).

II.  Destroyed  in  a  moment's  caprice,
i.    Within  a  few  hours  of  its  completion.

Its  reading  before  the  people,  princes,
and  king  was  all  on  the  same  day ;  and
then  it  was  destroyed.

ii.  Utterly  destroying  the  entire  pro-
duct of  devoted  toil.  Not  a  vestige,
not  a  leaf  remaining.

iii.  Apparently  rendering  all  the
labour  fruitless.  There  on  the  fire
smouldered  the  ashes  of  destroyed  toil.
*'  Strength  spent  for  nought."

IIL  Yet  effecting  its  full  Divine
purpose.

i.  Mighty   consequences    result  from


moments.  A  lightning  flash  lasts  but  a
second,  yet  it  fells  a  forest,  shivers  a
rock,  blasts  an  edifice,  scorches  a  life  into
instant  death.

This  roll  was  read,  and  though^  but
once  heard,  it  yet  conveyed  its  message,
2i,Tidi  vivo}i^tii&  different  results  :  on  the
people  (ver.  7),  on  the  princes  (ver.  16),
on  the  king  (ver.  23).

ii.  Man's  wanton  act  of  destruction
is  included  in  God's  arrangements.  He
intended  it  as  a  test  for  the  king,  and  it
revealed  to  both  people  and  princes  (who
had  been  solemnised  by  the  reading)
that  the  king  was  hopelessly  defiant  and
merited  the  destruction  so  soon  to  follow,

iii.  Hence  godly  work  should  be  done
and  left  with  God.  We  may  well  be
satisfied  with  the  consciousness  that  we
have  carried  out  His  bidding.  If  foes
seem  to  render  our  obedience  useless,  that
is  God's  matter,  not  ours.  Sometimes
best  results  follow  the  apparent  ruin  of
our  labours.  It  makes  the  way  clear
for  God  to  follow  on  with  His  judgments
(ver.  31).

IV.  Ruined  work  should  inspire  to
renewed  service.  "Then  took  Jere-
miah another  roll  "  (ver.  32).

i.  Go  over  again  the  path  of  obedience,
even  though  with  bleeding  feet.

ii.  Lose  not  faith  in  God  though  the
toil  seem  monotonous.

iii.  The  recomputed  service  shall  have
something  added.  '*  Many  like  words."
For  all  work  done  over  again  becomes
both  enlarged  and  improved;  and  its
disciplinary  effect  upon  the  worker  may
prove  not  the  least  of  the  advantageous
results  of  the  reattenipted  service.  For
the  heart  will  learn  to  be  patient  in
Divine  employ,  and  submissive  to  the
Providential  conditions  (of  failure  or
success)  amid  which  work  for  Him  is
fulfilled.

Paul  said,  "  I  have  learned  both  how
to  be  abased  and  how  to  abound.^*

Ver.  24.  Theme:  Hardened  Hearers.
"  Yet  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  rent  their
garments ;"  that  is,  the  king  and  his
attendant  princes.  Jeremiah  records
this  with  amazement,  sorrow,  and  alarm,

L  Contrast  the  solemn  fear  of
Josiah,  this  kind's  father  (2  Kings  xzii.

o  611


OflAl'.  XXXVL


HO  MI  LET W  COMMENT  ART:  JEREMIAH.


11,  19).  The  difference  in  their  acts
and  their  end.  Jehoiakim's  guilt  was
aggravated  by  reason  of  his  good  father^ $
example.

IL  Ponder  the  stolidity  which
habitual  disobedience  produces.  This
defiant  effrontery  in  the  Icing  was  the
climax  of  long  rejection  of  God's  mes-
sages. This  immovable  indifference  in
his  princes  was  the  result  of  the  king's
example  and  influence.

ni.  Beware  of  hearing  God's  mes-
sages with  heedlessness.

1.  Begins  with  inattention,

2.  Progresses  into  wilful  disobedience,

3.  Culminates  in  hardened  indiffer-
ence.

IV.  Eeceive  God's  word  with  a
chastened  seriousness  of  spirit.

1.  Warnings  from  God  should  produce
alarm.     *'  Afrai(i."

2.  Convictions  of  sin  should  lead  to  re-
pentance.    *'  Rend  garments."

3.  Divine  threatenings  should  urge  to
seeh  hiding  in  Christ.

Note.  —  The  guilt  of  indifference.  It
shows — (a.)  contempt  of  God ;  (6.)
recklessness  of  soul;  (<?.)  hardness  of
heart.

Ver.  31.  Theme:  Threatened  Pun-
ishment. "  And  I  will  punish  him,
and  his  seed,  and  his  servants,  for  their
iniquity."  A  current  sentiment  that  God
is  too  merciful  to  punish.    This  shows —

i.  A  misconception  of  the  character  of
God.

ii.  A  wilful  ignorance  of  the  facts  of
history.

iii.  Forgetfulness  of  the  suffering  condi-
tion of  this  present  evil  world.  For,  was
not  Adam  driven  from  Eden  ?  Did  not
the  deluge  sweep  the  ungodly  from  the
earth  1  Were  not  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
overthrown  ?  Has  God  never  sent
famine,  pestilence,  <fec.,  to  punish  the
sins  of  the  people  1  Has  He  not  so
constituted  the  human  mind  as  that
transgression  entails  misery  ?  No  error
could  be  more  irrational  and  unscriptural.
Yet  it  is —

L  Pleaded  that  punishment  is  in-
consistent with  mercy.    Because  **God
is  love"   and  merciful,  He  cannot  and
will  not  punish.
578


But — 1 .  Punishment,  instead  of  being
destructive  of  mercy,  is  itself  merciful.
To  let  transgressors  go  would  foster
evil  and  spread  ruin.

2.  Hence  God  could  not  he  merciful
did  He  not  punish.

II.  Yet  no  sin  in  human  history  has
been  committed  with  impunity.

1.  Every  transgression  and  disobe-
dience has  received  or  will  receive  a  just
recompense  of  reward.

2.  How  then,  if  sinners  must  be
punished,  can  they  be  pardoned  and
saved  ?  Christ  "  was  wounded  for  our
transgressions. "

3.  Had  the  saved  been  saved  without
their  sins  being  borne  by  their  Surety,
laiv  in  that  case  had  been  ignored,  and
Justice  slain  on  the  altar  of  Mercy.

III.  Since  justice  and  mercy  are
alike  attributes  of  God,  He  can  never
be  other  than  both  just  and  merci-
ful

1.  In  the  economy  of  redemption  they
exist  in  friendly  alliance.

2.  They  are  never  separated  either  in
the  Divine  nature  or  the  Divine  govern-
ment.

IV.  In  all  God's  judgments  on
rebellious  Israel  there  were  both  justice
and  mercy.  Justice  towards  them  that
fell,  mercy  towards  those  spared.  '*  Be-
hold the  goodness  and  severity  of  God,"
<&c.

V.  However  obscured,  still  mercy
always  tempers  justice  in  God^s  ad-
ministrations. DijEcult  to  discern  merry
in  the  deluge;  yet  it  arrested  aboun dings
of  iniquity  and  acted  beneficially  on  the
new  world.

In  some  cases  mercy  is  more  coji-
spicuous  than  Justice.  Yet  Heaven  is  not
all  mercy  unmixed  with  justice :  in  the
redeemed  we  see  the  mercy  of  God;  but
in  the  Redeemer,  with  His  scars,  we  see
the  justice.  And  Hell  is  not  all  justice
unmixed  with  mercy :  in  the  suffering
there  we  see  the  justice  of  God,  but
in  the  effect  of  their  doom  on  others
(and  other  worlds)  we  may  see  the
mercy.

VL  The  conduct  of  som>e  transgressors
leads  to  justice  being  allowed  to  take
its  course  untempered  by  mercy.  E.g.^
the  fallen  angels.     So  with  impenitent


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


OHAi'.  IXXVt


and  unbelieving  men.  Yet  while  Mercy
does  not  intervene  with  such,  it  is
merciful  to  others  that  such  should  be
punished ;  as  it  is  merciful  now  to
society  to  banish  great  criminals  from
their  midst.

In  God's  dealings  with  our  fallen
world,  ^^  grace  reigns^  through  righieous-
nesSf*  in  relation  to  all  who  believe;
whereas  justice  reigns  in  harmony  with
mercy,  in  reference  to  those  who  "neglect


the  great  salvation." — Bev.  D.  Pledge,
*'  Walks  with  Jeremiah"

Ver.  32.  Theme:  "Another  Roll,"
WITH  "  Added  Words."

I.   God's  judgments  against  sin.
II.  Man's  attempt  to  evade  them.

III.  How  Divine  condemnations  re-
appear.

IV.  How  they  reappear   with  addU
tions. — Rev.  John  Farren.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXXVI.  :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Revelation  in  Writing.  "  Tiiis
is  the  first  recorded  instance  of  the
formation  of  a  Canonical  Book,  and  of
the  special  purpose  of  its  formation.
*  The  Book '  now,  as  often  afterwards,
was  to  be  the  death-blow  of  the  old  regal,
aristocratic,  sacerdotal  exclusiveness,  as
represented  in  Jehoiakim.  The  '  Scribe,'
now  first  rising  into  importance  in  the
form  of  Baruch,  to  supply  the  defects  of
the  living  Prophet,  was  as  the  printing-
press,  in  far  later  ages,  supplying  the
defects  of  both  Prophet  and  Scribe,  and
handing  on  the  word  of  truth,  which
else  might  irretrievably  have  perished."
— Stanley  y  "Jewish  Church,'''  ii.  456.

The  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society
have  during  the  last  fifty  years  spread,
mainly  among  English  readers,  about
fifty  million  copies  of  God's  Word ;
and  from  their  press  six  copies  are  now
issued  every  minute  of  the  day  (of  ten
hours),  or  3600  daily  ;  and  this  at  a
price  enabling  the  poorest  to  possess  a
Bible.

And  the  Scriptures  have  been  circu-
lated now  in  almost  every  tongue  and
dialect  under  heaven,  and  are  being  cir-
culated in  every  country.

**  Within  this  ample  volume  lies
The  mystery  of  mysteries  :
Happiest  they  of  human  race

To  whom  their  Qod  has  given  grace
To  read,  to  fear,  to  hope,  to  pray,

To  lift  the  latch  and  force  the  way ;
And  better  had  they  ne'er  been  born,
That  read  to  doubt,  or  read  to  scorn."

—Scott.

Infuriated  Hearer&  Vespasian  is
said  to  have  been  patientissimus  veri
(Quintilian),  "  very  patient  of  truth  ;  *'
80  was  the  good  Josiah.    But  Jehoiakim


"  was  more  like  Tiberius,  that  tiger  who
tore  with  his  teeth  what  displeased  him ;
or  like  Vitellius  the  tyrant,  of  whom
Tacitus  saith  "  that  his  ears  were  of
that  temper  that  he  could  hear  no
counsel,  though  never  so  profitable,
unless  it  were  pleasant,  and  did  suit  with
his  humours  (Lib.  iii.  Hist.) — Trapp,

Burning  Bibles.  See  article  in
**  Secular  Annotations  on  Scripture
Texts  ^^  Second  Series,  by  Francis
Jacox,  pp.  180-189,  on  "  Baruch's
Burnt  Book."

Jehoiakim  is  the  first  we  read  of  that
ever  offered  to  burn  the  Bible.  An-
tiochus,  indeed,  did  the  like  afterwards,
and  Diocletian  the  tyrant,  and  later  the
Pope.     A  bad  confederacy  I

Dean  Stanley,  in  his  "Jewish  Church,''
vol.  ii.  pp.  455,  456,  says,  "  Three  or  four
columns  exhausted  the  royal  patience.
He  seized  a  knife,  such  as  Eastern  scribes
wear  for  the  sake  of  erasures,  cut  the
parchment  into  strips,  and  threw  it  into
the  brazier  till  it  was  burnt  to  ashes.
Those  who  had  heard  from  their  fathers
of  the  effect  produced  on  Josiah  by  the
recital  of  the  warnings  of  Deuteronomy
might  well  be  startled  at  the  contrast.
None  of  those  well-known  signs  of
astonishment  and  grief  were  seen ;
neither  king  nor  attendants  rent  their
clothes.  It  was  an  outrage  long  remem-
bered. Baruch,  in  his  hiding-places,
was  overwhelmed  (ver.  15)  with  despair
at  this  failure  of  his  mission.  But
Jeremiah  had  now  ceased  to  waver.
He  bade  his  timid  disciple  take  up  the
pen,  and  record  once  more  the  terrible
message.  .  .  .  But  the  Divine  Oracle
could  not  be  destroyed  in  the  destruction
of  its  outward  framework.     It  was  the

67d


09AP.  XXXVII.  ttOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAB,


new  form  of  the   vision  of   the  *  bush  the  fourth  or  of  the  sixteenth  century,  yet

burning,  but  not  consumed:'  a  sacred  multiplied  by  that  very  cause;  springing

book,  the  form  in  which  Divine  truths  from  the  flames  to  do  their  work,  living

were  now  first  beginning  to  be  known,  in  the  voice  and  life  of  men,  even  when

burnt  as  sacred  books  have  been  burnt  their  outward  letter  seemed  to  be  lost."
again  and  again,  in  the  persecutions  of


CHAPTER  XXXVII.


Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter.  In  the  tenth  and  eleventh
year  of  Zedekiah.  Later  than  chap,  xxi.,  for  that  embassy  was  sent  when  Nebuchadnezzar
was  marching  against  Jerusalem  ;  this,  during  the  crisis  when  the  Egyptian  army  came  and
temporarily  drew  off  Nebuchadnezzar's  from  the  siege  (ver.  5).  In  notes  on  chap,  xxxiv.  will
be  seen  the  mood  of  the  nation  at  this  moment.  But  as  the  interval  passed,  while  the  armies
of  Egypt  and  Chaldea  struggled  together  outside  of  the  city,  Zedekiah  was  moved  to  solicit  the
prophet's  intercession  with  God  for  his  people.

For  other  notes  cf.  on  chaps,  xxi,  and  xxxiv.

2.  Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  10.  **  Wounded  men :"  vnen  thrust  through.  Ver.  12.  **  To
separate  himself  thence  in  the  midst  of  his  people."  The  Syriac,  "  To  divide  thence  a.  share  with
the  people  ;"  Vulgate,  *'  To  divide  thence  a  possession  in  the  sight  of  the  citizens  ;'*  Targum,
"To  divide  an  inheritance  he  had  there  with  the  people  ;"  Septuagint,  *'  To  purchase  thence."
Kimchi,  Rosenmiiiler,  Dahler,  and  others  construe  the  meaning  thus:  Jeremiah  slipped  away,
&c.  (as  in  A.V.  margin).  But  pbn  to  be  smooth,  in  its  form  here,  means  to  make  smooth  or
divide:  hence  Henderson,  "that  he  might  take  his  portion  thence  among  the  people; "and
Naegelsbach,  *'  that  he  might  divide  his  inheritance."

Ver.  15.  **  Into  the  dungeons  and  into  the  cabins,'^  Some  interpret  ni*pn,  curved  posts  or
stocks;  but  the  word  rather  describes  arched  vaults.  **  Dungeon"  is  lit.  house  of  a  cistern.
Great  excavations  existed  under  the  palace  and  temple  at  Jerusalem,  as  reservoirs  for  water.

SECTIONAL  DIVISION  OF  CHAPTER  XXXVII.
Vers.  1-10.  Pkayers  Asked,  but  in  Vain.

i  A  disobedient  hearer  (ver.  1 ),  though  warned  hy  sad  example  (ver.  2),  ashing
the  prophets  prayers  (ver.  3)  in  an  hour  of  distress  (ver.  5).

ii.  A  self-willed  suppliant  (ver.  7)  answered  with  a  message  of  judgment  (vers.
7,  8)  and  words  of  solemn  admonition  (vers.  9,  10).

Vers.  11-15.  A  Prudent  Use  op  Opportunity  Maliciously  Thwarted.

i  A  judicious  effort.  The  prophet's  intention  was  wise  (ver.  12)  ;  the  brief
interval  was  auspicious  (ver.  11).     See  Lit.  Crit.  supra.

il  A  false  charge.  Maliciously  made  {yev.  13);  emphatically  repudiated  {wqt.
14)  ;  eagerly  believed  (ver.  14).

iii.  A  foul  injustice.  Angry  antagonists  (ver.  14);  ahusive  treatment/  un-
warrantable imprisonment.

Vers.  16-21.  Wronopul  Sufferings  Alleviated.

L  Royal  leniency.  Waited  for  patiently  (ver.  16);  exercised  more  from  ^cr-
sonal  anxiety  than  righteous  regret  (ver.  17).

il  Ti'oubled  inquiry.  Sought  secretly ^  eagerly ^  tremblingly  (ver.  17);  answered
emphatically  (ver.  17).

iii.  Righteous  expostulation.  Against  personal  wrong  (ver.  18);  against  heed-
ing delusive  teachers  (ver.  19).

iv.  Sufferings  ameliorated.     The  pathetic  pleadings  of  distress  (ver,  20) ;  the
royal  exercise  of  compcusum  (ver.  21).
580


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XXXVU.


EOMILETW  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XXXVfl.


Ver.  3.  Theme  :  A  Bad  Man  asking
A  Good  Man's  Prayers.

I.  What  led  to  this  bad  man  needing
this  good  man's  prayers  ?

1.  Neglect  of  the  warning  of  example
(ver.  2).  All  the  woes  which  came  upon
Jechoniah  and  his  people  afforded  Zede-
kiah  no  effectual  admonition  of  the
miseries  which  follow  disobedience.

2.  Imminent  perils  were  gathering
(ver.  5.)  He  sought  Jeremiah's  counsel
once  before  (chap,  xxi.),  when  the  king
of  Babylon's  army  first  approached  ;  and
now  asked  his  prayers  when  his  hopes
and  fears  struggled  within  him  as  the
Egyptians  and  Chaldeans  warred  out-
side the  city's  walls.  He  was  in  anxiety  ;
and  it  is  then  that  bad  people  come
for  the  sympathy  and  help  of  the
godly.

II.  What  mood  was  this  had  man  in
while  asking  the  good  mans  prayers ?

1.  He  cared  not  to  hear  the  Lord's
messages  and  commands  (comp.  Pharaoh,
Exod.  viii.  28,  29).

2.  He  dared  not  to  intercede  the  Lord
himself  {comp.  Exod.  x.  16,  17).

3.  And  he  craved  not  tJie  Lord  Him-
sdf  but  only  His  help.

IIL  What  facts  are  suggested  hy  had
men  asking  a  good  man^s  prayers  ?

1.  It  is  urgent  for  every  man  to  have
a  way  open  by  which  to  reach  God  in
prayer.  Even  bad  men,  prayerless  men,
will  come  to  need  this ;  and  the  moment
will  be  urgent  in  their  history :  in
trouble,  in  death.

2.  Intercessory  prayers  for  others  have
power  with  God.  Scripture  instances —
Moses,  Elijah,  <fec.  Even  evil  persons
seem  to  know  this,  and  cherish  the
thought,  and  use  the  prayers  of  others
in  their  own  extremity.  Wicked  people,
in  alarm,  will  ask  such  prayers.

3.  Prayers  in  which  God  Himself  is
rejected  from  the  soul,  and  merely  His
help  selfishly  and  sordidly  asked,  are  an
affront  to  Jehovah.  Jeremiah  would  not
carry  such  prayers  before  the  Throne.

4.  Sinners  defeat  the  prayers  of  good
men  by  their  own  wicked  lives.  They
war  against  the  pleadings  of  the  godly.

6.  Bad  men  dare  not  venture  before


God  themselves,  and  therefore  seek  the
intercession  of  the  good.  Penitents,
though  sinners,  have  sought  God,  for  in
their  penitence  they  cease  to  be  included
among  bad  persons  :  their  hearts  are  in
grief  for  their  sin.  There  is  a  Way  to
God  for  even  the  guilty,  and  the  Way  is
open  always :  it  is  through  Jestis ;  for
"if  any  man  sin  we  have  an  Advocate
with  the  Father,"  and  none  shall  seek
His  interce  sion  in  vain.

See  Addenda  :  Useless  Prayersl


Ver.  9.  Theme:  Deceptive  Hope.
'*  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Deceive  not  your-
selves^^ &c.

I.  Delusive  helps  rise  in  our  despair.

They  are  the  will-o^-wisps  on  the  swamp
decoying  the  lost  traveller  into  deeper
misery.

1.  Misery  makes  ut  ready  to  he  de-
ceived. We  hunger  then  for  any  faint
hope  of  help.  The  desert  travellers,
expiring  with  thirst,  see  the  mirage  :  it
is  an  illusion  of  their  fevered  vision.
A  shipwrecked  crew  sight  a  vessel,  but
it  is  the  creation  of  their  mad  imagina-
tion. In  the  hour  of  worldly  misfortune
we  seize  the  frailest  promise  of  relief.
Sinners  dying  in  their  sins  call  for  the
minister,  the  sacrament — grasp  at  any
help ;  will  take  man's  lying  words,
*' Peace,  peace!*'  while  they  are  still
unf or  given  hy  God,  unreconciled  through
Christ.

2.  Delusions  come  upon  all  who  turn
from  God.  These  Jews  trusted  and
sought  help  from  the  Egyptians,  and
would  not  heed  God's  messages  through
Jeremiah  that  the  Chaldean  power
should  scatter  the  forces  of  Pharaoh.
No  !  they  turned  from  God,  and  trusted
in  Egypt.

At  a  crisis  when  the  Chaldean  army
was  besieging  the  city,  the  army  of
Pharaoh  came  to  their  succour.

Yes ;  and  lying  comforters  will  appear
to  souls  who  reject  God,  The  atheist,
assuring  them  there  is  no  future,  no
judgment  to  come,  no  penalty  for  sin.
The  sacramentarian  ox  sacerdotal ist,  with
their  false  theories  of  the  efficacy  of  the

581


CHAP.  XXXVtL


BOMILETW  COMMBNTARY:  JBRmiAtJ.


Church's  sacraments,  and  tlie  priestly
functions  of  confessors  and  clergymen.
The  moralist^  who  will  urge  that,  though
religion  has  been  neglected,  the  Spirit
"  grieved,"  Christ  "  passed  by,"  yet  '*  he
can't  he  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the
right,''

God  sometimes  gives  disobedient  souls
over  to  their  delusions,  so  that  they
"  believe  a  lie. "  They  resolutely  reject
Him,  and  He  says  to  all  awakening
agencies  of  grace,  *'  He  has  turned  to
idols,  let  tliem  alone  I "

II.  Deceptive  hopes  leave  us  in
deeper  distress.  The  darkness  is  more
blinding  for  the  momentary  flash  of
light.  The  silence  is  more  ghostly  for
the  swiftly-gone  voice  of  pity.

ByPharaoh-Hophra's  approach,  Nebu-
chadnezzar's army  was  temporarily  drawn
off  from  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  but  ver.  9 ;
see  vers.  7,  8.

1.  They  bring  a  temporary  delight.
The  city  went  into  jubilation  at  the
sight  of  the  Egyptian  banners.  A  man
in  mental  wretchedness  rushes  into  ex-
hilarating company  and  indulgences ;
and  lo  !  he  laughs  the  laughter  of  fools.
Conscience  smitten  with  the  pangs  of
conviction  seeks  the  opiate  of  a  thrilling
book,  and  soul-misery  is  forgotten  in  the
enchantment  of  exciting  fiction.

Souls  consciously  needing  a  Saviour
attend  the  routine  of  Ritualism,  and  get
lulled  into  something  of  quietude ;  or
betake  themselves  to  self-righteous
efforts,  and  gather  a  new  pleasure  from
these  adopted  reformatory  habits.

2.  They  fail  to  fulfil  their  promises.
The  tower  of  Babel  did  not  lift  its
builders  up  to  heaven !  The  inflated
boastings  of  Goliath  did  not  fulfil  the
proud  hopes  of  the  Philistines.  The
army  of  Egypt  did  not  effect  the  de-
liverance of  the  city  from  Nebuchad-
nezzar's siege.

Then  follows  a  melancholy  dis-
illusionising. No  misery  can  exceed  that
of  being,  for  a  brief  respite,  raised  up
from  the  black  depths  of  despair  only
to  be  cast  down  again  into  profounder
deeps.

And  "  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite  shall
perish"  Indeed,  every  hope  which  re-
jects God  shall  mock  the  soul  with  its
582


falsity.  In  death  or  in  eternity.  The
storm  shall  beat  upon  the  house  reared
on  sand,  and  great  shall  be  its  fall.  Oh,
"  deceive  not  yourselves ;"  literally,  your
souls.  There  is  "a  Hope  sure  and
steadfast : "  Christ  is  our  Hope.

3.  They  defeat  not  the  purposes  of
God.  Deceptive  hopes  are  powerless  to
avert  facts.  It  is  as  if  attempting  to
arrest  Omnipotence  with  a  spider's  web.
God  intended  Nebuchadnezzar's  victory,
yet  the  Jews  cherished  the  hope  of
Pharaoh's  triumph.  But  God  is  ruling
human  events.  He  has  a  will  mightier
than  our  desires.  "  The  Chaldeans  shall
not  depart."

a.  Nor  will  the  horrors  of  death
"  depart "  from  the  dying  sinner.

h»  Nor  will  the  terrors  of  judgment  be
evaded  by  those  who  despise  God  and
reject  His  grace  in  Jesus.

c.  Nor  will  the  purposes  of  God  yield
to  our  schemings,  for  "  He  doeth  ac-
cording to  His  will  among  the  armies  of
heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,"
and  "none  shall  stay  His  hand."

d.  Nor  will  the  Divine  terms  of  salvor
tion  be  altered  for  man's  caprice,  or  any
other  means  of  securing  God's  mercy  be
accepted.  For  "there  is  none  other
name  under  heaven*  given  among  men
whereby  we  must  be  saved."

Therefore,  " deceive  not  yourselves**

Ver.  12.  Theme:  Seeking  Retire-
ment. "  Then  Jeremiah  went  forth  out
of  Jerusalem,  to  go  into  the  land  of
Benjamin,  to  separate  himself  thence  in
the  midst  of  the  people."  Various  in-
terpretations of  his  reason  and  purpose —

I.  His  wearied  heart  craved
quietude  amid  family  scenes.  Ben-
jamin was  his  birthplace.  He  was
tired  vnth  the  tumult  and  antagonism
of  the  city,  for  he  saw  that  he  spent
himself  in  fruitless  labours.  So,  worn
out  with  weariness,  burdened  at  heart
over  the  refractoriness  and  hardness  of
those  among  whom  he  had  laboured  so
long  and  in  vain,  he  sought  retirement
and  rest.

Perhaps,  too,  he  might  there  find  his
people  more  ready  to  heed  his  messages^
and,  by  repentance,  to  avert  the  Divine
judgments.


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OEIlT,  xzxtil


1.  Labours  abundant  justify  God's
servants  in  seeking  temporary  repose.
"  Come  ye  apart  and  rest  awhile."

2.  From  scenes  of  official  life  the
human  yearnings  turn  to  the  tenderer
associations  of  home.

II.  In  despair  of  further  usefulness
in  the  city,  he  sought  more  congenial
surroundings.  We  know  how  he  shrank
from  the  prophet's  ministry  in  Jerusalem
(see  on  chap.  xii.  5).  His  experience
there  had  been  very  adverse  and  dis-
appointing.  The  luxurious  dream  of  a
rural  ministry  allured  him.  And  now,
that  evidently  his  work  at  Jerusalem
had  failed,  he  seized  the  opportunity
for  retiring  to  Anathoth.

1 .  Service  in  forefront  scenes  becomes
very  harassing  and  exhausting.

2.  Failure  in  work  naturally  impels
the  worker  to  ask  an  altered  sphere  of
ministry,

ni.  Disasters  gathering  on  the
nation  impelled  him  to  concern  for
personal  safety.  The  siege  would  bring
ruin  and  famine.  Now  \\&s  the  favour-
able moment  to  quit  Jerusalem  and
hide  from  the  miseries  which  were  immi-
nent.

1.  Family  interests  claimed  his  at-
tention. He  was  needed  in  Benjamin
for  some  division  of  the  family  in-
heritance, which  the  siege  rendered
desirable  (see  Lit.  Grit.)

2.  In  times  of  common  trouble  we
strongly  covet  the  surroundings  of
family  affection.

Ver.  14.  Theme:  False  Charges.
"Then  said  Jeremiah,  It  is  false;  I  fall
not  away  to  the  Chaldeans."

False  charges,  false  witnesses,  false
words,  false  pretences,  have  been  so
common  in  this  deceitful  world,  that  no
marvel  David  said  in  his  haste,  "All
men  are  liars."

But  there  are  lovers  of  truth  in  the
world,  who  scorn  a  lie ;  disciples  of
Him  who  said,  "  I  am  the  Truth."

L  When  wrongly  charged  it  is
right  to  falsify  the  accusation.  To  be
silent  under  a  false  charge  is  tacitly  to
admit  its  truth.  All  such  untruths
should  be  indignantly  refuted.  In  this
we  have  warrant  not  only  from  Jere-


miah's example,  but  also  in  our  Lord
and  His  apostles.

But  while  it  is  sad  to  see  good  men
falsely  accused —

II.  It  is  sadder  to  see  men  so  depraved
as  to  he  guilty  of  knowingly  bringing
false  accusation.  Better  be  the  accused
than  the  false  accuser ;  the  slave  than
the  slave-owner.

"Dear  as  freedom  is,  and  in  my  heart's
Just  estimation,  prized  above  all  price,
I  had  much  rather  be  myself  the  slave
And  wear  the  bonds  than  fasten  them  on
him."

— COWPER.

IIL  Christianity  distinguishes  its
disciples  with  genuineness  and  truth.
Yet  none  have  had  grosser  charges
laid  against  them.  The  apostles  were
charged  with  encouraging  sin  that  grace
might  abound.  The  early  Christians
were  charged  with  fostering  sedition  and
"  turning  the  world  upside  down."  The
Protestant  martyrs  were  charged  with
^^  heresy."

IV.  Current  errors  need  to  be  con-
fronted with  the  cry,  '^  It  is  false  f*

1.  Ecclesiastical  theories  of  apostolic
succession,  of  baptismal  regeneration,
of  transubstantiation,  of  the  sinner's
annihilation,  of  universal  restoration,  of
the  Universal  Fatherhood  of  God — Soci-
nian  in  its  origin  and  tendency.  "  To
the  law  and  the  testimony,"  and  so  test
Church  politics,  creeds,  rites,  and
customs.

2.  Errors  are  being  disseminated  by
the  press  which  should  impel  us  to
"search  the  Scriptures  daily,  to  see  if
these  things  are  so."  And  wherever  we
meet  an  unscriptural  theory,  let  us
boldly  cry,  "  It  is  false  !  "

Time  will  ensure  the  triumph  of
truth.  "  The  greatest  friend  of  truth
is  Time." — Condensed  and  arranged
from  "  Walks  with  Jeremiah"  by  Rev,
D.  Pledge.

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Injusticb  to  the
JUST.  Though  prepared  to  defend  and
exculpate  himself,  he  was  not  allowed  to
explain  or  plead.
I.  Disqualified  judges  "  were  wrothj^
1.  Anger  renders  men  incapable  of
judgment.

d83


CHAP.  XXXVII.


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


2.  Prejudice  proves  fatal  to  adminis-
tration oi  justice.

3.  Hatred  gives  no  place  to  rectitude
or  humanity.

II.  Unproved  accusations.

1.  Malice  cares  not  to  wait  for  justifi-
cation.

2.  Wicked  men  allow  passion  to  hurry
them  on  to  indulge  their  vrrath.

3.  Innocence  has  no  hope  of  fair  treat-
ment from  guilty  men.

III.  Lawless  cruelty.    ^^ Smote  him."

1.  Pity  for  God's  servants  is  absent
from  the  hearts  of  those  who  hate
God.

2.  ViolencCy  regardless  of  righteous-
ness, has  often  been  the  cruel  lot  of  the
godly.

3.  Indignation  against  a  faithful  wit-
ness for  God  carries  men  to  shameful
extremes  and  criminal  brutality.  "  For
the  wicked  hateth  the  righteous  and
gnasheth  upon  him  with  his  teeth."

IV.  Foul  imprisonment.

1.  It  gratified  them  to  hinder  his
further  witnessing  against  their  iniquity.

2.  In  their  revenge  they  added  bar-
barity to  indignity.     **  The  dungeon."

3.  Weary  days  spent  in  vileness  and
darkness:  "remained  there  many  days."

This  was —

1.  A  heavy  cross  for  a  consciously
innocent  man  to  bear.

2.  Only  the  comforts  of  God's  Spirit
could  have  sustained  him  amid  this  cruel
usage.

3.  How  light  are  our  sufferings  for
Christ  compared  with  these  !

See  Addenda :  Injustice.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  A  Secret  Inquirer.
"  The  king  sent  .  .  ,  and  asked  him
secretly  in  his  hoiise,  Is  there  any  word
from  the  Lord  1 "

I  An  inquirer,  anxious  about  a
Divine  message.

1.  Fearing  lest  it  should  be  one  of
doom.

2.  Curious  to  learn,  though  unwilling
to  obey,  the  word  of  the  Lord.

3.  Wishfid  that  there  might  come  a
"  word  "  which  would  give  sanction  to
his  own  predetermined  course.

II.  An  inquirer,  solicitous  for  his
own  dignity.


1.  Ashamed  to  openly  show  himself  Q.n
inquirer.

2.  Contriving  a  secret  interview^  in
order  to  avoid  inconvenience.

3.  Devoid  alike  of  courage  and  of
self-abasement.

III.  An  inquirer,  touched  hy  a
sentiment  of  tenderness  and  mercy.
The  king —

1.  Believed  the  prophet  from  his  unjust
imprisonment.

2.  Showed  him  consideration  in  bring-
ing him  into  his  house.

3.  Doubtless  felt  some  compunction
for  the  wrong  done  to  him,  and  some
conviction  of  his  ovm  wrong  course  of
action — this  prompting  his  kindlier  con-
duct.

IV.  An  inquirer  answered  by  an
uncongenial  word  from  God.

1.  Denouncing  his  false  hopes  in
Egypt.

2.  Foretelling  his  personal  overthrow.
Why  such  a  message  sent  from  God  to

an  inquirer  ?

i.  Because,  though  an  inquirer,  he
was  determined  upon  a  disobedient  course
of  action.

ii.  Because,  though  an  inquirer,  he
was  in  no  humble  and  contrite  spirit.

iii.  Because,  though  an  inquirer,  he
was  time-serving  and  cowardly.

iv.  Because,  though  an  inquirer,  he
ought  not  to  have  been  an  inquirer  at
all;  for  he  had  already  heard  enough
from  God  through  Jeremiah,  and  ought
long  ago  to  have  ceased  asking  for  "any
word  "  additional,  and  obeyed  what  God
had  already  said  to  him.

Ver.  19.  Theme:  Delusions  Refuted.
"  Where  are  now  your  prophets  which
prophesied  unto  you,  saying,  The  king
of  Babylon  shall  not  come,"  <fec.  1

Not  only  had  false  prophets  risen,  but
both  kings  and  people  had  shown  eager-
ness to  heed  their  misleading  prophecies.
(See  on  xxviii.  14,  p.  489;  and  xxviii.
16,  p.  494.)

L  Men  covet  congenial  teachera
"  Your  prophets."

1.  A  delusive  vrish  to  hear  only  plea-
sant prophesyings.

2.  A  rash  readiness  to  hear  only  pleft*
sant  prophesyings.


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  XXXVII,


3.  A  fatal  proneness  to  believe  the
prophesyings  we  covet.

IL  Time  is  fatal  to  falsity.  "Where
now  ?  "

1.  False  words  fascinate  and  gratify
fo7'  the  moment.

2.  Gilded  hopes  charm  so  long  as  they
endure.

3.  Cherished  delusions  have  an  omi-
nously hrief  existence.

IIL  Experience  supplies  the  test  of
truth.

1.  Man  wants  safe,  rather  than  mere
pleasant,  teaching.

2.  Deceitful  words  will,  in  due  time,
meet  their  certain  refutation,

3.  The  day  of  adversity  will  shatter
all  refuges  of  lies.

IV.  God's  refutation  of  false  hopes,
«  The  king  of  Babylon,"  &c.     But—


1.  The  derided  event  is  actually  re-
alised. So  Satan's  lie,  "  In  the  day.
.  .  ye  shall  not  surely  die."

2.  God  will  see  that  truth  is  vindi-
cated against  falsity.

3.  Sinners  will  find  that  God*8  mes-
sageSy  though  reviled,  turn  out  true,

V.  Beguiled  souls  deserted  by  their
leaders.  "  Where  now  are  your  pro-
phets V

1.  They  who  ruin  others  will  wish  to
shun  their  dupes  in  the  day  of  calamity.

2.  Baffled  proph  ets  hide  from  their  own
thame  in  the  hour  of  defeat,

*.  Deceivers,  and  those  they  deceived,
must  hear  the  doom  of  their  delusions,
"  All  liars  shall  have  their  part  in  the
lake,"  <fec.,  as  these  wicked  prophets  had
to  share  the  misery  of  Jerusalem's  ruin.

See  Addenda :  Falsity.


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XXXVIII. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Valueless  Pkayers.  Scarcely  any
ministers,  and  many  a  Christian,  but
can  recall  instances  of  their  prayers
being  asked  by  persons  who  have  been
prayerless  themselves.     One  will  suffice.

I  went  to  see  a  woman  in  G .     She

was  dying,  but  without  a  gleam  of
hope.

*'  Oh,  pray  for  me ;  I  cannot,  cannot
pray  for  myself,  sir."

**  Indeed  ;  but  why  not  for  yourself  ?  "

"  My  state  is  too  hard  ;  I  have  known
all  about  religion  since  childhood,  but
have  insulted  my  conscience,  rejected
God,  resisted  the  Spirit,  neglected  Christ.
And  oh,  I  dare  not,  I  cannot  speak  to
Heaven  now  I "

All  my  pleading  failed  to  awaken  hope
in  her,  or  to  induce  her  to  an  efifort  to
pray.  It  seemed  awful.  No !  She
should  be  thankful  if  I  would  pray  for
her  ;  but  she  could  not  even  frame  in  her
thoughts  a  petition  ;  prayer  in  her  was
dead.

Although  I  did  kneel  and  earnestly
plead  for  her,  yet  when  I  asked  her  if
she  had  joined  in  any  one  of  my  direct
and  urgent  cries,  she  answered —

"  No,  I  have  no  power  to  bring  my
mind  into  any  definite  desire ;  /  have
killed  prayer  in  my  soul ;  1  can't  now
■peak  a  thought  to  God,"


"His  Cumrade  too  arose,
And  with  the  outward  forma
Of  righteousness  and  prayer  insulted  God,"

— SoiUhey.

"  We  are  told
How  much  the  prayers  of  righteous  men  avail,
And  yet  'tis  strange  how  very  few  believe
Those  blessed  words,  or  act  as  were  they  true.
One  reason  of  this  incredulity
May  be,  that  conscience  whispers  to  their  souls,
*  Not  righteous  men  are  ye.'  And  thus  they  think
That  useless  it  would  be  to  strive  in  prayer
For  other's  good,  when  scarcely  for  themselves
They  hope  for  mercy.     Lukewarm  hearts  and

faint,
Lift  up  your  feeble  hands  and  bend  the  knee;
A  Mightier  than  ye  your  guilt  hath  borne,
And  for  His  sake,  not  yours,  all  prayer  is  heard."

— Lady  Chattei'ton,

Injustice.  When  Athens  was  ruled
by  the  thirty  tyrants,  Socrates  the  philo-
sopher was  summoned  to  the  Senate
House  and  ordered,  together  with  others,
to  seize  one  Sevon,  a  man  of  rank  and
fortune,  whom  they  determined  to  de-
stroy that  they  might  possess  his  estate.
This  commission  Socrates  flatly  refused ;
and  boldly  replied,  "I  will  never  willingly
assist  in  an  unjust  act."

Cheiides  sharply  replied,  "  Dost  thou
think,  Socrates,  to  talk  always  in  this
style,  and  not  to  suffer?'*

"  Far  from  it,"  he  answered,  "I  expect

585


CHAP,  xxxvin.  EOMILETIO  OOMUENTART:  JEREMIAR.


to  sufiTer  a  thousand  ills,  but  none  so  ing  the  painting  at  a  distance,  you  would

great  as  to  do  unjustly."  think  the  friar  to  be  in  a  praying  atti-

u  A  „;c^  v«o«  «^^«^  ^^^c,  *K^  «z»«r.i^»=  ™«« .  tude,  for  his  hands  are  clasped  together,

•*  A  Wise  man  never  goes  tne  people  s  way ;  i   i    i  j  i      •  n  ^  '    ^  i  •

But  as  the  planets  still  move  contrary  and  held  horizontally  to  his  breast ;  his

To  the  world's  motion,  so  doth  he  to  opinion :  eyes  seem  meekly  closed  like  those  of

He  will  examine  if  those  accidents  the  publican  in  the  Gospel  :  before  him

^ti'hiT'"''"  ^^"^^  ""^"^  '"^""^''  ^^^^^"^  ^^^^  '^^^^  1^^^^  ^^^^  ^  ^^«^^'  ^^«^  ^^i^^

Deservedly  or  no  ?    Come  they  deservedly  f  prayerfully  he  bends  as  in  devout  medi-

They  are  no  wrongs  then,  but  punishments.  tation.     But  take  a  nearer  survey,  and

If  unf^werrccZ/y,  and  he  not  guilty  ?  the  deception  vanishes.       The  book  is

The  doer  of  them  first  should  bhish^not^he."  discovered  to  be  a  punch-bowl  3  in  the

hands  pressed  together  is  a  lemon  whose

Falsity.    "  The  essence  of  a  lie  is  the  juice  he  is  squeezing  into  the  bowl ;  and

intention  to  deceive."  the  half-closed  eyes  are  for  protection

A  very  capital  painter  in  London  ex-  fromthespurtingjuice,  and  not  for  prayer.

hibited  a  work  of  art   representing  a  Get  nearer  liars  and  their  falsity  is

friar  habited  in  his  canonicals.     View-  manifest


CHAPTER  XXXVIIL


Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — Chronological  Notes  as  on  preceding  ehapter.

Personal  Allusions.  Ver.  I.  *^  Shepkatiah,''  never  elsewhere  mentioned.  *'  Oedaliahj"
possibly  son  of  "Pashur"  the  violent  (chap,  xx.  1-3).  ** /ucai,"  called  Jehucal  (xxxvii.  3).
**  Pashur"  son  of  Malchiah,  same  as  mentioned  xxi.  1.

Ver.  6.  **  Malchiah  son  of  ffammelech  "  (see  on  xxxvi.  26).

Ver.  7.  **  Ebed-melech  the  Ethiopian."  Mutilation  to  a  Hebrew  was  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic
law  (Dent,  xxiii.  1) ;  and  Ethiopians  were  not  infrequently  selected  for  service  in  the  royal
harem  (Dan.  xi.  43).

Literary  Criticisms.  Ver.  1.  **  Words  Jeremiah  had  spoJeen:^'  was  speaJcing.  Ver.  4.
*' For  thus  he  weakeneth :*^  i.e.  since  or  because.  Ver.  6.  '* Into  the  dungeon:"  lit.  pit  or
cistern  (see  note  on  xxxvii.  16).  **  Sank  in  the  mire  : "  so  that  it  was  a  muddy  pit.  Subterranean
cisterns  under  the  houses  became  miry  pits  when  the  water  was  exhausted  from  them.    Ver.  10.

"  Thirty  men."     Ewald,  Hitzig,  Graf,  &c.,  thinking  D''^?K^    "thirty,"  too  many,  would  read

nK^PK'j  three:  but  this  overlooks  the  resistance  which  the  kfng*s  counsellors  might  perchance

offer.     Ver.  11.   *^  Old  cast  clouts  and  old  rotten  rags:"  from  SflD,  to  drag,  rend;  therefore

here,  shreds,  tatters  ;  and  next  D*n??3n    from  T^t2    to  rub  away  ;  hence  soft  or  smooth  rags.

Ver.  15.   "  Wilt  thou  not  hearken?"     The  interrogation  point  is  an  error  :  *'  Thou  unit  not"  Sec,
Ver.  22.   **  Those  women  shall  say,  Thy  friends,"  &c.    This  *'  saying  "  of  the  king's  women
is  in  the  poetic  form,  making  a  distich — a  jeering  refrain —

**  Thy  friends  have  urged  thee  on,  and  have  prevailed  with  thee  :
Thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  mire ;  they  are  turned  away  back  1 "

The  words,  **they  are  turned  away  back,"  refer  not  to  the  king's  feet,  but  to  the  friends  who,
having  lured  him  on,  desert  him  in  his  difl&culties.

Ver.  28.  "  He  was  there  when  Jerusalem  was  taken ;"  a  confused  sentence.  Omit  the  italic
word  "there*'  from  the  verse  ;  and  read,  **  And  it  was  when  Jerusalem  was  taken ;"  i.e.  "It
eame  to  pass  when  Jerusalem  was  taken  " — then  continue  next  chapter  ;  for  these  words  should
stand  at  the  head  of  chap,  xxxix.

TOPICS  OP  CHAPTER  XXXVIIL

Jeremiah's  slanderous  enemies  (vers.  1-4).
God*8  prophet,  a  prisoner  (ver.  6).
A  gracious  and  courageous  Ethiopian  (vers.  7-13).
Jeremiah's  experiences  typical  of  Christ's  (vers.  1-13).
Obedience  (ver.  20).

Sinners  the  cause  of  their  own  sufiferings  (vers,  17,  18).
Timidity  (ver.  19).
Equivocation  (ver.  27).
586


HOMILETIO  aOMMENTART:  JEREMIAH,  ohap.  xxxvni.


Topic :  Jeremiah's  Slanderous  Enemies.    (Vers.  1-4.)

Jeremiah  was  no  arch-traitor,  as  these  *'  princes  "  would  imply,  but  the  truest
patriot  in  all  the  land.  This  he  proved  by  his  courage  and  faithfulness,  in  repeating
counsel  which  cost  him  so  much  malignity  and  persecution.

Certainly  his  opponents  regarded  him  as  the  most  dangerous  man  among  the
people,  because  he  thwarted  their  counsels  and  designs  ;  just  as  Ahab  accused  Elijah
of  troubling  Israel  (1  Kings  xviii.  18)  ;  Azariah,  Amos  (Amos  vii.  10);  and  the  Jews,
Paul  (Acts  xvi.  20).

I.  Calumny  and  slander  assail  even  the  best  of  men.  "The  worthiest
people  are  frequently  attacked  by  slander,  as  we  usually  find  it  to  be  the  best  fruit
which  birds  peck  at." — Bacon,

"  The  world  with  calumny  abounds,
The  whitest  virtue  slander  wounds ;
There  are  whose  joy  is,  night  and  day,
To  take  a  character  away.
Eager  from  rout  to  rout  they  haste
To  blast  the  generous  and  the  chaste ;
And,  hunting  reputation  down,
Proclaim  their  triumph  through  the  town." — Popi,

**  Soft  buzzing  slander  :  silky  moths,  that  eat
An  honest  name." — Thomson,

**  The  tongue  of  the  slanderer  is  a  devouring  fire,  which  tarnishes  whatever  it
touches;  which  exercises  its  fury  on  the  good  grain,  equally  as  on  the  chaff;  on  the
sacred  as  on  the  profane ;  which,  wherever  it  pleases,  leaves  only  desolation  and
ruin ;  turns  into  vile  ashes  what  only  a  moment  before  had  appeared  to  us  so
precious  and  brilliant ;  acts  with  more  violence  than  ever  in  the  time  when  it  was
apparently  almost  smothered  up  and  extinct ;  which  blackens  when  it  cannot  con-
sume, and  sometimes  sparkles  and  delights  before  it  destroys." — Massillon,

"  Virtue  itself  'scapes  not  calumnious  strokes." — ShakespecMre,

IL  Calumny  and  slander  base  their  attacks  upon  misrendered  truths.

Jeremiah's  words  were  quoted  as  if  proving  him  unpatriotic;  whereas  his  full  words
are  earnest  with  love  and  solicitude  for  his  people  (comp.  xxi.  8,  9).

"  You  cannot  always  take  up  a  slander  and  detect  the  falsehood  there ;  you
cannot  evaporate  the  truth  in  the  slow  process  of  the  crucible,  and  then  show  the
residuum  of  falsehood  glittering  and  visible ;  you  cannot  fasten  upon  any  word  or
sentence  and  say  that  it  is  calumny ;  for  in  order  to  constitute  slander  it  is  not
necessary  that  the  word  spoken  should  be  false — half  truths  are  often  more  calum-
nious than  whole  falsehoods." — F.  W.  Robertson,

An  old  writer  has  said  that  we  have  two  eyes  and  two  ears,  but  only  one
tongue,  that  we  may  see  and  Lear  twice  as  much  as  we  say ;  but  unhappily  men
generally  act  the  reverse  ;  for,  alas  I  they  say  far  more  than  they  see  or  hear.

"  Mingling  truth  with  falsehood,  sneers  with  smiles,
A  thread  of  candour  with  a  web  of  wiles. " — Byron,

in.  Calumny  and  slander  inflict  the  most  piteous  wrongs  (see  ver.  6).
Against  slander  there  is  no  defence.  It  stabs  with  a  smile.  It  is  the  poisoned
arrow  whose  wound  is  incurable.

"  Good  name,  in  man  and  woman,
Is  the  immediate  jewel  of  their  souls.
Who  steals  my  purse,  steals  trash  ;  'tis  something,  nothing;
*Twas  mine,  'tis  his,  and  has  been  slave  to  thousands  |
But  he  that  filches  from  me  my  good  name,
Bobs  me  of  that,  which  not  enriches  him.
And  makes  me  poor  indeed," — Shakespeare,

687


CHIP,  xxxvin.  nOMILETlC  OOMMBNTAMT:  JEREMUB.


Note--'


**  Slander  meets  no  regard  from  noble  minds ;
Only  the  base  believe  what  the  base  only  utter.** — Bellew,


Topic  :  GoD*8  Prophet  a  Prisoner.  **  Then  took  they  Jeremiah,  and  cast  him
into  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah  the  son  of  Hammelech,  that  was  in  the  court  of
the  prison  :  and  they  let  down  Jeremiah  with  cords.  And  in  the  dungeon
there  was  no  water,  but  mire  :  so  Jeremiah  sunk  in  the  mire  "  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6).

A  prophet  in  prison !  An  ambassador  of  the  Most  High  God  in  bonds  !  Let
us  trace  the  history  of  this  great  crime  against  the  Majesty  of  Heaven.

Jeremiah's  prison  experiences  began  twenty  years  before  the  taking  of  Jerusalem
by  the  king  of  Babylon.  "  Pashur,  who  was  governor  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,
heard  that  Jeremiah  prophesied  these  things.  Then  Pashur  smote  Jeremiad  the
prophet,  and  put  him  in  the  stocks/'  &c.  (xx.  Z).  And  what  things  had  Jeremiah
prophesied  1  Only  those  which  the  Lord  commanded  him,  saying,  "  Diminish  not
a  word."  He  had  denounced  the  innumerable  abominations  which  prevailed  in
the  land,  the  oppressions  which  one  class  practised  upon  another,  and  the  gross
idolatries,  with  all  their  attendant  cruelties  and  sensualities ;  had  foretold  the
Divine  judgments  that  were  hastening  to  overwhelm  the  nation,  and  from  which
there  was  now  no  escape.

When  Nineveh  was  threatened  with  destruction  by  the  stranger  prophet,  it
repented  and  humbled  itself  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  But  Jerusalem  hardened
itself  against  the  Divine  voice,  and  the  chief  governor  of  its  Temple  seized  the
prophet  who  had  dared  to  foretell  its  doom,  and  ^^  smote  himJ^

L  It  was  the  governor  of  the  Lord's  house  that  did  this  great  wrong.
1.  It  was  the  chief  priests  of  the  Lord's  house  that  led  the  conspiracy  against
the  Master  of  prophets  and  apostles  six  hundred  years  later ^  and  one  of  their  officers
rudely  struck  the  Divine  captive  with  the  palm  of  his  hand.  Jesus  repelled  the
wrong  with  calm  dignity,  saying,  "  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil ;
but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  Me  1 "  But  Jeiemiah  did  not  bear  his  trial  with  the
calmness  and  meekness  which  adorned  the  Master;  for  he  addressed  severe  words
to  his  persecutor  :  *'  Thou  Pashur  .  .  .  shall  go  into  captivity,"  <fec.  (xx.  6).  But
having  delivered  his  message,  he  breaks  out  into  complaints  which  have  no  parallel
in  the  history  of  the  good  men  of  the  Bible,  except  of  Job  in  the  hour  of  bitter
despair.  "Cursed  be  the  day  in  which  I  was  born,"  <fec.  (xx.  14-18).  All  this
after  his  deliverance,  and  after  saying,  "Sing  unto  the  Lord,  praise  ye  the  Lord;
for  He  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  the  poor  from  the  hand  of  eVil-doers."

Many  a  servant  of  God  has  put  the  ancient  prophet  to  shame.  "  I  found  the
comforts  of  my  God  in  the  Fleet  prison  exceedingly,  it  being  the  first  time  of  my
being  a  prisoner,"  wrote  a  persecuted  Englishman  two  centuries  ago.  Nor  did  the
strength  of  this  good  man  depart  from  him  when  he  stood  in  the  pillory  and  had
his  ears  cut  off  by  the  hangman.  "  All  the  while  I  stood  in  the  pillory  I  thought
myself  to  be  in  heaven,  and  in  a  state  of  glory  and  triumph,  if  any  such  state  can
be  on  earth.  I  found  these  words  of  Peter  verified  on  me  in  the  pillory  :  '  If  ye
be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye ;  for  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of
God  resteth  upon  you,  which  on  their  part  is  blasphemed,  but  on  yours  glorified.'  '*
Henry  Burton  is  more  of  a  prophet  in  the  pillory  than  Jeremiah,  and  one  wonders
at  the  Hebrew  saint  that  he  should  sink  into  such  a  slough  of  despond.

We  must  find  the  secret  of  it  very  much  in  his  natural  temperament.  His  was
a  task  which  required  the  firmness  of  a  rock  and  the  boldness  of  a  lion — characters
which  were  certainly  not  constitutional  with  Jeremiah.  But  the  Lord  knew  his
frame,  and  did  not  err  in  choosing  him  for  His  instrument  :  "  I  am  with  thee  to
deliver  thee,'*  was  His  promise.  And  the  vicissitudes  of  the  prophet's  spirit  are
to  us  a  precious  legacy  of  instruction  and  comfort,
588


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxviii.


On  his  release  his  warfare  against  the  sins  of  the  nation  was  continued  as  here-
tofore (xx.  11,  12).  In  prolonged  strains  of  Divine  severity,  mingled  with  pro-
mises of  a  return  from  Babylon,  whither  they  were  doomed  to  be  carried  into  exile,
and  with  promises  of  still  greater  blessing  at  a  more  distant  period,  under  the
reign  of  the  Messiah,  Jeremiah  continued  his  expostulations  with  a  degenerate
people,  but  amid  intense  su£fering  to  his  own  tender  spirit — **  Mine  heart  within
me  is  broken  ;  all  my  bones  shake,"  &c.  (xxxiii.  9).

2.  Later  on  we  find  the  spiritual  and  the  secular  powers  playing  the  parts  which
they  have  often  played  in  other  ages  and  countries,  the  one  persecuting  the  prophet,
the  other  protecting  him  ;  the  spiritual  demanding  his  death,  the  secular,  with  more
regard  to  justice,  covering  him  with  the  shield  of  his  protection.  The  priests  and
prophets,  and  all  the  people,  took  him  and  said,  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die."  .  ,  .
Then  said  the  princes  and  all  the  people  unto  the  priests  and  prophets,  *'  This  man
is  not  worthy  to  die ;  for  he  hath  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (xxvi
7-16).

The  secular  ruler  Pilate  was  more  righteous  than  the  spiritual  rulers  Annas  and
Caiaphas.  "  Behold  I  bring  Him  forth  unto  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  I  find
no  fault  in  Him."  But  in  this  case  the  people  took  part  with  unrighteous  priests,
and  demanded  that  the  innocent  One  should  be  crucified.  In  the  case  of  Jeremiah,
the  people  at  first  joined  his  persecutors  in  demanding  that  he  should  die.  But
the  appeal  to  their  reason  and  conscience  won  them  to  the  side  of  justice,  and  they
joined  the  princes  in  saving  the  Lord's  servant  out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemies.

The  king  of  Babylon's  army  besieged  Jerusalem  about  fifteen  years  after  the
first  imprisonment  of  Jeremiah,  and  the  prophet  Avas  instructed  to  say,  "  Though
ye  fight  with  the  Chaldeans  ye  shall  not  prosper  "  (xxxii.  6).  The  king  was  now
the  persecutor  :  "  Wherefore  dost  thou  prophesy,"  said  Zedekiah,  *'  and  say,  Thus
saith  the  Lord,  Behold  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Babylon  1"
(xxxii.  2).  It  was  the  old  story.  "  Art  thou  he  that  troubleth  Israel  ?  "  said  the
wicked  Ahab  to  the  prophet  Elijah.  "  I  trouble  not  Israel,"  was  the  memorable
reply  ;  "  but  thou,  and  thy  father's  house,  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  Lord,
and  thou  hast  followed  Baalim."  Not  the  prophet,  but  the  king,  and  such  as  the
king,  was  the  cause  of  the  dark  cloud  which  now  hung  over  the  favoured  city.

II.  The  prison  walls  within  which  Jeremiah  was  shut  up  could  not  exclude
the  presence  and  the  voice  of  the  Lord.

In  his  solitude  he  received  assurances  not  only  of  the  inevitable  catastrophe
which  should  overwhelm  the  land,  but  of  a  certain  recovery  and  restoration  (xxxii.
26,  42),  a  message  which  Jeremiah  found  means  of  addressing  to  the  king  and  to
the  people.  How  and  when  he  was  released  does  not  appear,  but  we  find  him  soon
again  sent  back  to  his  place  of  confinement.  The  Chaldeans  retire  from  the  siege
of  the  city  for  a  time  for  fear  of  the  Egyptian  army,  and  Jeremiah  tries  to  slip
away  into  the  land  of  Benjamin.  He  is  caught  in  the  gate  in  the  act  of  departure,
and  charged  with  falling  away  to  the  Chaldeans.  In  vain  he  denies  the  charge  ;  he
must  return  to  prison,  and  there  he  remains  many  days  (xxxvii.  16).

The  king,  whose  secret  conscience  assures  him  not  only  of  Jeremiah's  innocence,
but  of  the  gravity  of  the  message  with  which  he  is  charged  of  God,  sends  for  him
and  asks  in  private,  "  Is  there  any  word  from  the  Lord  1 "  The  prophet  answers
promptly,  *'  There  is ;  for  thou  shalt  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of
Babylon."

Royal  menace  and  royal  clemency  are  alike  impotent  to  sway  the  prophet  from
the  faithful  discharge  of  his  duty.  But  fain  would  he  be  saved  from  returning
to  his  prison-house.  And  one's  heart  is  moved  by  the  earnestness  with  which  he
remonstrated  with  the  king  (xxxvii.  20).  The  king  was  so  far  moved  that  he
ordered  that  Jeremiah  shoidd  be  committed  not  to  the  dungeon  in  Jonathan's
house,  but  to  the  court  of  the  prison,  and  that  a  piece  of  bread  should  be  supplied
to  him  daily.     Thus  Jeremiah  remained  in  the  court  of  the  prison  (xxxvii.  21),

089


OHAP.  xxxvm.  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JBREMIAE,


But  the  hostility  of  his  enemies  was  not  satisfied.  The  princes  appealed  to
the  king  (xxxviii.  4).  The  sovereign  of  Judah  was  weak  as  well  as  wicked,  and
rehearsed  the  part  of  Herod,  in  relation  to  John  the  Baptist,  centuries  before
Herod's  time.  "  Behold  he  is  in  your  hand  ;  for  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do
anything  against  you."  Tlien  they  took  him,  and  not  having  courage  to  murder
him  outright,  they  put  him  into  a  dungeon  where  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should
live  long  (xxxviii.  6).  But  his  faith  did  not  fail  him.  Reciting  his  experiences
afterwards,  he  said,  *'  I  called  upon  the  Lord  out  of  the  low  dungeon.  Thou
drewest  near  in  the  day  that  I  called  upon  Thee  :  Thou  saidst,  Fear  not "  (Lam.  iii.
56-67.)  This  blessed  **  Fear  not " — how  often  has  the  Voice  from  the  excellent
glory  said  to  the  hearts  of  sufferers  and  mourners,  "  Fear  not "  !  **  Fear  not,  for  I
am  with  thee  j  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God  ;  I  will  help  thee."

The  heart  of  an  Ethiopian  is  moved  by  the  pitiful  condition  in  which  wicked
men  have  left  the  prophet,  and  he  goes  into  the  king's  presence  and  represents  the
wrong  that  has  been  done  and  the  danger  in  which  the  prophet  is.  The  king  grants
the  Ethiopian's  request,  and  says,  "  Take  from  hence  thirty  men  with  thee,  and
take  up  Jeremiah  the  prophet  out  of  the  dungeon  before  he  die"  (xxxviii.  10).
What  a  place  that  dungeon  must  have  been  !  A  deep  pit,  used  as  a  cistern,  per-
haps, during  part  of  the  year,  but  now  dry,  and  with  a  quantity  of  mud  at  the
bottom,  into  which  the  prophet  was  so  sunk  that  it  required  not  only  the  strength
but  the  skill  of  the  thirty  men  to  drag  him  up  !

Jeremiah,  thus  rescued  from  a  cruel  death,  was  not  set  at  liberty,  but  remained
in  the  court  of  the  prison  until  the  city  was  taken  by  the  army  of  Babylon.

ni  The  Lord's  blessing  was  on  the  head  of  Ms  deliverer,  Ebed-melech,
the  Ethiopian.

1.  While  Jeremiah  was  yet  in  prison  there  came  a  message  from  heaven  to  him^
saying,  "  Go  and  speak  to  Ebed-melech  the  Ethiopian,  and  say  unto  him  "  (xxxix.
15-18).

The  Ethiopian's  skin  was  not  changed  in  the  land  of  his  bondage,  but  his  heart
was.  He  found  light  shining  in  this  deep  night  of  Judaism,  and  was  guided  by
it  to  the  everlasting  and  ever-loving  God.  And  while  the  children  of  the  kingdom
cast  themselves  out,  this  child  of  darkness  and  of  the  desert  was  brought  in  to
share  the  inheritance  of  the  faithful.     He  "  trusted  "  in  the  Lord.

2.  The  message  of  God  to  the  Ethiopian  rebukes  the  vain  philosophy  of  man^
and  ij  fraught  with  comfort  to  the  obscure  and  despised  of  mankind.  God  is  too
great  to  concern  Himself  with  the  affairs  of  individuals !  He  may  hold'  in  His
right  hand  the  mighty  suns  of  the  great  universe  He  has  made,  but  what  to  Him
are  the  twinkling  lights  of  cottage  homes  1  He  may  rule  kings  and  princes,  but
what  to  Him  are  slaves  and  beggars  1  The  philosophy  which  is  capable  of  being
popularised  into  such  questions  as  these  must  be  vain.  Mungo  Park,  faint  and
perishing,  observes  a  single  tuft  of  grass  in  the  waste  African  desert,  when  he
thought  there  was  nothing  left  for  him  but  to  die,  and  his  heart  argued  with  the
rapidity  of  lightning,  that  the  Creator  of  that  tuft  of  grass  could  not  be  unobser-
vant of  him,  His  child ;  and  strengthened  by  the  thought  he  persevered  and  was
saved.  And  now  Jehovah  singled  out  an  Ethiopian  in  the  court  of  Zedekiah,  and
sent  to  him  a  message  of  His  divine  and  fatherly  love.  To  God  the  small  and  the
great  are  alike  (Isa.  xl.  26,  29).  If  He  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars,  and  calleth
them  by  their  names.  He  likewise  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  Israel ;  He
healeth  the  broken  in  heart  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds  (Ps.  cxlvii.  3,  4).

rV.  Jeremiah's  after  ministry.

Jeremiah  was  still  in  prison  when  the  armies  of  Babylon  took  Jerusalem.  He
was  found  in  chains  and  carried  with  other  captives  on  the  way  to  Babylon,  but
was  released  at  Ramah,  six  miles  from  Jerusalem.  Thus  ended  the  prison  life  of
Jeremiah,  but  not  his  ministry.

1.  How  long  the  prophet  was  in  prison  it  is  difficult  to  determine — probably
590


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTART:  JEREMIAH.  chap,  xxxvm.


for  years.  His  first  imprisonment  so  stunned  him  as  for  the  moment  to  overthrow
fuith  and  patience.  But  his  later  experience  was  more  worthy  of  the  man  of  God  ;
and  his  grief  was  far  less  for  himself  than  for  the  people  whose  day  of  grace  was
coming  to  an  end.  The  words  (viii.  21  to  ix.  1)  may  have  been  written  in  prison;
if  not,  they  were  recalled  there  and  oft  recited  by  the  bleeding  heart  of  the  sorrow-
ing prophet.  The  matter  of  the  Lamentations  which  he  wrote  after  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem  must  have  been  his  frequent  meditation  in  the  house  of  his
prison.

2.  He  was  permitted  even  in  his  prison  to  exercise  his  ministry.  The  word  of
the  Lord  was  not  bound.  It  came  to  him  and  went  from  him.  Prison  bars  and
fetters  could  not  separate  him  from  his  God,  and  happily  it  did  not  separate  him
even  from  his  people.  Their  conscience  and  their  fears  together  made  them  listen
to  the  words  which  were  given  to  him  from  God  to  speak  to  them.

It  may  be  likewise  that  his  imprisonment  was  cheered,  for  some  time  at  least,
by  the  companionship  of  his  faithful  friend  and  amanuensis,  Baruch.  Tradition
says  that  Baruch  was  his  fellow-prisoner  when  the  prison  door  was  opened  by  the
victorious  arms  of  Babylon.  The  apostle  Paul  was  comforted  in  his  prison  by  the
coming  of  Titus.  Baruch  must  have  been  as  an  angel  of  God  to  Jeremiah  in  his
solitude.  Often  would  they  commune  together  of  the  hour  drawing  nearer  every
day,  when  sword  and  famine  and  pestilence  should  fill  the  streets  and  homes  of
Jerusalem  with  horrors  unutterable,  and  the  thought  of  it  was  more  than  these
prisoners  could  bear.  But  their  darkness  was  not  unmingled.  There  was  light
beyond.

"Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,"  <fec.  (xxiii.  5-8,  and  xxxiii.  14,  15).

The  prophet  and  his  fellow-prisoner  could  not  understand  these  promises  so
clearly  and  fully  as  we  do  now.  But  they  saw  enough  in  them  to  lighten  their
burden  and  cheer  their  spirits.  Through  present  gloom  the  eye  of  faith  penetrated
into  a  glorious  future.

3.  Jeremiah  must  likewise  have  written  some  portion  of  his  prophecies  within
prison  walls.  The  thirty-second,  thirty-third,  and  thirty-fourth  chapters  were
doubtless  written  there,  perhaps  much  besides — perhaps  by  the  hand  of  the  skilful
and  faithful  penman,  Baruch,

Again  are  we  reminded  of  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Four,  at  least,  of
the  epistles  which  bear  his  name  were  written  in  his  Boman  prison.  And  many
books,  which  the  world  would  not  willingly  let  die,  have  been  written  in  like
circumstances.

Who  that  has  read  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  can  forget  its  opening  sentence  1 —
"  As  I  walked  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  I  lighted  on  a  certain  place
where  was  a  den,  and  laid  me  down  in  that  place  to  sleep ;  and  as  I  slept  I  dreamed
a  dream."  The  den  wherein  John  Bunyan  dreamed  his  immortal  dream  was  Bedford
Jail,  which  was  the  good  man's  home  for  twelve  years.  With  his  Bible  and  Foxe's
"  Book  of  Martyrs  "  as  his  constant  companions,  he  wrote  his  allegory,  not  witting
nor  dreaming  of  its  wonderful  history  in  ages  after  his  death.  As  the  composition
advanced  he  read  it,  part  by  part,  to  his  fellow-prisoners,  to  their  no  small  amuse-
ment as  well  as  instruction.  But  so  doubtful  was  he  of  the  value  of  his  prison-
work,  and  so  various  were  the  counsels  which  he  received  on  the  subject  of  its
publication,  that  he  did  not  put  it  into  the  printer's  hands  for  some  years  after  his
liberation.  To-day  it  is  read  in  more  languages  of  the  earth,  probably,  than  any
other  book,  except  the  Word  of  God.

Jeremiah  is  the  first  prison  author  that  we  know  of.  The  last  has  not  yet
written.  For  the  conflict  foretold  w  hen  sin  entered  the  world  is  not  yet  ended :
"I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  (the  serpent)  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy
seed  and  her  seed."  And  so  long  as  this  enmity  lasts,  and  the  conflict  between
good  and  evil  is  waged  on  earth,  we  shall  find  battles  fought  and  prisons  built  and
stakes  erected.

691


OHAP.  xxxtiit.  HOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY :  JEBEMtAB.


Be  it  80.  The  words  of  Christ  cannot  be  broken,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  are
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Let  them
call  upon  their  God  out  of  their  low  dungeon,  as  did  the  Jewish  prophet,  and  the
Divine  voice  which  cheered  his  prison  will  cheer  theirs.  "Fear  not."  It  is
enough.  It  is  enough.  God  says  it.  Martyrs,  rejoice  ! — your  God  is  with  you.
If  your  night  be  long,  He  will  not  forsake  you.  If  it  end  in  the  flames  of
a  cruel  death,  these  flames  will  be  as  Elijah's  chariot  to  carry  you  from  earth  to
heaven. — Kev,  John  Kennedy ^  D,D,f  London:  From  ^^ Christian  World  Ptdpit/*
1872.

Topic:  A  Gkaoious  and  Couraqeous  Ethiopian.    (Vers.  7-13.)

All  the  king's  counsellors  were  hostile  to  God*s  prophet ;  "  his  foes  were  they
of  his  own  household."  Ebed-melech  the  Ethiopian  was  a  stranger,  an  alien ;  yet
he  befriended  this  servant  of  Jehovah.  So  with  the  misused  Jewish  traveller :
the  Levite  and  priest  passed  him  by  in  his  wounded  and  perishing  state,  but  the
Samaritan  pitied  and  helped  him.     Consider —

I.  The  graciousness  of  his  spirit.     He  was —

1.  Deeply  affected  by  the  miseries  of  God^s  servant  (ver.  7).  To  hear  of  what
was  done  troubled  him.  He  had  *'a  heart  at  leisure  for  itself  to  soothe  and
sympathise."

2.  Impelled  by  pity  to  attempt  his  help  (ver.  8).  Not  passive  sympathy  only ;
lie  set  himself  to  aid  his  deliverance.     "  A  little  help  is  worth  a  deal  of  pity."

3.  Saw  the  wickedness  of  the  cruelty  shown  to  Jeremiah  (ver,  9).  The  inhumanity
was  shocking  to  his  kind  nature ;  but  the  sin  of  it  was  equally  evident,  for  abuse
of  God's  messenger  was  defiance  of  God !

4.  Dealt  very  tenderly  with  him  in  rescuing  him  (ver.  12).  His  gentleness  is
touching.  He  realised  how  sick  and  weak  the  prophet  must  be  through  the  horrors
of  his  imprisonment,  and  from  being  deprived  of  food.  A  tender  heart  makes  the
hand  gentle.

XL  The  courage  of  his  conduct.

1.  He  was  alone  in  this  act  of  pity.  Others  may  have  felt  pity,  but  feared
to  show  it ;  he  had  the  courage  to  avow  his  commiseration  and  sympathy  with
Jeremiah.

2.  By  his  practical  sympathy  he  openly  condemned  the  cruelty  and  guiltiness  of
the  Hng^3  courtiei'S.     Tims  braving  their  malevolence.

3.  Fearless  of  all  consequences^  he  even  presses  his  appeal  upon  the  king.  Even
as  Esther :  "  So  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king ;  and  if  I  perish,  I  perish."

4.  He  bravely  denounces  the  king^s  own  counsellors.  Thus  carrying  judgment
against  "  those  men "  (mark  its  vehement  scorn)  into  the  king's  presence ;  and
thereby  implying  that  the  king  was  himself  wrong  in  having  such  men  about  him,
and  in  conniving  at  their  conduct.

5.  He  honoured  Jeremiah  as  being  the  prophet  of  Jehovah.  Others  ridiculed
Jeremiah,  refused  to  own  him  God's  messenger  ]  but  Ebed-melech  calls  him  *'  the
prophet"  (ver.  9),  and  then  insinuates  the  impiety  of  all,  king  and  people,  for
disregarding  his  messages.

III.  The  success  of  his  intervention  (ver.  10).  This  is  remarkable ;  for  the
king  had  only  just  before  owned  himself  afraid  to  act  against  his  "princes,"  and
helpless  to  check  them  (ver.  5).     How  explain  the  king's  compliance  ?

1.  The  right  conduct  of  one  man  will  start  right  convictions  in  another.  Zedekiah
eould  not  look  at  this  brave  Ethiopian,  so  courageously  and  fearlessly  and  touchingly
pleading  for  the  prophet,  without  feeling  condemned  for  his  own  supineness  and
cowardice ;  and  impelled  to  better  purposes.  Even  a  lowly  man,  acting  in  fear  of
God,  may  awaken  the  conscience  and  move  the  heart  of  a  kinff  /  This  encourages
the  humblest  to  a  fearless  piety  :  it  must  work  good  results.
592


B^MfiLBTlO  OOMMENTART:  JEREMITH.  chap,  xxxviii.

2.  Courageous  conduct  should  he  regulated  bp prudence.  Armed  with  "thirty
men,"  he  arranged  for  Jeremiah's  rescue.  The  king  saw  he  would  need  such  a  band
of  helpers.  But  he  knew  himself  that  if  Jeremiah  was  to  be  drawn  up  alive,  the  work
must  be  done  tenderly;  so  he  provided  himself  with  *'old  cast  clouts,"  which  would
be  needed  to  prevent  injury  to  the  prophet,  for  the  force  needed  to  draw  him  up
out  of  the  mire  would  be  great.

3.  Befriending  care  followed  his  act  of  rescue  (ver.  13).  For  only  there  would
the  prophet  be  safe  from  the  fury  of  the  princes;  and,  providentially,  lie  was  there
within  reach  of  the  Tcing^  to  give  him  counsel  (ver.  14).

Here,  then,  is —

i  Encouragement  to  good  men  to  appear  in  a  good  cause  and  act  vigorously  for
God,  notwithstanding  they  are  alone  and  menaced  by  dangers  and  difficulties.

ii.  Noble  deeds  done  by  despised  Ethiopians  find  record  in  God's  book,  to  assure
us  that  He  honours  whosoever  fears  Him.  So  it  is  recorded  of  Joseph  of  Arimathea,
that  he  went  in  boldly  to  Pilate  to  beg  the  body  of  Jesus.

iiL  Though  the  Ethiopian  cannot  "change  his  skin,"  his  heart  can  be  changed.
This  man  showed  himself  to  be  a  true  child  of  God.  Such  an  instance  as  that  of
the  Candacian  eunuch  predicts  the  future  when  "  Ethiopia  shall  lift  up  her  hands
unto  God."

See  homily  on  chap,  xxxix.  15-18  :  "A  Lonely  Hebo  op  Faith.**

Topic:    Jeeemiah's  Experiences  Typical  op  Chbist's.

i.  Charged  mth  political  treachery.  Jeremiah  (vers.  1-4);  Jesus  (Luke
xxiii.  1-5).

ii.  Abandoned  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  nation  to  his  malignant  foes.
Jeremiah  by  the  king  (ver.  5) ;  Jesus  by  Pilate  (Luke  xxiii.  24).

iii.  The  awful  profounds  of  his  sufferings  suggestive  of  Chrisfs.  Jeremiah
(ver.  6,  "pit,"  &c.) ;  Christ's  (Ps.  Ixix.  2,  15).  Jeremiah  ^^sank  in  the  mire,**  up
to  the  neck,  says  Josephus,  and  so,  "  I  si7ik  in  the  mire  "  (Ps.  Ixix.  2).

iv.  Though  rejected  and  maltreated  by  his  own  nation,  yet  cherished  by  a
Gentile  alien.  So  Christ  was  believed  in  by  Gentiles  while  Israel  despised  Him,
and  Ethiopians  were  among  the  earliest  converts  (Acts  ii.  10,  41  ;  viii.  27—39).

V.  In  Jeremiah's  being  raised  up  alive  from  the  pity  we  have  Chrisfs  resurrection
from  the  dead  prefigured  and  portrayed.

vi.  l%e  Ethiopian's  plea  to  rescue  Jeremiah  reminds  us  of  a  like  act  by  Joseph  of
Arimathea  (see  vers,  8,  9,  and  comp.  Luke  xxiii.  52).

Note. — It  is  remarked  by  Ambrose,  "Jeremiah  was  cast  into  the  pit ;  and  no  one
was  found  among  the  Jews  to  draw  him  out  of  the  deep  dungeon.  But  Ebed-
melech,  the  Ethiopian  convert,  he  did  it.  Here  is  a  beautiful  figure.  The  Pro-
phetic Word  was  cast  by  the  Jews  into  the  mire ;  but  we  of  the  Gentiles,  who  were
formerly  darkened,  like  Ethiopians,  with  stains  of  sin  (comp.  Jer.  xiii.  23),  and
were  unfruitful,  have  raised  up  that  Word  out  of  the  mire.  As  it  is  said  by  the
psalmist,  *  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God'  (Ps.  Ixviii.  31)."

Topic  :  Obedience.     "  Ohey^  I  beseech  thee^  the  voice  of  the  Lordj  when.  I  speak  unto
thee  :  so  it  shall  be  well  with  thee^  and  thy  soul  shall  live  "  (ver.  20).

L  Safety  lies  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  Will.  There  is  scarcely  a  loss
sustained  by  an  intelligent  creature,  but  may  be  traced  to  disobedience  to  the
Divine  Will.  Angels'  loss  of  heaven.  Adam's  loss  of  Eden.  Israelites  who  lost
their  lives  in  the  wilderness  from  Egypt  to  Canaan.  Jews*  loss  of  their  country  in
captivity.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  who  lost  life.  The  captain  who  lost  his  ship  through
not  heeding  Paul.  Equally  it  is  through  disobeying  the  Divine  Will  that  health  ia
lost,  reputation  is  lost,  the  soul  is  lost.

2p  593


CHAP,  ixxvin.  MOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


IL  Causes  actuating  to  disobedience  of  the  Divine  Will.

1.  Tlie  first  cause  of  the  first  act  of  disobedience  is  an  insoluble  mystery.  God
alone  understands  the  origin  of  sin.  It  is  a  mystery  unfathomable  that  holy  and
intelligent  creatures,  as  **  the  angels  that  sinned,"  should,  without  being  tempted^
fall  into  temptation.

2.  The  second  act  of  disobedience,  that  of  our  first  parents,  is  less  mysterious  :
the  tempter,  by  lies  and  insinuations,  allured  them  to  disobedience.  Fallen  angels
had  no  tempter ;  fallen  men  had.

3.  Since  the  fall  of  angels  and  of  our  first  parents  two  causes  have  operated
leading  to  universal  disobedience — Satanic  agency  and  maits  depravity.  Hence  the
mystery  of  sin  lessens  as  we  discover  the  causes  leading  thereto.  Yet  these  causes
do  not  justify  acts  of  disobedience.

in.  Love  is  the  one  moving,  prompting  cause  of  all  obedience.

Love  prompts  the  angels  to  fulfil  the  Divine  behests  :  "  They  do  His  command-
ments, hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word."

Love  prompts  'Hhe  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect ;"  they  are  "  ministers  of
His,  to  do  His  pleasure."

Love  prompted  the  Apostles  to  obey  the  Divine  commission,  "  Go  ye  into  all
the  world;"  "The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."

Love  prompted  the  martyrs  to  be  "  faithful  unto  death."

Of  all  forces  there  is  none  so  great  as  the  power  of  love.  Law,  with  all  its
|)enalties ;  judgments^  with  all  their  terror  ;  morality,  with  all  its  advantages  ;  are
feeble  impulses  to  obedience  compared  with  love.    '*  Love  is  strong  as  death."

IV.  Consider  the  pleasures  of  obedience  to  the  Divine  Will.

1.  There  is  a  present  pleasure  arising  from  the  testimony  and  approbation  of
conscience,

2.  A  reflective  pleasure  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  having  obeyed  the
Divine  Voice.  Paul  felt  this,  on  review  of  life,  when  he  said,  "  I  have  fought  a  good
tight,"  (fee.    This  was  Christ's  pleasure  :  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,"  &c.

3.  An  anticipatory  pleasure ;  looking  for  the  Divine  approval — *'  Well  done,
good  and  faithful  servant,"  <fcc.

And  as  there  is  a  threefold  pleasure  in  obedience,  so  there  is  a  threefold  pain
in  disobedience —

1,  Present :  the  pain  of  an  accusing  conscience.  2.  deflective  :  the  memory
of  wasted  life.  3,  Anticipatory:  dreading  hearing  the  words,  "I  never  knew
you  ;  depart  from  Me,"  <fec.

V.  The  importance  of  obedience  of  the  Divine  Will.  "  It  shall  be  well
unto  thee."

Let  the  sinner  obey  t/ie  voice  of  Jesus,  and  "  it  shall  be  well  unto  him  ; "  not
die,  but  live.

Let  the  believer  obey  the  voice  of  his  Lord  and  Master,  and  he  shall  enjoy
Divine  favour  and  live  and  reign  with  Him  for  ever.

"  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven ;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven."

Yet  obedience  will  not  save  the  soul.  Obedience  is  no  ground  of  merit  nop
basis  of  hope.  It  avails  nothing  for  a  sinner's  justification ;  and  yet,  without
obedience,  the  soul  will  be  cast  away.  Obedience  is  the  sign  of  faith  and  mani-
festation of  love.

Topic:  Sinners  the  Cause  of  their  own  Suffering.  "If  thou  wilt  not  go
forth  .  .  .  thou  shalt  not  escape  out  of  their  hands"  (vers.  17,  18  j  comp.
xxxix.  7  :   '*  Moreover  he  put  out  Zedekiah's  eyes"),

Zedekiah  illustrates  the  non-acceptance  of  chastisements.     We  may  attribute
his  sufferings  (chap,   xxxix.  7)  to  Nt^i'uchadnezzar's  cruelty.     But  they  came  from
594


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAQ.  oHap.  xxxtiil.


sometbing  underlying  that,  Nebuchadnezzar  was  not  cruel  to  Zedekiah  till  Zede-
kiah  had  been  cruel  to  himself.  He  brought  it  upon  himself,  compelled  God  to  be
thus  severe  to  him.  He  would  not  accept  the  less  severe  chastisement  God  had
prepared  (ver.  17).     God  proves  too  strong  for  rebellious  man.

The  sure  consequence  of  non-acceptance  of  chastisements  is  increased  sorrow,
L  Chastisements  announced  (vers.  17,  18).     Here  consider —

1.  The  proper  coarse  of  action  when  chustisement  or  discipline  is  announced.
God  is  speaking  from  the  midst  of  clouds  and  darkness ;  go  into  the  secret  place
and  see  God  Himself.  It  is  His  will  that  we  should  see  Him ;  see  that  there  is
One  who  works  behind  the  chances  and  changes  of  life.  The  first  thing  is  to
believe  God  is  in  it;  not  to  lose  time  in  groping  about  for  Him  in  the  darkness.

2.  A  common  mistake  as  to  the  designs  of  sorrow  and  joy :  ihdXjoy  is  intended
to  draw  us  to  God  ;  sorrow  the.  reverse.     This  is  our  error.

3.  The  co-existence  of  trouble  and  alleviation.  Along  with  chastisement  God
promises  circumstances  of  gracious  dealing  (ver.  17).  We  think  of  the  trouble  only,
and  ask  its  removal,  ignoring  the  alleviation  which  God  places  side  by  side
with  it.

What  are  the  speakings  to  us  of  the  word  "  Moreover  "  (xxxix.  7)  I

(1.)  Bounded  chastisements  are  not  to  be  rejected.

(2.)  God's  omnipotence  is  to  be  realised.

(3.)  The  sad  effects  of  the  rejection  of  God's  chastisements  on  memory — nothing
left  to  Zedekiah  but  bitter  reflections.

(4.)  Chastisements  are  always  the  lightest  possible  under  the  circumstances.

(5.)  God's  terrible  reverses  of  chastisements  (chap.  xlii.  6).

(6.)  God's  care  of  His  people  under  chastisements — He  remembers  mercy.

(7.)  The  "moreover"  of  what  might  have  been;  and  some  of  the  mercies
which  are  bestowed.

(8.)  The  need  of  keeping  ourselves  within  the  line  of  God's  action  (2  Sam.
xxiv.  14).  We  may  pass  from  the  bounded  line  of  God's  action  to  the  unbounded
line  of  man's  !     This  is  to  go  we  know  not  whither.

(9.)  We  may  always  go  into  troubles  with  the  certainty  of  alleviation.  Try  and
find  how  many  lighteners  to  our  trials  are  vouchsafed.  God  will  never  crush  a  man
except  so  far  as  he  makes  it  downright  necessary  that  he  should  be  crushed.

n.  Chastisements  rejected.  Not  because  he  wished  daringly  to  defy  God  ;  but
because  of  personal  humiliation  and  suffering  (ver.  19).  How  powerful  this  motive
was  is  evident  from  his  overcoming  such  tremendous  considerations  as  those  of  ver.  18 !

1.  When  God  is  appointing  chastisement  and  we  accept  it,  we  may  be  sure  it  is
bounded.     As  with  Job — *' Only  not  upon  himself;"  "only  save  his  life."

2.  Enter  trouble  ivith  the  consciousness  of  limitation.  He  who  refuses  God's
cross  makes  a  heavier  one  for  himself  (vers.  21,  22).

3.  God's  grace  in  meeting  our  fears  with  assurances.  "They  shall  not  deliver
thee  "  (ver.  20).  **  Obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  it  shall  be  well  with  thee,"  &c.
(ver.  20).

III.  Chastisements  inflicted  with  increase  (xxxix.  7).  A  terrible  "more-
over" is  this!  Sightless  henceforth;  yet  what  a  scene  the  last  he  witnessed  !
Zedekiah  refused  to  put  himself  into  the  hands  of  God;  and  now  he  "fell  into  the
hands  of  man."     It  counsels —

1.  Immediately  chastisements  come,  go  to  God.  Thus,  all  the  affliction  needed
to  reduce  to  obedience  and  to  attention  to  God's  voice  will  not  be  inflicted.

2.  Be  not  too  curious  in  examining  a  discipline.  The  good  effects  will  be
revealed  after  endurance.

3.  By  a  too  close  inspection  of  our  troubles  and  brooding  over  them,  God  will
recede  from  our  view  ;  the  affliction  will  also  assume  an  exaggerated  importance.

4.  Beware  lest  a  dark  dispensation  so  overwhelm  you  as  to  prevent  your  appre-
ciating the  alleviations.

695


eUAt.  xxxvm.  BOMIlEfiC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMtAB,


5,  In  all  our  trial  let  us  consider  not  only  what  has  been,  but  lohat  is  left,  God
would  have  left  Zedekiah  a  great  deal  if  he  had  yielded.  God  is  great  in  healing
as  well  as  in  inflicting  wounds.

Heaven-made  crosses  are  lighter  than  earth-made  ones.  The  troubles  which  He
sends  will  always  be  less  than  what  you  bring. — Constructed  and  condensed  from
"  Breviatesj*  hy  Rev.  P.  B.  Power,  M.A.

Topic  :  Renewal  of  Opportunity  with  its  Alternative  IssTJBfli
See  on  Section  1—7,  chap,  xxxiv.  p.  558.

Topic:  Timidity.     ** I  am  af7'aid '^  (ver.  19).

A  craven  king !  Pitiable.  His  case  explained  thus :  he  knew  his  duty,  but
disliked  it ;  so  was  continually  "  halting  between  two  opinions ; "  wishing  to
know  God's  messages,  yet  reluctant  to  obey  them.  His  mind  was  harassed
with  divided  attention ;  he  was  afraid  of  men,  yet  also  troubled  with  a  dread
of  God.  It  is  thus  that  "  conscience  doth  make  cowards "  of  compromising  and
craven  souls.

L  Fear  of  men  creates  instability  of  character  and  conduct.  Zedekiah  knew
he  did  well  to  ask  counsel  of  Jeremiah  (ver.  14),  yet  feared  to  follow  it  (ver.  19).
Such  timidity —

1.  Paralyses  the  will;  2.  Fosters  duplicity;  3.  Confuses  the  clear  voice  of
conscience ;  4.  Enfeebles  the  power  with  which  God's  word  should  sway  the  life.

"  Pear  is  the  tax  that  conscience  pays  to  guilt," — SeweU,

n.  Fear  of  men  degrades  the  noblest  nature  into  servility.  Here  was  a
monarch  reduced  to  a  miserable  schemer,  afraid  to  have  his  subjects  know  what
he  did  1     Its  natural  fruits  are —

1.  Secret  transactions  (ver.  14) ;  2.  Cringing  cowardice  (ver.  24) ;  3.  Lying
subterfuges  (vers.  25,  26).

"  Cowards  die  many  times  before  their  deaths,
The  valiant  never  taste  of  death  but  once." — Shakespeare.

in.  Fear  of  men  entails  inevitable  derision  and  disaster.  All  Zedekiah's
scheming  to  keep  out  of  difficulties — the  difficulties  of  honesty  and  piety — would  only
lead  to  ills  far  more  serious.

1.  The  scorn  of  observers.  *'  The  Jews  will  moch  me "  (ver.  19),  and  '*  the
women'*  will  make  me  their  Jeering  song  (ver.  22).  2.  Desertion  by  false  friends
(ver.  22,  "They  are  turned  away  back").     3.   Dire  judgments  from  God  (ver.  23).

IV.  Fear  of  men  alienates  G-od's  protection  and  favour.  His  selfish  plottings
left  him  miserable  alternatives.  His  life  would  be  spared  if  he  took  one  course
(ver.  17),  although  it  would  be  spared  only  for  suffering  and  degradation  at  the
hands  of  his  conqueror  ;  whereas  the  other  course  would  entail  utter  ruin  (ver.  18).
To  this  dilemma  had  all  his  contrivances  reduced  him.  And  all  our  schemings  in
which  we  entrench  ourselves  will  end  fatally.  Honest  obedience  of  God,  regardless
of  consequences  and  of  human  threatenings,  will  ensure  us  the  Divine  overshadowing;
but  this  impiety  and  timidity  will —

1.  Leave  us  friendless  in  our  extremity ;  and  2.  Deprive  us  of  all  Divine  hiding
and  succour  when  enemies  prevail.

•*  Pear  or  guilt  attends  the  deeds  of  darkness :
The  virtuous  breast  ne*er  knows  it." — Havard.

Hence — (a.)  Obey  God^s  voice ;  for  in  His  favour  is  life.  "It  shall  be  well  unto
thee,  and  thy  soul  shall  live"  (ver.  20).

(6.)  Trust  not  in  friends  whose  attachment  can  be  preserved  only  by  disobeying
Divine  counsels  (ver.  19).
696


BOMJlEtlO  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAD,  chap,  xxxttft.

<M»~—  •

(c.)  Shun  duplicity;  it  degrades  to  contemptible  insincerity  (ver.  25).  "The
fear  of  man  woiketh  a  snaie."

{d.)  Righteousness  makes  courageous.  For  in  God's  friendship  the  soul  becomes
confident.     "  The  righteous  is  bold  as  a  lion."

T&pie  :  Equivocation.     "  So  they  left  off  speaking  with  him ;  for  the
matter  was  not  perceived  "  (ver.  27).

The  plain  meaning  of  such  words  is  that  Jeremiah  hoodwinked  them.  He,  did
not  lie  to  them  certainly ;  but  he  did  not  tell  the  full  truth,  and  left  them  with  a
false  impression.  It  conies  very  near  to  deception ;  it  was  evasion,  and  certainly
was  not  an  honest  act.     It  seems  an  oblique  lie.

I.  By  what  prudential  considerations  has  this  act  of  equivocation  been
extenuated  ?     Let  us  hear  the  pleas  of  his  defenders.

1.  "  It  does  not  appear  that  he  said  what  was  untrtie." — Bishop  Wordsworth.

2.  *'  No  one  is  bound  to  reveal  all  he  knows — to  enemies  who  seek  his  life." —
Bishop  Wordsworth,

3.  This  reservation  of  part  of  the  truth  "  was  necessary  to  prevent  an  open
rupture  between  the  king  and  his  generals." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

4.  He  did  not  tell  them  "what  they  wanted  to  know"  because  "he  ivas
ordered  to  be  silent  by  one  to  whom  obedience  was  due." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

5.  "  The  princes  were  not  questioning  him  in  due  course  of  law^  but  by  a  power
which  they  had  usurped." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

6.  "  Had  the  issue  only  concerned  the  prophet  himself,  it  might  have  been  his
duty  to  have  spoken  the  whole  truth  ;  but  the  princes  had  no  right  to  question  him
as  to  the  hinges  conduct." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

Put  these  six  pleas  into  common  English,  and  they  mean —

(a.)  Suppression  of  part  of  the  truth  is  not  a  falsehood.  But,  on  the  contrary,
it  most  frequently  is ;  for  a  half-truth  is  often  the  worst  of  lies.

(6.)  Discretion  should  teach  us  to  save  our  own  skin  rather  than  be  frank  and
fearless  I  But  this  is  contemptible  cowardice,  and  is  opposed  to  our  Lord's  words  :
"  He  that  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it."

(c.)  Preserve  good  feeling  between  men^  even  though  prevarication  be  the  only  way
to  effect  it  !  But  what  had  Jeremiah  to  do  with  "  preventing  a  rupture,"  <kc.  ?
If  peace  is  thus  to  be  purchased  at  any  price,  then  farewell  to  honesty  and  honour.

(d.)  Obey  a  kiiig's  command  even  when  his  order  is  contrary  to  strict  truthful-
ness I  But  who  is  a  king,  forsooth,  that  he  should  regulate  conduct  in  matters  of
conscience?     We  should  "  obey  God  rather  than  man."

(<?.)  l^hrow  dust  in  the  eyes  of  enemies.  Well,  if  "  all  is  fair  in  love  and  war,"
this  may  pass ;  but  craftiness  is  not  placed  among  the  Christian  virtues.

(/.)  It  is  right  to  do  for  another  what  would  be  wrong  if  done  for  yourself.  But
no  !  wrong  can  never  be  made  right.  If  Jeremiah  suppressed  the  truth  for  the
king's  sake,  it  was  as  much  a  piece  of  deception  as  if  he  had  done  it  for  himself.

II.  On  what  sacred  principles  should  this  act  of  equivocation  he
condemned  ?

1.  Fear  of  consequences  should  not  sway  conscience  from  its  fidelity.  "  Be  just,
and  fear  not."     But  fear  now  drove  Jeremiah  to  equivocate  (comp.  Gen.  xx.  2).

2.  Guileless  speech  should  distinguish  the  godly  character  (Ps.  xxxiv.  13).  Chris-
tians should  be  "  children  of  light"  "sincere  and  without  offence."

3.  Honesty  in  God^s  messengers  is  imperative.  A  witness  for  Jehovah  should
certainly  not  accommodate  himself  to  the  convenience  of  a  godless  potentate.

4.  Truth  suffers  in  the  hands  of  compromising  men.  It  brings  discredit  upon
truth  in  general,  if  professedly  holy  men  are  discovered  to  tamper  with  it  by
equivocation.     Souls  in  whom  God's  Light  shines  should  never  emit  dim  rays.

6.  Our  Saviour*s  example  was  ever  on  the  side  of  outspoken  honesty  even  before

697


cfiAP.  XXXIX.  FOMTinTIC  COMMENTARY :  JEltEMTA  77.


adversaries.     '*  If  I  liave  spoken  evil,  bear  witness,"  <fec.  ;    ''  Who    did    no  sin,
neither  was  guile  found  in  His  moutb."

6.   Life  is  safe  in  God''s  keeping,  tlierefore    we  should  never  dissimulate  for
the  sake  of  our  oivn  safety  (1  Peter  ii.  21-23).

"The  man  of  pure  and  simple  heart
Through  life  disdains  a  double  part;
He  never  needs  the  screen  of  lies
His  inward  bosom  to  disguise." — (?ay.

•*His  words  are  bonds,  his  oaths  are  oracles ;
His  love  sincere,  his  thoughts  imn  aculate;
His  tears,  pure  messengers  sent  ir<^m  his  heart;
His  heart  as  far  from  fraud  as  heaven  from  earth." — ShaJeetiptaiM*

••  Honesty,  even  by  itself,  though  making  many  adversaries
Whom  prudence  might  have  set  aside,  or  charity  have  softened.
Evermore  will  prosper  at  the  last,  and  gain  a  man  great  honour.
Yet  there  are  others  that  will  truckle  to  a  lie,  selling  honesty  for  interetl
And  do  they  gain  1     They  gain  but  loss  ;  a  little  cash,  with  scorn.
Behold  !  sorrowful  change  wrought  upon  a  fallen  nature  :
He  hath  lost  his  own  esteem  and  other  men's  respect.

For  the  buoyancy  of  upright  faith,  he  is  clothed  in  the  heaviness  of  cringing;
For  plain  trutli,  wiiere  none  could  err,  he  hath  chosen  tortuous  paths ;
In  lieu  of  his  majesty  of  countenance,  the  timorous  glances  of  servility  |
Instead  of  Freedom's  honest  pride,  the  spirit  of  a  slaTe." — Tuj^^»


CHAPTER  XXXIX.

Cbitigal  and  Exsqbtioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Cf.  notei  in  he,
chap,  zzxiv.  The  siege  lasted  just  one  year  and  six  months,  not  reckoning  the  interval
during  which  the  Chaldeans  broke  up  to  give  battle  to  the  army  of  Pharaoh.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — Ezek.  xii.  8-20,  xvii.  11-21  ;  2Kingsxxv.  1-12;  2  Chron.
zxxvi.  11-21  ;  Jeremiali  lii.  4-11.

3.  National  Affairs. —  Vide  below  on  *'  T7ie  tTiread  of  Events,**

4.  Personal  Allusions. — Vers.  3  and  13.  A  critical  examination  of  Hitzig  and  others,
into  these  compound  names,  tends  to  reduce  them  to  tTiree  (instead  of,  as  in  ver.  3,  six),  thus:
(1).  Nergal-SJiarezer,  tfie  Samgar,  or  cup-bearer  ;  (2).  Nebo-SarsecTiim,  the  Rah-saris,  or  chief
of  the  eunuchs,  or  chamberlain  ;  (3).  A  second  Nergal-Sharezer,  the  Rah-mag,  or  chief  of  the
magi.  The  LXX,  read  Na/Soucraxa/a,  as  a  name  linking  together  the  terminal  "Nebo"  and
"Sarsechim;"  while  other Greekmaiuiscripts  read  Na/Soutrapo-exi/*.  This  Neho-Sarsechim  is  called
in  ver.  13  **  Nebushasban  the  Rab-saris."  The  second  "  Nergal  Sharezer,"  the  Rab-mag,  or
chief  of  the  mogicians,  is  known  in  history  as  Neriglissar,  son-in-law  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (sup-
posed by  Dr.  Payne  Smith  to  have  been  his  vicegerent  during  Nebuchadnezzar's  seven  years'
madness  :  see  Daniel).  This  Neriglissar  seized  tlie  crown  two  years  after  Nebuchadnezzar's
death,  murdering  Evil-merodach,  the  late  king's  son.  This  man's  identification  with  the
**^a6-wia^"  named  here  arises  from  Neriglissar  being  called  ** Rabu-emga"  in  the  Assyrian
cuneiform  inscriptions.

Ver.  9.  ^*  Nebuzar-adan  the  captain  of  the  guard,  i.e.  the  Rab-tabbdchim,  or  chief  of  the
executioners,  called  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  **  Nabu-zir-iddina,"  i.e.  "  Nebo  has  given
offspring."

Ver.  14.  "  Oedaliah  the  son  of  Ahlkam."  Jeremiah's  steadfast  and  courageous  friend,  as  his
father  ^*  Ahikam  "  had  been  before  him  (chap.  xxvi.  24,  vide  note  in  loc).  He  was  "a  man
of  a  generous,  genial  nature,  such  as  might  have  rallied  the  better  spirits  of  his  countrymen
round  him,  and  taken  the  place  of  the  fallen  dynasty  "  (Stanley).

5.  Geographical  Allusions. — Ver.  4.  ^^  By  the  way  of  the  Icing' s  garden,  by  the  gate  betwixt
the  tioo  walls."  Jerusalem  then  consisted  of  an  upper  and  lower  city;  the  upper  including
Mount  Zion,  with  a  strong  fortress;  the  latter,  to  tlie  north,  was  considerably  lower,  and  more
easily  accessible  to  the  Chaldeans.  The  **  gate  "  from  the  upper  city  to  the  "  king's  garden  "
was  appropriated  exclusively  to  royalty,  and  "stairs"  led  down  from  Mount  Zion  and  the
palace  to  the  king's  garden  below  (Neliem,  iii.  15).  There  was  a  double  wall  south  of  Zion,
towards  the  plain  of  Jericho  (ver.  5).  He  broke  an  opening  through  the  wall  in  order  to  escape
(see  Ezek.  xii.  12).

598


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap,  xxxix.


Ver.  5.  **  Rihlahy  An  ancient  city  on  the  northern  boundary  of  Palestine,  in  the  land  of
Hamath,  about  six  miles  distant  from  Jerusalem,  forty  miles  south  of  Hamath,  on  the  great  road
between  Palestine  and  Bab v Ion.

Literary  Criticism. — Ver.  7.   ^^  He  put  out  Zedehiah's  eyes,  "  l^y.      Excavated,  dug  out.
Ver.  14,  ^'That  he  should  carry  him  home,'^  where,  is  uncertain,  for  iT'SH  is  indefinite.     The
words  are  lit.  *^*  io  take  him  out  mto  the  house.'*     Not  Gedaliah's,  or  it  would  have  read  "his
house."    Either  the  Temjple,  therefore,  or  the  king's  house;  and  most  naturally  the  latter — the
royal  palace.

GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  CHAPTER  XXXIX,

The  Siegb  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzae.

L  The  thread  of  events  as  indicated  in  this  chapter.  For  preliminary  events
866  notes  on  chap,  xxxiv.

1.  Nebuchadnezzar^ s  army  effected  an  entrance  into  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  It
was  at  midnight  (ver.  4).  The  date  is  carefully  given  in  ver.  2.  The  date  answers
to  our  July.  This  was  after  an  eighteen  months*  siege,  B.C.  587.  At  this  time  the
city  was  reduced  to  misery  and  starvation  (Ezek.  v.  12).

2.  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  himself  opened  the  siege  in  person  (ver.  1),  had  retired
to  Rihlahy  and  was  there  at  its  close  (vers.  3,  6  ^  c/".  xxxviii.  17).

3.  It  was  into  the  lower  city,  on  the  north  side,  that  the  Chaldeans  forced  an
entry  (ver.  3),  "the  middle  gate"  being  situate  between  the  lower  and  the  upper
city.

4.  Zedekiah,  with  his  wives  and  children  and  royal  guards,  having  their  heads
muffled  (Ezek.  xii.  6,  12),  fled  on  the  entrance  of  the  Chaldeans,  by  the  gate  south
of  Jerusalem  (ver.  4),  breaking  an  opening  in  the  wall  to  get  out  (Ezek.  xii.  12).

5.  Pursued  by  the  Chaldeans  and  captured  in  the  plains  of  Jericho,  his  troops
were  "  scattered  from  him "  (chap.  lii.  8) ;  and  Zedekiah  and  his  family  were
manacled,  and  thus  marched  to  Kiblah  to  confront  the  wrathful  king  of  Babylon
(ver.  5).

6.  Doomed  for  the  violation  of  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  Babylon  (Ezek.  xvii
13-19 ;  2.  Chron.  xxxvi.  13),  Zedekiah  was  first  made  to  behold  the  slaughter  of
his  courtiers  and  family,  and  then  his  own  eyes  were  put  out,  and  he  carried  away
in  chains  to  Babylon  (vers.  6,  7).  Thus  were  reconciled  the  two  passages,  Jer.
xxxii.  4,  and  Ezek.  xii.  13.

7.  A  month  elapsed,  during  which  the  Chaldean  princes  had  probably  gone  to
Kiblah  to  consult  Nebuchadnezzar  as  to  the  fate  of  the  city  and  inhabitants  (chap.
lii.  10 ;  2  Kings  xxv.  8),  and  then  Nebuzar-wlan  came  with  royal  orders  to  utterly
destroy  the  city  (ver.  8).  Fire  consumes  the  city  (chap.  lii.  13) ;  foul  ravages  were
committed  upon  the  inhabitants  (Lam.  v.  11,  12);  desecration  was  heaped  upon
the  dead  (chap.  vii.  32 ;  viii.  3).

8.  Among  the  hosts  of  captives  carried  off  to  Ramah  (ver.  9)  was  Jeremiah  (chap,
xl.  1).     See  below  :  IV.  Kindness  to  the  Lord's  Frophet.

II.  Incidents  of  the  siege.  It  began  in  January,  b.c.  587,  and  continued  till
July,  B.C.  586.

1.  The  store  of  bread  became  gradually  exhausted  (chap.  lii.  6),  and  the  horrors
of  starvation  set  in  (Ezek.  v.  10,  16;  Lam.  ii.  20 ;  iv.  4,  5  ;  v.  9,  10).

2.  In  their  profanity  and  despair,  the  priests  increased  their  flagrant  idolatries
within  the  very  Temple  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14;  see  Ezek.  viii.  7-ix.)

3.  The  midnight  surprise  (ver.  4),  was  a  moment  for  fearful  slaughter.  The
sleeping  city  awoke  in  terror,  and  soon  the  streets  flowed  with  the  blood  of  the
slain  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17;  Lam.  i.  15).  Princes  were  hung  up  by  their  hands  on  the
Temple  walls  (Lam.  v.  12).

4.  The  treasures  of  the  Temple  were  carried  away  as  spoil  (2  Kings  xxv.  13-17;
Jer.  lii.  17-22).

^99


CHAP.  XXXIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


5.  Pilgrims  from  surrounding  nations  came  to  wonder  and  bewail  over  the  ruins
of  the  city  (chap.  xli.  5,  6),  wliile  savage  heathen  tribes  exulted  over  Jerusalem's
overthrow  (Ps.  Ixxix.  1;  Ezek.  xxv.  6,  8,  15;  xxvi.  2).

III.  Vengeance  for  a  violated  oath  (vers.  5-7).

1,  Faithless  himself,  he  was  abandoned  by  fait! dess  friends —

(1.)  Deserters  from  the  city  carried  tidiug-s  to  the  Chaldean  army  of  Zedekiah*8
escape  {Josephus,  Antiq.  x.  8,  §  2).

(2.)  His  *'  friends  and  captains "  who  fled  with  him  abandoned  him  at  the
appearance  of  the  Chaldean  soldiers  (Ibid).

4.  The  wrath  of  the  conquering  king  was  justly  severe.  Brought  before  Nebuchad-
nezzar, he  was  first  charged  by  hiui  as  a  "  covenant-breaker,"  and  "  reproached  for
his  ingratitude,"  that  he  had  *'  used  the  power  he  gave  him  against  him  who  gave
it;"  but,  said  Nebuchadnezzar,  "God  is  great,  who  hateth  this  conduct  of  thine,
and  hath  brought  thee  under  us  "  {Ibid).

Then  followed  the  horrors  recorded  in  vers.  6,  7.  And  in  Babylon  Zedekiah
was  imprisoned  till  he  died.

3.  The  execration  of  God,  through  His  prophets,  /e/^  upon  him  for  his  violated
oath;  from  Jeremiah  in  Jerusalem  (chap,  xxxvii.  9,  10),  and  from  the  prophet
Ezehiel  among  those  already  carried  captive  to  Babylon  (Ezek.  xvii.  16-20).

See  homily  on  chap,  xxxviii.  17,  18:  "Sinners  the  Cause  of  their  own
Sufferings."

IV.  Kindness  shown  to  the  Lord's  prophet  (vers.  11-14).

1.  His  faithful  witness  against  ZedekiaKs  falsity  and  his  nation* s  perfidy  had
become  known  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  probably  through  the  Jews  carried  captive  to
Babylon  with  Jeconiah,  and  now  again  through  deserters  (chap,  xxxviii.  19,  and
ver.  9).     Hence  the  king's  clemency.

2.  Nebuchadnezzar's  chieftain,  therefore,  was  charged  specially  to  care  for  the
prophet  amid  the  judgments  to  be  dealt  on  the  nation.

3.  A  month  after  Zedekiah's  flight  (see  "  Thread  of  Events,"  7,  above),
Nebuchadnezzar  found  him  in  the  prison  where  "  he  abode  "  (chap,  xxxviii.  28)  ;
who  released  him,  and  with  the  first  mass  of  captives  he  was  hurried  on  to
Ramah  (chap.  xl.  1).

4c.  At  this  point  he  was  released  (chap.  xl.  4),  and  allowed  to  choose  either  a  place
of  high  favour  in  the  royal  court  at  Babylon,  or  any  spot  in  Palestine  which  he
might  elect  to  dwell.

6.  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  accordance  with  Jeremiah^s  desire,  placed  the  prophet  in
Gedaliah's  charge  (chap,  xxxix.  14,  xl.  5) ;  gave  him  "  a  reward ;  "  and  the  prophet
made  his  home  in  Mizpah  (chap.  xl.  6).

Patriotic  to  the  last,  this  grand  servant  of  God  "  had  no  mind  to  follow "
Nebuzar-adan  to  Babylon,  "nor  to  dwell  anywhere  else,  but  would  gladly  live
in  the  ruins  of  his  own  country,"  pleading  that  Nebuzar-adan  would  *'  set  at
liberty  his  disciple  Baruch,  one  of  a  very  eminent  family,  and  exceedingly  skilful  in
the  language  of  his  country  "  {Josephus,  Antiq.  x.  9,  §  1).

On  the  release  of  Jeremiah^  Wordsworth  comments:  '*  The  siege  and  capture  of
Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  were  the  cause  of  the  liberation  of  Jeremiah.  So  it  is
often  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The  shocks  of  dynasties  and  overthrow  of
thrones  have  often  been  overruled  by  God  into  occasions  for  the  liberation  and
free  circulation  of  His  Word.  How  much  has  the  diffusion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures
been  facilitated  by  God  amid  storms  and  revolution,  as  in  Italy  and  Spain !  How
much  may  the  Church  of  God  be  extended  and  purified  by  His  power  and  love
amid  the  coming  conflicts  and  suff'erings  of  the  latter  days  1 "

JVote, — For  descriptions  of  the  events  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Jerusalem,  see
Stanley's  *'  Jewish  Church,"  ii.  sect.  xl. ;  and  Josephus,  **  Antiquities  of  the  Jews,"
book  X.  chap.  viii.
600


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohai'.  xxxix.


Topic :  A  LoNKLY  Hero  op  Faith.  "  Go  and  speak  to  Ebed-melech  the  Eihiopiaii
...  I  will  deliver  thee  .  .  .  because  thou  hast  put  thy  trust  iu  Me,  saith
the  Lord  "  (vers.  15-18).

Comp.  homily  on  chap,  xxxviii ;  7-13,  also  outline  following  this,  "  The  Believing
Ethiopian.''^

The  hour  had  come  for  the  noble  act  of  this  Ethiopian  to  receive  its  due
reward  :   God  would  befriend  him  amid  prevailing  calamity  and  destruction.

L  Alone  in  his  heroism,  he  is  singled  out  by  God  for  special  recompense
(vers.  17,  18).

1.  Generous  deeds  arrest  God's  attention.  His  hazardous  interest  in  the  perse-
cuted prophet  was  chronicled  before  Heaven.  Nothing  noble  is  overlooked  by
God  (Acts  X.  4).

2.  Kindnesses  shown  to  God's  servants  are  especially  valued  by  God,  Those  who
"receive  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward"
(Matt.  X.  41) ;  for  they  thus  further  the  prophet's  work,  as  '*  fellow-helpers  to  the
truth  "  (3  John  6-8).

3.  His  single-handed  defence  of  the  prophet  made  his  valour  the  more  worthy  of
reward.  It  enhanced  his  service  that  it  was  done  without  the  sympathy  and
support  of  others,  and  in  the  teeth  of  their  malice.  See  Paul's  words  respecting
Onesiphorus  (2  Tim.  i.  16-18).

IL  Human  conduct  is  most  approved  hy  God  when  inspired  by  faith.
"  Thou  hast  put  thy  trust  in  Me."

This  religious  element  in  his  conduct  does  not  make  itself  seen  in  his  meri-
torious service  to  Jeremiah.  All  that  we  should  gather  as  we  watch  his  actions  is,
that  his  humane  heart  moved  him  to  seek  the  prophet's  release ;  although  it  is
clear  that  he  regarded  the  cruelty  of  the  princes  as  "  evil "  in  itself,  and  especially
"evil"  when  done  against  *^  the  prophet''  (chap,  xxxviii.  9).

1.  Amid  prevailing  unbelief,  this  Ethiopian  revered  the  Lord.  What  a  rebuke
on  these  Jews — God's  favoured  people  !  Remember  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  I  have
not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel  I "

2.  His  humanity  to  the  prophet  was  prompted  hy  devout  feeling.  He  had  the
Lord  before  him  in  rendering  this  noble  service  to  His  prophet.  And  this  explains
his  dauntless  courage  and  earnest  solicitude.  "  Ye  did  it  unto  Me  "  (Matt.  xxv.
36  and  40).

3.  Trust  in  God  sustained  him  amid  the  perils  he  had  to  confront.  Well  he
knew  that  he  could  not  act  as  the  prophet's  friend  without  incurring  hatred  and
danger ;  but  *'  he  trusted  in  the  Lord  that  He  would  deliver  him  "  (Ps.  xxii.  8).
Trust  in  God  was  at  the  root  of  his  defiance  of  the  mighty  men  who  were  foes  of
God  and  His  servant.

Note,  therefore,  Ebed-melech  believed  in  and  trusted  the  Lord.

(a.)  He  held  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  Jeremiah  proclaimed  against  the  city
to  be  true  (ver.  16).

(6.)  He  placed  no  hope  on  the  means  of  succour  or  escape  in  which  the  king
and  his  courtiers  trusted.

(c.)  He  withstood  the  cruelty  of  Jeremiah's  enemies  as  resistance  of  the  Lord's
purposes.

{d.)  He  placed  his  only  hope  on  the  power  and  graciousness  of  God  Himself.

IIL  In  the  hour  of  His  servant's  alarm,  God  manifests  His  timely  favour
(ver.  17).     For  here  observe —

1.  How  this  noble  and  daring  man  was  now  disturbed  by  alarm.  "Men  of
whom  thou  art  afraid  /  "  Courageous  though  he  had  been  when  Jeremiah  was
perishing,  he  yet  realised  impending  danger,  and  trembled  in  fear.  Whether  these
"men"  of  whom  he  was  afraid  were  the  princes  of  Zedekiah's  court,  or  the  Chal-
deans who  were  besieging  the  city,  is  uncertain  ;  most  naturally  the  latter,  for  the
mention  of  "  the  sword  "  connects  his  dread  with  the  army,

601


CHiT    (XXIX.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


2,  How  tenderly  God  comforts  the  souls  of  His  faithful  children  (vers.  17,  18).
C^Juiets  his  fear  with  express  and  appropriate  assurances.

3.  How  envious  is  their  lot  whom  the  Lord  lovingly  befriends  /  In  that
hour  of  Zion's  overthrow  what  avails  it  to  Zedekiah  that  he  was  a  king^  or  to  the
princes  that  they  were  the  mighty  ones  of  tliat  doomed  kingdom?  And  what
harms  it  now  that  Ebed-melech  was  only  a  servant  in  the  king's  household,  and
hated  by  those  in  power  ?  The  Lord  was  on  his  side  ;  and  while  king  and  nobles
suffered  miserably  for  their  ungodliness  (vers.  6,  7),  this  Ethiopian  was  divinely
shielded  from  mischief  (see  Heb.  xiii.  6  ;  Ps.  cxlvi.  5).

Observe — (i.)  Faith  may  often  be  found  in  those  we  should  least  expect  to  be
believers.     "  There  are  last  that  be  first,"  <fcc.

{}\)  Faith  never  is  allowed  to  pass  unrewarded  by  God,  who  prizes  a  sours  trust
beyond  all  else.     **  Because  he  trusted  in  Me,"


The  Believing  Ethiopian.


Connect  chap,  xxxviii.  7-13  with  chap,
zxxix.  15-18.

Help  for  Qod*s  servants  arises  from
directions  little  expected.  Though  not
one  of  Jeremiah's  fellow-countrymen
befriended  him,  a  Cushite  eunuch  be-
came his  friend.

I  Godliness  in  an  unlikely  person.
«*  Ethiopian."

1.  A  prophet's  ministry  may  win
success  where  not  expected.

2.  Though  hearers  we  naturally  sup-
posed would  regard  our  messages  turn
aside,  there  are  Jiearts  opened  to  our
word.

3.  Buried  seed  will,  in  its  right  time,
spring  up  and  reward  the  faithful
worker  for  God.

n.  Faith  stirring  the  soul  to
heroism.

1.  Convinced  that  God's  servant  suf-
fered wrongfully,  he  could  not  longer  con-
ceal his  attachment.

2.  Reckless  of  perils^  he  attempted  the
prophet's  deliverance.

3.  A  lowly  servant  acting  in  defiance
of  mighty  courtiers^  and  even  rebuking
the  cowardly  king  I

III.  Religious  life  flowing  out  in
kindness.

1.  How  natural  for  a  convert  to  love
his  teacher.

2.  Piety  beautifully  expressed  —  in
services  of  kindness.

3.  Affection  makes  the  soul  solici-
tous and  courageous ;  he  could  not  rest :
pleaded  with  the  king ;  hastened  to
rescue.  What  a  motive  in  life  is  godly
affection  !

603


IV.  Noble  service  signally  re-
warded.

1.  A  message  of  comfort  sent  to  calm
his  fears.

2.  In  the  general  ruin  this  godly  man
was  saved.  None  escapes  God's  care
who  trust  in  Him.

3.  No  service  for  God  is  allowed  to
pass  unrequited.  "  A  cup  of  cold
water  given  .  .  .  shall  in  no  wise  lose  its
reward."

V.  God's  pleasure  in  His  servants'
welfare.

1.  Ebed-melech's  generous  help  to
Jeremiah,  by  which  God's  prophet  was
saved  from  death,  won  for  the  Ethio-
pian special  Divine  favour.  For  God
was  concerned  that  His  prophet  should
not  suffer ;  and  He  providentially  pro-
vided deliverance  through  this  alien
eunuch.  For  He  "  careth  for "  His
own.

2.  Hence,  also,  God  was  concerned  for
the  Ethiopian's  comfort  and  safety.  He
was  a  child  of  God ;  and  amid  menacing
perils  which  filled  him  with  fears,  God
sent  assurance  of  his  preservation.

3.  God  loves  His  saints^  and  will  as-
suredly work  out  their  full  redemption.

Note. — Cramer  remarks  :  "This  pious
courtier  had  interceded  for  the  prophet
with  the  king ;  but  the  prophet  had  in
turn  interceded  for  him  with  God  the
Lord.  Ebed-melech  had  drawn  him
out  of  the  pit,  but  Jeremiah  draws  him
by  his  prayer '  from  the  jaws  of  all
Chaldean  war-vortices.  Preachers  do
their  patron*  more  good  than  they  get
from  them,'*


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB,


OHAP.  lU


Ver.  18.   Theme:  Trust.

I.  This  trust  in  a  Power  Divine,  and
in  a  Hand  unseen,  is  regarded  as  fanati-
cism hy  scoffers  and  sceptics.

But  against  thi.s  David  says,  "  It  is
better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put
confidence  in  man."  It  is  trust  in  the
In-fiidte,  the  Immutable^  the  Immortal.

II.  Trust  in  the  Lord  calms  and
assures  the  soul  in  times  of  alarm  and
distress.  So  that  the  believer  says,  "  I
will  trust  and  not  he  afraid."

III.  Trust  in  God  l>oth  pleases  Him
and  wins  special  manifestations  of  His
favour.     "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  him


because  he  trusteth  in  Me."  God  is
honoured  by  our  trust,  and  He  honours
them  that  honour  Him.

IV.  Trust  ill  God  for  our  welfare  ayid
success  does  not  supersede  the  neces-
sity of  effort,  nor  the  wisdom  of  pi-aye?-,
"  Trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times  ;  })our
out  your  hearts  before  Him."  God
expects  men  to  ask  for  grace.

Men  of  faith  and  prayer  have  Om^
nipotence  on  their  side,  and  can  confi-
dently say,  *'  No  weapon  formed  against
us  shall  prosper." — "  Walks  with  Jere-
miah,^* Rev,  £>,  Pledge,


CHAPTER  XL.


Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — A  purely  historical  chapter,  of  events  following  the  city'i
ruin.  It  records  the  out-g-leaminsrof  a  ray  of  hope  upon  the  appalling  gloom  which  had  befallen
the  land,  in  the  appointment  of  Gedaliah  as  its  governor  ;  and  also  its  quick  extinction  in  the
conspiracy  of  Ishmael,  a  prince  of  the  royal  family  (chap.  xl.  1).

Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  5.   "  Gedaliah  "  {vide  note  on  chap,  xxxix.  14).

Ver.  8.  *' Ishmael,  the  son  of  Nethaniah.'*  The  most  conspicuous  of  a  band  of  well-known
chiefs,  who  during  tlie  siege  had  fled  across  the  Jordan.  Here  he  had  become  closely  leagued
with  Baalis,  king  of  Ammon  (Josephus,  Antiq.  x.  9,  2).  Prompted  by  Baalis  (ver.  14),  and
coveting  Gedaliah's  place  and  power,  he  plotted  Gedaiiah's  assassination.

**  Johanan  and  Jonathan: '^  Jewish  chiefs  and  brothers.  Johanan  warned  Gedaliah  of
Ishmael's  trer.cliery,  and  subsequently  pursued  the  assassin  (chap.  xli.  13,  &c.)

Geographical  References. — Ver.  6.  "  Mizpah."  Asa  had  fortified  it  as  an  outpost  of  his
capital  against  the  northern  kingdom  (chnp  xli.  9  ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  6).  A  ridge  north-east  of
Jerusalem,  and  immediately  overlooking  the  city,

Ver.  8,  *'  The  Neiophathite."      Netophah,  a  village  near  Bethlehem  (1  Chron.  ii.  54).

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  5.  "  Now  while  he^  was  not  yet  gone  hack  " — Ewald's  correction
of  the  Hebrew  text,  substituting  y*^\  for  !1-1JJ^1  ;  ^^  And  as  he  yet  answered  nothing :"  or,
**  Before  he  made  any  reply  "  (Henderson).

Ver.  10.  **  Jb  serve  the  Chaldeans;'  D^"|lb>3n  >:Di)  "ibyb,  "  to  stand  hefare  the  Chaldeam;'  ».«.
to  act  as  their  representative,  to  negotiate  with  them.

Ver.  14.  " Slay  thee : "  lit.  " strike  thee  in  the  soul"  i,e,  a  deadly  stroke.


SECTIONS  OF  CHAPTER  XL,

Section  1-6.  Jeremiah'' s  release  and  patriotism,
7-16.  Gedaliah's  elevation  and  peril.

Vers.  1-6.  Jeremiah's  Release  and  Patriotism.

(See  on  previous  chapter,  "  Kindness  slvown  to  the  Lord^s  Prophet,^)


Ver.  1.  Theme :  The  Christian  in
THE  Tumult  of  thk  World.

(i.)  Ue  is  regarded  externally  like
others.  Treated  as  a  captive.  Carried
away  with  the  exiles  to  llainnh.


dealt  with  j    his  worth  recognised  and

rewarded.

(iii. )  Directs  all  his  efforts  to  the  wel
fare  of  God^s  kingdom.    Hisconcern  being
to  preserve  God's   honour,  to  vindicate


(ii.)    Watched  over  hy  God  with  especial      His  righteousness,  and  to  be  useful  to
care;  so  that  he  is  unliarmed  ;  kindly      to  his  own  people.

603


CHAP.  XL.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


From  this  patriotic  purpose,  neither
the  violence  nor  the  friendliness  of  the
world  can  turn  him  aside.  (Comp.
Naegehhach  in  Lange.)

Vers.  2,  3.  Theme:  GoD  Recognised
IN  His  Judgments.  And  this  by  a
heathen !  Thus  God  makes  the  very
heathen  testify  for  Him  against  His
rebellious  people.  Out  of  even  great
and  terrible  calamities,  such  as  Jeru-
salem's overthrow,  good  is  brought;  this
heathen  captain^s  eyes  are  opened  to
Divine  truths.

His  hopeful  progress  towards  conver-
sion—

(I)  He  acknowledges  Jehovah  as  God
(ver.  2).     -

(ii.)  That  the  Lord  foresees  future
events  (ver.  2).

(iii.)  That  it  is  in  His  name  that  God^s
servants  speak  (ver.  2),  and  pronounce
upon  future  events.

(iv.)  He  recognises  the  Divine  Hand  in
judgments  (ver.  3).  No  claiming  that
the  Chaldeans  had  wrought  the  over-
throw ;  no  !     " The  Lord,'  &c.

(v.)  Traces  calamities  to  their  cause:  the
moral  degeneracy  and  spiritual  apostasy
of  the  people  (ver.  3).

(vi.)  Declares  that  disobedience  to  God
brings  doom  (ver.  3).

Ver.  4.  Theme:  God's  Hidden  Hand
IN  Human  Kindness.

L  Benefactors  are  God's  benefac-
tions. They  come  from  Him,  at  the  ri<jld
moment^  to  supply  our  pressing  wants.

n.  Unconscious  agencies  of  Divine
kindness.  This  captain  knew  not  that
he  worked  out  God's  designs  and  admin-
istered Gods  mercies.

III.  God's  disguised  Hand.  He  con-
ceals Himself  in  His  works  ;  there  is  "  a
hiding  of  His  power" —

In  Nature.  Stored  out  of  sight  in
flowers,  fruits,  delights  of  creation.


In  Providence.  "Men  aie  Thy  hand.**
He  works  through  them.  For  He  uses
His  creatures  as  channels  of  His  help.

In  Grace.  Liglit  and  peace  come
into  human  souls  tlirough  Awma^i  words;
from  "sermons  in  stones,  books  in  the
running  brooks,"  (kc.  Yet  all  grace  is
God's  gift.

"  Every  good  gift  and  every  per  feet  gift
Cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  llghts.^^

Vers.  5,  6.  Theme :  A  Patriotic
Choice.

I.  Contrasted  offers.

1.  Of  location.  In  Babylonia,  honour
and  comfort ;  in  Judea,  sjidness  and
privation.

2.  Of  service.  In  Babylonia,  among
the  noblest  of  his  countrymen,  and  in
the  favour  of  royalty ;  in  Judea,  amid
the  poor  and  rabble.

II  A  difficult  choice.  Hence  his
faltering  a  moment  (ver.  5).

1.  A  heart  drawn  in  opposite  direc-
tions :  in  pity  towards  his  exiled  people;
in  love  for  his  dear  but  dishonoured
land.

2.  In  perplexity  concerning  Gods  will,
Not  easy  to  see  where  he  could  best  serve
God ;  not  clear  as  to  God's  purpose.

III.  A  patriotic  decision.

1.  Thus  he  disproved  his  sympathy
with  the  Chaldeans,  notwithstanding
his  advice  to  his  countrymen  to  surrender
to  them.  For  his  counsel  had  proceeded
from  purest  love  to  his  fatherland.

2.  Thus  he  proved  his  devotion  to  his
suffering  people,  imitating  Moses  (Heb.
xi.  25).

3.  Thus  he  kept  alive  Gods  word  amid
a  despondent  remnant.  In  Babylon  the
exiles  had  Ezekiel  and  Daniel ;  but  had
he  gone,  these  scattered  remnants  would
have  been  "as  sheep  having  no  shep-
herd." In  all  this  ^''he  looked  not  on
his  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of
others,"


Vers.  7-16.     Gedaliah's  Exaltation  and  Peru*


I,  Integrity  rewarded  (ver.  5).  His
faithfulness  to  Chaldea  had  arisen  from
the  consciousness  that  God  willed  it  so.
His  obedience  to  duty  won  him  human
confidence  and  high  exaltation.
604


II.  A  renewal  of  hope  (ver.  13).
Under  Gedaliah's  wise  administration
the  desolation  might  have  been  in  part  re-
paii  ed.  God  gives  to  the  downcast  agleam
of  hope  (vers.  9-11).      It  is  well  to  make


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.  chap.  xli.


the  best  of  our  misfortunes,  and  wisely  Therefore  is  he  the  happy  man  who  can

accept  the  facts  of  Providence  (ver.  10).  preserve  the  golden  mean." — Cramer,

III.   Treachery  in  ambush.  "  Gedaliah  seems  to  have  been  of  our

1.  Envy  covets  what  it  has  no  right  Queen  Elizabeth's  tenipei,  who  was  heard
to  claim.  to  declare  that  slie  could  believe  nothing

2.  A  generous  nature  finds  it  difficult  of  her  people  which  mothers  could  not
to  be  suspicious  (ver.  14).  believe  of  their  children." — Trapp.

3.  It  is  a  mystery  in  God's  Providence  '*Gedali..li  thouglit  that  Ishmael  durst
that  He  suffers  the  righteous  to  act  un-  not  attempt  anything  against  him  6^cawstf
wisel}',  and  thus  fall  into  the  hands  of  of  the  Babylonians ;  besides  he  knew
malignant  and  envious  men Cver.  16).  But  his  own  innocency  ;  and  he  believed  in
an  explanation  is  indicated  in  Isa.  Ivii.  1.  Ishmael's    pretended    familiarity    with

him,    which,     he    might    think,    other

Comments —  captains  envied.      Sure  it  is  that  good

"  Those  who  are  of  a  pious  disposition  Gedaliah  was  too  secure.      '  Nam  qui

cannot  believe  so  much  evil  as  is  told  of  omnia  credit^  et  qui  nihil  credit^  ex  aequo

people.      But   we   must    not    trust  too  peccat '  (Seneca).     It  is  no  less  a  fault  to

much,  for  the  world  is  full  of  falseness  believe   nothing  than  to   believe  every-

(Wisdom  xxxvii.  13).      He  who  believes  thing.     Reports  are  to  be  neither  over-

too  easily  will  be  often  deceived  ;  and  heeded  nor  overslighted,  especially  when

he  who  believes  no  one  is  also  deceived,  life  is  concerned." — Trapp.

General  Reflections  :  Israel's  Misfortunes  Typical  of  Human  Life.

This  overthrow  of  the  people  has  its  analogies  : —

I.  2Vie  deportation  of  the  whole  people  in  chains  and  fetters  is  a  type  of  our
universal  human  misery^  from  which  no  one  (not  even  Jeremiah)  is  free.

II.  The  fate  of  Gedaliah  and  the  journey  to  Egypt  is  a  type  of  the  insufficiency
of  all  human  help.

III.  As  the  Jews  after  Gedaliah^s  murder^  so  men  at  all  times  find  protection
and  deliverance  in  the  Lord  alone. — Naegelshach,

*'  Misfortune  is  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  :  when  one  is  broken  another  follows,
and  the  end  of  one  trouble  is  the  beginning  of  another." — Cramer,


CHAPTER  XLL


Critical  and  Exeoetical  Notes.— Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Only  tliree  months  after
Jerusalem  was  captured  by  the  Chaldeans:  *'in  the  seventh  month"  (ver.  I,  comp.  chap.
zxxix.  2)      See  notes  on  two  preceding  chapters.

Personal  Allusion.     Ver.  1.  **  Elishuma."     Vide  note,  chap,  xxxvi.  12,  in  loe.

Geographical  References.  Vers.  7  and  9.  "  The  pit : "  properly  cistern.  "  On  the  summit
of  the  hill  was  Asa's  fortress,  with  a  deep  well  within  a  high  enclosed  courtyard,  dug  by  him
for  the  security  of  the  garrison  "  (Stanley).  Asa's  reason  for  digging  this  cistern  was,  that  when
the  city  should  be  besieged  bv  the  king  of  Israel  there  might  be  sufficient  water  for  the
inhabitants.     (See  1  Kings  xv.  22.)

Ver,  12.  "  2%e  great  water.s  that  are  in  Gibeon,"  Gibeon  is  about  two  miles  north  of  Mizpah.
The  D^3"]  D.^D  "great  waters,"  mean  the  vast  pool  and  fountains  which  Robinson  {Researches,
ii.  136)  describes,  about  120  feet  by  100.     (See  2  Sam.  ii.  13.)

Ver.  17.  '*  2'he  habitation  of  Chimhavi:"  lit.  Geruth-Chimham,  i.e.  the  caravanserai
belonging  to  Chimham  (2  Sam.  xix.  37,  88).  Johanan  makes  this  his  headquarters  until  he
could  arrange  his  flight  to  Egypt.

SUBJECT  OF  CHAPTER  XLI.

Ishmael's  Sanguinary  Conspiracy.

Ver.   1.    Theme:  Unsuspiciousness.  L    Unsus]>iciousnes8  is  indicative  of  A

**They  did  eat  bread  together  in  Mizpah,^'      frank  and  generous  soul.

605


CHAP.  XLL


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


1.  Honest  men  are  naturally  trustful.
Themselves  faithful,  they  do  not  sus-
pect, in  seeming  frie fids,  perfidious  con-
spirators !

2.  Kindly  hearts  entertain  no  dark
suspicions.  "  Charity  thinketh  no  evil "
(1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  It  is  painful  to  look
for  a  villain  in  him  who  dips  his  sop
with  us  in  the  same  dish.

So  far  Gedaliah's  was  a  praiseworthy
simplicity,

II.  Unsuspiciousness  runs  the  risks  of
incaution.

1.  Guileless  minds  cannot  credit  base
reports.  Although  warned  (chap.  xl.  14,
16),  he  could  not  believe  it  possible  that
Ishmael  plotted  foul  designs.  Conscious
only  of  iniiocency  and  good  purposes
himself,  he  found  it  impossible  to  believe
that  wrong  was  intended  him.

2.  Indiscreet  trust  pays  a  severe
penalty.  In  this  case,  Gedaliah's
virtue  of  unsuspiciousness  became  a
fault ;  for  in  being  injudiciously  trust-
ful he  both  imperilled  his  own  life  and
exposed  the  public  interests  to  disaster,

IIL  Unsuspiciousness  is  apt  to  invite
calamity.

1.  By  neglecting  lurking  danger.  It
was  Gedaliah's  duty  to  have  regarded  the
information  given  him  (chap.  xl.  14),  and
arrested  a  villain  whose  plots  threatened
the  public  weal.

2.  By  si ir inking  from  exercising  a
just  severity.  For  the  incapability  of
suspicions  is  allied  often  with  a  weak
regard  to  justice;  and  hence  a  disinclina-
tion to  punish  wrong  (chap.  xl.  16).

3.  By  tolerating  evident  evils.  And
here  is  the  folly  and  blunder  of  habitual
unsuspiciousness  ;  it  will  not  see  evils  ;
it  prefers  to  let  them  alone,  hoping  for
the  best.  And  thus  iniquities  thrive
under  the  benign  tolerance  of  an  in-
genuous rule.

IV.  Unsuspiciousness  plays  into  the
hands  of  villany.

1.  Villany  is  a  fact,  existing  and
active  in  all  human  society.  He  who
ignores  it  is  wanting  in  prudence.

2.  Villany  plots  deeds  so  foul  that  no
vigilance  can  be  too  alert  to  check  its
purposes.  By  neglecting  this  wise  suspi-
ciousness Gedaliah  wronged  Johanan
(chap.  xl.  1 6),  imperilled  the  peace  of  the

606


people,  and  placed  himself  in  the  assas-
sin's grasp  (chap.  xli.  1).

3.  Villany  shrinks  not  from  outrage  on
noblest  souls.  Surely  it  is  the  highest
crime  (xliv.  2)  thus  to  woo  generous
confidence  only  to  act  the  fiend  !  *'0««
may  smile,  and  smile,  and  be  a  villain  /  "
The  execrable  character  of  such  villany
Shakespeare  describes —

*'  My   conscience  hath    a    thousand    several
tongues,
And  every  tongue  brings  in  a  several  tale,
And  every  tale  condemns  me  for  a  villain."
—Richard  III,  v.  3.

Ver.  2.  Theme:  Hospitality  Out-
raged. "  Then  arose  Ishmael,  .  .  •
and  slew  him  1 "

Murder  is  frightful  enough  in  itself,
but  the  moment  of  the  deed  makes  it
heinous  in  the  extreme.

L  Hospitality:  the  infamy  of  its
abuse.  Ishmael  polluted  his  hands
with  innocent  blood  at  the  sacred
table  of  hospitality.

Universally  and  in  all  ages  hospi-
tality has  been  cherished  as  sacred.

The  ancient  heathen  nations  regarded
it  80,  and  its  violation  was  counted  by
them  the  greatest  atrocity.

An  oath  given  when  at  table  and
afterwards  broken  called  for  summary
vengeance.

Among  the  Greeks  existed  a  custom
of  pledging  lasting  friendship  in  return
for  hospitality.  It  was  in  this  wise :
On  a  four-sided  stone  was  written  the
name  of  each  guest ;  the  stone,  called
*'  Tessara  Hospitalis,^'  was  then  broken,
and  each  friend  carried  away  the  part
of  the  stone  bearing  the  other's  name,
and  it  entitled  the  holder  of  the  part
to  ask  protection  and  shelter  from  the
other  whenever  necessity  arose.

See  Percy  Anecdotes,  on  **  Hospi-
tality," for  illustrations.

II.  Jealousy :  outraging  every  in-
stinct of  gratitude.  Ishmael  had  been
treated  with  magnanimity  by  Qedaliab,
and  now  was  being  entertained  with
courtesy  and  kindness  ;  yet—

1.  Ambition  and  envy  prompted  him
to  violence.  He  was  "  of  the  royal
seed"  (ver.  1),  and  could  not  endure
that  Qedaliah  should  be  in  exaltation.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREM1A3.


CHAP.  XLI»


•*  Base  envy  withers  at  another's  joy,
And  hates  that  excellence  it  cannot  reach."
— Thonism's  Seasons,  283.

**  Jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave."

—  Cant.  viii.  6.

"Jealousy,  the  injured  lover's  hell.'*

— Milton's  Paradise  Lost

*'  Fling  away  amhition:
By  that  sin  fell  the  angels."

— Shakespeare,  Henry  VIII.,  iii.  2,

2.  Innocence  was  no  shield  against  the
lust  of  jealousy.  Gedaliah  had  done
Ishrnael  no  wrong.  Ishmael  had  not
been  deposed  from  power.  All  Geda-
liah's  acts  had  been  generous  and  trust-
ful, yet  Ishmael  could  not  endure  the
sight  of  his  supremacy.

Such  outrage  on  innocence  refutes  all
natural  sentiments  in  the  human  heart,
and  shows  Ishmael  to  be  an  odious
monster.  Horace  speaks  the  natural
sentiment  which  we  cherish  towards
innocence —

**  True,  conscious  honour  is  to  feel  no  sin,
He's  armed  vrithoiU  who's  innocent  within  :
Be  this  thy  screen,  and  this  thy  wall   of
brass."  — Pope^s  Horace.

But  it  was  this  conscious  innocence  which
made  Gedaliah  fearless  and  trustful,
and  should  have  ensured  his  safety.

**  If  there  be  a  crime
Of  deeper  dye  than  all  the  guilty  train
Of  human  vices,  His  ingratitude.** — Brooke.

'*  Ingratitude  is  treason  to  mankind."

— Thomson^

Theme:  Gedaliah's  Fate  an  Ex-
ample. "  Illustrating  what  befalls  even
the  most  noble  in  times  of  deep  corrup-
tion : —

(i.)  They  enjoy  general  confidence.

(ii.)  They  are  incapable  of  attribut-
insr  extieme  wickedness  to  men.

(iii.)  They  become  a  sacrifice  to  their
confidence.

(iv.)  They  are  therefore  not  in  a
condition  to  stay  the  divine  judgments."
— Naegelshacli.

"  Juda^'s  kiss  and  Jucob's  brethren
are  very  common  in  the  world,  and  take
after  their  gr.indfather  Cain,  who  spake
kindly  to  Abel  and  yet  had  blood-
thirsty thoughts  (Gen.  iv.  8).  Yea,
they  take  after  their  father  the  devil,


who  is  a  murderous  spirit  (John  viii.
14),  and  disguises  himself  as  an  angel
of  light  (2  Cor.  xi.  14)." — Cramer,

"Much  treachery  and  cruelty  hath
been  exercised  at  feasts.  Absalom  slew
Amnon  at  a  feast ;  so  did  Zimri,  King
Elah ;  so  did  Alexander,  Philotas." —
Trapp.

Josephus  suggests  that  Ishmael  seized
the  opportunity  of  slaughter  when
Gedaliah  and  his  guests  were  merry
with  wine,  and  his  words  are  :  "  When
Gedaliah  had  feasted  Ishmael,  and  those
that  were  with  him,  in  a  splendid
manner  at  his  table,  and  had  given
them  presents,  he  became  disordered  in
drink,  while  he  endeavoured  to  be  very
merry  with  them  ;  and  when  Ishmael
saw  him  in  this  case,  and  that  he  was
drowned  in  his  cups  to  the  degree  of
insensibility  and  fallen  asleep,  he  rose
up  on  a  sudden,  with  his  ten  friends,  and
slew  Gedaliah  and  those  that  were  with
him  at  the  feast." — Antiq.  x.  9,  4.

Ver.  3.  "  Ishmael  also  slew  the  Chal-
deans and  men  of  war."  This  gives  sup-
port to  Kittos  suggestion,  that  *'  he  re-
garded Gedaliah  with  hatred,  as  one
who  had  stooped  to  hold  office  under
the  destroyers  of  his  country"' — Daily
Bib.  Illus.

Ver.  6.  Theme :  A  Traitor's  Tears.
"  Ishmael  went  forth  weeping  all  along  as
he  went."

I.  Patriotic  pilgrims  (ver.  5).  It  was
now  the  season  of  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles, and  these  pilgrims  journeyed  to
Jerusalem —

1.  Mourning  over  the  Temples  ruin.

2.  Carrying  their  devout  offerings,  to
present  them  amid  the  scene  of  desola-
tion.

A  piteous  spectacle  !  Oh  how  their
souls  grieved  for  the  destruction  of
"  the  house  of  the  Lord  "I  They  would
fain,  amid  the  ruins,  keep  the  observances
of  the  law,  and  mourn  before  the  Lord
who  had  [)ermitted  this  direful  calamity
to  overtake  His  sinning  people.  Their
aspects  show  them  to  be —

(a,)  A  penitential  group  ;  (6.)  bringing
their  propitiatory  offerings  before  God  ;
(c.)  touched  with  patriotic  sorrow.

607


CfHAP.  XLn.


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


II.  A  blasphemous  decoy.  "  Ish-
mael  went  weeping."

1.  Pretending  that  he  also  bemoaned
the  ruin  of  Zion.

2.  Capturing  them  by  his  foul  deceit.

They  were  unsuspicious  of  liis  murder-
ous designs ;  and  he  intending  to  slay
them  lest  they,  discovering  his  deed  to
Gedaliah,  should  rouse  the  country  against
him  before  he  had  completed  his  usurpa-
tion, decoyed  them  to  destruction.

What  barbarity  is  here,  thus  to  seize
defenceless  strangers^  and  slay  them  with-
out the  faintest  provocation  !

How  does  this  illustrate  the  progress
of  guilt ;  having  polluted  his  hands  in
blood,  Ishmael  went  on  to  even  baser
effrontery  and  deeper  villany.

Ver.  12.  Theme:  Treachery  Thwart-
ed. His  design  seems  to  have  been  to
carry  them  as  slaves  into  Ammon.
The  captives  hailed  their  deliverer  with
joy,  and  deserted  at  once  to  Johanan,
so  that  Ishmael  returned,  disgraced  and
defeated^  to  the  king  of  Ammon,  whose
base  purposes  he  attempted  to  serve.
Yet—

How  great  woe  may  one  foul  hand,
work !  How  startling  that  no  sorer
punishment  overtook  him  I

Nevertheless,  though  guilty  men  escape
the  immediate  penalty  of  crime,  their
prolonged  life  only  prolongs  their  career
of  wretchedness  and  terror,  execrated
by  righteous  men,  and  haunted  by  their
guilty  memories ;  for  in  this  way  God


drags  critninals  daily  before  the  tribunal
of  their  own  memory,  and  then  lets  them
live  under  the  curse  of  their  own  con-
science.

Vers.  16-18.  TAeme.' Mistaken  Pat-
riotism. "Johanan  departed  to  go
into  Egypt.*'

I.  Courage  ungoverned  by  godliness.

1.  His  energy  for  his  people  was
praiseworthy.

2.  His  valour  wrought  their  deliver-
ance (ver.  16).

3.  Yet  his  departure  from  God's  pur-
pose, in  inclining  towards  Egypt  (ver.
17),  showed  both  unbelief  and  wilful-
ness.

II.  Safety  sought  from  a  forbidden
alliance.

1.  Though  strictly  denounced  by
God's  messengers,  yet  he  intended  to
trust  in  Egypt.

2.  Fear  (of  the  Chaldeans)  was  allowed
to  rule  them  instead  of  faith  (in  God)
(ver.  18).

3.  Turning  from  the  straight  path  of
duty  they  were  led  to  a  tortuous  and
destructive  policy.

III.  Obedience  to  G-od  proves  the
highest  patriotism.

1.  It  wins  more  than  noblest  valour
can  effect.

2.  Righteousness  is  always  safest ;
doing  God's  will  regardless  of  conse-
quences, untroubled  by  fears.

3.  Simple  faith  in  God's  word,  regard-
less of  our  own  fears,  always  issues  best.


CHAPTER  XLII.

Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes. — Chronology  as  in  previous  chapter.  Observe :  JeremiaK
and  Baruch  had  been  among  the  captives  of  Ishmael,  whom  Johanan  resetted  (chap,  xliii.  6).

State  of  the  Nation. — The  preceding  chapter  reveals  the  baseness  of  the  "royal  seed"  and
the  infatuation  of  the  people's  latest  leader.  This  chapter  discloses  the  obstinacy  of  the  people
"from  the  least  to  the  greatest"  in  disobeying  God's  purpose  and  in  dissembling  their  prayers.
Thus,  all  God's  chastisements  leaves  them  still  a  rebellious  nation  and  justifies  the  severity  of
His  disciplinary  punishments.

Personal  Allusion. — Ver.  1.   **Jezaniah:**  called  **  Azariah"  (chap,  xliii.  2).

Literary  Criticisms. — Vers.  2,   3.    "  The  Lobd  thy  God."      Some  few  authorities  hare

^3"'ri'pfc{    **oMr  God."     But  probably  the  form  is  correct,  "The  Lord  thy  God,"  expressing  the

people's  sense  of  Jeremiah's  peculiar  relationship  to  Jehovah  But  when  the  prophet  replies
(ver.  4),  "  The  Lord  your  God,"  as  if  to  remind  them  that  He  had  not  cast  them  oflf,  they
change  the  form  of  expression  into  "The  Lord  our  God"  (ver.  6).

Ver.  12.  "  /  vnU  show  mercies  unto  you,  that  Tie,"  dec,  ue.  I  will  give  you  compassion,  or  will
excite  pity  for  you;  i.e.  in  the  king  of  Babylon.
608


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XUL


SUBJECT  OP  CHAPTER  XLIL
Wilfulness  in  Prayer:  God's  Guidance  asked  Hypocritically.


Vers.  2,  3.  Theme:  Perplkxed
Suppliants.  "  That  God  may  show  us
the  way  wherein  we  vaay  walk^  and  the
thing  that  we  may  do."

If  only  these  words  had  been  sincere^
could  their  request  have  been  better,  or
their  language  more  devout  ]

(i4.)  Regarding  the  words  as  IF
SINCERK,  they  suggest —

I  Inquirers  anxiously  seeking  the
light.

n.  Suppliants  humbly  craving  God's
favour.

IIL  Baffled  souls  troubled  to  gain
clearer  leading.

IV.  Obedient  children  eager  more
perfectly  to  do  God's  wilL

{B.)  Regarding  the  words  AS  hypo-
critical, they  show —

I.  Good  words  may  be  spoken  by
false  lips.

IL  Wilful  inquirers  mocking  God
with  a  pretence  of  seeking  guidance.

III.  Contumacious  sinners  assum-
ing the  disguise  of  piety.

IV.  While  in  the  very  path  of
transgression  (chap.  xli.  17),  rebels  will
dissemble  and  ask  God's  permission.

Ver.  4.  Theme :  "  No  Cloak  for
THEIR  Sin."

I.  Disobedience  done  without  fvU  know-
ledge is  a  lesser  crime  than  when
clearer  light  is  asked  and  gained.
Had  they  gone  to  Egypt  without  seek-
ing God's  decision  upon  their  course,
their  rebellion  would  have  been  less
defiant  and  blasphemous.

1.  The  awful  guilt  of  sinning  against
light  /

2.  The  baseness  of  asking  light  while
intending  to  defy  it.

II.  Audacity  reaches  its  culmination
when  rebellion  ventures  to  trifle  with
prayer.  Plainly  they  used  prayer
merely  to  get  their  own  way,  but  deter-
mined to  act  as  they  wished  should
God  oppose  them.

1.  Hypocrisy  flaunts  its  pretences  in
the  very  face  of  God.

2.  Determined  sinners  sometimes  use
religion  to  gain  their  own  ends.


IIL  Judgment  will  be  weighted  by
the  woe  of  slighted  grace.

1.  God  may  he  sought  in  prayer  j
their  conduct  proves  they  knew  this.

2.  Divine  guidance  is  granted  to  the
perplexed ;  this  also  they  knew,  yet
trifled  with  it.

3.  Abuse  of  God's  goodness  will  pro-
voke the  sternest  justice;  and  darken
the  soul's  doom.

Ver.  6.  Theme:  Absolute  Submis-
sion TO  God's  Direction.  Consider
the  state  of  affairs:  Jerusalem  over-
thrown; only  "a  few"  people  left  in  the
city;  internal  conspiracies:  Gedaliah  and
Ishmael ;  a  "  remnant  "  rescued  from
Ishmael  by  Johanan ;  a  despondent  and
subdued  people.

Now  arose  the  question  as  to  the  next
movement:  Should  they  remain  in  their
country  amid  disturbances,  or  go  to
Egypt  and  place  themselves  under
foreign  protection  1

Life  is  full  of  this  asking ,  "  What
next  /  "     From  that  day  to  this.

The  words  "  To  whom  we  send  thee  "
show  that  the  people  knew  they  had  a
prophet  among  them  whom  they  could
send  to  the  Lord.  But  we  have  no  one
whom  we  can  commission  to  go  to  God
for  us ;  we  must  go  each  one  for  our-
selves.

Yet  are  we  not  less  sure  of  a  hearing;
for  we  have  a  "  Mediator  between  God
and  man,"  and  *'Him  the  Father  heareth
always."

I.  God  appealed  to  for  direction  in
dif&cult  circumstances.  This  was  of
old  done  by  Israel  as  a  nation  habi-
tually;  they  hearkened  to  God's  direc-
tion in  their  oracles.  This  is  the  instinc-
tive act  of  a  godly  soul.  Marks  out
whether  godly  or  not.  Should  use  God
freely.

1.  Can  we  as  surely  learn  GodHs  voice
now  as  when  He  spake  by  such  direct
communication  1  It  was  so  assuring  to
have  a  personal  hearing  and  answer.
Yet  if  God  has  given  counsel  for  every
case,  and  given  it  mice  for  all  in  His
written  Wordj  we  can  refer  to  that.  To
<J  609


e&AP.  XLII.


BOM  I  LET  I C  COMMENT  ART:  J^REMlAB,


questi<  n  that  the  Bible  holds  advice  for
our  persoihd  and  special  wants,  is  to
d  aibt  the  wisdom  of  God  who  inspired
tlie  word  for  all  His  people^  for  every
circumstance,  for  all  time.

Besides  wliich,  prayer  is  our  privilege
freely  to  use,  as  well  as  the  Scriptures.

Do  ye  not  also  send  us,  God's  messen-
gers, to  Him  for  a  word  from  the  Lord
for  you  ?     "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."

Moreover,  cannot  God  impress  upon
our  minds  and  hearts  His  will  ?  By  His
Holy  Spirit ;  by  "  working  within  us  to
will  and  do  of  His  good  pleasure."

2.  Is  it  right  to  hazard  ourselves  when
we  act  from  the  persuasion  that  we  are
doing  God's  will  f  "  Whether  it  be  evil,
we  will  obey."

But  that  inquiry  means,  Shall  expe-
diency  alone  rule  us,  so  that  we  only  do
what  seems  advantageous  to  us  and  not
"evil"?

But  if  this  were  our  guiding  law,
would  missionary  pioneers  go  with  the
Gospel  where  destruction  threatened
them?  Would  needy  men,  for  con-
science' sake,  stand  aside  from  gain  and
reward  ?  Would  faithful  disciples  of
Jesus  carry  their  cross  and  endure
suffering  and  toil  in  following  Him  ?
Would  the  Christian  worker  penetrate
into  vile  courts  where  fever  raged  ?
Would  disciples  expose  themselves  to
the  ordeal  of  fierce  mocking,  <fec.  %
Would  the  widow  have  surrendered
"  all  her  living  "  %

Not  expediency y  therefore ;  but  im-
plicit obedience,

3.  Can  God  really  command  what
teems  adverse  to  our  good?  Yes;  ^^good
or  evil;"  i.e.,  it  may  seem  so  to  us.

Johanan  thought  that  he  and  the  rem-
nant would  be  safest  in  Egypt  (ver.  14).
But  God  refused  (ver.  19).

In  asking  God's  counsel  they  knew
beforehand  He  might  refuse  their  wish.
Yet  they  promised  to  abide  by  His
counsel,  "whether  it  be  good  or  whether
it  be  evil."  For  "  God's  thoughts  are  not
our  thoughts,  ifceither  His  ways  our  ways."

Surely  it  is  only  to  mock  God  to  ask
Him  to  guide,  and  then  only  to  obey  when
we  approve  I  "  Shall  we  receive  good
at  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  we
not  also  receive  evil?"
610


II.  Man's  resolve  of  unfaltering
obedience  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord.

Nothing  could  be  more  unreserved  than
this  avowal :  "  Whether  it  be  good  or
evil,  we  will  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,"
&c.

If  He  is  "  the  Lord  our  God,"  then
such  complete  trust  is  natural  and
right.

1.  Their  acknowledgment  of  perplexity
(ver.  3).  They  could  not  tell  what  was
best  or  wisest  to  do ;  so  sought  guidance.
Too  often  pride  prevents  our  making
such  an  acknowledgment ;  and  not  only
when  baffled  by  life's  perplexities,  but
equally  in  spiritual  quests.  But  we  are
here  reminded  once  again  that  "it  is
not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his
steps."  We  walk  in  darkness,  stumbling;
but  knowing  not  at  what  we  stumble.
If  we  are  thus  incompetent  to  choose
and  act  alone  in  earthly  affairs,  how
much  more  in  eternal  matters !  Baffled
concerning  these  trifling  things,  how
shall  we  direct  our  career  towards
heaven  ?  We  cannot.  Acknowledge
ignorance,  therefore,  and  incompetency ;
and  go  to  God.

2.  Their  belief  in  the  Divine  wisdom.
However  it  may  seem  to  us,  "  good  or
evil,"  God  knows  best  what  we  should
do  ;  go  to  Him  and  inquire.  Even  "the
foolishness  of  God  is  wiser"  than  man's
wisdom.  He  is  perfect  in  knowledge.
All  His  people  believe  this.  Therefore
"  if  any  man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of
God"  <fec.  Pray  more  when  perplexed
— in  providence — in  religion.  God  will
then  teach  you,  and  "  show  you  the  way
wherein,"  <fec.  (ver.  3).

3.  Their  intention  respecting  the  Lord^s
answer.  And  here  we  are  confronted
with  an  astonishing  illustration  of  the  in-
fluence of  self-will;  how  blinding!  (chap,
xliii.  2).  Did  they  mean  to  abide  by  the
reply  Jeremiah  brought  ?  They  took  an
oath  that  they  would  (ver.  6);  but  "ye
dissembled  in  your  hearts,"  <fec.  (ver.  20).
This  is  very  awful.  Oh!  let  us  heed  lest
we  do  the  same,  set  aside  the  Divine
counsels  by  our  wilfulness.  Do  we  not
often  pray  for  guidance,  have  we  not
also  vowed  obedience,  did  we  not  pro-
fess to  lay  ourselves  out  for  service ;  and
somehow  there  came  to  us  a  conviction


BOM  I  LET  W  COMM£NTART.  JERSmAS.


OfiAF.  XUL


of  God's  will ;  but  it  was  contrary  to
our  secret  inclinations,  so  we  beguiled
it  away!  Beware  of  "dissembling  in
your  hearts  "  when  you  deal  with  God  I

"  Good  or  evi7."  Let  us  be  honest  in
our  resolve.  Ask  God,  meaning  to  obey;
and  obey  as  if  we  believe  God  had
taught  us  what  to  do.  This  is  "faith,
nothing  doubting."

Ill  Implicit  obedience  to  God  in-
volves our  highest  welfare.  "That  it
may  be  well  ivith  us,  when  we  obey^''  <fea
True,  '*  Godliness  is  great  gain  ; "  always
for  our  good  to  obey.

1.  6^00?  will  befriend  those  who  rely
upon  Him  (vers.  10,  11).  It  is  an  old
truth,  God  preserveth  His  saints.  We
are  His,  if  we  trust  in  Him ;  and  He  is
"for  us."  "I  have  been  young,  and
now  am  old,  yet  have  I  not  seen  the
righteous  forsaken "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25).
"According  to  your  faith  be  it  done
unto  you."

2.  He  vfill  deal  most  graciously  with
those  who  obey  Him  (ver.  12).  "  Show
mercies ; "  not  only  avert  ill,  but  add
blessings.  Yes,  and  more  ;  God  would
dispose  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Babylon
to  their  favour,  "that  he  may  have  mercy
upon  you  and  cause  you  to  return  to
your  own  land"  (ver.  12).  For  "when
a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh
even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with
him."

3.  He  will  gather  His  faithful  people
together,  and  far  exceed  their  prayers
and  hopes  in  His  dealings  with  them.
For  God  would  eflfect  their  ultimate
restoration  to  their  land,  would  raise
again  about  them  all  the  old  joys  of
Jerusalem,  and  recover  to  them  their
lost — national  and  spiritual — privileges.
This  they  desired  ;  but  it  was  more  than
they  asked.

To  an  obedient  child  we  not  only
give  what  it  requests,  we  draw  the
child  to  our  very  heart.  Thus  doth
God.  He  will  gather  us  into  close  and
tender  relationship  to  Himself.  Yes,
and  in  due  season,  to  His  land,  where
foes  shall  no  more  invade,  and  we  shall
never  more  be  separated  from  "  the  Lord
our  God."  And  in  the  spiritual  blessings
with  which  He  will  enrich  us  until  the
day   of  our    "  gathering   together   unto


Him,*  we  shall  find  that  "it  is  well
with  us  when  we  obey  the  voice  of  the
Lord  our  God."

Ver.  7.  Theme:  A  Delayed  Answeb

TO  Prayer.

i.  Revelation  waited  for ;  the  prophet
would  not  speak  till  he  had  heard.

ii.  Interval  for  deliberation  ;  that  the
people  might  judge  of  their  own  willing-
ness to  accept  the  message  of  God.

iii.  Obedience  tested;  for  true  obedience
bows  to  God's  time,  as  well  as  to  His
way  and  will.

Ver.  11.  Theme:  God's  Repentance.
"I  repent  Me  of  the  evil  that  I  have
done  unto  you."  God  is  said  to  repent
when  He  alters  His  outward  methods  of
dealing  with  men  {Augustine).

"  /  am  satisfied  with  the  punishment
I  have  inflicted  on  you,  if  only  you  add
not  a  new  offence  "  (^Grotius),


Ver.  14.  Theme:  Delusions  OP  Dis-
obedience.

I.    A  forbidden   course.      To   "go

into  the  land  of  Egypt."

The  reason  for  this  prohibition  was
that  Egypt  was  infamous  for  idolatry,
full  of  the  snares  of  luxury,  doomed  for
its  oppression  of  their  ancestors.  It  was
a  standing  prohibition  (Deut.  xvii.  16).

IL  Coveted  advantages.  "Where
we  shall  see  no  war,"  <fec.

1.  Sin  always  entices  with  delusive
promises.  But  Egypt's  troubles  were
just  setting  in,  and  there  would  be  only
war  and  woe  till  it  was  destroyed.

2.  Sinners  show  their  rebellion  in  dif-
believing  God*s  promises  (vers.  10,  11).
as  if  He  were  a  liar  (1  John  ver.  10).

III.  Vain  hopes.

1.  Though  they  had  deserved  only  evlL
they  still  dreamed  of  peace  and  prosperity.
So  do  transgressors  still  "  deceive  their
own  souls."

2.  Though  they  intended  further  trans-
gression, they  boasted  in  the  prospect  of
comfort.  But  "the  ways  of  transgressors
are  hard ; "  and  "  though  hand  join  in
hand,  they  shall  not  go  unpunished."

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Calamity  Pursuing

Transgressors.    "  The  sword  which  ye

611


cfiKt.  xtn.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


feared  shall  overtake  you  there  ;  and  the
famine  whereof  ye  were  afraid  shall
follow  close  after  you  there  in  Egypt."

i.  Because  sinners  carry  their  own  woe
with  them  wherever  they  go,  even  into
hell.

ii.  Because  God  follows  transgressors
wherever  they  go,  and  His  being  with
them  makes  their  terror.

I.  The  very  evils  we  think  to  escape
by  sin,  we  bring  the  more  surely  upon
ourselves.

1.  For  the  act  of  sinning  renders
punishment  certain,

2.  Wrong  courses  never  can  lead
aright.

3.  Adopting  evil  devices  in  order  to
avert  evil  results  is  the  height  of  frenzy
and  folly.

II.  What  our  hearts  most  eagerly
determine  often  proves  most  fatal  to  us.

1.  Because  the  hear-t  is  deceitful  and
wicked,  and  to  follow  its  devices  and
desires  lands  us  in  rebellion  against
God  and  neglect  of  our  highest  spiritual
good.  *'  Whoso  trusteth  his  own  heart
is  a  fool."

2.  Because  sin  blinds  our  perception  of
good  and  magnifies  the  advantages  of  evil.

It  reverses  the  telescope  when  looking
at  good  and  minimises  it ;  but  it  turns
the  instrument  in  full  focus  on  evil,  and
vastly  enlarges  it.  "The  god  of  this
world  blinds  the  minds  of  them  that
believe  not."

3.  Because  the  highest  blessings  ive
receive  come  to  us  through  self-denial  and
suffering.  Certainly  not  through  indul-
gence/ **  Take  up  thy  cross  and  follow
Me."  *'  St7'ait  is  the  gate  that  leadeth
unto  life."

ni.  No  hiding-place  can  be  found
/or  escape  from  the  penalties  of  wrong.

1.  j^ot  on  earth.  "  If  I  take  the
wings  of  the  morning  and  fly  to  the
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.**  See  ver.
17.

2.  Not  in  death.  "  If  I  make  my  bed
in  Hades."

3.  Not  in  eternity.  For  judgment
and  doom  meet  the  sinner  there  (Rev.
▼I  15-17.     See  ver.  18.)

Ver.  18.  Theme:  Appeal  to  Past
Judgments — a  Warning.     "As  Mine
612


anger  and  My  fury  hath  been  poured
forth  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem;
so  shall  My  fury  be  poured  forth  upon
you."

I.  Predicted  doom  fulfilled.  For
what  had  occurred  had  been  foretold
(chap.  vii.  20 ;  xviii.  16).  God  had
acted  true  to  His  word.

II.  Repeated  guilt  threatened.  The
arrows  of  the  Lord  are  in  quiver,  ready!

III.  Neglected  warnings  punished.
In  vain  all  appeals  (ver.  19);  certain
therefore  the  doom  (vers.  21,  22).

Ver.  20.  Theme :  Hypocrisy  op
Desiring  the  Prayers  op  Others.
Frequently  persons  desire  their  ministers*
prayers,  yet  are  strangers  to  fear  of  God,
and  negligent  of  duty.  Place  a  false
and  dangerous  dependence  on  others*
praj^ers.  ''  Reranant "  of  the  Jews  left
from  captivity  entreated  Jeremiah*s
prayers  (ver.  2),  and  took  oath  to  obey
voice  of  Lord  (ver.  5).  But  they  had
determined  to  go  to  Egypt,  and  asked
his  prayers  hypocritically.     Text.

I.  Consider  on  what  principle  desir-
ing the  prayers  of  others  is  grounded.

1.  A  persuasion  that  it  is  our  duty  to
pray  one  for  another.  (1.)  This  a  dictate
of  reason  (Ezra  vi.  10 ;  1  Mace.  xii.  11).
(2.)  Expressly  required  in  the  word  of
God  (Jer.  xxix.  7 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  Jas.  v.
16).  Thus  Samuel  saith  (1  Sam.  xii.
23).  (3.)  The  pious  custom  of  good  men.
Abraham  for  Sodom.  Hezekiah  sent
Isaiah  to  pray  for  him  and  his  kingdom.
Christ  prayed  for  disciples ;  Paul,  in  all
his  epistles,  for  his  friends.

2.  Desiring  the  prayers  of  others
supposeth  that  God  hath  often  answered
intercessory  prayers  of  good  men,  God
loves  good  men ;  they  have  an  interest
in  heaven  ;  others  are  favoured  for  their
sake  (Gen.  xx.  7 ;  Job  xlii.  8).  Moses
prayed,  and  Amalek  was  vanquished,
fire  in  camp  quenched,  plague  stayed,
destructive  serpents  removed,  Miriam's
leprosy  healed,  plagues  taken  from
Pharaoh  ;  God  so  influenced  by  his
prayers  that  He  said,  "  Let  Me  alone,"
&c.  (Exod.  xxxii  10).  Hezekiah's  prayer
for  offenders  (2  Chron.  xxx.  20).  Same
truth  implied  in  inhibition  of  prayers
(Jer.  vii.  16;  xi.  14;  xiv.  11;  xxix.  7).


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JMEMIAO.


OHA.P.  iLtl.


Peter  delivered  from  prison  (Acts  xii.  5);
Paul  rescued  (2  Cor.  i.  11).  On  this
principle  the  intercession  of  Christ  is
founded;  '* Father  h)veth  Him,"  &c.,
"  heareth  Him  always."

3.  It  supposeth  that  it  is  very  desir-
able, specially  in  some  cases,  to  have  the
prayers  of  others  for  us ;  that  we  reap
advant;ige.s.  God  heeds  the  pleadings
of  those  He  L)ves.  There  are  special
circumstances  when  particularly  desir-
able ;  physical  prostration,  when  cannot
pray  for  ourselves ;  perplexity  or  distress
of  mind,  as  in  Job  xxxvii.  19  ;  in  cases
of  great  importance  and  difficulty,  as
Jer.  xlii.  3.  Encouraged  by  Christ's
promise  (Matt,  xviii.  19).

II.  When  they  who  desire  the  prayers
of  others  may  be  said  to  dissemble  in
their  hearts.

1.  When  they  desire  them  without
sincerity ;  through  form  and  custom  ;
when  a  mere  compliment  to  the  piety
of  those  they  ask ;  when  done  under
pretence  to  humility ;  when  only  desire
temporal  blessings,  averse  to  spiritual
(1  Kings  xiii.  6 ;  Acts  viii.  24).  So
also  when  public  praise  is  returned  for
deliverances  (Isa.  xxvi.  16) ;  yet  no
public  glory  for  mercies  (Luke  xvii.  18).

2.  When  they  will  not  pray  for  themr
selves ;  practically  live  without  God,
neglect  public  worship  and  secret  devo-
tion. Imagine  that  ministers*  prayers
more  acceptable  than  their  own.  Not
use  proper  means  to  obtain  what  they
ask  :  health,  prosperity,  self-conquest.

3.  When  they  will  not  do  what  God
by  His  word  and  ministers  requireth,
Jews  promised  (vers.  6,  6) ;  yet  were
resolutely  determined  on  their  course,
contrary  to  command  of  God.  Pharaoh
(Exod.  iv.  28).  Men  ask  our  prayers,
but  will  not  part  with  their  lusts,  nor
practise  duties  as  enjoined.

III.  Show  the  hypocrisy  and  evil  of
this  conduct.

1.  It  is  a  high  affront  to  the  all-seeing
and  holy  God,  It  is  mocking  God  (vers.
20,  22).

2.  It  is  deceiving  and  grieving  to  those
friends  whose  prayers  they  desire.  They
h(»pe  for  the  best ;  yet  if  discern  in-
sincerity they  will  have  no  heart  to  pray


for  you.  In  affliction,  prayers  sought ;
but  neglect  your  intercessors  and  religion
in  your  prosperity.

3.  Prayers  offered  for  such  persons
are  not  likely  to  avail.  Margin  reads,
"You  have  used  deceit  against  your
own  souls."

Servants  in  praying  families,  heed  this.
Weak  persons  who  look  to  godly  persons'
prayers  in  their  last  moments  (Pro v.
xxviii.  9).  Holy  men's  prayers  may
secure  a  temporary  good  (Jas.  v.  15),
but  ensure  no  lasting  advantage ;  no
salvation  of  the  soul.

Application.  —  (1.)  Learn  with  what
dispositions  of  mind  we  should  desire  the
prayers  of  others  :  in  sincerity ;  con-
curring with  them  ;  ready  to  obey  God
(Ps.  Ixv.  2).  (2.)  That  we  should  he
ready  to  pray  one  for  another.  Our
intercessions  may  bless ;  and  we  shall
be  blessed  in  return  (Ps.  xxxv.  13).  (3.)
It  is  particularly  wicked  to  dissemble  in
our  hearts  when  we  profess  dependence
on  the  intercession  of  Christ,  His  inter-
cession not  intended  to  supersede  our
prayers  (Rev.  viii.  3 ;  Heb.  vii.  25).  If
you  neglect  prayer,  or  pray  formally,  or
live  in  violation  of  His  teachings,  you
offer  indignity  to  His  holy  character  and
office  of  mediator. — Abstract  of  Sermon
by  Rev.  Job  Orton,  Kidderminster,  a.d.
1775.

Vers.  21,  22.  Theme:  Admonished
AND  Abandoned.

L  Wilful  self-deceit.  They  tried  to
beguile  themselves  that  they  were  acting
religiously,  and  were  ready  to  listen  to
God's  word,  and  were  doing  what  was
pleasing  to  Him  ;  while  all  the  time  they
were  resolved  to  follow  their  own  course,
yet  hoped  that  God  would  give  approval
to  their  rebellion.

Like  instances  of  self-deceit.  Numb,
xxii.  5,  19;  Matt,  xxiii.  11;  Luke  xviii.
11;  and  1  Tim.  iv.  2.

n.  Given  over  to  delusions.  All
further  counsels,  persuasions,  prayers  for
you  are  useless.  You  both  "  believe  a
lie,"  and  **  will  have  none  of  My  reproof,"
For  such  obstinacy  there  is  no  cure ;  you
must  now  be  left  to  be  "  filled  with  the
knowledge  of  your  own  devices,"


613


OHAP.  XLin.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  JEREMIAH.


CHAPTER  XLIII.

Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes. — ^L  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Continnous  with  the
preceding.

2.  National  Affairs. — The  miserable  "  remnant "  (rers.  6,  6)  left  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  now
controlled  by  wilful  men,  were  led  away  to  Egypt,  and  reach  Tahpanhes  (ver.  7).

3.  Contemporaneous  History. — Probably,  in  Egypt^  at  this  very  time  Pharaoh's  palace  was
in  course  of  erection  ;  for  the  mention  (ver.  9)  of  the  "  brick-kiln  "  and  "  clay  "  \i.e.  mortar]
*'  at  the  entry  of  Pharaoh's  house  "  implies  this.  The  deadly  struggle  between  the  Chaldeans,
under  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon,  and  the  Egyptians,  under  Pharaoh-Hophra,  for
ascendency  in  tiie  East,  was  now  at  its  fiercest  heat.  In  ver.  10  the  issue  of  the  struggle  is
predicted  ;  and  Josephus  states  that  on  the  fifth  year  after  the  overthrow  of  J  erusalem,  Nebuchad-
nezzar, leaving  the  sieare  of  Tyre,  undertook  his  expedition  to  Egypt  (Antiq.  X.  ix.  7).

4.  Geographical  References, — Ver.  7.  **  Into  the  land  of  Egypt  to  Tahpanhes"  vide  note,
chap.  ii.  16,  in  loc.  This  place,  being  on  the  frontier  of  Egypt  towards  Palestine,  they  naturally
come  to  first.

Ver.  13.  "  Beth-shemeshf**  i.e.  the  house,  or  temple,  of  the  Sun,  known  to  us  by  its  Greek
name  *'  Heliopolis"  and  in  Hebrew  by  **  On"  a  very  ancient  city  of  Eirypt.  It  is  situate  on
the  east  of  the  Nile,  a  few  miles  south  of  Memphis,  vide  note,  chap.  ii.  16,  in  loc.  Ruins  of
its  celebrated  Temple  of  the  Sun,  and  an  obelisk,  nearly  seventy  feet  high,  covered  with  hiero-
glyphics, still  remain  to  mark  its  site.

5.  Manners  and  Customs. — '*  He  shall  spread  his  royal  pavilion  over  them,"  i.e.  a  canopy,
which,  being  very  ornate  with  gilt  and  gorgeous  work,  is  described  as  a  glittering  canopy.
Oriental  monarchs  have  such  an  adorned  parasol  held  over  them  for  protection  from  the
sun's  rays.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  10.  The  word  rendered  "royal  pavilion,"  inQ^  is  from  'IBK',
to  he  polished,  shining,  beautiful.

Ver.  12,  *' I  loill  kindle,  and  he  shall  burn  them."  The  change  of  persons  seems  abrupt;
and  '•  he  shall  kindle  "  seems  better.  The  LXX.,  Syriac,  and  Vulgate  so  read;  and  the  difference
is  effected  by  a  transposition  [possibly  a  penman's  slip  in  the  Hebrew]  of  the  final  letters,  TV^t^

for  ^n^n.

SUBJECT  OF  CHAPTER  XLIII.
Jeremiah  Carried  into  Egypt.

Vers.  1-6.  Theme  :  Wilfulness  tak-  IIL  Impious  disobedience  follows  in

INQ  ITS  OWN  Course.     See  homilies  on  its  train.     "So  all  .  .  .  obeyed  not  the

preceding  chapter.     In  a  wilful  career —  voice  (f  the  Lord"  (ver.  4),  (fee.     Such

L  Arrogance  leads  the  way.      All  defiance  is  the  natural  and  necessary  out-

the  "proud  men"  (ver.  2).     Pnc?e  is  the  growth  of  wilfulness.

pioneer   of    wilfulness;    and  wilfulness  IV.  Overpowering  force  completes  its

leads  on  to  rebellion  against  God.  designs  (vers.    5,    6).     No  resisting  its

II.  Sinister  unbelief  comes  to  its  violence.  The  good  in  a  man  is  corn-
aid,  Baruch,  being  the  younger  man,  pelled  to  yield  as  well  as  the  evil  in
naturally  would  protest  more  vehemently  him;  as  here,  Jeremiah  and  Baruch
against  their  departure  for  Egypt.  This  were  carried  ofif  with  the  people.  For
the  "  proud  men  "  interpret  as  betraying  when  once  Wilfulness  becomes  regnant,
a  preference  for  the  Chaldeans.  So  they  it  overpowers  the  less  vehement  forces
fortify  their  own  self-will,  and  charge  and  bears  all  before  it.
lies  on  God's  servants  in  their  own
justification.  Ver.  2.  Theme :  Proud  Men.

Notes, — Henry  remarks:  "  Those  that  I.  Proud  men  are  distinguished  for

are  resolved  to  contradict  the  great  ends  <^e^V  disbelief  of  the  Divine  testimony,

of  the  ministry,  are  industrious  to  bring  1.  Some  deny  the  record  God  has  given

a  bad  name  upon   it."     And   Cramer:  of  crea^^ow/ array  geology  against  Moses.

"  Observe  the  old  diabolical  trick  ;  when  2.   Others    disbelieve    the    record    of

preachers  practise  God's  word  and  their  miracles^  on  the   plea  that  God    never

office  with  zeal,  the  world  understands  can  depart  from  the  great  laws  by  which

how  to  conflict  it  with  another  name  and  He  governs  the  universe.     Yet  it  is  now

call  it  personal  interest,*^  a  law  that  man  comes  into  existence  by
6U


HOMILETIO  aOMMENTART:  JEREMIAB,


OBAP.  xun.


propagation,  and  as  a  babe  ;  but  it  is
certain  that  the^^r.s^  man  did  not  come
into  being  by  propagation.  Here,  then,
is  action  by  God  apart  from  law  ;  and
if  one  instance  stands,  so  may  all  super-
natural records.

3.  Others  disbelieve  the  record  of
$alvation  hy  Jesus  Christ;  call  Chris-
tianity a  myth  ;  they  will  not  bow  to
the  Crucified  One ;  will  not  admit  their
guilt,  (fee.

II.  Proud  men  not  only  dishonour
God  by  disbelieving  His  testimony,  and
thus  pave  the  way  to  their  own  destruc-
tion; they  are  accessories  to  the  ruin
of  others.

1.  Others  endorse  their  scepticism,
imbibe  their  views,  follow  their  example,
and  thus  perish  through  their  misleading,

2.  Pride  hus  prompted  kings  and
potentates  to  all  the  sanguinary  wars
that  have  desolated  lands  and  homes.

III.  Pride  being  so  hateful  to  God,
He  specially  honours  and  approves
humility.

1.  Humility  was  the  garment  in
which  Christ  was  arrayed  when  He
came  into  the  world.  "  He  took  upon
Him  the  form  of  a  servant."

2.  This  adornment  of  Christ  should
be  tlie  garment  of  Christians.  "  Be
clothed  with  humility."

3.  Thus  attired ,  prowo?  men  may  de-
spise %LS.  But  though  they  occupy  high
stations,  "  the  lofty  looks  of  man  shall
be  humliled,  and  the  haughtiness  of  man
shall  be  brouiiht  low,"  (kc.

4.  But  while  God  resisteth  the  proud,
He  giveth  grace  to  the  humble.  He
who  inhabits  eternity  has  promised  to
dwell  with  the  lowly.  Thus  attired,
good  men  will  esteem  us,  angels  will
look,  upon  us  with  complacency,  and
God  will  crown  us  with  His  richest
favour. — **  Walks  with  Jeremiah,^'  Rev.
D.  Pledge.

Vers.  5-7.  Theme:  Life's  Aim  De-
feated. **  So  the  captains  took  .  .  .
Jeremiah  and  Baruch  ,  .  .  into  the  land
of  Egypt:'

L  The  ill  most  dreaded  was  even-
tually realised.  Nothing  could  be  more
bitter  to  Jeremiah  than  this  being  carried
at  last  to  Egypt.


1.  Throughout  his  whole  prophetic
career  he  had  pleaded  with  his  nation
against  looking  towards  Egypt  for  any
befriending.  It  is  the  sum  of  his  pro-
phetic ministry  :  "  Go  not  into  Egypt "
(ver.  2).

2.  At  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  he
had  chosen  to  stay  with  the  "  remnant "
in  his  own  land,  rather  than  go  away
into  Chaldea;  prompted  thereto  by  a
noble  patriotism  (chap.  xl.  4-6).

3.  The  penalty  of  his  faithful  service
of  his  country  comes  now  in  the  most
odious  form  it  could  assume,  forced  to
go  to  the  country  from  which  he  most
instinctively  recoils  (vers.  6,  7).

Note. — How  hard  at  times  seems  "the
irony  of  fate  r*  as  the  worldly  call  it;
but  the  ordering  of  Providence  I

•* Life's  hopes  o'erturned,  its  projects  crossed!"

II.  Godly  men  entailed  in  the  cala-
mities of  impiety.

1.  Their  ministry  for  God  and  their
people  cruelly  resisted  and  repudiated
(ver.  2).

2.  Their  wise  and  self-sacrificing
career  contemned  amid  the  excitement
and  passion  of  a  popular  caprice.

3.  The  very  wrongs  inflicted  upon
them  which  they  most  dread.

Notes. — (1.)  How  painful  in  his  old
age  to  be  thus  torn  from  the  land  he
had  so  loved  and  heroically  served  !

(2.)  After  all  his  righteous  denun-
ciation of  Egypt,  and  of  his  nation  for
turning  thitherwards,  how  bitter  this
experience  of  being /orcec?  to  go  thither  /

(3.)  If  he  must  go  from  his  own  land,
he  had  opportunity  of  goingamid  honours,
and  where  he  would  have  received  kind-
ness (chap.  xl.  4),  and  where  he  could
have  served  God  amid  the  worthier  part
of  his  nation.

IIL  Life's  painful  frustrations.

1.  Surely  after  such  a  faithful  career
of  service  for  God,  Jeremiah  deserved  a
kindlier  end  than  this  I

2.  It  strangely  baffles  our  faith  when
all  our  hopes  and  aims,  which  we  know
to  he  rights  are  thus  defeated.

3.  Certainly  if  life's  services  were  only
rewarded  on  earth,  we  should  see  most
grievous  failures  of  justice.

4.  A  sorrowful  career,  feuch  as  Jero-

615


OHAP.  SLIII.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


miah's,  closing  in  deepest  shadows  of
disappointment  and  defeat,  surely  predicts
a  brighter  world.

**To  steel  his  melting  heart,
To  act  the  martyr's  sternest  part ;
To  watch  with  firm,  unshrinking  eye
His  darling  visions  as  they  die.
Too  happy  if,  that  dreadful  day,
His  life  be  given  him  for  a  prey."
(See  Keble's  "  Christian  Year.")

Vers.  7-13.  Theme:  Fleeing  prom
God's  Control.  "  So  they  came  into
the  land  of  Egypt."

I.  Allured  thither  by  delusions  (chap,
xlii.  14).

II.  Defiant  of  Jehovah's  counsels
(chap,  xliii.  4).

III.  Choosing  for  themselves  a  refuge
regardless  of  God  (ver.  7).

IV.  Followed  by  the  denunciations
of  offended  justice  (vera.  8-10).

V.  Overtaken  at  last  by  the  foe
from  whom  they  fled  (vers.  10-13).

Note. — ''The  ways  of  the  Lord"
(says  Larige)  "  are  wonderful.  Israel
flies  from  Nebuchadnezzar  far  away  to
Egypt.  But  there  they  are  not  safe.
The  Lord  causes  it  to  be  proclaimed  to
them  that,  at  the  entrance  of  the  king's
palace  at  Tahpanhes,  Nebuchadnezzar's
tent  shall  stand.  Now,  indeed,  there  is
a  brick-kiln  there,  in  the  clay  of  which
Jeremiah  is  to  place  foundation-stones,
as  it  were,  for  the  Chaldean  king's
palace.  Thus  the  Lord  lays  the  germs
of  future  events f  and  whatever  He  pre-
pares in  secret  He  reveals  in  His  own
time,  to  the  glory  of  His  wisdom,  omni-
science, and  omnipotence."

Ver.  12.  **  Kindle  a  Fire  in  the
Houses  OF  THE  Gods  OF  Egypt."  Egypt
was  full  of  temples  and  idol-gods;  those
of  wood  the  conquering  army  would
commit  to  the  flames ;  those  of  gold  they
would  carry  away  as  spoil  to  Babylon.

This  burning  of  temples  and  idols  by
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  afterwards  by  the


Persian  kings,  was  mercifully  ordered  by
God  to  wean  the  exiles  there  from  their
idolatry  into  which  they  sank,  and  to
revive  their  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel.

"  Array  Himself  with  the  Land
OF  Egypt."  A  bold  figure.  The  king  of
Babylon,  from  whom  you  expect  to  escape
by  fleeing  to  Egypt,  where  you  hope  to
dwell  securely  and  peacefully  (chap.  xlii.
11,  14),  will  come;  and  loith  the  same
ease  as  a  shepherd  wraps  himself  about
in  his  mantle,  in  order  to  lay  quietly  down
in  it  arid  take  his  rest,  so  will  Nebuchad-
nezzar possess  himself  of  the  land.

The  Egyptians,  according  to  the
Arabs,  have  a  tradition  that  their  land
was  devastated  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in
consequence  of  their  Icing  having  received
the  Jews  under  his  protection,  and  that  it
lay  desolate  forty  years.

Prophecy  Fulfilled.

Note. — I.  This  is  definite  prophecy
(vers.  10-13).  llie  name  (f  the  invader
is  given ;  his  work  of  spoliation  is
described.  God's  predictions  are  not
generalisations  or  conjectures ;  but  eX'
plicit  fore-statements  of  events.  This
prophecy  by  Jeremiah  in  Egypt  was
echoed  {without  collusion)  by  Ezekiel  in
Babylon  by  the  river  Chebar  (Ezek.
xxix.-xxxvii.)

IL  Predictions  literally  accom-
plished. The  historian  follows  with
his  pen  long  after  the  prophet  has  written
his  predictions  ;  and  in  Josephus  we  have
impartial  testimony.  He  writes :  "Which
things  came  to  pass  accordingly  ;  for  on
the  fifth  year  after  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem,  which  was  the  twenty-third
of  the  reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  he  made
an  expedition  into  Coele-Syria  ; .  .  .  and
fell  upon  Egypt,  in  order  to  overthrow
it ;  and  he  slew  the  king  that  then
reigned,  and  set  up  another ;  and  he
took  those  Jews,  that  were  there  captives,
and  led  them  away  to  Babylon  "  (Antiq.
X.  ix.  7).


616


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xliv.


CHAPTER  XLIV.

Critical  AND  Exegetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — A  considerable  interval
must  be  placed  between  this  chapter  and  the  two  preceding,  which  record  their  arrival  in
Egypt;  for  we  here  find  tiie  fugitives  coming  together  to  Pathros  from  their  different  towns,
so  that  we  have  to  allow  time  for  their  dispersion  through  Egypt  and  settlement  in  widely
separated  cities  there.  Yet  the  address  of  Jeremiah  assumes  that  he  speaks  to  the  people  of
the  migration  who  have  come  into  Egypt,  and  not  to  a  later  generation  born  in  Egypt.  Dr.
Payne  Smith  puts  the  incident  only  a  year  after  their  arrival  in  Egypt,  but  this  seems  too
early  ;  and  it  may  be  nearer  the  case  to  conjecture  the  date  as  being  from  five  to  ten  years  after
the  flight  into  Egypt,  probably  about  580  B.C.,  though  Lange  suggests  610  B.C.  See  Introduc-
^on,  p.  2,  V.  c.

2.  Contemporaneous  Scriptures. — EzekieVs  visions  in  Babylon  are  synchronous.  See  also
Psalm  cxxxvii.  Daniel  also  in  Babylon  (see  chaps,  iii.,  iv.)  Ohadiah  also  rises  at  this  time  in
prophecy,  denouncing  Edom  for  its  exultation  over  Zion's  overthrow.

3.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  1.  " Migdol,**  meaning  "a  tower,"  a  boundary  city
in  the  north  of  Egypt,  now  Magdolum,  twelve  miles  from  Pelusium.  **  Tahpanhes,"  note  on
chap,  xliii.  8,  and  **  Noph,"  note  on  chap.  ii.  16.     Pathros,  i.e.  Upper  Egypt  (see  Ezek.  xxix.  14).

4.  Personal  Allusion. — Ver.  30.  Pharaoh-Hophua,  wc?e  Contemporaneous  History,  note  to
chap,  xxxii.  Hophra,  known  to  the  Greeks  as  Apries,  succeeded  Psammis,  the  successor  to
Pharaoh. Necho,  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  defeated  at  Charchemish.  Vide  "  Extermination  of
Jewish  Exiles  in  Egypt,"  below,  p.  620.

Ver.  19.  **  The  Queen  of  Heaven."     Vide  note  in  loc.  vii.  18.

6.  Literary  Criticisms.  —  Ver.  9.  '*  The  vnckedness  of  your  wives.**  As  the  Hebrew  suffix  is
singular,  V^3»  the    LXX.  alter  the  word  and  give  ^^your  princes."     But  Henderson,  Keil,

Naegelsbach,  and  others  \\  ould  retain  the  word  as  referring  to  the  Jewish  queens,  who  were  abet*
tors  of  idolatry  (1  Kings  xl.  1-8,  xv.  13),  and  take  the  singular  suffix  in  a  collective  sense.

Ver.  10.   **Not  humbled,"  lit.  "broken  "  (as  Isa.  xix.  10)  or  bruised  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).

Ver.  14.  •'  They  have  a  desire  to  return,"  i.e.  are  lifting  up  their  souh  to  return  to  Judah.
Vide  Literary  Criticisms,  xxii.  27.

Ver.  19.  "  To  worship  her,"  i.e.  the  Queen  of  Heaven.  The  Hiph.  of  IVJ^-  In  the  Piel
form  (Job  x.  8)  the  word  is  rendered  by  the  meaning  to  fashion,  shape.  The  meaning  is  similar
here,  to  represent  her  ;  the  cakes  being  made  in  the  form  of  a  crescent  to  represent  the  moon.
**  Without  our  menf"  i.e.  our  husbands.

SUBJECT   OF   CHAPTER    XLIV.

Jewish  Idolatry  in  Egypt.

Occasion  of  the  Idolatrous  Absembly.     There  had  gathered  together  at
Pathros  "  a  great  multitude  "  of  tiie  Jews  resident  in  Egypt.

L  It  was  a  public  festival  in  honour  of  Astarte,  the  '^  Queen  of  Heaven**
(ver.  17) ;  and  libations  are  being  offered  to  her  in  accordance  with  a  vow  tlie
worshippers  had  made,  ^^  Do  whatsoever  thing  goethfoith  out  of  our  mouth."  This
is  the  usual  phrase  for  avow  (Numb.  xxx.  2,  12  ;  Judg.  xi.  36).  They  had,  there-
fore, bound  themselves  to  this  public  homage  of  the  queen  of  heaven,  and  were
now  intent  upon  carrying  out  the  special  object  which  brought  them  together  (see
ver.  25  :   "  Our  voivs  that  we  have  vowed,"  &c.)

IL  It  was  to  an  assembly  of  women  that  the  prophet  spake.  For  this  "  great
multitude"  is  literally  a  great  kahal,  or  congregation  gathered  for  a  religious
purpose  ;  and  ''  except  for  such  a  purpose  Jewish  manners  would  not  allow  the  women
to  be  abroad  in  crowds  "  (Dr.  Payne  Smith).  The  women  are  now  the  speakers^
replying  to  Jeremiah's  protest  (see  ver.  19,  '*  without  our  men,*'  i.e.,  husbands).

III.  The  men,  however,  though  excluded  from  such  an  assembly,  knew  what
their  wives  and  daughters  were  doing  (ver.  15).  Though  they  do  not  engage  in
this  service  of  homage  to  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  they  sympathise  with  and  favour  it ;
for  they  have  come  with  the  women  to  Pathros,  thus  sanctioning  the  occasion  of
their  assembling.

IV.  The  festival  observances  consisted  of  fragrant  incense  burnt  upon  an  altar,
and  libations  poured  out  "  unto  her  "  (ver.  17),  possibly  before  some  image  or
representation  of  Astarte,  and  cakes  made  (either  to  be  burnt  Qv  eaten)  which  were

617


CHAP.  XLIT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.

shaped  like  the  crescent  of  the  moon.  Before  this  altar,  and  perhaps  also  image,
of  the  moon-goddess  the  women  advanced  and  passed  in  regular  procesdoUy  chanting
as  they  came,  and  reciting  the  benefits  they  had  received  from  the  hands  of  the
goddess  they  adored  (ver.  17).

V.  The  infatuation  of  these  idolatrous  worshippers.  This  adoration  of
Astarte  was  rife  (ver.  17)  when  Josiah  ascended  the  throne ;  its  suppression  by
Josiah  was  regarded  with  much  secret  ill-will.  In  Jehoiakim*s  reign  the  people
hastened  back  to  their  idolatry  (see  note,  National  History,  to  chap.  vii.  p.  143;
and  homily  on  Section  16-20,  p.  147  ;  also  on  vers.  17,  18,  p.  158, 159).  Zedekiah
prohibited  this  form  of  worship  during  the  miseries  of  his  reign.  The  people  now,
from  amid  Egyptian  scenes,  look  back  over  the  history  of  their  national  misfortunes
and  ascribe  them  all  to  their  neglect  of  this  goddess  (ver.  18).

VI.  Specious  excuses  offered  in  extenuation  of  their  apostasy.  Several
pleas  are  urged  : — 1.  Their  vows  must  be  fulfilled  (ver.  17)  ;  and  this  pledge  they  dare
not  violate,  for  that  would  entail  the  anger  of  Astarte.  2.  Their  idolatry  had  the
sanction  of  national  custom  in  the  days  gone  by  ;  for  their  ancestors  had  practised  it
generally  and  publicly  with  the  sanction  of  their  kings  and  princes  (ver.  17).  3.
It  had  entailed  no  calamity  (ver.  18) ;  for  they  persist  in  ignoring  their  wickedness
(ver.  9)  as  the  cause  of  their  distresses,  and  now  ascribe  calamity  to  their  neglect
of  this  goddess.  4.  These  female  worshippers  of  Astarte  had  the  authority  and
protection  of  their  husbands  in  their  idolatry  (ver.  19).  Without  the  consent  of
their  husbands  the  vows  of  women  are  not  binding  (Numb.  xxx.  7,  8) ;  but  as
"our  men"  support  us  in  these  obligations  to  Astarte,  we,  their  wives  and
daughters,  are  blameless  and  irreproachable.  Thus  they  desire  to  shield  themselves
under  the  complicity  of  others.

An  Indignant  Protest  against  Apostasy.     Delivered  amid  the  idol-scenes  of

Egypt,  and  to  the  assembly  of  Jewish  apostates.

L  A  bold  and  vehement  expostulation.  Jeremiah  stops  the  procession  of
the  women,  and  the  festival  of  Astarte,  to  pronounce  against  it  in  the  name  of  God.
The  prophet  was  undeterred  by  the  violence  he  had  endured  at  the  hands  of  his  nation,
who  had  dragged  him  away  into  Egypt,  but  fearlessly  rebuked  their  apostasy  from
God  for  the  idolatries  of  Egypt  (ver.  8).  In  this  earnest  remonstrance  he  declares
' — {a.)  that  the  existing  desolation  andr^dn  of  Judea  were  the  evil  consequences  of  their
own  past  wickedness  in  apostatinng  from  JeJiovah  (vers.  2—7);  and  (b.)  that  for  them
to  conti7iue  such  idolatries  in  Egypt  would  certainly  entail  destruction  and  rain  upon
themselves  (vers.  8-14).  If  God  had  not  spared  "Jerusalem"  (ver.  2),  the  holy
city,  where  He  had  made  His  name  to  dwell,  and  which  He  loved,  will  He,  think
ycm,  spare  Egypt — a  scene  He  loathes?  (ver.  8).  And  he  heaps  maledictions  upon
them — (a.)  for  i\\Q\v  needless  and  voluntary  and  wilful  departure  into  Egypt  {vev,  8),
"  whither  ye  be  gone  to  dwell  " — not  carried  by  force  as  your  brethren  in  Babylon  ;
and  now  (6.)  for  their  fiagrant  insidt  of  Jehovah^s  honour  before  the  very  eyes  of
the  heathen,  "burning  incense  to  other  gods  in  the  land  of  Egypt"  (ver.  8).  For
this  their  aggravating  guilt,  he  declares  their  sure  and  terrible  extermination
(vers.  11-14).

II.  Wilful  refusal  of  the  prophetic  admonition.  Here  the  men  join  the
women  in  loud  and  obstinate  rejection  of  God's  word  (vers.  15,  16).  (a.)  They
implicitly  acknowledge  that  this  solemn  protest  of  the  prophet  is  JtliovaKs  word
(ver.  16) ;  (6.)  but  insist  tliat  the  happiest  days  of  their  nation  were  associated  with
Astarte^s  worship  (ver.  17) :  (c.)  that  the  favour  of  the  Queen  of  Heaven  guarantees
more  advantages  than  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (vers.  18,  19).  It  was  thus  a  declara-
tion of — (L)  Absolute  faith  in  other  gods ;  Polytheism,  therefore.  (2.)  Preference
for  and  a  higher  esteem  of  Astarte ;  which  means  abandonment  of  Jehovah  as  their
national  God.  (3.)  Indifference  to  all  Jehovah! s  displeasure  and  threatening s ;
they  were  better  off,  with  His  anger,  in  Astarte's  favour,  for  the  Queen  of  Heaven
618


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  chap.  xuV.


was  certainly  more  benign,  whereas  Jehovah's  protection  had  been  of  little  good
to  them.

III.  Eefatation  of  popular  fallacies  and  announcement  of  certain  doom.

Taking  up  the/ac^5  of  their  national  misery  and  final  expatriation^  Jeremiah  shows
— (a.)  That,  though  they  played  an  idolatrous  part  in  their  own  land,  their  idols  had
not  preserved  them  from  national  destruction  ;  for  "  your  land  is  a  desolation,"  <fec»
(ver.  22).  (h.)  That  their  deeds  of  flagrant  apostasy  went  up  before  God  as  a  memo-
rial and  witness  against  them  for  their  ingratitude  and  faithlessness  (ver.  23) ;  for
He  had  established  and  honoured  them  as  a  nation  by  giving  them  **  His  law.  His
statutes,  and  His  testimonies  "  (ver.  23).  (c.)  That  because  of  their  "  evil  doings
and  abominations"  (ver.  22)  God  could  no  longer  hold  back  the  doom  which  at  last
overwhelmed  the  land  and  the  people  (vers.  22,  23).

Then  God  abandons  them  for  ever.  (1.)  They  had  allied  themselves  by  vows
to  an  idol  (ver.  25),  and  resolutely  kept  their  vows  of  allegiance  though  God  pleaded
with  them  (ver.  16).  (2.)  The  Most  High  therefore  divorces  them  from  Himself
by  solemn  oath  (ver.  26),  and  breaks  His  covenant  with  them  as  His  people.  (3.)
Declares  that  He  will  no  longer  extend  His  protection  over  them,  but  will  be  their
enemy  (vers.  27,  28) ;  and  (4.)  Gives  them  an  ominous  sign  (in  predicting  the  fate
of  their  Egyptian  king)  of  the  certainty  that  He  will  avenge  on  them  the  insidt  of
their  open  rejection  of  Him  (vers.  29,  30),  and  which  will  convince  them  that  it  it
the  hand  of  the  God  they  have  insulted  which  chastises  them  for  their  guilt.

The  Final  Word  op  Woe:  Jeremiah's  Farewell  Prophecy.

L  A  long  and  painful  ministry,  closing  amid  saddest  circumstances.  See
Introduction,  V.,  Length  of  his  Official  Ministry,  p.  2.  Could  any  facts  be  wanting
to  complete  the  melancholy  surroundings  1  (a.)  His  pleadings  and  warnings  against
a  fatal  national  policy  in  trusting  to  Egypt,  all  unheeded.  (6.)  His  nation  van-
quished and  scattered ;  some  in  Babylon,  others  in  Egypt,  (c.)  Jerusalem  destroyed,
God's  temple  in  ruins,  the  land  given  up  to  execration  (ver.  22).  {d.)  Himself,  an
old  and  forlorn  prophet,  amid  aliens,  and  even  more  alien  fellow-countrymen.  («.)
His  people  sunk  into  lower  deptlis  of  iniquity  than  during  his  entire  career ;  and
now  at  last  absolutely  repudiating  Jehovah  as  the  object  of  their  worship  and
obedience.

II.  A  brave  and  heroic  career,  shining  out  lustrously  to  the  end.  For  over
fifty  years  he  had  been  God's  messenger  to  this  hardened  people.  He  had  suflfered
much  at  their  hands ;  yet,  undaunted  till  the  last,  and  now  at  so  great  an  age,
between  seventy  and  eighty  years  old,  lifting  up  his  voice  in  fearless  protestation
and  fervent  pleadings  amid  the  people  whom  he  had  sought  to  keep  faithful  to
God.     His  last  outcry  is  full  of  grand  prophetic  power.

IIL  A  lifelong  witness  against  sinners,  ending  amid  signs  of  fruitlessness
and  defeat.  Not  one  feature  of  hope  illumines  the  dense  darkness  and  poignant
melancholy  of  this  last  sight  of  Jeremiah.  Every  view  looks  mournful  and  piteous.
(a. )  J^o  good  seems  to  have  resulted  from  all  his  earnest,  prolonged,  faithful,  and
self-sacrificing  work.  (6.)  No  prospect  opens  as  a  relief  io  the  desolate  retrospect.
The  sun  sinks  before  him  amid  portending  tempests  of  terror  and  woe.  The
Christian  tradition  respecting  his  death  is  that  he  was  stoned  to  death  at  Tahpanhes
by  his  own  countrymen  !  Another  tradition  is  that  he  escaped  to  Babylon.  But
no  star  rises  on  the  dark  night.  This  chapter  gives  the  farewell  glance  at  the
hoary  prophet ;  and  his  last  utterance  is  one  of  severest  gloom.

Note. — In  2  Maccabees  i.  and  ii.,  there  is  a  most  interesting  story  of  Jeremiah
hiding  the  sacred  fire,  the  tabernacle,  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  and  the  Altar  of
incense  in  a  cave  in  Mount  Nebo  previous  to  his  leaving  Judea,  where,  says  the
record,  they  remain  to  this  day,  nor  will  be  discovered  until  God  collects  Israel
together  again.

619


CHAP.  XLiv.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


Extermination  op  the  Jewish  Exiles  in  Egypt.

I.  Of  their  total  extinction  in  £g3^t  they  had  been  solemnly  forewarned
(chap.  xlii.  15-18).      Their  presence  in  Egypt,  therefore,  Invited  the  punishment.

IL  Their  open  abandonment  of  Jehovah  now  as  their  God  added  the  fatal
element  to  their  rebellion  (vers.  16,  17).

III.  God's  awful  farewell  to  these  guilty  people  is  taken  under  the  solemnity
of  an  oath,  as  indicating  its  irrevocableness  (ver.  26).

IV.  Their  absolute  extermination,  Jehovah  will  see  to  it  that  it  is  effected
(ver.  27).

Thb  Extermination  Accomplished.     Their  asylum  proved  no  shelter
from  the  pursuing  vengeance  of  Nebuchadnezzar.

L  The  "sign"  hy  which  they  should  realise  GocCs  destructive  judgments,
Pharaoh-Hophra,  when  defeated  in  battle  by  the  Cyrenians,  became  regarded  with
suspicion  as  having  betrayed  his  native  troops  for  selfish  ends,  and  hence  a  revolt
arose.  Amasis,  whom  Hophra  sent  to  treat  with  these  mutinous  troops,  himself
went  over  to  the  rebels.  Hophra,  gathering  an  army  of  foreign  auxiliaries,  now
fought  against  Amasis  and  the  Egyptian  troops,  but  was  defeated  and  taken  captive.
After  treating  him  kindly  for  some  years,  Amasis,  because  the  Egyptians  regarded
this  indulgence  with  ill-favour,  surrendered  Hophra  to  his  enemies,  by  whom  he
was  strangled.  He  came  to  the  throne  a  year  before  the  Jewish  migration  to
Egypt,  and  continued  king  for  eighteen  years  after,  although  his  last  ten  years
were  spent  a  prisoner  in  his  palace  at  Sair,  This  civil  war  of  Amasis  with  Hophra
opened  the  way  for  Nebuchadnezzar's  invasion  of  Egypt  in  the  twenty-third  year
oi  his  reign.

II.  The  total  extermination  of  the  Jewish  refugees  in  Egypt.  A  thousand
years  before  God  had  led  forth  His  people  from  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand,  and
planted  them  in  Zion ;  but  Israel  had  failed  of  her  mission ;  and  now  these  most
arrant  rebels  shall  utterly  perish  in  this  land  of  Egypt,  where  they  boasted  they
could  find  safe  asylum  (chap.  xlii.  14),  abandoned  and  disowned  by  God  (chap,  xliv,
26),  exterminated  by  the  rage  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  from  whom  they  sought  refuge
in  Egypt,  but  who  avenged  himself  upon  them  there  with  merciless  wrath  (ver.  12).

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  VERSES  OF  CHAPTER  XLIV.

Vera    2-13.   Theme:  God's  Appeal  doom  which  outraged  mercy  demanded

against   Judah.       In    this    wretched  (vers.  6-13).     Compare  Naegelsbach.
"  remnant "  the  old  root  of  disobedience  Ver.    4.    Theme  :    God   hates   Sin.

and  unbelief  remains  still.  "  Oh,    do    not   the    abominable   thing

I.  A  mirror  of  the  stubborn  heart  which  I  hate.''
of  man.  God  speaks  these  words  of  wickedness,

1.  Unceasingly   warned.       For   cen-  All  sin   is  in  principle  idolatry ;    the
turies  (ver.  10).  sinner   leaves  the  true  God,  and  pays

2.  Faithfully     and     impassionedly  homage  to  some  idol.

warned  (ver.  3).     By  words  of  thunder  He  who  searches  the  heart  may  see

and  strokes  of  power.     Think  only  of  now  that   there  is   some    **  abominable

Elijah,  Elisha,  Hosea,  Isaiah,  <fec.  thing  "   upon  which  you   are  intent —

II.  The  judgment  of  just  love  exe-  planned  during  the  week,  resolved  upon,

cuted.  But   the   Almighty   One  stoops  to  be-

1.    All     reforming     and    redeeming  seech  you,  "Oh,  do  not,"  &c.     Do  not

agencies  failed.      Judah    hardened    his  pass  this  message  of  God  on  to  another

stubborn  neck  (vers.  5,  10).  fellow-hearer  ;  your  sin  is  "  the  abomi-

2.  Long-suffering  love  became  exhausted^  nable  thing."

and    tliei  e    remained    nothing  but  tha  God  luUes  sin ;  so  hates  it  in  all  its
GiO


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.  XLI7.


forms — as  a  principle,  an  act,  a  course
of  life,  that  it  is  an  **  abominable
thing."

Why  does  He  hate  it?  He  hates  no-
thing He  has  made.  Many  things  you
dislike  He  does  not  dislike — the  reptile,
(fee.  ;  but  the  one  thing  He  liates  is  a
thing  He  has  not  made  ;  it  is  a  thing
the  creature  has  made,  not  the  Creator,

I.  Let  us  inquire  what  sin  is.
Violation  of  God's  law  (1  John  iii.  4).
Doing  what  God  forbids  ;  or  not  doing
what  He  commands.  To  love,  both  God
and  our  neighbour,  is  the  fulfilling  of
the  law  (Matt.  xxii.  36-40).  Right  con-
duct, without  love,  is  therefore  sin.  He
hates  it —

1.  Because  it  is  contrary  to  His  own
nature.     "  Holy  is  the  Lord  God."

2.  Because  sin  is  unnatural  in  His
creatures.  It  is  no  part  of  the  human
constitution,  but  a  foreign  element.

3.  Because  sin  transgresses  holy,  just^
and  good  laws.  Not  of  some  arbitrary
commandment.

4.  Because  it  defiles  and  injures  the
entire  human  nature.  It  pollutes  what
filiould  be  pure ;  blasts  and  blights,

6.  Because  it  makes  men  curses  to
each  other.  What  has  changed  children
into  profligates,  mothers  into  brutes,
fathers  into  beasts  of  prey  ?  Do  not
wonder  God  says,  "  I  hate  it."

6.  Because  it  ignores,  or  rejects,  the
Divine  government.  And  no  government
is  so  paternal,  tender,  and  beneficent  as
God's.

7.  Because  wherever  sin  exists,  except
it  is  checked  hy  God's  mercy,  it  has  the
dominion.     A  cruel  tyrant !

8.  Because  ivhere  it  is  introduced  it
spreads.  In  every  clime  ;  through  every
race ;  through  every  grade  of  society;  a
deadly  pestilence.

9.  Because  sin  requires  God  to  inflict
upon  men,  of  every  class  and  kind,  that
which  He  assures  us  upon  His  oath  He
has  no  ])leasure  in.

10.  Because  continuing  in  siri,  while
hearing  the  Gospel,  tramples  under  foot
the  blood  of  Jesus.

II  Heax,  then,  God's  entreaty  :  "  Do
it  not  ! "

1.  What  are  you  going  to  do  ?  Fer-
iist  in  it  ?    Think  !    Do  you  really  mean


to  go  on  sinning  in  the  face  of  such
a  message?  With  conscience  smarting,
memory  weighted,  remorse  springing  up
in  your  soul  like  a  tempest,  with  a  fear-
ful looking-for  of  judgment,  with  your
miserable  convictions  and  bitter  tears,
your  gloomy  forebodings  and  knowledge
of  penalties,  are  you  determined  to  con-
tinue 1

2.  Then  there  can  he  hut  Utile  hope^
if  this  state  of  heart  continue,  concerning
you.  You  may  live,  with  a  seared  con-
science, until  you  lay  down  on  the  bed
of  death ;  and  there  perhaps  all  your
old  fears  will  be  awakened — when  it  is
too  late  !  Then,  as  you  sink  down  into
perdition,  the  millstone  about  your  neck
will  be  *'  the  abominable  thing  which  God
hates." — Rev.  Samuel  Martin  (West-
minster), 1858  A.D.

Ver.  4.  Theme:  The  Abominable  Na-
ture OF  Sin.  **  Howbeit  I  sent  unto
you  all  My  servants  the  prophets,  rising
early  and  sending  them,  saying.  Oh,  do
not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate."

No  man  can  think  his  guilt  too  great.
We  may  confine  our  views  to  sin  and
exclude  mercy,  but  we  cannot  overrate
guilt.  God  long  laboured  in  vain  with
the  Jews,  and  at  length  Nebuchadnezzar
carried  the  mass  of  them  to  Babylon.
Jeremiah  took  the  remnant  to  Egypt.
While  there  he  spoke  to  them  the  words
of  the  text.  The  "  abominable  thing  "
was  their  idolatry;  the  same  may  be
said  of  all  sin.  Sin  is  the  "  abominable
thing"  God  hates.     This  ap{)ears —

L  From  the  nature  of  things.  Sin
is  opposed  to  the  wishes  and  designs  of
God.  *'  God  is  love,"  and  His  object  is
to  raise  all  creatures  to  highest  eternal
happiness.  They  must  therefore  have
the  same  love  He  possesses,  and  own
Him  for  their  Head,  His  law  being  their
standard.

1.  Sin  sets  up  private  interest  against
public  good.  The  root  of  sin  is  self-love,
and  out  of  it  arise  all  evil  passions  that
hurry  men  and  devils  into  evil  against
Heaven.  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the
law.  And  this  being  its  nature,  makes  it
the  enemy  of  happiness.  The  Friend  and
Guardian  of  the  universe  hates  and  must
punish  sin.     Love  abominates  it.

621


0&AF.  XLIT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


2.  Sin  opposes  God  in  all  good  for  His
creatures;  it  resists  all  His  loving  pur-
poses.    That  He  does  bate  sin  we  see —

n.  From  His  expressions  of  abhor-
rence.

1.  In  the  penalty  annexed  to  His  law,
the  eternal  exclusion  from  good,  and
eternal  endurance  of  evil.  This  endless
evil  is  the  measure  of  God's  hatred  of
sin.

2.  In  His  providential  government
When  angels  sinned,  not  all  God's  love
nor  their  dignity  could  save  them.  When
Adam  and  Eve  sinned  they  were  turned
out  of  Eden.  The  Flood  swept  the
world  when  it  was  filled  with  violence.
For  sin  Egypt  was  lashed  with  ten
plague^!,  and  her  king  found  a  watery
grave.  And  when  Israel  sinned,  God
brought  upon  them  fiery  serpents  and
fire  from  heaven  ;  the  ground  opened
and  swallowed  them  up;  and  while  they
possessed  the  promised  land  His  provi-
dence was  a  constant  remembrancer  of
His  hatred  of  sin.  God's  anger  against
sin  destroyed  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Tyre,
Edom,  Moab,  and  the  Philistines.

(a.)  All  human  suffering  and  death
express  God^s  anger  against  sin.  Sinners
willbe  punished  according  to  their  guilt.

(b.)  What  strength  of  that  abhorrence
of  sin  is  uttered  in  the  erg,  "Oh,  do  not
this  abominable  thing,"  (fee.  !

(c. )  Yet  one  exhibition  of  God^s  anger
against  sin  is  mx)re  amazing  than  the  rest.
For  us  God  spared  not  His  own  Son,
and  will  He  then,  0  sinner,  spare  thee  1

Who  are  sinners  ?  '*  All  have  sinned,
and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."
And,  moreover,  all  are  under  the  entire
dominion  of  sin.  *'God  saw  that  every
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of"  man's
**  heart  was  only  evil  continually."  As
is  the  fountain,  so  are  the  streams.
Words  and  actions  of  the  natural  man
are  but  sin.

ni.  Considering  G-od's  abhorrence  of
sin,  how  astonishing  His  long  forbear-
ance, and  how  wonderful  "  the  love  of
God  which  passeth  knowledge  "  !

1.  We  have  cause  for  humility.  Self-
importance  and  conscious  worth  are  un-
becoming. How  fearful  would  have  het  n
our  condition  had  not  the  Son  of  God
left  His  glory  to  save  us!  We  needed  a
622


Divine  Saviour.      Let  us  hide  ourselvei
in  His  righteousness.

2.  For  sinners  abhorred  of  God  this  is
our  only  remedy.  For  many  years  God
has  pleaded,  "Oh,  do  not  this  abominable
thing  which  I  hate."  Do  not  re-enact
the  rebellion  of  the  Jews.  Remember
it  is  written,  *'  Because  I  called  and  ye
refused.  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  cala-
mity, I  will  mock  when  your  fear
Cometh."  Seize  the  offered  blessing
now,  ere  God  says,  "  Ye  shall  not  see
My  rest." — Eev.  Edward  Griffin,  D.D»

Theme:  Sinners:  a  Warning.
"  Have  ye  forgotten  the  wickedness"  <kc.

I.  Guilty  careers  offer  a  melancholy
admonition  to  others.

II.  Examples  of  ruin  should  deter
us  from  sin.

III.  Reckless  indifference  to  the
careers  and  penalties  of  sinners  shows
the  most  obdurate  and  hopeless  im-
piety.

1.  Beyond  reformation  (Pro v.  xxvii,
22).

2.  Dead  to  all  saving  influences  (Prov.
XXV.  20).

Ver.  17.  Theme:  Self- vindicating
Sinners.  No  one  would  perhaps  justify
these  people;  yet  thousands  YfiW  justify
themselves  !

L  Criminal  impiety.

1.  Their  voluntary  engagements,  Jo-
hanan  had  inclined  to  hide  in  Egypt
from  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  sought  God's
direction  ;  pledging  themselves,  from  the
least  to  the  greatest,  to  obey  His  voice
(chap.  xlii.  1-6).  Instead  of  fulfilling
their  engagements —

2.  Their  deliberate  violation  of  them^
God  warned  them  (chap.  xlii.  13-17) ;
but  they  charge  Baruch  with  feigning  this
message  (chap,  xliii.  1-4),  and  followed
their  own  course.

3.  Their  self  -  vindicating  effrontery.
The  people  betook  themselves  to  idolatry
in  Egypt.  Being  reproved,  they  boldly
asserted  that  Jehovah's  worship  had
been  profitless,  and  that  the  Queen  of
Heaven  had  proved  their  benefactress.
So  they  would  worship  her,  whatever
God  or  His  prophet  might  say  (vera.
17-19).


RVMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OBAP.  ZitT.


IL  Modern  repetitions.

1.  The  profane  sinner.  See  his
engagements  in  baptism  and  confirma-
tion !  Yet  millions  repudiate  their  en-
gagements, and  vindicate  their  evil  ways.

2.  The  self-righteous  formalist.  Hear
him  joining  in  the  liturgy  as  a  "  penitent
sinner  ; "  yet  tell  him  in  private  what  a
sinner  he  is,  what  duties  should  follow
from  penitence,  how  he  should  cleave
humbly  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  repudi-
ates it  all.

3.  The  hypocritical  professor.  He
finds  excuses  for  his  sin,  "  turns  the
grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness."

III.  Certain  issues.  God  told  these
Jews,  who  defied  His  judgments,  ^Aa^^Aey
shoul'l  see  ivhosetvords  should  standi  His
or  theirs  (ver.  28).

1.  How  did  it  fare  with  them?  (vers.
12-14,  29,  30.)

2.  How  shall  it  fare  with  you  1  (Luke
xix.  27.)     Address —

(a.)  Those  who  disregard  our  testi-
mony. *'  In  the  day  that  God  shall  visit
for  sin,  ye  shall  be  cast  down  and  perish  **
(vers.  15-17).

ih.)  Those  who  tremble  at  the  word  of
God.     That  is   the  state  of  mind  becom-
ing to  every  sinner  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).    Culti-
vate it,  and  then  pay  to  God  your  vows.
— Charles  Simeon^  M.A.^  1828.

Theme:  The  Advantages  op  Irre-
LiGiON  I  "  For  then  had  we  plenty  of
bread,  and  were  well,  and  saw  no  evil."

No  doubt  there  are  times  when  the
wicked  prosper.  Because  of  this  it  is
too  often  thought  that  "godliness  is
(not)  profitable  for  the  life  which  now
is,"  (fee.  It  was  so  with  these  idolaters
(vers.  17,  18).  They  argued  that  be-
cause they  had  more  of  this  world's
comforts  when  living  in  idolatry,  that
therefore  it  was  more  advantageous  than
the  worship  of  the  true  God.

L  Consider  that  God  does  not  enter
into  judgment  with  wrongdoers  imme-
diately and  forthwith,  but  reserves  His
displeasure.  Punishment  does  not  follow
instantly  upon  transgression.  Sinners
may  "  see  no  evil"  at  the  time  of  sinning ;
yet  God^a  displeasure  is  kindled  hy  U,
and  will  one  day  burst  upon  them.  Sin
never  goes  unpunished.


II  God  does  not  connive  at  sin  be-
cause lie  allows  it  to  be  committed  at  the
time  with  impunity.  Though  they  en-
joyed abundance,  and  "  saw  no  evil  *'  at
the  time  of  their  idolatry,  yet  now  they
were  smarting  under  the  penalties.  "  Be-
cause  ye  burned  incense,  and  because  ye
sinned,  therefore  this  evil  happened  unto
you  as  at  this  day.^'

Even  though  no  manifestation  of
Divine  displeasure  comes  during  the
commission  of  sin,  God  is  assuredly  dis-
pleased. And  though  during  a  course
of  iniquity  there  is  no  lack  of  litVs  good
things,  yet  iniquity  is  not  profitable.
The  day  of  recompense  will  come.

in.  As  with  these  Jews  it  seemed
better  for  them,  in  a  worldly  sense,  when
they  lived  in  idolatry  than  when  they
abandoned  it,  so  it  sometimes  appears
to  have  been  better  with  the  sinner,  in
a  worldly  sense,  when  he  lived  in  sin
than  when  he  became  converted  by  God's
grace  and  professed  Christianity.  In
early  Christian  times  the  profession  of
Christianity  involved  "  the  loss  of  all
things,"  but  higher  blessings  more  than
compensated  these  worldly  sacrifices.
"  No  man  hath  left  houses  .  .  .  for  My
sake,  but  shall  receive  manifold  more"
&c.  But  though  nothing  was  gained  in
this  life ;  suppose  that  "  since  we  left
off"  (ver.  18)  our  worldly  and  evil  ways
we  only  suffered  misfortunes,  yet  what
an  ample  compensation  in  the  life  to
come  /

IV.  But  experience  testifies  that
more  is  gained  by  religion  than  lost.
If  a  Christian  lose  the  favour  of  man,
he  wins  the  favour  of  God ;  if  he  lose
the*'  pleasures  of  sin,"  he  gains  the  joys
of  salvation.  Let  not  good  men,  how-
ever great  their  privations,  look  back  on
their  days  of  sin  and  lament,  "  Then  had
we  plenty"  &c.,  as  if  the  former  days
were  better  than  these.  Rather  rejoice
that,  however  poor  they  be,  they  are
"  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  a  kingdom,"
that  "  all  things  are  theirs,  things  pre-
sent and  things  to  come."

V.  Gaze  not  with  envious  eyes  on
the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  O  men
of  God,  look  not  back  on  the  flesh-
pots  of  Egypt,  or  the  rewards  of  sin,

623


CHAP.  XLtir.


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


By  a  holy  content  and  joy  in  God  let  it
be  seen  in  yon  that —

"  The  hill  of  Zion  yields

A  thousand  sacred  sweets,
Before  you  reach  the  heavenly  fields,
Or  walk  the  golden  streets."

— «  Walks"  dhc,  Rev.  D,  Pledge.

Ver.  25.  Theme:  Keeping  Unholy
Vows.

I.  Conscientiousness  in  wrongdoing.
Must  keep  vows  I

IL  Defiance  of  solemn  prohibition.
Idol  worship  !

III.  Subtlety  of  8elfdelusion.  Vows
are  too  solemn  to  be  broken  !

IV.  Flattery  of  spiritual  infatuation.
It  is  good  for  us  to  be  faithful.

V.  God's  law  disobeyed  in  self -justi-
fication. Though  God  forbids,  we  are
bound  to  ^^  fulfil  with  the  hand "  our
vows,

A  Superstitious  Kegaed  for  Vows.
That  they  are  inviolable,  and  should  be
sacredly  fulfilled.     But —

i  To  cling  to  our  vows  when  they  arc
evidently  unwise  or  ungodly  is  criminal.

ii.  To  fidfil  our  rash  vows  in  proof
that  we  are  not  fickle,  is  to  add  reckless
deeds  to  reckless  words.

iii.  To  persist  in  our  vows  when  shown
they  break  God's  laws  is  defiant  obstinacy ;
substituting  constancy  to  our  words  for
obedience  to  God's  word.

iv.  To  retract  wicked  vows  is  the  high-
est proof  of  wisdom  and  piety.  Better
break  our  words  than  provoke  God's
wrath.  Think  of  Herod's  vow,  leading
to  murder  I

Ver.  25.  Theme:  Obstinacy.     "We

will  surely  perform  our  vows."

I.  Resisting  admonition  (ver.  16).

II.  Blinded  by  false  judgment  (vers.
17,  18).

III.  Wilful  persistency  (ver.  25).

IV.  More  obdurate  as  it  continues.

Ver.  26.  Theme:  Finally  Aban-
doned BY  God.  "Since  ye  will  not
hear  Me  speaking  and  warning,  hear  Me
twearing — *  By  my  great  namej^ "  &c.
'^'Jamieson.

•*  God  will  have  the  last  word;  the
624


prophets    may  be    run  down,  but  God
cannot. " — Henry.

This  is  the  severest  punishment,  wben
God  takes  away  His  holy  name  and  word.

I.  In  what  it  consists.  That  the
Lord  removes  the  candlestick  of  Hia
word  from  among  His  people;  i.e.,  by
depriving  them  of  the  means  of  grace
He  brings  Himself  into  forgetfulness
amongst  them.

II  On  what  it  is  founded.  That
this  people,  on  their  part,  have  striven  to
forget  God.

III.  What  is  its  effect  ?  The  people
given  up  ^0  the  powers  of  evilj  for  their
complete  destruction. — Naegelsbach.

Note. — "  The  Jews,  heretofore,  amidst
all  their  idolatry,  had  retained  the  form
of  appeal  to  the  name  of  God  and  the
law,  the  distinctive  glory  of  their  nation  j
God  will  allow  this  no  more  (Exod.  xx.
29) :  there  shall  be  left  none  there  to


profane   His
Jamieson.


name  thus  any  more." —


Ver.  29.  Theme:  One  Sinner  "a
Sign"  to  Many.  In  naming  to  this
audience  the  then  powerful  Egyptian
king,  "  Hophra,"  Jeremiah  exposed  him-
self to  greatest  hazards.  For  the  audi-
ence he  addressed  were  all  hostile  to  the
prophet  and  his  mission.  Had  any  of
Jeremiah's  hearers  reported  this  daring
utterance  to  the  king  himself,  it  would
have  insured  the  prophet's  swift  doom.
Yet  God's  messenger  dares  to  witness
even  against  powerful  kings,  unterrified
by  danger,  content  to  speak  what  God
speaks  in  him.  God  names  "Hophra"
in  this  prediction;  for  He  deals  with  men
individually ;  has  the  fate  of  each  in
His  hands ;  and  "  none  shall  stay  His
hand."

I.  "A  sign  "  given  as  a  premonition
of  coming  judgments.

1.  Signs  given  before  events  were  in-
tended to  prepare  the  mind  for  events
hereafter,  and  to  fortify  against  doubt.
Thus  with  Gideon's  fleece  (Judg.  vL
36-40).

2.  Signs  placed  in  the  ftdure^  and  to
be  waited  for,  were  intended  to  keep
the  mind  expectant  and  trustful.  Thus
with  the  sign  to  Moses  (Exod.  iii  12),
the  event   convinced   them  that  God'a


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  T :  JEREMIA  E.  ctt.vp.  xlv.


hand  had  wrought  it,  and  called  up  their  Exiles^'' '^.  620.)     Many  of  these  Jews

gratitude  to  Him.  would  live  to  see  this  sign  fulfilled.

3.  This  sign   was   thus  prospective;  2.   The  sign  pledged  the  fate  of  these

buried  for  a  time,  but  in  due  course  it  exiles.     They  vaunted   their  safety,  as

would  rise  into  realisation,  and  its  value  Hopbra    vaunted     his     power.       They

would  be —  deemed  their  shelter  in  Egypt  impreg-

(a.)  In  vindicating  Jeremiah  as  being  nable,  and  the  shield  of  Pharaoh  over

truly  God's  spokesman.  them   a   sure   protection ;   but  Hophra

(6.)  As  proving    that    God^s  Mighty  should  be  "  given  into  the  hand  of  them

Hand  was  working.  that  seek  his  life,"  and  so  should  they

(c.)  As  refuting  their  boasted  trust  in  also  perish.     His  fall  should  announce

the  security  of  Egypt  theirs.

{d.)  As  an  announcement  of  the  utter

ruin  of  this  rebellious  people  of  which  Note  : —

that  sign  was  the  forerunner.  1.  When  God^s  anger   overtakes   one

II.  A  sign  fulfilled  guarantees  ac-  man,  it  pledges  the  equal  certainty  of

complishment  of   the   truth   it  fore-  judgment  on  all  who  are  alike  guilty.

warned.  2.  Fulfilled  judgments  in  history,  in

1.  The  event  seemed  unlikely  of  fulfil-  the  destruction  of  cities  (Egypt,  Nineveh,
ment.  For  Apries  (Pharaoh  -  Hophra)  Jerusalem),  and  o/ na^iows  (Israel,  <kc.),
now  flourished  in  great  prosperity  and  and  of  individuals  (Nebuchadnezzar's
power  (so  Herodotus  records).  Indeed  madness,  Zedekiah's  fate),  are  all  wit-
he vaunted  impiously  that  *'  no  God  nesses  to  the  sure  doom  of  sinners.
has  power  to  dethrone  me,"  But  he  3.  Hopeless  deathbed  scenes  are  a
was  defeated  by  the  rebel  Amasis,  and  warning  against  those  who  neglect  sal-
strangled    by  his   own    subjects.     This  vation.

Hophra  became  (what  he  was  after-  4.  Fatal  and  sudden  accidents  ad-
wards  titled  on  Egyptian  monuments)  monish  those  who  reckon  on  years  of
"hated"   by   his  own  nation;  and  this  opportunity.

was  only  (according  to  Herodotus)  sati-  5.  The  visions  of  torment,  in  Christ's

ated  by  Amasis  giving  him  up  to  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  in  the  Reve-

people  for  a  violent  and  degrading  death.  lation,  warn  us  to  ^^  flee  from  the  wrath

Hophra's  death  occurred  eighteen  years  to  come.''

after  the  burning  of  Jerusalem  by  the  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  like-
Chaldeans.      (See    "  Extermination    of  wise  perish  "  (Luke  xiii.  1-6).


CHAPTER  XLV.


Critical  and  Exeoetioal  Notes. — Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Immediately  npon  his
having  written  the  roll  which  was  afterwards  read  to,  and  destroyed  by,  Jehoiakim  {vide  notes  on
chap,  xxxvi.);  eigiiteen  years  before  Jerusalem  was  taken.

Literary  Criticism.— Ver.  4.  "Even  this  whole  land.'"  Perhaps  |*")fc<  here  may  wisely  be
rendered  "  earth,"  rather  than  limited  to  the  "  land  "  of  Israel ;  for  Nebuchadnezzar's  invasions
and  conquests  were  at  that  time  disturbing,  not  Judea  alone,  but  the  known  world  (see  chap.
XXV.  26).  Albeit  the  force  of  the  statement  here  is  emphatic  respecting  Judea,  that  as  the
whole  country  is  under  doom,  no  single  individual  should  be  selfishly  craving  his  own  aggran-
disement,  but  accept  a  share  in  the  common  distress.

SUBJECT  OP  CHAPTER  XLV.
Baruch  Corrected  and  Comforted.

I.  What  can  be   gleaned    respecting  (6.)  Faithful  in  his  attaxkment  as  a

Baruch's  disposition  and  character?         friend  (chap,  xxxii.  12  •  xxxvi.  4  etseq.)

(a.)  A   skilful  scholar,  and  therefore  (c.)    Possessed   of  an   ambitious   tern-

selected  by  Jeremiah  as  his  amanuensis  perament  (ver.  5)  ;  doubtless  his  noble
(Joseph.,  Antiq.  X.  ix.  1).  lineage  (li.  59  ;  Joseph.,  Antiq.  X.  vi.  2  j

2r  625


CHAP.  XLV.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


ix.  1),  as  the  grandson  of  Maasiali,  in
Josiah's  time  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  8),  ani-
mated him  with  hopes  of  high  office  in
the  state;  or  his  close  association  with
the  prophet  fostered  the  expectation  of
becoming  Jeremiah's  successor  in  the
prophetic  calling.

{d.)  These  youthful  aspirations  (for
he  was  young  at  this  period,  eighteen
years  before  Jerusalem  was  captured),
when  wisely  corrected  (as  in  ver.  5),  did
not  alienate  his  attachment  to  the  pro-
phet, nor  render  him  less  zealous  in
serving  him.

(«.)  Nevertheless  he  exhibits  wounded
self-concerny  which  shows  a  lack  of  de-
voted patriotism  and  abandonment  of
Belf  for  the  nation's  spiritual  good.  His
words  (ver.  3)  "  Woe  is  me  now  /"  indi-
cate this  self-concern  as  unduly pi^ominent,
especially  at  such  a  crisis.

Oriental  tradition  exhibits  Baruch  as
offended  at  being  denied  the  gift  of  pro-
phecy;  of  disappointment  over  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem,  and,  with  it,  his
hopes  of  honourable  position;  that  there-
fore he  apostatised  from  Judaism  and
adopted  the  tenets  of  Zoroaster  (Dr.
Payne  Smith).     This  is  not  credible.

II.  What  is  the  burden  here  of  Ba-
ruch's  discontent  and  complaint  ?

(a.)  An  unpatriotic  self-concern  (comp.
{e.)  above).  As  he  writes  out  the  gloomy
predictions  of  Jeremiah  he  is  overpowered
with  a  feeling  of  deep  distress ;  but  on
what  account  1  That  his  city  and  people
were  to  experience  such  disaster  ?  No  !
but  that  he  himself  was  to  suffer.  "  Woe
is  me  now,  for  the  Lord  hath  added
grief,"  (fee.

(6. )  An  undevout  repining  against  God
for  His  dealings  with  him  (ver.  3).  "  The
Lord  hath  added  grief,''  <fec.  Rescued
from  the  perils  of  my  first  writing
(chap,  xxxvi.  26),  I  am  again  involved  in
a  similar  peril.  He  lacks  hardihood,  and
a  spirit  of  glad  obedience.

(c.)  An  inconsolable  despondency,  "I
fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  /  find  no
rest,^*  Instead  of  realising  his  privilege
of  being  allied  with  God's  prophet  in
God! 8  service,  he  murmurs.  Instead  of
hiding  in  God* 8  love  and.  care  amid
anticipated  distresses,  he  despairs !
(ci)  Impatience  or  distress  over  his
626


nation! s  sinfulness,  which  necessitates
these  gloomy  prophecies  of  ruin.  But
it  is  not  for  him  to  be  angry,  but  pitiful
and  prayerful.

Ill  What  correction  does  God  ad-
dress to  this  complaining  and  aspiring
youth  ]

(a. )  Specific  information  of  God* 8  ab-
solute purpose  of  overthrow  for  Judah
(ver.  4).     So  that  for  him  to —

\,  Fret  over  Judah* 8  overthrow^  is  to
repine  against  God's  designs.

2.  Deplore  his  own  misfortunes,  is  to
reflect  on  God's  justice  and  wisdom  in
allowing  him  to  be  involved  in  his  na-
tion's distresses.

3.  Abandon  all  comfort,  is  to  forget
that  God,  who  punishes  evil,  can  also
care  for  those  He  cherishes.

We  must  recognise  and  accept  God^s
law  of  justice.  It  behoves  us  to  check
all  re[)ining  at  His  judgments.  "  Shall
not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  V*
*'  It  is  the  Lord,  let  Him  do  what  seem-
eth  Him  good."  "  Just  and  true  are
Thy  ways,  O  King  of  saints."  Far  more
wise  is  this  trust  in  God's  righteousness
than  to  repine  against  His  laws  as  if  He
were  severe.

We  must  submit  to  the  Divine  retribu-
tions of  wrong.  God  punishes  sin  ;  shall
we  lament  it?  Surely  He  must  not  let
"  the  wicked  go  unpunished."  And
when  we  see  Him  smite  the  guilty,
we,  instead  of  exclaiming  against  it,
should  bow  in  awe,  and  say,  *'  I  was
dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because
Thou  didst  it."

(6.)  Positive  prohibition  of  all  ambitious
self-seehing  at  such  a  crisis  of  the  nation
(ver.  5).

The  '*  whole  land  "  is  under  doom ;  no
single  individual  should  think  to  escape
his  share  of  misfortune  ;  and  certainly  it
is  not  seemly  to  be  intent  upon  earthly
prosperity  amid  prevailing  calamities.
At  such  a  crisis,  when  even  the  elect  can
scarcely  be  saved  (Matt.  xxiv.  22),  when
the  very  flower  and  dignity  of  the  na-
tion's youth  (Daniel,  Ezekiel,  &c.)  will
be  carried  into  captivity,  no  man  ought
to  foster  plans  of  private  promotion  and
prosperity.

It  is  in  cherishing  ideas  unduly  lofty


BOMlinTW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAB.


CHAP.  XLI^.


that  men  make  reverses,  when  they  come,
the  more  painful  for  them  to  bear.

The  world^ 8  frowns  would  not  so  much
disquiet  us  if  we  did  not  so  eagerly  covet
its  smiles.

How  unseemly  for  God^s  servants  to
he  building  their  hopes  on  mere  earthly
success,  when  all  is  perishing  and  hasten-
ing to  destruction  !

IV.  What  word  of  consolation  is
conveyed  to  this  affrighted  and  discon-
solate soul  1

(a.)  Exemption  from  the  slaughtering
sword  is  guaranteed  him.  With  death
and  destruction  imminent,  with  evil
coming  '*  upon  all  flesh,"  his  "  life ''
should  be  secured  to  him.  "  Life  "  is  the
utmost  which  the  most  fortunate  and
favoured  can  hope  to  have  preserved  to
him  amid  the  general  conflagration  and
ruin.

(6.)  Yet  this  shall  only  he  secured  hy
special  clemency  ;  as  **  a  prey  ;  "  a  thing
snatched  from  danger,  saved  by  prompt
energy ;  as  "  a  brand  plucked  from  the
burning."

Is  it  not  a  great  distinction  in  a  world
where  *'  death  hath  passed  upon  all  men,
for  that  all  have  sinned,"  to  be  assured
of  salvation  f  Even  though  **  saved
with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire."
For  this  exemption  from  the  common
doom  ja  ours  whom  God  loves;  "  there  is,
thereiore,  now  no  condemnation  to  them
who  are  in  Christ  Jesus."

How  supremely  satisfied  and  grateful
should  we  be  if,  though  all  earthly  hopes
and  honours  perish,  we  are  guaranteed
safety  of  i>oul  I  "  For  I  know  whom  I
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that
He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com-
mitted unto  Him  against  that  day."

Comments. — '*  There  is  not  a  word
here  of  praise  for  his  steady  attachment
to  his  master.  However  great  might  be
his  personal  services,  God's  prophet  had
no  honeyed  words  of  flattery  for  his
faithful  minister,  but  only  the  bare  and
unseductive  message  of  truth.  It  tells
Baruch  to  give  up  his  ambitious  hopes,
and  be  content  with  escaping  with  his
life  only." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

"Baruch  did  not  act  as  secretary  for  hire
but  for  love.  He  esteemed  it  an  honour
and  a  happiness  that  by  his  skill  he  could


serve  the  Lord,  to  whom  he  owed  it.
Therefore  a  glorious  reward  is  imparted
to  him  unsought,  so  that  his  name  and
remembrance  are  immortalised  in  the
sacred  record  by  an  oracle  addressed
specially  to  him.  This  honour  is  to  be
esteemed  still  higher  than  the  assurance,
that  this  MTetched  mortal  life  should
not  be  taken  by  violence  before  its
time. " — Naegelsbach.

Ver.  3.  Theme :  Worldly  Prospects
Sacrificed  in  God's  Service.

I.  Born  to  high  social  status,  he  shrank
from  the  disfavour  which  identifica-
tion with  God's  prophet  brought  upon
him.  This  association  with  Jeremiah
incurred  the  wrath  of  the  king,  the
princes,  and  the  priests  of  Jerusalem ;
and  thus  he  was  shut  out  from  all  court
favours  and  honours.

II.  An  unpopular  career,  of  fidelity  to
God  and  His  prophet,  was  certain  to
entail  great  worldly  losses.  All  the
avenues  to  the  promotion  and  preferment
of  which  he  had  a  reasonable  expecta-
tion, and  to  which  he  aspired,  he  saw
closed  by  his  call  to  the  service  of
God.

IIL  His  faithful  service  of  God  placed
his  life  in  jeopardy,  and  entailed  ob-
loquy and  persecution  (chap,  xxxvi.  26).
Here  was  a  severe  trial  of  faith,  courage,
and  self-devotion  to  God.

IV.  His  clinging  to  mere  worldly
honour  was,  however,  a  mistake,  for  God*8
purpose  was  to  destroy  all  national
dignity  (ver.  4).  What  would  it  then
have  advantaged  him  to  have  kept  a
secular  goal  in  siglit]  And  **  what  shall
it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole
world  and  lose  his  own  souH "  "He
that  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  but
he  that  will  I  se  his  life  for  My  sake
shall  keep  it  to  life  eternal."

^ote. — i.  It  requires  both  courage
and  self-devotion  to  witness  for  truth
in  evil  days.

ii.  Love  of  the  world  is  inconsonant
with  a  fearless  and  faithful  service  of
God.

iii.  Earthly  hopes  must  be  surrendered
by  those  who  join  the  open  witnesses  for
Christ.

iv.  Every  true  follower  of  Jesus  must

627


CHAP.  XLT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J  ERE  MI  ATT.


**  take  up  his  cross,"  and  accept  suffer-
ing and  sacrifice  as  the  earthly  price  of
the  eternal  gain.

Vers.  3,  4.  Theme:  Man's  Voice
MET  BY  God's  Voice.  "  Thou  didst
say


V    a


Tlie  Lord  saith  thus."


Here  we  have  two  persons,  Baruch
aTid  God,  presented  in  a  manner  highly
characteristic  of  each — Baruch  absorbed
only  about  himself ;  God  terrible  and
tender.

The  chapter  shows  that  the  affairs  of
individual  children  of  God  are  of  conse-
quence in  His  eyes  ;  deems  them  worthy
of  a  revelation,  of  a  personal  contact
with  the  afflicted  spirit,  and  of  special
provision  for  it.

L  As  to  Baruch:  God  would  show
him  the  evil  in  himself,  before  He
showed  him  the  goodness  there  was  in
God.  *'  Thou  didst  say.''  It  is  God's
voice  to  man  saying,  "  I  know  what  is
in  thee,  as  well  as  what  is  in  Myself."
God  had  "  heard "  what  Baruch  had
been  saying,  as  He  "  heard  "  the  groan-
ings  of  the  Israelites,  the  affliction  of
Hagar,  <fec.    (Ps.  cvi.  44).

1.  God's  hearing  a  reason  for  our
humility.

2.  There  are  heart-voices  as  well  as
lip-voices.  As  in  Dent.  vii.  17;  viii.  17.
God's  ear  is  listening.

3.  The  murmuring  and  selfishness
of  heart-talk  (ver.  3).  All  comes  out
when  a  heart  fearlessly  talks  itself  into
words.  And  God  often  hears  such  talk
from  us  —  murmuring  and  impatient
words.

4.  The  prominence  given  to  **  self"  in
this  talk.  Not  a  word  about  the  woes
coming  on  his  country,  or  concerning
God's  honour;  "  I"  is  omnivorous.  Self-
love  will  always  discolour  and  distort  our
views  of  God  and  everything.

5.  The  discontented  thoughts  of  self-
love.  They  make  us  think  we  have  not
been  dealt  with  as  liberally  as  we  ought
to  have  been ;  have  been  disciplined  too
much.  We  think  only  of  the  afflictions
God  has  '*  added,"  not  of  His  sustaining
and  beneficial  care,  and  of  God's  purpose
and  aim.

n.  As  to  God:  His  heart  does  not
contract  because  He  hears  our  hearts
628


repining.      He  is  listening;  lets  us  talk
on  ;  not  check  us  at  once.

1.  God  taking  notice  of  a  iorrowfid
heart.

2.  His  manifestation  of  the  one-sided-
ness  of  our  thoughts.

3.  God  addressing  man  in  his  per-
sonality.

4.  The  decisiveness  of  God's  correcting
word.

5.  Let  us  expect  the  actings  of  sove-
reignty in  mercy.  We  must  listen  for
His  "thus;"  all  must  be  His  way  as
regards  the  boon  He  confers.

6.  His  way  may  be  strange,  but  will
surely  be  the  right  way,

7.  He  will  save  us,  but  not  by  a  weak
change  in  His  determination.  He  will
do  as  He  says;  perhaps  exercising  us  by
vicissitudes,  but  watching  over  us  with
personal  care,  that  we  may  come  forth
from  our  troubles  taught  of  God,  taught
about  ourselves ;  what  there  is  in  our-
selves: "Thou  didst  say;"  and  what
there  is  in  God :  "  The  Lord  saith
THUS." — Arranged  and  condensed  from
"  Breviates"  by  Rev.  P.  B.  Power,  M.A.

Ver.  5.  Theme:  Worldly  Aspira-
tions :  "  Seeking  Great  Things."

I.  Great  things  have  been  secured
without  seeking.    And  that  indicates —

1.  That  God  can  confer  great  things
on  whom  He  will.  "It  is  in  Thy  hand
to  make  great"  (1  Chron.  xxix.  12).
Com  p.  David's  confession  (2  Sam.  xxii.
36).

2.  That  the  pathway  to  greatness  is
through  lowliness  to  honour.  Observe
Scripture  instances :  Moses  left  the
palace,  yet  became  leader  of  Israel !
Solomon  craved  wisdom  only,  yet  became
rich  and  exalted !  David  kept  his
father's  sheep  while  his  brothers  hung
about  Saul,  yet  was  called  up  to  be
Israel's  poet  and  king !  Mary  crept
behind  Christ  and  anointed  His  feet ,  yet
her  name  and  deed  are  published
"  throughout  the  whole  world."  Mar-
tyrs, who  became  "  the  offscouring  of  the
world"  have  become  the  glory  of  the
Church  !  Christians,  despised  by  the
mighty,  are  to  be  sharers  of  Christ's  throne !

Hence,  when  we,  for  ChrisVs  sake,
surrender    the    "  great    things "  which


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OBAP.  XLYI.


others  seek,  we  are  in  the  way  of
gaining  **  greater  things  than  these."
*'  Before  honour  is  humility."

II.  "  Great  things  "  may  be  sought
worthily  and  even  nobly.  For  it  is  to
be  remembered —

1.  That  Scripture  encourages  a  spirit
of  aspiration.  "  Not  slothful  in  busi-
ness." "  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his
business,  he  shall  stand  before  kings."
To  aspire  is  not  a  proof  of  impiety,  nor
of  worldly-mindedness.

2.  God  bestows  great  worldly  power
and  prosperity  upon  godly  men.  For
*'  all  things  are  yours,  whether  the
world^^  &c.  The  high  places  of  life  are
to  be  coveted  for  the  sway  and  power
for  good  they  procure.

3.  It  is  only  when  they  are  sought
for  ^^  self  ^^  and  self-aggrandisement  that
they  are  prohibited.  For  then  they  en-
snare and  sfirfeit  and  debase  the  soul.

III.  "  Great  things,"  though  they
allure,  do  not  enrich,  the  soul.

1.  They  are  not  happiest  who  are
highest.  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that
wears  the  crown."  King  compared  with
boy  swinging  on  a  gate — *'  Happier  than
a  king  ! "

2.  Great  things  are  not  essential  to
happiness.

3.  Tliey  are  always  associated  with
subtle  ami  ceaseless  temptations.

4.  Often  close  the  heart  to  higher  in-
fluences and  purer  attractions.

5.  Always  prove  transient  and  unsatis-
factory. "  The  fashion  of  this  world
passeth  away."     The  heart  is  not  rested,


comforted,  satisfied  by  them  while  tliey
are  possessed ;  and  when  they  "  take
wings  and  fly  away,"  they  leave  *'  vexa-
tion of  spirit."

IV.  Greatest  things  are  assured  to
Christ's  servants.

1.  Greater  honours ;  higher  and  more
lasting  titles  than  earth  can  yield.
"  Heir  of  God,"  &c. ;  "  Kings  and  priests
to  God."

2.  Greater  treasures ;  more  satisfying
and  elevating.

3.  Greater  privileges  and  blessings.

4  Greatest  glory  in  the  life  to  come.
"  Sit  with  Me  on  My  throne."

Yet  the  Divine  principle  is  this :
Through  shame  to  glory.  As  Jesus^
through  the  Cross  to  the  Throne:  "Ought
not  Christ  to  have  suffered  and  entered
His  glory  1 "  As  His  followers:  '*  If  we
suffer  with  Him,  we  shall  also  be  glorified
together."  Hence,  seek  right  things  for
ourselves.  God  shall  give  the  *'  great
things  "  to  us  !

See  Addenda  to  chap.  xli. :  Ambition.

Theme :  Why  Great  Things  Should
NOT  BE  Sought  for  Self.

i.  Because  self  ought  never  to  be  our
ultimate  object.

ii.  l>ecause  great  things  thereby  be-
come objects  of  idolatrous  worship.

iii.  Because  to  do  so  is  to  subordinate
the  discharge  of  duty  to  their  acquisition
and  enjoyment.

iv.  Because  in  doing  so  you  will  in-
volve yourselves  and  others  in  much
positive  suffering. — Rev,  James  Stewart


CHAPTER  XLVL

Critical  and  Exegetioal  Notes.— l.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — First  Part:  Vers.
1-12,  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  ;  written  at  Jerusalem,  immediately  before  the  battle
of  Charchemish.  Tliis  section  forms  a  natural  addendum  to  chap.  xxv.  Vide  notes  there
on  CTironology,  National  Affairs,  and  Contemporaneous  History  ;  also  on  chaps,  vii.  and  x.  Second
Part:  Vers.  18-28,  is  a  prophecy  uttered  in  l-^gypt  alter  tlie  migration  of  tlie  remnant  thither,
carrying  Jeremiah  with  them,  and  should  he  connected  with  chap,  xliii.  8-13.  It  must  have
preceded  chap,  xliv.,  which  is  the  final  message  of  abandonment ;  for  here  in  vers.  27,  28,  a
message  of  comfort  is  sent,  in  which  the  old  (and  as  yet  disannulled)  covenant-relationship  is
Btill  recognised  and  asserted.      Vide  notes  on  chaps,  xl  ii.  and  xliv.     See  Historic  Facts  below.

2.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  2.  '' By  the  river  Euphrates  in  Charchemish."  "Char
chemisii  "  is  usually  identified  with  Cercwn'w?«,  at  the  juncture  of  the  Chebar  with  the  Euphrates  ;
but  Professor  Rawlinson  disputes  this  localisation,  and  would  place  it  considerably  higher  up
the  river.

Ver.  8.  "  As  a  flood,  and  his  waters  a/i-e  mxyoed  like  the  rivers."  Yeor,  "  flood,"  la  the  NUe;
and  **  his  waters"  are  the  branches  of  the  Kile  in  Lower  Egypt.

023


nOMriETTC  COMMmTARY:  jmEMIAB.


Ver.  9.  "  Ethiopians,  Libyans,  and  Lydians :  Heb.  Cush,  Phut,  and  Ludim.  "  Cush,"  the
Nubian  negro  ;  "  Phut,"  the  Ijihyans  of  Mauritania;  and  "Ludim,"  the  Hamite  Lydians  of
Nortii  Africa.

Ver.  14.   '*  Migdol,  Noph,  Tahpanhes.^'     Vide  notes  on  chaps,  ii.  14-16,  and  xliv.  1.

Ver  18.  **  Ta6or  "  lifts  itself  from  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  1350  feet ;  its  height  above  the  sea-
level  being  180.5  feet.     "  Carmd"  forms  a  bold  promontory  jutting  out  into  the  Mediterranean.

Ver.  25.  **  Multitude  of  No;"  rather  Amon  of  No;  called  in  Nahum  iii.  8  {ma/rgin)  No-
Amon.  The  sacred  city  of  Tiiebes,  capital  of  Upper  Egypt.  Comp.  Ezek.  xxx.  14-16.  Jupiter-
Ammon  had  his  famous  temple  there.     Amnion  was  the  supreme  deity  of  the  triad  of  Thebes.

3.  Personal  Allusion. — Ver.  2.  **  Pharaoh- N echo  hing  of  Egypt^^  son  and  successor  of
Psammeticus,  and  tlie  sixth  king  of  the  twenty-sixth  dynasty.  It  was  he  who,  when  going
against  Charchemish,  four  years  earlier,  encountered  king  Josiah  at  Megiddo,  and  slew  him,  but
whose  defeat  by  Nebucliadnezzar  is  here  pronounced.  In  this  battle  he  lost  all  the  territory
which  had  been  subject  to  the  Pharaohs  west  of  the  Euphrates,  and  between  it  and  the  Nile.
He  is  famed  as  having  equipped  a  fleet  of  discovery  from  the  Red  Sea  along  the  coast  of  Africa,
which  doubled  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  returned  to  Egypt  by  the  Mediterranean.

4.  Natural  History. — Ver.  8.  " kiseth  like  a  flood."  The  Nile's  annual  overflow  at  the
approach  of  the  summer  solstice.

Ver.  11.  "  Gilead,  and  take  balmy     Vide  chap.  viii.  22.

Ver.  20.  "A  very  fair  heifei\"  Her  god  was  the  bull  Apis,  and  she  is  here  called,  as  his
spouse,  the  fair  heifer.

Ver.  22.  **  Voice  shall  go  like  a  serpent,**  hissing  as  a  snake  disturbed  in  its  haunts  by  the
woodcutter.

Ver.  23.  **  Grasshoppers^  Rendered  ••  locust"  (Exod.  x.  4,  16;  Judges  vi.  6).  The
ffryllus  gregarius,

6.  Manners  and  Customs. — Ver.  3.  ^^  Order  the  buckler  and  shield."  **  BucTder"  a  small
round  target  carried  on  the  left  arm  by  the  light  infantry  ;  *'  shield,"  carried  by  the  heavy-armed
troops  and  covering  the  whole  body.

Ver.  4.  '^Harness  the  horses,"  the  cavalry  and  charioteers.  " Brigandines,"  cuirasses  or
coats  of  mail.

6.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver,  6.  "  Fear  was  round  abovt^  The  prophet's  old  cry,  Magor-
Missahib  (see  on  chap.  vi.  25).

Ver.  9.  "  Come  up,  ye  horses;"  or,  "Mount  ye  the  horses."

Ver.  11.   "  Many  medicines,"  &c.     Comp.  chap.  xxx.  13,  "Healing-plaster  hast  thou  none.'*

Ver.  15.  *'  Why  are  thy  valiant  men  swept  away?"  Lit.  "why  is  (singular)  thy  valiants.**
Evidently  a  corruption  of  the  text.  The  LXX.  read  diari  iipvyeu  airo  aov  6  'Attls  ;  6  fxoa'xoi  A
€k\€ktos  ffov  oiK  ifieivev :  thus  recoirnising  in  **the  valiant,"  or  strong,  Apis  the  bull.  It  is  a
Scripture  fiirure,  "strong  bulls"  (Ps.  xxii.  12)  ;  and  this  Apis,  the  bull-shaped  Egyptian  idol,  to
whom  might  was  attributed  by  its  worshippers,  would  be  unable  to  stand  before  Jehovah.  This
original  reference  to  Apis  as  the  strong  one  became  corrupted  by  transcribers  (who  did  not
understand  its  reference)  into  a  plural  noun,  as  if  alluding  to  horses  or  heroes.  Cambyses,  in  his
invasion  of  Egypt,  destroyed  the  sacred  bull.

Ver.  17.  "  They  did  cry  there,  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  is  but  a  noise."  The  LXX.  translate,
"  Call  ye  the  name  of  Pharaoh-Necho  king  of  Egypt,  Sam  Esbir."  Tlie  Syriac  renders  the  words,
"Disturber  and  parser  of  times;"  and  the  Vulgate,  "Time  hath  brought  tumuU."  All  three
regard  the  last  two  words  as  a  prophetic  name  for  Necho.  But  \\^li^  is  in  the  abstract  destruc-
tion; but  in  chap.  xxv.  31,  it  is  rendered  "a  noise;"  tumult,  therefore,  confusion,  as  associated
with  destruction.     So  Pharaoh  is  to  be  surnamed  "  a  noise  "  or  tumult.

HISTORIC  PACTS  REFERRED  TO  IN  CHAPTER  XLVL

L  The  Egyptian  power  broken  by  Nebucliadnezzar  (vers.  1-12).

1.  Preliminary  incidents.  About  four  years  before  this  decisive  campaign,
Pharaoh- iVecAo  had  marched  towards  Charchemish.  Josiah,  king  of  Judah,  has
hastened  to  Megiddo  to  intercept  Pharaoh,  and  was  there  slain  in  battle.  Necho
thereupon  made  Judea  tributary,  carried  away  to  Egypt  Josiah's  son  Jehoahaz
(Shallum)^  and  set  up  his  brother  Jehoiakim.  This  defeat  of  Judah  laid  Phoenicia
and  Syria  easily  open  to  subjugation  by  Necho,  who  soon  "  established  his  own
dominion  over  the  whole  country  between  Egypt  and  the  Euphrates  "  (Rawlinson).
Meanwhile^  two  years  after  Josiah's  fall  (see  note,  Contemporaneous  History^  to
chap,  vii.),  and  two  years  before  this  campaign  at  Charchemish,  the  Assyrian  power
at  Nineveh  bad  been  defeated  by  the  Babylonians  and  Medes.  Nebuchadnezzar
thereupon  became  the  leader  of  this  new  Babylonian  power,  and  came  at  length  to
confront  the  proud  Egyptian  forces  at  Charchemish.

2.  The  decisive  battle.     Taking  this  prophetic  poem  literally,  we  have  here
630


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,  chap,  xlvl


described  the  struggle  at  Charchemish.  First,  tlie  flower  of  Egypt's  army  advances
(ver.  3),  magnificently  equipped  (vers.  3,  4).  They  are  repulsed  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar's forces  (ver.  6)  ;  and  with  graphic  and  stirring  language  Jeremiah  depicts  the
sudden  terror  and  amazement  of  the  Egyptian  liosts,  long  used  to  victory,  at  finding
the  battle  turning  against  them ;  then  falling  back  and  betaking  themselves  to
hasty  flight  (vers.  5,  6).  But  from  this  first  repulse  they  rally;  and  the  whole  land
of  Egypt  (ver.  8),  together  with  its  dependent  nations  and  allies  (ver.  9),  seems  to
rise  up  like  a  flood  and  rolls  into  the  furious  conflict.  They  march  forth  now  in
assurance  and  pride ;  but  this  day  of  their  fury  and  pomp  is  the  appointed  day  of
Jehovah's  vengeance  (ver.  10).  Egypt  is  smitten  with  an  incurable  wound  (ver.
11),  and  the  cry  of  the  smitten  armies  resounds  through  the  lands  (ver.  11).
II.  Egypt  invaded  and  vanquished  by  Babylon  (vers.  13-26).

1.  Intervening  events.  The  new  Babylonish  empire  (Chaldea)  was  now  supreme.
Judah's  tributary  dependence  was  now  transferred  to  Nebuchadnezzar  (see  note.
Contemporaneous  History,  to  chap,  i.) ;  this  was  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim
(see  note,  National  Affairs,  to  chap,  xxv.)  Until  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah
this  vassalage  continued  (chap.  xxix.  2),  when,  in  consequence  of  Zedekiah's
falsity  and  the  nation's  treachery,  Nebuchadnezzar  destroyed  Jerusalem,  carrying
the  people  captive  to  Babylon.  The  remnant  of  the  poor  who  were  left  on  the  land
afterwards  migrated  into  Egypt  (chap,  xliii.),  where  they  lapsed  into  grossest  idolatry
(chap,  xliv.)  In  vain  had  the  prophet  Jeremiah  there  pleaded  with  his  apostate
people  ;  therefore  Jehovah  withdrew  His  name  from  them  (chap.  xliv.  26),  and
threatened  their  extermination  when  Egypt  should  be  overthrown  (chap,  xliii.  9-13),
of  which  the  death  of  Pharaoh-Zfop^?'a  should  be  the  ominous  sign  (chap.  xliv.  29,30).

2.  The  fatal  invasion  of  Egypt.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  been  held  back  by  his
siege  of  Tyre,  which,  though  all  the  nations  had  been  forced  into  subjection  by  his
irresistible  armies,  long  withstood  his  attack.  At  length  (585  B.C.),  after  thirteen
years'  siege,  Tyre  fell ;  Nebuchadnezzar  marched  his  army  against  Egypt.  The
Egyptian  power  was  now  in  its  boastful  zenith  ;  its  cities  were  like  a  ^^ forest"  (ver.
23),  numbering  a  thousand  and  twenty.  Yet  the  Egyptian  army  was  devoid  of
patiiotism,  for  they  were  subjected  races  (see  ver.  9)  and  mercenaries,  thirty  thou-
sand of  whom  Hophra  hired  from  Asia  Minor — Carians  and  Ionians(see  Herodotus).
In  this  crisis  these  hirelings,  instead  of  defending  the  country,  resolve  to
desert  the  Egyptian  cause  and  return  each  to  his  native  land  (ver.  16).  Egypt
thns  sinks  into  impotent  rage,  like  a  serpent  hissing  in  a  thicket  (vers.  19-23)  ;
terrified  by  the  force  of  the  Babylonish  assault  into  abject  submission  (vers.  24-26).
For  forty  years  Egypt  bore  the  yoke  of  Babylon,  when,  in  the  time  of  Cyrus,  she
recovered  her  freedom,  but  not  her  1,'lory  ;  for  she  has  been  in  servile  subjection  to
foreign  powers  until  this  day  (see  Ezek.  xxix.  11-15).

m.  Egypt  preserved  from  total  extinction  by  the  Chaldeans  (ver.  26).
Forty  years  after  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  which  she  was
despoiled  of  all  her  glory  and  treasures  (Ezek.  xxix.  19),  Cyrus  won  for  Egypt  her
emancipation.  And  through  these  long  centuries,  though  Babylon  has  ceased  to  exist,
though  mighty  dynasties  have  become  extinct,  Egypt  has  continued  as  a  monument
of  God's  faithful  word.  Instead,  however,  of  regaining  her  old  force  for  aggression
and  aggrandisement,  her  power  is  permanently  broken  (Ezek.  xxix.  11-15).  But
from  that  time  she  has  been  *' inhabited  ;"  and  to  this  day,  in  her  humiliation,  she
testifies  to  the  might  and  justice  of  God — a  warning  to  those  who  harm  His  people,
and  an  encouragement  to  those  He  promises  to  befriend.

HOMILIES  AND  OUTLINES  ON  CHAPTER  XLVL

Ver.   1.    Theme:    God's  Judgments      Judah.      His  onmiscience   surveys  the
LTON  THE  Nations.  nations.       His  omnipotence  sways  the

I.  Jehovah's  sway  is  wide  as  the      nations.     He  marks  their  history ;  He
universe.      Not  limited  to  Israel  and      works  their  destinies,

631


OHAP.  XL?L


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


n  Jehovah's  wrath  is  against  all
ungodliness.  Angry  with  His  own
apostate  people.  Equally  angry  against
iniquitous  Egypt.  The  fate  of  Josiah
shall  be  avenged  (see  above,  Historic
Facts).  All  nations  who  defy  God's
rule  shall  feel  His  rod.  If  He  smite  His
own  people,  let  not  His  foes  think  to
escape  I

IIL  Jehovah's  justice  pursues  into
all  lands.  Let  not  Israel  impiously
think  to  defy  God  by  fleeing  into  Egypt;
nor  to  secure  immunity  by  alliance  with
the  mighty.

Let  not  Israel  despondently  imagine
that  the  wicked  will  retain  their  proud
ascendancy  over  God's  people  whom  they
have  subdued,

"  Against  the  Gentiles."  See
Homilies  on  chap,  xxv.,  "  The  Manifold
Judgments  of  God'' {^.  469);  ''The  Wine-
cup  of  Wrath''  (p.  474).

Vers.  3,  4.  I'heme :  Brilliant  Hopes
Baffled.  "  Order  ye  the  buckler  and
shield,"  &c.

The  satire  of  prophecy  is  very  severe.
Thus  the  prophet  summons  the  proud
Egyptians  to  the  war  against  Nebuchad-
nezzar's hosts.  This  rallying  call  is  full
of  bitter  irony.  Grand  preparations  only
to  issue  in  ignominious  defeat.

I.  A  mighty  army  well  equipped
for  war.  It  would  almost  seem  that
victory  was  theirs  before  they  engaged
in  war.

1.  Absorbing  attention  to  our  own
resources  of  strength  shuts  out  all  heed
of  God  and  His  designs.  We  trust  in
armaments  and  forces,  rest  in  outward
defences  ;  and  thus  ignore  God,  and
alienate  Him,

2.  All  our  resources  of  strength  are
but  a  deception  and  a  snare  when  God
is  against  us.  They  delude  us ;  and
allure  on  boastfully  in  the  course  of
defeat  and  destruction.

3.  External  splendour,  being  greatly
impressive  and  imposing,  is  often  ima-
gined to  ensure  prosperity.  Men  believe
in  display ;  and

4.  Grow  confident  in  the  parade  of
power  and  skill.     But  Goliath  may  fall

632


before  a  stone  and  sUng.     The  loftiness
of  men  may  be  brought  low.

II.  A  bafled  army  utterly  van-
quished in  war.  It  was  a  sight  for
wonder.  *'  Wherefore  have  I  seen,"  &c.
(ver.  5).  *'  Wherefore  "  is  a  particle  ex-
pressive of  surprise  :  ^''HowV'  ^''WhyV

1.  Wondrous  surprises  do  occur  in
human  experience,  which  reverse  all  our
boastings.  Often  in  secular  courses  men
find  events  occur  which  shake  them  from
their  confidences.  Death -scenes  have
shown  the  **  boastful  lips  put  to  silence^^
&c.

2.  Proud  and  resplendent  forces  are
star^tlingly  overthrown;  vanquished  con-
trary to  all  reckonings;  as  if  a  super-
human  Hand  had  to  do  with  the  issues
of  our  struggles  and  efforts.  God  reverses
the  plans  of  the  proud,  and  defeats  the
hopes  of  the  vainglorious.

3.  Strongest  forces  will  find  themselves
"  beaten  down "  when  they  oppose  the
will  of  Omnipotence.  The  Divine  power
strikes  down  the  mighty,  and  thereby —

(a.)  Human  arrogance  is  chastised
(b.)   Divine  righteousness  is  satisfied
(ver.  10).

Ver.  5.  Theme :  The  Dismay  of
Defeat.

I.  Solid  guarantees  of  success.
''Mighty''  (ver.  5);  "Swift"  (ver.  6).

1.  Hopes  are  built  on  seeming  securities.

2.  With  boastful  confidence  men  attempt
their  aims.

3.  None,  however  opposed  to  God's
purposes,  allows  himself  to  expect  defeat ;
but  makes  his  endeavours  amid  promises
of  success.

II.  Guarantees  of  success  over-
thrown.

1.  Forces,  whose  resistance  are  un-
reckoned,  may  thwart  our  hopes.

2.  Human  resources  of  strength  are
impotent  when  God  is  opposed  to  our
success.

3.  Pride  and  prowess  will  fall  in  the
day  of  God's  resistance.

4.  Souls,  deluded  by  vain  boasting,
will  meet  an  appalling  defeat.

III.  Success  overthrown  followed  by
dismay.

1 .  What  amazement  will  overwhelm  the
wicked  in  their  doom  !


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


CHAP.  XLVI.


2.  How  helpless  vdll  the  sinner  he  in
the  moment  of  his  overthrow.

3.  How  certain  is  the  failure  of  all
earthly  schemes,  and  especially  of  all
plans  of  salvation,  which  God  disap-
proves.

4.  Oh,  the  terror  of  an  eternal  defeat  I

Ver.  11.  Theme:  Healing  for
Stricken  Ones.  For  Egypt?  Yes;
equ;illy  as  for  Israel  (chap.  viii.  22).

It  is  always  right  to  recognise  amongst
you,  as  a  congregation,  the  suffering.
Not  in  physical  affliction  merely,  but
spiritual  sufferers:  sinners,  backsliders,
Christians  who  have  lost  health.

Tlie  need  of  Christ's  ministry  of
healing,  and  of  the  Christian  ministry
of  consolation,  is  still  evident ;  and  can
never  cease  while  men  suffer  from  the
wounds  of  sin.

I.  Healing  urgently  needed.  Wliat
has  ivQunded  Egypt  ?  Sin  and  strife.
What  has  wounded  souls  ?     The  same.

1.  Persevering  search  for  remedies,
**Use  many  medicines."

2.  Fruitless  application  of  remedies.
**  In  vain  use  many,"  <fec.  The  world
offers  ** many  medicines."  If  conscience
is  distressed,  try  pleasure,  business,
ceremonialism.  If  the  hea7^t  is  wounded,
try  exciting  literature,  diverting  travels,
cheerful  society,  &c.

But  like  the  sufferer  (Mark  v.  26)
who  spent  her  money  on  many  physicians,
yet  could  be  healed  of  none.

II.  Healing  offered  the  stricken.

1.  Seek  the  healing  at  the  right  place.
"Go  up  to  Gilead."  Sinners,  go  to
Calvary.

2.  Secure  the  right  remedy,  "  Take
balm."  The  blood  of  Christ  for  cleansing
the  conscience ;  the  love  of  Christ  for
calming  the  heart ;  the  grace  of  Christ
for  clothing  the  soul.

See  homilies  on  chap.  xxx.  12—15:
"  Faithless  Healers  and  Vain  Remedies;  "
and  ^^  Healing  Medicines."

Ver.  15.  Theme:  Valour  Defeated.
"  Why  are  thy  valiant  men  swept  away  ?
They  stood  noty  because  the  Lord  did  drive
them."

(i.)  There  is  an  unseen  Powee
GREATER  than  that  visible.


(ii.)  When  the  unseen  Power  is  against
*'  the  valiants,'  valour  is  of  no  avail.

(iii.)  It  is  God  WHODECiDES  victories,
and  weakest  aimies  may,  therefore,  take
the  field,  against  the  stj^ong.

I.  Since  "2>oz^;6'r  belongeth  unto  God^^
we  should  attempt  no  conflict  without
first  gaining  Omnipotence  on  our  sida
Enter,  therefore,  upon  no  enterprise
without  God.

IL  Valour  is  nohle,  and  merits  a
better  issue  than  to  be  defeated.

They  who  are  "  valiant  for  the  truth,"
for  rights  civil  and  religious,  (fee,  deserve
success.

With  "  God  for  them  "  they  shall  go
on  ^^  conquering  and  to  conquer."

Yet  reliance  on  our  valour  will  repel
God  from  our  side,  and  insure  that  the
"  valiant  men  are  swept  away."

III.  The  overthrow  of  the  valiant
carries  its  own  admonition  against
Godless  confidence.

Mighty  armies  have  fallen,  because
they  trusted  in  their  equipments  and
strategies.  Mighty  men  have  fallen
before  weaker  forces — Samson,  Goliath,
(fee.

God  is  jealous,  and  will  allow  no
arrogance  and  boasting.  He  has  threa-
tened the  proud  and  wicked  with  over-
throw. "  Pride  goeth  before  destruc-
tion," (fee.  Victory  will  therefore  he
denied  to  the  valiant  who  ignore  God^
trusting  in  their  own  courage  and
strensjth.

IV.  Humility  blended  with  valour
wins  God's  mighty  help.

1.  Humility  is  better  even  than  valour,
for  it  secures  that  which  is  infinitely
more  important — "  God  giveth  grace  to
the  humble."

2.  Valour  blended  with  humility  has
wrought  marvels,  making  men  "  mighty
through  God,"  so  that  '*one  may  chase  a
tliousand,  and  two  may  put  ten  thousand
to  flight."

3.  Valour  is  commanded  in  those  who
stand  up  for  Clirist  and  His  cause —
"  Quit  ye  like  men,  be  strong  •"  but  the
uniform  to  be  worm  by  every  soldier  of
the  Cross  is  this :  "  Be  clothed  with
humility."

Ver.  19.  77ie»we  .•  Exulting  ovEE  THS


CHAP.  XLVII.


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Ruin  of  Enemies.  Jeremiah  had  reason
to  loathe  Egypt,  and  it  had  been  well
had  his  people  hated  the  land  and  its
inhabitants.  '*  Come  out  from  the  midst
of  her,  My  people,  and  be  not  partakers
of  her  plagues."

I.  The  overthrow  of  sinners  contem-
plated with  a  natural  satisfaction.

1.  The  Egyptians  typify  the  foes  of
God's  Churcir.

2.  All  the  miseries  and  humiliations
of  life  are  associated  with  these  spiritual
enemies:  like  "the  hard  bondage"  of
Egypt  before  God  redeemed  His  people.

3.  Molestations  and  oppression  had
been  experienced  by  Israel  at  the  hands
ol  these  enemies.

4.  The  righteous  see  with  satisfaction
that  the  wrongs  they  have  suffered  will
be  requited.

5.  It  is  with  equanimity  and  a  sense
of  right  that  the  overthrow  of  our  oppres-
sors is  contemplated.

II.  The  overthrow  of  sinners  rejoiced
In  with  righteous  gladness.

1.  The  law  of  recompense  is  a  gracious
law ;  it  vindicates  God's  justice  and
power,  and  assures  the  righteous  who
suffer  wrongfully  that  God  will  in  due
season  reverse  the  tyranny  of  evil-doers.

2.  The  honour  of  God,  as  much  as  the
peace  of  the  righteous,  necessitates  the
ultimate  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God
and  His  kingdom.

3.  A  godly  soul  therefore  exults  in
the  merited  defeat  of  evil;  for —

(a.)  It  insures  the  peace  of  the  godly.
(6.)  It  vindicates  the  faithfulness  of
God,

(c.)  It  frustrates  the  purposes  of  evil.
(d.)  It  demonstrates  the  certainty  of


justice — against  the  guilty,   and  to  the
godly.

Vers.  27,  28.  Theme :  Israel's  Res-
toration. (See  notes  and  homilies  on
chap.  XXX.  10,  11:  ^*  Recovery  of  Lost
Israel ,"  and  ^^  Nations  Obliterated;  Is-
rael Preser'ved.")  "  Egypt's  fall  and
restoration  have  been  foretold  ;  but  the
prophet  closes  with  a  word  of  exhorta-
tion to  the  many  erring  Jews  who  dwelt
there.     With  loving  earnestness  he —

I  Reminds  them  of  Israel's  hope,
and  of  the  promise  of  salvation  to  man-
kind  bound  up  with  their  national  exis-
tence. Further,  he  calls  hack  to  their
remembrance  the  prediction  from  which
these  two  verses  are  taken  (chap,  xxx.),
and  thereby

II.  Assures  them  of  Israel's  return
from  exile,  and  of  the  certain  accomplish-
ment, by  their  means,  of  God^s  purposes
of  mercy  to  the  whole  human  race.
Why,  then,  should  they  flee  from  their
country  and  trust  in  a  heathen  power,
instead  of  endeavouring  to  live  in  a  man-
ner  worthy  of

III.  The  noble  destiny  which  was
their  true  glory  and  ground  of  confi-
dence ?  " — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

Note. — "  When  God  turns  things  up-
side down,  and  takes  care  that  neither
root  nor  branch  remains,  His  little  flock
must  be  preserved.  The  punishments
which  redound  to  the  destruction  of  the
ungodly  redound  to  the  amelioration  of
the  godly.  For  from  these  He  takes  the
eternal  punishment,  and  turns  even  the
temporal  punishment  to  their  advantage;
but  the  ungodly  drink  it  to  the  dregs."
— Cramer.


CHAPTER  XLVII.

Critical  and  Exeoetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — **  Before  that  Pharaoh
•mote  Gaza  "  (ver.  1);  but  which  Pharaoh?  Pharaoh-iVecAo,  on  his  return  from  defeating
Josiah  at  Megiddo  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  20),  or  Fh&raoh- ffophra,  on  his  return  from  the  fruitless
eflfort  to  save  Jerusalem  from  the  Chaldeans  (chap,  xxxvii.  6,  7)  ;  or  this  same  Piiaraoh-Hophra
after  liis  defeat  at  Carchemish  {vide  previous  chapter,  notes)?  The  probabilities  favour
Pharaoh- Necho,  and  date  the  prophecy  before  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim.  Note,  that  just  as
ftn  enemy  from  the  south  (Egypt)  is  about  to  assail  Pliilistia,  the  prophet  pi  edicts  the  seemingly
unlikely  and  remote  fact  that  an  enemy  from  the  north  (the  Babylonians)  should  invade  and
#poil  them  !  Note  further,  that  the  country  of  the  Philistines  was  overrun  by  the  army  of
Nebucliadnezzar  during,  or  immediately  after,  the  siege  of  Tyre,  while  prosecuting  his  march
towards  Egypt.
634


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAU.  oukw  XLVitt.


2.  Cteographical  Beferences  (ver.  1).  **  Philistines  .  .  .  Gaza."  Philistia  bordered  upon
EL'^ypt,  and  Pharaoh-Necho  seized  this  on  his  retreat  (defeated  by  the  Chaldeans)  from  Car-
chemish  ;  for  Gaza  was  **  the  key  to  Egypt,"  and  his  holding  this  wouhi  elieck  the  now
victorious  Chaldeans  from  invading  Egypt  itself.

Ver.  4.  '*  Tyrus  and  Zidon.'*  Neighbours  to  Philistia,  so  that  the  Phoenicians  of  Tyre  and
Sidon  would  naturally  become  ^'helpers"  to  the  Philistines,  making  common  cause  againgtthe
invader,  for  the  overthrow  of  Philistia  carried,  as  a  consequence,  the  overthrow  of  Tyre  and
Sidon  also.  **  The  connti'y  of  Caphtor  :^' perha'ps  Crete  (so  Gesenius),  or  Cyprus  (so  Kitto).
Otliers  suggest  Cappadocia;  and  the  city  Caparorsa,  situate  between  Palestine  and  Idumsea,  is
pointed  out  as  probable  on  account  of  being  adjacent.

Ver.  5.  *'Ashkelon  .  .  .  their  valley"  The  "valley"  is  the  inland  vallej  of  Philistia  as
distinguished  from  her  maritime  fortresses,  Oaza  and  Askdon.

The  Sword  of  the  Lord  upon  Philistu.

For  ages  long  had  the  Philistines  em-  when  God's  sword  smites,  no  confederacy

bittered   tlie  lot  of  Israel.     From  the  of  defence  can  protect  or  shield,
times  of  Shamgar  (Judges  iii.  31),  down  3.  Abject  in  grief  and  dismay  (ver.  5).

to  those  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii.  8),  "  Baldness  "  a   sign   of   anguish  ;  "  cut

they  were  both   hostile  and  dangerous  <%s^^/"  the  conduct  of  terrified  despair,

neighbours.     Now  the  day  of  retribution  When  God  smites,  we  feel  His  strokes.
had  arrived,  when    Philistia*s  hostility  III.  The  appeal  for  mercy  (ver.  6).

should  be  punished.     For  "  God  is  not  1.   Though  smitten  for  their  «t»,  mea

slack  concerning  His  promise  as  some  cry  out  against  its  punishment,
men  count  slackness,  but  is  long-sutfer-  2.     Though  prayerless  while  sinning,

ing,"  (fee.  men  appeal  for  pity  when  its  chastise-

I.  The  avenging  sword—  ments  are  upon  them.

1.  Falls  at  length,  though  long  sheathed  3.  Though  stubborn  against  God's
(ver.  4).     Compare   Ps.  xxxvii.   12,  13.  word,   sinners   cannot    hold   out    long

2.  Is  wielded  by  other  hands  than  we      under  His  "  sword.**

iurmise    (ver.    2).     "  The    north "    (see  IV.  The  full  measure  of  doom  (ver.

note  above  to  Chronology).     God  selects  7).

His  own  agencies  for  punishing  men.  1.  Appointed  judgments  yiT\\\>QQf[Qclt\X'

II.  The  smitten  sufferers —  ally  cai  ried  out.

1.  Paralysed  with  terror  (ver.  3).  2.  No  pleadings  for  mercy  will  stay
Solicitous  for  themselves  to  the  forget-  those  judgments  when  they  at  last  come
ting  of  all  natural  afifection.  on  the  guilty.

2.  Destitute  of  helpers  (ver.  4).     For


CHAPTER  XLVIIL


Cbitioal  and  Exeoetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — Naegelsbaeh  snggestg,

with  ample  justification,  that  '*  this  prophecy  certainly  belongs  to  the  time  of  Jehoiakim,  and
before  the  fourth  year^  the  Chaldeans  and  Nebuchadnezzar  not  being  mentioned  ;  '*  and  adds  ;
'*  The  form  of  the  superscription  favours  its  contemporaneousness  with  the  first  prophecy  against
Egypt  (xlvi.  1,  2)."     Cf.  notes  on  chap.  xxv.

2.  Contemporary  Scriptures. — Cf.  on  chap.  xxv.  Here  it  is  appropriate  to  point  out  that
this  chapter  is,  to  a  remarkable  degree,  &  compilation  of  extracts  from  other  prophets^  mainly  from
Isaiah.  Gesenius  "depreciates  this  prophecy  as  a  tasteless  piece  of  patchwork"  [Dr.  Payne
Smith]  from  Isaiah;  and  adverse  critics  have  challenged  the  wisdom  and  good  taste  of  Jere-
miah's work  in  thus  putting  together  such  a  fragmentary  collection  of  older  inspired  utterances
"against  Moab."  But  Naegelsbach  well  states  the  case:  "Jeremiah's  object  in  this  prophecy
was  evidently  to  reanimate,  as  it  were,  the  former  declarations  of  similar  purport,  and  com-
prise them  together  for  the  sake  of  a  powerful  total  effect.  From  ver.  29  onwards  there  is  a
constant,  more  or  less  free,  use  of  older  utterances."  Quotations  taken  from  Isaiah  xv.  and
xvi.  are  numerous.  Thus  comp.  Isaiah  xv.  2-7  with  vers.  37,  38,  34,  5,  36  ;  Isa.  xvi.  6-12,
with  vers.  29-33,  36,  35  ;  and  Isa.  xxiv.  with  vers.  43,  44.  So,  also,  words  and  phrases,  in
vera.  45,  24,  and  41,  seem  to  be  appropriated  from  Amos  ii.  2 ;  and  in  vers.  26  and  42  from
Zephaniah  ii.  8-10 ;  and  vers.  15,  46  from  Numbers  xxi.  28,  29,  xxiv.  17.  It  should  be  jioted
that  Isaiah  prophesies  the  devastation  of  Moab  l)y  the  Assyrian  king,  Shalmaneser ;  Jeremiak
refers  to  its  overthrow  by  the  Chaldean  king,  Nebuchadnezzar,

635


OflAP.  xLViil.  BOMtLEflC  COMMSNTAJtY :  JEREMlAtt.


8.  National  Affairs. — The  historic  record  of  2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  shows  that  Moab  had  at  that
time  joined  the  Chaldeans  in  hostility  to  Judah.

4.  Contemporaneous  History. — Moab'g  overthrow  was  effected  by  Nebuchadnezzar  five  years
after  his  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  time  when  lie  also  attacked  Egypt  {cf.  notes  on  chap,
xliii.,  specially  vers.  8-13)  and  Ammon  {cf.  chap.  xlix.  1-6).  In  Josephus,  Antiq.f  x.  9,  §  7,  we
have  the  record.

5.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  1.  *^Nebo"  a  mountain  and  town  of  Moab.  **  Keria-
thaim,^'  a  place  of  great  antiquity,  originally  possessed  by  the  Enim  (Gen.  xiv.  6),  and  after-
wards by  the  Moabites;  placed  by  Eusebius  ten  miles  west  of  Medeba.  *'  Misgabf"  i.e.  citaddf
not  a  proper  name  at  all.

Ver.  2.  **  Heshhon,"  the  chief  city  of  Moab,  situate  midway  between  the  rivers  Arnon  and
Jabbok  ;  it  was  an  ancient  and  royal  city.    **  Madmen^"  a  town  of  which  no  information  exists.

Ver.  3.  "  Horonaim: "  the  same  as  the  city  Avara  mentioned  by  Ptolemy.  See  Nehem.  ii.
10  ;  Isa.  XV.  5.     It  lay  in  a  plain.

Ver.  6.   "  Luhith  "  lay  on  a  height ;  locality  unknown.

Ver.  18.  **  Dihon"  situate  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Arnon.  The  remains  of  the  fortifica*
tions  of  Dibon  are  still  visible  (Burckhardt*s  Travels).

Ver.  19.  **Aroer."     On  the  north  bank  of  the  Arnon,  a  city  of  Ammon.

Ver.  20.  "  Arnon,  This  river  was  the  north  boundary  between  Moab  and  Ammon.  See
Numb.  xxi.  13.

Ver.  21.  "Eolon.*'  Cf.  Josh.  xv.  51.  *' Jahazah.**  Of.  Numb.  xxi.  23.  *' MephaatV  Of,
Josh.  xiii.  18  ;  xxi.  37.    Of  these  and  following  cities  enumerated  little  or  nothing  is  known.

Ver.  32.  "  Sea  of  Jazar."  Jazar  lies  in  an  upland  valley,  about  fifteen  miles  north  of  Hesh*
bon.     "  Sea  "  is  very  doubtful  here  ;  probably  a  transcriber's  error.

6.  Personal  Allusion. — Ver.  7.  "  Chemoah"  the  national  god  of  Moab  (Numb.  xxi.  29).
His  being  led  into  captivity  represents  the  total  ruin  of  the  nation  he  protected.  The  literal
name  here  is  "  Ckemish"  and  this  is  doubtless  correct,  as  in  the  word  *'  Carchemish,"  i.e.  the
fortress  of  Chemish.

7.  Natural  History. — Ver.  28.  ^'  The  dove  that  maJeeth  her  nest  in  the  sides  of  the  hole's
mouth ;"  lit.  '*  that  resteth  in  the  passages  of  the  sides  of  the  abyss."  Tristram  says,  **  The  wild
pigeon  invariably  selects  .  .  .  deep  ravines  for  its  nesting  and  roosting  places."  Uendersom
quotes  the  following  classics : —

^&y€v  &<rT€  iriKeia
*H  pd  $*  W  tpriKos  KoLXijp  elffivraro  Trh-pTjK — Iliadf  xxL  498.
"  Qualis  spelunca  subito  commota  columba
Cui  domus,  et  dulces  latebroso  in  pumice  nidi." — Jindd,  v.  213,

8.  Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  2.    '*/n  Heshbon  they  have  devised:**  &  play  upon  words.
^lli^n  —  i^Hl^n^      "  Heshbou  "  means  a  place  of  devising  or  counsel.     *'  Thou  shaU  he  cui  doum

(margin,  brought  to  silence),  0  Madmen:*'  another  play  on  words;  "Madmen*'  means  sHence.

Ver.  7.  "Thy  works,"  i.e.  fortifications.     Moab  was  renowned  for  them.

Ver.  45.  "Because  of  the  forct^*  rather  without  force.  A  better  translation  is:  "The
fugitives  stand  powerless  under  the  shadow  of  Heshbon."  "  The  crovm  of  the  head  of  the
tumultuous  ones."  "  Crown  of  the  head  "  is  here  poetical  for  the  loftiest  elevation  of  Moab ;
and  the  Moabites,  in  reference  to  the  roar  and  fury  with  which  they  give  battle,  are  called
"sons  of  tumult."

SUBJECT  OF  CHAPTER  XLVIJL
Moab's  Doom.

Ver.  1.  7%em«.' Sin  THE  Precursor  OP  power,   money,   and   riches  (2  Chron.

Doom.     "  Because  the  destruction  of  the  xxxii.  8  ;  Isa.  xl.  6).

Moabites  is  of  no  service  to  us  except  HI.  Security,  as   if  all   were    pros-

for  penitence,  we  must  note  well  what  perous  and  peaceful,  which  was  the  sin

particular  sins  are  specified,  of   which  of  their  sister  Sodom  (Ezek.  xvi.  49 ;

they  were  guilty,  and  for  which  such  Zeph.  ii.  9).

heavy  punishments  were  heaped  upon  IV.  Talking  great  things,   and   in-

them,  viz.  : —  dulging  self-praise.     But  although  Go-

L  Disdain,  in  that  they  gave  no  one  liath  was  so  mighty  a  fellow,  he  had

a  good  word,  were  unfriendly,  and  only  yet  to  bite  the  grass  (1  Sam.  xvii.  60).
blustered  and  boasted  with  every  one  V.  Pride    and    arrogance.       These

(Ps.  Hi.  3).  never  do  well,  but  act  with   violence

n.  Confidence  in  their  fortifications,  and  injustice.      By  violence,  injustice,
636


ffOMlLBTIO  COMMENTAHY:  JEFEMTAff,


dHAf.  XLimt.


and  avarice,  however,  a  kingdom  passes
from  one  people  to  an  other." — Cramer.

Theme :  Sinners  alike  in  all  Ages.
"  How  many  are  still  like  the  Moabites  ;
for  how  many  are  there  who —

I.  Depend  on  their  power  and  vio-
lence, their  fortified  cities  and  buildings,
their  riches,  money,  and  property,  and
set  all  their  hope  and  confidence  thereon  !
How  many  are  there  who,  when  they
have  been  some  time  at  peace,

n.  Become  secure,  and  anticipate
no  further  evil,  thinking  there  is  no
more  trouble  from  the  rising  to  the
setting  of  the  sun  I  How  many  are
there  who —

III.  Rely  on  their  own  strength,
and  say,  Let  the  enemy  come,  we  are  a
match  for  him  !  How  many  there  are
who,  when  they  surpass  others  in  bodily
strength,  or  in  mental  gifts,  or  in  per-
ishable goods,

IV.  Become  proud  and  abusive;
ridicule,  despise,  and  treat  badly  their
inferiors,  as  if  they  had  "  found  such
among  thieves,"  as  God  the  Lord  here
says  (ver  27)  !  And,  although  all  good
and  perfect  gifts  come  from  the  Father
of  lights,  yet  many  will  not  acknowledge
this,  but

V.  Ascribe  their  advantages  to  their
own  wisdom  and  skill,  do  not  thank
God  for  them,  and  thus  make  themselves
the  idol  they  serve." — Bibl.  Summarien,
Halle,  1848.     From  Lartge.

Ver.  2.  Theme:  Praise  to  Man
Silenced.  "  There  shall  be  no  more
'praise  of  Moah."

I.  Human  praise  is  of  short  dura-
tion. Be  it  offered  to  nations  or  men,
it  is  like  the  trumpet  strain,  which
swells  in  loudness  and  then  dies  into
silence ;  like  the  fragrance  of  a  flower,
which,  however  sweet,  soon  passes
away.

IL  Praise  to  men  can  scarcely  be
given  with  justice.  Why  should  praise
be  given  to  a  nation  for  its  greatness —
of  wealth,  intelligence,  territory — when
that  greatness  is  the  result  of  the  de-
velopment of  natural  resources,  or  of
administrative  power,  given  to  it  of
God  1      And    why    should    praise    be


ascribed  to  a  man  of  genius  or  benevo-
lence, when  his  genius  is  a  Divine  en-
dowment, and  his  benevolence  a  Divine
implantation  ?

III.  Praise  is  due  only  to  God.
Shall  we  praise  the  Alps  that  they  reach
unto  the  clouds,  or  the  eagle  that  she
bears  her  young  upon  her  wings  and
covers  them  with  her  feathers?  No!
The  mighty  Alps  are  what  they  are  by
the  creative  power  of  God,  and  the  noble
eagle  is  what  she  is  by  the  instinct  God
has  given  to  her.

Mighty  nations  are  but  Alps  of  God*s
creation,  and  great  men  are  but  eagles
of  God's  endowing  ;  for  "  of  Him  and
through  Him  are  all  things,  to  whom
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever."

IV.  Heaven-taught  men  never  fail
to  trace  the  favours  their  fellow-men
confer  up  to  their  Divine  Source.  Does
Joseph  obtain  favour  of  Pharaoh  ?  It
is  acknowledged  that  "  the  Lord  gave
him  favour"  (Gen.  xxxix.  21  \  xli.  52).
Is  Daniel  a  favourite  in  the  court  of
Babylon  ?  "  God  had  brought  Daniel
into  favour  and  tender  love,"  (fee.  (Dan.
i.  9).  Is  the  Cburch  at  Corinth  ear-
nestly cared  for  by  Titus  ?  Paul  thanks
God  for  putting  that  "  care  into  the
heart "  of  Titus.

Every  river  has  its  source,  the  Avon
or  Thames,  the  Niger  or  Nile,  and  so
has  every  blessing;  and  that  source  is
God!

V.  Praise  to  man  shall  he  silenced
that  God  may  receive  His  due.  Often,
instead  of  all  blessings  being  traced  to
God,  they  are  in  part  traced  to  men ;
and  sometimes  so  largely  to  man  as  if
he  were  the  greater  benefactor  of  the
two.

But  silence  eventually  shall  come  upon
all  human  praise.

VL  God's  praise  is  the  Christian's
sweetest  employ,  and  it  shall  be  an
endless  employ.  "  There  shall  be  no
more  praise  ot  Moab  ;"  but  neither  in
time  or  eternity  will  God*s  praise  cease.

**  Praise  shall  employ  my  noblest  powers
While  immortality  endures !
Thy  days  of  praise  shall  ne'er  be  past
Wliile  life  or  breath  or  being  last."

Death  may  silence  the  tongue,  but  it

637


mkt.  xLviit


^OMILETIC  COMMENTAHY.  JEtiJ<:MTAB.


cannot  tbe  soul  ;  and  in  heaven  it  will
perpetuate  God's  praises.

"When  this  poor  lisping,  stammering  tongue
Lies  silent  in  the  grave,
Then  in  a  nobler,  sweeter  song,
I'll  sing  Thy  power  to  save."

As  He  loved  us  from  everlasting,  so
shall  our  praise  be  to  everlasting.  His
everlasting  love  will  call  forth  our  ever-
lasting song. — Arranged  from  Pledgees
"  Walks  with  Jeremiah"

Ver.  4.  Theme :  A  Cry  from  Little
Ones.  "  Moab  is  destroyed  ;  her  little
ones  have  caused  a  cry  to  he  heard."
Calamity  comes  upon  all,  young  and  old.
However  innocent,  however  *'  littlcj**  none
escape.

I.  Children  suffer.  "  Cry,"  as  if  in
distress  /  Yes,  even  '*  little  ones  "  share
in  pain,  grief,  and  calamity.  (1.)  Sad
to  think  of  suffering  children  ;  in  hos-
pitals, at  home.  (2.)  Sad,  also,  to  think
of  sorrowing  childr^en :  little  hearts
broken  with  grief ;  orphans,  ill-used
children,  hungry  children.  (3.)  Most
sad  to  think  of  sinning  children.  They
suflfer  most, — in  their  consciences  now  ;
and,  if  they  die  in  their  sins,  they  suffer
in  doom  !     For —

II.  Children  perish.  "  Cry  "  as  they
fall  under  the  destroy  en's  hands.  For
"  Moah  is  destroyed,*'  and  in  the  de-
struction the  children  are  included.

1.  Cruel  people  will  even  injure  and
destroy  "  little  ones.''  Think  of  Herod's
soldiers  slaying  the  infants  of  Bethle-
hem. There  are  evil  men  and  women
who  would  destroy  the  innocence,  the
purity,  the  affection,  the  truthfulness,
the  happiness  of  children.  They  do  it
with  had  hooks,  by  teaching  them  to  lie
and  deceive,  by  tempting  them  to  hreak
God's  day  and  His  laws.  And  children
are  perishing  around  us  !  (See  Matt,
xviii.  6.)

2.  Satan  delights  in  destroying  the
^^ little  07ies."  A  "roaring  lion  seeking
whom  he  may  devour."

IIL  Children  pray.  "  Cry  "  as  if  in
prayer.  Doubtless  these  '*  little  ones  "
in  Moab  would  cry  out  to  the  destroy-
ers, entreating  them  not  to  hurt  or  kill
them.

638


1.  Children  can  pray.  "Cause  a  cry
to  be  heard."

2.  Children  may  pray  in  a  vn^ong
direction:  to  their  cruel  destroyers,  in-
stead of  to  God,  their  mighty  Deliverer.

3.  Children  should  pray ;  for  peril  is
near,  and  Jesus  waits  to  save  those  who
seek  Him.  **  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day
of  trouble,  and  I  will  hear  thee."

Ver.    9.     Theme:    Hastening    to

Escape.      **  Give    wings    unto    Moab,
that  it  may  flee  and  get  away."

I.  Wherefore  should  a  soul  ''make
haste"  in  seeking  salvation?  Because —

1.  The  "  spoiler  "  is  alert  (ver.  8).

2.  None  will  be  exempted  (ver.  8).

3.  No  hiding-place  will  be  secure
(ver.  6).

4.  Moments  wasted  give  opportunity
to  the  foe.

5.  Lost  opportunities  never  return.

II.  From  what  should  a  soul  so
earnestly  speed  its  flight  ?

1.  From  delights  and  possessions  which
it  had  hitherto  cherished :  "  Thy  works
and  thy  treasures"  (ver.  7).  "Love
not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that
are  in  the  world."

2.  From  evoy  ohject  of  trust.  "  Thou
hast  trusted  in,"  <fec.  (ver.  7).  They  are
insufficient;  and  to  cling  to  them  will
work  delusion  and  destruction.

3.  From  all  false  religious  hopes.
"  Chemosh  and  his  priests "  (ver.  7),
all  shall  fail  Moab ;  as  all  religious
hopes,  but  Christ,  shall  fail  the  soul.

III.  How  can  a  soul  hasten  its
escape  from  pursuing  perils?  ''Give
wings  to  Moab,  tliat  it  may  flee  and  get
away."     Corap.  Ps.  Iv.  6.

1.  Its  own  unaided  powers  will  not
suffice  to  save  the  soul.

2.  The  "  wings "  a  soul  needs  aie
prayer,  purpose,  faith.  For  by  these
it  speeds  its  way  to  Christ.

3.  Such  supernatural  endowments  must
he  *^given;"  the  soul  cannot  assume  them
at  will,  nor  create  them  lor  the  emer-
gency. God  will  give  such  '*  wings."
He  gives  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  the
Spirit  stirs  the  soul  to  prayer,  to  pur-
pose, and  to  faith.

Blessed  is  that  soul  who  **get$away"
from  snares  and  pursuing  foes,  safely  hid


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


cn\p.  XLViu


in  Christ !  '' Flee"*  to  the  cross;  "flee**
to  the  throne,  of  grace ;  "flee"  to  your
Bibles;  "flee"  to  the  oj^en  heart  of
Jesus.

Ver.  10.  Theme:  Doing  God's  Work
Remissly.  Tliis  utter  devastation  of
M<»ab  was  "the  work  of  the  Lord;"
and  the  instruments  He  would  use
must  do  it  thoroughly.  Comp.  SauPs
sin  as  to  Anialek  (1  Sam.  xv.  3,  9),
and  Ahab's  as  to  Syria  (1  Kings  xx.
42).

Notes. — "  The  prophet  pronounces  *  a
curse*  upon  ministers  of  the  Divine  jus-
tice if,  being  sent  to  destroy  Moab,  they
are  remiss  in  executing  the  sentence." —
Dr,  Payne  Smith,

"The  work  of  destroying  Moab  is
here  mainly  meant.  But  the  text  taketh
in  all  lawful  employments:  these  are
God's  works,  and  must  be  done  vigor-
ously, with  all  our  might,  in  obedience
to  God,  and  for  His  greatest  glory.  Not
8ol(Hers  only,  that  have  a  good  cause,
and  in  a  good  calling  must  likewise  take
a  good  courage,  and  do  execution  lustily;
but  magistrates  also,  who  are  keepers  of
both  tables  of  the  law,  must  do  right  to
all  without  partiality.  Ministers  must
look  to  the  ministry  which  they  have
received  from  the  Lord  that  they  fulfil
it.  Every  man,  in  his  particular  place
and  station,  must  be  ^not  slothful  in
business^  but  fervent  in  spirit,  serving
the  Lord.'  In  God's  immediate  service
especially  men  must  stir  up  themselves
to  take  hold  of  Him,  minding  the  work,
and  not  doing  it  in  a  customary,  formal
way.  A  very  heathen  [Aristides]  could
say,  *  Ignavia  in  rebus  divinis  est  nefaris  *
— Dulness  in  Divine  things  is  abomi-
nable. And  Numa,  king  of  the  Romans,
made  a  law,  that  none  should  be  careless
or  cursory  in  the  service  of  God,  and
appointed  an  oflicer  to  cry  oft  to  the
people  at  such  a  time,  ^ Hoc  agite* —
Mind  what  you  do,  and  do  it  to  your
utmost.  He  that  is  ambitious  of  God's
curse,  let  him  do  otherwise." — Trapp.

Theme :  Deoeitpulness  in  God's
Service.     Jeremy  Taylor  suggests-

(i.)  He  that  serves  God  with  the  body,
without  the  toulf  serves  God  deceitfully.

(ii.)  He  that  serves  God  with  the  soul,


without  the  hody^  when  both  can  be  con-
joined, doth  the  work  of  God  deceitfully.

(iii.)  They  are  deceitful  in  the  Lord's
work  that  reserveone  faculty  for  siUyOv  one
sin  for  themselves^  or  one  action  to  please
their  appetite  and  many  for  religion.

(iv.)  And  they  who  think  God  suffi-
ciently served  with  abstaining  from  evil,
and  converse  not  in  the  acquisition  and
pursuit  of  holy  charity  and  religion. —
Quoted  in  Ixinge,

Ver.  10.  War  Theme:  The  Curse
OF  Cowardice.  The  God  of  peace
would  have  us  "follow  peace  with  all
men  ;"  and  the  Prince  of  peace  has  pro-
nounced, "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."
But  when  the  lusts  of  men  are  per-
petually embroiling  the  world  with  wars
and  fightings  ;  when  avarice  and  ambi-
tion would  rob  us  of  our  prosperity ;
when  they  would  enslave  the  free-born
mind  by  their  usurpation  and  arbitrary
power ;  when  they  would  tear  from  our
eager  grasp  Heaven's  highest  blessing,
our  religion — what  tlien  is  the  will  of
God  ?  Must  peace  be  maintained  with
perfidious  and  cruel  invaders,  at  the
expense  of  property,  life,  and  religion  ?
No ;  in  such  a  time  the  Providence  of
God  calls,  "Tb  arms/"  The  sword  is
then  consecrated,  and  the  art  of  war
becomes  part  of  our  religion.

The  Moabites-  against  whom  this  pro-
phecy was  denounced,  were  a  trouble-
some and  restless  nation  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Jews,  who,  though
often  subdued  by  them,  struggled  to
recover  their  power,  and  renewed  their
hostilities ;  by  this  and  other  sins  their
guilt  rendered  them  ripe  for  execution.
The  Babylonians  were  commissioned  to
this  work  of  vengeance,  and  they  were
bound  to  execute  the  commission  faith-
fully, under  penalty  of  a  curse.

The  text  is  a  declaration  of  the
righteous  "curse"  of  God  against  a
dastardly  refusal  to  engage  in  war  when
it  is  our  duty,  or  a  deceitful,  negligent
discharge  of  that  duty  after  we  have
engaged  in  it.  This  denunciation  i?
levelled,  like  the  artillery  of  heaven,
against  the  coward^  and  against  the
self-seeking^  as  distinguished  from  the
patriotic  soldier,

639


OHaP.  XLVIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


I.  Present  a  brief  view  of  the  cir-
cumstances which   call   us   to   war.

Barbarities  and  depredations  of  Indian
savages  and  French  papists.  Homes
demolished,  and  families  fleeing  in  con-
sternation ;  the  dead  lie  mangled  with
brutal  wounds;  others  have  been  dragged
away  captives,  made  the  slaves  of  im-
perious savages.  Our  frontiers  have
been  drenched  with  the  blood  of  oar
fellow-subjects.  Our  country  bleeds
at  a  thousand  veins,  and  without  our
timely  remedy  the  wound  will  prove
mortal.

Is  it  not,  therefore,  our  duty  in  the
sight  of  God,  a  work  to  which  He  loudly
calls  us,  to  take  up  arms  for  the  defence
of  our  country'?  Certainly ;  and  "Cursed
is  he  who  [without  justifiable  reasons]
keepeth  his  sword  from  blood,"

The  man  that  can  desert  the  cause  of
his  country  in  such  an  emergency,  whose
blessings  he  has  shared  in  times  of  peace,
and  whose  sympathy  and  aid  he  shares
in  the  day  of  distress,  that  cowardly,
ungrateful  man  deserves  the  curse  of
both  God  and  his  country.

What  greater  evidence  of  ingratitude
can  be  given  than  a  supine  neglect  of
the  blessings  the  land  enjoys,  and  a
stupidly  tame  resignation  of  them  into
rapacious  hands  ?  Love  of  country  and
of  religion  calls  us  to  action.

II.  Show  what  is  that  deceitful  per-
formance of  the  Lord's  work,  or  un-
reasonable keeping  back  the  sword
from  blood,  which  exposes  to  His
curse.  If  soldiers  should  unman  them-
selves with  debauchery  instead  of  risking
life  for  defence  of  country;  if  they  shun
instead  of  seeking  out  the  enemy ;  if
they  consult  what  is  safest  and  easiest
for  themselves  and  not  for  their  country;
when  they  prolong  the  war  that  they
may  the  longer  live  and  riot  at  the
nation's  expense ;  when  they  do  not
conscientiously  exert  all  their  power  to
repel  the  enemy  and  protect  the  state ;
then  they  "do  the  work  of  the  Lord
deceitfully,"  and  His  curse  lights  on
them  as  their  heavy  doom.  Let  sobriety,
public  spirit,  courage,  fidelity,  and  good
discipline  be  maintained  among  you.

But,  besides  soldiers,  you  are  sinners^
and  carulidates  for  eternity.     We  may

640


never  meet  more.  You  are  concerned
to  save  your  own  souls  as  well  as  your
country.  Surely  immorality  and  de-
bauchery cannot  better  inspire  soldiers
with  fortitude  against  the  fear  of  death
than  prayer  and  a  life  of  holiness.  Such
courage  must  be  a  brutal  stupidity  or
ferocity,  not  the  rational  courage  of  a
man  or  a  Christian.

If  free  from  these  vices,  negative  good-
ness is  not  enough  to  prepare  you  for
death.  You  must  experience  Divine
grace ;  become  humble  penitents  and
true  believers  in  Jesus  Christ;  must
"  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly
in  this  present  evil  world."  This  is
religion,  which  will  inspire  and  be-
friend in  conflict,  and  sustain  you  in
death.

God  grant  you  a  safe  return  from  the
struggle,  crowned  with  the  laurels  of
victory.

But  if  the  defence  of  our  country ,  in
which  we  can  stay  hut  a  few  years  at
mosty  be  so  important  a  duty,  then  how
much  more  are  we  obliged  to  "  seek  a
better  country,  even  a  heavenly,"  and
to  carry  on  vigorous  war  against  (mr
spiritual  enemies  who  would  rob  us  of
our  heavenly  inheritance  !  Therefore,
in  the  Name  of  "  the  Captain  of  our
salvation,"  I  invite  you  to  enlist  in  the
spiritual  warfare.  "  Take  to  you  the
whole  armour  of  God ;  quit  you  like
men ;  be  strong."  And  for  encourage-
ment, remember,  "  He  that  overcometh
shall  inherit  all  things,"  and  enter  a
kingdom  which  cannot  be  shaken  or
assailed. — Preached  to  the  Militia  hy
President  Davies,  A.D.  1758.

Vers.  10,  11.  Theme:  Cabnal  Secu-
rity. "  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from
his  youth,  and  he  hath  settled  on  his
lees,  and  hath  not  been  emptied  from
vessel  to  vessel,  neither  hath  he  gone
into  captivity :  therefore  his  taste  re-
mained in  him,  and  his  scent  is  not
changed.  Therefore,  behold,  the  days
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  send
unto  him  wanderers,  that  shall  cause
him  to  wander,  and  shall  empty  his
vessels,  and  break  their  bottles."

For  a  considerable  season  Moab  had
been  free  from  the  inroads  of  war  and


UOillLETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  XLvnt.


the  terrors  of  pestilence  ;  had,  therefore,
become  so  conceitedly  secure,  that  the
Lord  said,  "  We  have  heard  the  pride
of  Moab,"  (fee.  (ver.  29).  The  people
became  vain,  hectoring,  and  boastful,
and  mocked  at  their  afflicted  neighbours
the  Israelites,  manifesting  ungenerous
joy  in  their  sorrows  (ver.  27).  From
this  pride  sprang  luxury  and  all  those
otlier  vices  which  find  a  convenient  lair
in  the  repose  of  unbroken  prosperity.
The  warriors  of  Moab  said,  "  We  are
mighty  and  strong  men  for  tlie  war;'*
as  vainglorious  sinners,  they  defied  all
law  and  power;  trusting  in  Chemosh,
they  despised  Jehovah,  and  magnified
themselves  against  the  Lord.  The  pro-
phet compares  that  country  to  wine
which  has  been  allowed  to  stand  un-
stirred and  unmoved :  it  settles  on  its
lees,  grows  strong,  retains  its  aroma,
and  gathers  daily  fresh  body  and  spirit.
"  But,"  saith  he,  "  the  day  shall  come
when  God  shall  shake  this  undisturbed
liquor,  when  He  shall  send  wandering
bands  of  Chaldeans  that  shall  waste  the
country,  so  that  the  bottles  shall  be
broken  and  the  vessels  shall  be  emptied,
and  the  proud  prosperity  of  Moab  shall
end  in  utter  desolation."  The  uimsual
repose  of  Moab  had  been  the  envy  of
the  people  of  Israel,  but  they  might
well  cease  to  envy  when  they  under-
stood how  suddenly  it  should  be  over-
thrown.

That  continued  prosperity  breeds  car-
nal security  is  proved  by  the  instance  of
Moab.  In  the  first  place,  this  is  the
common  mischief  of  ungodly  men;  in  the
second  place,  this  is  the  frequent  danger
of  ike  most  godly.

L  Carnal  security  is  the  common
mischief  of  the  unconverted,  the  god-
less, the  prayerless,  the  Christless.
Many  have  become  like  Moab.  At
ease  from  your  youth,  not  "  emptied
from  vessel  to  vessel,"  but  settled  upon
your  lees,  and  therefore  careless  and
heedless.

1.  This  is  so  common  amxmg  the  unr
godly,  that  the  whole  world  was  in  this
condition  immediately  before  the  great
Deluge  which  destroyed  the  ancient  race.
We  read  that  "  they  married  and  were
given  in  marriage."     They  did  eat  and


did  drink,  and  were  drunken  even  until
the  day  when  Noah  entered  into  the
ark,  and  the  floods  came  and  swept  them
all  away.  The  preacher  of  righteous-
ness for  one  hundred  and  twenty  years
warned  them  that  their  sins  were  become
intolerable  to  Heaven,  and  that  vengeance
would  surely  be  taken  upon  their  devices,
but  they  laughed  the  prophet  to  scorn.
The  world  is  so  little  changed  to-day,
that  if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should
now  come,  as  come  He  will,  "  in  such
an  hour  as  ye  think  not,"  He  would
find  the  mass  of  men  still  in  the  same
condition.  "  As  it  was  in  the  days  of
Noe,  so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days  of
the  Son  of  Man."  This  is  the  abiding
state  of  the  world  which  lieth  in  the
wicked  one  :  settled  on  its  lees,  it  is  not
emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel,  and  there-
fore it  dreams  itself  into  presumptuous
peace.

2.  But  from  the  world  at  large  to  come
to  particulars,

(1.)  The  hold  offenders  who  are  at  ease
in  open  sin.  They  began  life  with  ini-
quity, and  have  made  terrible  progress
in  it.  These  men  are  not  disturbed  in
their  sins ;  their  conscience  has  been
seared  as  with  a  hot  iron  :  things  which
others  would  tremble  at  are  to  them  a
jest ;  they  make  a  mock  at  sin  ]  they
play  with  burning  coals  of  lust  and
carry  fire  in  their  bosom,  and  boast  that
they  are  not  burned.  These  are  they  of
whom  David  said,  "  They  are  not  in
trouble  as  other  men,"  <kc.  (Ps.  Ixxiii.
57).  Read  yonder  handwriting  on  the
wall,  O  despiser ;  and  this  is  the  inter-
pretation thereof :  "  Thou  art  weighed
in  the  balances  and  found  wanting ;  thy
joy  shall  soon  be  taken  from  thee,  and
thy  life  also,  and  what  shalt  thou  do  in
the  day  when  the  Lord  requireth  thy
souH"

(2.)  Men  who  give  themselves  wholly
up  to  the  world's  business.  Such  men,
for  instance,  as  one  whom  Christ  called
"  Fool."  You  know  the  story ;  his
fields  brought  forth  plenteously,  <kc.
He  was  a  raiser  of  grain  and  a  hoarder
of  gold,  and  nothing  more.  This  is  the
end  and  object  of  the  most  of  mankind.
Gain  is  the  world's  summum  honum^  the
chief  of  all  mortal  good,  the  main  chance,
ft  641


OHAP.  XLYIIL


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAff.


the  prime  object,  the  barometer  of
success  in  life,  the  one  thing  needful,
the  heart's  delight.  And  yet,  O  world-
lings, Jesus  Christ  calls  you  fools.
*■'  Thou  fool,"  said  He  ;  and  why?  Be-
cause the  man's  soul  would  be  required
of  him;  and  then  whose  woull  those
things  be  which  he  had  gathered  to-
gether t

(3.)  The  man  who  forgets  God  and
lilies  in  slothful  ease.  He  is  like  the
man  who  deposited  the  napkin  and  the
talent  in  the  earth,  and  was  perfectly  at
his  ease — a  fair  picture,  indeed,  of  many
who  ought  to  be  serving  God  ;  but  they
think  they  have  little  ability,  and  there-
fore do  not  strive  even  to  do  what  they
can.  They  are  not  openly  sinful ;  they
are  quiet,  easy-going,  good-tempered
souls,  but  the  talent,  where  is  it]
Buried  I  Alas  !  it  will  have  a  resurrec-
tion, and  when  it  rises,  all  rusty  from
that  rotting  napkin,  what  a  witness  will
it  bear,  and  how  will  the  Master  say,
**  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant ! "
The  charge  of  sloth  was  quite  enough.
His  doom  was  swift  and  terrible.  It  is
not  enough  to  abstain  from  outward  sin,
and  so  to  be  negatively  moral ;  unless
you  bring  forth  fruits  unto  righteousness,
you  have  not  the  life  of  God  in  you ;
and  however  much  you  may  be  at  ease,
there  shall  come  a  rough  awakening  to
your  slumbers,  and  the  shrill  sound  of
the  archangel's  trumpet  shall  be  to  you
no  other  than  the  blast  of  the  trumpet
of  condemnation,  because  ye  took  your
ease  when  ye  should  have  served  your
God.

(4.)  There  are  many  in  the  jyrofessing
Christian  Church  who  are  in  the  same
state  as  Moab.  At  the  table  of  com-
munion they  sit  with  God's  people.
Their  profession  is  a  very  comely  one,
and  their  outward  conduct  exceedingly
honourable,  yet  they  lack  the  inward
spiritual  grace.  They  have  the  virgin's
lamp,  but  they  have  no  oil  in  the  vessel
with  their  lamps  ;  and  yet  so  comfortable
are  these  professors,  that  tiiey  slumber
and  sleep.  Let  not  presumption  hold
you  in  its  deadly  embrace.  Ilemember,
you  may  think  yourself  a  believer,  and
everybody  else  may  think  so  too,  and
you  may  fail  to  find  out  your  error  until
642


it  is  too  late  to  rectify  it.  Be  ye  not,
O  ye  professors,  like  Moab,  that  had
settled  upon  his  lees  !

(5.)  The  mass  of  moral  nun  who  are
destitute  of  faith  in  Jesus,  They  hear
of  the  convictions  and  troubles  of  an
awakened  conscience,  and  they  inwardly
sneer  at  such  fanaticism,  and  boast  that
they  never  stooped  to  such  feelings.
But  those  pangs,  and  throes,  and  toss-
ings  of  a  wounded  conscience  are  signs
of  the  dawn  of  spiritual  life ;  it  is  by
such  things  as  these  that  we  are  led  to
put  our  trust  in  Jesus  ;  and  those  who
have  never  felt  them  may  well  lament
before  the  Lord,  and  pray  that  they
may  experience  them — that  they  may
be  brought  soundly  and  safely  out  of
their  self-righteousness,  and  led  to  rest
upon  the  finished  work  of  the  dear  Re-
deemer. Better  to  suffer  a  present  dis-
turbance which  will  end  in  life,  than
enjoy  the  ease  which  is  itself  a  protrac-
ted death.  God  give  you  to  be  saved
througli  Jesus  Christ !

IL  Carnal  security  is  the  frectuent
danger  of  the  most  godly.  A  Christian
may  fall  into  a  state  of  carnal  security,
in  which  he  grows  self-confident,  insen-
sible, careless,  inactive,  and  worldly.  The
great  disease  of  England  is  consumption,
but  I  suppose  it  would  be  difficult  to
describe  the  causes  and  workings  of
consumption  and  decline.  The  same
kind  of  disease  is  common  among  Chris-
tians. It  is  not  that  many  Christians
fall  into  outward  sin,  and  so  on,  but
throughout  our  Churches  we  have  scores
who  are  in  a  spiritual  consumption —
their  powers  are  all  feeble  and  decaying.
They  have  an  unusually  bright  eye —
can  see  other  people's  faults  exceedingly
well — and  sometimes  they  have  a  flush
on  their  cheeks  which  looks  very  like
burning  zeal  and  eminent  spiritual  life,
but  it  is  occasional  and  superficial.  Vital
energy  is  at  a  low  ebb  :  they  do  not
work  for  God  like  genuinely  healtliy
workmen  ;  the  heart  does  not  beat  with
a  throb  moving  the  entire  man  ;  they
go  slumbering  on,  in  the  right  road  it  is
true,  but  loitering  in  it.

1.  The  rapid  results  of  this  consump-
tion are  just  these  :  A  man  in  such  a  state
soon   gives    up  commi^nion    w^th   QocJ.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OB  A  p.  XLV1IL


His  walk  with  God  is  broken  and  occa-
sional. His  prayers  very  soon  suffer.
By  degrees  liis  conversation  ceases  to  be
earnest  for  Christ.  And  now,  strange
to  say,  "  The  minister  does  not  preach
as  he  used  to  do ; "  at  least  the  back-
slider says  so.  The  reason  is,  that  now
there  is  little  savour  about  the  Word  to
him.  Hymns  which  used  to  be  delight-
ful for  their  melody  now  pall  upon  his
ears ;  while  the  prayers  in  which  he  used
to  join  with  so  much  fervency  are  very
flat  to  him  now.  Very  much  of  this
sluggishness  is  brought  on  by  long-con-
tinued respite  from  trouble.

"  More  the  treacherona  calm  I  dread
Tiian  tempests  rolling  overhead."

2.  The  great  secret  danger  coming  out
of  all  this  is,  that  when  a  man  reaches
the  state  of  carnal  security  he  is  ready
for  any  evil.  If  the  history  of  great
offenders  could  be  traced,  it  would  be
very  much  like  this :  they  began  well,
but  they  slackened  by  degrees,  till  at
last  they  were  ripe  for  foul  sin.  Who
would  think  that  David,  the  man  after
God's  own  heart,  should  come  to  be  the
murderer  of  his  friend  Uriah,  to  rob  him
of  his  wife  ?  O  David  !  art  thou  so  near
to  heaven  and  yet  so  near  to  hell  ?  There
is  a  David  in  every  one  of  our  hearts,
and  if  we  begin  to  backslide  from  God,  we
do  not  know  to  what  extent  we  may  slip.

3.  God 8  cure  for  this  malady.  His
usual  way  is  by  pouring  our  settled  wine
from  vessel  to  vessel.  If  we  cannot  bear
prosperity,  the  Lord  will  not  continue  it
to  us.  Have  you  never  dreamed  that
you  were  trying  to  walk  and  could  not?
You  felt  as  though  you  could  not  move
a  foot — some  one  was  about  to  overtake
you  who  would  do  you  serious  mischief,
and  you  longed  to  run  and  could  not  stir
an  inch.  That  is  the  state  of  mind  in
which  we  get  when  we  would  but  can-
not pray,  when  we  would  but  cannot
re[)ent,  when  we  want  to  believe  and
cannot,  when  we  would  give  a  world  for
one  single  tear,  would  almost  pawn  our
souls  to  obtain  a  quiver  of  spiritual  feel-
ing, but  were  insensible  still : —

"  If  aught  is  felt,  'tis  only  pain
To  find  •!  cannot  feel.*"

po  yoi^  eve^'  sink  into  thaj;  petrified


condition  1  Can  you  be  its  victim  and
yet  be  happy]  Betake  yourself  to  ear-
nest prayer.  It  will  need  God  within
us  to  keep  us  from  such  a  tremendous
peril.

See  Addenda  :  Troubles  Revive  us.

4.  What  ought  we  to  do  if  we  are
prospering?  If  God  is  prospering  us,
the  way  to  prevent  lethargy  is — be  very
grateful  for  the  prosperity  which  you
are  enjoying;  do  not  pray  for  trouble
— ^you  will  have  it  quickly  enough  with-
out asking  for  it ;  be  grateful  for  your
prosperity,  but  make  use  of  it.  Do  all
you  possibly  can  for  God  while  He  pros-
pers you  in  business;  try  to  live  very
closely  to  Him.  Watch  the  very  first
symptoms  of  declining,  and  fly  to  Christ,
the  Great  Physician.  He  will  give  you
the  balm  of  Gilead  which  will  prevent
the  mischief,  and  you  may  bear  the  heats
of  prosperity  as  safely  as  the  chill  blasts
of  adversity.

But  if  you  have  fallen  into  such  a
state,  the  one  cure  is  tJie  Holy  Spirit,
Go  to  the  cross  of  Christ  again.  Chris-
tian, if  you  have  fallen  from  your  first
estate,  go  as  you  hope  you  went  at  first ;
go  with  your  deadness,  and  sloth,  and
lethargy,  and  put  your  trust  in  the  pre-
cious blood,  and  ask  the  Lord  Jesus  to
fill  you  with  the  Spirit  once  again,  that
you  may  be  renewed.  Try  to  get  a  due
estimate  of  your  indebtedness  to  God's
grace  ;  try  to  see  the  danger  of  your
lethargy;  think  more  of  eternity  and  less
of  time.  Eend  yourself  away  a  little
from  your  worldly  engagements,  if  pos-
sible ;  put  away  your  fancied  security,
and  by  strong  crying  and  tears  turn
again  to  your  former  state  of  nearness
to  the  living  God.

Owing  Thee  so  much,  O  Jesus  I  may
we  love  Thee  much  in  return,  and  be
found  faithful  when  Thou  shalt  come  to
reward  Thy  people  and  to  be  glorified
in  Thy  saints.  Amen. — C,  H,  Spurgeon^
A.D.  1867.

Ver.  n.  Theme:  Indifference  to
Eternal  Realities.  "Moab  hath  been
at  ease  from  his  yonth."

L  True  of  men  in  the  prime  of  life  or
in  the  decay  of  old  age.  The  high-born^
cradled  in  luxury,  <fcc     No  concern  as

^43


CHAP.  XLVnZ.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


to  things  temporal  or  spiritual.     "  Soul,
take  thine  ease,"  (kc.

Multitudes  of  men  of  Imsiness  and
toilers  in  all  grades  of  social  life  have
"  been  at  ease  from  their  youth  "  touch-
ing their  eternal  interests.  Conscience
seared ;  no  heed  of  the  momentous  truths
of  revelation.

II.  Deplorable  to  see  men  "  at  ease  "
in  the  condition  in  which  sin  has  placed
them  and  the  Gospel  finds  them.  That
condition  is  one  of  guilt  and  condem-
nation. In  this  condition  the  Gospel
comes  with  declaration  of  free  remission
of  all  their  sins  through  faith  in  Jesus
Christ ;  yet  states  that,  rejecting  Christ's
grace,  the  soul  must  die  !

Guilt  and  condemnation  are,  therefore,
increased  when  the  Gospel  is  rejected ;
and  yet  men,  despising  salvation,  are
"  at  ease."

III.  Apathy  so  serious,  so  appalling,
calls  for  explanation.  For  men  to  be
easy  under  condemnation,  surely  it  be-
speaks Satan  8  influence  exerted  on  mind
and  heart  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).

The  explanation  therefore  of  this  ease
and  indifference  is  supernatural  "  blind'
ness."  Danger  seen  or  apprehended
destroys  thoughtless  ease  and  stoical
apathy.  No  sooner  is  a  soul  enlightened
to  its  state  and  peril  than  the  distressed
cry  rises,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be
saved  ? "

IV.  Peace  can  be  found  only  in  Jesu  s.
It  is  a  peace  solid,  substantial,  and  abid-
ing— the  fruit  of  faith.  Far  different
from  the  stolidity  of  Moab.  Yet  this
divinely-given  peace  is  not  mere  %faie*^
ude.  For  the  soul  is  aroused,  active,
earnest.

V.  Under  the  very  sound  of  the  Gospel
souls  "sit  at  ease."  The  call  is  addressed,
"Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,"  (fee,  but
they  remain  in  death-like  torpor.  The
warning,  "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  !**
is  given,  but  they  treat  it  as  a  false
alarm.  The  invitation  is  presented,
"  Come  unto  Me,"  but  they  turn  aside.

God  regards  such  with  special  anger  :
**  Woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion.^*
They  slight  not  the  word  of  man,  but
of  God.  '*  I  have  called,  but  ye  refused,"
kc.  (Prov.  i.  24,  26).

Careless  souls,  rouse  from  your  torpor.
644


Why  cry  "  Peace,  peace  !  when  there  is
no  peace  "  ?  —  Pledgees  "  Walks  with
Jeremiah,^*

Comments. — Ver.  12.  "I  will  send
UNTO  HIM  Wanderers,"  <fec.,  lit.,  ^Hiltersj
who  shall  tilt  him  tip  and  empty  his
vessels,"  i.e.f  the  Chaldeans,  who  would
remove  Moab  from  his  settlements.
**  His  vessels"  are  the  cities  of  Moab.
The  "  broken  bottles"  or  pitchers  alludes
to  smaller  receptacles  as  well  as  the
larger  vessels,  and  sugoests  the  destruc-
tion of  *'  everything  that  has  contained
the  wine  of  her  political  life,  both  small
and  great." — Dr.  Payne  Smith.

Ver.  13.  "IsBAEL  was  ashamed  op
Bethel."  Israel  had  trusted  in  the
calf-deity  worshipped  at  Bethel  (1  Kings
xii.  27,  29;  Hos.  x.  15;  Amos  iii.  14;
V.  5,  6;  vii.  13),  but  Siialmanezer's
conquest  had  put  their  trust  to  "  shame."
Even  so  would  Moab  become  "  ashamed  "
of  Chemosh,  their  hope  in  his  protection
being  refuted.

Ver.  16.  *' His  Chosen  Young  Men

ARE  GONE  DOWN    TO    THE    SLAUGHTER."

A  text  suitable  for  sermon  on  occasion
of  Calamity  befalling  Young  Men,
or  upon  the  theme  Sin's  Destructive
Action  upon  the  Young.

I.  How  appalling  are  the  ravages  of
calamity  or  sin  !  "  Gone  down  to  the
slaughter"

II.  How  unsuspecting  is  youth  of
perils  and  destruction  !  "  Young  men
are  gone  down"  not  dreaming  of  the  dire
issue  of  their  course.

III.  How  pitiless  is  evil  to  the  pre-
ciousness  of  youth  !  Slaughters  even
'^  chosen  young  men  I  "  i.e.,  '*the  choice
ones  of  his  young  men."

IV.  How  urgently  should  the  young
regard  the  warnings  of  danger !  It
was  impossible  for  these  "  young  men  "
to  escape  "slaughter"  in  going  down  to
face  the  invincible  Chaldeans.  "  Young
men"  may  deem  themselves  strong —
may  scorn  the  perils  which  others  see
for  them,  and  of  which  they  warn  them
— but  the  world  is  full  of  dangers  to
youth  !

Qbserve    that    this     admonition    of


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  XLVm.


comiDg  doom  to  the  reckless  young  men
is  spoken  by  "the  Kino  whose  name
is  the  Lord  of  hosts."

Ver.  16.  "Calamity  is  near  to
COME,  AND  Affliction  hasteth  fast."
"Near**  to  the  prophet's  eye,  although
twenty-three  years  elapsed  between  the
fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  (when  this
prophecy  was  uttered)  and  the  fifth
year  after  Nebuchadnezzar's  conquest
of  Jerusalem  (when  this  prophecy  was
fulfilled).

L  God's  warnings  give  time  for  pre-
paratioa

II.  Justice,  thougli  slow,  yet  surely
moves  onward.

III.  God's  hand  lingers  to  deal  the
fatal  blow  so  long  as  there  is  possibility
of  amendment.

Ver.  17.  Theme:  Bemoaning  the
Sinner's  Doom.  "All  human  glory  is
turned  to  shame,  whether  one  glorify
himself  as  (according  to  ver.  14)  Moab
had  done — to  which  the  destruction  of
all  his  warlike  power  stands  in  strong
contrast  (ver.  15) — or  good  friends  and
neighbours  praise  us;  for  these  may
early  and  easily  find  occasion  (ver.  16)
to  turn  their  song  of  praise  into  a  lamen-
tation. " — Naeg,

"  Bemoan  " — not  that  Moab  deserved
pity,  but  this  mode  of  expression  pic-
tures more  vividly  the  grievousness  of
Moab's  calamities. — Jamieson.

"  Know  his  name  " — peoples  at  a  dis-
tance who  had  heard  his  name.

"  Strong  staff "  —  metaphorical  of
Moab's  power,  other  nations  having
been  oppressed  and  terrified  thereby
(Isa.  ix.  4 ;  xiv.  4,  5).

*^ Beautiful  rod" — the  splendour  of
the  Moabite  kingdom  (Ps.  ex.  2 ;  Isa.
xiv.  29;  Ezek.  xix.  11,  12,  14).

L  Human  greatness  brought  to  ruin.
Fame  reversed.  Dignity  humiliated.
Wealth  lost.  Influence  forfeited.  Virtue
squandered.  Noble  powers  prostituted.
Fair  promises  of  piety  falsified.  Precious
character  degraded.  Immortal  soul  lost.
Oh,  the  wrecks  of  human  greatness  I
Oh,  the  irretrievable  loss  of  human
purity  !  Oh,  the  eternal  doom  of  im-
penitent souls  !


XL  A  sinner's  ruin  helplessly  be-
wailed.

1.  Friends,  near  and  afar,  those
"about  him,"  and  those  "who  know
his  name,"  intimate  friends  and  more
remote  acquaintances,  can  do  nothing  but
lament  /     Cannot  help^  yet  can  weep.

2.  The  ruin  of  a  noble  life  is  indeed
cause  for  bemoaning.  Who  can  tell  the
woe  of  the  lost,  the  "  weeping  and
gnashing  of  teeth  "  !

m.  Outward  glory  utterly  deso-
lated.

1.  Strength  ("strong  staff")  and
beauty  ("  beautiful  rod  ")  win  men*s  re-
cognition and  praise.

2.  Outward  virtues  (physical  and  ex-
trinsic) do  m>t  prove  the  possession  of
intrinsic  worth  of  character  and  spirit.

3.  External  virtues  are  valueless  to
God  without  piety.

4.  Mer^s  admiration  and  praise  will
not  save  a  soul.

Ver.  19.  Theme:  The  Fate  op  others
A  Warning  to  us.  "  Stand  by  the  way
and  espy ;  ask  him  that  fleeth  and  her
that  escapeth,  What  is  done  ?  "

The  pillar  of  salt  on  the  plains  of
Sodom  was  a  warning  to  individual
sinners.  Buried  Nineveh  is  a  monu-
mental admonition  to  godless  nations.
Wretched,  homes  around  us  show  the  woe
consequent  upon  guilty  indulgences.  Em-
bittered lives  testify  of  the  miseries  of
iniquity,  the  delusion  of  the  world's
seductions,  the  falsity  of  sin's  pleasure,
that  "  it  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to
sin  against  God."

L  Admonitions  are  offered  by  the
careers  others  pursue.

II.  An  observant  eye  will  discern
the  consequences  of  wrong.

m.  Miseries  befalling  others  warn
us  to  shun  the  cause.

IV.  God  writes  lessons  upon  the
lives  men  live  that  we  may  be  wise.

V.  Attention  to  human  history
proves  the  woe  of  ungodliness.

VI.  Men  need  salvation  from  them-
selves— from  their  sins,  whicli  work
their  ruin ;  from  their  self-glorying^
which  shuts  away  the  gracious  help  of
God  and  the  saving  power  of  Christ.

Stand  in  the  "  public  way "  and  see

64d


CHAP.  XLTin.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


what  sermons  the  careers  of  men  preach  ;
"  ask  "  individual  sinners  of  the  conse-
quences of  their  indulgences  and  their
impiety  ;  then  beware  I     See  Ps,  i.

Ver.  27.  Theme:  Debision  op  God's
People  Avenged.  Moab  had  exulted
formerly  over  the  calamity  which  befel
the  ten  tribes  (2  Kings  xvii.  6)  under
the  Assyrian  Shalmanezer  (Isa.  xv.  6) ;
now  Moab  rejoices  over  the  fall  of
Judali  under  the  Chaldean  Nebuchad-
nezzar.

L  God  takes  up  His  people's  cause
as  His  own.  See  Obad.  x.  13.  He
feels  what  they  endure.

II.  Wrong  charges  against  the  godly
refuted  by  God  Himself.  Jehovah
demands  the  justification  of  Moab's  de-
rision. What  had  Israel  done  to  deserve
it  ?  Was  he  detected  in  nefarious  con-
duct 1  had  he  consorted  with  evil  con-
spirators ?  "  Was  Israel  found  among
thieves?"     See  Zech.  iii.  2.

III.  Retribution  comes  back  to  evil-
doers in  kind.  "  Moab  also  shall  be
in  derision "  (ver.  26).  He  in  his
disaster  shall  be  a  derision  to  Israel.
01),  when  sinners  are  overthrown  in
awful  judgment  at  the  end  of  the  world,
how  will  the  saints  of  God  have  cause  to
chide  and  scorn  them  for  their  proud
contem[)t  of  those  whom  God  loved  I
See  Moses'  song  over  the  defeated  host
of  Pharaoh,  Exod.  xv.  ;  also  Israel's
exultation  over  Babel  as  "  Lucifer,"
Isa»  xiv.  4—17  ;  also  the  Church's
rejoicing  over  Satan's  fall,  Rev.  xii.
9-12  ;  and  the  true  Church  of  Chiist
over  the  apostate  Church  of  Rome,  ilev.
xviii.  1-20.

Even  so  shall  God  have  scorners  in
derision  when  calamity  overtakes  them.
See  Prov.  i.  26-30.  "  I  will  laugh  at
your  calamity,"  &c.

Ver.  28.  T/ieme  :  A  Rock  fob  Sapb
Hiding.  **  Dwell  in  the  rock,  and  be
like  the  dove."

Text  part  of  prophecy  concerning  the
overthrow  and  desolation  of  Moab.  Yet
she  is  warned  to  escape  the  impending
danger,  and  shelter  herself  in  the  moun-
tain fastnesses  where  the  sword  could
ijLot  reach  then^.
^46


L  Admire  the  compassion  God  dis-
plays.

1.  He  warns  before  He  smiles,

2.  He  provides  a  shelter  before  the
storm  bursts,

3.  He  shows  solicitude  for  those  who
disregard  their  own  safety,

II.  Accept  the  security  God  pro-
vides.

1.  Distrust  the  safety  which  the  world
offers,     "  Leave  the  cities."

2.  Dream  of  no  security  away  from
Christ,     "  Dwell  in  the  Rock."

3.  Hide  in  Him  amid  lowering  storms,
"  Come,  my  people,  hide  thyself  as  it
were  for  a  little  moment,"  <&c.y  Isa.
xxvi.  20.

4.  Fear  no  future  crisis  wJien  safe
in  Him,  Not  death,  nor  the  glorious
return  of  Christ,  <kc.

III.  Avoid  the  sins  God  condemns.

1.  Apathy  and  heedlessness,  "  Moab
at  ease  from  his  youth  "  (ver.  11).  Light
thoughts  of  sin.  Careless  of  Qod's  warn-
ings.

2.  Self-sufficiency  and  selfrighteous'
ness.  '*  Heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab,"
<kc.  (ver.  29).

3.  Froa'astination  and  delay,  "Cala-
mity is  near"  (ver.  16).

IV.  Announce  the  tidings  God  de-
clares.

1.  To  those  terrified  by  apprehensions.
Let  them  know  there  is  a  "  Fock "  for
safe  hiding.

2.  To  those  beguiled  by  false  securities.
Urge  them  to  "  leave  the  cities "  which
they  imagine  safe.

3.  To  those  loitering  amid  gathering
perils.  It  is  wise  to  seek  Christ  at
once,  and  hide  in  Him.

4.  To  those  unsteady  in  their  religious
habits,  ^^ Dwell  in  the  Rock" — con-
stantly, contentedly ;  and  **  be  like  the
dove  that  maketh  her  nest " — *'  Rest  in
the  Lord."

Ver.  28.  Theme:  Fleeing  for  Re-
fuge. "Oh,  ye  that  dwell  in  Moab,
leave  the  cities  and  dwell  in  the  Rock,
and  be  like  the  dove  that  maketh  her
nest  by  the  side  of  the  hole's  mouth,"

The  uniformity  of  the  principles  of
Divine  government  in  providence  and
grace.      It  was   an   important  part  oi


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  JMBMIAJ3,


OAAt,  XLVilt


the  duty  of  the  prophets  to  foretell  the
overthrow  of  those  kingdoms  which
opposed  the  Church  of  God.  It  was  a
source  of  consolation  that  the  empires
that  persecuted  the  Church  should  them-
selves be  finally  swept  from  earth,  that
the  way  might  be  made  smooth  for  the
coming  of  Christ — **  the  glory  of  His
people  Israel"

This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, and  the  destruction  of  the
chief  cities  of  Moab  took  place,  as
Josephus  says,  five  years  after  the  over-
throw of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans.
That  conqueror  not  only  burnt  the
Temple  of  God,  but  poured  the  tide  of
his  desolation  and  conquests  over  the
neighbour  nations,  and  Moab  among
the  number.  But  when  pursuing  his
own  gigantic  and  ambitious  designs,  he
little  thought  that  he  was  accomplishing
prophecies  of  which  he  had  never  heard
— just  as  Herod  and  Pilate,  in  the
Crucifixion  of  Christ,  only  fulfilled
what  "  Ood^s  own  hand  and  counsel
be/ore  determined  to  be  done."

L  The  parties  addressed.  Learn
the  compassion  of  God  to  the  chief  of
sinners.  The  inhabitants  of  Moab,
whose  calamity  is  foretold  with  so
much  compassion  and  tenderness;  which
teaches  us  that  God  exercises  a  gracious
solicitude  not  only  for  friends  but  for
enemies.  For  Moab  was  not  a  neutral
state,  but  a  hostile  one — always  in  en-
mity and  arms  against  the  Church  of
God.  Their  country  closely  bordered
upon  the  Holy  Land.

But  though  such  near  neighbours  and
closely  allied  in  blood,  the  Moabites
were  bitter  enemies  to  the  people  of
God.  When  Israel  came  from  Egypt,
Moab  met  them  with  no  provision,  and
refused  them  a  passage  through  their
country.  They  hired  Balaam  to  curse ;
they  fought  bloody  battles  with  them;
they  held  Israel  in  bondage  in  time  of
the  Judges  eighteen  years ;  they  rebelled
against  Israel  under  Ahab ;  they  warred
against  Judah  under  Jehoshaphat ;  and
when  the  ten  tribes  were  led  into  cap-
tivity by  Sennacherib,  they  mocked  their
miseries  and  danced  for  joy.  "  For  was
not  Israel  a  de^-ision  to  thee  J  was  he
found   among    thieves  t  for    since   thou


spahest  of  him  thou  skippest  for  joy  J"
Yet  Israel  mourns  their  overthrow,  and
God  here  gives  instruction  and  warning
for  their  guidance — that  they  should
escape  the  cities  and  enter  the  Bock.

1.  Learn,  then,  that  God  warns  before
He  strikes,  and  follows  the  wicked  with
warning  upon  warning  and  entreaty
upon  entreaty.  Did  He  not  forewarn
the  men  of  the  old  world  one  hundred
and  twenty  years  before  the  Deluge  came
on  1  Did  He  not  wait  till  the  iniquity
of  the  Amorites  was  full  before  He
swept  them  away  %  Did  He  not  raise
a  long  succession  of  prophets  to  foretell
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  ?  and  is  not
Moab  here  warned  of  the  approaching
desolation?  Was  it  not  for  rebellious
sinners  that  God  gave  His  own  Son  to
die  ?  Did  not  Jesus  weep  over  Jeru-
salem 1  Is  it  not  true  that  '^  God  tuilleth
not  the  death  of  a  sinner  **  /  Yet  it  is
over  these  warnings  and  hindrances  you
pass  on  to  destruction.

2.  The  loss  of  a  single  soul  is  an
object  oj  mourning  to  the  Church  of
God,  as  the  conversion  of  one  sinner
gives  joy  in  heaven.  What  a  harvest
is  burnt  upon  the  ground  !  What  a
vintage  is  destroyed  !  "  0  vine  of  Sib-
mahy  I  will  weep  for  thee'^  (ver.  32).
Where  are  the  tears  fit  to  be  wept]

IL  The  direction  given.  Heed  the
dangers  of  false  security.  "  Leave  the
cities  and  dwell  in  the  Rock."

In  like  manner  God  provides  the
refuge  we  need  in  the  Gospel  He
guards  us  against  the  evils  of  a  fancied
security ;  and  would  have  us  forsake  all
false  refuges  and  enter  the  true.  "-4
m/in  shall  be  a  hiding-place  from  the
wind"  ^^ By  two  immutable  things"
&c.,  **we  have  strong  consolation  who
fled  for  refuge."

This  affords  an  argument  for  hope
and  security  to  the  righteous.  If  He
show  so  much  care  and  sympathy  for
enemies,  how  much  more  will  He  guard
and  bless  His  friends  ?  If  He  find  food
for  the  raven,  a  shelter  for  the  wild
dove,  and  the  shadow  of  a  great  Rock
for  guilty  Moab,  will  He  neglect  His
own  children  in  their  calamities,  and
leave  them  forsaken  and  shelterless
under  the  storms  of  life  1     Did  He  not

U7


<m^.  ximt


mMtLETlC  COMUMfAkY:  JJSMMfAM.


provide  succour  for  Naomi  in  Moab
itself  1  Did  not  the  angel  supply  Elijah
with  food  at  Horeb  ?  Was  not  David
preserved  against  the  persecutions  of
Saul?  Were  not  Hagar  and  I.shniael
preserved  for  Abraham's  sake  ]  Better
to  be  God's  outcasts  than  the  world's
favourites.  A  portion  with  God's  people
is  better  than  the  best  portion  of  the
world.  "  Their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock"
Ac.  (Deut.  xxxii.  31).

The  cities  were  of  man's  building;
the  Rock  was  of  God's  providing ;  and
David  wisely  said,  ^^  Lead  me  to  the
Rock  that  is  higher  than  I,"

This  accoids  with  all  analogy.  God
furnishes  relief,  and  finds  the  means  of
protection  and  shelter  to  all  beings.  No
creature  but  is  furnished  with  means  of
security  and  defence.  He  wings  the
angel,  guides  the  sparrow,  directs  the
young  lion  to  its  prey,  and  hears  the
ravens  when  they  cry.

The  weakest  creatures  have  often  the
strongest  shelters.  The  vine  stays  on
the  elm ;  the  ivy  clings  to  the  tower ;
the  worm  hides  itself  in  the  sure  and
tirm-set  earth;  the  dove  flies  to  the
rock ;  and  man  seeks  and  finds  his
refuge  in  God.  In  religion  the  ex-
tremes of  being  meet.  Human  weak-
ness and  Divine  strength ;  human  folly
and  Divine  wisdom ;  human  insufi^ciency.
Divine  all-sufficiency.

III.  The  faith  and  trust  to  be  exer-
cised. "  Be  like  the  dove."  The  doves
and  wild  pigeons  in  the  East  delight  in
cool  and  inaccessible  places.  They  build
their  nests  in  cliflFs  and  caverns  over-
hanging fearful  precipices,  especially  in
clefts  of  the  rock  where  the  adventurous
foot  of  man  cannot  tread.  This  is  re-
ferred to  by  Homer,  who  tells  us  that,
when  frighted  by  the  fowler,  or  by  birds
and  beasts  of  prey,  they  are  seen  "Jlp-
ing  on  the  wings  of  fear  to  their  hiding-
place  in  the  rocks."  Voltaire  says  that
Solomon  makes  him  better  acquainted
with  the  customs  of  the  East  than
Homer  himself  does.  "  Oh,  my  dove,
that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  in  the
secret  places  of  the  stairs  ;  let  me  see  thy
countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice  :  for
9weet  is  thy  voice,"

We  can  scarcely  have  a  more  beauti-
648


ful  description  of  the  simple  exercise  of
faith  and  dependence  than  this  image
supplies.  Flying  to  the  rock  and  rest-
ing there.  The  poor  dove  has  no
weapons  of  defence.  She  does  not
stay  to  fight  with  the  vulture  or  con-
tend with  the  fowler,  but,  relying  on
the  swiftness  of  her  wings,  hastens  to
the  rock,  assured  that  once  there  she
shall  be  safe.

Faith  is  the  eye  that  discerns  Christ,
the  hand  that  grasps  Christ,  the  wing
that  flies  to  Christ

The  constancy  of  our  trust  and  de-
pendence. ^^  Dwell  in  the  Rock."  It
is  not  her  place  of  shelter  merely,  but
of  permanent  abode.  "  JBTe  that  dwelleth
in  the  secret  place"  " That  Christ  vMLy
DWELL."  *^ Arise,  go  to  Bethel,  and
DWELL  there,"

IV.  The  infatuation  to  be  deplored.

1.  Pride  and  self-sufficiency,  "We
have  heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab."
Everybody  had — mentioned  six  times
in  this  chapter.  It  is  the  distinction
of  impious  men  to  have  a  hard  heart
under  softening  providences,  and  a  proud
heart  under  humbling  ones.

2.  Beware  of  idolatry  and  creature
confidence  (ver.  35).

3.  Beware  of  procrastination  and
delay;  of  despairing  of  mercy. — Hev,
S,  Thodey  (1856).

Ver.  29.  Themje:  Vauihinos  OF
Pride.  "  We  have  heard  of  the  pride
of  Moab  (he  is  exceeding  proud),"  &c.

L  Pride  is  the  trumpeter  of  its
own  fame.  " We  have  heard"  &c.
Proud  people  cannot  rest  unnoticed;
they  will  "sound  a  trumpet  before
themselves" — as  did  the  Pharisees — •
and  make  men  know  that  they  really
do  exist,  and  are  of  great  consequence
in  the  world.

**  Pride  is  his  own  glass,  his  own  trumpet,  hit
own  chronicle." — Shakespeare.

"  What  is  pride  f    A  whizzing  rocket,
That  would  emulate  a  star." — Wordsworth.

II  Pride  has  its  grades  of  inflated
grandeur.  "He  is  exceeding  pn  iid."
There  are  higher  heights  of  vanity,  as
there  are  low<ir  depths  of  infamy.


BOMtLBTiO  OOMMS^TART:  /SREMUff,


Ott4l>.  iLtttL


"  Whatever  sort  beside
Yoa  take  in  lieu,  shun  spiritual  pride  I
A  pride  there  is  of  rank,  a  pride  of  birth,
A  pride  of  learning:,  and  a  pride  of  purse;
A  London  pride — in  short,  tliere  be  on  earth
A  host  of  prides,  some  better  and  some  worse;
But  of  all  prides,  since  Lucifer  attaint.
The  proudest  swells  a  self-elected  saint."

—ITood.

in.  Pride  manifests  itself  in  nume-
rous varieties  of  fonn.  "Loftiness,
arrogancy,  pride,  haughtiness."  In  man'
ner  and  bearing  —  conceited:  "lofti-
ness." In  imperious  and  unreasonable
exactions  of  attention  and  homage —
ostentatious:  "arrogancy."  In  habitual
estimates  of  self  as  compared  with  others
— inflated  :  "  pride."  In  feelings  of  in-
difference to  and  contempt  for  inferiors
— cruel:  "haughtiness."

There  is  a  pride  of  feeling ^  of  speech^
of  action ;  a  pride  of  possessions,  and  a
subtler  pride  of  profession  [to  he  or  to
have  what  is  false]  ;  a  pride  of  goodness^
of  greatness^  and  even  of  godliness.

IV.  Pride  has  its  seat  in  a  haughty
heart.  "The  haughtiness  of  his  heart."
For  "out  of  the  heart  proceedeth"  every
deformity.  If  a  man's  own  heart  could
settle  the  question  of  his  personal  im-
portance, each  one  of  us  would  be  too
big  for  the  world.

When  Severus,  emperor  of  Rome,
found  his  end  approaching,  he  cried
out,  "  I  have  been  everything,  and
everything  is  nothing  !  "  Then  ordering
the  urn  to  be  brought  to  him  in  which
his  ashes  were  to  be  enclosed,  he  said,
"Little  urn,  thou  shalt  contain  one /or
whom  the  world  was  too  little,^'

But  the  "  heart  is  deceitful ; "  and
*'  whoso  trusteth  to  his  own  heart  is  a
foot:'

"  Of  all  the  causes  which  conspire  to  blind
Man's  erring  judgment  and  misguide  the

mind.
What  the  weak  head  with  strongest  bias

rules
Itkpridef  the  never-faXUng  vice  offods.*^

—Pope.

V.  Pride  provokes  the  scornful  no-
tice of  God.

"  I  know  his  wrath "  [or  insolence\
"  saith  the  Lord,"  And  God  hates  pride
and  hot  arrogance.  Because  of  pride
Nebuchadnezzar  was  thrust  from  men's


society,  Saul  was  cast  from  his  king-
dom, Adam  was  driven  from  Paradise,
Haman  was  expelled  from  court,  and
Lucifer  hurled  out  of  heaven.

VI  Pride  meets  at  length  its  de-
gradation and  defeat.

"  But  it  shall  not  be  so  ;  his  lies  shall
not  effect  it;"  i.e.,  all  his  brawlings  are
emptiness  and  fallacies.  God  will  bring
to  nought  the  plans  of  arrogant  Moab,
and  lay  his  pride  low  in  contempt.

"  A  proud  heart  and  a  lofty  moun-
tain are  never  fruitful." — GumaU,

"  As  the  first  step  heavenward  is  hu-
mility, so  the  first  step  hellward  is  pride.
Pride  counts  the  Gospel  foolish,  but  the
Gospel  always  shows  pride  to  be  so," —
Mason,

**  His  heart  is  black  with  pride.
He  for  himself  hell's  gate  has  opened  wide,
For,  weighed  in  God  the  All-Sufficient's  scale,
Not  claims  nor  righteousness  or  men  avail  :
But  these  are  costly  in  His  sight  indeed, —
Repentance,  contrite  shame,  and  sense  of
need.*'         — Oriental^  tr,  by  Trench,

Jeremiah  adds  to  Isaiah's  words  de-
scriptive of  MoaVs  pride  (comp.  Isa.
xvi.  6)  other  terms,  indicating  that  the
chastisement  inflicted  on  Moab  for  his
former  arrogance  against  Israel  had  not
lessened  his  pride ;  he  was  even  more
"  lofty  and  arrogant ; "  therefore  now
his  sentence  of  doom  is  weighted  with
heavier  penalties.

Comments.

Vers.  32,  33.  "  0  vine  of  Sibmah,^
&c,

"  So  great  was  the  general  joy  in-
spired by  the  vintage,  that  its  cessation
was  one  of  the  punishments  denounced
against  Moab." — Topics  for  Tecushers.

"  Their  shouting  shall  be  no  shout-
ing :^'  for  warriors  shall  tread  down
Moab  in  the  battle-field,  and  change  the
joyous  shoutings  of  vintners  into  the
agonised  cry  of  alarm.

Ver.  40.  "  He  shall  fly  as  an  eagle^
».«.,  the  Babylonian  conqueror.  Points
of  analogy :  — i.  The  rapidity  with  which
the  eagle  rushes  on  its  prey.  (See  Hab,
i,  8;  2  Sam.  i.  23;  Lam.  iv.  19.)  il
Its  peculiar  habit  of  expanding  its  wings
(see  chap.  xlix.  22),  suggesting  the
spreading  out  of  the  Chaldean  forces.

649


O&At.  XLVlll,


nOMlLEfIC  COMMEN'rARY:  JERBMIAB,


Ver.  42.  **  Destroyed  .  .  .  because  he
hath  magnified  himself."

i.  Self- EXALTATION  often  impresses
beholders  with  its  show  of  pomp^  power,
and  permanence.

ii.  Self- EXALTATION  against  God
provokes  His  swift  indignation  and  ul-
timate overthrow.

iii.  Self-exaltation  therefore  is  but

ANOTHER    FORM    OP    SELF-DESTRUCTION.

Tbey  who  "magnify  themselves  against
the  Lord  "  do  thereby  seal  their  sure
doom,  for  they  alienate  God's  grace  and
invoke  God's  justice.  (See  Addenda  :
Self-esteem.)

Ver.  45.  "A  fire  shall  come  forth  out
of  Heshbon."  Not  only  will  Ammon  (of
which  Heshbon  was  the  capital)  refuse
aid  to  Moab,  but  her  ruin  would  start
from  thence.  Historically  it  occurred
that  the  Ammonites  were  conquered
before  the  Moabites;  and  Nebuchad-
nezzar formed  the  plan  of  his  campaign
against   Moab    in    Heshbon   (ver.     2).


Jeremiah  here  fitly  appropriates  and  usei
part  of  an  old  Mosaic  triumphal  poem
(Numb.  xxi.  27),  made  on  Sihou's  con-
quests over  Moab.  For  Nebuchadnezzar
would  issue  "  as  a  flame  from  the  midst
of  Sihon,"  just  as  formerly  the  Amorites
had  done.

Ver.  47.  "  Yet  tcill  I  bring  again  the
captivity  of  Moab.**  Josephus  records
how  the  Moabites  were  afterwards  re-
stored to  their  country  (Antiq.,  xiii.  13,
§5,  14,  §  2,  (fee),  though  never  to  their
former  political  importance.

N'otes. — i.  Moab  is  the  symbolical

REPRESENTATIVE  OP  THOSE    ENEMIES  OP

God's  Church  who  are  characterised  by
carnal  strength,  lustful  passion,  unholy
haughtiness,  sensual  and  cruel  violence.
— Wordsworth.

ii.  Moab's  restoration  typifies  and
predicts  Gospel  blessings,  temporal
and  spiritual^  Fos  the  Qentiles  "  ia
the  latter  daysi''


ADDENDA  TO  CHAP.  XLVIJI. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUOOESTIYE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  11.  Troubles  revive  us.  Staying
for  awhile  in  the  valley  of  Aosta,  in
Northern  Italy,  we  found  the  air  to  be
heavy,  close,  and  humid  with  pestilential
exhalations.  We  were  oppressed  and
feverish — one's  life  did  not  seem  worth
a  pin.  We  could  not  breathe  freely,  our
lungs  had  a  sense  of  having  a  hundred
atmospheres  piled  upon  them.  Presently,
at  midday,  there  came  a  thunder-clap,
attended  by  big  drops  of  rain  and  a  stiff
gale  of  wind,  which  grew  into  a  perfect
tornado,  tearing  down  the  trees ;  tlien
followed  what  the  poet  calls  '*  sonorous
hail,"  and  then  again  the  lightning  flash,
and  the  thunder  peal  on  peal  echoing
along  the  Alps.  But  how  delightful  was
the  eff'ect  !  How  we  all  went  out  upon
the  verandah  to  look  at  the  lightning
and  enjoy  the  music  of  the  thunder  1
How  cool  the  air  and  bracing !  How
delightful  to  walk  out  in  the  cool  even-
ing after  the  storm  I  Then  you  could
breathe  and  feel  a  joy  in  life.  Full  often
it  is  thus  with  the  Christian  after  trouble.
He  has  grown  to  be  careless,  lethargic,
feverish,  heavy,  and  ready  to  die,  and
650


just  then  he  has  been  assailed  by  trouble*
thundering  threatenings  have  rolled  from
God's  mouth,  flashes  of  lightning  have
darted  from  Providence :  the  property
vanished,  the  wife  died,  the  children
were  buried,  trouble  followed  trouble,
and  then  the  man  has  turned  to  God,
and  though  his  face  was  wet  with  tears
of  repentance,  yet  he  has  felt  his  spirit
to  be  remarkably  restored.  When  he
goes  up  to  the  house  of  God,  it  is  far
more  sweet  to  hear  the  Word  than  afore-
time. He  could  not  pray  before,  but
now  he  leans  his  head  on  Jesus'  bosom
and  pours  out  his  soul  in  fellowship.
Eternity  now  exerts  its  heavenly  attrac-
tions, and  the  man  is  saved  from  him-
self.-—/Sjpur^eon.

Ver.  42.  Self-esteem.

**  Beware  of  too  sublime  a  sens^
Of  your  own  worth  and  conseqaence.
The  man  who  deems  himself  so  great^
And  his  importance  of  such  weight,
That  all  around,  in  all  that's  done,
Must  work  and  act  for  him  alone,
Will  learn  in  school  of  tribolatiosy
Th«  folly  of  his  expectation."


nOMILKTlC  COMMKXTA  U  Y :  JEREMIA  U.  chap.  XUX.


CHAPTER  XLIX.

Gbitioal  and  Exeobtioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — The  prophedes  against
Ammon^  Edom,  Damascus,  and  Kedar.  Vers.  1-33  are  synchronous  with  the  previous  chapter,
but  the  section  (vers.  34-39)  against  Elam  has  its  own  date  given,  **In  the  beginning  of  the
reign  of  Zetlekiah  ;"  therefore  seven  years  later  than  those  preceding  it,  and  coinciding  with
chaps,  xxvii.  1,  xxviii.  1,  which  see.

2.  Geographical  References. — Ver.  1.  "Ammon."  Their  country  lay  north  of  Moab.
**Gad:"  the  country  west  of  the  Ammonites,  between  them  and  the  Jordan.  Ver.  2.
**  Eabbah  :*'  the  fortified  metropolis  of  Ammon.  Ver.  3.  **Ai:*'  an  Ammonite  city  whose
location  is  not  known.

Ver.  7.  '*  Edom  :"  their  country  stretched  south  of  Judah.  **  Teman:**  Jerome  places  it
south  of  Idiimea;  Keil  and  Furst  suggest  N.B.  of  Edom.  Ver.  8.  Dedan  :  the  name  of  an
Arabian  tribe  boniering  on  Idumea.  Ver.  13.  ** BozraJi:"  see  Gen.  xxxvi.  33  ;  1  Chron.  i.  44.
Ver.  18.   **  The  neighbour  cities  "  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  Admah  and  Zebaim.

Ver.  23.  "  Damascds  :  "  Aram,  called  by  us  Syria,  was  divided  into  the  northern  part,  of
which  "  Bamath  "  was  the  capital ;  and  the  territory  south-east  belonging  to  "  Damascus."
**  Arpad  : "  a  Syrian  city,

Ver.  28.  "  Kbdab  : "  a  wide  range  of  country  between  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Euphrates.
Vide  on  chap.  ii.  10.  *'  Hazor : "  a  country  contiguous  to  that  of  the  Kedarenes — Arabia
Deserta.

Ver.  34.  '*Elah:"  The  Elymais  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  forming  part  of  the  ancient
Susiana,  on  the  west  of  Persia,  separated  from  Chaldea  by  the  Tigris.

3.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  1.  Their  king :  properly  Melcom,  (see  marg. ) :  the  tutelary
idol  (Zeph.  i.  5).  Jehovah  was  their  true  King;  this  Melchom  or  Moloch  was  a  U8urper-A:m(7.
Ver.  27.  *'  Palaces  of  Benhadad."  **  Benhadad  "  was  a  common  name  of  several  Syrian  kings,
and  siiould  not  be  identified  with  the  Benhadad  of  2  Kings  xiii.  3 ;  Amos  i.  4.  {Cf,  1  Kings
XV.  18).

4u  Literary  Criticisms.— Ver.  4.  **  Thyjlomng  valley  ;"  or  **  thy  valley /ows,"  either  with
abundance  or  with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  Ver.  12.  "  They  whose  Judgment  was  not  to  drink : "
Le.f  whose  habit  or  experience^  &c.  It  was  not  God's  people's  usual  experience  to  drink  of  the
•up  of  His  wrath.

Ver.  19.  •*  Against  the  habitation  of  the  strong  ;"  rather,  to  the  ever-verdant  pastarage  ;  for
jn*X  means  durableness,  from  |n*,  to  be  constant,  perennial.

Ver.  23.  *'  Sorrow  on  the  sea  :  **  Many  MSS.  read  "  sorrow  like  the  sea,"  changing  3  for  3  ;
and  the  corresponding  passage  in  Isa.  Ivii.  20  reads  **like  the  sea" — in  which  passage  the  sea
is  used  for  the  agitations  of  men's  hearts.  Here  it  might  mean,  sorrow  in  the  agitated  hearts  of
the  Syrians,  for  all  the  versions  read  "  in  the  sea"  in  this  text.

Ver.  25.  '*  How  is  the  city  of  praise  not  leftf"  rather,  **  Would  that  the  city  of  praise  were
not  abandoned  1 "    So  Qraf.     Damascus  was  "  the  city  of  praise  '*  for  its  beauty.

HOMILIES  ON    VERSES  OP  CHAPTER   XLIX.

Note  on  ver.   1.    '^  Hath  Isi'oel  no         III.  Final  triumph  to  the  oppressed

ionst"'    When   the   Ammonites  seized  Church.

Gad,  on  Israel's  being  carried  into  cap-  1.  They  who  despoil  our  peace  shall

tivity  by  the  Assyrians,  they  acted  as  if  be  overthrown.

the  country  had  no  rightful  heir,  as  if  2.  They  who  arrogantly  appropriate

the  banished  ones  should  never  return  the  privileges  exclusively  belonging  to  the

to  claim  their  country.  goifly  shall  be  driven  forth  into  desola-

Ver.  2.    Theme :   The   Vanquished  tion.
BAiSED  INTO  Victors.  3.  They  who  make  gain  of  our  diffi-

L  Scorners  revel  in  Israel's  over-  cutties  and  sorrows,  which  God  permits

throw.       Seize    on    their   treasures   as  for  our  chastening  and  profit,  shall  feel

spoil     Exult  in  their  hopeless  defeat,  in  due  time  the  punishments  of  Heaven,
Profit  by  their  temporary  reverses.  Or  thus  (as  Naegelsbach  suggests)  : —

IL  The  heritage  of  Ood's  people  is  I  The  CSiurch's  lament  over  lost
Inalienable.  Foes  may  appropriate  it  territory.  Melcom's  possession  of  Is-
for  a  while,  but  Israel  shall  repossess  raePs  inheritance.  So  now  Mohammed's
her  lost  heritage,  and  her  foes  shall  be  possession  of  the  tenitory  of  the  Chris-
abject,  tian  Church  in  Asia  and  Europe.     And,

651


GHA.P.  XLll.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JBREMTAH.


in  general,  heathenism  in  possession  of
lands  and  hearts  which  should  be  held
for  Christ.

II.  The  Church's  hope  of  ultimate
repossession.

1.  As  to  the  overcoming  of  her  oppo-
nents.

2.  As  to  the  reacquisition  of  the  lost.

Ver.  7.  Theme :  Futility  op  Human
Wisdom.

Note.

i.  The  people  of  Teman  had  an  ancient
and  remote  fame  for  their  wisdom  (Gen.
xxxvi.  15;  1  Kings  iv.  30;  Job  ii.  11.
Teraan  was  the  home  of  Eliphaz).  Cele-
brated for  their  skill  in  dark  sayings
and  proverbs.

ii.  Eminent  sagacity  affords  no  secu-
rity against  Gods  designs.  "  Their
wisdom  vanished."  Thus  God  puts  to
shame  those  who  trust  to  **  their  own
craftiness  "  (1  Cor.  i.  19,  20).

Ver.  11.  Theme:  A  Father's  dying
Consolations.  "  Leave  thy  fatherless
children  ;  I  will  preserve  them  alive  :
and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  me."

L  A  most  affecting  situation  is  sup-
posed.    "  Fatherless  and  widows."

1.  Desertion :  their  strong  human
helper  gone !

2.  Bereavement:  who  supply  the  place?

3.  Defencelessness :  who  will  be  their
safeguard  %

4.  Anguish  of  spirit:  lonely,  heart-
stricken,  home  desolated  I

II.  A  most  consoling  promise  an-
nexed.

1 .  An  exhortation  precedes  the  promise,
*'  Leave,"  (kc.  An  exhortation  which
breathes  into  the  dying  man  the  spirit
of  Resignation.

2.  It  is  an  exhortation  to  confidence.
As  he  is  compelled  to  leave  them  another
i'oWKB  springs  up  to  protect  those
dearer  than  life — confidence  for  himself
— confidence  for  his  family.

3.  The  exhortation  is  full  of  Comfort.
The  latter  clause  addressed  not  to  the

dying  man  but  to  the  widow — '*  let  thy
widows  trust" — it  binds  up  the  heart  of
the  desolate.

m.  A  most  tender  appeal  is  ad-
dressed.   ''  Let  thy  widows  trust  in  Me."
G52


1.  Trust  the  Divine  Faithfulness;
2.  the  Divine  Tenderness;  3.  the  Di-
vine Vigilance.

IV.  A  most  gracious  service  is
guaranteed.     "I  will  preserve,"  &o.

1.  Keep  them  from  eviL

2.  Supply  their  wants.

3.  Carry  them  through  life,

4.  Receive  them  to  glory.

Ver.  11.  TJiem^:  Comport  in  Bb-
REAVEMENT.  "  Leave  thy  fatherless  chil
dren^  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  me**

We  must  always  regard  it  as  a  grand
peculiarity  of  the  religion  that  comes
from  God  that  it  brings  relief  and  com-
fort under  trials  for  which  the  world  has
no  balm,  and  throws  light  upon  dispen-
sations which  would  be  otherwise  clouded
with  a  hopeless  and  impenetrable  gloom.
The  religion  of  Jesus  comes  as  a  com-
forter when  other  oracles  are  silent ;
comes  as  a  star  of  promise  and  of  hope
when  every  other  lamp  is  extinguished ;
comes  to  breathe  upon  our  ear  its  still
small  voice  of  mercy,  when  we  hear
nothing  besides  but  the  earthquake,  and
the  fire,  and  the  great  and  strong  wind ;
and  clothes  with  a  mantle  of  celestial
light  the  darkest  appearances  of  this
lower  world.

I.  The  mournful  changes  of  human
life.

The  text  refers  to  the  overthrow  of
Edom,  to  the  calamities  of  war,  to  the
domestic  calamities  produced  by  that
event,  and  brings  in  the  father  of  a
family,  about  to  leave  his  children  for
ever  to  the  hard  mercies  of  the  world.
Here  are  collected  around  you  a  sad
group  of  sufferers  —  a  dying  father,
mourning  children,  a  widowed  mother,
addressed  by  a  pitying  and  gracious  God.

1.  Of  these  changes  God  proclaims
himself  the  Author:  whether  they  come
by  war,  by  invasion,  by  pestilence,  by
famine,  or  by  the  ordinary  progress  of
human  decay,  the  hand  of  God  is  to  be
seen  and  acknowledged  in  them.  **/
will  bring  the  calamity  of  Esau  upon
him — tlie  time  that  I  will  visit  him.  I
have  made  Esau  bare^  he  shall  not  be  able
to  hide  himself  his  seed  is  spoiled^  and
his  brethren^  and  his  neigJihourSf  and  he
is  not"


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JBREMIAE.


<mkT,  XLIZ.


The  worldling  often  views  his  calami
ties  as  coming  unbidden  and  unblest,  as
contingent  and  casual,  as  evils  which  he
must  either  resolutely  resist  or  sullenly
endure ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  he
sitber  "  despises  the  chastening  of  the
Lord,  or  faints  when  he  is  rebuked  of
Him."  But  the  Christian  views  them  as
coming  from  a  Father's  hand,  for  pur-
poses which  he  may  not  be  able  to
fathom,  indeed,  but  which  he  certainly
knows  to  be  sent  in  love.  The  Chris-
tian knows  no  such  Deity  as  Chance  or
Fate,  and  is  at  no  loss  to  assign  the
Author  of  the  triaL  Afflictions  fall
upon  mankind  in  a  manner  too  regular
for  the  agency  of  chance^  but  in  a  man-
ner not  stated  and  regular  enough  to
have  a  blind  Fatality  for  their  author.
They  are  not  only  consistent  with  God's
love,  but  they  actually  flow  from  it.

This  is  the  universal  creed  of  the
Cliurch  of  God.  Amos  says,  "  Can
there  be  evil  in  tlie  city  and  the  Lord
hath  not  done  it?"  Naomi:  "/  went
out  full,  and  the  Lord  hath  brought  me
home  empty. ^^  True,  the  famine  was
tiie  procuring  cause,  and  the  anxiety  of
tb  it  period  may  have  brought  on  diseases
wbich  swept  her  husband  and  her  two
sons  into  an  untimely  grave  ;  but  she  sees
the  hand  of  God  in  all  :  "  The  Almighty
hath  afflicted  me  ;  the  Lord  hath  testified
against  mej'  What  more  uncertain  tban
a  casual  flight  of  the  arrow  in  the  battle-
field ?  But  if  a  certain  man  drew  a  bow
at  a  venture,  his  hand  was  strengthened
by  an  Omnipotent  Arm,  and  the  arrow
directed  by  an  unerring  Eye.  What  we
term  accident  and  casualty  is  in  reality
Providence  accomplishing  deliberate  de-
signs, but  concealing  its  own  interposi-
tion. What  can  be  more  trivial  than
tlie  fall  of  a  sparrow  1  But  "  not  one  of
these  falls  to  the  ground  without  your
Father."  And  if  a  sparrow  falls  not
without  God,  certainly  one  of  His  own
children  cannot.  One  is  hurried  away
by  a  burning  fever,  one  by  a  lingering
consumption,  one  by  some  unforeseen
accident,  one  by  pestilence,  one  by  war.
But  God  says,  "  /  toUl  bring  the  cala-
mity of  Esau  upon  him  ;  the  time  that  I
ihall  visit"  &c,

2.  From  tlie  prospect  of  t^tese  changes


feeble  human  nature  shrinks  and  re-
coils.

Where  is  the  father  who  does  not
tremble  at  the  idea  of  leaving  his  chil-
dren orphans  and  his  home  desolate  t
Where  are  the  children  who  do  not  dread
the  thought  of  the  hour  when  father  and
mother  shall  be  removed  from  their
embrace  1  Tbink  of  the  picture  drawn
in  the  text — the  anxiety  of  a  dying
father — the  breaking-up  of  family  ties
— the  darkened  chamber  —  the  silent
home — the  waking  in  the  morning  to  a
bereaved  and  forsaken  world — and  you
bearing  a  weight  of  grief  in  your  bosom,
in  comparison  with  which  a  mountain
would  be  light.

Why  do  we  refer  to  these  points,  but
to  teach  children  to  value  the  privileges
they  possess  in  having  parents  to  guide
and  protect  them,  and  to  remind  Chris-
tian parents  of  their  high  responsibilities
before  it  be  too  late.  1  can  conceive
tbat  death  will  make  strange  revelations.
The  light  of  eternity  wbich  glares  upon
a  death-bed,  and  sbows  the  value  of
your  own  soul,  may  show  you  the  value
of  the  souls  of  your  children,  and  your
own  responsibility  to  the  God  of  the
families  of  the  whole  earth.

II.  The  compassion  of  a  gracious
God.     "Leave  thy  fatherless  children."

God  sympathises  with  all  the  fears,
all  the  sorrows,  and  all  the  painful
emotions  of  the  human  bosom.  His
POWER  enables.  His  love  inclines.  His
FAITHFULNESS  pledges  Him  to  your
guidance  and  direction.  God,  who  has
made  the  parent's  heart  what  it  is,
knows  how  to  meet  its  awakened  sus-
ceptibility and  care.  God,  who  sends
the  calamity,  knows  how  to  send  the
support  with  it.

The  history  of  tbe  Church  tells  out
wonderful  instances  of  compassion  to
parents  and  children.  Look  at  the  first
mission  of  an  angel  to  a  world  ;  was  it
not  to  deserted  and  widowed  Hagar
before  the  birth  of  her  first  child  ?  and
was  not  the  second  visit  of  an  angel  to
Hagar  and  Ishmael  when  the  Lord  heard
the  voice  of  the  lad  ?  Did  not  the  angel
descend  to  wrestle  with  Jacob  when
involved  in  trouble  for  his  family,  lest
Esau  come  and  smite  the  mother  with

653


OHAP.  XLIZ.


BOMTLETtC  OOMMENTAkY :  JEREMIAB,


hhe  children?  Was  it  not  to  the  widow
of  Zarephath  Elisha  was  sent  1  Was  not
Elijah's  greatest  miracle  employed  on
behalf  of  that  pious  mother  mourning
(or  her  only  son  %  Was  not  the  Lord
with  Joseph  when  separated  from  his
(ather  ?  with  Moses  when  left  to  the
buh'ushes  1  Look  at  our  Lord's  miracles.
IIL  The  privilege  of  enlightened
faith.     Let  your  widows  trust.

1 .  Trust  in  the  vse  of  appointed  means,

2.  Trust  when  outward  means  appear
to  fail.

3.  When  Providence  appears  to  oppose
promises.

4.  When  death  and  eternity  are  at
hand. — Rev,  S.  Thodey^  a,d.  1844.

Ver.  12.  Theme:  The  Cup  op  Suf-
fering FOR  Godly  and  Guilty.  See
Lit.  Criticism  on  verse  supra.  If  the
godly  are  made  to  drink  it,  shall  the
ungodly  escape  1  Will  not  Jehovah  deal
judgment  to  His  people's  foes  ?

I.  A  fact  for  Wonder  :  God^s  people
suffer  punishment.  *'  Behold,  they  whose
judgment  was  not  to  drink  of  the  cup
have  assuredly  drunken."

1.  It  is  not  the  ordinary  eacperience  of
God's  people  "  to  drink  of  the  cup."

2.  Yet  it  has  befallen  Israel  that  he
has  "  assuredly  drunken."  God's  people
are  sometimes  severely  chastened.

3.  The  good  among  the  people  suffered
with  the  disobedient.  For  there  were
many  pious  and  righteous  men  in  Israel
who  zealously  strove  to  keep  the  nation
from  apostasy,  as  with  Daniel,  Ezekiel,
Jeremiah ;  yet  they  were  entailed  in  the
griefs  of  exile.

II.  A  fact  full  qj  Admonition :  the
ungodly  shall  not  escape  punishment.

"  Art  thou  he  that  shall  altogether  go
unpunished  'i  Thou  shalt  not  go  un-
punished, but  thou  shalt  surely  drink
of  it."

1.  How  can  the  wicked  expect  to  escape
when  the  people  God  loves  are  made  to
suffer  for  their  faults  ?

2.  The  affections  of  the  righteous  are
purifying^  but  those  of  the  guilty  are
punitive.

3.  Surely  it  may  be  expected  that
God  will  he  lenient  with  and  forgive  His
sons  sooner  than  aliens.

654


4.  If  the  godly  are  banished  from  their
land  and  life's  privileges  for  their  wrong,
shall  not  the  "  wicked  be  turned  into
hell,"  and  be  banished  from  all  the
covenant  favours  of  Heaven  I

Note—

(a.)  The  cup  of  affliction  is  placed  in
the  hands  of  us  all.

(6.)  None  can  claim  to  be  exempted
because  of  his  covenant  relationship.

(c.)  The  Christian's  natural  enjoyment
of  grace  leads  to  surprise  when  the  cup
is  placed  in  his  hands.

(d.)  Yet  the  justice  which  will  not
spare  the  beloved  child  forewarns  the
rebel  of  certain  punishment  of  wilful  sin.

Ver.  16.  Theme:  Fortipied  against
God's  power.  "  Thy  terribleness  hath
deceived  thee,  and  the  pride  of  thine
heart,  0  thou  that  dwelled  in  the  deft*
of  the  rock"  <fec.

I.  Such  startlingboastfulness  against
God  can  be  accounted  for  only  as  result-
ing from  remarkable  delusions.

A  soul  must  have  become  strangely
elevated  in  mood  and  defiance  to  be
capable  of  such  arrogance.  Men  often
wish  themselves  protected  from  the  reach
of  God's  power;  but  few  indeed  ever
become  so  deluded  as  to  believe  and  to
boast  that  they  are  so  protected.  What
explains  it  ?

1.  Arrogance  fostered  by  successes.
"  Thy  terribleness  hath  deceived  thee ;
i.e.f  at  first  the  fear  inspired  into  others
by  her  power  rendered  her  proudly  con-
fident, as  if  none  would  dare  to  assail
her ;  for  success  and  sway  over  others
tend  to  foster  this  inflated  sense  of  im-
portance and  power.  Beware  of  the
"deceiving**  influence  of  success  and
power  I

2.  Vanity,  which  fed  itself  upon  the
obsequious  subjection  of  others.  "The
pride  of  thy  heart."  And  such  vanity
grows  as  it  is  gratified.

3.  Self  created  resources  of  strength
and  security.  '*  Clefts  of  the  rock — the
height  of  the  hill."  Sinners  build  their
houses  against  the  coming  flood,  and
think  themselves  safe  in  them.

II.  It  is  a  frequent  effort  of  irrelu
gious  men  to  fortify  themselves  against
the  reach  of  God.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  ZLIZ.


1.  Against  the  revet'ses  of  His  provi-
dence. So  they  place  their  fortune  in
safest  securities,  in  various  sure  under-
takings, in  order  to  have  a  guarantee
that,  should  one  fail,  they  will  be  right
with  the  rest.  Thus  they  plan  that
"  riches  shall  not  take  to  themselves
wings  and  fly  away."

2.  Against  the  afflictions  of  His  hand.
They  choose  healthy  localities  for  their
houses,  with  every  sanitary  appliance
for  the  security  of  health.  They  com-
mand ablest  physicians  in  illness.  They
seek  the  most  salubriousand  invigorating
climates  for  the  different  seasons  of  the
year.  They  command  every  luxury  and
comfort  for  the  ease  and  security  of  life.

3.  k^d.mst  the  agencies  of  death.  They
**  make  their  nest  as  high  as  the  eagles."
They  climb  up  away  from  the  grim
shadow — take  great  pains  to  elude  the
last  enemy.

4.  Against  the  penalties  of  sin.  Give
money  in  their  wills  to  religious  societies,
as  a  bribe  to  their  consciences.  Leave
wealth  to  Popish  priests  to  pray  their
souls  out  of  purgatory.  Fortify  them-
selves in  atheism  or  rationalistic  theories^
to  satisfy  themselves  that  there  is  no
penalty  for  sin,  or  no  hereafter.

in  God's  mighty  hand  will  be  laid
upon  even  the  proudest  boaster.

1.  Misfortunes  pursue  men  in  all  their
sure  retreats.

2.  Death  mounts  over  all  "rocks,"
climbs  up  into  all  **  nests."

3.  Terror  will  seize  and  shatter  the
confidence  of  every  sinner  in  the  day  of
God's  righteous  judgment.

4.  There  will  be  an  awful  "  bringing
down**  of  the  lofty  when  the  Almighty
puts  forth  His  hand  to  destroy  men's
*' refuges  of  lies."  See  Isa.  ii.  11-17;
Rev.  vi.  15.

Note — Theie  is  a  cleft  of  a  Rock  in
which  the  soul  may  securely  hide.

•*  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me,
Let  me  bide  myself  in  Thee  1 "

Ver.  19.  ^^  Like  a  lion  from  the  swelling
of  Jordan,"  See  Homily  on  chap.  xii.
5,  and  Notes  on  chap.  iv.  7.

Ver.  23.  Theme :  The  Ska  ;  its  RA-
VAGES  A^'P   TKAGEDiEs,       '■  fhey   have


heard  evil  tidings:  they  are  faint-hearted ;
there  is  sorrow  on  the  sea ;  it  cannot  be
quiet."

I.  The  sea  has  its  stories  of  heart-
rending disaster.

II.  The  stories  of  the  sea's  ravages
fill  us  with  trembling  and  grief.

Ill  The  perils  of  the  deep  witness
to  the  awful  power  and  presence  of
God.

IV.  How  urgently  should  prayer
be  made  for  and  by  those  who  tra-
verse the  ocean.

*'  When  through  the  torn  sails  the  wild  tem-
pest is  streaming,

When  o'er  the  dark  wave  the  red  lightning  is
gleaming,

Nor  hope  lends  a  ray  the  poor  seaman  to
cherish,

We  fly  to  our  Saviour  : — *  Save,  Lord,  or  we
perish !  "

*'  0  Jesus,  once  rocked  on  the  breast  of  the

billow,
Aroused  by  the  shriek  of  despair  from  Thy

pillow.
Now  seated  in  glory,  the  mariner  cherish.
Who  cries  in  his  anguish,  'Save,  Lord,  or  we

perish  ! '

**  And  oh,  when  the  whirlwind  of  passion  is

raging,
When  sin  in  our  hearts  its  wild  warfare  is

waging,
Then  send  down  Thy  grace  Thy  redeemed  to

cherish  ;
Rebuke  the  destroyer  : — *  Save,  Lord,  or  we

perish  I ' "

— ffeber,

V.  The  sea's  wildest  tumult  is
under  the  control  of  God.  **  It  can-
not be  quiet,"  says  this  text :  but  once
over  the  furious  sea,  where  terror-
stricken  men  dreaded  death,  Jesus  sent
out  His  word — and  "  there  was  a  great
calm."  "Then  are  they  glad  because
they  be  quiet;  so  He  bringeth  them
to  their  desired  haven  "  (Ps.  cvii.
28,  29).

Comments.

Ver.  27.  **  Palace  op  Benhadad  : "
whence  so  many  cruelties  against  Israel
emanated  :  thus  indicating  the  reason
for  the  overthrow  of  Damascus.  God
traces  guilt  to  its  source  /

Ver.  29.  "  Cry,  Feab  is  on  every
SIDE."  Jeremiah's  watchword  again,
**  Magoi-Missabib  :  "    cf.   chap.   xx.    3,

650


OHAF.  &.


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


10;  Ps.  xxxi.  13.  The  mere  '*cry''
of  the  foe — "  Fear/'  <fec.,  shall  dis-
comfort the  Kedarenes.

Ver.  31.    '*  Arise,  get  you  up  unto

THE  WEALTHY  NATION,"  <fec.

Notes —

L  They  who  possess  worldly  plenty
do  not  have  all  advantages  on  their  side,
for  their  "  wealth "  courts  the  envy  of
the  covetous  and  the  assaults  of  the
spoiler,

ii.  An  easy  self-security  lays  men  open
to  the  invasions  of  trouble  and  loss.
Better  to  be  secure  in  Ciirist,  "  your
life  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  than  to
enjoy  a  fancied  security  in  the  wealth
and  possessions  of  earth.

Ver.  34.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord
AGAINST  Elam."  *'  In  the  cuneiform
inscriptions  we  find  the  Elamites  in
})erpetual  war  with  Nineveh,  with
whom  they  contested  possession  of  the
country  of  Rasi  (probably  the  country
mentioned  in  Ezek.  xxxviii.  2,  xxxix.
1).  With  Babylon,  on  the  contrary,
they  were  on  friendly  terms,  and  they
appear  perpetually  as  the  allies  of
Merodach-Baladan  and  his  sons  in
their  struggles  for  independence.  The
suggestion,  therefore,  of  Ewald,  that
they  served  as  auxiliaries  in  the  Chal-
dean army  in  the  expedition  which
ended   in   the   fall   of   Jehoiakim   and


the  deportation  of  Jeconiab  and  th*
best  of  the  land  to  Babylon,  is  not
improbable,  though  there  is  nothing  to
justify  us  in  laying  to  their  charge
any  extraordinary  cruelty." — Dr.  Payne
Smith.

"When  the  monarchy  of  Persia  was
established  under  Cyrus,  Elam  was
blended  into  and  formed  a  part  of  it ;
but  before  that  time  they  were  two
distinct  kingdoms.  According  to  the
present  prophecy,  Elam  is  spoken  of
as  having  actually  become  a  province
of  the  Babylonish  empire  (Dan.  viii.
2)  ;  and  Daniel  appears  to  have  pre-
sided over  it,  having  Shushan  for  the
seat  of  his  government" — Dr,  Blajf'
iMy.

Ver.  38.  "  I  will  set  my  throne
IN  Elam:"  God  would  show  Himself
the  Ruling  and  Omnipotent  King  by
His  judgments  there.

Ver.  39.     "In  the  latter  days,  I

will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Elam."
The  full  restoration  belongs  to  Gospel
times  :  and  "  Elamites "  were  among
the  first  who  heard  and  accepted  the
Gospel.  Their  presence  at  the  Pente-
cost shows  that  the  Elamites  were  still
preserved  by  the  Divine  Providence,  and
were  there  among  the  representatives  of
the  Gentile  world  to  whom  the  Evangel
of  Christ  was  proclaimed.


CHAPTER  L.

Critioal  and  Exeoetioal  Notes. — 1.  Chronology  of  the  Chapter. — This  and  the  following

chapter  constitute  one  prophecy  against  Babylon ;  and  the  date  of  its  authorship  is  given  in
chap.  li.  59:  "the  fourtli  year  of  Zedekiah."  Jeremiah  delivered  this  written  prophecy  to
Serial),  the  king's  chamberlain  and  Baruch's  brother  (c/.  chap,  xxxii.  12),  who  accompanied
Zedekiah  the  king  to  Bab.vlon,  probably  at  Nebuchadnezzar's  summons,  for  some  imposing
state  occasion  :  the  prophet's  design  being  to  send  to  the  exiles  there  His  message  concerning
the  overthrow  of  the  Chaldean  power  and  their  return  from  captivity.

2.  National  Affairs. — Jeremiah  was  at  this  time  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  5,  lit.
**  hithei'wards,'^  not  as  in  E.V.,  *'  thitherwardSf*'  the  writer  being  in  Jerusalem),  yet  he  regards
the  city  as  already  captured  and  in  ruins  (vers.  11,  15, 17,  28,  &;c.),  while  the  exiles  at;  Babylon,
taught  by  their  sorrows  and  misfortunes,  are  seeking  their  God  in  penitence  (vers.  4-7).  But
the  expressions  are  all  general,  there  are  none  of  those  minute  touches  which  would  certainly
have  been  found  had  the  city  and  temple  been  actually  destroyed  {Dr.  Payne  Smith).  The
exact  position  of  affiiirs  will  be  apparent  bv  reference  to  Notes  in  toe.  to  chap.  xxix.  Comp.  also
Topic,  "  Prophec]/  vindiailtd  in  Babylon's  Fall"  (on  chap.  xxv.  13),  p.  473.

3.  Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  2.  " Bely'*  the  principal  deity  of  Babylon,  and  ** Mero'
dach  "  (which  means  ii;  Syria,  litUe  lord)^  another  idol-god.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  5.  *^  Their  face*  thitherward:**  but  7W^  uniformly  ineana
hither :  thev  look  "hither"  from  BCepep  of  exile,

?56


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  J E REM T AH.  OTAP.  L.

Ver.  9.  ** A  mighty  expert  man**  The  pointing  of  the  word  7*3^^)0^  muschil,  appears  in
most  of  the  authorities  ;  therefore  is  rendered  expert ;  but  some  editions  read  ?'»3b'D  maahchU^
a  destroy er^  or  prosperous.

Ver.  12.    "  Your  mother :  "  DDDS  is  the  metropolis  of  the  empire,  Babylon.

Ver.  17.  *'  Devoured  him  .  .  .  broken  his  hones."  Rather,  "  The  firsts  even  the  king  of
Assyria,  ate  him  (imagery  of  a  lion  being  kept  up),  and  this  last,  even  Nebuchadnezzar,  hath
picked  his  bones.'*  For  Israel  was  so  wasted  by  Assyria,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  had  but  the  bones
to  pick.

Ver.  21.    "  Marathaim.'*      Marg.   "  the  rebels  ; "    but  D.^ri"ip  is  doubly  rebellious  :   it  is  a

dual   form,    intended   as  an  intensitive,  and  conveys  the  sense  of  the  very  rebellious  land.
"  Pekod  "  signifies  visitation.

Ver.  31.  **  0  thou  most  proud."    Lit.  0  Pride  ;  Ood  calls  Babylon  by  that  name,  ]\l\,

SUBJECT  OP  CHAPTER  L.
Babylon's  Pebdicted  Overthrow  :  Israel's  Sure  Redemption

Introductory  considerations —

i.  Why  was  Babylon^ s  fall  announced?  That  the  exiles  there  might  cherish
hope  in  their  captivity  and  nvixinve  faith  in  Jehovah  as  still  working  out  purposes
of  mercy  for  His  covenant  people.  Comp.  "  The  Theocratic  Purpose  of  the  Cap-
tivity,'' p.  472.

ii.  What  wa^  the  power  which  should  effect  BahylovUs  overthrow  /  "A  nation
Cometh  up  against  her  from  the  north^^  (ver.  3).  The  Median  power,  which
Cyrus  successfully  led  against  Babylon  (see  Topic,  " Sheshach"  ii.  2,  p.  475).  As
Judah's  overthrow  by  Babylon  had  always  been  predicted  "  from  the  north  "  (chap.
i.  14),  now,  in  turn,  Babylon's  overthrow  is  to  be  by  a  power  "  from  the  north."  The
north  is  the  region  where  the  sun  never  shines,  and  emblematical,  therefore,  of
severity  and  gloom.  The  Medo-Persian  empire  was  an  aggregation  of  small
nationalities  welded  into  unity  by  Cyaxares  (b.c.  633).

iii.  In  what  light  is  Babylon's  ruin  to  he  regarded  ?  Comp.  "  The  Supernatural
Termination  of  Babylon's  Power,"  p.  472.  Her  work  was  done ;  and,  as  being  a
graceless  and  arrogant  power,  God  destroyed  it  when  it  had  served  the  end  for
which  He  created  and  prolonged  it.  For  though  Babylon  worked  out  God's
designs  in  Judah's  punishment,  it  was  not  done  by  her  in  recognition  of  Jehovah
and  His  will,  but  in  violent  lust  of  empire,  and  in  disregard  of  the  sanctity  of  Zion's
holy  things.

iv.  How  would  tJie  exiles  greet  this  prediction  f  Surely  it  would  call  them  to  the
repentance  and  re-allegiance  to  God  which  Jeremiah  describes  (vers.  4,  5),  and
foster  in  them  a  patient  waiting  for  the  hour  of  their  promised  redemption,  and
restrain  their  souls  from  Babylon's  idolatries  by  fixing  their  expectation  and  trust
in  Jehovah.

Observation. — The  fate  of  Babylon  is  homiletically  treated  in  chap.  xxv.  ;  hence
in  these  two  chapters  t^e  <renera?  theme  will  be  left,  and  only  verses  selected  for
homilies.

HOMILIES  ON  VERSES  IN  CHAPTER  L.

Ver.  4.  Theme :  Weeping  Pilgrims,  to  come  (chap.  xxxi.  9  ;  see  Homilies  on

** Going  and  weeping ;  they  shall  go  and  "The  Watchmen's  Call  "  and  "Pilgrims

seek  the  Lord  their  God."  to  Zion,"  pp.   518,  519.       Comp.   also

i.   Tbe  Return.      '*  Going."   In  part  Hos.  i.  11  ;  Zech.  xii.  10).     Its  constant

fulfilled  when  some  few  of  the  ten  tribes  fulfilment  is  realised  in  souls  returning

of  "  Israel "  joined  Judah  in  a  **  cove-  to  the  Lord  in  prayer,  penitence,  and

nant"  with  God  at  the   restoration  of  faith.

Judah  to  their  own  land  (Neb.  ix.  38,  ii.  The  Tearful  Journey.     "Weep-

X,  29).     Its  full  accom/dishment  is  yet  ing."     With  sorrow  at  tlie  remembrance

057


OHAP.  Kb


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


of  their  sins  and  sufferings  (Ezra  iii.  12,
13  ;  Ps.  cxxvi.  5,  6).  With  gladness
at  their  restoration,  after  so  long  a
delay,  and  in  a  manner  surpassing  all
hope.

iil  The  Divine  Goal.  '*Seek  the
Lord  their  God."  More  a  going  back
in  heart  to  Him,  than  a  mere  geogra-
phical return  to  their  land.  A  happier
goal  that  than  to  a  ruined  country  ;  for
the  goal  of  piety ,  "The  Lord,"  is  a
better  and  more  blessed  one  than  the
goal  of  patriotism — a  wasted  country.
God  is  more  to  the  ransomed  soul  than
Zionl

Vers.  4, 6.  Theme  :  SiNinsBS  Retuen-
INO  TO  God.

Evident  that  the  verses  allude  to  the
return  of  tlie  Jews  from  the  Babylonish
captivity.  But  as  they  interestingly  de-
scribe what  is  manifest  in  the  return  of
sinners  to  God,  we  will  use  them  to
illustrate  such  a  circumstance.

L  Penitents  going  in  company.  **In
those  days  the  children  of  Israel  shall
come,  they  and  the  children  of  Judah
together.'*

There  had  been  much  dissension  and
great  enmity  between  these  tribes  from
the  days  of  Rehoboam  (see  1  Kings  xii.);
but  it  had  been  foretold  that  they  should
again  unite,  and  here  we  behold  them
coming  *^ together"  Thus  it  is  with
sinners  in  submitting  to  the  teachings
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  yielding  to
divine  influence.

Whatever  was  the  distance,  whatever
the  enmity  existing  between  them  be-
fore, now,  as  with  one  accord,  they  come
together  to  the  house  of  God,  to  the
throne  of  grace,  to  the  Saviour  of  man-
kind.    See  Eph.  ii.  13,  14.

n.  Sinners  returning  with  weep-
ing.    "  Going  and  weeping."

What  an  affecting  sight !  Whence
have  they  come?  Why  do  they  weep?
Whither  are  they  going  ?  They  have
left  the  land  of  their  captivity,  where
they  were  aliens  from  God,  servants  to
idolaters,  slaves  to  their  enemies ;  they
have  left  the  ways  of  sin,  the  company
of  the  wicked,  the  service  of  the  devil.
Behold  them  going.

^s  they  qo  they  weep :  not  Uqi^x  regret


that  they  are  leaving  scenes  and  circum-
stances to  which  they  have  been  so  long
habituated,  but  rather  because  they  re-
mained connected  with  them  so  long.
They  are  affected  by  a  sense  of  God's
goodness  to  them  and  by  a  conscious-
ness of  their  ingratitude  towards  God ;
they  weep  on  account  of  their  sins,  and
the  proof  of  their  sincerity  is  manifest
in  their  movement;  for  as  they  weep
they  go  ;  they  leave  their  former  sinful
situation,  and  they  are  going,

III.  Souls  returning  to  the  Lord*
"To  seek  the  Lord  their  God."

The  children  of  Israel  and  of  Judah
had  wandered  from  Jehovah,  the  true
God,  the  God  of  their  fathers ;  they
had  provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to
anger,  especially  by  the  folly  and  the
infamy  of  idolatrous  practices,  and  God
had  left  them  for  a  while  captives  in
the  hands  of  idolaters.  But  mixing
mercy  with  judgment,  He  remembered
them  in  their  low  estate ;  and  here  we
find  them  again  seeking  the  Lord  their
God.

Sinners  ituiy  wander  from  Gk>d,  but
misery,  infamy,  and  ruin  will  be  the
consequence  ;  they  must  return  again  to
God  or  perish.  And  they  may  return ;
for  oh  !  how  kind  are  the  words  of  the
Lord  our  God,  of  Jesus  our  Saviour,  to
weeping  returning  sinners  1  *'  Ye  shall
seek  me  and  find  me  when  ye  shall
search  for  me  with  your  whole  heart"
(Jer.  xxix.  13).

IV.  Seekers  asking  direction.  "They
ask  the  way  to  Zion  with  their  faces
thitherward."

Zion  was  t)ie  city  of  solemnities  among
the  Jews,  and  God  was  peculiarly  pre-
sent there.  But  Zion  means  the  Church,
and  it  is  in  His  Church  that  God  may
always  be  found.  So  Jesus  our  Saviour
promises.  Agreeably  to  this,  "  tJiey
ask  the  way  to  Zion ; "  and  as  a  proof
that  this  is  not  an  idle  inquiry,  they
ask  *'  with  their  faces  thitherward.^^
Their  dispositions  are  turned  toward
God  and  His  [>eople ;  their  souls  are
inclined  to  religion  and  its  ways.

Thus  disposed,  they  next  resolve,
"  Come  and  let  us  join  ourselves  to  the
Lord  in  a  perpetual  cov§n?^nt,  that  s|iaU
i^ot  be  forgotten,"


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH


OHAP.  L.


They  had  been  joined  to  idols,  to  sin,  to
wickedness.  But  now  they  say,  *'  Come
let  us  join  ourselves  to  the  Lord."

The  way  to  join  ourselves  to  the  Lord
is,  spiritually,  by  faith  and  by  love ;
oidwardly,  by  connecting  ourselves  with
the  Lord's  people — with  those  who  wor-
shi[t  God  in  spirit  and  rejoice  in  Christ
Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the
flesh. — Altered  from  ^^  Sketchet  of  Ser-
mons"

Ver.  5.  Theme:  Directions  to  In-
quirers. '*  They  shall  ask  the  way  to
ZioUf  Come  and  let  us  join  ourselves  to
the  Lord"  The  evidences  of  a  state  of
grace  are  the  same  in  all  ages.  The
thought  of  the  numbers  in  heaven  and
the  numbers  on  the  way  to  it  may  well
encourage  us.

Text  said  of  Israel  in  Babylon,  but
said  spiritually  of  seekers  in  every  age.

Perhaps  never  a  day  since  first  pro-
mise in  which  there  has  not  been  some
inquirer  to  heaven.

"  We  are  compassed  "  etc.  It  is  always
instructive  to  mark  the  peculiar  and
characteristic  distinctions  of  the  people
of  God.  Though  tliere  are  some  things
in  which  they  differ,  there  are  many  in
which  they  agree.  Unity  without  uni-
formity.

There  may  be  circumstantial  differ-
ences between  Moses  and  Joshua,  Paul
and  John,  Martha  and  Mary,  Peter  and
Nathaniel,  but  they  yet  possess  a  one-
ness of  character.  All  love  Christ ;
love  prayer ;  love  the  Word  of  God ;
love  the  fellowship  of  tlie  Gospel.
**  All  drink  into  the  same  Spirit."

Our  text  exhibits  some  of  these,  and
we  shall  set  before  you —

I  Some  of  the  marks  and  charac-
teristics ol  the  pilgrims  to  Zion.
'*  Arise,  let  us  go  up  to  Zion."  Earnest-
ness, Union,  Effort.

\.  By  their  earnest  inquiry.  "  They
inquire  the  way  to  Zion  with  their  faces
thitherward."  Supposes  Desire,  Ignor-
ance, Docility,  Resolution.

As  when  the  bondage  of  Israel  was
broken  they  began  to  turn  homewards,  so
when  the  soul  is  truly  converted  to  God
it  begins  to  turn  b^ftvenwards,  ♦*  Ari^
ye"  etc,


The  soul  truly  awakened  is  no  longer
content  to  sleep  in  sin,  to  linger  upon  the
brink  of  perdition,  to  remain  under  the
sentence  and  condemnation  of  a  broken
law,  but  determines  to  seek  salvation  and
escape  the  wrath  to  come.   "  /  will  arise."

Paul  inquiies,  **  What  wouldst  Thou
have  me  to  do  1 "  Peter  inquires,  "  Lord^
to  whom  shall  we  go  hut  to  Thee?"  The
jailor  inquires,  *'  What  shall  1  do  to  he
saved  V  Balak  inquires,  "  Wherewithal
shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "

Depend  upon  it,  it  is  a  great  era  in
any  man's  history  when  he  feels  himself
ivrong,  becomes  aware  of  his  danger,
has  strong  convictions  awakened,  sees  his
need  of  a  Saviour,  feels  for  the  first
time  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,
and  earnestly  resolves  to  make  the  care
of  his  soul  the  first  concern.

But  it  is  of  great  consequence  that  he
should  at  once  act  upon  his  convictions.
These  inquired  with  '*their  faces  di-
rected thitherward."  Not  ask  the  way  to
heaven  and  set  their  faces  to  the  world  ;
not  set  their  faces  to  heaven  and  go  on  at
a  venture  withhut  asking  the  way  ;  but  in
all  true  converts  there  is  both  a  sincere
desire  to  attain  the  end  and  a  constatit  care
to  keep  the  way.  Guard  against  trifling
with  convictions.  Pray  that  they  may
be  deepened  and  confirmed,  that  you
may  be  enabled  to  act  upon  them,  that
they  may  issue  in  sound  conversion.

2.  By  their  penitential  regrets.  "Going
and  weeping."

They  weep  that  they  have  been  in
bondage  so  long,  that  their  best  days
have  been  devoted  to  folly  and  sin,  that
so  few  are  found  walking  with  them,
that  the  way  is  so  rough,  the  difficulties
so  great,  and  that  they  find  so  many
traces  and  footprints  of  returning  feet —
of  those  who  professed  to  set  out  on
pilgrimage,  but  whose  hearts  were  not
right.  The  open  enemies  of  the  way  do
not  discourage  so  much  as  the  false
friends  of  the  way  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  8-11).

Repentance  awakens  a  godly  sorrow
for  a  in  past,  a  painful  sense  of  sin  pre-
sent, our  remaining  corruption,  and  a
holy  jealousy  and  distrust  of  ourselves
for  the  future,  lest,  like  Lot's  wife,  we
look  back,  or,  like  Israel,  in  heart  go
bftck  (Ps.  U.  12).

m


OHAP.Li


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


3.  By  their  mutual  solicitude  and
concern.  "  Come  and  let  ««."  Roused
themselves,  they  long  to  rouse  others.

Religion  delights  in  unity  and  associa-
tion. It  consecrates  the  social  principle
by  bringing  it  in  aid  of  our  own  and
others'  piety.  The  charity  of  religion
when  it  begins  at  home  does  not  end
there.  One  of  the  first  indications  of
piety  is  a  concern  for  the  salvation  of
others  (John  i.  41).  ^^  Andrew  first
findeth  his  own  brother."  Like  lighted
torches  spread  the  flame.

He  who  can  forego  the  communion  of
saints  will  probably  very  soon  be  able
to  resign  communion  with  God.

4.  By  their  solemn  and  determined
consecration  to  God.  "Let  us  join  our-
selves to  the  Lord  in  a  perpetual  cove-
nant."

**  My  understanding  shall  be  His  to
know  Him ;  my  will  His  to  choose
Him ;  my  affections  His  to  love  Him ;
and  all  my  active  powers  His  to  serve
and  honour  Him." — Bishop  Beveridge.
Williams  of  Kidderminster  records : —
"  I  solemnly  devoted  and  dedicated  my-
self to  Him  who  is  the  King  of  kings,
resolving  by  His  grace  to  give  a  full
divorce  to  all  manner  of  sins,  and  to
the  utmost  of  my  power  to  strive  and
wrestle  with  all  temptations  to  sin,
whether  from  without  or  within ;  to
avoid  the  society  of  vain  and  graceless
persons ;  to  commend  myself  to  God  by
prayer  at  least  twice  a  day ;  to  be  careful
and  constant  in  self-examination  and
meditation  ;  particularly  to  meditate  on
the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  and  of  Christ  in
willingly  oflFering  Himself  a  sacrifice  for
poor  sinners,  and  in  sending  the  blessed
Spirit,  whose  strivings  and  quickening
motions  I  resolved,  by  the  grace  of  God,
never  to  quench.  I  resolved  to  watch
narrowly  against  the  wanderings  and
strayings  of  my  heart  in  any  duty ;  to
make  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation
of  my  soul  my  chief  business  and  de-
sign; and  to  account  the  affairs  of  this
world  but  as  diversions  to  me  in  my
way  heavenward.  I  determined  to  call
myself  to  account  for  the  actions  of  the
day,  and  frequently  to  write  remarks
thereon.  This  was  of  excellent  use  to
keep    me    close   to    God    and   duty   tq

m


prevent  sin  ;  it  helped   me  to  redeem
precious  time,  making  conscience  of  ris-
ing betimes  for  communi(m  with  God."
IL  Directions  to  those  who  are  de-
sirous of  walking  in  this  way.

1.  Solemnly  consecrate  yourself  to  God,
*' Join  yourselves  to  the  Lord  in  a  per-
petual covenant,"  <fec.

2.  Carefully  study  the  directions  for
the  way.  **  Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  to
my  feet."  Here  your  course  is  clearly
marked  out  all  the  way  from  the  city
of  destruction  to  the  heights  of  Zion.

The  uses  of  the  Bible  read  and  heard
are  to  convince  of  sin,  to  convert  to  Christ,
to  confirm  in  grace,  to  conduct  to  glory.

As  ever  you  would  profit  by  a  sermon
or  a  chapter,  follow  it  with  the  tears  of
repentance  and  the  prayers  of  faith.
Remember  that  the  Bible  without  its
Inspirer's  illumination  is  like  a  dial  with-
out sunshine.

3.  Keep  close  to  your  Guide.  Jesus
says,  **  I  am  the  way."  He  is  the  Lion
of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Honour  Christ
in  His  prophetical  office  as  He  who
loosens  the  seals  and  opens  the  Book,
and  throws  light  on  the  dispensations
of  God,  and  guides  and  guards  the
Church  from  earth  to  heaven.

Peter  followed,  but  followed  afar  off.

4.  Bo  not  separate  yourselves  from
your  godward  companions.

5.  Keep  the  end  constantly  in  view, —
S.  Theodey,  1842.

Vers.  4,  5.  Theme:  YouNO  Converts

STARTING  ZiONWARD.

I  God  reconciled  to  them  in  grace
is  the  object  of  their  inquiry.

U.  It  is  usual  with  inquirers  to  asso-
ciate with  those  who  are  like-minded
with  themselves.

III.  This  inquiry  after  God  and  happi-
ness is  frequently  accompanied  with
tears.

IV.  Mount  Zion  is  the  place  to
which  they  will  repair /or  instruction
and  comfort.

V.  Devout  and  sincere  inquirers  tvill
gladly  avail  themselves  of  the  dire<>-
tion  and  counsel  of  Christian  ministers
and  of  other  pilgrims  who  have  made
some  advance  in  the  way  to  the  celes-
tial citjr.


BOM] LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHIf.L


VL  Young  converts,  having  found
Godj  to  their  unspeakjible  satisfaction,
will  do  well  to  "join  themselves  to  the
Lord  in  a  perpetual  covenant  that
shall  not  be  forgotten." — Rev,  R.  Frost,
Dunmow,  1833.

Note—

"  The  fall  of  Babylon  is  to  be  imme-
diately followed  by  the  return  of  the
exiles  homewards  in  tearful  procession
because  they  go  as  penitents,  and  yet
with  joy  because  their  faces  are  towards
Zion.  The  cessation,  moreover,  of  the
schisms  between  Israel  and  Judah  is
one  of  the  signs  of  the  times  of  the
Messiah  (Isa.  xi.  12,  13),  and  symboli-
cally represents  the  gathering  together  of
all  the  discordant  and  warring  empires
of  the  world  under  the  peaceful  sceptre
of  the  Church's  King." — Speaker* 8  Com-
mentary,

Ver.  6.  Theme :  The  Soul's  Resting-
place.  ^^They  have  forgotten  their  rest-
ing-place,**

The  prophet  speaks  of  the  captivity  of
Israel  in  language  of  plaintive  and  poetic
beauty  :  "  My  people  have  been  lost
sheep;  their  shepherds  have  caused  them
to  go  astray  ;  they  have  turned  them
away  on  the  mountains :  they  have  gone
from  mountain  to  hill ;  they  have  for-
gotten their  resting-place."  Jehovah
had  now  come  to  seek  and  save  them,
and  the  first  evidence  that  He  is  among
them  is  that  they  return  penitent  to
Him.  As  the  lost  child  that  has  run
hither  and  thither  in  the  crowded  streets,
seeking  in  vain  the  parent  from  whom
she  has  wandered,  crying  herself  sick  in
the  bitterness  of  her  sorrow,  does  at  the
sight  of  the  mother  coming  to  her  relief
rush  to  her  embrace,  so  the  Jewish
nation  rose  repentingly  to  meet  God
as  He  drew  near,  saying  with  earnest
and  devout  enthusiasm,  "  Come  and
let  us  join  ourselves  unto  the  Lord  in
a  perpetual  covenant  that  shall  not
be  forgotten "  (ver.  6).  To  take  the
text  in  a  spiritual  sense  is  not  accom-
modation, but  interpretation,  for  all
this  was  designed  to  present  a  striking
analogy  to  the  case  of  the  sinner  and
his  Saviour.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the
text  suggests —


I  That  the  hnman  soul  needs  a
resting-place.

This  is  true  of  the  soul —

1.  In  innocence.  As  a  creature  he
could  not  but  be  dependent.  Without
unquestioning  trust  in  God,  safety  and
happiness  were  impossible  to  man  even
before  the  Fall

2.  How  much  more  true  is  this  since
man  has  become  a  sinner/    To  the  sense
of  dependence  there  is  now  added  the
restlessness  of  a  rebel,  whose  conscience
is  carrying  a  load  it  cannot  shake  off,
whose  intellect  is   revolving  questions
it  cannot  solve,  whose  heart  is  crying
out  for  love  that  shall  be  worthy  of  its
acceptance,  and  for  an  object  that  shall
be  worthy  of  its  love.     His  nature  is
utterly  weary.     The  past  is  guilty,  the
future  is  hopeless,  and  so  the  present  is
restless.      Have  you   never   sought  to
hide  yourself  from  God  and  from  your-
self in   business,  pleasure,  excitement,
because  of  a  consciousness  of  guilt,  even
as  Adam    attempted    to    hide    himself
amid  the  trees?     You  become  yourself
the  spectre  that  haunts  your  heart,  and
you  carry  yourself  for  ever  with  you.
Never,     therefore,     until     yourself    is
changed  can  you  enter  into  an  unfailing
resting-[)lace.

II.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  resting-place
the  soul  needs.

The  deliverance  from  the  power  of
sin  and  the  effects  of  sin  can  alone
remove  the  soul's  distress.  In  Christ
we  have —

1.  Full  redemption.  He  took  upon
Himself  our  sins  and  redeemed  us  from
the  curse  of  the  law,  so  that  "  there  is
no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in
Him."  No  anodynes  of  earth  can  give
the  soul  the  rest  that  the  blood  of  Christ
can.  What  the  words  of  men  could  not
do  the  voice  of  Jesus  has  accomplished;
for  when  He  has  said,  *'  Thy  sins  are
forgiven  thee,  go  in  peace,"  the  heavings
of  the  troubled  heart  have  been  stilled,
as  of  old  the  rolling  waves  of  Galilee
subsided  at  His  command.

2.  In  Him  we  also  have  regeneration,
*'  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new
creature."  A  new  centre  has  been  given
to  his  heart,  a  new  aim  to  his  life,  a  new
joy  to  his   experience.       In    his  heart

661


OHAP.  L.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Christ    Las    opened    a    fountain    that
quenches  his  thirst  for  evermore.

3.  He  gives  repose  to  the  intellect,
Christ  is  "  the  truth."  Jesus  Christ
alone  brings  to  the  soul  the  element  of
certainty,  and,  worn  out  by  vain  flights,
it  folds  its  weary  wings  and  rests
with  quiet  thankfulness  on  this  tree  of
knowledge,  which  is  also  the  tree  of
life.

4.  He  also  gives  repose  to  the  affec-
tions of  the  soul.  Earthly  objects  prove
disappointing  or  fall  away  from  us,  or
are  torn  from  us  and  leave  the  soul  all
palpitating  with  agony,  but  no  power
can  separate  from  the  love  of  God  in
Christ  Jesus.  Earthly  objects  cannot
last  through  the  soul's  immortality,
but  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,
to-day,  and  for  ever,  and  the  repose
that  Christ  brings  is  as  everlasting  as
Himself.

III.  The  text  implies  that  this  resting-
place  of  the  soul  is  sometimes  forgotten,
even  by  those  who  have  known  and
enjoyed  it.

"  My  people  have  forgotten  their
resting-place."  This  place  can  be  at-
tained even  on  earth  by  Christians.
Paul,  amid  the  damp  and  darkness  of
his  prison,  exclaimed,  **I  know  whom
I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  He
is  able  to  keep  what  I  have  committed
to  Him  against  that  day."  Eminent
Christians  in  all  ages,  <fec.  But  a  Chris-
tian may  frequently  have  his  peace  in
Christ  disturbed.  At  moments  he  may
be  walking  through  darkness.  Job  was
a  true  man  of  God  even  when  he  was
crying  out,  "  Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I
might  find  Him  ! "  True,  a  Christian
is  not  justified  in  being  in  this  distressed
state  of  mind.

When  does  a  Christian  forget  his
resting-place  %

1.  When  he  falls  into  perplexity,
doubting  whether  he  is  forgiven  or
not.

2.  When  he  depends  upon  merely
human  and  earthly  resources.

3.  When  he  loses  his  confidence  in
the  midst  of  affliction.

Are  there  those  here  who  have  never
known  this   resting-place  ?      Let  them
geek  it  now.     Qo^fte  to  Christ^^
662


"Take  Him  for  what  He  is;  oh,  take  Him  ally
And  look  above.
Then  shall  thy  tossing  soul  find  anchorage

And  steadfast  peace;
Thy  love  shall  rest  on  His,  thy  weary  doubts

For  ever  cease ;
Thy  heart  shall  find  in  Him  and  in  His  grace
Its  rest  and  bliss."
—Rev,  W.  M.  TayloTf  D.D.,  New  Fori.

Ver.  6.  Theme :  Roamino  from
God.

i.  However  unlike  in  all  other
choices  and  courses  of  action,  men
alarmingly  concur  in  this,  to  neglect
religion,  forsake  the  fountain  of  happi-
ness. **  They  have  gone  from  mountain
to  hilly  they  have  forgotten  their  resting^
place,**

ii.  We  find  no  exception  to  this
rule  apart  from  individual  cases  in
which  Divine  grace  has  worked  a  dis"
tinciion.  As  in  Nature  we  never  find
a  stone  ascend  upwards  or  a  river  flow
backwards  of  its  own  accord,  so  in  the
moral  world  we  never  find  men  prefer-
ing  eternity  to  time,  holiness  to  sin,  the
Creator  to  the  CTedture  of  tlieir  own  accord,

iii.  Wherever  this  wrong  tendency
is  found  superseded  hy  a  supreme  aU
tachment  to  heavenly  things^  we  are  sure
that  this  new  bias  owns  a  heavenly
agency.

These  Jews  in  Babylon  wandered
from  hill  to  hill,  from  religion  to  re-
ligion, from  comforter  to  comforter,
from  one  broken  dependence  to  an-
other, but  never  by  any  chance  wa»»
dering  back  to  God.

I.  God  is  the  proper  rest  of  the
human  spirit.

1.  Every  created  life  requires  some
object  of  Ihope  and  trust.

2.  The  dire  effect  of  human  depra-
vity is  to  separate  us  from  God,  and  to
prompt  us  to  seek  some  other  rest.

3.  Actually  to  know  and  enjoy  God
is  the  triumph  of  personal  and  experi-
mental religion.

II.  A  tendency  to  forget  and  for-
sake God  lies  at  the  root  of  all  our
miseries.

It  plunged  Israel  into  captivity ;  it
exposes  us  to  ruin.

1.  This  is  literally  true  of  tlie  whoU
world  of  sinners.  We  have  ftU  "  fo^
gotten  our  resting-plac^"


trOMIlETtC  COAfMENTAkT:  JEREMtAlt.


CHA?.  U


2.  This  is  practically  true  of  the
whole  world  of  saints — the  source  of
their  miseries.  Not  absolute  forget-
fulness,  but  a  practical  one.  What
makes  us  faint  in  calamity,  quarrel
with  Providence,  murmur  under  dis-
appointments, betake  ourselves  to  un-
worthy means  to  avoid  calamity  or  ob-
tain relief,  <kc.

III.  Satisfaction  is  sought  in  vain
while  we  desert  God.  "  Wander  from
mountain  to  hill.'*

1.  Some  concentrate  happiness  in
self,

2.  Others  seek  satisfaction  in  their
worldly  possessions  and  well-planned  en-
terprises.

3.  Others  in  their  personal  talents.

4.  Others  in  their  untarnished  repvr
tation.

No  matter  what  be  the  object  of
idolatry,  if  God  be  "  forgotten "  and
the  proper  "  resting-place  "  forsaken,  if
the  care  of  their  soul  be  neglected  and
the  cross  of  Christ  unsought,  "  destruc-
tion and  misery  are  in  their  waySy  and
the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known,**

(a.)  There  is  criminality  in  this  ne-
glect of  God.

(b,)  There  is  degradation  in  it

(c)  There  is  rwt/i,  disaster ,  in  it,
sooner  or  later.

IV.  God's  dispensations  correct  this
perverse  tendency  iw  man  to  roam  from
Him,

1.  The  dispensations  of  His  provi-
dence.

2.  The  influence  of  His  grojce  and
Spirit,

Comments —

Ver.  6.  "  My  people  hath  been  lost
sheep  :  tlieir  shepherds  have  caused  them,
to  go  astray."  See  on  chap.  ii.  8,  and
especially  xxiii.  1  seq,

Ver.  7.  "  Their  adversaries  said.  We
offend  not^  because  they  sinned  against  the
Lord,**  "  It  is  the  worst  condition  into
which  the  Church  of  God  can  come
when  the  enemies  who  desolate  it  main-
tain they  are  in  the  right  in  doing  so.
It  is,  however,  a  just  Nemesis  when
those  who  will  not  hear  the  regular
messengers  of  God  must  be  told  by  the


extraordinary  messengers  of  God  what
they  should  liave  done." — Naegelsbach.

Nebuzaradan  urged  the  plea  of  tljis
verse  (chap.  xl.  2^  3 ;  cf  Zech.  xi.  5).
The  Jews*  guilt  was  so  palpable  that
they  were  condemned  even  in  the  judg-
ment of  heathens.  They  saw  they  had
apostatised  from  **the  hope  of  their
fathers,"  from  the  God  whose  faithful-
ness their  fathers  had  experienced.

Ver.  1 4.  "  Against  Babylon,  for
she  hath  sinned  against  the  Lord.**  By
oppressing  His  people ;  for  their  cause
is  His.  Also  by  profaning  His  sacred
vessels  (Dan.  v.  2).

Ver.  17.  Theme:  The  Scattered
Sheep.  "  Israel  is  a  scattered  sheep  ;
the  lions  Imih  driven  him  away.**

Sin  made  them  victims  of  invading
conquerors.  Text  was  fulfilled  in  the
captivity  by  Assyria.  Language  appro-
priate to  every  lost  sinner.

L  A  wandering  sheep  is  a  very  fit
emblem  of  a  poor  sinner.  Entangled
in  the  briars  of  the  wilderness,  torn  and
pierced  by  its  thorns ;  the  lions  have
devoured  us,  &c.  In  plain  language :
man's  heart,  affections,  powers  of  his
mind,  all  are  alienated  from  God.  A
wandering  sheep  is  the  emblem  of —

1.  Indigence,  perplexity,  and  disap-
pointment,

2.  Danger,

3.  Helplessness.

4.  A71  object  of  pity  and  anxious
solicitude.  God  pitied  the  sinner  (John
iii.  16) ;  His  love  is  illustrated  by  Luke
XV.  3,  (fee.

n.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  Shep-
herd, who  seeks  and  gathers  into  His
fold  His  wandering  sheep.  As  sucli
He  is  frequently  described  (Ps.  xxiii.  1 ;
Isa.  xl.  11;  John  x.  11).

1.  He  knows  they  are  in  the  wilderness.
He  came  "to  seek  and  to  save  that
which  is  lost."  He  finds  them  in  a
ruined  condition.

2.  He  pities  them,  and  rescues  them
from  their  enemies.  He  "  takes  the
prey  from  the  mighty,  and  delivers  the
lawful  captive."

3.  He  restoreth  the  soul  (Ps.  xxiii.)
He  came  to  give  "life  more  abundantly  **

663


onat.  L.


UOMILETIC  COMMBM'AHr:  JEtlEMlAH,


(John  X.  10,  11).      For  this  purpose  He
died,  paid  the  price,  <kc.

ILL  How  blessed  is  the  present
state  of  the  restored  sheep  !  Loved,
redeemed,  enfolded.

1.  The  fold  of  Christ  is  a  secure
enclosure.  The  "Lord  is  round  about
His  people."  His  perfections  are  on
every  side  for  their  security.

2.  They  are  in  suitable  and  congenial
society.  Sheep  associate  not  with  other
animals.  We  "  have  fellowship  one  with
another"

3.  He  will  ever  watch  over  them,
guide  and  defend  them ;  for  they  are
precious  to  Him.  He  will  *'  never  leave
nor  forsake  them  : "  be  with  them  in  the
valley  of  death,  and  then  enfold  them  in
heaven.

IV.  The  restored  sheep  are  amply
tended  and  nourished.

1.  They  '*  go  in  and  out  and  Jlnd
pasture,"  But  they  are  not  always  fed
on  the  same  ordinance.  Tlie  blessing  is
not  confined  to  one  means  of  grace.

2.  All  the  blessings  of  the  new  covenant
are  for  tJie  nourishment  of  the  soul.

3.  The  endearing  character  of  Christ
should  engage  our  confidence,  as  our
Shepherd.  He  is  infinitely  good,  pro-
videntially kind,  and  graciously  tender
to  His  people.  His  bounty  supplies.
His  wisdom  orders,  all  things  for  us  ;
and  His  Gospel  brings  us  every  spiritual
enjoyment.

V.  The  sheep  shall  be  eventually
removed  from  the  fold  below  to  that
in  glory.

1.  Here  they  have  much  enjoyment,
but  it  is  often  imperfect  and  interrupted*
Sin  disquiets,  the  world  disappoints,
ordinances  only  prove  a  blessing  occa-
sionally.

2.  The  time  is  nearing  when  the  flock
shall  be  all  in  one  fold^  eternally  with
the  Shepherd,  led  by  Him  into  the  ever-
verdant  pastures.

(a.)  Are  you  one  of  Christ's  sheep  ?
As  a  wandering  sinner,  have  you  been
reclaimed  ?

(6.)  Have  you  sensible  enjoyment  of
the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  ?  Are  they
to  you  green  pastures,  <kc.  ]

(c.)  If  not  identified  with  the  flock  of
Christ  now,  at  the  day  of  division  you
664


will  be  severed  from  the  redeemed  of  the
Lord  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  <fec)

—From  ''Helps for  tJie  Pulpit"

Ver.  20.  Theme:  God's  Mercy  to
His  People.  "  In  those  days  the  ini-
quity of  Israel  sJiall  be  sought  for,  and
there  shall  be  none;  and  the  sins  of
Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  :  for
I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve, "

God's  piomises  seem  so  "  exceeding
great "  that  we  are  tempted  to  limit
them  by  conditions.  Men  may  indeed
deceive  themselves  as  to  their  oion  per-
sonal interest  in  them;  but  God  is
sovereign  in  His  affluence.

This  promise  has  been  only  in  part
accomplished ;  for  since  the  Jews'  return
from  Babylon  "  their  sins  have  been
found,"  and  visited,  too,  in  wrathful
indignation  for  many  hundreds  of  years.
At  a  period  fast  nearing,  God's  elect
among  them  shall  be  restored  to  His
favour,  (fee.

I.  The  extent  of  God's  mercy  to  His
chosen  people.

1,  They  are  constantly  represented  as
a  remnant.  Yet  they  are  "  a  remnant
according  to  the  election  of  grace"
(Rom.  xi.  5).

2.  For  them,  however,  God  designs  the
richest  mercy.  A  full  and  perfect  remis-
sion of  all  sin  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17) ;  and
to  remember  their  sins  no  more  for  ever
(Jer.  xxxi.  31-34;  Heb.  x.  14-17).
God  will  henceforth  view  them  as  they
are  in  Christ,  "  without  spot  or  blemish  **
(Eph.  V.  27).

n.  The  interest  which  the  Jewish
nation  has  in  this  covenanted  mercy.

1.  They  are  the  direct  objects  God  has
in  view  in  this  promise.  We  do  right
to  apply  these  words  to  God's  elect
generally,  but  wrong  to  overlook  their
primary  purpose.  This  is  emphatically
a  pledge  to  the  Jews.

2.  So  applied,  the  promise  sliould  fill
us  with  unutterable  joy.

III.  With  what  thoughts  should  wa
contemplate  this  promised  mercy  7

1.  Amazement  at  the  riches  of  God's
grace,

2.  Humiliation,  loathing  ourselves
for  our  iniquities  against  such  a  God.

3.  Gratitude  (Rom.  xii.  1),


UOMlLSTta  COMMmTAUy:  JEREMIAU.


CflAF.  £..


4.  Affiance,  In  all  He  has  done  He
gives  us  the  pledge  that  He  will  never
Buffer  any  one  to  "  separate  us  from  the
love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  " —
Rev.  Chas,  Simeon^  M.A.,  1828.

Ver.  20.  Theme:  Plenteous  for-
giveness. "  /  urill  pardon  them  whom
I  reser-ve."

L  In  some  cases  pardon  would  be  both
unrighteous  and  dangerous.

The  law  must  be  honoured  and  the
transgressor  cease  from  the  sin  which
needs  pardon.

II.  The  pardon  God  bestows  is  sove-
reign in  its  exercise.

As  pardon  is  an  act  of  grace,  not
merited,  it  must  be  sovereign  ;  bestowed
acc(»rding  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His
will.

m  A  universal  offer  of  pardon  is
proclaimed  in  the  Gospel.

On  the  ground  of  "repentance  towards
God  and  faith  towards  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."

IV.  Wbile,  therefore,  God's  grace  de-
signs the  scheme  of  pardon  through
Christ,  the  responsibility  of  securing
pardon  rests  on  man.

However  wicked,  no  man  need  despair
of  obtaining  it.  "  Let  him  return  unto
the  Lord,  and  He  will  abundantly  par-
don."

How  can  we  doubt  this  when  He
pardoned  a  Manasseh,  a  Magdalene,  a
Saul?  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ
cleanseth  from  all  sin." — Eev.  D.  Fledge,
{See  Addenda  :  Sin  in  oblivion.)

Ctmments--

Ver.  24.  "  /  have  laid  a  snare  for  thee,
O  Babvlon."  Cyrus  turned  the  waters
of  the  Euphrates  into  a  different  channel,
and  so  entered  Babylon  by  the  dried-up
channel  at  night.  Thus  was  the  impreg-
nable city  taken  by  a  stratagem — "  Thou
wast  not  aware;"  for  one-half  of  the
city  was  in  the  enemy's  hands  before  the
other  knew  of  it.

Ver.  34.  Theme:  The  Strength  of
THE  Redeemsb.  **  Their  Redeemer  is
strong."

L  Thtte  ufcrds  suggest  a  difficulty.


If  He  be  strong,  why  does  Israel  so
often  suffer  beneath  the  hand  of  the
oppressor?  If  my  father  have  bread,
why  do  I  hunger  ?

1.  God  does  not  display  His  strength
at  once,  in  order  the  more  to  glorify  it
Lazarus  dies.  Jesus  hastens  not  to
him  until  the  third  day.  Why?  We
had  never  known  He  could  raise  the
dead  if  He  had  displayed  His  power
always  in  healing  the  sick.  Stephen
dies  full  of  faith,  triumphing.  God
could  have  saved  him  from  death,  but
showed  His  power  by  sustaining  him.

2.  God  does  not  at  once  display  His
strength,  <fec.,  in  order  to  make  His
people  lay  hold  of  it  When  did  Jonah,
Manasseh,  <fec.,  cry  loudest?  Was  it
not  when  His  arm  seemed  far  from
helping  them  ?

3.  Another  reason  is  that  He  hereby
chastens  His  people.  There  is  no  greater
punishment  than  God  leaving  us  to  our-
selves.

4.  Hereby  He  instructs  them.  We
are  taught  that  God's  strength  will  never
be  exerted  to  make  us  secure  in  sin  and
indolence.

6.  Often  He  does  not  exert  His
strength  to  liberate  His  people  so  that
He  may  show  mercy  to  their  oppressors.
He  delayed  to  redeem  Israel  out  of  the
hand  of  Pharaoh  that  Moses  might  rea-
son with  him.

II.  These  words  convey  a  blessed
truth.

1.  Consider  the  might  of  the  enemy
from  whom  He  delivers  us.  From  the
power  of  Satan,  the  world,  our  evil
hearts.

2.  Consider  the  completeness  of  the
deliverance.  He  saves  both  body  and
soul,  by  His  own  arm,  without  the  help
of  another.  "  His  own  arm  hath  gotten
Him  the  victory."

3.  Consider  His  strength  upholds  to
tlie  very  end  all  whom  He  hath  redeemed.
He  brings  up  from  Egypt  to  the  goodly
land.  Was  there  one  of  all  the  host
He  brought  out  of  Egypt  that  was
forced  back  to  captivity  ?

IIL  These  words  imply  a  terrible
warning.

1.  To  all  who  oppress  God's  people.
He  who  blesses  the  giver  of  the  cup  of

665


mAf.  SA.


BOM  r  LET /a  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAM.


cold  water  shall  punish  all  those  who
touch  one  of  these  little  ones.

2.  To  all  who  reject  His  help.  As
strong  to  slay  as  to  make  alive.  Seek
His  blessing.  Flee  to  Israel's  strong
Redeemer,  lest  the  plagues  written  in
the  Book  be  experienced  by  you.

Say  not,  *'  I  am  willing  to  enjoy  life
now  and  take  the  consequences  of  it
hereafter."  Say  not,  "If  it  be  right,  I
am  willing  to  expiate  my  crimes."  That
is  but  hanging  garlands  on  the  sword  that
must  enter  your  souL — From  "  /Stems
and  Tmffs,**


Comments —

Vers.  39,  40.  Babylon  deserted  of
INHABITANTS.  This  utter  extinction  of
Babylon  was  not  effected  by  one  stroke,
but  gradually.  Cyrus  took  away  its
supremacy.  Darius  Hystaspes  deprived
it,  when  it  had  rebelled  against  Persia,
of  its  fortifications.  Seleucus  Nicanor
removed  its  citizens  and  wealth  to  Se-
leucia,  which  he  founded  close  by  Baby-
lon. The  Parthians  removed  all  that
was  left  to  Ctesiphon.  Nothing  but  its
walls  were  left  under  the  Roman  Emperor
Adrian,


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  L. :  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  SUGGESTIVE  EXTRACTS.


Ver.  5.  Faces  Zionward.  Among
the  old  Romans  there  prevailed  the
touching  custom  of  holding  the  face  of
every  new-born  infant  towards  the
heavens,  signifying,  by  their  presenting
its  forehead  to  the  stars,  that  it  was
to  look  above  the  world  into  celestial
glories.  It  was  a  vain  superstition ;
but  Christianity  dispels  the  fable,  and
gives  us  a  clear  realisation  of  the  Pagan


yearning.       Young     lives    should     be
turned  with  their  faces  heavenwards.

Ver.  20.  Sin  cast  into  oblivion.
Cicero  said  of  Caesar,  *'  He  forgiveth
nothing  but  injuries  only.*'

"  These  evils  I  deserve,
Tet  despair  not  of  His  final  pardon,
Whose  ear  is  ever  open,  and  His  eye
Gracious  to  readmit  the  sappliant."


CHAPTER  LL

Cbitioil  and  ExEOsnoAL  Notes. — For  Chronological  NoteSf  see  foregoing  chapter.

Qeographical  References. — Ver.  27.  **  The  kingdoms  of  Ararat,  Minni,  and  Ashehenaz,*'
These  nations  of  Western  Asia  are  summoned  to  join  the  Medes  in  their  attack  on  Babylon.
By  *'  Ararat^^  is  meant  the  region  of  Upper  or  Major  Armenia,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountain  ;
by  ** Minni,"  Lower  or  Minor  Armenia;  and  by  ** Ashchenaz,"  probably  Asia  Minor,  in  which
**  Ascania  "  stands.

Personal  Allusions. — Ver.  59.  **  Seraiak,"  brother  to  Baruch  (chap.  xzxiL  12)  and  the
king's  cliamberlain  ;  see  below.  Lit.  Crit.  on  verse.

Literary  Criticisms. — Ver.  1.  ",4  destroying  wind  :"  possibly  this  should  read  **a  destroy-
ing spirit,*'  i.e.,  Cyrus.

Ver.  5.  "  Israel  hath  not  been  forsaken  : "  read,  "  Israel  is  not  widowed  nor  Judah  of  his
God."

Ver.  10.  "  The  Lord  hath  brought  foHh  our  righteousness  ;"  rather,  righteousnesses,  pi.  nipl^j
i.e.,  proofs  that  we  are  righteous.

Ver.  12.  "  Upon  the  walls,"  should  be  against  the  walls.

Ver.  23.  "  /  wiU  also  break  in  pieces : "  Henderson  notes  that  Y&O,  from  y^i^  to  scatter,
break,  dash  in  pieces,  designates  the  war-club  anciently  used  by  warriors  for  the  purpose  of
clearing  away  all  with  whom  they  came  in  contact.

Ver.  41.    *^  Sheshach  :*'  vide  Notes  on  chap.  xxv.  26.

Ver.  50.  '^  Remember  the  Lord  afar  off :"  i.e.,  from  afar;  from  Chaldea,  far  distant  from
Zion,  God's  dwelling-place.

Ver.  59.  "^  quia  prince,"  nn-IJD'lKf,  has  been  variously  rendered.  The  Sq>t.,  Apxiap
lihpwv,  as  if  Seraiah  were  the  distributor  of  the  royal  presents.  The  Vvlg.,  "prince  of  pro-
phecy." Other  renderings  are,  "chief  of  the  caravan,"  "lord  chamberlain;"  but  there  is
warrant  for  the  rendering  as  the  E.V.  Comp.  nn-13P"C^''K,  a  rfian  of  quietness,  1  Chron.
xxii.  9.

666


EO  MI  LET  10  OOMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,  char  U.

SUBJECT  OF  CHAPTER  LI.:  MYSTIC  BABYLON;  ROMANISM  DOOMED.
General  Survey:  Babylon^s  Doom;  Mystio  Babylon*s  Destruction.

i.  The  Median  power,  which  Babylon  formerly  invited  to  unite  with  her  for
Nineveh's  destruction,  was  made  the  instrument  for  her  own  overthrow.  So  in  the
Apocalypse  it  is  revealed  that  some  of  the  kings  who  were  once  vassals  of  the
mystical  Babylon  will  be  the  instruments  in  God's  hands  for  chastising  her  (Rev.
xvii.  16).

ii.  Babylon's  colossal  splendour  formed  no  hindrance  to  God's  purposes  of  her
fall,  for  He  opens  unlooked-for  avenues  along  which  His  judgments  may  invade  the
strongholds  of  evil.  The  Euphrates  of  her  power,  which,  with  mystic  Babylon,  has
flowed  on  for  so  many  centuries,  and  in  which  she  has  trusted  as  her  defence,  the
non  possumus  of  the  Pontifical  arrogance,  may  prove  the  cause  of  her  destruction.
See  Rev.  xvi.  12.  Nor  shall  all  her  vaunted  majesty  and  glory  save  her  in  the
hour  of  invasion,  when  God's  emissaries  of  judgment  flow  in  upon  her.

iii  The  suddenness  of  Babylonia  capture  (vers.  8,  41)  may  have  equal
analogy.  At  a  time  when  she  is  most  exultant,  revelling  in  some  imposing  fes-
tival or  carnival,  as  Babylon  was  feasting  at  the  time  of  its  invasion,  elate  with
pride,  fearless  of  harm,  provoking  God  by  her  sacrilege  of  sacred  things,  then  the
fingers  of  a  man's  hand  shall  write  her  downfall,  and  she  shall  be  ensnared.  See
Rev.  xviil  10,  17.     **  In  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come  !  "

iv.  As  with  Babylon  so  with  Rome,  her  fall  shall  he  total  and  finaly  leaving
her  an  absolute  and  hopeless  ruin.

The  walls  of  Babylon,  of  vast  dimensions,  87  feet  broad  and  360  feet  in  height,
the  palaces  and  vast  architectures  within  (ver.  53),  all  suggested  imperishable
strength  ;  as  indeed  the  vast  system  of  Romanism  does  to-day.  But  all  her  excel-
lency became  a  ruin  (ver.  58),  and  ancient  Babylon  became  a  dreary  wilderness,
unsightly  "  heaps"  (ver.  37).  Alexander  the  Great  made  efforts  to  rebuild  Babylon,
and  employed  2000  workmen  for  two  months  in  clearing  away  the  foundations  of
the  Temple  of  Belus,  preparatory  to  his  project :  but  he  died  in  the  midst  of  his
ambitious  scheme,  and  it  was  abandoned.  Nor  shall  Rome  ever  exalt  her  head
more  when  once  the  hand  of  doom  lays  her  pride  low.  **It  shall  be  found  no
more  at  all"  (Rev.  xviii.  21).

V.  Babylon's  ruin  became  the  signal  for  IsraeVs  release  and  redemption.  The
faithful  Jews  in  captivity  there  found  liberty  once  more,  and  returned  to  rebuild
Jerusalem  and  restore  the  desolations  of  Zion.  Even  so  shall  the  fall  of  Rome  set
free  the  souls  of  men  from  the  galling  captivities  of  superstition,  and  the  true  Israel,
the  Church  of  Christ,  shall  rise  into  honour,  prosperity,  and  power  (Rev.  xix.  1-9).

vi.  Israel  was  admonished  and  enjoined  to  flee  from  Babylon  and  "  deliver  every
man  his  soul"  (vers.  6  and  45);  so  from  mystic  Babylon  the  voice  of  inspiration
urges  men  to  separate  themselves  from  her  sins  and  escape  her  impending  destruction.
**I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not
partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues  "  (Rev.  xviii.  4).

General  Topic  :  The  Predicted  Overthrow  op  Babylon.

Probably  no  people  were  ever  more  luxurious  and  licentious  than  the  Baby-
lonians at  the  time  of  their  overthrow.  Disgusting  excesses  marked  the  pleasures  of
the  table,  and  debauchery  crowned  the  banquet.  Profligacy  especially  character-
ised the  female  sex ;  hence  the  image  in  Revelation  of  mystic  Babylon  as  a  vile
woman  (xvii.  1,  2,  18,  xix.  2,  &c.),  hurled  from  the  seat  of  her  effeminacy  into  total
misery  and  degradation,  is  used  to  represent  Babylon's  doom.

I.  Prophecy  literally  vindicated.  Almost  every  step  in  the  fall  of  Babylon,
and  its  subsequent  reverses,  is  the  accomplishment  of  a  prophecy.

667


CHAP.  LI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  JEREMIAH,

1.  The  name  of  the  victor,  with  his  appointment  by  Providence  to  the  work  of
retribution,  was  given  more  than  a  century  before  his  birth  (Isa.  xlv.  1—3).

2.  The  varied  character  of  the  besieging  host  which  would  be  engaged  in  the  assault
is  minutely  described.  Not  only  the  Medo-Persian  army,  but  auxiliaries  drawn
from  the  highlands  of  Armenia,  the  provinces  of  Asia  Minor,  and  the  great  deserts
bordering  on  the  Indian  Caucasus  (Jer.  1.  41,  42,  li.  11,  27,  28).

3.  Some  leading  circumstances  of  the  capture  are  also  unequivocally  pointed  out.
(1.)  The  intemperate  festivity  of  the  population  (Jer.  li.  57).      (2.)  The  negligence  of
the  guards  in  charge  of  the  portals  of  the  river :  "  gates  not  shut "  (Isa.  xlv.  1).
(3  )  The  remarkable  operation  upon  the  Uujyhrates  (Isa.  xliv.  27 ;  Jer.  1.  38,  li.  32,
36).     (4.)  The  suddenness  and  surprise  of  the  capture  (Jer.  1.  24).

Nothing  can  be  more  exact  that  the  correspondence  between  the  futures  of
Babylon  and  the  language  of  prophecy.  Its  story,  viewed  in  connection  with  the
previous  announcement  dictated  by  the  Spirit  of  inspiration,  is —

i.  A  bright  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Holy  Scripture  and  of  the  divinity
which  breathes  in  its  pages.

ii.  A  confirmation  of  the  religious  system  revealed  in  God's  Word,  from  the
first  promise  made  to  the  first  transgressor,  to  its  perfect  realisation  in  the  Gospel
of  Christ.

II.  Sacred  lessons  emphatically  enforced.  The  records  of  Babylon's  over-
throw should  be  read —

1.  J5y  the  believer,

(1.)  With  trembling  awfy  as  an  illustration  of  the  divine  anger  against  the  sinful-
ness of  man.

(2.)  With  grateful  feelings  2I&0,  as  strengthening  the  conviction  that  the  founda-
tions of  his  faith  and  hope  are  solid.

(3.)  With  assurance  of  the  verity  of  God's  promises^  that,  as  He  fulfilled  the
words  of  awful  retribution,  so  will  He  His  promises  of  gracious  deliverance  :  for
"  light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart."

2.  By  the  enemies  of  God^s  people — with  the  appalling  thought  that  as  Babylon,
the  great  oppressor  of  God's  ancient  people,  has  been  reduced  to  nothingness,  so
certainly  will  all  the  persecuting  enemies  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  of  which  that
people  is  the  selected  type,  be  brought  to  confusion.

3.  By  the  sceptic  and  infidel.  The  whole  case  is  abundantly  admonitory  to
such.  Well  would  it  be  for  them  to  compare  the  convincing  evidences  of  the
religious  system  they  reject  with  the  difficulties  and  hollowness  of  their  own
theories ;  to  remember  that  if  Christianity  be  true^  its  truth  is  awful  to  those  who
repudiate  it ;  and  to  turn  from  their  own  delusive  dogmas  to  receive  the  revelation
of  the  Bible,  while  yet  an  insulted  but  still  merciful  God  is  waiting  to  be  gracious
to  the  chief  of  sinners  through  the  mediation  of  the  Son  of  His  love. — Babylon
and  Nineveh.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  CHAPTER  LL

Ver.  6.    Theme:  Israel  not  aban-  **  Flee  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  B,nd

DONED.  deliver  every  man  his  soul :  be  not  cut

See    Lit,     Crit.     on     verse :     "  Not  oflf  in  her  iniquity."

widowed,''  not  deserted  by  the  Lord,  I.    A  doomed  system   entails  the

who  is  her  Husband.  doom  of  its  votaries.      As  they  who

Comp.  chap,  iii  v.  14;  Homilies  on  will  not   leave   a   sinking  vessel,  sink

p.  60,  "  Banished  yet  still  beloved;"  and  with  her.

66,  ''  God  a  loving  Husband"  et  seq.  IL  Identification  with  a  false  reli-
gion is  culpable  in  God's  regard.    "  Her

Ver.    6.     Theme :    Romanism     rk-  iniquity "  becomes  the  iniquity  of  each

HOUNCED.  individual  adherent,  and  each  will  be
668


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  J E REM  I  A  B,


OHAT.U;


**cut  off"  as  being  responsible  for  and
sharing  her  sins.  Men  cannot  screen
themselves  on  the  plea  that  they  have
always  been  what  they  are,  and  there-
fore they  should  stay  where  they  are.
"  Flee  out,"  &c.

III.  The  soul's  safety  is  jeopardised
by  delusive  systems.  '*  Deliver  every
man  his  soul"

False  beliefs  are  as  fatal  as  no  beliefs.
^^  Refuges  of  lies"  will  be  destroyed,  and
houses  built  on  sand  will  fall.

IV.  Prompt  and  earnest  separation
from  Babylon's  errors  is  enjoined.  '■^Flee
out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon."

1.  We  have  responsibilities  towards
truth,  and  should  jffee/rom  error,

2.  We  have  duties  to  our  souls,  and
should  separate  ourselves  from  known
spiritual  delusions  and  dangers.

3.  We  have  clear  forewarnings  of
judgment,  and  should  ha^te  to  escape
from  the  coming  tribulation,

Note—

"A  time  may  come  when  it  is  well
to  separate  one's  self.  There  may  come
moments  in  the  life  of  a  Church  when
it  will  be  a  duty  to  leave  the  community.
Such  a  moment  is  come  when  the  com-
munity has  become  a  Babylon.  When
the  soul  can  no  longer  find  in  the  Church
the  pure  and  divine  bread  of  life,  it  is
well  "  to  deliver  the  soul  that  it  perish
not  in  the  iniquity  of  the  Church." —
Article  on  Sects  in  Herzog^  R,-Enc.

Ver.  7.  Theme:  Rome's  luxuri-
ance.

"  Babylon  hath  been  a  golden  cup  in
the  Lord's  hand,  that  made  all  the  earth
drunken."

For  the  metaphor  see  Topic,  chap.
XXV.  15  seq.  ;  **  The  wine  cup  of  wrath  "
(p.  474).

C(jnipare  for  identification  of  Babylon
with  Rome,  Rev.  xiv.  8 ;  xvii.  4.

I.  "A  golden  cup"  dazzles  and  fasci-
nates the  beholder.  Men's  eyes  are
bewitched  and  dazed  by  the  glitter  and
splendour  of  gold^  by  the  gilded  errors
of  Rome,  so  that  they  do  not  inquire
what  the  '*  cup  "  contains.  (So  suggests
Origen.)

II.  From  ^^  a  golden  cup"  men  may
drink  maddening  intoxicants.     ''The


nations  have  drunken  of  her  wine :  there-
fore the  nations  are  mad.^*  This  suggests
that  the  errors  and  blandishments  of
Rome,  her  opulence  and  splendour,  stu-
pefy men's  reason  and  conscience,  as
**  wine  "  does  the  inebriate.

III.  In  Rome's  golden  chalice  are  de-
lusive and  destructive  drinks.  "  Mark
well,"  says  Origen,  "in  the  golden  cup
of  Babylon  is  the  poison  of  idolatry,  the
poison  of  false  doctrines,  which  destroy
the  souls  of  men.  I  have  often  seen
such  a  '  golden  cup '  in  the  fair  speeches
of  seductive  eloquence,  and  when  I  have
examined  the  various  ingredients  of  the
golden  chalice,  I  have  recognised  the  cup
of  Babylon."

IV.  From  this  ^^ golden  cup"  the  Lord
administers  judgment  to  Homers  intoxi-
cated dupes.  "  A  golden  cup  in  the  hand
of  the  Lord"  Jehovah  used  ancient
Babylon  to  punish  the  godless  nations
and  apostate  Israel  He  now  v^es  Rome
as  an  agency  of  judgment  on  faithless
souls.  They  who  will  not  use  their  en-
dowments and  opportunities  aright,  who
prostitute  their  reason,  conscience,  and
will  before  the  fascination  of  these
"golden"  errors  of  R(»me,  who  neglect
the  sacred  chalice  of  the  Holy  Bible  and
prefer  to  drink  from  Rome's  cup  of
errors,  God  uses  Romanism  to  punish
such:  "Therefore  God  sends  them  a
strong  delusion,  that  they  may  believe
a  lie  "(2  Thess.  ii.  11).

Ver.  9.    Theme:   Rome's  rejection

OP  HEALING.

L  Health-giving  teaching,  if  received,
might  have  healed  the  errors  of  Rome.
This  was  offered  Babylon ;  her  remedy
lay  in  receiving  God's  Word,  urged  upon
her  by  God's  prophets.  So  with  mystical
Babylon  :  she  has  been  offered  instruc-
tion and  warning  by  Paul  (2  Thess.  ii,
2-9),  by  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  xiii—
xviii.)  Protestantism  has  been  attempt-
ing to  heal  Rome  by  the  literature  dif
fused  and  arguments  addressed  against
Rome's  errors,  and  by  appeals  to  Scrip-
ture truth.

II  Besotted  attachment  to  wrong
leads  to  the  refusal  of  God's  truth.  Saving
doctrines  are  rejected  when  they  would
save  from  cherished  errors  and   beloved

669


OHir.  LL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


Bins  and  profitable  lies.  So  still :  light
shines  in  Christian  teaching  suflScient
to  scatter  the  darkness.  "But  men
love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because
their  deeds  are  evil."  Rome  refuses
healing,  rejects  truth,  because  errors  are
her  traflSc.

III.  From  the  outraged  heavens
doom  hangs  over  deceitful  and  destruc-
tive Rome.  **  Her  sins  have  reached
unto  heaven  "  (Rev.  xviii.  5).  There-
fore *'  her  judgment  reacheth  unto
heaven,"  as  if  pressing  upon  God  the
urgency  of  executing  her  overthrow.
And  certainly  God  hath  sent  the  fore-
warnings  of  Rome's  doom  from  the
heavens  in  His  Word,  and  ere  long  the
thunders  of  His  destructive  wrath  will
sweep  down  upon  the  Antichrist,

Ver.  10.  Theme:  Israel  justified
AGAINST  Babylon.  *'  The  Lord  hath
brought  forth  our  righteousness."

I.  Punishment  of  sinners  testifies  of
the  advantages  of  righteousness.

II.  Overthrow  of  error  testifies  to  the
veracity  of  divine  truths  on  which  right-
eous souls  lived  by  faith.

III.  Defeat  of  God's  foes  testifies  to
the  blessedness  of  His  people,  whom  He
befriends.

IV.  Deliverance  of  the  righteous  tes-
tifies that,  though  their  adversaries  may
for  a  while  prevail,  the  injustice  of  evil-
doers and  the  goodness  of  God's  children
will  ultimately  be  vindicated.

Therefore —

1.  Wait  patiently  under  endurance
of  wrong.  God  will  work  your  justi-
fication   against  evil-doers  (Ps.   xxxvil

2.  Believe  in  God*s  watchfulness  of
you  in  the  day  of  your  oppression.  He
marks  your  conduct  during  your  *'  cap-
tivity," remembers  to  your  account  your
**  righteousness,"  and  will  *^bring  it  forth"
in  due  season.  "  Then  shall  thy  light
break  forth  as  the  morning"  (Isa.  Iviii.
8).

Ver.  13.  Theme:  Rome's  kesouroes
DESOLATED.  "  O  thou  that  dwellest
upon  many  waters,  abundant  in  trea-
sures, thine  end  is  come,  and  the  measure
of  thy  covetousness."
670


"  Many  waters."  Not  only  was  Ba-
bylon protected  and  nourished  by  the
mighty  river  Euphrates,  but  by  nume-
rous canals  and  streams.  These  were
essential  to  her  very  existence — for
drink,  food,  health,  transit,  and  safety.
Thus  with  Romanism,  "  that  sitteth
upon  many  waters"  (Rev.  xvii.  1);  and
**  the  waters  are  peoples,  and  multitudes,
and  nations,  and  tongues "  (ver.  15).
These  form  the  tributary  streams  to
nourish  Rome  by  gifts,  money,  popular
sympathy.

"Abundant  treasures."  The  im-
mense booty  of  Nineveh,  the  plunder  of
Jerusalem,  the  tributes  which  Syrian
and  Phoenician  cities  furnished,  the
fruitfulness  of  the  Babylonian  territory
itself.     Comp.  Rev.  xviii.  12,  19.

*'  Her  end  come."  The  words  are,
**Thy  end  is  come,"  i.e.,  the  ret7'ibution
for  (or  limitation  of  the  period  of)  thy
covetousness.  Babylon*s  day  for  spoil-
ing others  and  enriching  herself  closed.
So  shall  Rome's  (Rev.  xviii.)

Vers.  15-19.  Theme:  An  appeal  to
God's  works.

See  Homily  on  p.  219,  chap,  x,
12-16,  verbatim.

Ver.  25.  Theme:  Volcanic  Rome.
**  0  destroying  mountain,^*

The  imagery  here  is  of  a  volcano,
whose  burning  lava  *'  rolls  down,"  itself
*'  a  burnt  mountain ; "  lit.,  a  mount  of
burning.

Such  was  Babylon  under  Nebuchad-
nezzar; its  destructive  energy  was  like
the  fierce  outbreak  of  volcanic  fires,  and
its  rapid  collapse  was  as  a  volcano  whose
fires  had  burned  themselves  extinct.

Rome,  which  has  raised  itself  up  to
heaven  in  lofty  assumption^  which  has
surrounded  itself  with  bewitching  cliarms^
like  the  luxuriancies  of  nature  that
fibound  in  warm  and  fertile  volcanic
regions,  which  has  proudly  domineered
like  a  lofty  mountain  over  surrounding
lands,  will  also,  like  a  volcano,  bring
ruin  on  itself  and  on  all  it  overshadows
by  the  fires  which  are  ready  to  burst
forth  in  God's  time.

I.  A  volcano  impresses  beholders  with
its  majestic  beauty.     So  does  Rome.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


OHAP.   Urn


IL  A  volcanic  mountain  wears  the
appearance  of  enduring  strength.  So
does  Rome.

III.  Near  a  volcano  residents  dwell
oblivious  of  perils.  So  with  the  adhe-
rents of  Rome.

IV.  The  absence  of  fiery  portents  in
a  volcano  is  a  sign  to  the  wise  of  gather-
ing fury.  So  when  Rome  shows  no
threatening  signs  she  is  most  seductive.

V.  Within  a  volcano  slumber  ruin-
ous fires.  And  Rome  will  be  both  de-
stroyed herself  and  all  who  trust  in  her.

Note  :  The  mystical  Babylon  will  be
overthrown  with  fire:  Rev.  xvii.  16,
xviii.  8,  9,  18 — "the  smoke  of  her
burning.**

Vers.  30-33.  Babylon*s  capture  by
Cyrus.

For  historic  records  comp.  on  chap,
XXV.  pp.  473,  474.

Note  :  Prophets  beforehand  and  his-
torians afterwards  coincide  in  describing
the  events.

Ver.  33.  Theme:  A  coming  har-
vest. "  Yet  a  little  while  and  the  time
of  the  harvest  shall  come."

The  noble  practice  of  Jewish  antiquity
was  that  the  harvest  should  never  be
gathered  in  till  the  first  ripe  sheaf  was
brought  into  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,
and  presented  as  an  acknowledgment  to
the  Lord  of  the  harvest  (Lev.  ix.  14).
This  was  to  connect  the  Giver  with  His
gifts,  to  associate  our  temporal  mercies
with  the  sanctuary  of  religion,  and  to
hold  communion  with  God  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  His  favours.

Ought  we  not  to  be  thankful  to  the
God  of  our  mercies  when  we  see  a  smil-
ing spring  followed  by  a  joyful  harvest,
&c.  ?  Always  the  practice  of  saints
(Ps.  Ixv.)

The  very  constancy  of  Nature  banishes
our  Creator  from  our  thoughts.  We
need  to  be  told  there  is  going  on
everywhere  around  us  a  vast  system
utterly  independent  of  human  wisdom  ;
need  to  be  reminded  of  invisible  domi-
nion and  concealed  omnipotence.

Text  points  us  to  another  harvest ;
and  the  plain  doctrine  is  every  man  has
a  Jtarvest  of  his  own  daily  ripening,  and


may  be  unexpectedly  gathered  in  : — A
harvest  of  punishment  for  the  ungodly
(from  this  our  only  refuge  is  the  Cross
of  Christ)  ;  of  mercy  to  the  penitent
(through  Christ) ;  of  consolation  to  the
sorrowful ;  of  final  blessedness  to  the
righteous.

I.  There  is  a  harvest  of  punishment
for  the  ungodly.  Prophecy  against
Babylon,  type  of  all  sinners.

Life  is  the  seedtime  of  an  immortal
harvest.  It  is  the  scene  of  a  mighty
preparation  ;  it  is  the  first  step  of  an
infinite  series  ;  it  is  the  dawn  of  an
everlasting  day.  We  are  beginning  to
be  what  we  shall  for  ever  be.  In  your
nature  are  united  mortality  and  immor-
tality.

God  has  made  a  seedtime  of  iniquity
the  certain  forerunner  of  a  harvest  of
shame  and  punishment — partly  present,
partly  future.  He  has  laid  it  down  as
an  unalterable  maxim  of  His  govern-
ment that  what  a  man  soweth  he  shall
reap.  The  law  that  regulates  the  return
of  day  and  night  and  the  renewal  of
seedtime  and  harvest  is  not  more  sure
than  that  sin  brings  sorrow  here  or  here-
after. These  are  things  of  every  day's
experience.  A  wild  and  wasteful  youth
makes  an  unhappy  and  unrespected
manhood.  He  who  neglects  the  culti-
vation of  his  mind  and  the  formation
of  his  character  when  young  can  never
repair  the  damage  afterwards  ;  just  as  if
the  husbandmen  let  his  seedtime  pass
without  sowing,  the  whole  year  is  lost
to  him  beyond  recovery.  The  same  law
prevails  in  much  higher  matters.  The
man  that  lives  without  Christ  usually
dies  without  Him ;  and  he  who  dies
without  Christ  perishes  to  all  eternity
without  Him.  Every  day  the  sinner
carries  a  brand  to  his  own  burning.

Inquire  what  seed  you  are  sowing!
What  a  harvest  you  expect  to  reap  ?
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  deaih.^^  "  The  way
of  transgressors  is  hard."  And  if  it
be  solemn  now  for  sinners  to  eat  the
fruit  of  their  own  ways,  to  be  caught  in
their  own  snare,  and  even  on  earth  to
be  pierced  through  with  many  sorrows —
what  will  it  be  in  eternity,  when  *'  right-
eousness shall  be  laid  to  the  line  and
judgment  to  the  plummet,"  when  they

671


OHAP.  U.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


shall  be  resigned  to  the  evil  they  have
chosen,  and  when  God  shall  verify  to  the
wicked  the  anticipations  of  their  own
remorse,  and  give  them  bread  (the  bread
of  sorrow)  to  eat  unto  the  full  1  We
rejoice  in  the  return  of  harvest  ;  but
know  you  not  tbat  there  is  a  harvest  of
which  God  is  the  proprietor,  angels  are
the  reapers,  and  the  souls  of  men  are  to
be  gathered  in  %  Know  you  not  that
the  world  is  ripening  for  the  harvest,
and  you  are  ripening  with  it^  Know
you  not  that  that  Saviour  who  was  once
crucified  on  Calvary,  and  has  been  often
crucified  by  you,  is  about  to  ascend  the
throne  of  judgment,  and  to  ^^  send  forth
His  angels  and  gather  out  of  His  king-
dom all  things  that  offend,  and  cast
them  into  the  lake  of  fire  ?  "  Soon  shall
the  signal  be  given,  ";Z%ri^s<  in  thy  sickle.'*

"  Yet  a  little  while,"  All  your  hope
hangs  upon  those  two  short  words — a
little  while.  What  a  revolution  may  be
accomplished !  You  may  flee  for  refuge ;
may  exercise  repentance  and  faith  ;  may
obtain  salvation  with  eternal  glory  ;  may
share  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the
Spirit ;  may  have  the  tide  of  damnation
rolled  back  ;  may  have  incorruptible
seed  sown  in  your  souls.

It  is  but  "a  little  while"  Oh,  delay
not.  Escape  for  life.  Listen  not  to
tempter.  Better  Councillor  asks  your  heed.

II.  A  harvest  of  mercy  to  the  peni-
tent. "They  that  sow  in  tears,"  &c.
AH  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel  cove-
nant go  to  assure  peace  and  pardon  to
those  who,  renouncing  self-dependence
ftnd  relying  on  the  mercy  of  God  in
Christ,  place  all  their  hope  where  God
placed  all  their  help.

But  we  are  no  strangers  to  the  anxiety
of  the  penitent  on  this  head.  Our
fears  are  usually  in  proportion  to  our
hopes.  You  may  be  assaulted  with
many  temptations,  the  subject  of  many
apprehensions,  doubtful  whether  your
sins  are  not  too  many  and  aggravated,
alarmed  lest  you  should  not  have  come
aright.  "  We  are  not  ignorant  of  Satan's
devices"  nor  of  the  misgivings  of  the
burdened  mind.  But  ^'strong  consola-
tion" is  promised  to  them  that  flee  for
refuge.  Prayers  and  tears  and  desires
for  pardon  and  purity  offered  by  faith
672


in  Christ  will  produce  a  harvest  nothing
else  will.  The  promise  is  sure  :  "  Him
that  Cometh."     "  Ask  and  you  shall."

III.  A  harvest  of  consolation  to  the
sorrowful  "  Comfort  ye."  "  He  that
goeih  forth^'  dec  Many  afflictions  are
the  Christian's  portion.  But  God  **gives
songs  in  the  night."  And  the  time  is
limited — the  night  is  followed  by  morn-
ing. **  Our  light  afflictions  hut  for  a
moment — far  more."  God  tempers  and
mitigates  trial.  God  fortifies  the  mind
under  it,  strengthening  to  bear  that  the
prospect  of  which  would  have  over-
whelmed. Internal  peace  in  outward
trial.  Harvest  now — hereafter.  No
one  of  that  palm-bearing  company  regrets
past  trials  (Rev.  vii.  9-14).

IV.  A  harvest  of  final  blessedness
to  the  righteous.  "  Be  faithful  unto
death,"  &c.— /S.  Thodey,  1825.

Ver.  41.  "Sheshach."  Comp.  p.
475.

Ver.  45.  Quitting  Babylon.  See  on
ver.  6.

Ver.  46.  Theme:  Forewarnings  op

EVIL.

**  Ye  fear  for  the  rumour  that  shall  he
heard"

The  fall  of  Babylon  was  to  be  pre-
ceded by  a  state  of  disquiet,  men's  minds
being  unsettled  partly  by  rumours  of
the  warlike  preparations  of  the  Medes
and  of  actual  invasions,  in  repelling  one
of  which  Neriglissar  fell ;  partly  by  in-
testine feuds,  in  which  Evil-Merodach
and  Latorosoarchod  was  murdered.  So
before  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem  by  the
Romans  the  Church  had  similar  warn-
ings (Matt.  xxiv.  6,  7).

I.  Opportunity  precedes  impending
judgment.

IL  God  thus  ameliorates  the  seve-
rity of  grave  crises.

III.  Responsibility  is  thereby  thrown
upon  us  to  heed  His  warnings  and  utilise
the  interval  of  grace.

IV.  Neglect  of  such  interludes,  dur-
ing which  God  stays  the  judgment,  much
increases  the  anguish  when  the  storm  at
length  hursts.

V.  Spiritual  wisdom   in  discerning


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


OHAP.  LI.


ilie  propitious  hour  is  given  to  and  du-
tinguishes  those  who  are  appointed  to
salvation.

VI.  Senselessness  of  danger  amid
these  forewarnings  shows  men  to  be
ripe  for  destruction.

These  Babylonians  laughed  danger  to
scorn  on  the  very  night  when  doom
fell  upon  them.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye
shall  all  likewise  perish."

Ver.  48.  Theme:  Joy  in  heaven
OVER  Babylon's  fall.

L  Songs  of  judgment  upon  the  enemies
of  Israel.  See  Exod.  xv.  5  seq.  ;  Ps.
cxviii.  12,  15,  16;  Rev.  zviii.  20.

IL  Songs  of  deliverance  for  God^i
'people  redeemed,     Comp.  vers.  49,  50.

This  is  in  eflfect  the  joy  described  in
Luke  XV.  6,  7.

IIL  Songs  of  celebration  of  God's
promises  fulfilled.

For  the  heavenly  hosts  surely  watch
the  accomplishment  of  Jehovah's  pledges
to  His  afflicted  people,  and  hail  the  day
of  their  completion  (Isa.  xliii.  23).

Ver.  50.  Theme:  Revived  memories
OF  SPIRITUAL  PRIVILEGES.  *'  liememhev
the  Lord  afar  offy  and  let  Jerusalem  come
into  your  mind.'*

This  is  an  appeal  to  the  Jews  to  turn
all  their  longings  Zionwaid  so  soon  as
Cyrns  opens  Babylon  for  them  to  escape.

I.  Sorrowing  exiles  of  Zion  cherish
tender  memories  of  long -lost  privi-
leges.

IL  Freedom  regained  should  be
promptly  used  for  our  glad  return  to
God.

III.  Sacred  heritages  in  God  and
Zion  await  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord
on  their  return.

Or,  Valedictory  address  to  mission-
aries or  emigrants.

Lange's  Commentary  says—
"  This  text  may  be  used  at  the  send-
ing out  of  missionaries  or  the  departure
of  emigrants.     Occasion  may  be  taken
to  speak —

**  1.  Of  THE  GRACIOUS  HELP  AND  DE-
LIVERANCE which  the  Lord  hath  hitherto
shown  to  the  departing,  '  Ye  that  have
escaped  of  the  sword.'


**2.  They  may  be  admonished  to
FIDELITY  in  that  distant  land.

*'  (1.)  In  ^remembering  the  Lord^  i.e.,
ever  remaining  sincerely  devoted  to  Him,
and  trusting  Him  as  the  shield  of  our
salvation.

**  (2.)  In  faithfully  serving  Jerusalem,
i.e.f  the  Church  and  cause  of  Christ,
with  all  their  powers,  keeping  the  pro-
gress of  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  ever
near  their  hearts."

Ver.  66.  Theme :  Recompenses.
"  The  Lord  God  of  recompenses  shall
surely  requite."

L  All  history  illustrates  and  estab-
lishes this  fact.

Not  an  evil  has  been  committed,  not
a  good  has  been  done,  but  has  been
followed  with  recompense.  The  sin  of
Adam,  of  Cain,  of  Sodom,  of  the  Antedi-
luvians, all  were  recompensed.

Nor  does  good  fail  of  reward.  **  He
is  not  unmindful  to  forget  your  labour
of  love."  Even  the  gift  of  a  cup  of
cold  water  is  to  be  rewarded.  Comp.
Matt.  XXV.  35  seq.

II.  The  requiting  of  men's  deeds  often
finds  illustration  in  the  laws  of  our
physical  and  mental  being.

God  has  so  constituted  us  that  evil  is
productive  of  evil  and  good  of  good.  By
the  very  laws  of  our  nature  the  drunkard
is  recompensed  by  loss  of  reason,  the
libertine  by  loss  of  health,  <fec.  ;  so  by
the  same  laws  of  our  being  the  kind,  the
compassionate,  <fec.,  are  requited  with
joy,  peace,  <kc. ;  a  "great  recompense  of
reward."

These  are  the  natural  recompenses
which  flow  from  the  operation  of  Nature's
laws  apart  from  God's  judgments.

III.  There  still  remains  to  be  super-
added the  judicial  recompense,  which
the  Righteous  Judge  will  administer.

*'  He  will  render  to  every  man  accord-
ing to  his  deeds:"  deeds  of  wickedness
by  the  frown  of  His  anger  and  the  sen-
tence, '*  Depart,  ye  cursed  ; "  deeds  of
righteousness  by  the  smile  of  His  favour
and  the  welcome,  "  Come,  ye  blessed."

IV.  Yet  notwithstanding  this  natural
and  judicial  recompense,  men  are  not
deterred  from  evil  nor  constrained  to
do  good.

2  u  673


CHAP.  Lt.


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


How  astounding  the  depravity  of  the
human  heart !  "  Desperately  wicked  "
indeed,  when  the  fearful  consequences
of  evil  and  the  blessed  results  of  good,
here  and  hereafter,  fail  to  influence  the
heart.

V.  From  the  ultimate  consequences
of  our  deeds  there  can  he  no  possible
escape.  "  The  Lord  God  of  recompenses
ehall  surely  requite."  "Vengeance  is
mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."
*'With  the  merciful  Thou  wilt  show
Thyself  merciful,  with  the  upright  man
Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  upright ;  with
the  pure  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  pure,
and  with  the  fro  ward  Thou  wilt  show
Thyself  froward."

Compare  "Walks  with  Jeremiah." —
Fledge,

Ver.  58.  "  The  broad  walls  op
Babylon."

Tiiese  walls  were  85  English  feet
in  width  (according  to  Herodotus),
32  feet  (according  to  Strabo  and
Q.  Cuitius).  Their  height  was  335
feet  (Herodotus),  235  (Pliny),  150
(Curtius),  75  (Strabo).  But  as  there
was  an  outer  and  inner  enclosure,  they
may  not  all  have  been  referring  to  the
same  walls,  or  the  outer  wall  may  have
differed  in  height  in  different  parts.
The  entire  length  of  the  walls  was
(according  to  lowest  estimate)  41  miles,
and  by  other  authorities  is  estimated
at  48,  and  by  Herodotus  at  60  miies  in
extent.

Berosus  says  that  triple  walls  en-
compassed the  outer,  and  the  same
Jiumber  the  inner  city ;  and  that  Cyrus
ordered  the  outer  walls  to  be  demo-
lished. A  cylindrical  inscription  records
that  Esar-haddon  was  the  real  builder
of  the  walls  of  Babylon,  and  that  Ne-
buchadnezzar only  completed  them.

"  Her  high  gates."  One  hundred
in  number,  twenty-five  on  each  of  the
four  sides  of  the  square-built  city.  An
ancient  inscription  exists  which  says,
"  In  the  thresholds  of  the  great  gates  I
inserted  folding-doors  of  brass,  with  very
strong  railings  and  gratings  (?)."

Ver.    59.     Seraiah   carrying   the

PREDICTION     OF     DELIVERANCE    TO     THE

EXILES  IN  Babylon.
674


Zedekiah  the  king  may  have  jour-
neyed voluntarily  to  Babylon  in  order
to  obtain  some  favour  from  Nebuchad-
nezzar, or  because  he  was  summoned
to  be  present,  as  Nebuchadnezzar's
vassal,  on  some  state  occasion ;  or
Nebuchadnezzar  might  have  distrusted
Zedekiah^ s  fidelity,  and  have  demanded
an  explanation  of  the  presence  of
those  ambassadors  who  met  that  year
at  Jerusalem  from  Moab,  <kc.  (chap,
xxvii.  3).

Jeremiah  used  the  opportunity  for
intrusting  Seraiah,  the  king's  chief
attendant,  with  these  predictions  for  the
exiles  at  Babylon.  (He  had  already  sent
them  a  letter  full  of  affection  and  hope,
chap,  xxix.)

As  Zedekiah's  retinue  paused  each
night  on  the  journey  across  the  desert,
it  is  quite  conjectural  that  Seraiah,  his
chief  courier,  may  have  read  to  the
king  the  contents  of  this  prophetic
roll.  '*  What  an  interesting  subject  for
conjecture  (says  Wordsworth)  does  this
view  open  upon  us  !  How  many
thoughts  may  have  passed  through  the
mind  of  the  king  and  of  Seraiah  his
chamberlain  at  the  time !  How  many
conversations  may  they  have  had — or
certainly  might  they  have  had — con-
cerning the  destiny  of  Jerusalem  and  of
Babylon,  and  concerning  things  in  the
far-off  future — the  liberation  and  return
of  the  captives  of  Israel  from  Babylon
by  the  same  road  on  which  they  were
travelling ;  and  even  with  regard  to
blessings  more  remote,  which  Jeremiah
had  pre-announced  —  the  graces  and
glories  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  I "

Ver.  63.  The  prophetic  roll  sunk
IN  THE  Euphrates.

Not  in  order  to  destroy  it,  but  as
symbolic  of  events  to  come.  It  signi-
fied that  Babylon  should  he  likewise
overwhelmed  and  sink  from  sight.  It
foreshadowed  the  like  fate  of  mystic
Babylon — Antichristian  Rome  (see  Rev.
xviii.  21,  "  A  mighty  angel  took  up
a  stone,"  <kc.)  The  reiteration  of  the
"Weird  and  pensive  words —

"  They  shall  be  weary,**  is  also
suggestive.  They  were  the  final  words
Jeremiah's     prophecy    contained     (ver.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.  ohap  U.


/J8),   and   their  reiteration   as  the  roll  the   Chaldeans^   a  worn-out  power— •

sank  would  pronounce  (what  the  words  fit  requiem  to  accompany  the  symbolie

imply)  the  decayed  energy  and  life  of  burial  of  Babylon.

ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  LI. :    HISTORICAL  SUMMARY  OF  EVENTS  IN

BABYLON S  PALL.

"  In  his  father's  absence  Belshazzar  gates  must  have  been  a  neglect  of  this

took  the  direction  of  afi^airs  within  the  kind.     Had  the  sentries  even  kept  proper

city,  and  met  and  foiled  for  a  consider-  watch,  the  enemy's  approach  must  have

able  time  all  the  assaults  of  the  Persians,  been  perceived.

He  was  young  and  inexperienced,  but  "  Following  the  example  of  their
he  had  the  counsels  of  the  queen-mother  king,  the  Babylonians  gave  themselves
to  guide  and  support  him,  as  well  as  up  for  the  night  to  orgies,  in  which  reli-
those  of  the  various  lords  and  officers  gious  frenzy  and  drunken  excess  formed
of  the  court.  So  well  did  he  manage  a  strange  and  revolting  medley,
the  defence,  that  after  awhile  Cyrus  '*  Meanwhile,  mitside  the  dtyy  in
despaired ;  and,  as  a  last  resource,  ven-  silence  and  darkness^  the  Persians  watdied
tured  on  a  stratagem  in  which  it  was  at  two  points  where  the  Euphrates  en-
clear  that  either  he  must  succeed  or  tered  and  left  the  walls.  Anxiously
perish.  they  noted  the  gradual  sinking  of  the

"  Withdrawing   the   greater   part   of  water  in  the  river-bed ;  still   more  an-

the  army  from  the  vicinity  of  the  city,  xiously  they   watched   to   see   if  those

and   leaving   behind    him    only  certain  within    the    walls    would    observe    the

corps    of   observation,    Cyrus   marched  suspicious  circumstjmce  and  sound  an

away  up  the  course  of  the  Euphrates  alarm  through  the  town.     Should  such

for  a  certain  distance,   and  there  pro-  an    alarm    be  given,    all    their   labours

ceeded  to  make  a  vigorous  use  of  the  would  be  lost.     If,  when  they  entered

spade.     His  soldiers  dug  a  channel  or  _  the  river-bed,  they  found  the  river  walls

channels  from  the  Euphrates,  by  means  manned,  and  the  river  gates  fast  locked,

of  which  a  great  portion  of  its  waters  they   would   be   indeed    *  caught   in   a

could  be  drawn  off,  and  hoped  in  this  trap*    (Herod,    i.    191).     Enfiladed   on

way  to  render  the  natural  course  of  the  both   sides   by   an    enemy   they    could

river  to  be  fordable.  neither  see   nor  reach,  they  would  be

"  When  all  was  prepared,  Cyrus  deter-  overwhelmed  and  destroyed  by  his  mis-

mined  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of  a  certain  siles  before  they  could  succeed  in  making

festival,  during  which  the  whole  popula-  their  escape.     But  as  they  watched,  no

tion  were  wont  to  engage  in  drinking  sounds  of  alarm  reached  them,  only  a

and  revelling,  and  then  silently,  in  the  confused  noise  of  revel  and  riot,  which

dead  of  the  night,  to  turn  the  water  of  showed    that   the    i;nhappy   townsmen

the   river   and   make   his   attack.     All  were  quite  unconscious  of  the  approach

fell  out  as  he  hoped  and  wished.     The  of  danger.

festival  was  even  held  with  greater  pomp  *'  At   last   shadowy   forms  began    to

and  splendour  than  usual,  for  Belshazzar,  emerge  from  the  obscurity  of  the  river-

with  the  natural  insolence  of  youth,  to  bed,  and  on  the  landing-places  opposite

mark    his   contempt   of    the   besieging  the  river  gates  scattered  clusters  of  men

army,  abandoned  himself  wholly  to  the  grew  into  solid  columns ;  the  undefended

delights  of  the  season,  and  himself  en-  gateways  were  seized,  a  war-shout  was

tertained  a  thousand  lords  in  his  palace,  raised,  the  alarm  was  taken  and  spread,

Elsewhere  the   rest  of   the    population  and  swift  runners  started  off  to  *  show

was  occupied  in  feasting  and  dancing,  the  king  of  Babylon  that  his  city  was

Drunken  riot  and  mad  excitement  held  taken  at  one  end*  (Jer.  IL  31).     In  the

possession  of  the  town ;  the  siege  was  darkness  and   confusion   of   the   night

forgotten  ;    ordinary    precautions    were  a   terrible  massacre  ensued  (Xenophon,

neglected.     The  non-closing  of  the  river  Cyrop.  vii  5),     The  drunken  revellers

675


etAK  ttt.


BOMIL^TIC  COMMENTARY:  JEHEMtAH,


could  make  no  resistance.  The  king,
paralysed  with  fear  at  the  awful  hand'
writing  upon  the  wall,  which,  too  late,
had  warned  him  of  his  peril,  could  do
nothing  even  to  check  the  progress  of
the  assailants,  who  carried  all  before
them  everywhere.  Bursting  into  the
palace,  a  band  of  Persians  made  their
way  to  the  presence  of  the  monarch  and
slew  him  on  the  scene  of  his  impious
revelry.  Other  bands  carried  fire  and
sword  through  the  town  (Xenophon,
Cyrop.  vii.  5).  When  morning  came,
Cyrus  found  himself  undisputed  master
of  the  city,  which,  if  it  had  not  despised
his  efforts,  might  with  the  greatest  ease
have  baffled  them,*' — Robinson* i  Ancient
Monarchies^  yoL  iii  p.  515.


"  The  Persians  came  upon  them  un-
awares, and  on  account  of  the  extent  of
the  city,  as  is  said  by  those  who  dwelt
there,  when  the  extremities  of  it  were
taken,  the  Babylonians  who  dwelt  in
the  middle  of  it  were  7iot  aware  that
they  were  captured,  but  were  dancing
at  the  time  (for  it  happened  to  be  a
festival),  and  were  rejoicing,  until  they
perceived  it  in  very  deed." — Herodotus,
i.  191.

'*  Babylon  was  more  like  a  nation  th?.n
a  city,  and  it  is  said  that  when  it  was
taken,  some  of  its  inhabitants  did  not
hear  of  the  capture  till  the  third  day,** —
Aristotle,  Folit.,  iii.  c  1.


CHAPTER  LIL


Cbitioal  and  Exeqetigal  Koteb. — This  chapter  forms  a  historical  appendix  to  the  Book
•f  Jeremiah.  Its  authorship  is  conjectural.  They  who  think  Jeremiah  penned  it  urge  that
the  closing  words  of  chap,  li.,  *'Thu8  far  the  words  of  Jeremiah,"  really  ended  the  original
form  of  the  book.  Yet  this  chapter  may  have  been  a  separate  roll,  penned  earlier  than  chap.
li.,  and  now  added  to  the  book  as  supplying  additional  details  to  those  be  gave  in  chap,  xxxix.;
or,  indeed,  he  may  have  written  it,  copying  part  of  the  Book  of  Kings  (2  Kings  zxiv.  18,
xxT.  21)  as  a  historical  preface  to  his  Book  of  Lamentations.  Others  urge  that  the  men  of  the
Great  Synagogue  took  the  chapter  from  Kings  and  added  it  here.  Others  suggest  Ezra.  Probably
some  unknown  hand  appended  the  account  from  Kings,  adding  to  that  account  other  items  which
valuable  documents  in  his  possession  supplied.

For  Chronology  of  the  Chapter  and  General  NoteSj  vide  chaps,  zxxiv.,  xxxix.  in  toe.

The  DATES  given  in  vers.  2b-30  differ  from  those  in  other  Scripture  accounts.  The  Jir^
deportation  of  Jews  under  Nebuchadnezzar  is  ascribed  to  ** the  seventh  year"  of  Nebuchadnezzar's
reign  ;  but  the  numeral  here  must  be  the  seventeenth,  the  **  ten  "  having  dropped  out  of  the
text;  for  the  earliest  deportation  was  in  the  eighth  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings xxiv.  12),
and  the  captives  were  far  more  numerous  than  those  here  reckoned.  Most  probably  the  depor-
tations mentioned  here  are  all  connected  with  the  final  war  with  Zedekiah  ;  and  even  then  the
dates  are  one  year  too  early  throughout.     See  in  verses  below.


SUBJECT  OF  THE  CHAPTER:  CAPTURE  OP  JERUSALEM,

See  for  homiletic  arrangements  of  events,  "  The  Siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nehuchad-
nezzar^**  pp.  599,  660,  and  chap,  xxxix.

HOMILIES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  CHAPTER  Ul.


Vers.  1-11.  Theme:  The  captivity

OF  JUDAH.

L  The  immediate  causes  of  the
captivity  (vers.  1-4).

1.  Moral.  "  He  did  that  which  was
evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."

(1.)  This  is  the  divine  summing  up
of  Lam.  i.  6.

(2.)  The  history  of  every  nation  and
of  every  individual  proves  that  sin
against  God  as  surelv  brings  ruin  as
676


that   any  physical   cause   produces  its
legitimate  effect

(3.)  This  law  in  God's  moral  universe
is  an  all-sufficient  answer  to  the  mate-
rialist of  any  and  every  age.  (a.)  A
universe  without  a  moral  cause  could
have  no  moral  law.  (b.)  A  class  of
beings  without  a  moral  nature  could  not
be  legitimate  subjects  of  such  a  law.
(c.)  But  the  law  exists,  and  mankind
are  subjects  of  it ;  therefore,  <fcc.  <fec.


BOMtLBTlC  COMMENT  ART:  JEREMtAH,  chap.  tit.


2.   The  political  cause  {\er.  S).    "Zede-  1.  Nowhere  are  found  mor\3  striking

kiah  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Baby-  illustrations  of  the  hardness  and  hlind-

lon.'*  ness  which  impenitence  produces  than  do

(1.)  The  invasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  furnish,
was  politically  just,      (a.)  Zedekiah  ac-  2.   Nowhere  are  found  more  striking

cepted   the  throne  of  Judah   from   the  illustrations  of  the  mercy  and  forbear-

hands  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  his  vassal.  ance  of  Almighty  God.
(b.)  Every  principle  of  good  faith  bound  3.  Nowhere  are  found  more  striking

Zedekiah  to  be  true  to  his  Babylonian  illustrations   of  the  divine  truths   "  He

master,      (c.)    To   this   course   he    was  that,    being  often   reproved,  hardeneth

advised  by  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  nay,  his  neck,   shall  suddenly   be  destroyed,

commanded  by  God  (Jer.  xxvii.  12-14).  and  that  without  remedy  "  (Prov.  xxix.

(d.)  Zedekiah's    rebellion   was   no   less  1). — Hev.  D.  G.  Hughes,
perfidious,   in   view  of  his  relation  to

Nebuchadnezzar,  than  was  his  disobe-  Ver.  3.   Theme :  Rebellion  and  ven-

dience  to  God.  OBANCE.      "  Through  the  anger  of  the

II.    The   terrible  sufferings  which  Lord  it  came  to  pass  .  .  .  that  Zedekiah

immediately  preceded  the   captivity  rebelled^
(vers.  5-11).  i.  Anger   in   God*s   heart  against

1.  The  city  was  besieged  for  the  space  His  covenant ^  yet  now  apostate,  people.
of  tioo  years  and  a  half  iL  God's  anger  in  action  :    "  Till

(1.)  This  was  a  time  of  terrible  suf-  He  had  cast  them  out  of  His  presence.'*

fering  (Lam.  iv.  4-10).     (a.)  The  chil-  Comp.  2  Kings  xxiii.  2Q,  27.
dren  perished  with  hunger  and  thirst.  iii.  Human    agencies    op    punish-

(6.)    The   dunghills   were   searched    for  ment.     **  It  came  to  pass  that  Ze<ie^ia^

scraps  of  ofial.     (c.)  Mothers  cooked  and  rebelled y*'  ie.,  against  Nebuchadnezzar;

ate  their  own  children,     (d.)  The  com-  and  that  was  the  moving  cause  of  Jeru-

plexion  of  men  grew  black  with  famine.  salem's  destruction.      God  exercised  no

(e.)  What  a  type  of  the  sufi'erings  of  all  restraint  upon  Zedekiah  to  prevent  his

who  reject  God  1  rebelling   and    thus   involving  Judah's

2.  At  the  end  of  the  siege,  when  the  overthrow.

city  was  taken,  the  sufferings  were  still         iv.  Vengeance    the    requital    of

more  terrible.  A  violated  oath.     He  '*  rebelled,"  not-

(1.)  Zedekiah,   who  with    his  wives  withstanding  his  sacred  oath  of  fealty  to

and  sons,  and  men  of  war,  fled  from  the  Nebuchadnezzar,   and    uotwithstandino

captured   city,    was    overtaken    in    the  all  God's  commands.      Comp.  2  Chron.

plain  of  Jericlio,  brought  before  Nebu-  xxxvi.  13.

chadnezzar,   who   ordered   the   sons  of  Thus  we  see  why  God  sometimes  places
Zedekiah  to  be  slain  before  their  father's  ungodly  rulers  over  a  country — to  punish
eyes,  and  then  Zedekiah's  own  eyes  to  it  for  its  sins  with  degradation  and  de-
be  "  dug  out ;"  and  in  this  pitiable  con-  struction.
dition  he  was  taken   to   Babylon,  cast

into   prison,    where   in    blindness    and  Ver.  6.   Theme:   Famine.     *^  The  fa-

wretchedness  he  languished  till  the  day  mine  was  sore  in  the  city"  <kc.
of  his  death.  L  Bread  is  the  gift  of  God.

(2.)  Thousands   of    the   unfortunate  1.  In  the  first  instance  it  was  the  pro-

people   were    carried   away   captive  to  duct  of  His  creative  power,  not  as  now,

Babylon,  whose  sufferings   have  never  the  result  of  growth.     This  is  obvious,

been  written.  The  first  grain  of  wheat  could  not  have

(3.)  But  over  all  this  must  be  written  proceeded  from  another  grain  :  it  wo*  a

for  the  confusion  or  conviction  of  men  :  direct  creation.

*'  Righteous  art  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  and  2.  Its  very  growth  is  the  result  of  His

upright  are  Thy  judgments ! "  (Ps.  cxix.  laws.     Let  them  be  suspended:  no  rain,

137).  &c.,  and  the  sower  might  sow  in  vain.

Practical  Lessons^"

677


OBAP.  LH.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  JEREMIAH,


n.  Breads  God*s  gift,  withheld  as  a
punishment  of  sins.

For  judicial  reasons,  God  sometimes
breaks  the  whole  staff  of  bread  and
sends  famine  into  a  city  or  throughout  a
land.  This  either  bt/  successive  failures
in  the  crops  or  6y  permitting  an  invad-
ing army  to  invest  and  besiege  a  city.

The  famine  in  Egypt  in  Joseph's  time
was  occasioned  by  a  seven  years* /at/Mre
in  the  crops ;  so  the  famine  in  Canaan
in  Abab's  reign  resulted  from  a  three
years  and  six  months'  drought.

The  famine  in  Jerusalem  was  caused
by  a  state  of  siege  (vers.  4,  5 ).  So  was
the  scarcity  in  Paris  during  the  reign  of
Napoleon  III.,  when  William,  king  of
Prussia,  besieged  the  city  five  months.

Thus  He  who  gives  bread  can  take  it
away ;  and  He  does  take  it  away  when
a  land  like  Egypt  becomes  tyrannical
and  oppressive,  and  a  city  like  Jerusalem
or  Paris  forgets  God,  lives  in  defiance  of
His  authority,  and  tramples  under  foot
divine  and  human  laws.

III.  God  visits  guilty  cities  with  sore
distress.

When  cities  fall  into  moral  guilt  and
depravity,  their  prosperity  is  desolated,
their  doom  is  sealed.  With  expressions
of  His  anger  He  visited  Jerusalem,  with
famine  first,  and  then  with  ruin  (ver.  7).
Equally  with  proofs  of  displeasure  He
visited  France  :  famine  in  the  city,  Paris
desolated,  the  Emperor  overturned,  the
valiants  of  the  army  slain.  Thus  events
in  A.D.  1870-71  reaflSrm  the  meaning  of
events  in  Jerusalem's  overthrow  nearly
8ix  hundred  years  before  Christ.

Superficial  observers  may  see  in  these
events  only  the  hand  of  man  ;  but  what
saith  God  ■?  See  Isa.  Ix.  1 2,  Jer.  v.  9,  whe-
ther with  war,  or  pestilence,  or  famine,
God  deals  with  nations  and  men  after
their  sins.

IV.  Famished  cities  on  earth  suggest
thoughts,  as  a  glad  contrast,  of  the
blessed  city  of  God  above,  the  heavenly
Jerusalem.  Of  its  inhabitants  it  is  de-
clared, "  They  shall  hunger  no  more,"  <fec.
Many  of  its  residents  did  hunger  when
here  on  earthy  e.g,^  Paul  (2  Cor.  xi.  27).

No  more  assaults  of  foes,  nor  penalties
of  sin,  nor  sufFerinfrs  and  deprivation,
will  be  known  in  the  Holy  City,  the  Jeru-
678


salem  above. — Arranged  from  "  Walks
with  Jeremiah."

Comments —

Vers.  9-11.  Nebuchadnezzar  "qavb
judgment"  7ipon  Zedeldah.  See  on
chap,  xxxix.  14;  also  xxxii.  4,  xxxiv.  3.

Ver.  12.  "/ti  the  tenth  day  of  the
month."  Note  in  2  Kings  xxv.  8  it  is
given  as  the  seventh  day.  But  the  dif-
ferent preposition  explains  the  difference
of  dates.  '*  He  came  unto  Jerusalem"
on  the  seventh,  and  "  into  Jerusalem  *'
on  the  tenth  day ;  or  he  moved  toivards
Jerusalem  on  the  "  seventh,"  and  entered
on  the  *'  tenth  "  day.

Vers.  17-23.  Spoils  of  the  Temple
carried  away,  thus  fultilling  the  predic-
tion of  chap,  xxvii.  19-22.

The  minute  enumeration  of  these  ar-
ticles and  of  their  construction  shows
how  precious  was  the  remembrance  of
them  to  the  godly  Israelite.  This  height-
ened the  bitterness  of  their  loss.

Ver.  24.  Capture  of  the  priests.

*'  As  teachers  are  often  to  blame  for
their  beliaviour  that  sin -gets  the  upper
hand  in  a  community,  it  is  exceedingly
just  when  God  brings  such  for  an  ex-
ample into  great  punitive  judgment
(1  Sam.  ii.  27 -3^y ^Starke.

"  The  priests  are  caught  and  slain —

"  1.  Because  they  could  not  believe  the
truth  for  themselves,

"  2.  Because  they  led  others  astray.

"  3.  Because  they  appealed  to  the
Temple  of  the  Lord,

'*  4.  Because  they  persecuted  the  true
pro]>hets.

"  6.  Because  they  troubled  the  whole
Church  of  God,

"  But  he  who  troubleth  shall  bear
his  judgment,  whosoever  he  be  (Gal.  v.
10)." — Cramer,  quoted  in  Lange.

Vers.  27-30.  Deportation  op  cap-
tives.

*'  The  present  account  of  the  deporta-
tion of  captives  by  Nebuchadnezzar  him-
self (not  by  Nebuzar-adan)  is  subordi-
nate and  supplemental  to  other  narra-
tives of  those  taken  from  Jerusalem  at
other  times.  Two  of  the  deportations
here  mentioned  are  of  the  Jews ;  only
one  was  from  Jerusalem  itself.  That
this  is  their  true  character  is  evident
from  the  smallness  of  the  number  here


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


9B^,UL


specified.  The  total  of  these  three  de-
portations is  only  4600,  whereas  in  2
Kings  xxiv.  14-16  they  who  are  carried
captive  with  Jehoiachin  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar, in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,
were  18,000  souls.  How  many  were
carried  away  with  Zedekiah  by  Nebu-
zar-adan  wlien  Jerusalem  was  burnt  we
are  not  told,  but  probably  a  still  larger
number. " —  Wordsworth.

*'  According  to  this  account,  Nebu-
chadnezzar, in  his  seventeenth  (usually
called  his  eighteenth)  year,  while  the
siege  of  Jerusalem  was  going  on,  selected
3023  Jews  for  deportation  to  Babylon.
In  the  next  year,  his  eighteenth  (*,«.,
nineteenth),  upon  the  capture  of  Jeru-
salem, he  selected  832  more,  the  small-
ness  of  the  number  evincing  the  des-
perate tenacity  with  which  the  Jews  had
defended  themselves  during  the  year
and  a  half  of  the  siege,  and  the  havoc
made  in  them  by  famine,  pestilence,  and
the  sword.  We  must  bear  in  mind,
however,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  had  not
left  more  than  6000  or  7000  people  in
Jerusalem  under  Zedekiah,  and  must
not  exaggerate  this  fewness.  Finally,
five  years  afterwards,  Nebuchadnezzar
selected  745  more,  not  ^^from  Jerusalem*^
(as  is  said  expressly  of  the  832),  but
Jews  simply,  the  occasion  probably  being
war  with  the  Moabites,  Ammonites,  and
Edomites.

**  Another  point  often  noticed  is  the
small  number  generally  of  the  exiles  car-
ried away  compared  with  the  42,360
men  who  returned  with  Ezra  (Ezra  ii.
64,  65),  leaving  a  large  Jewish  po})u]a-
tion  behind  at  Babylon.  But  if  these
were  mere  supplementary  deportations^
they  show  that  a  continual  drain  of
peo}>le  from  Judea  was  going  on,  and
thus  help  to  solve  the  diflBculty." — Dr,
Payne  Smith,

Vers.   31-34.   Theme,   Meecy  to  a

CAPTIVE  KINO.

These  verses  recount  the  deliverance
of  Jehoiachin.

I  It  shows  us  tliat  the  Lord  can
help  us —

1.  Out  of  great  distress :  grievous
imprisonment  of  thirty-seven  years,

2.  In  a  glorious  manner.


IL  It  admonishes  ns —

1.  To  steadfast  patience.

2.  To  believing  hope  (Psalm  xiiL) —

Naegelshach,

Vers.  31-34.  Theme:  Release  to
THE  CAPTIVE.  "  The  king  of  Babylon
lifted  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin,  brought
him  forth,  spake  kindly,  set  his  throne,"
<&c.

The  obscure  portions  of  the  Word
of  Qod  are  worthy  of  notice,  like  the
filings  of  gold  which  the  artist  preserves.
They  often  illustrate  great  principles.

I.  The  deliverance  which  the  king
of  Babylon  accomplished  for  Jehoia-
chin.

1.  It  is  specially  noticed^  as  an  act,  no
doubt,  acceptable  to  God.  God  is  the
Father  of  mercies,  and  He  loves  ex-
ercises so  like  His  own.  Many  events
are  unrecorded,  but  this  has  a  conspi-
cuous place.  It  throws  a  lovely  light
over  the  dark  events  of  this  chapter.

2.  It  is  every  way  complete.

Nothing  is  left  undone  that  could  re-
lieve his  sad  captivity.  Released  from
prison ;  spoken  kindly  to ;  a  seat  of
honour  given  him  among  other  princes ;
his  prison  garments  changed ;  he  con-
stantly is  a  guest  at  the  king's  table;
a  continual  diet  is  given  him  ;  the  kind-
ness extends  to  the  very  close  of  life.

3.  It  is  worthy  of  practical  imitOr
iion.

**Fure  religion  and  undefiled,**  &a
(Isa.  viii.)  ^*  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it
unto  m«,"  (fee.  "  If  thine  enemy  hunger^*
<kc.  **  Remember  tJiem  in  bonds,"  See
Isa.  Iviii.  67.

II.  The  greater  deliverance  which
Christ  accomplishes.  To  rebels,  to
traitors.

1.  He  emancipates  us  from  the  power
of  sin.

Conversion  is  the  opening  of  the
prison.  "To  open  their  eyes,**  <fec.
**  He  is  made  of  God  to  us  redemp-
tion."

2.  He  speaks  in  accents  of  kindness
and  compassion.  Margin  reads,  **  Good
things  with  Him"  "  The  Spirit  of  the
Lord  is  upon  me,  to  preach  good  tidings
to  the  weak,"  <fec.

3.  He  clothes  us  with  the  robe  ofmerqfm

679


OHAF.  LIL


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH,


**  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,'*  <fcc.
Changed  his  prison  garments  (Zech.  iii.
3,  4).

4.  He  feeds  us  with  the  bread  of  life.
"  Man    did   eat  angels*   food."      He

thus  nourishes  us  freely^  daily,  con-
stantly, to  the  very  end,

5,  He  exalts  us  to  the  throne  of  immor-
tality.

On  the  career  of  Jechoniah,  see
Personal  Allusions,  p.  419,  ver.  24,
Coniah,  son,  of  Jehoiachin ;  also  llieme^
"  Woe  to  Coniah,"  pp.  430,  431.

Notes —

"  No  one  should  despair  in  misfortune,
for  the  right  hand  of  the  Highest  can
change  all  (Ps.  Ivii.  10),  and  Christ
rules  even  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies
(Ps.  ex.  2). — Cramer.

St.  Jerome  reports,  from  an  ancient
tradition  of  the  Jews,  that  Evil-Merodach,
having  had  the  government  of  the  Baby-
lonish empire  during  the  distraction  of
his  father,  used  his  power  so  ill,  that  as
soon  as  the  old  king  came  to  himself  he
put  him  in  prison  for  it,  where  lie  con-
tracted a  peculiar  acquaintance  with
Jehoiachin^  his  fellow  -  prisoner ;  and
that  this  was  the  cause  of  the  great
kindness  he  expressed  towards  him.
This  elevation  of  the  captive  king  was
evidently  an  act  of  grace  by  Evil-Mero-
dach on  the  occasion  of  his  ascending
the  throne,  561  B.C.

Lange  asks  here :  "  May  not  the
influence  of  Daniel  and  other  highly
esteemed  Jews  at  the  Babylonian  court
have  operated  in  favour  of  the  im-
prisoned king  1  **

Wordsworth  reflects  thus :  "  The
change  vouchsafed  at  Babylon  by  God's
mercy  even  to  Jehoiachin,  after  the
terrible  maledictions  denounced  against
him  (xxii.  24-30),  and  after  a  long
exile  of  thirty-seven  years,  was  like  a
message  of  mercy  and  comfort  from  God
Himself,  and  was  a  prelude  and  a  pledge
of  the  liberation  and  exaltation  of  the
Jewish  nation  when  it  had  been  humbled
and  purified  by  the  discipline  of  suffer-
ing, and  of  its  return  to  its  own  land.
A.nd  it  was  like  b.  joyful  free  announce-
ment of  that  far  more  glorious  future
restoration,  which  the  prophets  in  the
680


Old  and  the  apostles  in  the  New  Testa-
ment foretell  —  of  Israel  to  God  in
Christ.**

Ver.  32.  Theme  :  Kind  words.    "  He

spake  kindly  unto  him.^'

After  thirty-seven  years  of  captivity,
during  which  had  passed  away  the  youth
and  joyousness  of  King  Jehoiachin,  his
prison  doors  were  opened,  his  prison
garments  changed,  and  his  throne  exalted
among  the  vanquished  kings  in  Babylon;
and  yet  we  can  well  imagine  that  bettei
far  than  the  earthly  distinction  thus
awarded  him  were  the  sunshine  and  com-
fort in  his  stricken  heart  when  Evil-
Merodach,  king  of  Babylon,  *' spake  kindly
unto  him,**

"  A  little  word  in  kindness  spoken,
A  motion,  or  a  tear.
Hath  often  healed  the  heart  that's  broken,
And  made  a  friend  sincere.

**  A  word— a  look— hath  crushed  to  earth
Full  many  a  budding  flower,
Which,  had  a  smile  hut  owned  its  birth,
Would  bless  life's  darkest  hour.

*'  Then  deem  it  not  an  idle  thing
A  pleasant  word  to  speak ;
The  face  you  wear,  the  thought  you  bring,
A  heart  may  heal  or  break." — Whittier,

L  Kindness  should  be  a  natural  in-
terchange between  man  and  man.

The  very  word  "  kindness  **  comes
from  the  cognate  word  kinned,  i.e,,  or  of
the  same  kin  or  race,  acknowledging
or  reminding  us  of  the  fact  that  all  men
are  brethren,  all  of  the  same  blood,  and
therefore  all  should  act  as  brethren.  All
who  are  of  the  same  kindred  should  be
kind.  The  same  analogy  is  found  in
the  word  humane,  from  humxin.

"  'Tis  the  first  sanction  Nature  gave  to  man,
Each  other  to  assist  in  what  they  can."

— Denham.

n.  Small  ministries  of  kindness
may  readily  find  occasion.

Life  affords  but  few  opportunities  of
doing  great  services  for  others,  but  there
is  scarcely  an  hour  of  the  day  that  does
not  afford  occasion  of  performing  some
little,  it  may  be  unnoticed,  kindnesai

**  Scorn  not  the  slightest  word  or  deed,
Nor  deem  it  void  of  power  ;
There's  fruit  in  the  wind-wafted  seed.
Waiting  its  natal  hour.


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  JEREMIAH.


CHAP.  LII.


**A  whispered  word  may  toucli  the  heart,
And  bring  it  back  to  life  ;
A  look  of  love  bid  sin  depart,
Or  still  unholy  strife."

III.  Kindly  words  effect  more  than
pompous  speech.

Loud  talking,  blustering  pledges,  os-
tentatious promises,  are  less  agreeable  to
a  man  than  honest  though  gentle  words
of  affection,  and  win  his  heart  less.

"  Good  words  do  more  than  hard
speeches,  as  the  sunbeams  without  any
noise  will  make  the  traveller  cast  off  his
cloak,  which  all  the  blustering  winds
could  not  do,  but  only  make  him  bind
it  the  closer  to  him." — Leighton.

*'  You  can  give  me  kind  words  if  you
can  do  nothing  else  for  me,"  said  a  poor
woman  to  her  district  visitor,  '*  and  they
make  my  heart  glad.  You  cannot  think
how  I  look  for  the  day  of  your  coming,
that  I  may  tell  you  all  my  trials.  Ah  !  *'
she  added,  "if  only  people  thought  a
little  about  the  trials  and  troubles  of
the  poor,  and  the  comfort  and  encourage-
ment of  a  few  kind  words,  they  would
not  let  them  be  so  scarce."

IV.  How  touching  the  power  of
kind  words  on  the  suffering !

A  compassionate  visitor  entered  a
prison  hospital,  and  conversed  with  one
of  the  most  degraded  and  ignorant  of
men  anywhere  to  be  found.  As  he
spoke  kindly  to  him,  the  man  drew  the


bed-clothes  over  his  head  and  sobbed
convulsively.  As  soon  as  he  could
speak  he  said  to  the  visitor,  "Sir,  you
are  the  first  man  that  ever  spoke  a
kind  word  to  me  since  I  was  born,  and
I  can't  stand  it.'*

"  If  a  soul  thou  wouldst  redeem,

And  lead  a  lost  one  back  to  God,
Wouldst  thou  a  guardian  angel  seem

To  one  who  long  in  guilt  hath  trod  f
Go  kindW  to  him,  take  his  hand,

With  gentlest  words,  within  thine  own,
And  by  his  side  a  brother  stand,
Till  all  the  demons  thou  dethrone."

— Mr».  Sawyer,


Thus  closes  this  plaintive  Book  of
the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  with  a  gleam  of
light  on  the  gloom  of  exile^  with  a  record
of  "mercy  rejoicing  against  judgment,"
of  kindness  shown  to  a  long-suffering
captive,  of  God's  pity  for  the  degraded
and  dethroned  king.  So  also  may  we
in  life's  deepest  and  most  prolonged
sufferings  find  gracious  alleviation  ;  in
our  dethronisation  —  which  sin  has
wrought — recover  exaltation  to  spiritual
honour  and  privilege  ;  and  in  our  earthly
life  of  exile  from  the  "land  very  far
off,"  enjoy  the  favour  of  the  glorious
King,  and  be  nourished  with  "a  con-
tinued diet "  of  sacred  grace  "  given  us
of  the  King,  every  day  a  portion  until
the  day  of  our  death."     Amen.


■■esttg^cc-tsg"


ALPHABETICAL    INDEI


A  rR0PHiT*8  work  •  •
Abandoned  to  judgment  •
Abandoned,  God's  covenaiit  •
Abandoned  by  God  .  •
Abasement,  prostrate  in  •
Abuse  of  religion  .  ,  •
Accursed  trust  ,  ,  •
Admonished  and  abandoned  •
Adoration  of  God  in  nature  .
Advantages  of  irreligion
Affecting  expostulations,  incorrigible

penitence  ....
Affliction  and  sorrow  of  heart
Alienation  the  road  to  atheism
Aliens  united  in  the  Church .
Ancient  paths       .         .
Anomaly  in  the  law  of  transmission
Answer  to  prayer  delayed      .
Ark  lost        ....
Attention  to  Qod*8  word        •


Babylon's  broad  walls  •        •        •     674

Babylon's  overthrow  .  •  657,  667,  675
Babylon's  fall,  joy  over  •         •        .     673

Backward 160

Backward  glance  of  sorrow  .  •  •  250
Balm  of  Gilead  .....  189
Baruch  corrected  and  comforted    •        .     625

Basket  of  figs 460

Beautiful  but  brief  .  .  •  •  327
Believing  Ethiopian       ....     602

Bellows  burned 1 35

Benignant  promises  of  future  restoration    352

•'Be  not  proud" 281

bereaved  of  children  ....  226
Bereavement,  comfort  in  •  .  .652
Best  Christians,  best  citizens  .  •  499
Bitter  issues  of  impious  effrontery  •  120
Blast  of  the  Almighty  .  •  .  .83
Blessed  and  cursed  .  .  «  .381
Branch  of  righteousness  •  •  •  554
Bright  and  blessed  vision,  %  •  .  67
Bright  era  for  mankind  •  •  •  444
Brilliant  hopes  baffled  ....  632
Burden  of  the  Lord  on  trifl^ra  .  .  456
Buried  gifts 265

Call,  consecration  and  commission  of

the  prophet       .....         9
Captive,  release  of  ,         ,         ,         #679

Captive  king,  mercy  to  ...     679

Captives,  deportation  of        ,         ,         .     678


PAGB

77

532
624
70
164
368
613
no
623

40

222
107

257»  658

138

322

611

62

272


im


Captivity  of  Judah       •

Capture  of  Jerusalem    •

Capture  of  the  priests  •

Carnal  security     .         •

Cautions  and  consolation!

Chaff  and  wheat    ....

Characteristics  of  an  unbeliering  epoch

Charge  to  pastors  .         .         •

Chastened,  but  not  abandoned

Chastisement  resulting  in  penitence

Children,  what  they  can  do  for  God

Children's  sermon,  *'  Good  way"  ,

Christ  the  True  Ark  of  the  covenant

Christ's  supreme  name  .

Christian  creed  summarised

Christian   in  the  tumult   of  the  world,

the  ....
Christian  patriotism  .
Christian  Sabbath  .

Christian's  highest  glory
Christian's  triumph       .
Church's  lost  territory
Circumcision,  true  and  false
Cisterns  and  the  Fountain
City  saved  for  one  good  man
Clay  in  the  potter's  hands
Cleansing  refused  ,         ,
Comfort  and  warning    ,
Comfort  in  bereavement
Coming  harvest     .         •
Commission  to  destroy
Commission  to  preach  ,
Comparative  criminality
Comparative  sinfulness
Complaining  prayer  merging  into  godly

confidence  ,

Complaint  that  treachery  prospers
Complete  devastation  of  the  land
Conditional  covenants  .
Conditions  of  continuance  in  privilege
Confession  of  the  Gentiles    •
Converts        ....
Corrective  punishment .        .
Consideration         ...
Consolation  ....
Consolations  and  hopes  .

Consolations  of  a  dying  father
Constancy  of  Recbabites        .
Conversion  of  the  Jews
Courageous  Ethiopian   .          ,
Covenanted  alliance       ,  ,

Creation  an  argument  for  Isith

C83


VAOS

676
676
67S
640
180

453
161
27
467
526
166

137
68

445
447

603

499
384
202
251
651
204

293
102

390
280

391
652
671
106
149
65
449

403

246

254
391
421
360
660
198

513
255
524
652

563
542

592
235
543


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX.


Critical  and  exegetical  notes,  5,
116,  143,  170,  190,  212,231,

313,  350.  362,  386,  399»40i,
460,  468,  479,  484,  490,  496,
547,  557,  562,  570,  580,  586,
608,  614,  617,  625,  629,  634,
666,  676
Cry  for  healing      ,         .         .
Cry  from  scenes  of  exile         •
Cry  of  the  godless  in  calamity
Cup  of  Buffering    .         •         .


PAGE

32,55,  73,96,
245,  260,  289,

411,  418,437,

504,  5«4,  537,
598,  603,  605,

635»  651,  656,


377
178

237
654


Dearth,  the         •        •        •        •

Death «

Death  an  invading  enemy  •  •
Death  preferable  to  life  ,  •
Deceptive  hope  •  •  •  •
Deep-seated  character  of  Bin  •

Defeat  predicted  .  ,  ,  ,
Defiance  reduced  to  despair  .  •
Deliberate  combination  against  Qod
Delicacy  and  desirableness  of  Zion
Deliverance  from  trouble  .  •
Delusions  of  disobedience  .  .
Delusions  refuted  ,         ,         .

Demoralising  trust  placed   in  external

piety

Deserting  ancient  paths  .  ,
Desire  to  be  remembered  .  .
Desolations  hastening  ,  ,  ,
Desperation  dangerous  •         ,

Destruction  of  the  fair  olive-tree  .
Directions  to  enquirers  .  .  .
Dirge  over  an  unhappy  life  .  •
Disasters  consequent  upon  sin  •
Discipline  .  .  •  ,  •
Diseased  souls  •  •  »  •
Dismal  outlook  •  •  .  •
Dismay  of  defeat  •  •  •  •
Divine  formation  of  ft  human  life,  the
Divine  message  sent  into  a  prison
Divine  promises  .  .  •  •
Divine  wrath  an  object  of  fear  •
Doctrine  of  the  Church  •         .

Drawn  with  everlasting  love  •

Dreading  God's  abhorrence  .         •
Duty  of  Christians  to  their  country
Duty  of  trusting  in  God        •         .

Early  piety  the  beauty  of  youth  .
Earnest  persuasion  recklessly  defied
Election        .         ,         ,         .         .
Engaging  the  heart  in  religious  service
Enquirers,  directions  to  .         ,

Ephraim  bemoaning  himself  •

Equivocation         ...»
Errors  and  doom  of  Judftb'B  kings
Escaping  evil  habits      •         •         •
Estrangement  from  Qod        •        •
Everlasting  inheritance  •         .

Everlasting  love  .  .  •  ,
Evil  of  sin  after  conTenion  .  •
Evils  of  false  security  •  ,  ,
Exhortations  to  hallow  the  Sftbbath
Exiles  in  Babylon,  letter  to  .
Existence  regretted  .  ,  ,
Extermination  accomplished

684


306

327
201
422

581
367

538
177

237
123
506
on

584

146

392
331
430

397
238

659
404

249

182
112
632

25
548

541
380
164
517
303
499
369

SO

236
263

5"
659
526

597
419
277
267

153
518

42
129
366
674
409
620


Facts  for  amazement,  reckless  desertion

of  the  Fount  of  life  .  .         •

Faithful  minister's  appeal      .         •
Faithless  healers,  and  vain  remedies
Faithless  pastors  ,         .         .
False  charges         .         .         •
False  peace,  warning  against
False  prophets      .         .         .
False  theories        .         •         •
Falsity  and  foulness  of  man's  heart
Falsity,  its  cruelty  and  cowardice

Famine

Fate  of  others  a  warning  to  us      •
Fearless  performance  of  perilous  service
Fears  and  comforts  in  prospect  of  labour

with  God  ....
Fertility  of  the  soul  .  .
Fidelity  required  in  ministers
Fire  kindled  in  the  houses  of  gods   of

Egypt  ....
Fleeing  for  refuge  •        •

Forgiveness  plenteouB  •  •
Forewarnings  of  evil  •  •
Forewarning  despised  .  •
Fortified  against  God's  power
Fretting  lamentations  silenced  with  pro-

mises  ....
Fruit,  delicious  and  repulsive
Frustrated  ministry  of  grace
Fury  for  the  impious  oppressor
Futile  self-cleansing  .  •
Futility  of  human  wisdom  •
Future  of  believers        .         •


PAa


Gbdaliah's  exaltation  and  peril  •
Gedaliah's  fate  an  example  •  •
Genuine  philanthropy  .  •  •
Girdle  of  truth  .  •  •  •
Glorying  prohibited  and  sanctioned
God,  all-present    .         .         •         •

appearing  as  a  vain  hope        ,

— —  devising,  yet  deploring  evil   •

forsaking  and  God-forsaken  .

gained,  or  heaven  lost

■  of  families,  the

■  our  comforter        .
recognised  in  judgments

reproached


the  antagonist  of  false  teaohen

,  the  heart-searcher

,  the  only  true        •

Godless  mirth  silenced  •
Godly  conduct  .  •
God's  account  of  himself

ambassador  fortified

anger  understood

■         appeal  against  Judah

call  to  the  world  •

chastisements        •

claim  on  parents   •

control  shunned     .

controversy  with  humanity  •

«— —  covenant  an  argument  in  prayer

covenant  heritage  in  Israel     .

decisive  refusal   of   the   prophet's

petition

earnestness  in  dealing  with  sinners


604
607
194
266
203
452
338
391

515
52a
604
82
456
408
213, 219
355


315

157


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX,


Qod's  eameBtness  with  ginneni       •

■  ejeB  on  the  path  of  men  •
faithful  people  abandoned     •

■  foreknowledge       .         .         •

girdle

glorious  purpose  for  His  people

gracious  thoughts  •         •

guarantee  to  Hia  church        •

hidden  hand  .         .         .

interest  in  man     .         ,         .

judgment  upon  the  faithless  vindi

CaT/CQ,  •  •  •  •  •

•  judgments  upon  the  nations  •

law  in  the  heart     .         •         •

mercy  to  His  people       .         •

■■  message  in  writing  •  •
— —  message  of  life  and  death      .

■  messenger  baffled  and  repudiated
— —  messenger  to  rebellious  Judah

messenger  opposed        .         .

method  of  confuting  unbelief

— —  name  the  sinner's  plea  .         .

nearness  everywhere     .         .

people  suffer,  shall  His  foes  escape

•— —  proclamation  of  grand  purposes

prophet  a  prisoner  ,         .

reply  to  a  perplexed  soul        ,

righteousness,  its  baffling  anomalies

rule  of  judgment  .

seeming  disregard  of  man       ,

tender     expostulation    with     the

young

— —  tender  memory  of  the  sinner
— —  unwilling  separation  from  Judah
■'        voice  to  men  .         .         .

•  withdrawings  from  His  people
—  witness  -         .         ,         ,

word  and  man's  word    •         •

— —  word  enjoyed         ,         .         •

word  the  joy  of  the  godly      •

work  done  remissly        •        •

-^—  works  appealed  to  ,         ,

wrath  over  national  vices       •

wrath,  the  fire  of  ,         •         ,

Golden  key  of  prayer  ,  ,  •
Qood  man's  strength,  fortress,  and  refuge
Good  news  for  true  seekers  .  •
Good  old  way  .  .  •  .
Gospel  a  sure  remedy  .  •  ,
Gracious  purposes  of  grievous  punish

ments         .         .         •         •  •

Graves  dishonoured       .         •  •

Greater  future  of  Israel         •  •

Grief  over  sinners*  ruin  •  •

Guilt  under  sanction  of  religion  •

Harvest  sermon  .  .  •  •
Harvest,  a  coming  .  •  •
Hastening  to  escape  •  •  •
Healing  for  stricken  ones  •  •
Healing  medicines  •        •        •

Healing  wounds  slightly  •  •
Hearer  becomes  a  preacher,  th*  .
Hearers  hardened  ...

Heart  inscrutable  ....
Heart's  deceitf  ulness  towards  itself
Heath  in  the  desert       .        .


PAGE

568

541
247
161
269
270

501
534
604

377

277
631
532
664

505
416
119
6
538
107

295
451
509
520
588

541

248

377
298

63

126

433
308

14

455
333
336

639

219

448

80

551
359
502

130
553

500
171
356
194

154

671

638

633
509

128
574
577
376

374
370


Heathen  auguries 489

Heaven's  appeal  to  the  sinner        •        .  43

Hero  of  faith           .          .         •         •         •  601

Heroic  friendship            .         •         .         .  484

Hidden  manna 337

Holy  land  utterly  devastated,  ill**        .  76

Hope 573

Hope  of  man  in  misery .         •         •        •  306

Hope  of  the  soul  in  time  of  terror         •  379

Horror  over  faithless  prophets        .        .  448

Hospitality  outraged     .         •         .         .  606

Human  glorying  corrected     .         •     202,  654

Human  heart  deceitful          •         .         .  383

Human  outcry  silenced,  the  ...  26

Human  vindication  of  divine  vengeance  200
Hypocrisy   of   desiring  the  prayers  of

others •  6l2

Hypocritical  repentance         •         •        •  560


DOL  manufacture  •        •        «         .217

dolatrous  conspiracy  .  •  •  •233
gnominious  burial  ....  425
gnorance  may  excuse  irreligion  •  .  104
mminent  exile  .....  222
mpending  desolations  .  .  •  •  35^
mpious  soul  cloaked  in  pious  speech  •  103
m  possibility  of  pardon  .         •         .     106

mprecatory  prayer  provoked  .  .  389
mpregnable  security  in  Jehovah's  service  342
ncapacity  divinely  rectified  .         .20

ncredulity  at  God's  message  of  doom  .  320
ndifference  ....••  108
ndifference  to  eternal  realities  •  .  643
ndignity  to  Jehovah  .  •  •  •  147
nflexible  godliness  .  .  •  •  215
nfluence  of  prosperity .  .  •  •  427
niquitous  nation  openly  degraded  .  264
niquity  unabashed       .         .         •         .172

njustice       .     ^ 583

ntellectual  vanity  perverting  revelation  176
ntercessory  prayer  .  .  •  169,  319
ntercessory  prayer  forbidden  .  .158
nterrogating  our  conduct  •  •  .  184
ntoxicating  judgments  •  •  •  263
ntrepid  denunciations  •         •         •     414

ronical  calls  to  salvation  .  •  .  122
shmael's  conspiracy  ....  605
solation  resulting  from  consecration  •  337
srael  ingathered  .....  553
srael  invited  to  renewed  repentance  .  58
srael  justified  against  Babylon  •  .  670
srael  not  abandoned  ....  668
srael's  divorce,  its  lessons  lost  upon  Judah  57
srael's  own  glorious  King  .  .  .510
srael's  restoration  wholly  engaging  God     542

Israel's  return  shall  allure  the  Gentiles  to
God 80

"It  may  be" 572


Jeconiah's  captivity     •        •        •  •  498

Jeconiah's  career  and  release          •  •  680

Jehoiakim's  degeneracy                   •  •  423

Jehova  Justitia  Nostra .         •         •  •  447

Jehovah  the  true  God  .         .         •  •  213

Jehovah  weary  with  repenting       .  .  323

Jehovah's  **  charge  "  to  his  servant  .  10

Jehovah's  claim  on  human  reverence  .  218

685


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX,


Jehovah's  covenant  ....
Jehovah's  message  widely  published  •
Jehovah's  refusal  to  allow  intercession

to  prevail

Jeremiah  a  wrestler  with  God  in  prayer
Jeremiah  called  to  attest  predictions  by

action        .         .         .         •        •
Jeremiah  carried  into  Egypt  •

Jeremiah  imprisoned     •         •         •
Jeremiah's  experience  typical  of  Christ
— —  final  prophecy        •         •         •
— —  mission  •         •         •         •

— — >  second  letter  to  the  exiles     •

slanderous  enemies       •        •

vision  of  figs  •        •        •

Jerusalem,  capture  of  •  •  •
Jerusalem  rebuilded  •  •  •
Jerusalem  ruined .  •  •  •
Jesus  Christ  as  King  •  •  .
Jesus,  our  Lord  and  Righteousness
Jewish  idolatry  in  Egypt  •  .
Josiah's  discovery  of  the  law  •

Judah  impenitent  •         .         •

Judah's  diviuely-sent  teacher  ignored
Judah's  guilt  flagrantly  manifest   .
Judah's  mournful  distress     •         •
Judah's  restoration       •        .        •
Justice  of  threatened  ruin  vindicated

Ejnd  words  •        •        •        •  •

Kingdom  of  the  Messiah       •  ,

Knowing  Qod  with  the  heart  •

Knowledge  of  Gk>d        •        •  •

Knowledge  should  ensure  piety  .


Labobious  service  wasted     .        •        •  577

Lament  for  the  nation's  woe  .        •  292

Lament  for  the  slain  daughters  of  society  205
Lamentable  changes — ^violated  faith       .       36

Lamentations        .        ,        •        •        •  174

Lesson  for  the  disappointed  •        •        •  207

Life  prematurely  closed  •  •  •  326
Life's  aim  defeated        •        •        •        •615

Life's  noontide      •         •         •        •         •  325

Life's  solemn  opportuni^     •         •         •  180

Limitations  of  marriage         •        •         •  353

Litera  Scripta  Manet    .        •         •         •  572

Little  one's  cry,  the       .        •         •         •  638

Loathsome  soul  outcast  from  Gk>d  •  318

Localisation  marked  by  God,  our  •  .198
Looming  disasters— external  results  of

impiety 38

Lord  our  righteousness  •        •        •        •  445

Lost  even  to  pity  .....  323
Lost  flock  demanded  of  the  faithless

shepherd 275

Lost  harvest,  the  ....      I79»  189

Lying  prophecy  distinguished  from  true  490

Makino  God  our  trust  .        .        •  37i

Maledictions,  God's  messages  of  doom  .  1 73

Man  of  Gk>d 567

Man  on  earth         .....  175

Man  perishes,  Qto&  must  work       •         •  294

Manifold  judgments  of  God  .         ,         .  469

Man's  career  under  God's  control  •         •  223

Man's  changeable  condition   •         •         .  391

6S6


PAQB
232
236

291
297

353
614

538

593

619

10

503
587
46s
676

535
199

554

617

240

76

88

363
214

438
388

680
442

463
202
105


Man's  voice  met  by  God's  voiee     •

Mediation  and  sacrifice  unaccepted
Meetness  before  God     .         .
Men  of  progress,  men  of  strife
Men  try  to  right  themselves  .
Merciful  chastisement  .         .
Messages  of  prophecy  brought  to

tne  .....
Messages  to  exiles  .         .

Ministry  of  discrimination  .
Ministry  of  the  word  .  •
Misery  unpitied  ,  ,  ,
Missionary  sermon  ,  •
Mistaken  patriotism  •  •
Moab's  doom  .  ,  ,
Moab's  restoration  ,  •
Mocking  at  the  preacher  •
Murderers  in  ambush  •  •
Mystic  Babylon     .        .        .

Nations  obliterated      .        •
Nature  and  prosperity  of  Messiah'i
Nature  of  sin         .         .         .
Nearness  to  God  destroyed  by  sin
Nebuchadnezzar  God's  servant
Nets  to  catch  men  .         ,

New  created  wonder  .  •
"  No  cloak  for  their  sin  **      •


Obbdibnob,  its  rewards         .
Obedience  to  traditions  of  aneestors
Obstinate  unbelief  .        •

Old  age  without  religion  «
Old  paths  ....
Omniscience  regulates  judgment
On  the  new  year  .  .  •
One  sinner  *'a  sign"  to  many
Opportunities  neglected  ,
Opportunity  and  its  issues  •
Opposition  ....
Outcast  Israel  .  .  •
Outcry  of  woe  answered  with  ezpostula

tions  .        .        .        .        •
Outward  religious  service      •

Past  judgments  appealed  to^
Pastoral  service      .         .         •
Pathos  of  an  earnest  soul       •
Patriotic  choice     ,         ,         ,
Patriotic  prayers  irrepressibis
Penalty  for  oppressors  .         •
Penitent  tears       .         .         ,
Penitential  return  to  the  Lord
Penitent's  prayer   .         .        ,
People  ripe  for  destruction    •
Perfidy  and  punishment        .
Perpetuity  of  David's  reign  .
Perpetuity  of  the  spiritual  Jemsalem
Perplexed  suppliants      .         ,
Persecution  of  God's  prophet
Persecution  of  the  faithful  prophet
Persistent  alienation      .         ,
Personal  career  of  Jeremiah  .
Perverse  son  .         •         •

Piety  a  reciprocation  of  lOTV*
Pilgrims  to  Zion  •  •  •
Pitiable  dilemma  •         •         •


men


FAOI
628
234
487

345

175
224

15

497
339
342
254
360
608
636
650
406

235
667

508

443
621

281
470
357
529
609


563,  595
563
107

136
130

35S

495
624

180

28
60


reign


316
148

612

267

274
604

303
247
536
59
378
161

559
555
536
609
238
403
257
I

424
34

415


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX.


PAOE

Pleading  with  God  over  calamitous  dearth   290

Potter's  work 395

Power  of  evil  habits  •  •  •  •  278
Power  of  rebuke  .  •  •  •  •  346
Power  of  sin  .        .        •        •        .     278

Praise  to  man  silenced  .        •         •         •     637

Prayer 333

Prayer  by  God*s  afflicted  servant  .         .     54^
Prayer  encouraged         .         .         •         •     55°
Prayer  for  a  people  unavailing       ,         .     344
Prayer  for  all  seasons     ,         .         .         .299
Prayer  for  salvation  based  upon  praise  .     378
Prayer  holds  its  own  reward  .         .         .     297
Prayer  of  mediation  silenced  by  God     .     237
Prayer  the  solace  of  a  perplexed  soul     .     540
Prayers  of  a  good  man  asked  by  a  bad
man  .......     5^'

Preach  the  whole  truth  .         .      480,  484

Preacher's  cry  for  help  .  .  ,  .37^
Preachers  tested  by  their  hearers  .
Preaching  made  inevitable  .  ,
Preaching  rendered  useless  .  •
Premonitory  visions  .  .  •
Prescience  sealed  by  experience  .
Presumptuous  pride       .         .         •

Pride

Profligate  people  ripe  for  vengeance,  a
Progress  of  man's  salvation   .         •
Pro^^ression  and  direction       .
Prophecy  of  lies    ....
Prophecy  tested  by  prayer     ,         .
Prophecy  vindicated  in  Babylon's  fall
Prophet  a  subverter  of  kingdoms,  the
Prophets  and  their  mission    ,
Prophet's  lamentation    .
Prophet's  timely  arrival,  the
Prosperity  baneful         ,         •
Protest  against  apostasy         .
Proud  men     ...         *
Provision  for  the  churches    .
Punishment  of  the  impenitent
Punishment  threatened         •
Purity  necessary  to  salvaticm
Purpose  rightly  directed        •

Rachel's  lamentations  •

Rapacity  denounced       •         •
Reasor's  for  fearing  the  Lord
Reasons  for  irreligion  of  the  masses
Rebellion  and  vengeance
Reckless  desertion  of  the  right  way
Reckless  inattention  to  warning
Reckless  penknife         ..         .
Recompenses         •         •         •
Recovery  of  the  ten  tribes     .
Redeemer,  strength  of  .         .
Redemption,  its  progressive  acts
Reflex  consequences  of  sin     ,
Reflex  degradations  of  idolatry
Reflections  of  a  penitent        •
Regard  for  God     ...
Release  of  the  captive  .        •
Repentance  glorifies  Gk>d       •
Resolute  spiritual  inaction    •
Restoration  of  the  Jews        ,
Restoration  to  lost  spiritual  privileges
Retirement  sought        .         .         .


450

127

126

10

539

268

272

98

517
227

489
490

473
22

470
93

15

428

618

614

10

430

578

84

529

524
423
100

183
677

45
132

575

673

458
665

256
159
39
527
425
679

273
131
519
58
582


Retribution  for  idolatrous  abominations

Return  to  God  averts  doom  ,

Revelation  in  writing     .

Revived  memories  of  spiritual  privileges

Rewards  of  obedience    .

Righteous  judgments  of  God

Righteous    requirements    and   gracious

promise  ....
Righteous  soul  pleading  with  God
Roaming  from  God  .  .
Robbery  in  the  sanctuary  •
Romanism  doomed  .  •
Rome's  luxuriousness  .
Rome's  rejection  of  healing  ,
Rome's  resources  desolated  .
Rome  volcanic  .  .  .
Ruin,  a  woful  spectacle  of  .
Ruin  of  enemies  exulted  over
Ruined  nationalities      .         •


Sabbath  and  the  Lord's  day

Sacred  overthrows  .         •

Sacrifices      .         .        •        •

Sacrifices  contemned     •         •

Sacrilege       ....

Safety  and  vindication  sought  in  God

Salvation,  The  true  source  of

Sanctimonious  self-delusions

Satisfying  nature  of  God's  goodness

Scoffing  answered  by  sarcasm

Sea,  its  ravages  and  tragedies

Seasons  of  grace  lost

Secret  inquirer      .         .         .

Seer's  anguish  over  the  sinner's  doom,

Self-improvement .

Self  in  service       .         .         ,

Self -vindicating  sinners  reproved

Self-vindicative  sinners  •

Servants  of  God    .         .         •

Set  apart  for  judgment  •

Seventy  years'  captivity         •

Shamelessness  in  sin      .         .

Sheep  scattered     .         .         •

*'SheBhach,"  Babylon  reversed

Showing  exiles  the  way  home

Siege  of  Jerusalem         .         .

Sin  an  outrage  on  self  ,

Sin  banished  or  the  soul  banished

Sin  dangerous        .         .         .

Sin  excludes  from  sympathy .

Sinners  alike  in  all  ages

Sinners  cause  their  own  Buffering

Sinner's  desperate  depravity,  the

Sinner's  doom        .

Sinners  in  altercation  with  God

Sinners  returning  to  God

Sinners  requited  for  their  work  of  spolia'

tion  .....
Sinners  summoned  to  self-improyement
Sin's  hold  on  the  inmost  man
Sins  of  omission   •         •        •
Sin's  ravages         .         •        •
Slandering    .         •         •         •
Slavery  exchanged  for  serriea
Solemn  warning   ,         ,
Soul  agriculture    .
Soul  under  discouragement  •

687


PAOl
148

75

571

673

565
132

145
249
662

155
667
669
669
670
670
134
634
157


381
167
169

'59
168

365
69

151
523
321

655

180

584

87
150

492

/^
022

14
124

471

129

663

475»  672

529

599
198

78
284

354
637
594
64
645

355
658


358
568

367
242

185
197

507

494

80


393


ALPHABETICAL  IXDBX.


Soul's  Resting  Place
Sovereignty  of  God
Spared  through  grace
Spiritual  corruption
Spiritual  criminality
Spoiled  linen  girdle,  the
Spontaneity  and  spoliations  of  guilt
Strength  of  the  Redeemer     .
Strengthening  the  hands  of  the  wicked
Structure  and  scope  of  the  prophecies
Substitutes  for  piety  repudiated    .
Superficial  piety  a  delusion    .
Superstitious  terror  at  the  marvels   of

nature       .         .
Stubborn  sinner  submitting  himself  to

God

Submission  to  God's  direction  •
Sudden  spoliations  ,  .  •
Suffering  for  godly  and  guilty         •

Swearing

Sword  of  the  Lord  upon  Philistia  .
Symbol  of  God's  sovereignty  •

Symbolic  prophecy  of  doom  •  •
Symbols  of  God's  word,        •        •


Takinq  side  with  God  .  •  •  •  65
Temple  of  the  Lord  •  •  •  ,167
Thoroughness         •         •         •         •     1 52,  168

Timidity        ..,,•.  596

Traitor's  tears,  a 607

Treachery  crouching  behind  fair  words  .  252

Treachery  thwarted       ....  608

Treasures  consigned  to  foes   .         •         •  252

Treatment  shown  to  the  Jews        •         .  509

Triumphant  prayer        ....  309

Troublous  preacher  troubled          •         •  329

True  repentance 527

Trust  placed  in  lies        .         •         •        •  494

Truths  great  and  mightj       •        •        •  552

Two  astounding  evils    •        •         •        •  44

Two  yokes 493

Ultimate  argument  with  God  for  mercy  305
Unabashed  apostasy       .         •         •         .158

Unconscious  divine  agents    ...  24

Unforgotten  past,  an      .         .         .         •  41

Unfit  soil  prepared  for  the  blessing        .  91


PAOB

661
488
517
365

lOI

261

125

665

449

3
132

205

216

528
609
324
654
89

635
387
399
455


Unholy  vows  kept  •  •  •
Universal  knowledge  of  the  Lord  •
Unreasonableness  of  despair  •  •
Unwelcome  sacrifice  .  .  •
Urijah's  persecution  and  death      .

Vain  thoughts     .        •        •        •

Vanity  of  thoughts  •  ,  •
Vanquished  raised  into  victors  •
Vauntings  of  pride  ,  ,  ,
Verdict  of  law  and  the  appeal  of  love,  the
Verdure  in  the  midst  of  desolation
Verification  of  the  prophecies  •
Violated  sanctuaries  doomed  •

Violation  of  the  law  of  liberty  •
Vision  of  retributive  war  .  •
Volcanic  Rome     ....


PAOB
624

533
392
238

483

84

91

651
648
57
37*
4
156

118
670


Waning  light  foreshadowingutmostgloom  273
War  the  stroke  of  God  ,         .         ,         •23

War  theme ,     432

Watchmen's  call  .  ,  ,  ,  .518
Wealthy  nation  .  •  ,  ,  .656
Weeping  pilgrims  .         ,         .         .657

Weeping  over  hardened  transgressors  .  274
*•  What  hast  thou  done  ?"  .  .  .  47
*'  What  wilt  thou   say   when  he  shall

punish  thee  f  "  .  ....  276
Why  great  things  for  self  should  not  be

sought 629

Wicked  a  terror,  the  .  .  •  .  406
Wicked  terrified  and  terrifying  •  .  405
Wilful  inquirers  seeking  counsel  •  ,413
Will-worship,  its  sinfulness  •  •  ,163
Wine-cup  of  wrath  .  •  •  •  474
Wine  of  the  wrath  of  God  •  •  .271
**Woe  to  Coniah"  .  •  ,  .  430
Woes  of  war  .        •        •        •        •    302

Word  of  Jeremiah,  the .  •  •  •  14
Worldly  aspirations  ....  628
Worldly   prospects  sacrificed    in   God's

service •     627

Wrathful  agents  of  destruction      •         .     107

Yokes  for  the  confederate  kings  •  .  487
Young  converts  starting  Zionward  .  660
Youth's  gracious  hour  .        •        •        •      63


fW


AiULYTlCAL   INDEX


Abandoned  of  God,  77,  121,  124,  247,  252,
253,  299,  308,  318,  325,  393,  394,  613,  619,
668.

Abasement,  70.

Abstinence  (See  Rechabites).

Adoration,  1 10.

Afflictions  (See  Chastisementb).

Age  (See  Old  Age).

Agents,  divine,  23,  24,  77.

Agriculture,  spiritual,  80,  91.

Alarm  sounded  to  sinners,  Si,  112,  122,  I28|
132,  200.

Ambition,  627,  628.

Ancestors  (See  Rechabites).

Anger  (See  also  Wrath),  483,  677.

Apathy,  644.

Apostasy,  36,  43,  51,  158,  352,  365,  618.

Ark,  62,  68.

Arrogance  (See  Boasting  and  Pride).

Attention  (See  also  Indifferenob),  272.

Babylon,  473,  475,  486,  630,  657,  667,  669,

674,  675.
Backsliders,  66,  160,  175.
Baffling  mysteries  (See  Mysteries  in  Life).
Bereavement,  226,  652,  653.
Bible  (See   Heakers,   Word,  and  Written

Word).
Boasting,  202,  421,  637,  648,  654.

Calamity,  324,  422,  615.

Carnal  security  (See  Security).

Captivity,  62,  178,  352,  471,  497,  620.  676,

678.
Chastisements,    103,  135,   198,  225,  358,  500,

526,  595,  654-

Children,  137,  166,  226,  241,  281,  322,  368,
423,  424,  428,  638.

Choice,  the  soul's,  414,  415)  5^^>  ^^4*

Christ  (See  Healing,  Sin,  Cleansing,  Sal-
vation, Righteousness,  Messiah).

Christian  (See  Godly,  Death,  Fruitfulness).

Church,  III,  123,  257,  330,  357,377f  534iS36,

^555.651.

City— citizenship,  I02,  499.

Cleansing,  46,  84,  279,  280,  368,

Comparative  sinfulness,  65,  449

Comfort,  179,  522,  524,  626,  65*

Compassion,  God's,  653.

Complaining,  403,  408,  409.

Compromises,  215*

Confession,  65,  295,  303.

Consecration  (See  also  Sebviob),  337,  511.

2x


Consideration,  5I3»

Conversion,  103,  272,  303,  542,  560,  659.

Courage,  20,  24,  342,  345,  414,  592,  596,  601,

608,  633,  639.
Covenant,  221,  232,  235,  311,  391,  532,  661.
Creation,  543.
Creed,  447.

Darkness,  273.

Day  of  judgment,  276,  379,  505.

Dearth,  290,  292,  306.  [494*

Death,  174,  201,  226,  250,  326,  327,  422,  423,

Deception  (Comp.  also  Falsity),  368,  406, 494,

581.
Defeat,  538,  615,  632,  633,  670.
Defiance  of  God,  120,  129,  147,  177,  299,  578.
Deliverance,  679.
Delusions,  83,    146,  151,  274,  301,  413,  486,

584,611,  613,  654,  669.
Derision  (See  Scoffing).
Desertion  of  God  (See  Rejection),  662,
Despair,  178,  392,  397,  557.
Disappointment,  207,  407,  409,  628.
Discipline  (See  also  Chastisements),  525.
Discouragement  (see  Disappointment).
Distress  of  the  sinner,  134,  338.
Domestic  (See  Family).
Doom,  113,  124,  320,  388,  393,  394,  399,  573,

636,  665.
Dove,  647.
Dread  of  death,  250.

Earnestness,  157,  236,  274,  482,  568,

Ease  (See  Apathy).

Egypt,  614,  615,  616,  617,  620,  623,  630.

Enquirers,  257,  413,  502,  584,  659.

Escape,  Effort  to,  131,  638.

Estrangement  from  God,  267.

Ethiopian,  590,  592.

Everlasting  facts,  153,  517.

Example,  161,  612,  624,  645.

Exile  (See  Captivity),  222.

Expostulations,  God's,  with  men,  6S,

Faith  (See  Creed).
False  trusts  (See  DECEPTION).
Falsity,  Human,  112,  252,  373,  374,  375,  383,
453»  490,  559, 584.  596,  604,  606,  607,  608,

639.
Family,  351,  515.
Famine,  677.
Fasting,  300.
Fatherless,  652,  653,

689


ANALYTICAL  INDEX,


Fear,  19,  26,  100,  109,  379,  596,  639,  655.

Fearing  God,  100,  109.
Fidelity,  215,  249,  480.
Fleeing  from  God,  616,
Flocks,  275,  283,  441,  554,  663.
Foreknowledge,  God's,  17,  161.

prophetic,  538.  [672.

Fore  warnings,  99, 1 12,  167,  388,  393,486,612,
Forgiveness,  665.
Fountain  (See  Water).
Freedom,  man's,  44.
Friendship,  484.
Frivolity  (See  Trifling).
Fruitfulness,  Christian,  372,  377,  462,  521.
Frustrations  of  life's  aims,  615.
Future  glories  of  the  righteous,  356,  521,  534,
542.

Gentiles,  80,  360,  533.
Glorying,  202,  203,  645.
God,  the  hope  of  man  (See  HoPl).

the  true,  214,  219.

Godly,  221,  262,  266,  270,  327,  365,  381,  453,

520,  567,  615,  654.
God's  abhorrence  of  sin,  621,  622.

account  of  Himself,  542.

anxiety  over  man,  1 76,  298,  62O.

compassion,  653.

glory,  219.

goodness,  523.

love  (See  Lovb).

mercy  to  His  people,  664,  665,

reply  to  a  perplexed  soul,  541.

work  on  men,  25,  387,  390,  395,  527.

works  in  creation,  219,  670.

Gospel,  525,  553.
Gospel  age,  444.
Government,  divine,  24,  224*
Grace,  exhausted,  323.

spared  through,  517,

Graves,  17 1.

Guidance,  divine,  224,  226,  227.

Habits,  277,  278,  284.

Harvest,  no,  113,   179,   189,  671,  677  (See

also  Dearth).
Healing,  128,   182,   185,  377,   378,  508,   $09,

633,  669.
Hearers  of  God's  Word,  272,  333,  335,   415,

450,  573»  574,  577.
Heart,  367,  373,  374,  375,  376,  463,  464,  51 1,

532,  649.
Heaven,  78,  1 5 3.
Heroism,  24,  592,  601,  619.
Hiding-places,  89,  6 1 2,  646,  66l*
Holiness  (See  Cleansing).
Homage  to  God,  218.
Honesty  (See  Untruthfulness).
Hope,  God  our,  296,  298,  338,  379,  548,  653.
Hopes,  151,  173,  379,  524,  573,  581,  6X1,  632.
Hospitality,  606.
Human  greatness  ruined,  645.
Humility,  633.
Hypocrisy,  103,  III,  133,  164,  196,  238,453,

560,  606,  609,  612.

iDOLiiTRY,  39,   147,   174,  217,  221,  617,  623.

Ignorance,  104.

690


Impenitence,  40,  430,  623.

Incredulity  (See  Unbelief).

Indifference,  108,  131, 132,  172,  299,  412,  643^

672.
Injustice,  583.

Insincerity  (See  Hypocrisy).
Insolence  (See  Defiance).
Inspiration,  8.
Integrity  (See  Fidelity).
Intercession,  158,  237,  291,  297,  303,  310,  315,

319,  344,  389.  581.
Israel  lost,  60,  458.
Israel's  return,  80,  356,  444,  458,  5 1 8,  542,

553,  657,  664.

Jealousy,  606.

Jeremiah's  sufferings,  2,  538,  548,   593,  603,

614,  619.     (See  Patriotism.)
Jerusalem,  163,  199,  535,  555,  599.
Jews,- conversion  of,  509,  519,  542.
Jordan,  250,  251.
Joy,  408,  553,  673.
Judah's  guilt  and  banishment,   65,  76,  264,

363,  419,  471,  620.
Judah's  restoration,  80,  438, 444,  518,  519,  676.
Justice  and  judgments  of  God,  200,  277,  358,

376,  379,  388,  469,  578,  604,  677.

Kindness,  680.

Kingdom,  Christ's,  67,  442,  443,  444,  510,  554.

Knowing  God,  202,  463,  533.

Lament,  sinner's,  179,  274,  313,  645.

Law,  57,  532.

Liberty,  507,  561.

Life's  changes,  652.

Life's  work,  16,  20,  25.  [55S«

Lord  our  righteousness,  438,  445,  447,  457,

Love  divine,  34,  57,  517.

Man  (See  Renewed).

Manna,  337

Marriage  (See  Family),  353.

Memory,  41,  331,  528,  673  (Comp.PAST  Life).

Mercy,  305.

Messiah  (See  also  LoRD  OUR  Righteousness),

4^2,443,457,510.
Ministers,  char^^es  to,  call  of,    1 3,  1 6,  27,  343,

414,  439,  448,  450,  451,  453.  481.
difficulties  of  their  work,  15,  19,  328,

339,  345,  346.

—  distress  over  sinners,  87,  93,  328,  619.
rejected,    88,  119,   121,    126,  345,  395,

404,  406,  480,483,  578,  618.

responsibility  of,   275,    340,  357,  440,

441,  456.

Miraculous  conception  of  Christ,  529.

Mirth  (See  Trifling).

Misery,  man's,  306,  316.

Missionary  themes,  360,  431,  433,  533,  673.

Moral  wrecks,  206,  448.

Mysteries  in  life,  248.

National  topics,  23,  157,  292,  448,  460,  465,

473,  474,  476,  508, 631.
Nature,  no,  216,  219,  290,  306,  372,  543.
Nearness  to  God,  281,  45 1  (See  also  Omnifrb-

sknce).


ANALYTICAL  INDEX,


Nebuchadnezzar,  470^  503.  599,  630,  649.
Neglect,  172,  181,  242,  265,  325,  412,  672.

Nets,  357.

Oaths,  79,  89,  600.

Obedience,  26,  563,  565,  567,  568,  593.

Obstinacy,  1 27,  131,  624.

Old  age,  136.

Omission  (See  Neglect).

Omnipresence,  451,  452  (See  Nbabnbss).

Omniscience,  198,  358.

Opportunity,  104,  181,  273,  412,  415,  $58,
572,  580,  644,  672.

Opposition,  28.

Outward  glory  desolated,  645.

Outward  religion  (See  Superficial  and  Pro-
fanity).

OTerthrow  of  enemies  (See  Triumph),

Parkntaqb,  7,  241,  283,  322,  356,  423,  515.
Paths,  the  old,  130,  138,  416,  424.
Patriotism  and  philanthropy,    134,   195,  254,

303>  499.  600,  603,  604,  608.
Past  life,  47.
Peaces,  301,  664.

Penitence,  59,  303,  360,  378,  526,  527,  529.
Perplexity,  541  ;  in  prayer,  609.
Persecution,  235,  238,  389,  403, 480,  483, 584,

588,  641.
Physician  (See  HbaliNO).
Piety,  31,  I4S»  146.
Pilgrims  to  Zion,  519,  529,  657,  659,

Pity,  323-

Plea,  the  sinner's,  295,  305.

Pleaders  with  God,  297,  540,  54 1,  548.

Poor,  the,  104,  105.

Popular  neglect  of  religion,  183.

Power,  spiritual  and  divine,  329.

Prayer,  158,  237,  294,  297,  299,  303,  304,309,

332,  333.  344,  378.  389,  490,  541,  548,  55O1
551,  581,  609,  612.
Preaching,  126,  127,  149,  328,  406,  481,  490,

573.
Presumption,  268,  05a
Predestination,  17,  25.

Pride,  268,  272,  281,  282,  614,  648,  649,  654.
Priesthood,  555.  [59 1»

Prison  (See  also  Persecution),  548,  584,  588,
Privilege,  conditional,  420,  421,  430.
Profanity,  155,  321.
Protection,  God's,  24,  343,  359, 365, 497,  516,

598,  601.
Prosperity,  425,  427,  428,
Punishment  (See  Retributiov)>
Purity  (See  Clbansino).

QUALIFIOATIOV,  20,  21.

Rachel's  lamentation,  524.

Rebellion,  677.

Rebuke,  346.

Rechabites,  562,  563,  565,  568,  569^

Recklessness,  299.
Recompenses,  673.
Reconciliation,  256,  319.
Refuge  (See  Hidino-PlaoBS).
Rejeeting  God,  51,   162,    172,  237,  «S7,  299,
325,  662.


Religion  (See  Pibtt).

Remedy  (See  Healino),

Remembrance  (See  Mbmobt)*

Renewed,  391.

Repentance  (See  Pemitbncb).

Rest  to  your  soul,  131,  66l,

Retirement,  582,  646.

Retribution,    108,   253,   276,   302,   358,    381,

559,  578,  646,  654,  673.
Return  to  God,  75,  78,  568,  658.
Revelation,  552,  571,

Righteousness  (See  LOBD  OUB  BlOHTKOUINISl)
Rock,  646,  654.
Rome,  667,  669,  670,
Ruin,  sinner's,  645.

Sabbath,  366,  380,  381,  384,

Sacrifice,  160,  627.

Salvation,  69,  343,  378,  457,  519,  531,  63$.

Sanctuaries,  156,  1 6  7.

Scoffing,  321,  406,  4S2,  646,  651.

Scriptures  (See  Word).

Sea,  655.

Security,  129,  151,  640,  647,  654,  656,

Self -exaltation,  652.

Self.excusings,  48,  154,  276,  622.

Self -improvement,  150,  568.

Self -righteousness,  46,  48,  175.

Service,   13,  19,  492,  507,  511,  577,  602,  627,

639.
Shame,  129.

Shepherds  (See  Flocks).
Sin  (See  Wickedness).
Sinners,  43,  45,  65,  79,    101,  295,  35$,  381,

393,  568,  594,  622,  658.
Sin's  miseries  and  spoliations,  249,  267*  269,

284,  354.  364.  370,  425.  645.
Slander,  197,  556,  583,  587.
Sorrow  (See  Trouble).
Sovereignty,  God's,  387,  488^
Speech,  103.
Stranger,  God  a,  308.
Strife,  345.

Strength,  spiritual  (See  PowbbV
Sudden  death  (See  Deatb).
Suffering,  for  godly  and  guilty,  654.
Superficial  religion  (See  also  Htpocbist),  148,

152,  154,  164,  205,  238,  300,  453.
Superstitions,  164,  213,  216.
Surrender  and  submission  to  God,  266,  528,

609.
Swearing,  448.
Symbols,  II,  80,  387,  399,  421,  455,  46a

Talbnts,  265.

Terror  of  the  soul,  379,  380^  405.

Thirst  (See  Water).

Thoroughness,  154,  502.

Thoughts,  85,  91,  501.

Touch,  the  Lord's,  21.

Treachery  (See  Falbitt)*

Trifling,  323,  355,  456.

Triumph,  the  Christian's,  25 1,  329,  342,  634,

651.
Trouble,  222,  296,  506,  643,  654.
Trust  in  God,  51,  295, 369, 370,  371,  551,  6oa,

603.
Truths,  great  and  mighty,  552.

691


ANALYTICAL  INDEX.


Unbbltef,  107,  320.
Unsuspiciousness,  605*
Untruthfulness,  597.

Valedictory  Address,  673,
Victors  (See  Triumph).
Vindication  of  Israel,  670.
Vision!,  II,  67,  76,  u8,  $yx
Volition,  124.
Vow,  42,  562,  624.

Wanderers  (See  Rbjbotixo  God).

War,  23,  83,  118,  123,  302,  432,  639.

Warfare,  Christian,  123.

Warnings  (See  Alarm,  Examples,  and  Fobs-

warnings).
Water,  293,  294.  [660.

Way  of  salvation,  45,  130,  I37,  417,  424,  529,
Wealth,  377,  425,  656.
Weariness  (See  Kutikement).
Weeping  pilgrims  (See  FiLaBim).

692


Wickedness,  112,  278,  284, 354,  358, 364,  367,

449,  620,  621,  636.
Wilfulness,  108,  4 1 3,  609,  613,  614.
Winecup  of  wrath,  270,  474.
Wisdom,  176,  652,  672.
Word,  God's,  266,  272,  333,  335,  342,  433,  454,

455,  574.
Words,  151,  252,  680.
Work  for  Christ  (See  Sebyioe).
Wounds,  128.

Wrath,  God's,  81,  107,  270,  380, 413,  450,  474.
Written  word  of  God,  505,  57 1,  572,  575.

Year,  old  and  new  year  themes,  494,  495.
Yoke,  46,  493.

Youth,  50,  63,  240,  325,  326,  356,  368,  423,
424,  429,  644,  661.

Zedekiah,  538,  594,  599.
Zion   (See   also   Jbeusauoi,   Pilobims,   and
Chxtroh),  123,  529.


ILLUSTUTlOiXS,    EXTRACTS,    POETRY.


Abstinenos  .  •  •  •
Ackuuwiedge  thine  iniquity  •
Affliction  ....
Almond-tree  .  .  .  •
Anathoth  ....
Ancient  hymn  by  John  Mardley,  on  Jer,
iii.  12


Appropriating  Qod's  word
Average  of  life        .        •


Backslidinq  .        •  •

Balm  of  Oilead        .  •

Banished  ones  recalled  •

Be  not  discouraged  •

Bereaved  of  children  •

Bibles  burnt  .         .  •

Bitter  at  heart        .  •

Bitter  lamentation .  •

Blast  of  the  Almighty  .

Boldness  in  prayer .  ,

Broken  down  at  the  presence  of  Qod

*'  Burial  of  an  am  "  •

Buried  girdle  •  •


Calumnt       •       •  •

Chastened       •         •  •

Christ's  example    .  •

Christ's  yoke  easy  •  •

Confession      .         .  •
Conspiracy  against  Qod.

Contrition  necessary  ,

Conversion      ,         .  •

Correction       •         ,  •

Courage  before  kings  •

Covenant,  the         .  •

Covetousness .         .  •
"Crane"
Cyrus'  capture  of  Babylon


Dan

Dark  mountains  •
Death  .  .  •
Death  desired  •

Dearth,  the  •  •
Defiance

Denominational  ism
Deriding  the  preacher
Despair  .         .         •
Discerning  eyes      •


Earlt  death  •
End,  the         .
Everlasting  ]aw9
Evil  of  sin


AGB

VAon

569

Evil  sent        .        •        •       •

.       .    478

72

Evil  shall  not  prevail     •        •

.    349

230

31

Faces  Zionward    .        •        »         .

.    666

29

Fallow  ground       •         •         •         •

.      94

False  gods    .         •         •         •         ,

.      54

72

False  peace  .         •         •         •         .

.     142

350

Falsity

.    586

496

Fasting  offensive  •        •         .        .

.    312

Fearlessness .        •         •         .         ■

.    484

188

Flattery

.      96

189

Fore-ordination    •         .         •         1

.      30

94

Frivolous  sinning .        •        •        .

.    361

349

Fulness         .         .         •         .         •

.    "5

230

Fury  for  the  oppressor  •        •        <

.    231

579

95

*•  Gates"

.    3"

189

God  giveth  rain     .         •         .        «

•     116

95

God  recognised  in  the  harvest        ,

.     115

313

God's  control  of  man's  career        •

.    230

95

God's  omnipresence       .         •         ,

•    460

436

God's  sovereign  power  .         •         ,

.    398

286

God's  withdrawal  from  man .         .

141,  312

God's  word  enjoyed       •        •         i

.     349

587

Graves  disturbed  .         •         •         <

.        .     181

467

495

Habits         •        •        •        •        •

.    288

495

Harvest  past          •         •         •         •

•     189

537

Help  from  God      «        •         •         ■

.    547

244

Heretics  burned  >        •        •        •

.     503

313

Hope    .         .         .         •        .

.    385

3'3

Hospitality   •         •         •         •         .

.    606

55

Human  inability  •        •        •        •

.    547

31

Hunting        •         •         •         •         •

•    361

344
436
188

Hypocrisy    .        •        •        •        «

.    560

Idolatry     .        •       •       •        •

•      54

675

Idol  manufacture          •        •        •

.    228

Ignorance  and  irreligion        •        «

.     115

95

Incredulity  .         .         •         •         <

.    348

388

Indelible  records  of  sin          •         «

.    385

210

Infuriated  hearers         •         •         «

.    579

188

Ingratitude  .         •         •         •         ■

.      54

3'*

Iniquity  marked   •         •         •         i

5S»229

189

Injustice      .         •         •         •         t

.    585

73

Innocence     .          •         •          •         •

•    607

411

Intercessory  prayer       •        •        •

.    347

39S

30

Kind  words  .        •        •        •        «

.       •    680

Kindness        .         •        •         •        <

>       •    680

348

Kings  and  priests  •        •         •

•       •     55

116

536

Jealousy

•    607

362

Jehoiakim's  fourth  year        •        .

^^    •    477

093


ILLUSTRATIONS,  EXTRACTS,  POSTRT.


Jehovah'fl  message  widely  published
Jeremiah's  diiscouragemeut
Jerusalem,  God's  throne
Jerusalem  in  ruins        •

Lenient  correction  •

Limits  in  prayer  •  ,

Lion,  the      .         ,  ,

Lord  shall  roar,  the  .
Lost  book  of  the  covenant

Lost  ten  tribes      ,  ,

Lost  to  pity  ,  ,

Love    .         .         ,  ,

Lowliness  of  mind  •

Lying  down  in  shame  •

Manhood     .        ,  ,

Man's  lone  hope    •  •

Marriage        .         ,  ,

Millstones     ,         ,  ,

Murderers  in  ambush  •

Mutations  of  life  •  •

Neb  U  OHADNEZZAB  •

Negligent  pastors  •

Noble  friendship  ,  ,

No  latter  rain        ,  •

None  like  Gk>d      •  •

Obedienob  .  .  •
Obedience  to  anoeston  •
Oblivion,  sin  cast  into  •
Old  paths  .  ,  ,
Opportunities  lost         •

Pahbntaob  .  ,  ,
Peaceable  habitations  •
Peace  assured  ,  ,
Permanence  of  the  Rechabites
Persecution  ,  ,  ,
Piety  the  beauty  of  youth
Pilgrimage    .

Prayer  ....

Prayer  for  one's  own  countrj
Predestination  •  ,
Pride  abashed  .  ,
Pride  lamented  •  •
Pride,  spiritual  .  ,
Prophet's  distress  .

Prophets  sent  by  Jehovah
Prosperity    ,         ,        ,

QuEBN,  the .        •        •

Refiner       .        •  ,

Eemembered  •  ,
Bepeutance  glorifying  God

Reprobate  iilver   .  .

Rest     .         .         ,  ,

**  Retribution  in  kind  "

Revelation  in  writing  •

Revolting  heart    .  •

Riches  .         .         •  •

Ritual .         •        •  •

Royalty  rebuked  •  •


PAGE

244

411

72

210

231

347
95

478

243
71

348
53
30
73

114

313
361

477

244

29

477
459
485

71
229

1,286

569
666
142
140

29i  348

479

313

569

410,  485

54

54

3«,  547

503

30

287

288

648,  649,  650

95
477
436

288

142

349

287

143

142

116
579

"5
211

71
28S


Sabbath  rest        •

Sacred  wisdom      •

Sea        .        .         .

Searching  the  heart

Self-esteem  .         .

Self-interrogation

Shame .        .         .

Sign  of  fire  .         •

Signs  of  heaven    .

Sin  acknowledged

Sin  banished,  or  no  heaven

Sin  debases  the  soul

Sin,  its  continuity

Sin  its  own  punishment

Sinner's  burial

Slander         .         •

Society         •        •

Solitude        .         •

Spurious  glorying

"Stork"      .

*'  Stranger  in  the  land  **

Streets  of  Jerusalem

"Swallow"

"  Swift  dromedary  "

Symbols  of  the  spiritual

Tears  .

Tears  of  penitence

Thou  shalt  swear  .

* '  Time  of  their  trouble

Trap     .

Trees    .         .         •

Troubled  ministry

Troubles  revive  us

True  God      .

True  manhood      .

* '  Turn  from  evil  ways

Turtle  .

Unquenohablb  fire
Unwashed  girdle  .
Unwelcome  sacrifice

Vain  thoughts  •
Valueless  prayen  •
Vine  •  .  •
Visions         •        •

Wandering  •        •
War     .         .         •
Weep  not  for  the  dead
Whole  truth
Wicked  a  terror    .
Wine-cup  of  fury  .
Woe-stricken         •
Word,  the     .        .
Women,  mourning
Works  of  God        .
Wrestling  prayers
Written  childless  •

TOKB     .  .  •

Youth  .        •        •

ZiON  a  refuge       •


PAOB

386
189
Ii5»  65s

385
650
188

73
140
228

313
94
73

141

54
436
210
142
209
211
188
312
114
188

55

72

209,  288
536
94

55
116
141

348

650

229

18

477
188

94

286
244

95
585
141

31


312

31
435
484

478
96

141

210


II


229

313

437

54*493
53*71

•     95


694
