m 


"^ 


THE 


THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM 


LORD  JESUS,  THE  CHRIST, 


AS    COVENANTED    IN 


THE    OLD   TESTAMES^T, 


AND    PRESENTED    IN 


THE    NE^V    TESTAME^^T. 


BY 

EEY.  GEO.  K  H.  PETERS,  A.M. 


■Buy  the  truth  and  .'ell  it  not ;  ai?o  wisdom,  and  instruction,  and  underi?tanding."— Peov.  23  :23. 
The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him;  and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant."— Ps. 


Vol.  I. 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS 

J  NEW  YORK  .  1884  LONDON 

10  AND  12  Dey  Street  44  Fleet  Stkeet 

All  Eights  Beserved 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Conpress,  in  the  year  1884,  by 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS, 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington,  D.  C. 


TO 
MY    ^\^IFE 

THIS     VOLUME    IS    MOST   AFFECTIONATELY 

My  Dear  Wife  :  Be  not  surprised  token  you  see  this  Dedication — this 
token  of  my  high  esteem.  Fo«,  above  all  others^  deserve  this  mark  of  heart- 
felt  regard.  When  often  discotiraged  in  my  labors,  you  sustained  me  with 
your  affection  ;  when  bowed  doivn  under  the  attacks  of  bigotry,  your  love 
raised  me  up  ;  when  sorely  depressed  by  the  neglect  of  others,  your  sympa- 
thetic attention  revived  me.  You  have  ever  taken  a  deep  and  abiding 
interest  in  my  work.  Surely,  in  view  of  your  faithfulness  to  me  and  the 
communion  of  a  common  faith  in  the  doctrines  following,  it  is  proper  for 
me  to  express  the  constant  desire,  that  you  may  abundaritly  realize,  in  a 
futtire  hap>py  experience,  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom  here  delineated. 

THAT    YOU,    WHO    HAVE  LIVED    SO    MUCH   IX   MY  HEART. 

May  enjoy  the  privileges  of  ''■the  frst-born,'"  and   thus  reign  vnth   Christy 
that  07ir  relationship  here  tnay  qualify  us  the  more  for  the  fruition 
of  each  other's  society  in  the  predicted  Tlieocracy  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  the   Chiist,  is  the  ardent  prayer  of  your  devoted 

HUSBAND. 


"  Sr^ere  is  no  snfc  tcrfaintic  but  of  .Scripture  oitin,  for  aim  toitsibcriug  niait  to  bullb 
tipoit.  S^ljis,  ijicrcfore,  anb  iliis  onlg,  |  Ijnbc  rrasoit  io  bdicbc ;  ll^is  |(  bill  proftssc ;  nc- 
torbhtg  lo  Ijiis  |  foill  libe,  anb  far  this  |  bill  not  onlg  foiUhigliT,  but  rbcn  gliiMn,  loose  in]T 
life,  though  |  sljoulb  ht  sorrjr  tijnt  ^Ijrbtians  sljonlir  take  it  from  mc.  |3roposc  nic  angtl/mg 
out  of  tl^ts  booh,  aub  require  toljrtbcr  |  belicbe  it  nr  no,  anb  secure  it  neber  so  iiicomprebeu- 
sible  to  Ijumnne  reason,  |  bill  subscribe  it  }p\\b  anb  Ijenrt,  as  luiobing  no  bemons  ration  can 
be  stronger  tljan  tbis,  6ob  \pth  saib  so,  tijercfore  it  is  true.  |n  otbcr  tbings  |  bill  tahe  no 
man's  libertie  of  jubgmcnt  from  bim ;  neitber  sbnll  anjr  man  tahe  mine  from  me.  |  bill 
lljinh  no  man  tlje  borse  man,  nor  fijc  borse  Cbristian.  |  bill  lobe  no  man  tht  Icsse  for 
biffcring  in  opinion  bitl^  me.  giiib  bljat  measure  |  meet  to  otljers  |  e^-pcct  from  iljcm 
againe.  |  am  fulljr  assureb  tbat  6ob  bocs  not,  anb  Ibcrefore  tljat  men  out  not  to  require 
ang  more  of  anjr  man,  than  tbis :  to  belicbe  Ibe  Scripture  to  be  #ob's  Stiloib,  to  eubcabor  to 
fiitbc  the  true  sense  of  it,  anb  to  libe  accorbing  to  it." — Chillixgworth. 

"  (Tljat  portion  of  ||eabenln  S^lisbom  bljiclj,  nnber  suclj  tircnmstanccs,  snrbibcs  anb  is 
c^erisbeb,  bill  be  jnst  tbc  first  articles  of  belief, — tbe  Sabing  |lubinunts  of  Spiritual  ITifc. 
^i  tijcse  tbc  Jcab  of  tlje  Cljurcb  bimself  tahcs  care,  lest  faiti)  sljoulb  nttcrln  btsappear  from 
tlje  eartlj.  ^ut  bcsibe  tbe  inestimable  jebel  of  elcmentarn  hnoblcbge — ilje  price  of  bbiclj 
can  neber  be  tolb— boes  lljere  not  rest  bitbin  tlje  folbs  of  tbe  |nspireb  fiooh  an  iim'Ijaustible 
store,  b^iclj  tbe  inbustrir  of  man.  piousln  bircctcb,  ought  to  elicit;  but  bbicb  if  men  neglect  it, 
llje  ITorb  bill  not  force  npon  t^cir  notice  ?  |t  is  tl/is  bibben  treasure  bljicb  sljoulb  animate 
l^e  ambition  of  Vigorous  anb  bet^ont  minbs.  J^rom  such  at  seconb  Ijanb  tl^e  bobg  of  t^e 
faithful  are  to  leceibe  it,  if  at  all ;  anb  if  not  so  obtaineb  for  t^cm  anb  bealt  out  bn  their 
teachers,  nothing  bill  be  more  meager,  nnfinb,  almost  infantile,  than  tlje  faitlj  of  Cj^ris- 
tians," — Isaac  Taylob,. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 


INTEODUCTION 13 

Proposition  1. — The  Kingdom  of  God  is  a  subject  of  vital  importance 29 

Prop.  2.— The  establishment  of  this  Kingdom  was  determined  before,  and  designed 

or  prei^ared  from,  the  foundation  of  the  world 34 

Peop.  3.— The  meanings  usually  given  to  this  Kingdom  indicate  that  the  most  vague, 

indefinite  notions  concerning  it  exist  in  the  minds  of  many 39 

Peop.  '4. — The  literal,  grammatical  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures  must  (connected 
with  the  figurative,  tropical,  or  rhetorical)  be  observed  m  order  to  obtain  a  cor- 
rect understanding  of  the  Kingdom 47 

Peop.  5.— The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  based  on  the  inspiration  of  the  Word  of 

God 68 

Peop.  6.— The  Kingdom  of  God  is  intimately  connected  with  the  Supernatural 80 

Peop.  7.— The  Kingdom  being  a  manifestation  of  the  Supernatural,  miracles  are  con- 
nected with  it 88 

Peop.  8. — The  doctrine  of  the   Kingdom  presupposes  that  of  sin,  the  apostasy  of 

man 102 

Prop.  9.— The  nature  of,  and  the  things  pertaining  to,  the  Kingdom  can  only  be  as- 
certained within  the  limits  of  Scripture 110 

Peop.   10.— This  Kingdom  should  be  studied  in  the  light  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and 

not  merely  in  that  of  Creeds,  Confessions,  Formulas  of  Doctrine,  etc 122 

Prop.   11. — The  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  were  given  to  the  apostles 141 

Prop.   12.— There  is  some  mystery  yet  connected  with  the  things  of  the  Kingdom. . .   144 

Prop.  13.— Some  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  intentionally  revealed  somewhat 


obscurely 


148 


Prop.  14.— Some  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  not  so  easily  comprehended  as 

many  suppose 1^1 

Prop.  15.— The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  can  become  better  understood  and  appre- 
ciated     1^1 


Prop.  16.— This  Kingdom  cannot  be  properly  comprehended  without  acknowledg- 
ing an  intimate  and  internal  connection  existing  between  the  Old  nnd  New  Tes- 


taments. 


157 


8  CONTENTS. 

Pkop.  17. — Without  study  of  tlie  prophecies  no  adequate  idea  can  be  obtained  of  the 

Kingdom 163 

Pkop.   18.— The  prophecies  relating  to  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  are 

both  conditioned  and  unconditioned 170 

Pkop.   19. — The  New  Testament  begins  the  announcement  of  the  Kingdom  in  terms 

expressive  of  its  being  previously  well  known 181 

Prop.  20. — To  comprehend  the  subject  of  the  Kingdom  it  is  necessary  to  notice  the 

belief  and  expectations  "of  the  more  pious  portion  of  the  Jews 183 

Pkop.  21. — The  prophecies  of  the  Kingdom  interpreted  literally  sustain  the  expec- 
tations and  hopes  of  the  pious  Jews 190 

Prop.  22. — John  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples  employed  the  phrases  "King- 
dom of  Heaven,"  "  Kingdom  of  God,  "  etc.,  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the 
Jews 195 

Prop.  23. — There  must  be  some  substantial  reason  why  the  jahrases  "Kingdom  of 

God,"  etc.,  were  thus  adopted 198 

Prop.  24. — The  Kingdom  is  offered  to  an  elect  nation,  viz.,  the  Jewish  nation 207 

Prop.  25  — The  Theocracy  was  an  earnest,  introductory,  or  initiatory  form  of  this 

Kingdom 216 

Prop.  26. — The  Theocracy  thus  instituted  would  have  been  permanently  established 

if  the  people,  in  their  national  capacity,  had  been  faithful  in  obedience 222 

Prop.  27.— The  demand  of  the  nation  for  an  earthly  king  was  a  virtual  abandon- 
ment of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  by  the  nation 226 

Prop.  28.  — God  makes  the  Jewish  king  subordinate  to  His  own  Theocracy 228 

Prop.  29. — This  Theocracy,  or  Kingdom,  is  exclusively  given  to  the  natural  descend- 
ants of  Abraham,  in  their  corporate  capacity 230 

Prop.  30. — The  prophets,  however,  without  specifying  the  manner  of  introduction, 
j)redict  that  the  Gentiles  shall  participate  in  the  blessings  of  the  Theocracj'  or 
Kingdom 232 

Prop.  31. — This  Theocracy  was  identified  with  the  Davidic  Kingdom 234 

Prop.  32. — This  Theocratic  Kingdom,  thus  incorporated  with  the  Davidic,  is  re- 
moved when  the  Davidic  is  overthrown 237 

Prop.  33. — The  prophets,  some  even  before  the  caj^tivity,  foreseeing  the  overthrow 

of  the  Kingdom,  both  foretell  its  downfall  and  its  final  restoration 240 

Prop.  34.— The  prophets  describe  this  restored  Kingdom,  its  extension,  glory,  etc., 

without  distinguishing  between  the  First  and  Second  Advents 242 

Prop.  35. — The  prophets  describe  but  one  Kingdom 245 

Prop.  36.— The  prophets,  with  one  voice,  describe  this  one  Kingdom,  thus  restored, 

in  terms  expressive  of  the  most  glorious  additions 248 

Prop.  37.— The  Kingdom  thus  predicted  and  promised  was  not  in  existence  when 

the  forerunner  of  Jesus  appeared 250 

Prop.  38.  — Johi  the  Baptist  preached  that  this  Kingdom,  predicted  by  the  prophets, 

was  ' '  nigh    it  hand  " 253 


\ 


CONTEXTS.  9 

PEOP.  39.— John  the  Baptist  was  not  ignorant  of  the  Kingdom  that  he  preached.. . .  256 

Peop.  40.— The  hearers  of  John  believed  that  he  preached  to  them  the  Kingdom  pre- 
dicted by  the  proi^hets,  and  in  the  sense  held  by  themselves ? 2G0 

Peop.  41. —The  Kingdom  was  not  established  under  John's  ministry 262 

Prop.  42.  —Jesus  Christ  in  His  early  ministry  preached  that  the  Kingdom  was  "nigh 

at  hand  " 266 

Peop.  43,— The  disciples  sent  forth  by  Jesus  to  preach  this  Kingdom  were  not  igno- 
rant of  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  Kingdom °  _  .   274 

Peop.  44.— The  preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  being  in  accordance  with  that  of  the 
predicted  Kingdom,  raised  no  controversy  between  the  Jews  and  Jesus,  or  be- 
tween the  Jews  and  His  disciples  and  apostles .' 280 

Peop.  45.— The  phrases  "Kingdom  of  Heaven,"  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  "  Kingdom  of 

Christ, "  etc.,  denote  the  same  Kingdom 283 

Peop.  46.— The  Kingdom  anticipated  by  the  Jews  at  the  First  Advent  is  based  on 

the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants 285 

Peop.  47.— The  Jews  had  the  strongest  possible  assurances  given  to  them  that  the 

Kingdom  based  on  these  covenants  would  be  realized 287 

Peop.  48.— The  Kingdom  being  based  on  the  covenants,  the  covenants  must  be  care- 
fully examined,  and  (Prop.  4)  the  literal  language  of  the  same  must  be  main- 
tained     290 

Peop.  49.— The  covenants  being,  in  Eevelation,  the  foundation  of  the  Kingdom, 

must  first  be  received  and  appreciated 293 

Peop.  50.— This  Kingdom  will  be  the  outgrowth  of  the  renewed  Abrahamic  cove- 
nant, under  which  renewal  we  live 320 

Peop.  51. — The  relation  that  the  Kingdom  sustains  to  "the  covenants  of  promise  " 

enables  us  to  appreciate  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom 337 

Peop.  52.  —The  promases  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  as  given  in  the  covenants,  will 

be  strictly  fulfilled. 342 

Peop.  53.— The  genealogies  of  our  Lord  form  an  important  link  in  the  comprehen- 
sion of  the  Kingdom 352 

Pbop.  54.— The  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  by  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples,  was 

confined  to  the  Jewish  nation ; 356 

Peop.  55.— It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  and  His  disciples  should,  at  first,  preach  the 

Kingdom  as  nigh  to  the  Jewish  nation 362 

Peop.  56.— The  Kingdom  was  not  established  during  the  ministry  of  "the  Christ  ". .   366 

Peop.  57. — This  Kingdom  was  offered  to  the  Jewish  nation,  but  the  nation  rejected 

it 375 

Peop.  58. — Jesus,  toward  the  close  of  His  ministry,  preached  that  the  Kingdom  was 

not  nigh ." 379 

Peop.  59. — This  Kingdom  of  God  offered  to  the  Jewish  elect  nation,  lest  the  pur- 
pose of  God  fail,  is  to  be  given  to  others  who  are  adopted 386 

Peop.  60.— This  Kingdom  of  God  is  given,  not  to  nations,  but  to  one  nation 392 


10  CONTENTS. 

Peop.  61. — The  Kingdom  which  by  promise  exclusively  belonged  to  the  Jewish  na- 
tion, the  rightful  seed  of  Abraham,  was  now  to  be  given  to  an  engrafted  people.   396 

Pkop.   62. — This  people,  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  given,  gathered  out  of  the 

nations,  becomes  the  elect  nation 401 

Peop.  63. — The  present  elect,  to  whom  the  Kingdom  will  be  given,  is  the  continua- 
tion of  the  i^revious  election  chiefly  in  another  engrafted  people 404 

Peop.   64.— The  Kingdom  being  given  to  the  elect  only,  any  adoption  into  that  elect 

portion  must  be  revealed  by  express  Divine  Kevelation 408 

Peop.   65. — Before  this  Kingdom  can  be  given  to  this  elect  people,  they  must  first  be 

gathered  out 412 

Peop.  66. — The  Kingdom  that  was  nigh  at  one  time  (viz.,  at  the  First  Advent)  to 
the  Jewish  nation  is  now  removed  to  the  close  of  its  tribulation,  and  of  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles 419 

Peop.   67. — The  Kingdom  could  not,  therefore,  have  been  set  up  at  that  time,  viz., 

at  the  First  Advent 421 

Peop.   68.  —This  Kingdom  is  then  essentially  a  Jewish  Kingdom 424 

Peop.  69. — The  death  of  Jesus  did  not  remove  the  notion  entertained  by  the  disci- 
ples and  aj)ostles  concerning  the   Kingdom 429 

Peop.  70. — The  apostles,  after  Christ's  ascension,  did  not  preach,  either  to  Jews  or 

Gentiles,  that  the  Kingdom  was  established 43  3 

Peop.   71. — The  language  of   the  apostles  confirmed  the  Jews  in  theii  ^sianic 

hopes  of  the  Kingdom 445 

Peop.  72. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  as  preached  by  the  apo.5tles,  wa,       reived 

by  the  early  Church 449 

Peop.  73. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  preached  by  the  apostles  and  elders  raised 

up  no  controversy  with  the  Jews 467 

Peop.  74. — The  belief  in  the  sjDeedy  Advent  of  Christ,  entertained  both  by  the  apos- 
tles and  the  churches  under  them,  indicates  what  Kingdom  was  believed  in  and 
taught  by  the  first  Christians 470 

Peop.  75. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  as  held  by  the  churches  established  by  the 

apostles,  was  perpetuated "  480 

iOP.  76. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  was  changed  under  the  Gnostic  and  Alex- 
andrian influence . .    499 

Peop.   77. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  as  held  by  the  early  Church,  was  finally 

almost  exterminated  under  the  teaching  and  power  of  the  Papacy 513 

Peop.  78. — The  early  Church  doctrine  was  revived  after  the  Keformation 524 

Peop.  79. — The  Kingdom  of  God,  promised  by  covenant  and  proj)hets,  is  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  the  general  and  universal  sovereignty  of  God 556 

Peop.  80. — This  Kingdom  of  covenant,  j^romise,  and  prediction  is  to  be  distin- 
guished from  the  sovereignty  which  Jesus  exercises  in  virtue  of  His  Divine 
nature 559 

Peop.  81. — This  Kingdom,  as  covenanted,  belongs  to  Jesus,  as  "the  Son  of  Man  ". .  565 

Peop.  82. — This,  Kingdom  is  a  complete  restoration,  in  the  person  of  the  Second 

Adam  or  Ma*p,  of  the  dominion  lost  by  the  First  Adam  or  Man 572 


\ 


CONTENTS.  1 1 

Pkop.  83.— This  Kingdom  is  given  to  "the  Son  of  Man  "  by  God,  the  Father 577 

Peop.  84.— As  this  Kingdom  is  specially  given  to  "  the  Son  of  Man  "  as  the  result  of 
His  obedience,  sufferings,  and  death,  it  must  be  something  different  from  His 
Divine  nature,  or  from  "piety,"  "religion,"  "God's  reign  in  the  heart,"  etc., .   582 

Prop.  85.— Neither  Abraham  nor  his  engrafted  seed  have  as  yet  inherited  the  King- 
dom ;  hence  the  Kingdom  must  be  something  different  from  "jDiety,"  "relig- 
ion, "  "  God' s  reign  in  the  heart, ' '  etc 585 

Prop.  8G.— The  object  or  design  of  this  dispensation  is  to  gather  out  these  elect  to 

whom,  as  heirs  with  Abraham  and  his  seed  Christ,  this  Kingdom  is  to  be  given. ,   58G 

Prop.  87.— The  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  key  to  the  understanding  of 

the  meaning  of  this  dispensation 590 

Prop.  88. — The  Church  is  then  a  preparatory  stage  for  this  Kingdom 592 

Prop.  89.— Christ,  in  view  of  this  future  Kingdom,  sustains  a  peculiar  relationship 

to  the  Church ...    59(3 

Prop.  90.— Members  of  the  Church  who  are  faithful  are  promised  this  Kingdom GOO 

Prop.  91.  —The  Kingdom  of  God  is  not  the  Jewish  Church GO-i 

Prop.  92.— This  Kingdom  is  not  what  some  call,  "the  Gospel  Kingdom  " 607 

Prop.  93,— The  covenanted  Kingdom  is  not  the  Christian  Church GOO 

Prop.  94       "he  overlooking  of  the  postponement  of  this  Kingdom  is  a  fundamental 

mist  id  fruitful  source  of  error  in  many  systems  of  Theology G21 

Prop.  -90.  if  the  Church  is  the  Kingdom,  then  the  terms  "Church  "  and  "King- 
dom "  shoiild  be  synonymous 632 

Prop.  96.— The  differences  visible  in  the  Church  are  evidences  that  it  is  not  the  pre- 
dicted Kingdom  of  the  Messiah 634 

Prop.  97. — The  various  forms  of  Church  government  indicate  that  the  Church  is  not 

the  promised  Kingdom 638 

Prop.  98.— That  the  Church  was  not  the  Kingdom  promised  to  David's  Son  was  the 

belief  of  the  early  Church 641 

Prop.  99. — The  opinion  that  the  Church  is  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  the  Christ  wa^, 

of  later  origin  than  the  first  or  second  century .  '4 

Prop.  100. — The  visible  Church  is  not  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ 6    ' 

Prop.  101. — The  invisible  Church  is  not  the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  Christ 655 

Prop.  102. — Neither  the  visible  nor  invisible  Church  is  the  covenanted  Kingdom. . .   662 

Prop.  103. — This  Kingdom  is  not  a  Kingdom  in  "the  third  heaven  " 668 

Prop.  104. — The  Christian  Church  is  not  denoted  b}'  the  jiredicted  Kingdom  of  the 

prophets 671 

Prop.  105. — The  Lord's  Prayer,  as  given  to  the  discijjles,  and  understood  by  them. 

amply  sustains  our  position  689 

Prop.  106. — Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  sustained  by  the  temptation  of  Christ.    ..  698 


INTRODIJCTION. 


Ix  this  work  it  is  proposed  to  show  what  the  Covenants  demand,  and 
what  relationship  the  second  coming,  kingdom,  and  glory  of  "  The  Christ" 
sustains  to  the  same,  in  order  that  perfected  Redemption  may  be  realized. 
This,  logically,  introduces  a  large  amount  of  converging  testimony. 

The  history  of  the  human  race  is,  as  able  theologians  have  remarked, 
the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  man.  It  is  a  fulfilling  of  revelation  ; 
yea,  more  :  it  is  an  unfolding  of  the  ways  of  God,  a  comprehensive 
confirmation  of,  and  an  appointed  aid,  in  interpreting  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion. Hence  God  himself  appeals  to  it,  not  merely  as  the  evidence  of  the 
truth  declared,  but  as  the  mode  by  w^hich  we  alone  can  obtain  a  full  and 
complete  view  of  the  Divine  purpose  relating  to  salvation.  To  do  this  we 
must,  however,  regard  ^^rt-s-^,  present,  and  future  history.  The  latter  must 
be  received  as  predicted,  for  we  may  rest  assured,  from  the  past  and 
present  fulfilment  of  the  word  of  God,  thus  changed  into  historical 
reality,  that  the  predictions  and  promises  relating  to  the  future  will  also 
in  their  turn  become  veritable  history.  It  is  this  faith,  which  grasps  the 
future  as  already  present,  that  can  form  a  decided  and  unmistakable 
unity. 

This  is  becoming  more  profoundly  felt  and  expressed,  and  is  forcibly 
portrayed  in  some  recent  publications  {e.g.,  Dorner's  His.  Prot.  Theol., 
Auberlen's  Div.  Rev.,  etc.).  Seeing  that  all  things  are  tending  toward 
the  kingdom  to  be  hereafter  established  by  Christ,  that  the  dispen- 
sations from  Adam  to  the  present  are  only  preparatory  stages  for  its 
coming  manifestation,  surely  it  is  the  highest  wisdom  to  direct  special 
and  careful  attention  to  the  hingdom  itself.  If  it  is  the  end  which 
serves  to  explain  the  means  employed  ;  if  it  is  the  object  for  which 
ages  have  passed  by  and  are  ever  to  revolve  ;  if  the  coming  of  Jesus, 
which  is  to  inaugurate  it,  is  emphatically  called  "  the  blessed  hope  ;"  if  it 
embraces  the  culmination  of  the  world's  history  in  ample  deliverance  and 
desired  restitution  ;  then  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  us  to  determine  the 
true  significance,  the  Divine  course,  and  the  development  of  the  plan  of 
salvation  without  a  deep  insight  into  that  of  the  kingdom  itself.  Proph- 
ets, apostles,  and  Jesus  himself,  especially  in  his  last  testimony,  contin- 
ually point  the  eye  of  faith  and  the  heart  of  hope  to  this  kingdom  as  the 
bright  light  which  can  clearly  illumine  the  past  and  present,  and  even 
dispel  the  darkness  of  the  future.  Scripture  and  theology,  the  latter  in 
its  very  early  and  later  development,  teach  us,  if  we  will  but  receive  it, 
that  we  cannot  properly  comprehend  the  Divine  economy  in  its  relation  to 
man  and  the  world,  unless  we  reverently  consider  the  manifestation  of  its 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

ultimate  result  as  exhibited  in  this  kingdom.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  a 
work  of  this  kind,  intended  to  give  an  understanding  of  a  subject  so  vital, 
however  defective  in  part,  requires  no  apology  to  the  reflecting  mind. 
Every  effort  in  this  direction,  if  it  evinces  appreciation  of  truth  and  rever- 
ence for  the  word,  will  be  received  with  pleasure  by  the  true  Biblical  student.^ 
In  the  reaction  against  Rationalism,  Spiritualism,  Naturalism,  etc.,  special 
attention  has  been  paid  to  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  relation  that  it  sus- 
tains to  history.  The  attack  and  defense  revealed  both  how  important  the 
subject,  and  how  sadly  it  had  been  neglected.  It  has  been  admitted  by 
recent  writers  of  ability  {e.g.,  Dr.  Auberlen,  Div.  Bev.,  p.  387),  that 
much  is  yet  to  he  learned  in  reference  to  it  ;  that  only  a  beginning  has  been 
made  in  investigating  the  subject  ;  that  a  correct  solution  of  the  difficul- 
ties surrounding  it  in  order  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply  to  objections  is  still 
a  worh  of  the  future.  Some  (as  e.g.,  Rothe),  when  looking  over  the  great 
array  of  Biblical  authors,  still  find  in  their  labors  a  something  lacking, 
which  when  carefully  analyzed  resolves  itself  in  a  lack  of  Divine  unity  in 
reference  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  evincing  itself  in  a  mystical,  if  not  arbi- 
trary, definition  of  it,  in  various  forms,  to  suit  a  present  exigency,  or  har- 
monize a  supposed  difficulty.  This  feeling  is  strengthened  by  the 
continued  assaults  of  unbelievers,  which  have  been  for  some  time  made 
against  the  early  history  of  Christianity.  Numerous  works  have  appeared, 
and  with  the  boldest  criticism  have  pointed  out  discrepancies  existing 
between  the  ancient  faith  and  that  entertained  by  the  large  body  of  the 
Church  at  the  })resent  day  ;  and  from  such  differences  of  belief  have  inferred 
that  the  early  faith  was  sadly  defective,  and  that  its  promulgators  are  there- 
fore unworthy  of  our  confidence.  We  are  told  that  the  apostles,  apostolic 
fathers,  and  the  first  Christians  generally  were  well-meaning  and  even 
noble  men,  but  "  ignorant,  enthusiastic,  and  fanatical  "  in  their  opinions. 
Rejoinders,  on  the  other  hand,  have  appeared,  which,  professing  to  defend 
the  apostles,  and  fathers,  are  yet  forced,  most  unwiUingly,  to  admit  the 
leading  charge  preferred  by  their  opponents.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  German 
Rationalists  point  to  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  the  disciples,  and  the 
first  believers,  and  show  conclusively  that  they  preached  a  kingdom  Avhich 
accorded  with  the  Jewish  forms — viz.,  a  kingdom  here  on  earth  under  the 
personal  reign  of  the  Messiah,  the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom  being 
restored.  They  press  this  matter  with  an  exultant  feeling,  realizing 
that  the  great  proportion  of  the  Church  being  opposed  to  such  a  belief 
materially  aids  them  in  condemning  the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  of 

1  When  regarding  the  large  nnmber  of  able  treatises  on  various  parts  of  the  subject  here 
discussed,  the  author  felt  somewhat  like  Montesquieu,  who,  in  his  preface  to  "  The 
Spirit  of  Laws,"  wrote  :  "When  I  saw  what  so  many  great  men  in  France,  in  England, 
and  in  Germany  had  written  before  me,  I  was  buried  in  admiration  ;  but  I  did  not  lose 
courage.  I  said  with  Correggio, '  I  also  am  a  painter.'  "  My  painting  consists  in  bringing 
together  upon  a  large  canvas  the  ideas  of  many  painters  ;  or,  without  figure,  to  place  in 
a  strict  logical,  consecutive  order  the  truths  pertaining  to  the  kingdom,  truths  too  often 
presented  in  an  isolated,  disconnected  manner,  and  thus  destroying  their  force.  As  to 
the  ability  to  perform  such  a  labor  of  love,  the  text  above  contains  a  sufBcient  excuse. 
For  God,  passing  by  the  refined  and  the  learned,  first  showed  forth  His  wisdom  and 
power  in  Galileans  (Acts  2:7);  He  chooses  "  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  con- 
found the  wise"  (1  Cor.  1  :  27)  ;  He  places  His  "  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  that  the 
excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God  and  not  of  us"  (2  Cor.  4  :  7),  in  order  to  evince 
the  often-repeated  fact  that  even  humble  talents  and  attainments  may  be  highly  useful 
in  upholding  the  truth. 


USTTRODUCTION.  15 

tlie  kingdom,  and  tliiis  making  the  founders  of  the  Churcli  unworthy  of 
credence.  The  Church  itself,  by  its  published  faith  resj^ecting  the  king- 
dom, forges  the  weapons  that  are  employed  against  it.  Every  work  on 
the  other  side  in  defense  of  the  founders  of  the  Christian  Church,  unabie 
to  set  aside  the  abundant  and  overwhelming  evidence  adduced,  frankly 
admits  that  the  first  preaching  was  in  a  Jewish  form  ;  that  the  faith  of  the 
early  Church  is  not  now  the  faith  of  the  Church  (saving  that  of  a  few 
individuals)  ;  and  endeavors  to  solve  the  difficulty  (as,  e.g,,  Neander,  and 
others)  by  declaring,  that  the  early  period  was  a  transition  state,  a  prepara- 
tory stage,  an  adaptation  to  meet  the  necessities  of  that  age  ;  that  hence 
the  truth  in  the  matter  of  the  kingdom  was  enveloped  in  a  "  7^^^s^•,"  and 
was  to  be  gradually  evolved  in  "  the  consciousness  of  the  Churcli  "  by  its 
growth.  Aside  from  thus  virtually  making  Church  authority  superior  to 
Scripture  (for  according  to  this  theory  we  know  far  more  doctrinal  truth 
than  the  apostles),  we  earnestly  protest  against  such  a  defense,  which  leaves 
the  apostles  chargeable  with  error  (embracing  the  husk  instead  of  the 
kernel),  invalidates  their  testimony,  and  makes  them  unreliable  guides. 
Under  several  of  the  propositions  this  feature  will  be  duly  examined  ;  for 
the  present  we  have  only  to  say  :  the  reason  for  such  alack  of  unity,  of 
vital  connection,  of  satisfactory  apologetics,  arises  simply  from  ignoring  a 
fact  brought  out  vividly  by  Barnabas  in  his  Epistle — viz.,  that  the  Abra- 
hamic  Covenant  contained  the  formative  principles,  the  nucleus  oi  the  Plan 
of  Redemption  ;  and  that  all  future  revelations  is  an  unveiling,  a  develop- 
ing, a  preparation  for  the  ultimate  fulfilment  of  that  covenant,  and  of  the 
kingdom  incorporated  in  the  predictions  and  promises  relating  to  that 
covenant.  The  legitimate  outgrowth  is  alone  to  be  received  as  the 
promised  kingdom,  without  human  addition  in  the  way  of  defining  and 
explaining.  In  this  way  only  can  we  preserve  the  simplicity  and  harmony 
of  Scripture,  find  ourselves  in  unison  with  the  early  preaching  of  this 
kingdom,  and  consistently,  without  detracting  from  the  apostles  and  their 
immediate  followers,  defend  the  Divine  record  against  the  shafts  of 
unbelievers. 

The  multiplicity  and  utter  inconsistency  of  prevailing  interpretations 
of  the  kingdom  ;  the  complete  failure  to  reconcile  such  meanings  with  the 
preaching  of  the  apostles  ;  the  unfortunate  concessions  made  by  able  theo- 
logians to  the  Strauss  and  Bauer  school  on  the  subject  of  the  kingdom  ;  the 
impossibility  of  preserving  the  authority  and  unity  of  the  apostolic  teaching 
from  the  modern  standpoint  of  the  kingdom  ;  the  honest  desire  to  obtain, 
if  possible,  the  truth — these  and  other  considerations  led  the  writer  to 
repeatedly  consider,  for  many  years,  the  Divine  Revelation  (in  connection 
with  the  history  of  man)  with  special  reference  to  this  subject,  until  he  was 
forced,  by  the  vast  array  of  authority  and  the  satisfactory  unity  of  teach- 
ing and  of  purpose  which  it  presented,  not  only  to  discard  the  modern 
definitions  as  untrustworthy,  but  to  accept  of  the  old  view  of  the  kingdom 
as  the  one  clearly  taught  by  the  prophets,  Jesus,  the  disciples,  the  apostles, 
the  apostolic  fathers,  and  their  immediate  successors.  In  a  course  of  read- 
ing and  study  it  has  been  constantly  kept  in  view,  and  the  results,  after  a 
laborious  comparison  of  Scripture,  are  now  laid  before  the  reader.  This 
work  is  far  from  being  exhaustive.  Here  are  only  i^fesented  the  outlines 
of  that  which  some  other  mind  may  mould  into  a  more  attractive  and 
comprehensive  form.  Owing  to  providences  which  prevented  the  writer 
from  actively  prosecuting  the  ministry,  he  was  directed  to  a  course  of  study 


16  INTRODUCTION^. 

wliicli  influenced  Tiim  years  ago  to  draw  up  a  draft  of  the  present  work. 
The  need  of  such  an  one  was  then  impressed,  and  this  impression  has  been 
deepened  by  a  varied  and  close  observation.  Yet,  feeling  the  necessity  of 
caution,  it  was  held  in  abeyance  to  allow  renewed  reflection  and  investiga- 
tion, until  finally  a  sense  of  duty  has  impelled  him  to  publish  it  as  now 
given.  If  it  possesses  no  other  merit  than  that  of  presenting  in  a  comj^act 
and  logical  form  the  Millenarian  views  of  the  ancient  and  modern  believers, 
and  in  paving  the  way  for  a  more  strict  and  consistent  interpretation  of 
the  kingdom,  this  itself  would  already  be  sufficient  justification  for  its 
publication.  The  work,  aside  from  its  main  leading  idea,  contains  a 
mass  of  information  on  a  variety  of  subjects  and  texts  which  may  prove 
interesting,  if  not  valuable,  in  suggestions  to  others.  The  author  is  not 
desirous  to  play  the  Diogenes,  evincing,  untler  the  garb  of  humility  and 
pretended  low  opinion  of  self,  the  utmost  vainglory  ;  or  to  enact  the 
Alexander,  showing,  through  an  ardent  desire  for  praise,  a  strong  ambition 
for  honors.  A  due  medium,  involving  self-respect  and  a  sincere  desire  to 
secure  the  approval  of  good  men,  is  the  most  desirable,  and  also  the  most 
consistent  with  modesty.  He  therefore  concluded,  that  no  one  could 
justly  suspect  his  honesty  of  purpose,  integrity,  and  desire  to  promote  the 
truth,  if  he  would  publish  his  thoughts  in  the  form  herein  given,  even  if 
he  went  to  the  length — impelled  by  what  he  regarded  as  truth — of  giving 
the  decided  opinion,  with  reasons  attached,  that  the  views  so  universally 
promulgated  respecting  the  kingdom  of  God  are  radically  wrong,  deroga- 
tory to  the  Plan  of  Redemption,  opposed  to  the  honor  of  the  Messiah,  and 
a  remnant,  remarkably  preserved,  of  Alexandrian,  monkish,  and  popish 
interpretation.  Not  that  the  writer  claims  entire  freedom  from  error  him- 
self. Imperfection  and  a  liability  to  err  are,  more  or  less,  the  condition  of 
all  human  writings,  even  of  the  most  well  intended.  Therefore,  while,  in 
illustrating  or  defending  my  own  views,  the  opinions  of  others  may  be 
brought  into  review,  it  is  far  from  me  to  assert  that  in  some  things,  either 
through  inadvertency,  or  ignorance,  or  prejudice,  the  author  may  not  be 
ultimately  found  to  be  in  error.  Seeing  that  this  is  our  own  common  lot, 
it  would  be  unwise  to  approach  each  other's  works  with  any  other  than 
candid  eyes  and  charitable  hearts  ;  so  that,  while  we  may  feel  to  regret 
what  appears  to  us  a  mistake,  we  may  at  the  same  time  duly  acknowledge 
the  truth  which  is  given.  It  may  be  proper  to  add  in  this  connection, 
lest  the  spirit  and  motive  be  misinterpreted,  that  in  the  course  of  the 
work  the  names  of  authors  are  necessarily  presented  w^hose  views  are  antag- 
onistic to  those  here  advocated.  As  it  would  have  required  considerable 
space  to  insert  in  each  instance  the  respect  and  high  regard  the  author  has 
for  them,  although  they  thus  differ  from  him,  he  may  be  allowed,  once  for 
all,  to  say  that,  while  compelled  to  dissent  from  them,  he  nevertheless 
estee77is  them  none  the  less  as  believers  in  Christ.  Honestly  impelled  to 
differences,  and,  in  justice  to  our  subject,  to  criticise  the  views  of  eminent 
men,  we  still  gratefully  acknowledge  ourselves  largely  indebted  to  many  of 
them  for  valuable  information,  instruction,  and  suggestions.  We  have  no 
desire  to  reproach  them,  or,  in  imitation  of  some  of  them  in  reference  to 
ourselves,  to  call  their  integrity,  or  piety,  or  orthodoxy  into  question.  W^) 
may  even  indulge  the  hope  that  this  work  may  elicit  renewed  reflection, 
study,  and  discussion,  leading  to  the  removal  of  the  evident  weakness  a.id 
contradictory  statements  of  the  prevailing  Church  view.  Its  publication 
may,  we  trust,  be  provocative  of  good,  sustaining  as  it  does  the  humble 


INTRODUCTION.  17 

position  of  a  forernnncr  of  the  truth,  or  the  relationship  of  being  merely 
suggestive,  and  thus  opening  the  wa}^  for  a  more  severe  and  critical 
examination  of  a  doctrine  which  has  been  too  much  taken  for  granted. 
Defective  as  our  works  are  in  some  respects,  yet  gifted  minds  have  asserted, 
with  charity  and  truth,  that  no  mental  toil,  no  laborious  research,  no 
earnestness  of  effort  to  interpret  the  Scriptures,  however  deficient  in  part 
or  whole,  should  be  undervalued,  or  scouted,  or  denounced,  because  all 
such  may  either  present  some  truth  which  may  serve  to  elucidate  others, 
or  produce  thoughts  that  may  be  suggestive  to  others  in  introducing  true 
knowledge.  We  too  often  overlook  even  our  indebtedness  to  opposers  of  our 
opinions  and  belief.  What  Julius  Miiller  says  should  influence  us  not 
only  to  attempt  to  labor  ourselves,  but  to  tolerate  the  efforts  of  others  : 
"  Our  attempts  to  exhibit  the  truth  in  its  entirety  and  connection  are  only 
like  the  prattle  of  children,  compared  with  that  clear  knowledge  which 
awaits  us  ;  but  woe  would  it  be  to  us  if,  because  we  cannot  have  the 
perfect,  we  should  cease  to  apply  to  the  imperfect,  in  all  truthfulness 
and  honor,  our  strength  and  toil"  (quoted  by  Auberlen,  Div.  Rev., 
p.  415).  This  work  is  written  under  the  impression,  deepened  by  the  tes- 
timony of  able  scholars,  that  the  love  of  truth  is  one  of  the  fundamental 
principles  given  to  us  by  Christianity,  and  revived  by  the  spirit  of  Protes- 
tantism and  Science.  Ignorance,  fanaticism,  party  prejudice,  etc.  may 
indeed  at  times  have  obscured  it,  but  intelligent  piety  has  constantly 
restored  it.  Under  its  influence  every  inquiry  after  the  truth,  if  conducted 
with  reverence  to  the  Word,  without  animosity,  and  in  meekness,  even  if 
unsuccessful  in  its  full  attainment,  is  regarded  by  the  truly  learned  and 
wise  with  charity,  without  an  impugning  of  motives,  or  questioning  of 
the  religious  standpoint  of  the  searcher.  This  leads  ot  course,  to  the 
position,  that  the  credit  we  desire  to  be  awarded  to  ourselves  for  present- 
ing what  we  conceive  to  be  truth,  should  be  likewise  extended  to  others. 
And  if  others  cUiim,  that  they  are  not  to  decline  the  responsibility  of  hold- 
ing forth  the  whole  truth  from  our  apprehension  of  consequences  ;  that 
they  are  not  to  disguise  or  withdraw  it  through  fear  of  giving  offense,  of 
losing  reputation  and  support — we  justly  claim  the  same  privilege.  More 
than  this  :  we  can  say  with  a  distinguished  theologian,  who,  contrasting 
the  labors  of  more  recent  theologians  with  those  of  the  older,  and  pointing 
out  how  the  Old  Testament  is  beginning  to  be  appreciated  in  its  relations 
to  the  Xew  Testament,  and  the  future — how  the  historical  and  doctrinal 
features  of  the  primitive  Church  are  more  distinctly  developed,  how  the 
place  of  the  Church  in  its  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  God  is  more  fully 
recognized— adds,  that  these  are  only  "  the  beginnings  of  a  work  in  which 
it  is  a  pleasure  and  joy  to  have  any  share."  ^ 

This  pleasure,  however,  is  materially  affected  by  one  feature,  the  natural 
result  of  human  infi-mity.  Uprightness  demands  that  we  follow  the 
truth  wherever  it  may  lead,  regardless  of  results,  keeping  in  mind  the 
remark  of  Canstein  (Lange,  Com.,  vol.  1,  p.  516),  "  Straightforward- 
ness is  best.  When  we  seek  to  make  the  truth  bend,  it  usually 
breaks."  Tbe  doctrine  discussed  in  the  following  pages  being  within  th(? 
field  of  controversy,  and  the  subject  of  varied  interpretation,  it  will 
become  in  its  turn,  owing  to  its  antagonism  to  the  prevailing  theology,  the 
legitimate  subject  of  criticism.     Of  this  we  do  not  complain,  but  rather 

'  Auberlen.  D'lv.  Bev.,  p.  26-i. 


18  INTRODUCTION. 

commend  the  fact.  *'  History  repeats  itself/'  and  in  sucli  a  repetition  we 
do  not  flatter  ourselves  to  escape  the  nsual  fate  of  our  predecessors  in 
authorship.  Indeed,  we  already  have  had  sad  foretastes  of  the  same,  con- 
firming the  teaching  of  Scripture,  and  corroborating  the  experience  of 
good  men,  that  no  exercise  of  wisdom,  caution,  and  prudence  will  be  able 
wholly  to  avert  the  evil  tongues  and  pens  of  others.  Some  men  seem  to  be 
constitutionally  constituted  to  be  "  heresy-hunters,"  and  imbibe  largely  the 
spirit  of  Osianderof  Tubingen, who (Dorner's  Hist.  Prof.  Tlieol.,  p.  185,  note) 
discovered  in  Arndt's  writings  Popery,  Monkery,  Enthusiasm,  Pelagianism, 
Calvinism,  Schwenckfeldianism,  Flacianism,  and  Wegelianism.  Arndt 
survived  the  attack  and  still  gloriously  lives  in  the  esteem  of  true  Christian 
freedom,  while  his  opponent  is  almost  forgotten.  This  random  illustra- 
tion^ is  taken  from  a  vast  multitude  familiar  to  every  scholar,  and  serves 
to  indicate  a  weakness  naturally  inherent  in  some  men,  and  who, 
perhaps,  are  scarcely  answerable  for  its  unfortunate  display.  Truth  itself, 
hoAvever,  requires  no  such  picking  of  flaws,  no  harshness  of  language,  no 
personality  of  attack,  no  bigoted  and  selfish  support.  She  loves  to  hide 
herself  in  meekness,  humility,  and  love,  while  the  graces  of  the  spirit 
surround  and  accompany  her.  The  rude  grasp,  the  rough  touch  even,  is 
sure  to  mar  the  neat  foldings  and  to  spoil  the  downy  softness  and  shining 
lustre  of  her  garments.  That  this  work  will  bring  upon  the  author  bitter 
and  unrelenting  abuse  is  almost  inevitable,  presenting  as  it  does  unpalata- 
ble truths  to  a  proud  humanity.  How  can  this  be  otherwise,  when  even 
the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  intended  as  a  bond  of  union  and  love, 
has  been  made  the  subject  of  uncharitable  diseord,  violent  abuse,  and 
miserable  hatred  between  professed  believers.  While  we  trust  that  the 
spirit  which  actuated  many  of  the  eucharistic  controversies  may  never 
again  arise,  we  are  only  too  sensible,  from  treatment  already  experienced, 
that  human  nature  remains  the  same.  If  the  amiable  Melanchthon  did 
not  escape,  but  most  earnestly  wished  to  be  delivered  from  the  rabies  tlieo- 
logorum.,  how  can  others  be  safe  ?  Even  the  Master  himself  2oas  and  is 
attacked,  and  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  Master.  The  virulence 
occasionally  received  from  some  quarters  reminds  one  of  the  utterances  of 
older  controversialists,  such  as  Henry  VIII. 's  work,  Luther's  rej^ly,  and 
More's  rejoinder.  Perhaps,  like  St.  Austin  and  others,  they  regard  such 
a  manifestation  of  spirit  as  perfectly  legitimate,  desirable,  and  honor- 
able. We  do  not  quarrel  with  those  who  have  inherited  a  taste  for  "  bitter 
herbs."  Expressing  ourselves  candidly  and  fairly  toward  our  ojiponents, 
we  dare  not  return  the  epithets  so  liberally  bestowed  upon  us.  Two  reasons 
prevent  us  :  the  first  is,  that  dealing  as  we  do  "  with  the  testimony  of 
Jesus,  which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy,"  entering  the  sacred  province  of 
Scripture  with  the  words  of  God  constantly  flowing  from  our  pen,  portray- 
ing the  holy  utterances  of  the  Most  High,  it  ill  becomes  us,  when  thus 
writing  of  the  precious  things  pertaining  to  redemption,  the  kingdom  of 
the  Great  King,  and  the  ultimate  glory  of  God,  to  mingle  with  it  the 
painful  evidences  of  human  passion.  The  second  is,  dealing  with  a 
subject  which,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  has  been  misapprehended  by 
talented  men,  it  is  amply  sufficient,  for  the  elucidation  and  confirmation  of 
the  truth,  to  point  out  defects  and  exhibit  statements  in  opposition  with- 

1  The   Faculty  of  Wittenberg  with  John   Deutschman   (Kurtz's   Ch.  Hist.,  vol.  2,  p. 
211)  charged  the  amiable  Spener  with  264  errors,  so  lynx-eyed  are  some  critics. 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

out  defaming  the  character  or  standing  of  any  one.  The  latter  procedure 
is  worthy  alone  of  a  grovelling  Jesuitical  casuistry.  Our  names  (Millena- 
rian)  have  been  linked  with  Cerinthus,  heresy,  etc.,  which  is  only  imitat- 
ing the  amiable  example  of  the  Jesuit  Theophilus  Raynaud,  who  was  noted 
for  coupling  his  adversaries  with  some  odious  name  to  render  them,  if 
possible,  contemptible  by  the  comparison.  It  is  the  same  trick  resorted  to 
by  some  Jews  to  wound  Christ,  and  can  only  have  weight  with  the 
unreflecting/  To  hold  up  the  faults  of  opinion  in  others,  for  the  sake  of 
contrasting,  explaining,  and  enforcing  the  truth,  is  allowable  to  all  ; 
especially  when  they  are  published,  and  thus  become  a  sort  of  common 
property,  or  at  least  challenge  the  notice  of  others  ;  but  to  hold  up  a 
man's  faults  simply  to  make  him  odious  is  a  despicable  business.  As  Ful- 
ler {Eccl,  Hist.,  Book  X.,  p.  27)  has  wisely  said  :  "  What  a  monster 
might  be  made  out  of  the  best  beauties  in  the  world,  if  a  limner  should 
leave  what  is  lovely  and  only  collect  into  one  picture  what  he  findeth 
amiss  in  them  !  I  know  that  there  be  white  teeth  in  the  blackest  blacka- 
moor, and  a  black  bill  in  the  whitest  swan.  Worst  men  have  somethino- 
to  be  commended  ;  best  men,  something  in  them  to  be  condemned.  Only  to 
insist  on  men's  faults,  to  render  them  odious,  is  no  ingenious  (sic) 
employment,"  etc.  We  doubt  not  the  ultimate  fulfilment  of  Isa.  (jQ  :  5 
in  the  case  of  many  who  have  been  thus  defamed  :  "  Hear  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  ye  that  tremble  at  His  word  ;  your  brethren  that  hated  you, 
that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  sake,  said.  Let  the  Lord  be  glorified  Tbut 
He  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be  ashamed."  This  passage 
suggests  that  a  mistaken  zeal  for  God's  glory  may  often  be  the  leading 
motive  of  controversial  bitterness — that  our  "  brethren  "  may,  through 
such  overzeal,  be  its  willing  instruments.  This,  alas,  embitters  author- 
ship on  controverted  questions.  The  opposition  and  obloquy  consequent 
to  and  connected  with  such  a  discussion  as  follows  while  duly  antici- 
pated,^ as  a  heritage  of  the  studious  sons  of  the  Church  (the  more  marked 
their  labors,  the  greater  the  abuse),  would  be  less  painful  if  it  came  only 
from  infidels  or  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  but  much  of  it  comes  through 
those  from  whom,  in  view  of  a  common  faith  and  hope,  ^e  expect  differ- 
ent treatment — at  least  forbearance  if  not  charity.     Acknowledging   the 

^  Simple  candor  requires  us  to  say,  that  some  of  our  opponents  write  against  us  in  a 
style  that  forcibly  reminds  us  of  the  Popish  bulls  against  heretics,  or  the  supercilious  lan- 
guage addressed  by  sundry  ecclesiastical  and  civil  judges,  in  the  days  of  Queen  Elizabeth, 
against  the  Puritans— a  style  constantly  reiterated  in  history  and  produced  by  the  spirit, 
"  I  am  holier  than  thou,"  connected  with  a  feeling  of  j^ersonal  importance  akin  to  that 
of  the  petty  constable  who  felt  that  anything  in  opposition  to  himself  was  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  commonwealth  itself.  Yet  philosophy  may  suggest,  that  reproach,  however 
bestowed,  often  answers,  like  the  dark  background  or  shading  of  a  portrait,  to  bring  out 
more  vividly  the  individuality — a  principle  that  Eenan  recognizes  in  Christ  ;  the  re- 
proaches of  others  bringing  out,  by  way  of  contrast,  more  prominently  and  distinctively 
the  traits  and  characteristics  of  Jesus.  Would  any  lover  of  the  Christ  wish  this  part  of 
the  record  blotted  out  ?  If  not,  why  object  to  it  when  related  to  ourselves,  especially 
when  contrasted  with  Matt.  5  :  10-12',  etc. 

'^  When  Spalatin,  the  chaplain  of  Frederick  the  Wise,  desired  to  translate  a  work  that 
would  give  general  satisfaction  and  at  the  same  time  be  useful,  he  requested  Luther  to 
recommend  to  him  such  an  one.  Luther,  in  his  reply,  declared  that  it  was  impossible  to 
find  such  a  book,  saying,  that  if  he  wished  to  make  people  "  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ, 
you  will  be  useful  and  agreeable,  depend  upon  it,  to  a  very  small  number  only. "  Luther's 
view,  alas,  is  painfully  corroborated  by  the  disputes  over  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus,"  and 
the  recompense  meted  out  to  those  calling  specific  attention  to  it. 


20  INTRODliCTIOlS^. 

respectful  and  Christian  manner  in  which  we  are  spoken  of  by  a  number  of 
our  opponents,  yet  the  simple  fact  is,  that  if  any  one  dares  to  arise  and 
call  into  question  the  correctness  of  popular  "views  and  pro230se  another,  one 
too  in  strict  accordance  with  the  early  teaching  of  the  Church,  his  motives 
are  assailed,  his  piety  is  doubted,  his  character  is  i3rivately  and  publicly 
traduced,  his  learning  and  ability  are  lowered,  his  position  is  accorded  a 
scornful  and  degrading  pity,  by  persons  who  deem  themselves  set  up  for 
the  defense  of  the  truth.  This  plainness  of  speech  the  reader  will 
pardon  when  he  is  assured  that  the  writer,  for  the  sake  of  the  opinions 
set  forth  in  this  work,  has  suffered  all  this  from  the  hands  of  "  brethren," 
who,  by  such  efforts,  reproaches,  innuendoes,  etc.,  have  sought  to  lessen 
his  influence  and  retard  his  preferment.  Precisely  as  the  learned  Mede 
and  hundreds  of  others  have  experienced.^  We  here  enter  our  protest, 
that  truth  is  never  benefited  by  such  conduct,  and  that  Christianity  in  its 
most  rudimentary  form  forbids  such  treatment.  But  in  justice  to  the  real- 
ly intelligent  class  of  our  opponents,  we  must  say  that  such  dealings 
toward  us  do  not  come  from  the  truly  learned  opposer — for  among  such  the 
writer  has  the  pleasure  of  numbering  valued  friends.  One  feature  of  this 
work  will  bring  upon  us  the  censure  of  some— viz.,  the  candid  concessions 
made  to  unbelievers  who  attack  the  Scriptures,  and  the  acceptance  of 
the  principle  of  interpretation  {i.e..  the  grammatical  sense),  the  views 
entertained  respecting  the  kingdom  by  John  the  Baptist,  disciples,  and 
early  church,  etc.,  to  which  the  writer  is  forced  by  justice,  love  for  the 
truth,  and  the  decided,  overwhelming  proof  presented  in  behalf  of  the 
same.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  many  facts  pertaining  to  the  king- 
dom, as  covenanted,  predicted,  and  preached,  are  either  entirely  ignored  or 
most  imperfectly  (inconsistently)  explained  by  Christian  A])ologists.  But 
these  very  concessions  form  for  us  a  means  of  logical  strength,  of  consonant 
unity,  of  accordance  with  Scripture  and  history,  that,  meeting  unbelief 
fairly  and  lionesthj  upon  its  own  ground,  furnish  us  with  the  proper 
weapons  for  defending  the  integrity  of  the  Word  and  the  reputation  of  the 
first  preachers  of  "  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,"  bringing  a  continued  veri- 
fication of  the  Divine  utterance,  that  "  a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his 


1  Compare  tlie  case  of  Edward  Irving  {Life  of,  by  Mrs.  Oliphant,  pp.  337-339),  who  of- 
fered to  win  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Divinity  by  submitting  to  an  academical  examina- 
tion, etc.  Some  of  our  opi)onents  have  received  the  title  for  writing  books  against  us. 
Those  subject  to  such  treatment  can,  however,  console  themselves  with  such  passages 
as  1  Cor.  3:18,  when,  as  Barnes  tells  us  {Com.  loci.,  Eeniark  17),  that  the  Christian 
"must  be  w^illing  to  be  esteemed  a  fool  ;  to  be  despised  ;  to  have  his  name  cast  out  as 
evil  ;  and  to  be  regarded  as  even  under  delusion  and  deception.  Whatever  may  be  his 
rank  or  his  reputation  for  wisdom  and  talent  and  learning,  he  must  be  willing  to  be 
regarded  as  a  fool  by  his  former  associates,"  etc.  Alas  !  this  was  foreseen,  and  hence  the 
encouragement  given  by  Jesus,  Matt.  5  :  11,  etc.  Bishoj)  Newton  remarks  {Proph. 
■.Diss.,  Vol.  2,  p.  164:),  tliat  we  have  but  little  encouragement  from  the  Church  in 
studies  of  this  kind,  and  instances  the  neglect  bestowed  upon  two,  "  the  most  learned 
men  of  their  times,"  viz.,  Mede  and  Daubuz.  The  experience  of  many  corroborates  this 
statement.  The  writer  has  now  in  his  mind  several  men  of  eminent  ability,  who  are 
suffering  from  the  covert  and  open  attacks  of  "  brethren,"  and  are  in  danger  of  losing 
positions  of  usefulness  and  trust.  But  we  console  ourselves  wdth  Rothe's  declaration 
("  Stille  Stunde")  :  "  He  whose  thoughts  rise  a  little  above  the  trivial  must  not  be  sur- 
prised if  he  is  thoroughly  misunderstood  by  most  men."  One  of  the  severest  trials — in- 
cident to  our  infirmity— to  a  sensitive  heart,  is  the  loss  of  personal  friends,  highly 
esteemed,  through  adhesion  to  what  is  honestly  regarded  as  the  truth,  but  which  such 
may  suppose  to  be  error. 


INTRODUCTIOIS".  21 

own  lionsehold. "  Of  course,  Ave  expect  no  special  favor  from  gross 
Infidels,  Spiritualists,  Mystics,  Free  Religionists,  and  a  variety  of  others, 
whose  basis  necessarily  leads  to  opposition  and  whose  unbelief  is  frankly 
criticised.  Yet  even  such  have  dealt  far  more  justly  toward  us,  owing  to 
our  honest  conceptions  of  historical  facts,  than  members  who  were  united 
with  us  in  the  same  church.  We  may  suitably  close  this  section  by  again 
referring  to  that  noble  characteristic  of  candor  which  should,  above  all, 
mark  our  criticism  of  doctrine.  We  select  as  an  apt  illustration  of  our 
meaning  the  honorable  example  of  Professor  Bush.  Although  in  his 
writings  an  opposer  of  Millenarianism,  he  endeavors  to  conceal  no  facts, 
however  adverse  to  himself,  but  freely  gives  them,  being  too  much  of  a 
scholar  to  be  unacquainted  with  them,  and  too  much  of  a  gentleman  and 
Christian  either  to  ignore,  or  to  despise,  or  to  deny  them.  Thus,  e.g.,  he 
fully  admits  the  universality  of  our  doctrine  in  the  first  three  centuries  and 
eloquently  says  :  "  We  are  well  aware  of  the  imposing  array  of  venerable 
names  by  which  it  (Chiliasm)  is  surrounded,  as  if  it  were  the  bed  of  Solo- 
mon guarded  by  threescore  valiant  men  of  Israel,  all  holding  swords,  and 
expert  in  war."  Unable  to  receive  our  doctrine,  he  still  does  justice  to 
that  noble  list  of  martyrs,  confessors,  writers,  theologians,  missionaries, 
and  others,  who  have  held  it,  and  finds  in  them  the  redeeming  qualities  of 
Christian  integrity,  faith,  love,  and  holiness. 

It  is  a  fact,  lamented  by  some  of  our  ablest  divines,  that  there  must  be 
something  radically  wrong  in  our  prevailing  interpretation  of  the  Bible, 
which  allows  such  a  diversity  of  antagonistic  exegesis  and  doctrine,  and  by 
which  the  truth  is  weakened  and  humbled,  so  that  Revelation  itself,  by  its 
means,  becomes  the  object  of  Rationalistic  and  Infidel  ridicule  and 
attack,  and  is  even  sorely  wounded  in  the  house  of  its  friends  by  its 
stumbling,  conceding,  but  well-meaning  apologetic  defenders.  To  indi- 
cate this  feeling,  which  prevails  to  a  considerable  extent.  Dr.  Auber- 
len  {Div.  Rev.,  p.  387)  quotes  Rothe  as  saying  respecting  the  defects  of 
exegesis  :  "  Our  key  does  not  open — the  right  key  is  lost ;  and  till  w^e  are 
23ut  in  possession  of  it  again,  our  exposition  will  never  succeed.  The 
system  of  biblical  ideas  is  not  that  of  our  schools  ;  and  so  long  as  we 
attempt  exegesis  w^ithout  it,  the  Bible  will  remain  a  half-closed  hook.  We 
must  enter  upon  it  w^ith  other  conceptions  than  those  which  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  think  ^/^e  only  ])Ossihle  ones;  and  whatever  these  may  be, 
this  one  thing  at  least  is  certain,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  melody  of 
Scripture  in  its  natural  fulness,  that  they  must  be  more  realistic  and 
massive.''^  This  is  a  sad  confession  after  the  voluminous  labors  of  cen- 
turies, and  yet  true  as  it  is  sorrowful.  We  may  be  allowed  to  suggest, 
that  the  only  way  in  which  this  key  can  be  obtained  is  to  return  to  the 
principles  of  interpretation  adopted  and  prevailing  in  the  very  early  history 
of  the  Christian  Church,  by  which,  if  consistently  carried  out,  the  kingdom 
of  God  in  its  "  realistic  and  massive  "  form  appears  as  the  reliable  inter- 
preter of  the  Word.  In  other  words,  we  have  no  suitable  key  to  unlock 
Revelation  if  we  do  not  seize  that  provided  for  us  in  the  revealed  Will  of 
God  respecting  the  ultimate  end  that  He  has  in  view  in  the  plan  of 
redemption  and  the  history  of  the  world.  A  way  is  only  known  when  the 
beginning  and  terminus  are  considered  ;  a  human  plan  can  only  be 
properly  appreciated  when  the  results  of  it  -are  fully  weighed  :  so  with 
God's  way  and  God's  plan,  it  can  only  be  fully  known  when  the  end 
intended  is  duly  regarded.     How  to  do  this  will  be  contained  in  some  of 


22  INTRODUCTION". 

the  following  propositions.  That  it  will  be  accomplished  we  doubt  not, 
and  we  are  encouraged  to  labor  on  when  such  men  as  Dr.  Dorner 
(p.  4,  In  trod.,  vol.  2,  Hist,  of  Prot.  Theol.),  expressing  the  sentiments 
of  many  others,  says  :  "  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Holy  Scripture 
contains  a  rich  abundance  of  truths  and  views,  which  have  yet  to 
le  expounded  and  made  the  common  j^ossession  of  the  Church,"  and 
adds,  that  this  will  be  done  as  the  necessity  of  the  Church  requires/ 
This,  however,  cannot  be  accomplished  without  long  and  laborious  stndy 
of  the  Scriptures,  diligent  comparison  of  them,  and  inflexible  abiding 
within  the  limits  of  their  plain,  grammatical  teaching.  We  have  no 
sympathy  with  that  flippant,  unargumentr.tive,  higii-sounding,  but 
unscriptural  mode  of  presenting  theological  questions,  so  prevalent  at  the 
l^resent  day,  by  which  the  merest  tyro  of  a  student  endeavors  to  elevate 
himself,  as  a  teacher,  above  men  who  have  been  trained  by  grave  and 
extended  reflection,  and  which  manifests  itself  by  despising  the  teachings 
of  the  Apostolic  Fathers  and  of  the  noble  men  of  the  Church,  and  enforces 
its  views  by  an  applauding  of  modern  views  and  modern  theories  as 
evidences  of  progression  in  truth.  The  dignity  of  religion,  the  steadfast- 
ness of  faith,  and  the  reliability  of  the  discovery  of  truth,  must  suffer  by 
such  a  style,  which  lacks  the  strength  imparted  by  a  scriptural  basis — a 
*'  thus  saith  the  Lord'^ — being  built  upon  the  deductions  of  reason,  with, 
perhaps,  here  and  there  a  scripture  passage  thrown  in  byway  of  ornament.^ 
Give  us  men,  who,  instead  of  following  their  own  fancies,  or  binding  their 
faith  to  human  utterances,  availing  themselves  of  preceding  knowledge, 
patiently,  thoughtfully,  and  reverently  go  to  the  very  roots  of  questions, 
and  in  things  revealed  by  God  determinately  reject  everything  inconsistent 
with  such  a  revelation.     We  know  that  such  a  course  demands  courage 


1  See  tlie  duty  of  contribution  in  this  direction  insisted  upon,  and  so  eloquently  ex- 
l^ressed  by  Van  Gosterzee  m  his  address,  "  The  Gospel  History  and  Modern  Criticism," 
before  the  Evangelical  Alliance  of  1873,  and  his  insistence  ujoon  all  in  the  church  in  a 
broad  catholic  spirit  participating,  happily  quoting  Dr.  Nevin  :  "  The  sectarian  spirit  is 
always  fanatical,  or  affects  strength  and  has  none."  Oosterzee  in  his  Ch.  Dog. 
(vol.  1,  p.  69),  speaking  of  an  advancing  and  clearer  apprehension  of  the  truth,  antici- 
jDates,  such  "  e.g.  on  the  subject  of  the  eschatology  of  the  nineteenth  century." 

'^  We  are  reminded  of  Henry  More's  sarcastic  remark  of  smatterers  in  theology,  who 
are  "  parrot-like  prattlers,  boasting  their  wonderful  insight  to  holy  truth,  when  as  they 
have  indeed  scarce  licked  the  outside  of  the  glasse  wherein  it  lies."  Human  nature  alM^ays 
produces  a  class  who  think  that  what  they  do  not  know  is  not  worth  knowing,  or  who 
suppose  that,  from  the  knowledge  professed,  they  are  eminently  qualified  to  judge  of 
those  things  never  examined  or  studied.  The  latter  are  illustrated  by  the  professor  of 
Church  history  (mentioned,  Blackwood' s  Magazine,  June  1873,  in  article  on  Dr.  Arnold), 
who,  when  questioned  as  to  the  writings  of  the  Aj)osto]ic  Fathers,  and  the  Apologists  of 
the  second  century,  replied,  that  he  knew  nothing  of  these  writings,  but  "  what  with 
the  Bible  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  human  consciousness  on  the  other,  he  knew  very 
well  what  must  have  hapjjened  in  that  century."  Bishop  Berkeley's  saying  is  still  true  : 
"  In  the  present  age  thinking  is  more  talked  of  but  less  practised  than  in  ancient  times, " 
In  ancient  times  the  thinkers  were  the  instructors  ;  nowadays  nearly  every  one  sets  him- 
self up  for  a  teacher.  The  tendency  now  is  to  despise  laborious  research  and  to  substitute 
tinsel  ;  scholarship  must  give  place  to  beautiful  writing  ;  depth  must  be  sacrificed  for  a 
vast  range  of  graceful  figures  of  speech.  The  Bishop  of  Exeter  {The  Intellectual  Life, 
p.  46)  has  well  said,  confirmed  as  it  is  by  experience,  "  of  all  work  that  produces  results, 
nine  tenths  must  he  drudgery" — "  there  is  nothing  which  so  truly  repays  itself  as  this 
very  perseverance  against  weariness,"  The  discriminating,  the  scholarly,  the  wise,  will, 
over  against  the  large  majority,  give  due  credit  to  evidenced  study  and  labor,  even  if  un- 
able to  accept  of  all  its  results. 


INTKODUCTION.  23 

and  study,  but  in  every  instance  when  exhibited  by  published  labors,  it  will 
command,  if  not  the  entire  assent,  the  respect  of  the  truly  learned  ;  for 
the  latter,  from  experience,  can  appreciate,  at  least,  the  toil  in  producing 
such  a  work.  Give  us  such  men,  and  then  we  can  hope  to  make  advance- 
ment in  Christian  knowledge,  in  harmonizing  the  difficulties  besetting 
theology,  and  in  widening  the  domain  of  thought,  faith,  and  hope.  What 
we  want  is  solidity,  and  that,  in  theology,  is  alone  attainable  by  having 
underneath  as  a  foundation  to  build  on  the  pure  declarations  of  God. 
What  God  says  is  true,  what  man  says  may  be  true  ;  and  the  truthfulness 
of  the  latter  can  be  ascertained,  its  certainty  demonstrated,  by  compar- 
ing it  with  that  which  God  has  declared.  If  the  comparison  is  favorable, 
let  us  accept  of  it  ;  if  unfavorable,  then  let  us  have  the  Christian  manhood 
to  reject  it,  no  matter  under  whose  name,  patronage,  or  auspices  it  is 
given.  Rendering  the  regard  due  to  the  writings  of  others,  it  does  not 
follow  that  we  must  elevate  them  to  the  position  of  competitors  of,  or  peers 
with,  the  Divine  utterances.  Such  a  test  the  author  solicits  from  the 
reader,  bringing  to  the  consideration  of  the  subject  an  impartial  judgment, 
and  weighing  its  value  and  authority  in  the  scripture  balance  and  not  in 
human  scales.  Every  sincere  lover  of  the  truth,  even  should  his  labor  be 
rejected  in  part  or  whole,  must  feel  honored  by  the  institution  of  such  a 
comparison. 

It  has,  however,  been  the  fate  of  some  authors  to  be  so  far  in  advance  of 
their  contemporaries  that,  appreciated  only  by  the  few  discerning  or 
candid,  it  has  required  time,  or  the  necessity  of  the  Church,  or  the  endorse- 
ments of  a  line  of  students  to  give  importance  and  weight  to  their  state- 
ments. While  the  deepest  thinkers  freely  admit  that  neio  and  valuable 
contributions  to  theology  are  reasonably  to  be  anticipated,  that  such  are 
absolutely  required  at  the  present  juncture,  and  that  such  can  only  be 
found  in  the  rich  resources  of  the  Word,  yet  it  is  remarkable  that  a 
contribution  thus  given  will,  especially  in  the  hands  of  those  whose  minds 
are  controlled  by  human  traditions  and  by  an  exalting  of  Church  author- 
ity above  that  of  the  Scriptures,  be  rejected  and  anathematized  on  the 
ground  of  its  being  in  opposition  to  their  preconceived  and  favorite 
formula  of  doctrine.^  Others,  through  indifference  or  an  indisposition 
to  examination,  will  pass  it  by  with,  probably,  a  momentary  interest. 
Others  again,  the  few  tried  friends  of  intellectual  and  theological  effort, 
will  give  it  a  fair,  frank,  and  sincere  reception,  and  form  a  candid  estimate 
of  its  value  based  exclusively  upon  its  correspondence  with  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  The  latter  occupy  the  real  student  position — one  that  Dorner 
has  aptly  characterized  as  of  "  individual  freedom,  that  indispensable 
medium  for  all  genuine  appropriation  of  evangelical  truth" — a  freedom 

'  Truth  has  ever  met  with  bitter  opposition,  and  the  cessation  of  this  condition  would 
nullify  the  example  and  exhortations  of  the  Master,  and  materially  lessen  the  prospect  of 
future  reward  and  glory.  Emerson,  in  referring  to  a  scholar's  duty  to  afford  at  least 
"  hospitality  to  every  new  thought  of  his  time,"  adds  :  "The  highest  compliment  man 
ever  receives  from  heaven,  is  the  sending  to  him  its  disguised  and  discredited  angels." 
Advised  by  some  friends,  who  take  no  interest  in  "  the  blessed  hope,"  to  destroy  my  work 
(and  if  such  advice  had  been  followed  in  the  case  of  others,  exceedingly  valuable  works, 
the  most  highly  esteemed,  would  never  have  seen  the  light  and  secured  the  admiration 
of  multitudes— Comp.  Library  Notes,  \).  145,  etc.,)  because  the  only  books  read  were 
those  of  well-known  and  noted  men,  the  writer  felt  impelled  to  perseverance  for  the  rea- 
sons assigned  in  the  preface. 


24  INTRODUCTIOIT. 

only  limited  by  Eevelation.  Without  intending  an  imitation  of  sncli  great 
writers  as  Bacon  and  others,  who  declared  that  they  wrote  for  "  poster- 
ity," and  that  it  would  require  time  to  "  ripen  "  their  views  so  as  to  cause 
their  due  appreciation,  yet  such  is  the  subject-matter  of  this  work,  so  beset 
and  resisted  by  the  torrent  of  opposing  doctrine,  so  circumscribed  by  the 
intrenched  prevailing  dogmas,  so  unpalatable  to  the  licentiousness  of  the 
increasing  free-thinking,  so  unwelcomed  to  a  proud  and  self-satisfied 
reason,  that  we  are  justly  apprehensive  of  an  overwhelming  opposition  to 
the  following  propositions.  In  this  belief  we  are  fortified  by  the  predic- 
tions of  the  Word,  which  unmistakably  teach  that  they  will  find  but  little 
acceptance  Avith  the  world,  and  even  with  the  Church  at  large,  and  that  they 
will  only  be  pondered  and  received  by  the  thoughtful /ew.  In  this  period 
of  prosperity,  of  sanguine  hope  of  continued  and  ever-increasing  peace 
and  happiness,  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  multitude  will  be  closed 
against  all  appeal,  all  instruction.  It  is  only  when  the  dreadful  storm  of 
persecution  and  death,  alluded  to  in  several  propositions,  shall,  when 
excited  and  marshalled  by  the  elements  and  forces  now  at  work,  burst  with 
fearful  violence  upon  the  Church,  and  beat  with  pitiless  vehemence  upon 
the  heads  of  true,  unflinching  believers  in  Christ,  that  this  luorh  will  find 
a  cordial  response,  a  hearty  welcome  in  the  breasts  of  the  faithful.  Time 
with  its  startling  and  terrible  events  will  justifij  this  publication.  When 
the  dreams  of  fallible  man,  now  so  universally  held  as  the  prophetic 
announcements  of  God,  are  swept  away  by  stern  reality  ;  when,  instead  of 
the  fondly  anticipated  blessedness  and  glory  to  be  brought  about  by  exist- 
ing agencies,  the  blood  of  man  shall  &,gain  stain  and  steep  the  soil  of 
earth  with  its  precious  crimson,  then  will  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  as 
here  taught,  be  regarded  worthy  of  the  highest  consideration,  and  tlien 
will  it  also  become  a  solace,  hope,  and  joy  under  tribulation.  But  to 
remove  the  suspicion  of  arrogance  or  pride  in  making  so  strong  an  asser- 
tion, we  may  be  allowed  to  say,  that  such  a  future  estimation  is  not  based 
on  literary  or  theological  merits  or  attainments,  but  solely  upon  a  strict 
adhesion  to  and  firm  belief  in  the  infallible  Word  of  God  as  herein 
delineated  under  the  guidance  of  a  legitimate  rule  of  interpretation,  by 
which  the  Divine  purposes  relating  to  the  Church  and  world  are  plainly 
and  distinctly  taught.  The  possessions  of  God,  even  the  most  costly,  are 
often  given  to  mere  children,  and  denied  to  the  wise  and  noble.  The 
Magi,  although  babes  in  knowledge  compared  with  the  Pharisees,  came 
nearer  to  the  truth  than  those  who  "supposed  themselves  to  be  specially  set 
up  for  its  advocates.  Numerous  examples  attest  the  same  and  reveal  the 
feature,  that  jnst  in  proportion  as  a  man,  learned  or  unlearned,  receives 
and  endorses  the  declarations  of  God,  to  the  same  extent  will  his  writings 
have  an  abiding  valne.  Especially  is  this  true  concerning  the  things 
pertaining  to  the  future — that  region,  those  ages  known  only  to  the 
Eternal,  and  utterly  impenetrable  to  mere  mortal  vision.  Hence,  the 
w^riter  consistently  claims  that  his  labors  will  not  be  in  vain;  that  they 
will  at  least  some  day  be  esteemed  i7i  the  degree  that  they  sustain  to  the 
Bible.  We  firmly  hold  to  the  opinion,  confirmed  by  the  providences  of 
God,  that  the  necessity  has  arisen  for  a  renewal  of  the  early  Church 
doctrine  respecting  the  kingdom.  If  the  millennial  age,  as  conceded  by  a 
host  of  antagonistic  writers,  is  near  at  hand,  and  if  the  kingdom  in  that 
age  is  such  as  herein  portrayed,  then  is  the  kingdom  itself  not  very  distant, 
and  the7i  too  ought  we  reasonably  to  expect — in  view  of  its  peculiar  nature. 


INTRODUCTION".  25 

prominence,  aims,  etc.,  especially  of  its  immediate  tremendous  and  fright- 
ful antecedent  preparations,  and  of  its  becoming  a  net  and  snare  for  the 
unbelieving  and  wicked — that  before  its  appearance  God  will  raise  up 
instruments — even  if  weak  Jonahs — who  will  so  distinctly  announce  the 
order  of  events,  so  vividly  represent  the  nature  of  the  kingdom,  point  out 
its  manner  of  manifestation,  give  a  precise  understanding  of  the  Church's 
actual  relationship  to  the  world  and  this  kingdom,  that  the  Church  will  he 
pre2xirecl  to  endure  the  awful  scenes  awaiting  her,  and  that  the  saints, 
called  to  suffer  the  loss  of  life,  may,  in  the  thus  revealed  will  of  God,  find 
encouragement  and  comfort  instead  of  disappointment  and  despair.  With 
the  hope  of  being  tlius  honored  with  others  ^  as  an  instrument  m  itpholding 
the  faith  of  God's  dear  children  in  the  darkest  period  of  the  Church's 
history,  one  will  sadly  hut  cheerfully  endnve  the  censures  of  mistaken  zeal 
and  bigotry,  and  give  his  days  and  years  of  wearisome  labor  as  an  inspiring 
sacrifice  of  love.' 

The  doctrine  herein  advocated,  because  of  its  being  so  directly  opposed 
to  the  current  theology,  and  perhaps  new  in  form  to  some  readers,  must 
not  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  novelty.*  It  is,  as  we  shall  show,  far 
older  than  the  Christian  Church,  and  was  ably  advocated  by  the  founders 
and  immediate  supporters  of  that  Church.  It  is  admitted  by  all  scholars, 
that  the  Ai^ostolic  Fathers  and  many  of  their  successors  endorsed  it,  and 
that  since  their  time  eminent  and  pious  men  have  taught  it,  and  that  to- 
day it  is  embraced  in  the  faith  of  some  in  the  various  denominations  of  the 
Church.  We  therefore  are  not  open  to  the  charge  of  introducing  a 
"  modern  novelty."  Again:  men  of  pretensions,  without  perceiving  the 
logical  result  of  its  once  being  universally  held  by  the  early  Church,  may 
deride  this  early  view  of  the  kingdom  and  stigmatize  it  as  a  return  to 
"  Jewish  forms."  Bat  persons  of  reflection,  seeing  how  largely  it  is  inter- 
woven with  the  very  life,  prosperity,  and  perpetuity  of  the  Church  in  its 
earliest  period,  and  perceiving  how  deeply  we  are  indebted  to  "  Jewish 
forms,"  even  if  unable  to  accept  of  its  teachings,  regard  its  faith  with 
respect.  Indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  apprehend  how  any  one  can  scorn  that 
which  inspired  a  hope  that  supported  and  strengthened  the  ancient  steadfast 
witnesses  for  the  truth,  the  very  pillars  of  the  Church  in  their  sufferings, 
the  dying  martyrs  at  the  stake,  on  the  cross,  or  in  the  circus.  Cut  off  the 
believers  of  this  very  kingdom  as  they  existed  and  testified  in  the  first, 
second,  and  third  centuries,  and  where  ivould  he  the  Church  9  The  really 
intelligent  comprehend  this,  feel  its  force,  realize  their  indebtedness  to 
such  believers  for  the  perpetuation  of  gospel  truth,  and  hence  from  such 

^  See  Props,  on  His.  Mill,  doctrine  for  others  thus  honored. 

2  The  author  of  The  Kingdom  of  Grace  in  his  preface  coolly  charges  the  Millenarian 
view  with  being  a  "  novelty."  (Comp,  Props.  76-79.)  Over  against  such  unscholarly 
aiSrmations,  it  is  sufficient  to  present  the  acknowledgment  of  Dorner  {Hist.  Prot.  TJieoh, 
vol.  2,  p.  462-3),  that  Millenarian  doctrines  have  been  successfully  introduced  into  the 
province  of  theology,  and  that,  as  in  the  early  ages  of  the  churcli  and  in  the  days  of 
Spener,  etc.,  they  are  of  importance  to  a  correct  understanding  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

3  It  is  saddening  to  have  religious  ideas — sanctified  by  the  dearest  associations  of  life  ; 
hallowed  by  connection  with  suffering,  trial,  and  bereavement  ;  endeared  by  study,  medi- 
tation, and  pi-ayer  ;  fortified  by  strength — imparting  power  in  times  of  deepest  gloom — 
ruthlessly  trampled  upon,  or  branded  by  cruel  terms;  but  if  productive  of  comfort,  hope, 
and  strength  to  ourselves  and  others,  such  trials  are  alleviated  by  a  preponderating  glad- 
ness of  heart. 


26  inteoductio:n'. 

we  anticipate  no  censure,  couched  in  derision,  in  advocating  what  was 
once  almost,  if  not  entirely,  universal  in  the  Church.  They  are  ready  to 
acknowledge  how,  instead  of  its  being  a  novelty  and  being  held  by  weak 
and  unreliable  men,  it  interpenetrated  the  most  significant  and  remarkable 
era,  and  how  widely  it  was  inculcated  by  the  very  teachers  to  whom  the 
Church  owes,  under  God,  its  growth  and  extension. 

Some,  probably,  may  object  to  the  quotations  as  excessive  or  pedantic, 
but  the  reader  will  allow  me  thus  to  express  my  gratitude  to  and  respect 
for  others  ;  thus  to  avoid  the  charges  of  misquoting  or  misstating  writers 
(from  which  he  has  unjustly  suffered)  ;  hence  the  author,  book,  and  page  are 
adduced  to  facilitate  reference  and  indicate  an  intended  fairness  in  argu- 
ment, thus  to  aid  those  who  are  disposed  to  examine  the  affirmations  in  the 
following  propositions  ;  to  show  how  many  great  and  earnest  thinkers  have 
given  this  subject,  or  parts  of  it,  their  earnest  attention  ;  to  evince  my 
indebtedness  to  others,  and  avoid  the  appearance  of  so  many  writers  of  the 
present  day,  who,  while  under  great  obligations  to  others  for  valuable 
material,  give  no  sign  of  a  just  recognition  ;  to  imitate  the  conduct  of 
those  who  go  forth  to  meet  the  storms  Qf  the  sea,  taking  in  a  quantity  of 
ballast  to  keep  the  bark  steady  among  the  currents  and  winds  ;  to 
emulate  the  practice  of  writers  of  conceded  merit,  impressed  by  the 
fact  tersely  stated  by  D'Israeli  {Curios,  of  Lit.,  vol.  2,  p.  416),  that  "  those 
who  never  quote,  in  return  are  seldom  quoted  ;"  to  present  a  sense  of 
delicacy  by  avoiding  ''the  odium  of  singularity  of  opinion,"  adding 
weight  and  authority  to  what  otherwise  might  be  regarded  as  doubtful  ; 
and,  lastly,  to  avoid  even  by  imj^lication  the  application  of  the  simile  of 
Swift  in  "  The  Battle  of  the  Books  " — viz.,  of  being  like  the  spider  weaving 
his  flimsy  nets  out  of  his  own  bowels,  instead  of  being  like  the  bee  passing 
over  the  field  of  nature  and  gathering  its  sweets  from  every  flower  to 
enrich  its  hive.  We  may  be  allowed  to  add  :  like  the  bee,  however,  we 
may  justly  claim,  if  nothing  more,  the  industry  and  skill  requisite  in  the 
gathering  of  the  wax,  the  honey,  and  the  building  of  the  cells. ^  Indeed, 
such  is  our  infirmity,  that  we  all  are  more  or  less  influenced  by  the  author- 
ity of  names,  and  in  the  reading  of  a  work  chiefly  composed  of  contro- 
verted questions  given  in  an  argumentative  form,  we  reasonably  expect  an 
array  of  advocates  on  both  sides,  which  imparts  confidence  that  the  author 
has  bestowed  some  attention  to  the  subject,  and  makes  his  labor,  in  conse- 
quence, the  more  valuable  as  an  expression  of  opinion  or  a  book  of  refer- 
ence. At  the  same  time,  important  as  it  is  to  the  student  to  know  and 
trace  opinions,  we  are  not  influenced,  either  by  their  commonplaceness, 

1  Burton  {Anal,  of  Melancholy,  p.  37)  quaintly  remarks  :  "As  a  good  housewife  out 
of  divers  fleeces  weaves  one  i^iece  of  cloth,  a  bee  gathers  wax  and  honey  out  of  many 
flowers."  In  reference  to  the  difficulties  of  authors,  the  originality  manifested,  the  cred- 
iting of  thoughts  and  ideas  to  others  which  have  become  assimilated  with  our  own, 
etc.,  the  reader  may  consult  Mathews'  The  Great  Conversers,  D'Israeli's  Calamities  of 
Authors,  Curlosiiles  qf  Literature,  Saunders's  Salad  for  the  SoUtai'y,  etc.  This,  how- 
ever, does  not  prevent  a  student  who  diligently  compares  scripture  with  scripture  to 
bring  forth — so  rich  is  the  precious  mine — things  "  new  as  well  as  old"  (Matt.  13  :  52). 
That  explorations  thus  conducted  will  not  be  fruitless  may  be  found  not  only  in  exeget- 
ical  remarks  scattered  through  the  work,  but  under  special  propositions,  as  those,  e.g.,  on 
the  disciples  preaching,  the  preaching  of  Jesus,  the  election,  the  postponement  of  the 
kingdom,  the  covenants,  the  genealogies,  the  temptation,  the  Divine  sovereignty,  the 
Son  of  Man,  the  kingdom,  the  Church,  the  parables,  the  inheritance,  the  resurrection, 
the  barren  woman,  Pre-Mill.  Advent,  signs,  Divinity  of  Jesus,  etc. 


liS-TRODUCTIOlS'.  27 

axiomatic  nature,  or  remoteness  in  time,  to  assert,  as  Glanvil  (Lecky, 
Hist,  of  Rat.,  vol.  1,  p.  132,  note)  sarcastically  charged  the  scholars  of  his 
day,  on  the  authority  of  Beza,  that  women  have  no  beards,  and  on  that 
of  Augustine,  that  peace  is  a  blessing,  or  to  believe  that  common  pebbles 
must  be  rare  because  they  come  from  the  Indies. 

Finally,  the  form  of  ]3ropositions  adopted  avoids  repetition  and  insures 
easy  reference.  It  also  gives  distinctness  to  the  numerous  subjects  so 
intimately  connected  with  the  kingdom,  and  it  enabled  the  writer  to 
abridge  what  otherwise  would  have  required  considerable  enlargement. 
The  design  kept  in  view  has  been  to  give  the  greatest  amount  of  informa- 
tion within  the  smallest  space,  resisting  the  temptation,  often  presented, 
of  extending  some  salient  point.  The  propositions,  separately  treated,  are 
to  be  examined  and  criticised  in  the  light  which  each  one  sustains  in  its 
connection  with  the  whole.  It  is  but  a  low  polemical  trick  to  detach 
one  from  the  rest  without  indicating  its  relationship  to  others,  and  upon 
such  a  detachment  frame  a  charge  of  error.  It  does  not  require  much 
cunning  or  skill  to  wrest  the  words  of  any  author  from  their  connection,  to 
misrepresent  their  meaning,  and  to  hold  them  up  to  undeserved  reproach. 
Willing  to  have  any  fault  or  error  jDointed  out,  it  must,  to  give  it  adequate 
force,  be  done  not  only  with  a  consideration  of  the  manner  and  relation 
in  which  it  is  set  forth,  but  also  of  the  scriptural  arguments,  if  any,  which 
profess  to  sustain  it.  Otherwise,  we  take  refuge  in  what  Zeisius  (Lange, 
Com.,  vol.  1,  p.  496)  says  :  "  If  the  words  of  Christ,  who  was  eternal 
Wisdom  and  Truth,  ^ff^YQ  perverted,  why  should  we  wonder  that  His  servants 
and  children  suffer  from  similar  misrepresentations."  ^ 

GEORGE  N.  H.  PETERS. 
Speixgfield,  Ohio,  1883. 


1  May  the  author  add  :  after  many  years  of  hibor— as  the  following  pages  indicate — 
and  the  cold  fraternization  of  "  brethren"  who  had  no  symj)athy  for  Chiliastic  study,  it 
would  be  a  personal  gratification  to  the  writer  to  learn  from  students  who  have  investi- 
gated the  subjects  j^resented  in  this  work,  that  the  perusal  of  this  book  has  given  them 
pleasure  and  strengthened  them  in  "  the  blessed  hope." 


THE 

THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM 

OF  OUR 

LORD  JESUS,  THE  CHRIST. 


Propositiot^  1.  The  'kingdom  of  God  is  a  subject  of  vital  im- 
]}ortcmce. 

The  Scriptures  cannot  be  rightly  comprehended  without  a  due 
knowledge  of  this  kingdom.  It  is  a  fact,  attested  by  a  multitude 
of  works,  and  constantly  presented  in  all  phases  of  BibHcal  litera- 
ture, that  the  doctrine  respecting  the  kingdom  has  materially 
affected  the  judgments  of  men  concerning  the  canonical  authority, 
the  credibility,  inspiration,  and  the  meaning  of  the  writings  con- 
tained in  the  Bible.  If  in  error  here,  it  will  inemtably  manifest 
i!  i,  e.g.,  in  exegesis  and  criticism.  This  feature  has  been  noticed 
b>  arious  writers,  and,  however  explained,  the  views  entertained 
on  ^his  subject  are  admitted  to  greatly  modify  the  reception,  the 
interx)retation,  and  the  doctrinal  teaching  of  the  Word. 

To  illustrate  :  Olshausen,  Pref.  to  Com.,  attributes  Luther's  remarks  and  hesitancy 
conf^erning  the  Apocalj^ose  to  a  preconceived  opinion  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  his  not 
"  thoroughly  apprehending  the  doctrine  of  God's  kingdom  upon  earth."  Numerous 
examples  will  be  given  as  we  proceed.  It  is  gratifying  that  recent  writers  begin  to  ap- 
preciate  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  kingdom.  While  some  are  wrong  in  not  more 
accurately  distinguishing  between  the  Divine  Sovereignty  (Props.  80  and  81)  and  the 
covenanted  kingdom  (Prop.  49,  etc.),  yet,  as  the  Bible,  they  correctly  make  the  kingdom 
of  God  the  central  topic  around  which  all  other  doctrines  logically  arrange  themselves. 
Correctly  apprehending  the  kingdom  of  God  as  the  guiding  idea,  Oosterzee  ((%.  Dog.,  vol. 
i.  p.  65)  justly  observes  :  "  The  dogmatic  theology  which  understands  its  vocation  will 
be  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  theology  of  the  kingdom  in  all  the  force  of  the  word." 
He  aptly  remarks  (p.  168)  :  "  The  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  the  golden  thread 
which  runs  through  all  ;  and  of  this  kingdom  the  Bible  is  the  document  ;"  and  quotes 
Nitzsch  :  ' '  The  Word  of  God  is  the  testimony  of  His  kingdom,  in  the  form  of  a  history 
and  doctrine  explained  and  continued  by  personal  organs."  Many  others,  however  they 
may  treat  it,  designate  it  as  Augustine  (Tlie  City  of  God),  a  fundamental  thought  or  idea. 

Obs.  1.  Its  importance  may  be  estimated  by  considering  the  following 
particulars  :    1.  The  kingdom  is  the  object  designed    by  the  oath-bound 


30  THE  THEOCRATIC   KITTGDOM.  [PrOP.  1. 

covenant  (Prop.  49).  2.  It  is  the  great  theme,  the  burden  of  prophecy 
(Props.  33-35,  etc).  3.  It  is  a  subject  which  embraces  a  larger  proportion  of 
Revelation  than  all  other  subjects  combined  ;  thus  indicating  the  estima- 
tion m  which  it  is  held  by  God.  Dr.  Pye  Smith,  Bickersteth,  and 
others  have  well  observed  and  commented  on  this  peculiarity — viz.,  that 
inspired  writers  say  more  respecting  the  kingdom  of  Christ  than  they  do 
concerning  all  other  things  treated  or  discussed  in  the  Word.  4.  It  was 
the  leading  subject  of  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  Christ,  the 
disciples  and  apostles  (Props.  38-74).  5.  It  was  a  cherished  subject  of 
preaching  in  the  primitive  Church  (Props.  75-77).  6.  It  is  the  foundation 
of  a  correct  scriptural  preaching,  for  the  Gospel  itself  is  ''  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom."  7.  To  promote  its  establishment  Jesus  ap|)ears,  suffers,  and 
dies  (Props.  50,  181),  and  to  manifest  it  He  will  come  again  (Props. 
G6,  68,  130,  etc.).  8.  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  must  be  deeply  interested  in 
it,  since  it  is  a  distinguishing  blessing  and  honor  given  to  Him  by  the 
Father  (Prop.  84),  and  belongs  to  Him  as  His  inheritance  (Props.  82,  116, 
etc.).  9.  We  are  invited,  as  the  most  precious  of  privileges,  to  inherit  this 
kingdom  (Prop.  96).  10.  It  is  the  constantly  presented  object  of  faith 
and  hope,  which  should  influence  us  to  prayer,  duty,  and  watchfulness. 
11.  It  is  the  result  of  the  preparatory  dispensations,  enabling  us  to  appre- 
ciate the  means  employed  to  attain  this  end.  12.  It  embraces  within 
itself  perfect  completed  redemption  ;  for  in  it  all  the  promises  of  God  will 
be  verified  and  realized.  13.  It  exhibits  in  an  outward  form  the  pleasure 
of  the  Divine  will  in  the  salvation  of  the  race  and  the  deliverance  of  crea- 
tion (Props.  149,  145,  etc.).  14.  It  brings  the  Divine  utterances  into 
unity  of  design  (Props.  174,  175),  exhibits  manifested  unity  (Prop.  173), 
and  vindicates  the  inspiration  of  Holy  Writ  (Prop.  182),  including  the 
Apocalypse  (Prop.  176).  15.  It  enforces  not  only  the  humanity  (Props.  82, 
89)  of  Christ,  but  also  His  Divinity  (Props.  85  and  183),  with*^  the  strong- 
est reasoning.  16.  It  exhibits  to  us  the  majesty  and  glory  of  Jesus,  ^'  The 
Christ,"  as  Theocratic  King  (Props.  88,  89,  132,  184,  etc.),  and  the  pre- 
eminent position  of  "  the  first-born  "  who  are  co-heirs  with  Him  (Props. 
118,  119,  127,  etc.).  All  these,  as  well  as  other  related  points,  will  be 
fully  discussed  in  the  following  pages.  A  sufficiency  is  briefly  stated,  that 
the  reader  may  not  fail  to  see  hoiv  significant  must  be  a  proper  compre- 
hension of  this  subject. 

We  are  prepared,  from  such  considerations,  to  appreciate  the  remark 
attributed  by  Lange  {Oom.,  toI.  1,  p.  254)  to  Starke  :  "  The  king- 
dom of  heaven  must  form  the  central  point  of  all  theological  learn- 
ing." Van  Oosterzee  {Tlieol.  of  ^  the  N.  T.,  p.  69)  calls  it  the 
foundation  thought^  and,  after  giving  the  doctrine  of  the  king- 
dom its  proper  position  in  the  teaching  of  Jesus  (saying,  "  that  the  idea  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  \^  fundamental  in  the  theology  of  Christ,'*)  remarks  : 
"  Already  Hess  has  furnished  a  treatise  on  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  in  which  he  shows  how  prominent  a  place  this  idea  occupies  in 
Holy  Scripture,  especially  in  the  teaching  of  the  Lord.  It  is  surprising 
therefore  that  Schmid,  in  the  work  cited,  assigns  to  it  the  third  j)]ace  in 
his  treatment  of  the  doctrine  of  Jesus.  Much  better  Neander,  who,  in  his 
life  of  Jesus,  derives  a  '  whole  system  of  truths  '  from  the  parables  of  the 
kingdom  of  God."  Let  us  add,  however,  that  even  Schmid  does  ample 
justice  in  acknowledging  its  importance,  when  {e.g.,  Bit).  Theol.  N,  T.,  p. 
243)  he  calls  it,  the  groundiuork  of  His  (Christ's)  teaching." 


Prop.  1.]       the  theocratic  kingdom.  31 

Such  testimony  could  be  multiplied.  It  is  gratifying  to  find  numerous  recent  writers 
of  eminence  (as  e.g.  Delitzsch,  Auberlen,  Kurtz,  Bonai-,  etc.)  who  emphatically  declare 
that  the  most  important  subject  for  careful  consideration,  and  the  one,  too,  that  will 
most  serve  to  explain  the  plan  of  salvation,  is  that  contained  so  prominently  in  the 
IJreaching  of  Christ,  viz.,  that  of  the  kingdom.  We  conclude  in  the  words  of  one  of 
the  most  recent,  Thompson  {Theol.  of  Christ,  p.  19)  :  "  The  whole  circle  of  doctrines 
taught  by  Christ  revolves  about  this  central  point,  that  he  represented  to  men  the  khi(jdom  of 
God  ;"  or  to  recall  Oosterzee  (C7i.  Dog.,  vol.  1,  p.  169)  :  "  The  central  thought  is  contained 
in  the  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  Dr.  Kling  (Herzog's  Ency.,  Art.  "  Kingdom  of 
God")  pertinently  saj^s  :  "  The  idea  of  the  kingdoDi  of  God  is  the  central  idea  of  the 
entire  economy  of  revelation  ;  the  kingdom  of  God  is  the  purpose  of  all  heavenly  reve- 
lation and  preparations,  and  therefore  the  moving  principle  of  Divine  works,  guidance, 
and  institutions  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  the  law  and  the  gospel,  and  even  of 
creation  and  j^romise  from  the  beginning  on." 

Ohs.  2.  It  is  significant  to  the  thoughtful  student — a  fulfilment  of 
prophecy — that  the  idea  of  a  distinctive  Divine  kingdom  related  to  Christ 
and  this  earth,  a  kingdom  which  decidedly  holds  the  foremost  place  in  the 
teaching  of  Jesus,  should  be  made,  both  (with  few  exceptions)  in  theology 
and  the  confessions  of  the  Church,  to  come  down  from  its  first  position  in 
the  Bible  and  occupy,  when  alluded  to,  a  very  subordinate  one.  In 
hundreds  of  books,  where  it  reasonably  ought  to  be  conspicuous,  a  few 
references  of  a  somewhat  mystical  and  unsatisfactory  nature,  or  a  brief 
endorsement  of  the  old  monkish  view  that  it  applies  to  the  Church, 
dismisses  the  entire  subject  ;  while  inferior  subjects  have  long  chapters  and 
even  volumes  in  their  interest.  There  is,  to  the  reflecting  mind,  something 
radically  wrong  in  such  a  change  of  position,  and  the  wider  the  departure 
from  the  scriptural  basis  the  more  defective  does  it  become.  Any  effort, 
as  here  made,  to  restore  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  to  its  true  and  para- 
mount Biblical  station  should  at  least  solicit  attention. 


Ohs.  3.  The  kingdom  deserves  the  first  place  in  Biblical  and  the  first 
rank  in  Systematic  theology.  The  reasons  for  this,  as  already  intimated, 
are  abundant.  Tliis  has  been  too  much  overlooked,  and  the  kingdom  has 
been  placed  in  a  subordinate  position,  until  for  some  years  past  a  reaction 
— induced  by  unbelieving  attacks — has  taken  place,  and  the  kingdom 
(however  explained)  is  brought  out  again  most  prominently,  especially  by 
Lange  (see  Pref.  to  Com.),  Van  Oosterzee  [Ch.  Dogmatics),  Thompson 
(Theol.  of  Christ),  Auberlen  {Div.  Rev.),  and  others.  While  thus  advo- 
cating its  claims  to  doctrinal  position,  we  do  not,  as  sometimes  unjustly 
charged,  depreciate  the  importance,  the  value,  and  the  exceeding  precious- 
ness  of  the  person  and  death  of  Jesus.  The  latter  is  doctrinally  the  out- 
growth from  the  former,  and  as  provisionary  (for  without  the  latter  the 
kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  promised,  could  not  possibly  be  obtained), 
for  the  kingdom,  is  of  incalculable  consequence. 

If  it  be  said  that  "  the  Christ"  is  of  greater  importance  than  the  kingdom,  this  is 
fully  admitted,  inasmuch  as  the  theocratic  king  who  establishes  the  kingdom  is  greater 
than  the  kingdom  itself.  Indeed,  as  the  student  will  observe,  our  line  of  reasoning 
proceeds  to  exalt  the  kingdom  because  of  the  vital  union  existing  between  the  king  and 
kingdom — the  latter  being  the  inheritance  of  the  former.  On  the  other  hand,  we  glorify 
"  the  Christ "  by  showing  the  result  and  grandeur  of  His  work  as  exhibited  in  this  theo- 
cratic ordering.  In  the  kingdom,  Jesus  Himself  is  evermore  the  central  figure,  and  He 
can  never  be  regarded  in  a  higher,  holier,  clearer  light  than  that  reflected  upon  Him  by 
His  theocratic  relationship.     This  will  hereafter  be  brought  forth  in  detail. 


32  THE   TIIEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  1. 

OJ)S.  4.  In  proportion  as  investigation  advances  in  this  direction  may 
we  expect  valnable  acquisitions.  Reuss  {Hist,  of  Ch,  Theol.  of  Ap. 
Age,  p.  137),  although  mistaken  in  his  interpretation  of  the  kingdom, 
truthfully  says  :  "  There  can  be  no  doubt,  then,  that  this  full  and 
suggestive  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God  must  be  in  some  way  the  mine 
to  he  explored  by  us,  in  order  to  bring  to  light  the  treasures  which  Chris- 
tian science  have  to  mould  and  fashion,  to  meet  the  necessities  of  every 
successive  sjohere,  and  the  measure  and  capacities  of  every  mind." 

Ohs.  5.  That  the  subject  of  the  kingdom  is  one  widely  acknowledged  as 
leading  can  even  be  seen  in  the  most  extreme  views,  as  e.g.  Sweden- 
borgianism,  Mormonism,  Shakerism,  etc.  We  need  only  refer  to  the 
simjile  fact  that  writers  of  pantheistic  and  mystical  tendencies  have 
taken  the  phrase  "  kingdom  of  heaven  "  to  be  the  real  starting-point  of 
Christianity,  which  they  designate  "  The  New  Jerusalem  coming  down 
from  Clod  out  of  heaven  ;"  and  from  which  they  argue  that  all  men 
should  morally  labor  for  the  infinite,  making  every  effort,  whether  in  relig- 
ion, science,  poetry,  art,  etc.,  to  be  hailed  as  a  subjective  submission  to,  or 
acknowledgment  of,  this  kingdom.  Taking  the  spiritualized  notion 
entertained  by  many  in  the  Church,  they  enlarge  it  by  giving  to  it  a 
pantheistical  dress  or  mystical  adornment,  to  suit  their  ideas  of  evolution, 
law,  unity,  johilosophy,  human  nature,  S2:)iritualism,  etc.  Attention  now 
is  only  called  to  the  circumstance,  that  in  systems  and  theories  of  religion 
the  most  unscriptural,  still  a  great  degree  of  prominency  is  given  to  the 
idea  of  the  kingdom. 

Even  Bauer  says  :  "  The  essence  of  Christianity  is  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  the  conditions  requisite  for  a  participation  in  this,  so  as  to  place  man  in  a  gen- 
uine moral  rehition  to  God."  Christlieb  {Modern  Doubt,  p.  38)  approvingly  quotes 
Bauer,  but  is  inclined  to  make  the  essence  to  be  Christ,  bringing  men  back  in  and 
through  Christ.  Both  are  correct  :  viewing  Christ  as  the  means  of  salvation,  etc.,  He  is 
the  foundation  of  the  Christian  system  ;  but  regarding  the  Bible  in  its  doctrinal  aspect 
or  even  the  end  designed  by  Christianity  and  its  relationship  to  the  past  and  the  future, 
then  the  kingdom  of  God  forms  the  fundamental  idea,  and  "  the  Clirist "  is  the  chosen 
instrumentality  by  which  it  is  to  be  realized.  As  our  w^ork  is  devoted  to  the  doctrinal  as- 
pect, we  would  sa}^  that  the  essence  of  Christianity,  linked  with  the  past  dispensations 
and  the  future  one,  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  more  specifically  shown  to  be  obtained 
through  Jesus  Christ— ?iou;  the  heirship  by  repentance  and  faith  in  Him,  then  by  actual 
inheriting  at  His  coming. 

Obs.  6.  This  subject  is  attractive  to  the  reverent  believer  not  merely 
because  of  its  being  the  absorbing  theme  of  Old  Testament  prophecy 
and  New  Testament  prediction,  but  owing  to  the  personal  relationship  that 
he  sustains,  as  an  heir,  to  it.  It  is  fitting  to  recognize,  comprehend,  and 
appreciate  our  inheritance.  But  even  the  literary  aspect,  the  intellectual 
excellence  of  it,  invites  earnest  investigation.  Aside  from  its  being  a 
predominating  idea  of  a  book,  which  has  had  such  a  moulding  influence 
in  all  the  departments  of  life,  it  is  the  topic  which,  above  all  others,  calls 
forth  the  most  eloquent  and  sublime  of  all  the  descriptions  and  promises 
of  the  Bible,  culminating  in  the  last  heart-stirring  words  of  Jesus 
intrusted  to  John. 

This  excellence  is  illustrated,  e.g.,  by  the  last  chapter  of  Habakkuk,  which  Dr.  Frank- 
lin admired  as  exceeding  all  human  descriptions,  and  which,  it  is  said,  he  caused  a  num- 
ber of  infidels  at  Paris,  reading  it  to  them  without  informing  them  that  it  was  in  the 


Prop.  1.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  33 

Bible,  to  eulogize  as  something  descriptively  grand.  The  reader,  too,  may  recall  the  poet 
Burns,  so  sensitive  to  beauty,  that  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  could  not  read  Isa.  25  :  8, 
Rev.  21  :  4,  and  kindred  passages  without  being  affected  to  tears.  Who  can  estimate  the 
emotions,  the  delight  excited  by  this  subject,  as  presented  by  inspired  men,  in  the 
hearts  of  believers  in  the  past  and  present. 


0^.5?.  7.  When  surveying  the  vast  array  of  facts  and  events,  some  the 
greatest  that  the  world  has  ever  witnessed,  all  pointing  to  this  kingdom  as 
a  contemplated  end  ;  when  looking  at  the  same  as  they  occur  and  exist 
to-day,  preparatory  to  the  kingdom;  and  when  contemplating  the  host  of 
remarkable,  astounding  events  predicted  to  come  to  pass  in  connection 
with  the  kingdom  still  future,  surely  this  forms  a  subject  worthy,  beyond 
all  others,  of  the  earnest,  devout  and  patient  study  of  every  student  of  the 
world's  eventful  and,  without  this  key,  perplexing  history.  The  kingdom 
embraces  so  much,  both  in  preparation  and  in  actual  realization,  that,  in 
view  of  its  extent,  the  doctrine  exceeds  all  others  in  magnitude,  enfolding 
in  itself  nearly  all  doctrine. 

To  this  we  may  add  the  pregnant  idea  (Lange's  Com.  Luke,  p.  326,  Doc.  1)  :  "It  lies 
in  the  nature  of  the  case  that  Christian  eschatology,  the  more  the  course  of  time  ad- 
vances, must  become  less  and  less  an  unimportant  appendix,  and  more  and  more  a  locus 
primarius  of  Christian  doctrine." 


Obs.  8.  A  deeper  investigation  of  this  doctrine  and  a  correspondent 
return  to  the  old  faith,  held  by  men  who,  by  position  and  association 
(as  e.g.  Apostolical  Church),  were  pre-eminently  qualified  to  comprehend 
it,  will  remove  those  painful  concessions  now  made  to  unbelief,  which 
stigmatizes  the  apostles  and  early  Church  as  still  under  the  influence  of 
"  erroneous  Jewish  forms."  Such  a  study  and  return,  will  relieve  theo- 
logians from  being  driven  to  the  humiliating  expedient  of  virtually 
acknowledging  that  the  apostles  were  mistaken  in  their  notions  respecting 
the  kingdom  ;  that  they  embraced  "  the  Jewish  husk,"  which,  however, 
contained  the  germ  of  truth  (which  they,  situated  as  they  were,  could  not 
properly  appreciate)  that  "  the  conciousness  of  the  Church  "  in  its  devel- 
opment (so  Neander,  etc.)  was  to  strip  of  its  surroundings  and  fructify 
into  full  grown  truth.  It  is  alone  in  the  direction  indicated  by  us,  that  we 
can  hope — defending  as  it  does  every  utterance  and  doctrinal  position  of 
the  first  preachers  of  the  kingdom — for  a  consistent  pleading,  justification, 
and  protection  against  the  Strauss  and  Bauer  school  (and  others),  which 
has  driven  noted  theologians — led  by  a  preconceived  doctrine  of  the  king- 
dom— to  place  '^  the  consciousness  of  the  Church  "  (that  finally  obtained 
the  truth  which  had  escaped  the  grasp  of  the  apostles),  as  exhibited  in 
Church  authority  or  theology,  or  the  productions  of  fallible  men,  above  that 
of  the  Scriptures  containing  "  the  Jewish  husk."  The  importance  of  our 
doctrine  is  evinced,  in  that  it  reverses  all  this,  exalting  and  vindicating 
both  the  Scriptures  and  the  correct  knowledge  of  its  inspired  writers. 

This  doctrine,  rightly  apprehended,  is  not  only  important  to  elevate  apologetics,  to 
meet  the  objections  of  unbelief,  to  honor  the  authoritative  doctrinal  utterances  of  the 
Scriptures,  but  is  admirably  adapted  to  refute  numerous  errors,  out  of  which  religious 
systems  are  originated,  and  through  which  they  are  maintained.  The  following  propo- 
sitions will  introduce  many  of  these,  and  practically  show  how  they  are  met  and  defeated 
by  this  doctrine  alone. 


34  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  2. 


Proposition  2.  The  establishment  of  this  Mngdorn  ivas  deter- 
mined  before^  and  designed  and  ^yr  spared  from^  the  foundation 
of  the  world. 

These  two  phrases  are  given  in  Matt.  25 :  84,  Jno.  17 :  24,  Eph." 
1 :  4,  Heb.  4  :  3,  1  Pet.  1  :  20,  Rev.  13  :  8,  in  comparison  with  other 
passages.  The  one  may  indicate  that  the  Divine  purpose  relating 
to  the  kingdom  existed  in  the  mind  of  the  Eternal  before  the  crea- 
tion of  the  world  ;  and  the  other,  that  the  creation  itself  both 
evinced  His  intention  to  carry  out  His  design  (/.e.,  was  prepara- 
tory), and  that  it  was  in  fact,  as  it  existed  before  the  fall  a^pd  ensu- 
ing curse,  the  prepared  sphere  of  its  manifestation. 

Comp.  Matt.  13  :  35,  Luke  11  :  50,  Rev.  17  :  8.  Whatever  application  these  passages 
may  have  to  the  future  kingdom,  we  cannot  rid  ourselves  of  the  plainly  implied  meaning 
that,  in  the  mind  of  the  Divine  Architect  and  Pur]3oser,  the  contemplated  tinal  use  of 
this  world  was  allied  with  its  origin.  Shallow,  unbelieving  criticism  makes  itself  merry 
at  the  idea  of  "  the  foundations  of  the  earth,"  and  present  it  as  a  proof  that  the  Bible 
teaches  an  untrue  form,  and  hence  exhibits  ignorance.  The  forcible  figure  of  speech 
and  the  intent  are  entirely  overlooked,  for  the  sake  of  making  an  uncritical  attack. 
As  to  the  form,  the  Bible  gave  it  (Job  26  :  7)  long  before  science  taught  it  ;  as  to  "  the 
foundations,"  the  general  analogy  of  the  Scriptures  teach  that  these  are  in  the  creative 
power,  wisdom,  love — the  attributes — of  the  Creator  "  in  whom  we  live,  move,  and  have 
our  being." 

Ols.  1.  Hence,  we  properly  infer  tlie  dignity  of  this  subject,  compre- 
hended in  the  eternal  counsels  and  evolved  from  the  ever-existing  ''  pur- 
pose of  Him,  which  worketh  all  thin^^s  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will." 

King  Edward  VI.' s  Catechism  (Bickersteth's  Promised  Glory,  p.  2),  however  it 
may  explain  it,  correctly  affirms  :  "  Before  the  Lord  God  made  heaven  and  earth.  He 
determined  to  have  for  Himself  a  most  beautiful  kingdom  and  holy  commonwealth." 
Moll  (Lange's  Com.  Heb.,  Doc.  p.  211)  says  :  "  At  the  very  creation  of  the  world  God 
looked  forward  to  and  made  arrangements  for  the  eternally  abiding  and  unchangeable 
kingdom  of  glory  ;  and  to  the  introduction  of  that  kingdom  tend  all  the  revelations, 
arrangements,  and  providences  of  God  in  the  history  of  the  world." 

Ois.  2.  We  also  justly  infer,  that  God's  will  thus  expressed  respecting 
the  kingdom  indicates  a  Divine  plan,  which,  in  view  of  His  attributes, 
necessarily  embraces  nnity^  of  design.  Therefore,  when  the  kingdom  is 
once  defined  by  the  Spirit,  no  change  or  modification  can  possibly  be 
allowed  without  the  most  express  declarations  from  God  announcing  it. 

Ohs.  3.  The  idea  of  the  kingdom  being  thus  identified  in  its  connec- 
tion with  eternal  purpose  and  with  creation,  God  will  imdouUedly  accom- 
plish His  revealed  will  concerning  it,  confirmed  as  it  is  even  by  oath. 
God  Himself  stands  2)ledged  to  the  ultimate  realization  of  this  idea. 


Prop.  2.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  35 

Ols.  4.  The  exercise  of  creative  power,  and  its  continued  exhibition  in 
behalf  of  man  and  the  world,  clearly  shows  the  Divine  determination  to 
establish  this  kingdom,  notwithstanding  the  antagonistic  elements  intro- 
duced by  the  fall.  All  things  exist,  because  God  has  a  determined  end  in 
view,  which  end  is  embraced  in  this  kingdom. 

Ols,  5.  This  kingdom  is  one  pertaining  to  the  earth.  Before  the  crea- 
tion of  the  world,  it  only  existed  in  the  determination  or  purpose  of  God, 
but  at  creation  the  very  foundation  of  the  world  was  laid  in  preparation 
for  it.  We  know  that  the  expression  "  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  is  interpreted  by  many  simply  to 
mean,  prepared  for  you  from  the  beginning  or  from  eternity,  and  refers 
only  to  purpose.  But  taking  into  consideration  the  paradisaical  condition 
of  the  earth  at  creation  and  the  fact  (Props.  140-148)  of  its  future  restora- 
tion to  the  same  when  the  kingdom  is  to  be  established,  we  believe  that  the 
phrase  embraces  a  far  deeper  significance,  viz.,  its  relationship  to  the 
earth.  ''From  the  foundation  of  the  world"  is  indicative  that  God 
purposed  this  very  earth,  when  founded,  for  this  kingdom. 

Fairbairn  {Typology,  vol.  1,  p.  812)  says:  "Because  destined  for  Clirist  and  his 
elect  people  in  the  mind  of  God,"  to  which  we  add,  destined  to  become  the  theatre  of  a 
theocratic  kingdom.  It  may  be  suggested  :  As  will  be  shown  hereafter,  this  kingdom 
embraces  completed  redemption,  and  this  alone  indicates  the  truthfulness  of  our  j^ropo- 
sition,  because  redemption  (which  the  kingdom  perfects)  was  in  jDurpose  co-existent 
with  that  of  creation  (Eph.  1  :  4,  1  Pet.  1  :  20).  This  enables  us  to  consider  the  unbe- 
lieving objection  that  God  made  creation  so  imperfect  that  it  required  constant  interfer- 
ence or  "  tinkering,"  seeing  that  all  things  have  been  previously  foreseen  and  provided 
for  in  order — against  all  adverse  influences  arising  from  free  will,  passion,  prejudice, 
etc.  to  carry  out  a  predetermined  result  to  its  intelligently  expressed  consummation. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  answers  the  extravagant  eulogies  heaped  by  unbelief  (in  opposition 
to  revelation)  upon  nature,  its  perfection,  sublimity,  etc.,  in  showing  that  the  Creator 
Himself,  far  from  deeming  nature  able  to  save  man,  to  render  him  hapjjy,  to  deliver  him 
from  evil,  declares  it  placed,  with  all  its  faded  nobility,  with  all  its  tarnished  greatness 
and  riches,  under  a  curse,  and  jDroposes  in  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  a  renewal,  a 
deliverance,  a  restitution,  which  shall  free  nature,  exalt  man,  and  glorify  the  Maker. 

Ols.  G.  Such  phraseology  involves,  of  necessity,  owing  to  the  fall  and 
entailed  curse,  a  glorious  restitution  for  which  provision  is  to  be  made. 
We  are  pointed  to  that  original  perfection  of  creation  which  the  Almighty 
pronounced  good,  but  this  being  marred  (as  the  Bible  teaches)  by  sin  and 
resultant  evil,  it  is  requisite,  before  God's  purpose  is  fully  carried  out,  to 
restore  that  forfeited  perfection.  How  this  is  done  will  be  explained  at 
length  hereafter. 

Obs.  7.  This  phraseology  respecting  the  kingdom  includes,  in  view  of 
expressed  predetermination,  the  appointment  or  preordination  of  the 
king  (1  Pet.  1  :  20).  It  also  comprehends  the  number  of  the  rulers, 
elect,  heirs  or  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  (Eph.  1  :  4,  etc.),  as  well  as  every 
particular,  provisionary  and  realized,  pertaining  to  it.  God  does  not 
undertake  the  accomplishment  of  a  set  purpose  without  His  perfect  knowl- 
edge embracing  all  things  relating  to  it.  For  "  known  unto  God  are 
all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world"  (Acts,  15  :  18,  Isa. 
46  :  9,  10,  etc.) 

Obs.  8.  The  idea  of  the  kingdom  being  the  beginning  (i.e.,  leading  to 
creation,  etc.)  and  the  ending  {i.e.,  embracing  the  final  result)    of   the 


36  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  2. 

dispensations  or  ages,  we  may  well  believe  what  the  Scriptures  state 
concerning  it,  viz.,  that  this  idea  is  carried  on  to  a  practical  accomplish- 
ment in  order  that  the  supremacy  and  authority  of  God  may  be  universally 
acknowledged,  and  that  the  maaifold  wisdom  and  love  of  the  Lord  may  be 
displayed  and  experienced  in  the  eternal  ages.  It  also  reaffirms  that  for 
this  object  and  end  all  things  are  sustained  and  allowed,  to  work  out, 
under  Divine  Providence,  their  destiny  in  respect  to  this  kingdom. 

Ois.  9.  This  language,  so  expressive  of  the  comprehensiveness  and  funda- 
mental nature  of  the  kingdom  idea,  suggests  to  us  that  the  dispensations 
or  ages  themselves  (the  Adamic,  Abrahamic,  Mosaic,  and  Christian)  are 
ordered  in  their  succession  as  part  of  the  Divine  purpose  m  relation  to  this 
kingdom.  If  we  are  to  take  the  rendering  given  by  Locke,  Chandler, 
Clarke,  Whitby,  etc.,  to  Eph.  3  :  11,  such  a  special  ordering  is  announced. 
Instead  of  our  version,  "  according  to  the  eternal  purpose,''  etc.,  they 
read  :  "  according  to  the  dispositiou  or  arrangement  of  the  ages  which  He 
made  for  (or,  in  or  through)  Clirist  Jesus  our  Lord."  Whatever  transla- 
tion we  may  prefer,  one  thing  is  certainly  taught  in  the  passage,  viz., 
that  in  the  "eternal  purpose,"  or  "the  purpose  of  the  ages,"  etc.,  is 
included  the  notion  that  time  itself  is  embraced  in  God's  plan  with  special 
reference  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  King  of  the  kingdom,  for  whom  the  plan  is 
carried  into  execution  and  by  whom  it  will  be  perfected. 

Favoring  the  rendering  "  the  arrangement  of  the  ages"  as  most  in  accord  with  anal- 
ogy (teaching  that  times  themselves  are  controlled,  etc.,  by  God),  yet  we  object  not  to 
receive  Bloomfield's  "  disposition  of  the  ages"  or  Barnes'  "  purjDose  of  the  ages,"  etc., 
because  under  all  of  them  is  still  included  the  provisionary  measures  instituted  in  time, 
following  each  other  in  succession,  for  and  by  Christ.  The  idea  of  a  Divine  plan,  ever- 
abiding  and  sure,  is  necessarily  connected  with  the  passage,  which,  as  Holy  Writ  teaches, 
includes  the  doctrine  that  all  things  are  ordered  for  and  have  their  foundation  in 
Christ,  because  He  is  the  Christ,  the  theocratic  king.  The  plan  of  salvation  contem- 
plates a  restoration  effected  through  Christ  and  witnessed  in  this  kingdom,  and,  there- 
fore, it  embraces  all  arrangements,  even  those  of  time.  This  is  corroborated  by  other  pas- 
sages. Thus  e.g.,1  Cor.  2  :  7  reads  :  "  the  mystery  which  He  ordained  before  the  worlds  " 
(Trpd  Tov  aiovov,  before  the  ages),  i.e.,  the  ages  relating  to  the  world  (Comp.  Prof.  Lewis's 
ch.  on  Time-worlds  in  Six  Days  of  Creation). 

Ohs.  10.  The  kingdom  being  comprehended  in  the  eternal  counsels  of 
God  and  in  the  design  of  creation,  and  being  allied  with  various  orderings 
extending  over  the  past  history  of  the  world  and  with  others  still  future, 
we  ought  reasonably  to  anticipate  it  to  be  a  deeply  involved,  widely  com- 
prising subject,  having  a  variety  of  aspects  (as  e.g.,m  relation  "^to  the 
Father,  Son,  elect,  etc.),  and  an  encircling  of  other  subjects  (as  e.g.,  elec- 
tion, resurrection,  judgment,  etc.),  as  well  as  a  profundity  of  scope  (as 
e.g.,  in  relation  to  time,  the  person  of  the  king,  glorification,  etc.),  which 
demand  7nost  careful  study,  reflection,  and  comparison  to  understand. 

Ohs.  11.  The  proposition  indicates  a  fundamental  position  that  the 
student  of  the  kingdom  must  occupy.  It  implies  that  as  the  kingdom  is 
God's  purpose,  all  knowledge  of  the  kingdom  must  be  derived  from  Him. 
It  is  God's  idea,  contemplated  and  realized,  that  we  are  endeavoring  to 
apprehend,  and  all  reliable  information  must  come  from  Him.  Hence, 
compare  Prop.  9. 


Prop.  2.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  37 

Ols.  12.  In  Prov.  8:31,  wisdom  is  represented  as  *' rejoicing  in  the 
habitable  part  of  his  earth,"  and  as  dehghting  in  or  presenting  "my 
delights"  to  "the  sons  of  men."  When  the  Divine  purpose,  as  em- 
braced in  this  kingdom,  in  reference  to  the  earth  and  man,  is  completely 
manifested,  then  the  reason  of  this  will  also  fully  appear.  Wisdom  will 
be  justified  both  in  preparing  this  earth  for  its  display  and  in  exhibiting 
itself  in  the  riches  bestowed  upon  her  adherents  in  the  theocratic  relation- 
ship. If  it  is  wisdom  to  receive  any  truth  of  God,  much  more  is  it  wise 
to  lay  hold  of  the  great  leading  truths,  that  we  may  finally  obtain  the 
blessings  that  true  wisdom  imparts. 

Ohs,  13.  The  proposition,  from  a  purely  Biblical  standpoint,  shows 
that  v^e  cannot  entertain  the  view  that  unbelief  urges  against  the  Bible, 
viz.,  that  Oriental  religions  antedate  the  Bible  by  many  centuries.  The 
respective  proofs  of  priority  are  found  in  the  respective  religious  works  m 
the  shape  of  assertion,  and  the  truthfulness  of  one  or  the  other  must  be 
determined  by  its  contact  with  the  facts  of  history.  Now  history,  as  far  as 
known  outside  of  the  religious  books,  does  not  countenance  Oriental  exag- 
gerations of  age  ;  on  the  other  hand,  history  corroborates  the  Bible  state- 
ment, which,  owing  to  a  plan  systematically  developed  and  with  which  is 
connected  a  vast  array  of  facts,  is  fully  sustained  both  as  to  alleged  age  and 
contents.  (Compare"  Props.  179  and  182.)  The  proof  of  a  continuous  plan, 
evidenced  in  the  history  of  the  past  and  present,  and  in  the  immense 
superiority  of  subject  matter,  adaptation  toman,  etc.,  will  follow  in  various 
propositions. 

Ohs.  14.  Lastly,  this  proposition  is  based  on  the  scripturally  derived 
statement,  that  a  Divine  Creating  Mind  and  a  Ruling  Will  orders  and  rules 
over  all,  so  that  notwithstanding  apparent  difficulties  and  unexplained 
problems,  that  Mind  and  Will  shall  be  ultimately  triumphantly  vindicated 
in  an  open,  revealed  manner,  indicating,  what  piety  already  realizes  as  an 
earnest  in  preparatory  work,  their  close  and  intimate  relationship  with 
man  and  earth.  This  absolute  Mind  and  Will,  affirming  that  it  consciousl}' 
and  personally  works  to  introduce  a  predetermined  kingdom,  is,  of  course, 
the  original  fountain-head  from  whence  all  proceeds.  To  the  believer  in 
the  Word,  it  is  unnecessary,  because  our  views  are  based  on  Scripture,  to 
add  anything  ;  but  to  the  unbeliever  we  may  remark  :  that  in  defense 
of  such  a  position  it  is  not  required  to  represent  the  absurdities,  the 
contradictions  of  reason,  etc.,  into  which  those  fall  who  deny  this  existing 
Mind  and  Will  (other  writers  have  ably  done  this),  but  rather  to  follow  out 
in  all  its  connections  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  and  from  the 
evidences  of  marked  design  and  unity  manifested  in  its  history,  bring 
forth  a  proof  in  behalf  of  a  personal  existing  God,  ordering  and  overruling 
all  things,  that  will  commend  itself  to  the  intelligent  reader  more  than  any 
otlier  that  we  could  possibly  propose.  The  greater  the  work  contemplated — 
and  there  is  none  greater  than  this  kingdom — the  more  clearly  ought  we 
to  see  the  intelligence  of  the  Mind  that  originates  it,  and  the  power  of  the 
Will  that  performs  it.  If  that  Mind  and  Will  has  proposed,  in  Revelation 
to  man,  a  certain,  determinate  plan  of  operation  by  which  the  kingdom 
shall,  after  a  while,  be  openly  revealed  ;  if  the  design  and  mode  of 
procedure  and  result  commends  itself  to  faith  and  reason  as  adapted  and 
desirable  ;  if  history  and  experience  plainly  sustains  the  developments  of 


38  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  2. 

sucli  a  plan  through  the  ages,  tlien  we  may  rest  assured  that  in  harmony 
with  such  a  purposed  plan,  with  its  corroborating  history  and  adjustment 
to  the  necessities  of  man  and  creation,  there  must  be,  as  the  Bible  wisely 
and  scientifically  affirms,  a  guiding  mind  and  controlling  will.  It  would 
be  premature  to  press  this  argument ;  let  us  then  first  present  an  array  of 
incontrovertible  facts,  and  from  these  facts,  as  a  conclusion  {e.g.,  Prop. 
182,  etc.),  deduce  the  statement  made,  that  the  kingdom  itself  is  depend- 
ent upon  the  pleasure  and  work  of  the  Father  both  in  its  inception  and 
provision,  in  its  prediction  and  realization.     (Comp.  e.g.  Prop.  84.) 

This  proposition  logically  follows  from  the  idea  of  intelligent  design.  The  Bible  ap- 
peals to  the  evident  manifestation  of  design  in  the  mind  of  the  Creator  as  exhibited  in 
the  ordering  of  the  universe.  Natural-  theology  lays  special  stress  on  the  evidences  of  a 
previous  forethought  and  knowledge  of  adaptedness.  The  Scriptures  likewise  refer  us  to 
the  abundant  testimony  of  design  in  the  mind  of  the  Almighty  Euler  as  declared  in  the 
ordering  and  provisionary  ruling  of  the  world.  The  moral,  religious,  and  civil  training 
of  mankind,  the  fundamental  laws  of  society,  etc.,  are  appealed  to  in  proof.  Numerous 
passaged  like  Ps.  94  :  9,  10,  Isa.  40  :  14,  Acts  15  :  18,  Isa.  46  :  9,  10,  Rom.  11  :  33,  Eph. 
1  :  8,  9,  etc.,  indicate  not  merely  God's  knowledge  and  wisdom,  but  the  manifestation  of 
such  in  a  predetermined  purpose.  Systematic  theology  directs  particular  attention  to 
the  evidences  of  a  previously  settled  purpose.  Our  subject  largely  develops  this  fact, 
and  insists  upon  the  truth  and  force  of  Eph.  3  :  10,  11  and  kindred  passages. 


Prop.  3.]  the  tiieocPwATic  kiis^gdom.  39 


Proposition   3.  Tlie  meanings  usually  given  to  tliis  hingdom  in- 
dicate that  the  most  vague^  indefinite  notions  exist  concerning  it. 

Theologians,  eminent  for  their  piety  and  position  in  the  Church, 
are  now  entertaining  crude  ideas  and  contradictory  conceptions  of 
the  kingdom.  For  many  centuries,  under  the  interpretation  given 
by  men  who  have,  probably  unconsciously,  largely  imbibed  the 
spirit  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  the  kingdom  has  been  made  to 
mean  a  variety  of  things  at  the  option  of  the  writer.  Modern 
authors,  with  but  few  exceptions,  instead  of  discarding  this  loose- 
ness, seem  to  revel  in  it,  making  the  kingdom  to  denote  almost 
everything  that  fancy  connects  with  religion,  or  the  Church,  or 
even  with  humanity.  We  select,  out  of  numerous  examples,  sev- 
eral to  illustrate  the  prevaleiit  mode  of  expounding  it,  and  the  lati- 
tude of  opinion  expressed  concerning  it. 

Ols.  1.  Albert  Barnes,  who,  possessing  many  admirable  traits,  is  re- 
garded as  a  popular  commentator,  gives  the  following  definitions  of  the 
kingdom  in  his  Commentary.  The  kingdom  is.  Matt.  3:2,  "His 
(Messiah's)  spiritual  reign  begun  in  the  Church  on  earth  and  completed 
in  heaven;"  Matt.  6  :  10,  the  "reign,"  God's  reign,  or  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  advanced;  Matt,  13  :  24,  "the  gospel,"  or  "the  effect  of  the 
gospel  ;"  Matt.  13  :  31,  "  piety  in  a  renewed  heart,  or  the  Church  ;" 
Matt.  13  :  44,  "  the  gospel,  the  new  dispensation,  the  offer  of  eternal 
life  ;"  Matt.  13  :  45,  "  religion,"  or  "  the  gospel  ;"  Matt.  13  :  52,  "  the 
gospel,"  or  "  the  truth  ;"  Matt.  25  :  34.  "  salvation,"  "  eternal  hfe,"  or 
'Mieaven  ;"  Matt.  26  :  29,  "heaven  ;"  Matt.  19  :  24,  "  way  of  salvation  ;" 
Matt.  21  :  31,  to  "  become  Christians,"  or  to  "  follow  the  Saviour  ;"  Matt. 
5  :19,  "the  Church;"  Matt.  5  :  20,  "the  Church,"  or  "the  world  to 
come  ;"  Matt.  11  :  11,  "  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  the  gospel  ;" 
Matt.  16  :  19,  "  the  Church  on  earth  ;"  etc.  With  minor  changes  (as  e.g. 
Jno.  3:5,"  the  true  Church,"  1  Cor.  15  :  24,  "  dominion  in  general  "),  and 
a  hesitancy  in  precisely  determining  what  it  means  (as  e.g.  Mark  10  :15, 
"  the  gospel,  the  new  dispensation  by  the  Messiah,  or  the  reign  of  God 
through  a  mediator,"  etc.),  we  find  these  often  repeated.  Surely  the 
kingdom  cannot  possibly  mean  all  these  things,  seeing  that  such  explana- 
tions are  loth  arhitrary  cmd  contradictory.  The  gospel  of,  or  concerning, 
the  kingdom  is  one  fact,  the  kingdom  itself  is  quite  another  ;  the  dispensa- 
tion in  which  the  kingdom  is  to  be  manifested  is  certainly  different  from 
the  kingdom  which  it  embraces  ;  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  are  certainly 
not  the  inheritance.  These  and  other  plain  scriptural  statements  are  en- 
tirely overlooked  in  such  definitions.  The  evident  antagonism  of  such 
popular  explanations  are  amply  sufficient  to  their  refutation.  The  reply 
to  all  such  definitions  will  follow,  as  e.g.  Props.  90-115. 


40  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  3. 

Dr.  Lawrence  in  the  Independent,  October  23d,  1870,  makes  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " 
to  mean:  1.  "The  universe  of  matter  and  mind;"  2.  "That  part  of  the  revolted 
human  race  which  has  been  brought  into  subjection  to  Christ;"  3.  "  A  kingdom  of 
grace,  because  it  is  by  God's  love  in  Christ  that  they— believers— are  brought  into  it  ;" 
4.  "  A  kingdom  of  glory  in  heaven  ;"  and  5.  "It  is  His  reign  over  His  loyal  subjects." 
Our  Church  literature  is  permeated  with  similar  definitions.  M'Clintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  Art.  "  Kingdom  of  Heaven,"  defines  it,  first,  "  the  Divine  spiritual  kingdom,  the 
glorious  reign  of  the  Messiah  ;"  then  afterward  it  is  "  the  Christian  dispensation  or  the 
community  of  those  who  receive  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  ;"  this  again  is  divided  into  "  an 
internal  and  external  form" —  internal  "  in  the  hearts  of  all  Christians,"  and  externally  it 
is  "  embodied  in  the  visible  Church  ;"  and  then  finally  in  its  future  relation,  "  it  denotes 
the  bliss  of  heaven,  eternal  life."  Compare  Dr.  Craven's  remarks,  in  an  excursus,  Lange's 
Com.  Rev.,  p.  94,  on  Eobinson's  definition  {Greek  Die.)  of  the  kingdom,  who  makes  it  a 
dispensation,  also  a  principle,  and  likewise  a  people  actuated  by  that  principle.  Dr. 
Craven  justly  objects  to  such  "  a  looseness  in  the  use  of  language." 

Obs.2.  Dr.  Barrow,  O71  the  Creed,  explains  "the  kingdom  of  heaven" 
as  "  capable  especially  of  two  acceptations."  Without  discarding  other 
views,  he  lays  down  this  proposition  :  "  It  first  commonly  signifies  the 
state  or  constitution  of  religion  under  the  gospel,  in  opposition  to,  or 
contradistinction  to,  the  state  of  things  under  the  ancient  law."  To 
prove  this,  he  shows  that  "  in  the  time  of  the  law,  God's  kingdom  was  in 
a  manner  earthly,"  and  proceeds  to  point  out  its  earthly  characteristics  ; 
but  that  now  under  the  gospel  "  God's  kingdom  is  more  capacious, 
unlimited,"  and,  in  brief,  more  spiritual.  From  this  he  deduces  that  it 
may  denote  :  1".  The  state  of  relation  ;  2.  The  society  of  men  put  into  such 
a  state  ;  and  then  also  adds  :  3.  It  is  "  taken  for  the  perfection  or  utmost 
improvement  of  this  state." 

Aside  from  the  indefiniteness  of  such  a  definition,  indicating  the  difiiculty  of  forming 
a  consistent  whole  (for  the  relation  in  which  men  are  placed  is  superseded  by  the  men 
themselves,  and  then  again  by  the  perfection  of  the  state  realized),  we  only  now  notice 
some  self-contradictions  which  it  contains:  1.  If  the  phrase  "  kingdom  of  heaven"  is 
used  "  in  opposition  or  contradistinction  to  "  former  dispensations  (the  ancient  Theoc- 
racy), then  it  follows,  which  he  himself  will  not  allow,  that  no  true  kingdom  of  God 
existed  previously  to  the  Christian  Church.  2.  If  the  kingdom  only  denotes  the  state  or 
constitution  of  religion,  does  it  embrace  or  reject  that  which  preceded  the  Christian  era? 
If  it  embraces  it,  then,  after  all  the  kingdom  is  a  continuation  of  the  former  ;  if  it  rejects, 
then  it  does  not  allow  that  religion  existed  previously  in  "a  state  or  constitution."  3. 
If  the  mere  "  capaciousness,"  etc.  causes  such  a  change  in  phraseology,  that  the  ex- 
pression "  kingdom  of  heaven"  is  applicable  to  the  Church  now  and  not  to  the  Church 
previously  existing,  how  comes  it,  notwithstanding  its  supposed  earthly  natiire  (as  op- 
posed to  the  present  state),  that  the  ancient  saints  are  accounted  equally  worthy  with 
Christian  believers  to  enter  in  and  inherit  the  kingdom  ?  The  whole  theory,  in  its 
invidious  comparisons,  is  derogatory  of  God's  previous  appointments,  and  degrades  the 
position  occupied  by  the  ancient  believers.  Other  objections,  still  more  serious,  will  be 
brought  forth  under  appropriate  heads  :  these  however,  briefly  suggested,  are  sufficient 
for  the  student  to  note  the  defectiveness  of  interpretation. 

Gbs.  3.  Neand6r's  elaborated  theory  of  the  kingdom  is  pervaded  by  th'> 
same  indistinctness  and  contradiction.  Thus  e.g.,  in  one  place  {Life  of 
Christ,  sec.  213)  the  kingdom  is  something  not  visible,  not  outward  ;  in 
other  pkces  {Hist.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  2,  p.  176)  "the  Church  comprised 
the  whole  visible  form  of  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  (p.  .177)  "hither- 
to, therefore,  there  could  be  no  visible  appearance  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  beyond  the  pale  of  the  Church."  His  view  only  makes  these 
"  apparent  "  contradictions  ;  for  he  has  a  number  of  kingdoms  to  suit  the 
varied   demands  of  his  development  speculations.     He  gives  us  :    1.  An 


PeOP.  3.]  THE  TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  41 

invisible  kingdom  connected  with  the  Church  ;  2.  An  invisible  kingdom 
established  in  the  heart  ;  3.  A  visible  kingdom  in  the  Church  ;  4.  A  future 
consummation  or  completion  by  the  direct  intervention  of  Jesus  Christ  ; 
5.  The  present  as  one  with  the  future,  i.e.  viewed  connectedly  ;  6.  A  king- 
dom in  the  person  of  Christ  ;  7.  The  higher  spiritual  world  or  heavenly 
community  co-existing  with  the  invisible  Church. 

In  defining,  a  singular  variety  is  introduced,  and  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to  quote 
largely  from  him  under  the  propositions  relating  to  the  Church,  one  illustration  {Hist. 
Ui.  Church,  vol,  1,  p.  499)  will  suffice  :  "  The  idea  of  the  Church  is  subordinate  to  that 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  because  by  the  latter  is  denoted  either  the  whole  of  a  series  of 
historical  developments  or  a  great  assemblage  of  co-existent  sjiiritual  creations."  Here 
is  certainly  a  latitude  opened  great  enough  to  introduce  the  various  changes  that  strict 
adherence  to  the  development  theory  required.  Following  j^ropositions  will  show  how 
unscriptural  such  interpretations  are,  when  compared  with  the  simplicity  and  unity  of 
the  Word.  They  engraft  upon  Holy  Writ  the  deductions  of  Hegelian  pliilosophy,  and 
thus,  through  the  great  ability  and  learning  cojoined,  mislead  the  unwary  reader. 

Obs.  4.  Dr.  Lange  {Bremen  Lectures,  1871,  Lee.  8)  says  :  "  The 
kingdom  of  God  itself,  the  older  theologians  divided,  not  without  grounds, 
into  the  kingdom  of  power,  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the  kingdom  of  glory. 
Still  it  must  be  remarked  that  each  of  these  kingdoms  properly  separates 
into  two  kingdoms  ;  the  kingdom  of  power  into  God's  rule  over  entire 
nature,  and  His  rule  over  the  whole  rebellion  of  such  intelligences  as,  in 
the  misuse  of  freedom,  have  gone  astray  ;  the  kingdom  of  grace,  into  the 
typical  prefiguration  of  the  real  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  the  Old  Testament 
theocracy,  and  into  the  real,  i.e.  spiritually  potent,  New  Testament  king- 
dom itself  ;  the  kingdom  of  glory,  into  the  realm  of  the  triumphant 
Church  in  the  other  world,  and  the  union  of  that  world  and  this  in  the 
final  consummation."  Lange  thus  forms  six  kingdoms  or  divisions  of  the 
kingdom,  which  was  rendered  necessary  by  the  partial  rejection  of  the 
early  Church  doctrine.  These  are  purely  theological  deductions,  having  7io 
foundation  whatever  in  Scripture,  as  v/ill  appear  when  we  come  to  the 
preaching  of  the  apostles,  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  etc.  As  we  are  only 
now  concerned  in  giving  a  few  specimens  of  entertained  opinions,  it  is 
premature  to  present  our  reply.  Like  preceding  definitions,  it  lowers  the 
theocracy  by  denying  to  it  the  reality  of  being  in  all  respects  the  kingdom 
of  God.     This  alone  should  cause  us  to  receive  it  with  grave  doubts. 

It  is  difficult  at  times  to  understand  those  complex  and  contradictor^^  meanings. 
Thus  e.g.,  Lange  in  his  Commentary  gives  a  variety,  some  of  which  are  not  in  accord  with 
those  just  mentioned.  In  the  general  introduction  he  says  :  "  As  mankind  was  original- 
ly destined  to  form  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  for  that  purpose  was  arranged  into  one 
family,  the  kingdom  of  God  may  also  be  viewed  as  the  restoration  of  mankind  to  one 
body  under  the  One  and  Eternal  Head  (Acts  3  :  21,  Eph.  1  :  22)  in  whom  it  was  elected 
from  all  eternity,  and  called,  for  the  harmonious  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God,  Eph. 
1  :  4,  5."  (This  we  can  cordially  adopt  with  the  provision  that  this  is  done  in  the  cov- 
enanted way  proposed).  But  then  he  adds  :  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  that  new  creation 
in  which  God  reveals  Himself  in  His  character  asKedeemer."  "  It  consists  in  the  resto- 
ration of  the  dominion  of  the  Spirit  of  God  over  the  hearts  of  men,"  etc.  Hence  it 
existed  from  the  beginning  of  time,  for  he  says,  p.  3,  "  the  real  kingdom  of  God  was 
founded  when  redemption  was  introduced,"  etc.  On  p.  24  he  has  it  founded  in  the 
Apostolic  Church  and  manifested  in  "  ecclesiastical  and  Christian  life."  On  p.  25  he 
has  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  person  of  Christ,"  and  afterward  "  the  person  of 
Christ  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  On  p.  25  he  has  "  His  kingdom  founded  upon  earth 
by  the  planting  of  His  Church  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Gbost,"  etc.  Thus  there 
is  a  shifting  from  one  position  to  another,  a  substitution  of  the  means  by  which  to  obtain. 


42  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIl^GDOM.  [PrOP.  3. 

tlie  kingdom  for  the  kingdom  itself,  etc.,  that  evidences  a  weakness  incompatible  with 
a  leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  For  indefiniteness,  see  Com.  on  Matt.  16  :  13,  20,  p.  298, 
where  it  is,  and  then  it  is  not,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,     Comp.  p.  299,  s.  5  and  6,  etc. 

Ois.  5.  Olshansen  {Com.  on  Matt.  3  :  1)  defines  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  be  both  "external  and  internal;"  externally  in  the  Church, 
and  ultimately  in  its  consummation  ;  internally  in  believers,  and  in  the 
ideal  future  world.  Hence  a  believer  is  already  in  the  kingdom,  or  carries 
it  with  him,  and  "yet  even  for  him  it  is  still  to  come,"  i.e.,  a  higher 
manifestation  or  realization  of  it.  This  is  also  "  applied  to  different 
relations  "  both  of  time,  place,  etc.  How  unsatisfactory  this  is  in  the 
light  of  covenant  and  promise,  will  be  shown  under  the  Church  (Props. 
94-115),  where  the  incongruity  of  persons  being  in  the  kingdom  while 
still  heirs,  the  lack  of  resemblance  between  the  covenanted  kingdom  and 
the  Church  (visible  and  invisible)  are  fully  noticed.  Much  that  Olshausen 
has  written  is  valuable  and  suggestive  (take  e.g.  the  caution,  ch.  10, 
p.  116,  Introduction),  but  his  exegesis  of  Matt.  3  :  2  is  most  certainly  defec- 
tive. For  any  theory  which  can  make  "is  at  hand "  to  be  actually 
present,  thus  arbitrarily  changing  the  tenses  used  ;  which  virtually  makes 
the  kingdom  of  God  "  always  existing,"  thus  not  discriminating  between 
things  that  materially  differ  ;  which  makes  the  theocracy  under  Moses  and 
David  a  mere  ty])Q,  thus  overlooking  its  reality  as  a  kingdom  ;  which 
applies  Luke  17  :  21  to  a  kingdom  in  the  heart,  divides  and  subdivides 
the  kingdom  after  the  fashion  of  those  already  referred  to,  and  tells  us, 
without  proof  annexed,  that  "  the  Saviour  put  forward  its  ideal  charac- 
ter," must  be  received  with  great  caution. 

The  reader  will  notice  that  we  also  introduce  those  who  are  Millenarian,  or  have  a 
strong  bias  for  our  doctrine  (as  Olshausen,  Lange,  etc.),  and  yet  largely  adojit  the  mysti- 
cal notion  of  the  kingdom.  While  such  have  tlie  kingdom  pre-eminently,  and  in  its  ful- 
ness, in  the  millennium,  they  also  (not  accurately  distinguishing  the  kingdom,  as  cove- 
nanted, from  the  Church,  not  observing  the  postponement  of  the  kingdom,  not  discerning 
the  difference  between  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and  the  Theocracy,  etc. )  have  a  kingdom 
now  existing  in  the  Church  and  individual  believer,  preparatory  to  and  merging  into 
the  other  or  proper  one.  A  large  number  of  eminent  men  take  this  position,  as  e.g.  Oos- 
terzee,  Delitzsch,  Auberlen,  Bonar,  etc.  A  careful  consideration  of  Scripture  compels  us 
to  differ  from  brethren  highly  esteemed  ;  the  reasons  will  follow  in  their  order. 

Obs.  6.  In  Dr.  Hodge's  recent  work  on  "  Systematic  Divinity,"  we  find 
(p.  596,  vol.  2)  a  section  entitled,  "the  Church,  God's  kingdom."  To 
prove  this  caption,  he  informs  us  that  God  determined  to  deliver  man  from 
his  apostasy,  and  hence  inaugurated  a  kingdom  antagonistic  to  that  of 
darkness.  This  kingdom  thus  introduced  had  no  "  visible  organization 
apart  from  the  families,  the  people  of  God."  It  was  afterward  through 
the  descendants  of  the  patriarchs  formed  into  a  "  visible  kingdom,"  which 
has  existed  down  to  the  present  day.  But  when  we  ask,  if  it  has  always 
thus  existed,  why  e.g.  do  the  prophets  speak  of  it  as  non-existing,  as  still 
future,  as  something  to  be  anticipated,  as  set  up  by  the  Messiah  at  His 
coming,  such  questions,  and  similar  ones,  that  readily  suggest  themselves 
to  the  scholar,  remain  unanswered.  Indeed,  as  he  goes  on  defining,  he 
forgets  his  previous  declaration  ;  for  when  speaking  of  the  nature  of 
Christ's  kingdom  he  tells  us,  that  "  as  the  Messiah  was  to  come  to  make 
all  things  new  "  (which  he  thus  strangely  locates  with  the  first  Advent 
instead  of  the  second,  as  the  Scriptures  do),  we  have  also  "  the  establish- 


Prop.  3.]  the  theocratic  kingdo:m.  43 

ment  of  a  new  kingdom.'^  How  can  it  be  new,  if  ifc  has  always  existed? 
Then  he  has  Christ's  dominion  over  the  universe,  calling  it  "  the  kingdom 
of  power  ;"  Christ's  "  spiritual  kingdom,"  which  is  twofold,  viz.,  an 
invisible  kingdom  consisting  only  of  the  regenerated,  and  a  visible  king- 
dom manifested  in  the  organized,  external  society  of  believers.  Finally, 
he  gives  us  "the  kingdom  of  glory"  to  be  revealed  when  Christ 
comes  again.  Thus  he  presents  us,  1.  An  invisible  kingdom  down  to 
the  patriarchs  ;  2.  A  visible  kingdom  down  to  Christ  ;  3.  An  invisible 
one  down  to  the  first  Advent  ;  4.  Christ's  kingdom  of  power  ;  5.  Christ's 
invisible  kingdom  since  his  Advent  ;  6.  Christ's  visible  kingdom  extend- 
ing from  the  same  period  ;  7.  And  the  kingdom  of  glory.  Surely  the  very 
enumeration  of  such  a  list,  when  compared  with  the  simplicity  and 
uniform  phraseology  of  the  Bible,  forces  upon  our  minds  the  suspicion  that 
there  must  be  a  serious  defect  in  a  system  whicli  requires  such  an  array  of 
kingdoms  ;  which  ignores  the  distinctive  marks  of  the  covenanted  king- 
dom; which  does  not  distinguish  between  the  universal  Divine  sovereignty 
and  the  kingdom  as  predicted;  and  which  presents  us  a  series  of  definitions 
utterly  unknown  to  those  who  were  specially  set  apart  to  preach  the  gospel 
of  the  kingdom. 

Such  interpretations,  with  slight  changes,  could  be  multiplied.  The  New  Testament, 
with  notes  published  by  the  American  Tract  Society  on  Matt.  3  :  2,  makes  the  kingdom 
"  the  sway  of  Christ's  Gospel  and  dispensation  over  the  hearts,  lives,  and  destinies  of 
men,  both  in  this  world  and  the  next,"  and  this  (mistaking  the  means  for  the  end)  is 
equivalent  to  *'  the  Messiah's  reign  as  predicted  by  the  prophets."  But  to  make  this 
out,  recourse  is  had  to  various  "  stages"  in  the  "  heart  of  the  individual  believer,  in 
the  churches,  in  influencing  society,  in  the  millennium,  in  the  judgment-day,  and 
in  the  heavenly  world."  Storr,  in  Diss,  on  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  compresses 
the  matter  so  that  it  shall  "  embrace  the  whole  time  of  the  Messiah."  He  forgets  that 
this  is  not  the  time  of  the  Messiah  {e.g.  Luke  17  :  22),  but  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
(Luke  21  :  24),  and  that  the  predicted  time  of  the  Messiah  is  still  future,  (Comp.  e.g. 
Props.  136  and  137).  Schmid  {Bib.  Theol.  X.  T.,  p.  244)  tells  us  that  "the  kingdom  of 
God  is  understood  to  be  both  present  and  future  ;  the  dominion  of  the  exalted  Christ, 
M'hich  consists  partly  in  the  influence  over  the  minds  of  men  exercised  by  the  Word, 
partly  in  the  guidance  of  the  external  destinies  of  the  Church,  partly  in  the  rewards  and 
IDunishments  at  the  last  judgment.  In  it,  too,  is  perhaps  recognized  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  the  temporal  institutions  of  religion,  the  kingdom  of  glory,  and  the  future  acts  of 
judgment  ;  adding,  too,  the  idea  that  Jesus  was  only  in  error  in  fixing  too  close  a  proxim- 
ity for  this  judgment."  Schmid  afterward  defines  the  kingdom  to  be  "  in  its  nature,  on 
the  one  hand,  something  simply  existing  and  eternal,  and,  on  the  other,  something  tem- 
poral, developing  itself  through  various  conditions  ;"  being  also  "  a  Divine  order  of 
things,"  "  a  communion  of  spirits  founded  by  Christ,"  "  a  fellowship  of  men,"  etc. 


Ois.  7.  The  definitions  given  to  the  kingdom  by  Infidels,  Rationalists, 
Free  Religionists,  etc.,  are  varied.  While  some  reject  the  idea  entirely  as  a 
mere  phantom  or  ''  Jewish  conception,"  others  incorporate  it  and  make  it 
mean,  "  God  manifested  in  and  through  nature,"  or  ''  God  in  humanity," 
or  "  God  in  progressive  development,"  or  "  the  truth,"  or  ^'  the  suprem- 
acy of  reason,"  or  "  the  supremacy  of  the  natural  dignity  and  nature  of 
man,"  etc.  Renan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  240)  makes  it,  "  the  reign  of  the 
poor  and  disinherited,"  "the  literal  accomplishment  of  the  Apocalyptic 
visions  of  Daniel  and  Enoch,"  "the  kingdom  of  souls"  (p.  249),  "the 
good,"  "  the  reign  of  justice,"  "  the  liberty  of  the  soul,"  etc.  In  this 
direction  there  is  no  end  to  the  notions  respecting  it,  generally  drifting, 
however,  toward  the  idea  of  a  humanity  redeemed  by  an  enthroned  reason 


44  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINCtDOM.  [PrOP.  3. 

(of  wliicli  Jesus  is  an  example  of  higli  genius),  or  of  a  God  permeating 
nature  and  man. 

Indeed,  no  doctrine  of  the  Bible  has  fared  so  badly  through  mere  fancy,  imagination, 
enthusiasm,  and  fanaticism  as  that  of  the  kingdom.  In  behalf  of  a  theory  or  sj'stem  it 
has  been  perverted,  distorted,  and  abused  until  many  persons,  looking  onl^^  at  the  abuses 
and  antagonism  (forgetting  that  all  truth  is  subject  to  the  same),  discard  the  whole  mat- 
ter. When  the  Papacy,  Shakers,  Mormons,  etc.  define  it  in  a  way  to  embrace  their  par- 
ticular  organizations  ;  when  Anabajstists,  Fifth  Monarchy  men,  etc.  interpret  it  so  as  to 
include  their  ambitious  projects  ;  when  almost  every  denomination,  sect,  etc.  explain  it 
so  as  to  make  themselves  the  recipients  of  the  kingdom  ;  when  it  has  been  j^rostituted  to 
the  basest  of  purposes,  and  it  is  presented  in  a  hundred  different  aspects  and  claims — all 
this  only  shows  how  important  these  parties  consider  the  incorporation  and  possession 
in  some  form,  of  the  doctrine.  It  is  amazing  to  a  person  who  steadily  for  years  notices 
the  definitions  of  others,  how  latitudinarian  they  have  become  in  these  modern  days. 
Recently  a  tract  written  and  published  by  Speer  informs  us  that  the  Church  was  "  taken 
into  the  Roman  kingdom  of  God  " — i.e.,  into  the  Roman  Emj^ire,  thus  designating  that 
"  the  kingdom  of  God"  which  the  Scriptures  (Dan.  2  and  7)  call  a  "  Beast."  We  are 
told  by  Rev.  Fowle  {Contemp.  Review,  May,  1872,  art.  "Christ,  and  Immortality"), 
that  "by  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Christ  meant  almost,  if  not  quite  exclusively,  the  estab- 
lishment of  God's  rule  and  order  upon  earth  ;"  and  to  make  this  denote  the  Church  is, 
in  his  opinion,  "  a  substituting  a  secondary  and  comparatively  unimportant  interpreta- 
tion for  the  primary  and  true  one."  This,  then,oiDens  the  way  for  mystical  incorpora- 
tions, for  it  supplies  "  the  missing  link  needed  to  bind  together  the  morality  of  Paganism 
and  Christianit3%"  and  brings  us  to  this  result  :  "the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  civilization 
viewed  religiously,  owning  God  as  its  Creator  and  Judge,  and  looking  for  still  nobler  de- 
velopments in  other  spheres." 

Ohs.  8.  Those  who  give  us  such  definitions,  antagonistic  to  the  primitive 
Church  view,  exhibit  also  the  greatest  diversity  among  themselves  respect- 
ing the  commencement  of  this  kingdom  in  its  supposed  present  form.  Tliey 
are  as  little  agreed  concerning  its  beginning  as  in  its  meaning.  Some 
commence  it  in  paradise  ;  others,  after  the  fall  when  redemption  was 
proposed  ;  some  with  the  patriarchs  or  with  the  theocratic  ordering  at 
Sinai  ;  others,  at  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist  ;  some,  with  the  birth 
of  Christ  ;  others,  at  Christ's  baptism  ;  some,  at  the  preaching  of  Jesus 
and  disciples  ;  others,  at  the  confession  of  Peter  ;  some,  at  the  death  of 
Christ,  or  at  his  resurrection  and  ascension  ;  others,  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost ;  and  others,  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Some  again  have 
several  commencements  or  dilferent  stages  ;  others  have  only  one,  regard- 
ing all  previous  as  merely  typical  and  unreal.  Quotations  illustrative  of 
this  antagonism  will  be  given  in  following  proj^ositions.  Let  us  only  now 
suggest  to  the  reader  :  is  it  not  remarkable  that  a  kingdom  of  God,  so 
distinctively  covenanted  and  predicted,  should  be  so  indefinite  in  its 
commencement  that  eminent  and  pious  men  are  unable  to  point  out  its 
beginning  with  any  degree  of  absolute  certainty  ?  That  we  even  find 
many  who,  in  their  perplexity,  have  several  beginnings,  such  as  "  typi- 
cal," '*  initial,"  etc.?  That  they  are  undecide^^^g^ni  wh  j-^.^^^^^^pd  in 
Christ's  life  to  date  it?  Surely,  is  it  not  wise  ;  non-existing  aTsti'll 
diversity,  unknown  to  Scripture,  and  based  solely  .  ^^^  Messiali  at  His 
from  some  mistake,  a  fatal  flaw  in  its  meaning?  Ha,  gno-o-est  th^'  '""^  ^^^^^ 
and  at  present  existing  (over  against  the  plainest  sta  _  ^^^^^  ^^-  Scripture 
to  the  contrary),  it  is  easy  to  see  lioio  such  a  confusif^     £   ^^  ety  arises. 

.j-as  to  0 
Olis.  9.   Attention  is  called  to  the  fact,  that  the  .'ith- serious  contradic- 
tions  greatly  weaken  the  force  of  these  definitiono.     Thus  e.g,  eminent 


Prop.  3.]  the  theockatic   kingdom.  45 

men  inform  its  that  there  has  been  a  continuous  kingdom,  without  in- 
termission, from  the  earliest  period  down  to  the  j^resent.  Now 
others,  as  e.g.  Van  Oosterzee  {Theol.  of  N.  Test.)  positively  makes 
the  kingxlom  of  heaven  or  of  Christ  something  ''  new  ;"  not  a  mere  con- 
tinuation, for  "  smce  it  had  first  come  nigh  in  the  fulness  of  time,  it 
did  7iot  before  exist  on  earth  ;"  and  then  asserts  that  it  is  a  mistake  to 
make  the  Church  the  kingdom.  He  reduces  the  force  of  the  latter  by 
admitting  that,  although  it  is  spiritual,  yet  the  Church  is  also  the  external 
form  in  which  it  appears.  With  some  truth,  we  have  here  an  admixture 
of  error  and  weakness,  that  neutralizes  the  whole.  In  the  following  pages. 
It  will  be  shown,  stej^  by  step,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  did  joreviously 
exist  on  earth,  that  it  does  not  apply  to  the  existing  Church,  and  that  the 
kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  when  established,  is  not  neiv  but  a  renewed 
with  precious,  astounding  additions.  Meyer  (Com.  on  Matt.  3  :  2), 
seeing  how  fanciful,  arbitrary,  and  contradictory  are  the  interpretations 
usually  given,  cautiously  remarks  :  "  These  expressions  '  kingdom  of 
heaven,'  etc.,  never  signify  else  than  the  Messianic  kingdom,  even  in  those 
passages  which  seem  to  denote  the  Church,  the  Christian  religion,  etc." 

Obs.  10.  Able  authors  admit  that  Christianity  has  met  with,  and 
undergone,  changes  yince  its  introduction.  Buckle  {Hist.  Civ.)  in- 
forms us  that  this  has  been  affected  by  foreign  events  contrary  to  the 
original  scheme.  This  has  been  pressed  by  Bauer,  Eenan,  etc.  All 
confess  to  some  variations  from  the  original  ;  one  class  contending  that 
they  are  for  the  better — another,  for  the  worse.  However  this  may  be, 
it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  when  comparing  the  early  Church  doctrine 
of  the  kingdom  with  the  meanings  now  so  extensively  given  and  adopted, 
a  wide  departure  from  the  original  and  primitive  meaning  is  fully  evi- 
denced. It  is  a  substitution,  too,  so  opposite  and  diverse,  that  it  assumes 
the  attitude  of  hostility  to  the  first  one  adopted  by  the  Church,  casting,  at 
the  same  time,  as  many  shadows  as  Simon  Magus  is  reported  to  have  done 
when  walking  the  streets.  The  design  of  this  work  is  to  restore  and 
defend  the  original  meaning,  by  showing  its  scriptural  basis  and  historical 
connection. 

It  has  been  truthfully  said  by  Jer.  Taj^lor  {Works,  vol.  5,  p.  348)  that  "men  will 
call  all  opinions  by  the  name  of  religion  ;  and  suj^erstructures  by  the  name  of  funda- 
mental articles  ;  and  fancies  by  the  glorious  appellation  of  faith."  This,  alas,  is  con- 
stantly repeated,  so  that  the  student  needs  constant  watchfulness.  Nothing  is  exempt 
from  diversity,  so  that,  as  illustrative,  Vares  long  ago  assured  us  that  he  reckoned  the 
old  philosophers  had  about  eight  hundred  opinions  concerning  the  "  summum 
bonum." 

Obs.  11.   Oonsiderir-^  the  various  conflicting  interpretations  entertained 
.-J^^^  ^      uoa  i:-<pp..iestet   ting  the  kingdom,  we  realize   what  Glanvil  (The 
or  "  God  in  ^progressive  /)  developed  from  hints  given  by  Bacon,  viz.,  the 
ry  of  reason,"  or  "  th    d  powerful   mind   even  under   the   most   favorable 
circunxV".     Eenan  (  .n  its  moments  of  highest  confidence.     After  making 
due  allowi'sinheritei'^e  leadings  of  education,  the  tenacity  of  prejudice,  the 
proneness   I'uiel  and  Mie  inherent  weakness  of  intellect,   we  have  still  a 
sufficiency  tc^iffn  of  ^      God  foresaw  this  diversity,  and  hence  accommo- 
dated Himself  ro  '^  en   ^akness  in  the  plain,  grammatical  language  and  sense 
in  which  He  exprebJ.j  Himself.     But  unfortunately  we  are  prone,  in  our 


46  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  3. 

superior  wisdom,  to  overlook  this  fact,  and  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  high- 
er power  of  adding  to  the  grammatical  meaning  our  oivn  constriictions  of 
what  the  sense  ought  to  be,  and  thus  plunge  ourselves  into  hopeless 
embarrassments. 

Ohs.  12.  The  only  way  to  rid  ourselves  of  these  ill-defined  and  antago- 
nistic explanations,  is  to  adopt  legitimate  principles  of  interpretation,  and 
then  carefully,  in  detail,  examine  the  original  covenants  and  promises 
upon  which  the  kingdom  is  based  ;  and  if  we  have  obtained  a  definition 
strictly  in  accordance  with  these,  never  to  depart  from  the  same,  without 
the  most  ex23ress — not  inferential — proof  in  hand  that  a  change  is  denoted. 

Ohs.  13.  It  is  a  lamentable  fact,  that  few  theologians  are  to  be  found 
who  are  willing  to  give  a  rigid  scriptural  examination  to  this  subject. 
Preachers,,  who  profess  themselves  called  to  proclaim  "  the  gospel  of  the 
kingdom,''^  totally  waive  such  a  study.  A  few  isolated  passages,  either 
torn  from  their  connection,  or  misapprehended  in  their  relationship  to 
other  Scripture,  form  the  basis  of  a  vast  inferential  structure.  Instead  of 
making  Holy  Writ  the  standard  of  interpretation,  multitudes,  while  in 
theory  recognizing  the  Bible  as  the  sole  measure  of  faith,  yet  in  practice 
will  take  the  ex|3lauations  and  Scriptural  references  given  by  favorite 
authors  as  their  reliable  guides,  without  the  least  attempt  to  verify,  by  a 
personal  application  to  Scripture,  their  correctness.  Undoubtedly  we  are 
greatly  indebted  to  writers  for  definitions,  interpretations,  suggestions, 
etc.,  yet,  after  all,  those  who  are  called  on  to  instruct  others  should  satisfy 
themselves  by  a  personal  study  of  Revelation  that  their  belief  and  opinions 
are  scripturally  founded.  Error,  too,  is  often  plausible  and  friendly  ; 
truth  sometimes  comes  in  the  garb  of  an  adversary. 

Ohs.  14.  Many  shrink  from  investigation  when  they  find  that  things 
which  they  fondly  believed,  incorporated  in  their  prayers  and  hopes,  and 
portrayed  with  eloquence,  are  subject  to  the  suspicion  of  being  built  upon 
a  sandy  foundation.  It  is  a  trite  saying  that  "  truth  never  dies,''  however 
great  the  opposition  ;  and  we  may  rest  assured  that  any  opinion  that  we 
may  individually  entertain,  can  never  alter  or  seriously  affect  the  trath  of 
God.  It  is  folly  to  shelter  ourselves  behind  the  fear  that,  peradventure, 
inquiry  and  scrutiny  may  lead  to  a  revolution  of  our  views.  This  may 
indeed  be  an  amiable  weakness,  but  it  is  one  as  fatal  to  the  student  as 
Delilah's  hands  were  to  Samson.  If  in  earnest  search  after  the  truth,  such 
a  result,  should  it  occur  under  clear  apprehension  and  decided  conviction 
of  Scriptural  authority,  must  be  accepted  as  (done  honorahle.  It  is  to  the 
credit  of  some  of  the  greatest  writers  (especially  the  German  who  so 
frankly  express  it),  that  opinions  once  strongly  advocated  were  subse- 
quently discarded  under  the  persuasion  that  truth,  honesty,  and  integrity 
required  the  change. 


PeOP.  4.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  47 


Peoposition  4.  Tlie  literal^  grammatical  interpretation  of  tlie 
Scripttires  must  {connected  with  the  figurative,  tropical,  or 
rhetoricaT)  he  observed  in  order  to  ohtain  a  correct  understand- 
ing  of  this  Mngdom. 

On  a  proposition  wMcli  has  brought  forth  many  volumes  in  its 
discussion,  we  desire  simj)ly  to  announce  our  position,  and  assign  a 
few  reasons  in  its  behalf.  Its  import  is  of  such  weight ;  the  conse- 
quences of  its  adoption  are  of  such  moment ;  the  tendency  it  i)os- 
sesses  of  leading  to  the  truth  and  of  vindicating  Scri2:)ture  is  of  such 
value,  that  w^e  cannot  pass  it  by  without  some  explanations  and 
reflections. 

Ot)S.  1.  We  unhesitatingly  plant  ourselves  upon  the  famous  maxim  {Ecch 
Polity,  B.  2.)  of  the  able  Hooker  :  "  I  hold  for  a  most  infallible  rule  in 
expositions  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  that  where  a  literal  construction  will 
stand,  the  furthest  from  the  letter  is  commonly  the  worst.  There  is 
nothing  more  dangerous  than  this  licentious  and  deluding  art,  which 
changes  the  meaning  of  words,  as  alchymy  doth,  or  would  do,  the  sub- 
stance of  metals,  making  of  anything  what  it  pleases,  and  bringing  in  the 
end  all  truth  to  nothing."  The  primitive  Church  occupied  this  position, 
and  Irena?us  i^Aclv.  Hcer.  2,  C.  27)  gives  us  the  general  sentiment  Avhen  (in 
the  language  of  Neander,  Hist.  Dogmas,  p.  77)  "  he  says  of  the  Holy  Script- 
ures :  that  what  the  understanding  can  daily  make  use  of,  what  it  can 
easily  know,  is  that  which  lies  before  our  eyes,  unambiguously,  literally, 
and  clearly  in  Holy  Writ."^  However  much  this  principle  of  interpreta- 
tion was  subverted,  as  history  attests,  by  succeeding  centuries  (not  without 
l^rotests),  yet  at  the  Reformation  it  was  again  revived.  Thus  Luther  ( Talh 
Talk,  "On  God's  Word,"  11)  remarks  :  "I  have  grounded  my  preach- 
ing upon  the  literal  word  ;  he  that  pleases  may  follow  me,  he  that  will  not 
may  stay."^  In  confirmation  of  such  a  course,  it  may  be  said  :  if  God 
has  really  intended  to  make  known  His  will  to  man,  it  follows  that  to 
secure  knowledge  on  our  part,  He  must  convey  His  truth  to  us  m  accord- 
ance with  the  Avell-known  rules  of  language.  He  must  aclajjt  Himself  to 
our  mode  of  communicating  thought  and  ideas.  If  His  words  were  given 
to  be  understood,  it  follows  that  He  must  have  employed  language  to 
convey  the  sense  intended,  agreeably  to  the  laws  grammatically  expressed, 
controlling  all  language  ;  and  that,  instead  of  seeking  a  sense  which  the 
words  in  themselves  do  not  contain,  we  are  primarily  to  obtain  the  sense 
that  the  words  obviously  embrace,  making  due  allowance  for  the  existence 
of  figures  of  speech  when  indicated  by  the  context,  scope,  or  construction 
of  the  passage.  By  "  literal,"  we  mean  the  grammatical  interpretation  of 
Scripture.  Some  writers,  to  avoid  lengthy  or  circumlocutory  phraseology, 
have  employed  the  phrase  "  literal  interpretation,"  by  which  they  denote. 


48  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  4. 

not  that  every  word  or  sentence  is  to  be  taken  in  its  rigid  literalism,  but 
that  the  language  of  the  Bible  is  to  be  interpreted  by  the  customary  rules 
of  grammar  and  rhetoric,  which  are  used  in  determining  the  sense  of  the 
"  Iliad/'  "  Paradise  Lost,"  and  works  of  human  composition.  We  are  to  ac- 
cept of  a  strictly  literal  rendering,  unless  we  have  the  distinctive  marks  of 
figures  of  speech,  when  the  tropical  sense  is  also  received,  without  after- 
ward, ill  addition,  engrafting  upon  it  another  and  separate  sense  which  is 
not  allowed  by  the  rules  of  grammar,  but  which  {i.e.,  last  added  sense)  is 
applied  by  many  to  the  Bible,  as  if  the  language  of  that  book  was  not  fairly 
circumscribed  by,  but  formed  an  exception  to,  the  universal  Ia2us  of 
language.  This  is  our  position  endorsed  by  the  exhortation  given  to  all 
to  search  the  Scriptures  (Acts  17  :  11,  Jno.  5  :  39),  by  the  frequent  appeals 
made  to  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  on  a  literal  basis,  by  the  obligations  to 
know  God's  Word  founded  on  the  ability  (Matt.  24  :  15)  to  comprehend  it, 
etc.  AYhen  employing  the  word  "  literal,"  we  are  to  be  comprehended  as 
also  fully  acknowledging  the  figurative  sense,  the  beautiful  ornaments  of  lan- 
guage ;  we  cordially  accept  all  tliat  is  natural  to  language  itself,  its  naked 
strength  and  its  charming  adornments,  but  object  to  additionally  forcing 
on  it  a  foreign  element,  and  enclosing  it  in  a  garb  that  hides  its  just 
proportions.  When,  too,  it  is  said  that  the  Bible  is  thus  to  be  interpreted 
like  any  other  book,  governed  by  the  laws  which  alone  can  protect  us 
against  a  wrong  imposition  of  meaning,  reference  is  solely  made  to  its 
grammatical  construction,  and  not,  as  Liberals  and  others  em23loy  this  idea 
in  behalf  of  unbelief,  that  it  is  merely  a  human  production.  With  the 
human  element  there  is  also  a  Divine  ;  grammatically,  to  accord  Vv'ith  our 
infirmity,  it  is  constructed  like  any  other  book,  but  under,  in  and  through 
this  are  truths  far  beyond  human  conception  and  production.* 

1  Neander  {Ch.  Hist,  vol,  1,  p.  388)  says  that  Irenoeus,  Tertullian,  Clement,  etc.,  in  op- 
posing Gnosticism,  directed  attention  to  "  a  sober,  grammatical  method  of  interpretation, 
and  leading  them  to  establish  the  first  hermeneutical  canons, "  etc.  The  student  will 
observe  that,  while  advocating  the  early  reception  of  the  grammatical  interpretation,  yet 
even,  as  Mosheim,  Neander,  and  others  have  noticed,  then  some  of  its  adv^ocates  as  well 
as  others  more  or  less  imbibed  the  Habbinical  Jewish  custom  of  obscuring  the  plain  lan- 
guage of  Scripture  by  forced  allegories  and  a  recondite  sense.  The  Jews,  as  is  well 
known,  while  to  a  large  degree  holding  to  a  literal  interpretation  (as  e.g.  in  reference  to 
a  literal  coming  and  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  etc.),  at  the  time  of  the  First  Advent  had 
fallen  more  and  more  into  a  figurative  and  allegorizing  interpretation,  which  culminated 
in  the  speculative  Cabala.  Milman  {^Hlst.  Jeics,  vol.  3,  p.  443)  remarks  of  the  Cabala  : 
"  Not  only  was  the  Bible  one  vast  allegory,  in  which  the  literal  sense  was  scornfully  cast 
aside,  and  a  wild  and  arbitrary  one  attached  to  every  history  and  every  doctrine,  but  at 
the  same  time  there  was  a  superstitious  reverence  for  the  letter  ;  the  numbers  of  the  let- 
ters, 10,  7,  12,  32,  every  single  letter,  the  collocation  of  every  letter,  the  transposition, 
the  substitution,  had  a  special,  even  a  supernatural  power."  Fairbairn  (lypolugy,  vol. 
1,  p.  326)  refers  to  Eisenmenger  (Entwectes  Judenthum),  and  remarks  that  ''  some 
Eabbinical  authorities  contend  for  forty-nine,  and  others  for  as  many  as  seventy  mean- 
ings to  each  verse." 

■^  Bloomfield  (Pref.  p.  15,  Gr.  Test.)  quotes  Luther,  Melanchthon,  Scaliger,  and  Bishop 
Middleton  as  favoring  the  grammatical  and  literal  sense.  Luther  (On  Deut.,  quoted 
Seiss's  Last  Times,  p.  253)  j^ointedly  says  :  "  I  here  once  more  repeat,  what  I  have  so 
often  insisted  on,  that  the  Christian  should  direct  his  efforts  toward  understanding  the 
so-called  literal  sense  of  Scripture,  which  alone  is  the  substance  of  faith  and  of  Christian  the- 
ology, which  alone  will  sustain  him  in  the  hour  of  trouble  and  temptation,  and  which 
will  triumph  over  sin,  death,  and  the  gates  of  hell,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  The 
allegorical  sense  is  usually  uncertain,  and  by  no  means  safe  to  build  our  faith  upon  ;  for  it 
depends  for  the  most  part  on  human  opinion  only,  on  which  if^  a  man  lean  he  will 
find  it  no  better  than    the    Egyptian    reed.     Therefore  Origen,   Jerome,  and  similar 


Prop.  4.]  the  tiieoceatic  kixgdom.  49 

of  the  Fathers  are  to  he  avoided,  with  the  whole  of  that  Alexandrian  school  which 
abounds  in  this  si^ecies  of  interpretation."  The  Enc.yclop.  Jlelig.  KnoicL,  Art.  "Sense 
of  Scripture,"  affirms  that  the  Reformers,  over  against  the  Romish  fourfokl  sense, 
adopted  the  grammatical,  and  that  Luther  declared  it  to  be  "the  only  sense  that  it  will 
do  to  die  by."  Mosheim  (E'cc^.  Hist.,  vol.  3,  -p.  137),  over  against  "  the  uncertain  and  falla- 
cious method  of  the  ancients,  who  neglected  the  literal  sense,  and  labored  to  extort  from 
the  holy  oracles  by  the  aid  of  the  fancy  a  kind  of  recondite  meaning,  or  in  other  words 
to  divert  them  without  reason,  to  foreign  apjilications,"  eulogizes  "  that  golden  rule  of 
all  sound  interpretation  which  Luther  iirst  introduced,  namely,  that  all  the  sacred  books 
contain  but  one  single  meaning,"  and  commends  Melanchthon because  "  rarely  departing 
from  the  literal  meaning."  All  the  Keformers,  without  exception,  expressed  similar 
views  ;  and  however  much  they  may  have,  on  the  one  hand,  injured  the  principle  by  a 
too  rigid  literalism  in  some  instances,  or,  on  the  other,  by  a  violation  of  it,  j^et  every  one 
holds  it  up  as  a  jorinciple  to  be  followed  as  a  guide.  Every  student  of  the  Reformation 
must  have  noticed  that  one  of  the  objections  urged  against  the  Reformers  was  their  too 
strict  adherence  to  the  letter,  as  e.g.  Carlstadt's  issuing  violent  tracts  against  Luther's 
"stupid  and  shallow  literal  theology."  Ellicott  {Aids  to  Faith,  Essay  9,  Scrip,  and  Inter. ), 
after  tracing  the  intei'iDretation  of  the  Church,  says  :  "  there  has  been  from  the  very 
earliest  times,  not  only  m  theory  but  in  practice,  a  plain,  literal,  and  historical  mode  of 
interpreting  Scripture,"  and  this  he  finds  exemplified  even  in  many  who  often,  for  the 
sake  of  the  preciousness  of  the  literal,  overlooked  their  theory  of  differing  senses. 

2  The  extreme  of  Parker  (Dis.  of  Religion,  p.  242)  is  one-sided — viz.,  "  the  conclusion 
is  forced  upon  us  that  the  Bible  is  a  human  work,  as  much  as  the  Principia  of  Newton  or 
Descartes."  Unbelievers  and  semi-believers  generally  advocate  that  the  construction  of 
the  Bible  is  like  that  of  other  books,  but  refuse  (Bauer,  etc.)  to  credit  the  fact  that  it  is 
diverse  from  all  other  books  in  the  authority  and  truths  that  it  contains.  Our  entire 
argument  following  shows  that  we  hold  it  to  be  above  and  beyond  all  other  books  in  the 
unity  of  supernatural  and  Divine  things  embraced.  Briefly:  when  the  dyer  and  weaver 
color  and  weave  the  woollen  fabric  of  artistic  design,  we  do  not  discard  the  wool,  or  dye^ 
or  machinery— common  to  the  production  of  all  woollen  fabrics — which  have  aided  in 
producing  it,  when  we  also  regard  the  design,  the  figures  and  their  connection,  and  ad- 
mire the  taste  and  skill  of  the  designer.  Thus  api^lied  to  the  Word,  admitting  the  in- 
strumentalities employed— even  the  most  humble — it  would  be  folly  to  confine  ourselves 
to  these,  and  not  contemplate  the  unity  of  design,  etc.  evidenced.  Again,  the  very  fact 
that  the  Bible  is  received  as  a  revelation,  has  influenced  many,  who  are  largely  addicted 
to  spiritualizing,  to  tell  us,  as  e.g.  Professor  Bush  (Pref.  to  Mill.)  :  "  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  the  sacred  volume  was  given  to  man  in  order  to  be  understood."  If  so, 
how  is  it  possible  to  discard  the  grammatical  interpretation  for  another  depending 
solely  upon  man's  inferences  or  fancies  ?  Again,  this  position  does  not  conflict  with  a 
twofold  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  if  some  choose  to  adopt  it  in  several  cases  (Comp. 
Brooke's  EL  of  Froph.  Interp.,  p.  86,  etc.),  seeing  that  both  fulfilments  are  based  on  the 
same  literal  sense.  Again,  the  grammatical  interpretation  combined  with  the  historical 
does  not  forbid,  owing  to  the  variety  of  subjects,  the  greatness  of  them,  the  deep  mean- 
ings  often  presented,  the  connection  that  one  portion  has  to  another,  the  difference  of 
style,  the  signification  of  words,  etc.,  a  diversity  of  opinion  on  various  jjassages, 

Obs.  2.  Tlie  only  true  standard  of  interpretation  is  the  grammatical 
(aided  by  the  historical),  and  this  opposes  :  1.  That  spiritual  or  mystical 
one  which  looks  for  an  internal  revelation  either  in  or  under  the  letter  ;  2. 
The  rationalistic  notion  that  such  an  interpretation  must  be  attached  to  the 
letter  as  will  best  accommodate  itself  to  reason  ;  3.  The  Romish  idea  that 
such  an  interpretation  of  the  letter  can  only  be  accepted  as  is  in  unison 
with  the  authoritative  utterance  of  the  Church  ;  4.  And  the  High  Church 
notion,  that  only  such  a  meaning  as  is  consistent  wuth  symbolical  repre- 
sentations can  be  received.  The  adoption  of  any  one  of  these  four  opin- 
ions immediately  causes  Si  prejudicing  oi  the'Word,  and  thus  unqualifies  the 
person  from  becoming  an  unbiased  interpreter.  Let  the  reader  consider 
that  the  grammatical  interpretation  was  for  ages  tlie  only  one  used  ;  and 
can  a  reason  be  given  why  it  should  suddenly  be  abandoned  for  another? 
Much  of  Scripture  was  presented  long  before  Christ,  and  the  portion  thus 


50  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIT^TGDOM.  [PrOP.  4. 

written  was  literally  comprehended  by  the  Jews,  not  only  without  rebuke 
from,  but  with  the  decided  approbation  of,  the  Almighty.  God  appeals  to 
the  literalness  of  His  Word,  as  affording  proof  that  each  part  shall  find  in 
due  time  its  mate.  His  veracity  and  power  are  staked  on  a  literal  fulfil- 
ment. Now  if  the  Word  was  not  thus  to  be  understood  ;  if  a  hidden  and 
recondite  sense  lay  beneath  it  waiting  for  Origeu,  Swedenborg,  etc.,  to 
reveal  it,  how  could  the  Jews  be  censured  for  misapprehending  the  Script- 
ures ;  how  could  they  derive  comfort  and  edification  from  them  ;  and 
how  could  they  possibly  have  entertained  an  enlightened  faith  and  hope  ? 
To  suppose  this  is  equivalent  to  saying,  that  for  many  centuries  the  Jews 
held  to  an  erroneous  sense  ^ — to  the  "  husk,"  as  Neander  and  others  phrase 
it — and  that  they  were  guided  into,  and  confirmed  in,  such  a  belief  by  the 
express  words  of  God  Himself.  If  we  reject  the  literal  and  substitute 
another  mode  of  interpretation,  there  is  no  deliverance  from  this  dilemma, 
however  much  men  may  attempt  to  gloss  it  over  by  "  progression," 
"development,"  etc.  Admitting  that  revelation  was  gradual,  that  truth 
and  additional  light  were  introduced  by  degrees,  all  this  has  nothing  what- 
ever to  do  with  the  mode  of  interpretation,  seeing,  as  we  shall  abundantly 
show  hereafter,  that  a  consistent  unity  can  only  be  preserved  by  a  contin- 
uous application  of  the  same  method  of  interpretation  to  the  respective 
additions  given.  It  is  the  most  reasonable  to  anticipate,  that  a  principle 
of  interpretation  once  universally  held  and  for  ages  ap2:)lied,  would  not 
undergo  a  reversal  without  a  plain  direction  from  God  authorizing  it  to  be 
made.^ 

^  We  do  not  overlook  (Obs.  1,  note  1)  that  before  the  Advent  of  Jesus  the  Jews  bad 
already,  to  some  extent,  departed  from  this  literal  interpretation,  having  adoj^ted  an 
allegorical,  mj^stical  system,  which  was  in  favor  with  the  Rabbinical  portion.  This, 
however,  does  not  vitiate  our  argument,  which  urges  the  period  preceding  this  introduc- 
tion, and  accejDts  of  the  fact  that,  e.g.,  in  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  there 
was  no  departure  from  the  literal  interpretation  even  among  the  Rabbinical  party.  The 
mj^stical  departure,  too,  was  confined  to  but  a  few,  comparatively,  of  the  learned,  and 
had  but  little  influence  upon  the  body  of  the  nation.  This  is  seen,  1.  By  the  united 
expectation  of  a  literal  kingdom,  as  admitted  by  all  writers  ;  2.  By  the  preaching  of 
John  the  Baptist,  the  disciples,  and  Jesus  ;  3.  By  the  rejection  of  Jesus  on  the  ground 
that  a  literal  kingdom  was  not  established,  etc.  Even  Shedd  {Rlst.  Ch.  Doc.)  acknowl- 
edges  that  "  one  of  the  princij^al  grounds  of  their  (Jews)  rejection  of  Christ  was  the  fact 
that  He  represented  the  Messiah's  rule  as  a  spiritual  one  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  gave  no 
countenance  to  their  literal  and  materializing  inteii:)retation  of  the  Messianic  prophecies." 
(Shedd's  misai^prehension  of  Christ's  teaching  will  be  noticed  hereafter,  but  he  is  correct 
in  his  statement  that  the  Jews  understood  the  Messianic  prophecies  in  their  grammatical 
sense.)  Dr.  Knapp  {Ch.  Theol,  p.  326)  affirms  :  "  The  allegorical  interj^retation  of  the 
Sacred  Scriptures  cannot  be  historically  proved  to  have  prevailed  among  the  Jews  from 
the  time  of  the  exile,  or  to  have  been  common  with  the  Jews  of  Palestine  at  the  time  of 
Christ  and  His  apostles.  Although  the  Sanhedrim  and  the  hearers  of  Jesus  often 
appealed  to  the  Old  Testament,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  New  Testament  writers, 
they  give  no  indication  of  the  allegorical  interpretation.  Even  Josej^hus  has  nothing  of 
it.  The  Platonic  Jews  of  Egypt  began,  in  the  first  century,  in  imitation  of  the  heathen 
Greeks,  to  interpret  the  Old  Testament  allegorically.  Philo  was  distinguished  among 
those  in  that  place  who  practised  this  method  and  he  defends  it  as  something  new  and 
before  unheard  of,  and  for  that  reason  opposed  by  the  other  Jews  ;  De  Confus.  Lingu. 
page  347  seq.  Jesus  was  not,  therefore,  in  a  situation  where  he  was  compelled  to  com- 
j)ly  with  a  prevailing  custom  of  allegorical  interpretation  ;  for  this  method  did  not  prevail 
at  that  time  among  the  Jews,  certainly  not  in  Palestine,  where  Jesus  taught."  (He  de- 
clares :  "  The  writers  of  the  New  Testament  themselves  make  a  clear  distinction  be- 
tween the  allegorical  and  literal  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament.  When  they  use 
the  allegorical  method,  they  either  say  expressly,  here  is  allegory,  Gal.  4  :  24,  or  they  show 
it  by  the  context,  or  by  prefixing  some  j)article  of  comparison,  e.g.,  donep  KuOdg,  Heb.  7, 


Prop.  4.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  -  51 

John  3  :  14,  Matt,  12  :  40."  He  concltides,  therefore,  that  we  mtist  receive  literal  predic- 
tions, promises,  etc.,  unless  otherwise  indicated,  which  rule  he  repeatedly  violates  in  his 
own  work.)  Dr.  Knapp's  position  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  Neander,  Mosheim, 
Kurtz,  and  other  historians,  by  articles  in  Cyclopsedias  on  Philo,  interpretation,  etc. 
Pressense  ( The  Early  Years  of  ChrisUanity,  p.  99)  says  :  "  "While  an  ingenious  and  learned 
school  formed  at  Alexandria  had  contrived  by  a  system  of  allegorical  interpretation  to 
infuse  Platonism  into  the  Old  Testament,  the  school  at  Jerusalem  had  been  growing  in- 
creasingl}^  rigid,  and  interdicted  any  such  daring  exegesis.  It  clung  with  fanatic  attach- 
ment to  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures,  but,  failing  to  comprehend  the  sjDirit,  it  sunk  into 
all  the  puerilities  of  a  narrow  literalism.  Its  interiaretations  lacked  both  breadth  and 
depth  ;  it  surrendered  itself  to  the  subtilities  of  purely  verbal  dialectics."  So  also  Pres- 
sense (p.  325)  remarks  of  the  heresies  of  the  first  century  :  "  These  heretics  then  fol- 
lowed the  example  of  Simoil  Magus,  in  turning  the  Scriptures  to  their  own  purposes, 
and  wresting  them  into  the  confirmation  of  their  peculiar  tenets.  They  gave  an  allegor- 
ical interpretation  to  the  historical  portion  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  thus  cast  a  sacred 
veil  over  their  monstrous  errors."  Heresy  is  no  friend  to  the  plain  grammatical  sense 
of  the  Word.  The  history  of  interpretation  is  briefly  told.  The  first,  and  Jewish, 
method  was  to  abide  by  the  grammatical  sense  (still  retained  to  some  extent  by  the 
Orthodox— over  against  the  Reformed  or  Rationalist — Jews,  and  especially  by  *'  the  Kar- 
aites" or  "  Scripturists"),  but  as  the  Jews  came  in  contact  with  Greek  and  Oriental 
philosophy  (in  Egyj)t,  Greece,  etc.),  the  effort  to  conciliate  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  with 
such  a  philosophy  led  to  a  second  mode  by  which  the  obvious  sense  is  made  figurative 
in  order  to  convey  another  sense — the  latter  being  regarded  as  the  higher.  This  brought 
forth  three  distinctive  types  of  interpretation  :  the  grammatical,  the  ideal,  and  these 
tv.o,  more  or  less,  combined.  The  Jewish  method— evidenced  by  its  exclusiveness  and 
Messianic  hopes — was  adopted  by  the  primitive  Church,  as  witnessed  e.g.  by  its  appli- 
cation of  prophecy,  its  Pre-millenarian  views,  etc.  The  ideal,  presented  in  the  system 
of  Philo,  was  inaugurated  into  the  Christian  Church  by  the  Alexandrian  fathers,  and 
speedily  gained  a  wide-spread  reputation,  being  followed  by  numerous  writers.  A  com- 
bination of  the  grammatical  and  ideal  found  a  host  of  followers  down  to  the  Reforma- 
tion. Tradition,  metaphysical  speculations,  some  favorite  form  of  philosophy,  were  in- 
corporated. At  the  Reformation  there  was  a  return  to  the  Jewish  method,  and  while  the 
ideal  and  mystical  has  been  largely  adopted,  yet  the  extremes — excepting  in  a  few 
cases— once  so  prevailing  are  now  avoided.  As  to  Philo's  system,  afterward  adoi^ted  by 
Christian  fathers  (Origen,  etc.),  we  only  quote,  as  illustrative,  from  an  Article  entitled 
"Alexandrian  Christianity"  {The  North  Brit.  Review,  August,  1855):  "According  to 
him  (Philo),  nearly  the  whole  of  Scripture,  not  only  its  parables,  its  symbolical  cere- 
monies, its  obscure  prophecies,  but  even  the  simplest  language  in  which  it  relates  the 
most  ordinary  transaction,  every  name  and  every  number  that  it  contains,  possesses  not 
only  a  plain  but  also  a  hidden  meaning,  the  former  of  which  is  to  the  latter  as  the  body 
to  the  soul."  After  stating  that  Aristobulus  and  other  Jews,  Oriental  and  Alexandrian, 
and  even  Greeks  (in  application  to  their  poets)  had  employed  this  method,  the  writer 
adds  :"  We  should  say  that  the  adoption  of  this  principle  of  interpretation  hj  Philo 
and  his  Christian  disciples  was  the  greatest  obstacle  to  their  discovering  the  true  mean- 
ing of  the  Bible,  and  is  the  cause  of  their  being  almost  useless  as  expositors.  They 
themselves  compared  the  literal  interpretation  to  the  flowers  and  fruits  that  grow  upon 
the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  the  allegorical  one  to  a  jewel  hid  beneath  the  soil  ;  and 
we  may  well  say  that,  while  boring  and  groping  after  this  jewel  supposed  to  be  con- 
cealed, turning  every  stone  and  sifting  every  grain  of  sand,  they  often  missed  or  de- 
stroyed the  wholesome  fruit  and  beautiful  flower  that  grew  before  their  eyes  and  be- 
neath their  feet."  So  that  Ueberweg  {Hist.  Philosophy,  vol.  1,  p.  229)  remarks  :  "Philo 
criticises  the  attitude  of  those  who  merely  hold  fast  to  the  literal  sense  of  Scrij)ture  as 
low,  unworthy,  and  superstitious." 

2  It  is  a  sad  fact  that  multitudes  declare  the  plain  grammatical  sense  in  numerous  pas- 
sages, if  received,  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  truth.  God  is  thus  virtually  charged  not 
merely  with  surrounding  "  the  kernel  "  (truth)  with  "  a  husk  "(error),  but  (to  carry  out 
the  figure)  with  a  poisonous  one  !  But  even  men  who  constantly  violate  the  gram- 
matical sense  by  the  engrafting  of  a  higher  and  spiritual  sense,  at  times  confess  the 
superiority  of  the  former.  Thus,  to  illustrate  (quoted  in  McClintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  Art.  "Interp.")  :  "Jerome  {Com.  in  Mai.  1  :  16),  about  a.  d.  400,  could  say, 
'  The  rule  of  Scripture  is,  where  there  is  a  manifest  prediction  of  future  events,  not  to 
enfeeble  that  which  is  written  by  the  uncertainty  of  allegory.' "  "  Even  Hilary  in  his 
book  '  De  Trinitate,'  1,  properly  asserts,  'He  is  the  best  reader  who  rather  expects  to 
obtain  sense  from  the  words  than  imposes  it  upon  them,  and  who  carries  more  away 


52  THE   THEOCRATIC   KUN^GDOM.  [PkOP.  4. 

than  he  has  brought,  nor  forces  that  upon  the  words  which  he  had  resolved  to  under- 
stand before  he  began  to  read.'  "  The  student  will  not  fail  to  observe  that  Protestant 
Confessions  of  Faith  insist  ujDon  this  grammatical  sense  when  e.g.  speaking  (Art.  XX. 
Anglican  Church)  of  "  God's  Word  written,"  or  (Art.  18,  Scotch  Conf.)  of  "  the  plain  text 
of  Scripture."  Indeed,  all  confessions  are  based  upon  it,  and  assume  the  sense  accepted 
as  the  one  commending  itself  to  all  b}^  the  common  rules  of  language.  Manj^  like 
Porphyry  (in  his  third  Book  ;  see  Art.  on,  McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.),  object  to 
the  allegorical  and  mystical  interpretation  introduced  into  the  Church  by  the  Alexan- 
drian fathers,  as  e.g.  illustrated  in  "  The  Apology,"  (vol.  1,  j).  11  of  The  Llteralist),  and 
in  Luther's  principle  of  interpretation  (vol.  3,  p.  i'27).  Some  Millenarian  writers  (as  Dr. 
Craven  in  Lange's  Com..  Rev.,  p.  98)  prefer"  normal"  to  the  word  "  literal,"  as  more 
expressive  of  our  views  of  interpretation,  not  discarding  the  figurative. 

OI)s.  3.  Such  a  reversal  or  change  is,  unfortunately,  inferred  from  several 
passages  of  Scripture,  and  professing  to  be  controlled  in  this  matter  by  the 
Word,  it  becomes  requisite  to  examine  the  legitimacy  of  the  inference.  1 
Cor.  2  :  14  is  advanced  as  in  conflict  with  our  proposition  and  as  fully 
endorsing  its  opposite,  viz  :  "■  The  natural  man  receivetli  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  ;  neither  can  he  k?ifnu 
them,  because  they  are  spirihiaUy  discerned.^''  This  passage  pushed  to  an 
extreme,  forms  the  key-note  of  the  mystical,  spiritualizing,  Origenistic 
system  of  interpretation  ;  the  foundation  of  countless  vagaries.  Let  us 
test  it,  e.g.,  by  the  facts  connected  with  the  incarnation  and  death  of 
Jesus  ;  these  were  revealed  by  the  Spirit  and  realized  in  such  a  manner 
that  they  are_to  be  understood  literally  (as  commands,  duties,  etc.),  but  to 
one  class  they  are  foolishness,  and  they  do  not  hnoiu  them,  in  the  sense  of 
appreciating  their  value,  or  importance,  or  relation  to  God  and  man  (for 
hnoiving  is  used,  as  any  concordance  will  show,  as  an  equivalent  for  appre- 
ciation, experience,  etc.);  while  to  another  class  they  are  known  by 
"spiritual  discernment."  What  does  this  latter  expression  denote.^ 
That  we  are  to  attach  to  the  incarnation  and  death  a  sjjiritual  meaning 
and  discard  tlie  literal?  No  !  "  spiritually  discerned  "  is  discerning  "  tlie 
things  of  tlie  Sjnrit,"  i.e.,  things  given  by  the  Spirit  ;  noting  how  the  Spirit 
reveals  and  records  them  in  the  Scriptures,  submitting  ourselves  to  the 
guidance  and  enlightening  influence  of  the  Spirit  tlirough  the  written 
Word,  until  by  His  teaching  and  Divine  aid  we  learn  to  artprcciate  and  to 
apj^ropriate  the  truths  revealed  to  ourselves  ;  and  not  to  reject  a  literal 
rendering,  and  fasten,  under  the  assumption  of  special  superadded  enlight- 
enment, another  sense  uj^on  the  Scriptures.  "  The  things  of  the  Spirit" 
are  a  matter  of  record,  and  not  left  to  the  fancies  or  heated  imaginations 
of  every  man  who  professes  to  be  remarkably  guided  and  influenced  by  the 
Spirit.  Therefore,  to  properly  discern  what  are  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit, 
the  record  itself  must  be  received  in  the  sense  prescribed  by  the  usage  of 
language.  Even  if  the  passage  be  regarded  as  teaching  that  the  soul, 
mind,  or  Spirit  discerns  the  truth,  this  does  not  invalidate  the  literalness 
of  the  recorded  things  of  the  Spirit,  as  already  evidenced  by  the  example 
presented.  For  in  the  context  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  God  reveals  His 
truth  through  the  Spirit,  and  that  such  a  revelation  is  contained  "  not  in 
the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  "  (in  the  words)  "  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  teacheth  ;  comparing  spiritual  things  "  {i.e.  the  things  taught 
by  the  Spirit)  "  with  spiritual  things  "  [i.e.  with  other  things  also  received 
from  the  Spirit).  This  brings  us  back  to  the  question  already  answered. 
How  are  tlie  words  themselves  to  be  apprehended — as  teaching  what  they 
grammatically  contain,  or  as  including  some  other  meaning  ? 


Prop.  4.]       the  theocratic  kingdom.  53 

Another  passage  often  paraded  as  against  ns  is  found  in  2  Cor.  3:6: 
''  Who  also  hath  made  ns  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament  ;  not  of  tM 
letter,  hut  of  the  Spirit :  for  the  letter  hillcth,  hut  the  Spirit  gireth  tife.^' 
While  it  is  impossible  to  preserve  the  force  and  true  apprehension  of  this 
Scripture  without  understanding  what  is  meant  by  the  New  Testament  or 
covenant  (which  will  be  examined  Prop.  50,  in  connection  with  the  Abra- 
hamic  covenant),  yet,  aside  from  this,  sufficient  reason  can  be  advanced  to 
rebut  its  reference  to  a  literal,  or  any  other  system  of  interpretation. 
Asking  what  is  meant  by  "  the  Spirit,"  the  answer  comes  in  the  very  same 
chapter  "  Xoiu  the  Lord  is  that  Spirit  "  (v.  17,  comp.  Barnes'  admissions, 
etc.),  and  (in  y.  18,  according  to  Barnes,  Beza,  Wolf,  Locke,  Eosenmiiller, 
Doddridge,  etc.,  the  Greek  is)  ^\from  the  Lord  the  Spirits  If  Christ  be 
the  Spirit  here  denoted,  how  can  it  refer  to  interpretation  ?  Or,  if  the 
testimony  of  the  apostle,  that  by  the  Spirit  Christ  is  meant,  is  set  aside,  we 
ask  then.  How  comes  it,  according  to  the  statement  of  Neander  and  a  host 
of  writers,  that  the  apostles  could  not  rid  themselves  of  the  "  materialistic 
husk  "  of  a  literal  interpretation  of  the  Word  ?  If  the  "  literal  "  applica- 
tion *'  killeth"  as  some^  declare,  how  does  it  come  then  that  God  gives  His 
word  in  such  a  form  9  Is  it  reasonable  or  credihle  that  He,  who  is  justly 
lauded  for  benevolence,  mercy,  and  grace,  would  give  truth  surrounded  by 
a  deadly  covering — truth  too  indispensable  to  secure  the  happiness  and 
peace  of  man  ?  Is  it  not  the  rule  of  the  Divine  procedure  (uttered  by 
Jesus,  Matt.  7  :  S,  9,  10,  etc.)  that  even  man  will  not  give  to  an  asking 
son  a  stone  for  bread  or  a  serpent  for  a  fish,  much  less  God  ?  Such  are  a 
few  of  the  questions  that  immediately  suggest  themselycs,  Avhen  making 
the  passage  advocate  a  proceeding  that  would  be  inconsistent  in  man. 
The  simple,  unpretending  meaning  of  the  verse  is  this  :  that  the  Word 
of  God  in  its  letter  {i.e.  in  its  plain,  unambiguous  written  form)  cannot  give 
life  ;  that  possessing  the  letter  alone  would  inevitably  lead  to  death,  for 
having  only  the  letter  the  covenant  promises  could  not  be  realized,  but 
that  having  the  Spirit,  even  Christ,  the  assurance  is  given  that  the  letter 
itself — death  without  Christ  or  the  Spirit — or  the  promises  of  God 
contained  in  the  letter,  shall  be  duly  verified  and  accomplished.  Two 
passages  throw  light  on  this  verse  ;  the  one  where  even  the  letter  of  the 
Gospel,  the  preaching  of  the  apostles,  may  prove  to  be  a  "  savor  of  death 
unto  death  "  (2  Cor.  2  :  IG)  without  Christ ;  and  the  other  (John  6  :  63), 
when  Jesus,  to  indicate  the  future  resurrection  and  possession  of  eternal 
life,  says:  ''It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  "  (comp.  2  Cor.  4:14; 
John  5  :  21  ;  Rom.  8:  11;  Gal.  4  :  17;  Phil  3  :  21),  keeping  in  view  that  this 
quickening  is  applied  to  Christ  in  1  Pet.,  3  :  18,  "  being  put  to  death  in 
the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  Hence  the  literal  aspect  of  the 
truth  is  far  from  being  condemned  or  set  aside  ;  if  so,  it  would  sweep  away 
tlie  most  precious  promises  that  the  Bible  contains.  It  is  then  to  be 
received,  but  in  connection  with  it,  tliat  also  which  alone  gives  it  efficacy 
and  power  in  this  world,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.'  The  idea,  there- 
fore, of  the  apostle  is,  that  without  the  related  work  and  power  of  Jesus, 
as  the  Christ,  and  His  Spirit  exerted  in  our  behalf,  the  mere  reception  of  the 
truth  in  its  material  form  will,  instead  of  delivering  from,  only  conduct  to 
death.  There  is  nothing  in  the  scope  of  the  passage  to  indicate  any  such 
reference  as  many  attach  to  it,  so  condemnatory  to  the  Bible  and  the  prac- 
tice of  the  apostles.^ 


54  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIISTGDOM.  [PkOP.  4. 

1  Cornelius  Agrippa  (On  the  Vanitie  of  Sciences,  ch.  97)  speaks  of  the  Scholastics  and 
their  performances,  and  adds  (what  is  applicable  to-day)  :  "  against  which  if  any  will  resist 
w^ith  the  authoritee  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  f  ourthwith  he  shall  saie  :  the  letter  killeth,  it  is 
deadly,  it  is  unprofitable  ;  but  they  saye  that  we  ought  to  search  out  that  which  lieth 
hidden  in  the  letter  afterwarde  they  having  recourse  to  interpreting,  to  expoundinge,  to 
glossinge,  and  to  sillogisinge,  do  rather  give  it  some  other  sense,  than  the  proper  mean- 
inge  of  the  letter  ;  if  thou  instantly  require  an  answere  and  be  earnest  upon  them,  they 
will  give  evil  language  and  call  thee  Asse,  as  one  which  understandeth  not  that  which  is 
hidden  in  the  letter,  but  as  a  serpente  feedest  on  the  earthe  alone,"  etc.  A  recent  illus- 
tration of  a  ruinous  interpretation  of  this  passage  in  2  Cor.  3  :  6  may  be  in  place.  The 
eloquent  H.  W,  Beecher  preached  from  this  text,  as  reported  e.g.  N.  Y.  Sun,  May 
19th,  1873,  and  the  sermon  exhibits  the  painful  conclusion  that  in  his  efforts  to  glorify 
"the  Spirit"  he  utterly  degrades  "the  letter."'  Misapprehending  the  meaning  of  his 
text,  he  presses  it  in  his  service  to  undervalue — as  infidels  do— the  written  record  ;  com- 
paring the  latter  in  its  imperfections  to  the  dead  bark,  moss,  worms,  and  insects  scraped 
(by  assailants,  unbelievers)  from  the  trees  of  an  orchard,  adding  :  "  and  the  more  they 
raked  the  better  he  would  like  it,"  etc.  The  tendency  of  such  declarations  are  danger- 
ous and  most  derogatory  to  the  Word.  Then,  again,  it  is  amazing  to  witness  the  self- 
contradiction  of  writers.  Take  e.g.  Calvin  (who  in  many  places  favors  a  literal  inter- 
pretation Inst.  ch.  10  B.  2,  8.  8,)"speaking  of  the  letter,  says  :  "  The  Old  Testament  is 
literal,  because  it  was  promulgated  without  the  efficacy  of  the  Sjyirii,''  etc.,  and  yet  in  the 
same  section  he  admits  that  under  this  "  literal "  dispensation  men  were  converted,  that 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  was  experienced,  that  men  were  moved  and  spake  by  Him  !  He 
endeavors  to  palliate  his  expression  by  adding  that  this  "  is  used  hy  way  of  comparison," 
But  this  does  not  remove  the  difiiculty,  and  it  does  not  inform  us  how  the  Old  Testament, 
once  literal,  now  becomes  "  spiritual."  And  when  Calvin  was  attacked  (D'Aubigne's  Bef- 
ormation,  vol.  3,  p.  81)  by  Quinten  "  the  spiritual,"  the  latter  sought  refuge  in  the  fol- 
lowing :  "  We  are  not  subject  to  the  letter  which  killeth,  but  to  the  Spirit  which  giveth 
life.  .  .  .  The  Bible  contains  allegories,  myths  which  the  Holy  Spirit  explains  to 
•us."  Calvin  replied  :  "  You  make  your  Scriptures  a  nose  of  wax,  and  play  with  it,  as  if 
it  were  a  ball." 

2  The  critical  reader  will  observe  that  our  argument  has  only  reference  to  the  doctrinal 
interpretation,  and  not  to  the  practical  influence  that  doctrine  or  truth  should  have  on 
the  life.  There  may  be  a  clear  apprehension  of  doctrine,  and  yet  it  may  (as,  alas,  multi- 
tude of  instances  testify)  be  inconducive  to  piety,  etc.,  but  this  practical  neglect  does 
not  affect  the  interpretation.  Spener  (Hagenbach,  Hist.  Doc,  vol.  2,  p.  216)  took  the  right 
position  when  opposing  the  mere  reception  of  the  letter  without  an  additional  self- 
appropriation  of  the  truth  expressed  in  it.  And  in  opposing  the  Quakers  he  justly 
observes,  on  the  other  side  :  "  Our  feelings  are  not  the  norm  of  truth,  but  Divine  truth  is 
the  norm  of  our  feelings.  This  rule  of  truth  exists  in  the  Divine  Word  apart  from  our- 
selves." 

3  The  misinterpretation  of  this  and  the  previous  passage  has  opened  a  wide  door  to 
innumerable  vagaries  and  assumptions  of  higher  spiritual  excellence.  Thus,  to  illus- 
trate :  it  led  Schwenkfeld  (Xurtz,  Ch.  Hist,  vol.  2,  p.  155),  to  call  Luther's  insisting  upon 
the  unconditional  authority  of  the  Word  of  God  "  a  bondage  to  the  letter,"  and  caused 
him  to  exalt  a  professed  ''  inner  word  of  the  Spirit  above  the  written  Word  of  the  Script- 
ures." The  names  of  Antoinette  Bourignan,  Seb.  Frank,  Thamer,  Servetus,  Labadie, 
"  The  Angelic  Brethren,"  Jumpers  or  Barkers,  Shakers,  Duchoborzins  (a  Bussian  sect, 
see  Kurtz,  Ch.  Hist.,  vol.  2,  p.  239),  Zoharites,  Muggletonians,  Petro-Joannites,  and 
others,  are  suggestive  of  the  same.  This  theory  of  interpretation  run  to  excess  may  be 
found  in  Woolston's  book  (London,  1722),  "  A  Free  Gift  to  the  Clergy,"  in  which  "  the 
hireling  priests  of  what  denomination  soever"  "are  all  ministers  of  the  letter."  The 
titles  of  various  works  are  amply  sufficient,  such  as  e.g.  How's  "Sufficiency  of  the  Spirit's 
Teaching  without  Human  Learning  ;  or  a  Treatise  Tending  to  Prove  Human  Learning  to 
be  no  Help  to  the  Spiritual  Understanding  of  the  Word  of  God  ;"  or  the  "  Allegorical 
Explanations  of  both  Testaments  ;"  or  the  "  Mystical  Ark,"  etc.  So  Hutchinson  based 
his  system  on  a  fanciful  etymology  of  Hebrew  words,  from  which  spiritual  significations 
•were  drawn,  so  that  history  was  turned  into  prophecy,  and  the  plain  grammatical  sense 
was  set  aside.  Such  extravagances  still  exist,  and  a  thousand  illustrations  might  be  drawn 
from  recent  writers,  reviving  in  a  measure  the  idea  advocated  even  by  Lardner,  Steven- 
son, Pearce,  Sherlock,  etc.  (who  follow  Woolston's  and  Thomas'  views)  that  the  Gospel 
history  itself  is  to  be  understood  in  a  mystical  or  parabolic  sense.  Mysticism,  more  or 
less  developed,  is  found  in  many  authors  of  the  present  day,  although  they  refuse  the  ex- 


Prop.  4.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  55 

treme  of  the  "  Abecedarians,"  who  (Appletons'  Cyclop.)  "  held  that  without  the  aid  of 
study  the  Holy  Spirit  would  convey  directly  to  the  understanding  a  knowledge  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  that,  therefore,  it  was  better  not  to  know  how  to  read."  It  is  also  a  sad 
commentary  on  human  weakness  that  tracts  and  books,  containing  doctrinal  statements, 
interpretations  of  prophecy,  etc.,  claim  that  their  interpretations  were  given  by  special 
Divine  insj^iration  or  enlightenment  through  the  Spirit.  Without  questioning  the  sin- 
cerity of  these  persons  (for  men  are  easily  led  to  such  a  belief,  if  they  assume  themselves 
to  be  the  special  favorites  of  the  Spirit  in  the  reception  of  gifts),  it  is  sufficient  to  say 
that  every  such  a  plea  vitiates  the  value  of  their  teaching,  and  imposes  alone  upon  the 
weak,  ignorant,  or  unreflecting,  who  are  unable  to  test  their  utterances  by  the  general  anal- 
ogy of  the  Word.  Luther,  on  John  14  :  25-28,  gives  an  infallible  rule  for  trying  the  pro- 
fessed (by  men)  utterances  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  thus  :  "  If  one  come,  therefore,  and  pre- 
sent anything  to  me  as  taught  or  revealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  keep  to  the  Word  and  hold 
this  doctrine  up  to  it,  as  to  the  true  touchstone.  If  now  I  see  that  it  agrees  with  that 
which  Christ  says,  I  receive  it  as  right  and  good.  But  if  it  be  a  departure  from  it,  or 
would  produce  something  different  from  it,  then  I  say.  Thou  art  not  the  Holy  Ghost,  but 
the  detestable  devil.  For  the  true  Spirit  comes  in  no  other  name  than  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  and  teaches  nothing  other  than  what  the  Lord  Christ  has  said."  A  writer  in 
the  Korth  Brit.  Review  (May  1849)  objects  to  Morell  ("  Philosophy  of  Religion"),  not 
allowing  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures  its  true  position  and  weight  as  the  testimony  of  God, 
but  makes  the  only  ground  of  certitude  to  exist  in  the  subjective  mind  of  the  inquirer — in 
intuitional  consciousness.  The  fact  is  that,  to  induce  the  highest  certitude,  we  must 
receive  the  authoritative  letter  as  containing  the  truth,  give  it  its  logical  force  (through 
reason),  and  allow  its  intuitive  influence  (through  a  responding  moral  nature),  dependant 
upon  the  Spirit  that  gave  the  truth,  and  upon  our  adaptability  for  its  recej)tion.  God's 
Word  is  true,  whether  men  receive  or  reject  it. 

Ohs.  4.  Briefly,  then,  we  are  forced  by  a  regard  for  consistency  to 
endorse  tlie  proposition  for  the  following  reasons  :  1.  God  communicates 
with  US  through  language,  and  He  follows,  in  order  that  we  may  under- 
stand, the  usages  of  language.  2.  The  literal  interpretation  was  the 
ancient  mode  employed  down  to  the  time  of  Christ.  3.  It  was  the  early 
Christian  Church  method,  and  continued  thus  until  subverted  by  the 
Alexandrian  and  monkish  one.  (Comp.  e.g.  in  reference  to  interpretation 
of  Scriptures  relating  to  kingdom,  Props.  70-78).  4.  It  is  the  one  to 
which  God  alone  appeals  in  behalf  of  the  yeracity,  etc.,  of  His  word. 
5.  It  is  the  only  one  that  can  give  us  the  certainty  that  it  is  not  the  work 
of  man.  6.  The  fundamental  truths  of  Christianity,  the  covenants,  the 
person,  incarnation,  life,  and  death  of  Jesus,  the  promises,  the  fulfilment 
of  prophecy,  etc.,  are  based  upon  it.  7.  It  is  the  one  that  maintains  its 
reasonableness  and  accordance  with  the  laws  of  language,  and  can  thus  be 
tested  and  proven.  8.  It  presents  a  simplicity  which  binds  together  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments  in  unity  of  language  and  of  design  that  no  other 
system  bestows.  9.  It  brings  forth  most  prominently  the  analogy  of 
Scripture  and  of  faith.  10.  It  not  only  preserves  the  promises  of  God 
intact,  but  fully  shows  how  and  when  they  are  fulfilled.  11.  It  conduces  to 
bring  out  most  distinctively  a  perfect  Redeemer  and  a  completed  redemption. 

12.  It  prevents  a  host  of  contradictory  meanings  applied  to  the  kingdom, 
clearly  tracing  and  presenting  it  as  the  covenants  and  promises  demand. 

13.  It  effectually  closes  the  door  to  a  flood  of  wild  and  antagonistic  inter- 
pretations fastened  on  the  Word  under  the  claim  of  superior  spiritual 
enlightenment,  discernment,  and  sanctity.  14.  It  aids  us  fairly  to  meet, 
without  lowering  and  degrading  the  Word  by  abject  concessions  and  the 
accommodation  theory,  the  assaults  of  unbelievers.  The  bearing  of  all 
this  will  be  evidenced  as  we  pass  over  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible  ;  and 
the  result  of  our  labors,  the  fruit  of  adherence  to  grammatical  interpreta- 
tion, will  indicate  the  solidity  of  the  ground  occupied. 


56  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  4. 

Dr.  Sprecher  in  his  Groundwork  of  Theol,  p.  1,  ch.  5,  on  "  The  Eight  of  Private 
Judgment  and  the  Sufficiency,  Intelligibility,  and  Efficacy  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,"  fully 
and  ably  sustains  our  position.  After  insisting  upon  the  intelligibility  of  the  Scriptures, 
because  "  a  revelation  unintelligible  is  no  revelation  at  all,"  etc.,  he  (p.  109)  remarks  : 
"  As  the  revelation  is  made  in  oral  communications  and  in  written  words,  in  articulate 
speech  and  intelligible  language— language  intelligible  to  its  first  hearers  and  readers— it 
follows  that  the  words  in  this  revelation  must  have  been  used  according  to  the  rules  of 
language  then  prevalent,  the  usus  loquendi  of  that  day,  according  to  the  meaning  or  sense 
of  the  words  to  those  to  whom  the  language  was  vernacular.  Otherwise  the  communica- 
tion could  not  have  been  understood  by  them.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  Bible 
must  be  explained  in  the  same  way,  and  interpreted  by  the  same  rules  which  apply  to 
any  other  books  written  in  the  same  language.  This  was  the  view  of  Luther,  and  he 
called  it  the  .se?isu/?i  literalem."  Brookes  {2IaranaiJia,]i.  38)  justly  observes,  in  behalf  of 
the  grammatical  sense,  that  if  the  Word  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  interpreter,  then  the  Bible 
"  is  no  longer  a  revelation,  but  a  concealment  of  God's  will."  Professor  Eiddle  {Hints 
on  Bible  Interpretation)  forcibly  observes  that  "the  right  of  private  interpretation'^ 
*'  assumes  that  the  Bible  is  a  human  (in  its  language)  book  ;  that  however  its  human 
authors  were  insj^ired,  they  wrote  or  spoke  so  as  to  be  understood,  using  words,  whether 
literally  or  figuratively,  in'the  sense  in  which  general  usage  employs  them.  For  if  this 
principle  of  interpretation  were  not  correct,  there  could  be  no  duty  of  private  interpre- 
tation." "Indeed,  any  other  position  makes  the  Bible  a  dishonest  book."  Chilling- 
worth  {Works,  vol.  1,  p.  231)  affirms  our  view,  because  God  designed  His  Word  not  sim- 
ply  "for  the  learned,  but  for  all  men,"  which  design  is  only  met  by  the  grammatical 
sense. 

Ois.  5.  Our  position  is  enrlorsed,  at  least  in  theory  if  not  always  in  prac- 
tice, by  the  ablest  writers.  Our  introductions  and  aids  to  the  study  of  the 
Bible  (as  e.g.  Home's,  vol.  1,  p.  322,  etc.  Comp.  Alford's  How  to  Smdij 
Neio  Test.,  Dunn's  Study  of  the  Bible ;  Smith's  Die.  of  the  Bihle  ;  Her- 
zog's  Encyc.,  The  BiUe  and  its  Study,  etc.),  regard  it  as  fundamental  to  a 
correct  understanding  of  the  Word.  Theologians  and  authors  in  every 
statement  of  doctrine  or  argument,  lay  stress  on  it  as  the  strongest  possible 
proof  to  be  adduced  in  favor  of  what  the  Scriptures  actually  do  teach. 
This,  e.g.  is  evidenced  on  almost  every  page  of  such  works  as  Kitto's  Cyclo- 
pedia, Fairbairn's  Bih.  Dictionary,  Kurtz's  Sac.  History,  etc.,  and  in  all 
our  leading  commentaries,  in  Sys.  Divinity,  etc.  Indeed,  the  plain  gram- 
matico-rhetorical  sense  is  to  multitudes  the  end  of  controversy.  The 
reformers,  as  stated  (comp.  Mosheim's  Ch.  Hist.,  Cent.  16,  S.  3;  Eichhorn's 
Gech.  der  Cultur,  p.  1,  and  175  ;  Hallam's  Introd.  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  2, 
p.  287  etc.)  confined  themselves,  more  or  less,  to  the  literal  interpretation. 
Even  some  eminent  Roman  Catholic  divines  (comp.  Calmet's  Die.)  have 
admitted  the  literal  sense,  as  e.g.  John  Charlier  De  Gerson,  Chancellor  of 
the  University  of  Paris,  of  whom  Neander  {Hist.  Dogynas,  vol.  2,  p.  G07) 
says  :  ''  Gerson  first  of  all  asserted  as  a  fundamental  maxim  that  the 
literal  sense  of  the  Bible  was  the  only  true  one  ;  that  all  things  necessary 
to  salvation  were  plainly  contained  in  the  Bible,  and  that  no  true  doctrine 
could  be  at  variance  with  the  Bible."  He,  however,  neutralized  this  by 
also  declaring  that  this  literal  sense  must  be  explained  by  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Church,  given  to  it  through  General  Councils.  The  most 
pompous  array  of  testimonials  might  be  presented  in  favor  of  the  interpre- 
tation advocated  by  us — even  from  men  who  are  largely  addicted  to  spirit- 
ualizing— but  the  illustrations  appended  will  suffice.  It  is  self-evident 
that,  in  the  perusal  of  the  writings  of  others,  we  feel,  explain  it  as  we  may, 
that  in  the  interpretation  of  Scripture  they  are  correct  and  truthful  in 
proportion  as  the  literal  sense  or  the  natural  figurative  one  sustains  them. 
Barnes  {Com.  Gal.  4  :  24)  expresses  our  view  :  "  the  great  truth  has  gone- 


PkOP.  4.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  57 

forth,  never  more  to  be  recalled,  that  the  Bible  is  to  be  interpreted  on  the 
same  principle  as  all  other  books  ;  that  its  language  is  to  be  investigated 
by  the  same  laws  as  language  in  all  other  books  ;  and  that  no  more  liberty 
is  to  be  taken  in  allegorizing  the  Scriptures  than  may  be  taken  with 
Herodotus  or  Livy." 

Eev.  Dr.  Sprecher,  my  honored  instructor  in  theologj^  in  a  letter  addressed  to  me 
dated  January  16th,  1856,  after  referring  to  his  extensive  reading  on  the  subject  and  the 
reflection  of  years,  says  :  "  Their  (i.e.,  Millenarians)  principles  of  interpretation  are  cor- 
rect," however  he  may  differ  on  some  details  of  exegesis.  Eev.  Eobert  Hall,  in  his 
Review  of  Gregory's  Letters,  utters  the  following  :  "  Let  the  fair  grammatical  import 
of  Scripture  language  be  investigated  ;  and  whatever  pro]3ositions  are,  by  an  easy  and 
natural  interpretation,  deducible  from  thence,  let  them  be  received  as  the  dictates  of 
infinite  wisdom,  whatever  aspect  they  bear,  or  whatever  difficulties  they  jDresent.  Re- 
pugnant  to  reason  they  never  can  be,  because  they  spring  from  the  author  of  it  ;  but 
sui^erior  to  reason,  whose  limits  they  will  infinitely  surpass,  we  must  expect  to  find 
them,  since  they  are  a  communication  of  such  matters  of  fact  respecting  the  spiritual 
and  eternal  world  as  need  not  to  have  been  communicated,  if  the  knowledge  of  them 
could  have  been  acquired  from  any  other  quarter."  Ernesti  only  exijresses  the  views 
of  many  v»-hen  he  tells  us  :  "  Theologians  are  right  when  they  affirm  the  literal 
sense  to  be  the  only  true  one."  In  the  Insi.  Interp.  of  the  New  Testament,  he  lays 
it  down  as  a  fundamental  law  of  exegesis  that  the  interpretation  of  Scrii^ture  is  to  be 
conducted  by  the  same  rules  applicable  to  the  interpretation  of  a  classical  or  profane 
author.  (This  has  not  been  wholly  eliminated  in  Professor  Stuart's  translation).  The 
only  caution  requisite  is,  that  no  exegesis  is  to  be  considered  isolated  from  other  Script- 
ure, but  must  be  regarded  in  its  connection  with  the  general  analogy,  spirit,  or  design 
of  the  writers.  The  painful  fact  is,  that,  however  correct  in  principle,  Ernesti,  Mi- 
chaslis,  and  others  too  much  overlooked  the  internal  and  Divine  unity  exhibited  by  a 
grammati co-historical  interpretation— i.e.  its  union  and  corresjDondence  with  a  continu- 
ous Divine  plan.  They  failed  to  combine  what  even  exegesis  presented.  Every  reader 
of  course  knows  that  without  the  literal  interpretation,  works  on  the  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  cannot  be  effective  as  seen  in  writings  of  Sherlock,  Newton,  Kelt,  Faber,  Keith, 
Hurd,etc.  Greswell  {Parables,  vol.  3,  p.  173)  denounces  the  dangerous  practice  cf  mak- 
ing varied  senses,  as  "  substituting  an  indefinite  and  capricious  standard  of  interpreta- 
tion," and  then  forcibly  adds  :  "  If  there  is  any  one  principle  of  interpretation  which 
from  the  nature  of  the  case  is  not  liable  to  vary  ;  which  is  founded  in  the  reason  of 
things,  and  cannot  accommodate  itself  to  the  peculiar  tastes  or  jjrejudices  of  individuals, 
in  the  use  and  admission  of  which  persons  of  every  persuasion  might  be  capable  of  con- 
curring, and  w^hich  would  lead  all,  if  they  applied  it  rightly,  to  similar  conclusions  ; 
which  is  consequently  the  least  likrly  to  fail  of  the  desired  effect,  and  therefore  we 
may  presume  was  of  all  others  intended  to  be  our  guide  and  director  in  arriving  at  the 
knowledge  both  of  what  we  are  required  to  believe,  and  of  what  we  are  bound  to  prac- 
tice ;  it  apjjears  to  me  to  be  this,  that  we  take  the  v/ords  of  Scripture  as  we  find  them  ; 
that  we  endeavor  to  ascertain  their  true,  grammatical  sense,  whether  in  the  Old  or  the 
New  Testament,  in  the  first  instance,  and  then  receive  the  truths  which  are  thereby  con- 
veyed, whether  articles  of  faith  or  rules  of  pi-actice,  according  to  the  plain  and  simple 
and  obvious  meaning  of  the  language  itself."  Graff,  in  his  Lay  Sermons,  No.  1,  ob- 
serves that ''  the  language  is  human,"  and  adds  :  "  It  is  this  human  phase  of  the  Script- 
ures which  brings  them  within  our  reach,  even  as  it  is  the  human  nature  of  the  Divine 
Person,  of  whom  they  treat,  that  renders  Him  capable  of  being  our  Saviour,  Representa- 
tive, and  Friend.  As  in  the  perusal  of  other  books,  so  in  reading  the  Bible,  there  is  no 
better  general  rule  than  that  the  obvious  meaning  is  the  true."  A  sensible  art.  on  Biblical 
Interpretation  may  be  found  in  the  North  Brit.  Review,  Aug.,  1858.  We  only  add 
this  :  if  the  idea  contained  in  the  grammatical  sense  is  not  the  one  inspired,  then  the 
inspiration  of  the  views  presented  is  largely  left  to  the  option  of  the  interpreter. 

Ohs.  6.  This  proposition  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  seeing  that,  as  all 

frankly  acknowledge,  our  doctrinal  basis  and    subsequent  superstructure 

depend  upon  its  adoption.     The  early  Christians  in  their  simi:)licity  and 

faith  occupied  our  posture,^  and  therefore  held  a  doctrine  concerning  the 

'ngdom,  which,  by  a  change  to  another  attitude,  is  now  regarded  by  the 


58  THE  THEOCEATIC   KHS^GDOM.  [PrOP.  4. 

masses  as  erroneous.  We  are  mainly  indebted  to  Origen  for  tliis  transfor- 
mation, he  giving  the  leverage  through  which  it  was  accomplished. 
Luther  and  others  may  give  their  estimate  of  his  performance.^  It  is  sufiS- 
cient  to  say  that  he  laid  down  the  principle  "  that  the  Scriptures  are  of 
little  use  to  those  who  understand  them  as  they  are  written,"  etc. 
(Porter's  Lee.  Horn.,  p.  51).  He  advocates  {De.  Princ.  B.  4  C.  1)  the 
threefold  interpretation  ;  the  obvious  sense  he  likens  to  "  the  flesh  ;  a 
higher  sense  is  equivalent  to  "  the  soul,"  and  a  still  higher  is  represented 
by  "  the  Spirit  ;"  ''  for  as  man  consists  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  so  in  the 
same  way  does  Scripture."  How  this  system  spread  is  briefly  stated  by 
Mosheim  (Eccl.  Hist.,  Cen.  3,  p.  2,  S.  6):  "A  prodigious  number  of  inter- 
preters, both  in  this  and  succeeding  ages,  followed  the  method  of  Origen, 
though  with  some  variations  ;  nor  could  the  few,  who  expUiined  the  sacred 
writings  with  judgment  and  a  true  spirit  of  criticism,  oppose  with  any 
success  the  torrent  of  allegory  that  was  overflowing  the  Church."  ^  Augus- 
tine {City  of  God,  13.  17,  S.  3)  gives  a  threefold  meaning  to  the  prophecies, 
one  referring  to  the  earthly,  another  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  a 
third  to  both  of  these.  The  moral  sense  advocated  by  Kant  (Home's 
Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  323),  which,  setting  aside  the  grammatical,  imposes  a 
moral  meaning,  whether  the  passage  can  naturally  bear  it  or  not,  is  an 
offshoot  of  sucii  a  system.  So  also  the  theory  of  accommodation  to  the 
opinions  and  prejudices  of  the  Jews  as  advanced  by  Semkr  and  developed 
by  his  followers  (Home's  Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  324),  is  the  natural  offspring 
of  such  bold  handling  of  the  Word.  In  addition  :  the  extravagant  claims 
of  Swedenborg  that  he  was  set  up  as  the  true  interpreter  of  the  Word,  is 
exclusively  based  on  the  notion  that  to  him  was,  for  the  first  time,  given 
the  secret  key  by  the  Creator  himself,  to  unlock  the  Bible  and  portray  its 
meaning  ;  and  this  key,  on  examination,  turns,  only  in  a  more  scientific 
way,  the  old  bolts  in  Origen's  lock,  now  enlarged  and  reburnished.  It 
resolves  itself  in  as  wide  a  removal  as  possible  from  the  literal,  and  finds 
morality  and  religion  in  the  plainest  historical  statements  and  facts  ;  in 
short,  wherever  a  mystical  ingenuity  could  engraft  them.''  Without  ques- 
tioning the  sincerity,  intended  honesty,  and  piety  of  such  men,  justice  to 
ourselves,  and  a  desire  to  vindicate  the  truth,  demands  an  exposure  of  their 
inconsistency  and  dangerous  tendency.  Many,  indeed,  reject  the  vagaries 
of  Origen,  the  absurdities  of  Augustine,  the  folly  of  Kant  and  Semler,  the 
visions  of  Swedenborg,  and  would  regard  it  as  uncomplimentary  to  be 
classed  as  interpreters  with  one  or  the  other  of  them,  who,  notwithstand- 
ing, are  precisely  in  the  same  category.  For  with  all  these,  they  also  for- 
sake the  literal  sense,  or,  if  the  passage  contains  it,  the  figurative  sense, 
and  add,  as  the  true  sense  anotlier,  viz.,  a  spiritual  or  mystical.  It  is 
singular,  too,  that  many  writers,  unable  to  discriminate  between  figurative 
language  and  their  own  superadded  spiritualizing,  confound  the  two, 
although  greatly  differing,  as  one.  Waldegrave,  Fairbairn,  and  others 
employ  the  term  ""'  figurative  "  as  if  it  were  equivalent  to  spiritual,  over- 
looking the  fact  that  all  figurative  language  falls  under  the  grammatical 
construction  of  speech  and  is  very  different  from  tlie  additional  meaning 
fastened  upon  the  obtained  figurative  sense.  Let  us  again  say  :  all  parties 
admit — however  some  may  afterward  discard  it — the  literal  sense  ;  they  all 
accept  of  the  figurative  meaning  ascertained  by  the  rules  of  grammar  and 
rhetoric  ;  these  are  freely  admitted  as  contained  in  the  words  or  sentences, 
and  thus  far  all  are  agreed,  but  here  the  points  of  agreement  cease,  and 


PkOP.  4.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KIA^GDOM.  59, 

the  paths  become  diverging.  "We  are  satisfied  with  the  sense  thus 
obtained,  seeking  no  other  foreign  to  all  languages,  and  which  no  one 
dreams  to  apply  to  any  book  except  to  the  Bible.  They,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  not  contented  with  such  a  sense — frequently  finding  it  contra- 
dictory to  their  preconceived  theory — but  gravely  tell  us  that  this  gram- 
matical sense  is  a  purely  re2)resentativG  sense  of  another  and  differing  one, 
which  last  they  fail,  either  through  design  or  discrimination,  to  distinguish 
from  the  literal.^  This  peculiar  mode  of  interpretation,  traceable  to 
the  old  Origenistic  method,  makes  it  easy  to  fasten  almost  any  meaning  to 
"the  kingdom  of  heaven."  To  its  looseness  are  we  indebted  for  the 
yaried  interpretations  concerning  it.^ 

^  Professor  Shedd  {Hist,  of  Ch.  Doc,  B.  6,  cli.  1)  endeavors  to  make  the  impression 
that  the  later  system  of  interi^retation  (i.e.,  Alexandrian)  was  "  the  most  authoritative 
one."  Eev.  Shimeall,  in  his  Reply,  conclusively  shows  that  it  only  became  such, 
over  against  the  literal,  by  a  wide  and  disastrous  departure  from  the  once  prevailing  in- 
terpretation. Ellicott  {Aids  to  Faith,  Essay  9,  "  Scripture  and  its  Interpretation")  cor- 
rectly shows  that  the  only  really  valuable  and  authoritative  interpretation  of  the  Church, 
including  even  the  available  portion  of  Origen's,  etc.,  is  that  based  on  a  grammatical 
and  historical  one.     The  reader  will  be  gratified  with  his  Essay. 

2  For  Luther's  view,  see  note  to  Obs.  1.  Also  Michelet's  Life  of  Luther,  p.  273  and 
Ap.  p.  419.  Comp.  estimate  of  Mosheim,  Neander,  Milner,  and  Kurtz  in  Ch.  His- 
tories, Killen  in  The  Old  (Jath.  Church,  Porter's  Ilomiletics,  etc.,  and  it  will  be  found 
that  Pressense  {Early  Years  of  Chris.,  vol.  2,  p.  328)  is  correct  when  he  says  that  Origen's 
mode  of  interpretation  "  reads  a  Bible  of  his  own  invention,  a  human  book  within 
the  Book  of  God." 

3  Compare  Hagenbach's  Hist,  of  Doc,  sec.  1(')2,  vol.  1,  Davison's  Hac  Herm.,  j). 
1G3-192,  etc.,  and  it  will  be  found  that  Origen's  threefold  sense  and  Augustine's  three 
and  fourfold  sense  gave  jDlace  even  to  Angelom's  sevenfold  and  eightfold  sense,  and 
ultimately  to  as  many  as  could  be  derived.  John  Scotus  Erigena  taught  an  infinite 
sense,  and  Cocceius  declared,  "that  the  words  of  Scripture  must  everywhere  be  sup- 
loosed  to  signify  just  as  much  as  they  may  signify,"  i.e.,  as  much  as  fancy  could  torture 
out  of  them.  Milner  justly  describes  {Eccl.  Hist.,  vol.  1,  p.  4G9)  a  long  i:)eriod  thus  : 
"  A  thick  mist  for  ages  pervaded  the  Christian  world,  supported  and  strengthened  by 
his  (Origen's)  allegorical  manner  of  interjDretation.  The  learned  alone  were  considered 
for  ages  implicitly  to  be  followed  ;  and  the  vulgar,  when  the  literal  was  hissed  off  the 
stage,  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  follow  their  authority  wherever  it  led  them."  This 
"  mist"  is  far  from  being  dispelled,  and  the  work  performed  under  its  cover  is  still 
largely  retained. 

■*  Swedenborg  {Tlie  Apoc.  Revealed,  vol.  2,  p.  959)  advocates  three  senses,  viz.,  "the 
celestial,  the  spiritual,  and  the  natural  ;"  tlie  last  being  of  little  account.  Under  the 
l^ious  garb  of  visions,  etc.,  he  conveniently  gets  rid  of  the  grammatical  sense,  and,  with 
it,  of  covenant  and  prediction  according  to  their  plain  meaning.  This  Swedenborgian 
key  reveals,  e.g.,  that  (Div.  Prov.  No.  326)  "  cows"  signify  "  good  natural  affections  ;" 
that  (True  Ch.  Kelig.  Nos.  113,  277)  a  horse  denotes  "  the  understanding  of  the  Word  of 
God  ;"  that  (Arc.  Coeles.  No.  2089)  Ishmael  begetting  twelve  princes  means  "  the  primary 
l^recepts  which  are  of  charity  ;"  that  (Arc.  Coelest.  No.  4790)  Joseph  sold  to  Potijohar 
signifies  "  the  alienation  of  Divine  truths  by  scientifics."  A  large  number  of  such 
engrafted  meanings  are  scattered  all  through  his  writings,  and  remind  us  strongly  of 
Origen's  flights  in  the  same  direction.  Thus  e.g.  the  latter  makes  the  seven  women  tak- 
ing hold  of  one  man,  mentioned  by  Isaiah,  to  denote  the  "  seven  operations  of  the 
Divine  Spirit,"  viz.,  "  the  sjoirit  of  wisdom,  of  intelligence,  of  council,  of  virtue,  of 
knowledge,  of  piet}',  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord"  (Porter's  Lee  Horn.,  p.  51).  Multitudes 
followed  and  endorsed  such  interjoretation.  Gregory  the  Great  in  his  exposition  of  Job 
fancies  that  "  Job's  friends  denote  the  heretics,  his  seven  sons  the  twelve  apostles,  his 
three  daughters  the  laity  adhering  to  the  Trinity,  his  seven  thousand  sheep  the  same 
faithful  people,  and  his  three  thousand  humjDbacked  camels  the  depraved  Gentiles." 
Eckhart  (art.,  Mystics  of  Fourteenth  Century,  Littell's  Living  Age,  vol.  123,  p.  457) 
informs  us  that  "  the  shell  is  to  be  broken,  the  husk  to  be  torn  off  and  flung  aM-ay  ere 
the  spiritual  kernel  could  be  reached."  How  he  reaches  this  "  spiritual  kernel"  is 
illustrated  in  his  sermon  on  the  restoration  to  life  of  the  widow's  son,  thus  :  he  makes 


60  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  4. 

*'  the  city  of  Nain  to  be  the  soul  of  man,  the  disciples  the  rays  of  light  entering  into  the 
soul,  and  the  widow's  son  the  human  will,"  etc.  Nicholas  of  Basle,  with  thousands  of 
others,  in  a  professed  spirit  of  self-renunciation,  but  which  really  exalted  self  in  that  it 
230ssessed  a  private  inspiration,  sought  out  the  hidden  meaning  of  Scriptm-e.  Under 
the  plea  of  supernatural  illumination,  ancients  and  moderns  discard  the  authority  of  the 
letter— some  are  extremists,  others  more  moderate. 

5  Thus  e.g.,  take  the  promises  relating  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  throne  and  kingdom 
of  David,  and  to  the  blessings  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  same  Jewish  nation  which  realized  the 
fulfilled  threatenings,  and  after  the  grammatical  sense,  both  strictly  literal  and  figura- 
tive, is  obtained,  then  these  are  converted  into  something  else.  Thus  David's  throne  is 
the  Father's  throne  in  heaven,  the  blessings  siJecifically  announced  to  the  Jews  are 
spiritualized  as  something  now  to  be  experienced  and  appropriated  by  the  Gentiles,  etc. 
Those  who  are  desirous  to  see  how  far  men  can  go  in  sj^iritualizing  are  referred  to  the 
writings  of  T.  R.  Gates  and  others.  This  additional  sense,  too,  is  often  one  of  the 
most  far-fetched  inferential,  reminding  one  of  the  Rabbinical  principle,  thus  (Hopkins' 
Puritan.^,  vol.  1,  p.  533)  illustrated  :  "  Hunting  on  the  Sabbath  day  is  a  sin,"  says  the 
Jewish  Talmud,  and  "  therefore  catching  a  flea  on  that  day  is  sin,  because  it  is  a  kind 
of  hunting."  This  is  no  caricature  ;  for  recently  in  the  Christian  Pulpit  appeared 
an  article  by  an  evidently  sincere  w^riter  (Vv'hose  name,  out  of  respect,  is  repressed)  on 
the  "  Parable  of  the  Leaven,"  in  which  the  author  asserts  that  the  first  measure  of  meal 
was  the  Jews,  the  second  measure  George  Washington  and  his  compeers,  and  the  third 
a  chosen  body  now  raised  up  in  a  certain  sect  of  which  the  writer  is  a  member  !  Alas  for 
the  Word,  when  thus  mutilated.  One  of  the  latest  exhibitions  in  this  direction  is  found 
in  Milton  Woolley's  Science  of  //le  5/.f>Ze,  which  interprets  all  by  suj)iDosed  astronomical 
relations.  Even  jjlain  history  symbolizes  natural  phenomena,  either  terrestrial  or  celes- 
tial. We  give  a  brief  specimen  of  ai:)plication  :  "  Now  when  Moses  was  grown  {i.e.,  when 
Aquarius  rises  heliacally  as  before  the  sun),  he  spied  an  Eg^'ptian  smiting  a  Hebrew 
(i.  e.,  winter  smiting  summer),  and  he  looked  this  way  and  that  way,  and  perceiving 
himself  unseen  (i.e.,  the  sun's  rays  hid  him),  he  slew  the  Egyptian  (i.e.,  winter  was 
followed  by  summer).  But  when  he  went  out  the  second  day  (i.e.,  after  he  passed  the 
summer  solstice),  he  saw  two  Hebrews  {i.e.,  the  two  halves  of  summer)  striving  to- 
gether, ' '  etc.  Ridiculous  as  this  may  appear,  it  is  not  near  as  dangerous  as  man}^  other 
interpretations  already  mentioned. 

^  The  reader  is  reminded  that  recent  writers,  as  Fairbairn,  Brown,  etc.,  make  no  effort 
to  give  us  canons  or  rules  which  would  guide  us  in  engrafting  a  spiritual  sense  upon  the 
grammatically  figurative.  The  nearest  approach  is  that  given  by  Home,  (Introd.  vol.  1, 
p.  382,  on  the  "Spiritual  Interpretation,"  sec.  1),  This  is  unsatisfactory  because  it 
mixes  type,  symbol,  figure,  etc.  In  conversation  with  a  talented  professor  of  theology, 
allusion  v/as  made  to  Home's  rules  for  spiritual  interpretation,  and  although  favorable 
himself  to  spiritualizing,  he  promx^tly  rejected  them,  and  frankly  admitted  that  deter- 
minate rules  could  not  be  recorded,  claiming  that  there  were  some  things  beyond  our 
power  to  fully  recognize  and  control  by  rules.  However  true  the  latter  may  be  as  to 
some  scientific  or  theological  truth,  it  certainly  cannot  apj)ly  to  interpretation. 

Obs.  7.  A  departure  from  the  literal  sense  has  not  only  caused  those 
immensely  varied  and  antagonistic  interpretations  of  the  kingdom,  but  it 
has,  in  its  self-defence,  forced  able  and  pious  men  to  a  confession  which 
undermines  and  destroys  the  authority  of  the  Bible.  Strauss,  Bauer,  and 
others,  charge  the  Bible,  including  the  ISTcav  Testament,  with  teaching  in  a 
direct,  literal  sense  a  visible,  outward  kingdom  here  on  eartli  under  the 
personal  reign  of  Jesus  ;  in  brief,  a  kingdom  in  its  Jewish  form.  This 
is  frankly  admitted  by  eminent  theologians;  indeed,  there  can  be,  as  we 
shall  hereafter  show,  no  question  about  its  being  a  fact.  But  how  do  they 
get  rid  of  this  objection  as  urged  by  Renan,  Parker,  and  others  ?  Easily 
enough,  by  turning  on  to  it  the  light  afforded  by  their  additional  sense. 
We  have  one  of  the  most  scholarly  inform  us.  Thus  e.g.  JSTeander  (Life 
of  Jesus y  p.  250,  etc.)  concedes  that  the  true  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
was  contained  in  a  *'  materialistic  husk,"  which  (the  latter)  he  designates 
a  "  chimera,  which  was  the  rough  rind  of  the  sacred  bulb  ;"  and  contends 
that  this  **  husk  "  was  in  the  second  or  ^third  century  removed,  and  then 


Prop.  4.]  the  theocratic  kixgdoim.  61 

*' the  real  kingdom  of  God  was  made  clear,"  and  the  believers  in  that 
"rough  rind"  by  the  change  '*  became  heretics."  In  other  words,  the 
literal  sense  once  held  is  discarded  and  another  sense,  which  is  pronounced 
the  true  one,  is  given  to  the  kingdom,  and  a  complete  reversal  of  opinion 
follows,  so  that  in  the  estimation  of  many  the  former  believers  are  no 
longer  to  be  regarded  as  in  sympathy  and  belief  with  the  Church.  We 
earnestly  protest  against  such  a  procedure,  which  makes  the  apostles  and 
early  believers  to  put  their  faith  in  a  "  chimera,"  "  a  rough  rind,"  "  a 
materialistic  husk  ;"  which  proclaims  with  the  utmost  self-complacency 
that  "  in  the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  in  doctrinal  truths,  we,  or  the  Church, 
are  far  m  advance  of  the  apostles  ;  which  makes  inspired  men  and 
preachers  of  the  kingdom  ignorant  of  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible, 
and  one  too  that  they  were  specially  to  proclaim.  Let  this  husk  be  the 
grammatical  sense — strictly  literal  and  figurative — we  are  abundantly 
satisfied  with  its  consolations,  profundity,  and  sublimity.  Its  meat  is 
wholesome  and  nourishing,  imparting  strength,  and  we  need  no  other, 
although  it  is,  with  high-sounding  words,  pronounced  to  be  the  inner, 
sacred  germ  developed  by  *' the  consciousness  of  the  Church,"  or  by  the 
growth  induced  by  the  Spirit.  When  we  see  that  the  reception  of  this 
inner  germ  produces  direct  antagonism  to  one  admitted  sense  of  the  Word, 
hostility  to  the  early  faith  of  the  Church,  inability  to  fairly  meet  the 
objections  of  infidelity,  a  countless  number  of  mystical  additions  leading 
to  the  most  extravagant  revelations,  we  respectfully,  but  firmly,  decline 
the  intoxicating  potion.  This  "  germ  system  "  virtually  makes  the 
Bible  "  all  things  to  all  men,"  in  a  way  that  opens  wide  the  door  to  the 
entrance  of  that  mournful,  endless  procession  of  diverse,  adverse,  opposite, 
inimical  opinions,  doctrines,  systems,  etc.,  which  appear  in  the  history  of 
hermeneutics,  theology,  and  the  Church.  Should  we  not,  to  say  the  least, 
hesitate  before  we  endorse  a  method  which  has  been  so  Avidespread  for 
evil,  and  which,  with  the  best  intention,  sweeps  a  net  with  meshes  so 
large  that  it  cannot  hold  in  confinement  the  fishes  it  encloses  ;  which  is  a 
power' so  explosive  and  dangerous  to  manage  that  when  handled  its  effects 
cannot  be  controlled  ?  It  leads  even  such  men  as  Cocceius  to  exult  in  the 
prolific  manner  in  which  reason  can  become  the  measurer  of  Scripture,  say- 
ing :  "  The  Scripture  is  so  rich  that  an  able  expositor  will  bring  more  than 
one  sense  out  of  it."  What  kind  of  riches  these  are,  we  need  not  now 
delineate.^ 

The  most  dangerous  attacks  of  unbelief  against  the  Bible  are  based  on 
a  purely  grammatical  interpretation  of  it.  The  result  is,  that  the  teaching 
of  the  Scriptures  being  diverse — as  e.g.  in  reference  to  the  kingdom — from 
the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the  modern  Church,  both  are  rejected  on  the 
ground  that  they  are  unreliable,  for  the  first  given  by  professed  inspired 
men  is  not  entertained  by  the  Church,  and  the  second  is  solely  the  work 
of  fallible  successors.  Now  the  vast  mass  of  the  Church,  having  left  the 
apostolic  interpretation  and  followed  the  Alexandrian,  monkish,  and 
popish  interpretations,  is  utterly  unable  to  resist  those  attacks  without 
resorting  to  a  double,  concealed,  inner,  or  spiritual  meaning.  Here  is  tlie 
fatal  lach  of  consistencij ;  for  it  is  virtually  admitting  that  the  Word  accord- 
ing to  its  letter  cannot  be  defended,  thus  opening  a  wide  gap  for  the 
enemies  of  the  truth  to  enter,  conceding  that  one  admitted  sense  possesses 
a  serious  defect.  Now,  we  propose  in  this  work  to  take  the  principles  of 
interpretation  correctly  adopted  by  unbelievers,  admitted  by  many  ortho- 


62  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  4. 

dox  to  be  sound  and  reliable,  however  tliey  may  violate  tliem,  and  show, 
step  by  step,  i)resenting  Scripture  proof  as  we  advance,  that  they  preserve 
the  integrity  of  the  Word,  the  inspired  teaching  of  the  apostles,  and  a 
marked  unity  of  design  in  redemptive  purposes.  While  there  is  a  large 
class  who  make  their  attack  against  Christianity  through  the  literal  inter- 
pretation and  reject  it  as  untenable,  there  is  another  large  one  who  profess 
to  retain  some  regard  for  the  Bible,  and  under  this  esteem  manipulate 
the  literal  sense  by  engrafting  upon  it  what  they  designate  a  higher  and 
nobler  sense.  Rationalistic,  iSTaturalistic,  and  Liberal  books,  full  of  Free 
Religionist  ideas,  develop  this  feature  largely.  Alas  !  this  destructive 
work  was  taught  them  by  the  system  of  believers,  and  they  plant  them- 
selves complacently  upon  the  interpreting  basis  so  kindly  i^rovided — all 
objections  being  swallowed  up  in  the  latitude  given  by  a  supposed  freedom. 
Grammar,  rhetoric,  and  history  are  violated  for  the  sake  of  an  idea,  an 
'^  inner  germ,"  and  the  most  scholarly,  learned  men  are  pushing  on,  exult- 
antly, the  w^ork.^  Prudence  dictates  a  return  to  the  grammatical  sense, 
which  all  admit,  and  a  strict  adherence  to  the  same.  Every  one  feels  that 
just  in  proportion  as  an  important  doctrine  or  truth  is  founded  upon  such 
a  sense,  in  that  proportion  is  it  credible.  Even  mystics,  the  greatest 
spiritualizers,  seek  to  sustain  their  views  by  an  appeal  to  such  wherever 
available.  The  leading  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  cannot  prove  an  excep- 
tion to  a  rule  which  commends  itself  to  good  judgment. 

^  History  is  full  of  them.  Not  merely  Cocceins  (Mosheim  Ch.  Hist.,  vol,  3,  p.  429),  but  a 
host  of  others  arose  in  all  centuries,  who  thus  perverted  the  plainest  passages,  making  even 
(Home's  Introcl.,  vol.  1,  p.  384,  note)  the  incest  of  Lot  and  his  daughters  a  sign  of  salva- 
tion tl  I'oTigh  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  phrase  "  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun"  to  be  the  equiva- 
lent 0  "  Jesus  the  Son  of  Man,"  etc.  These  are  extremes,  which  happily  the  good  sense 
of  ma  ly  of  our  ojDponents  reject  with  tis,  and  they  are  only  presented  to  show  what  fruits 
the  s-ystem  itself,  in  the  hands  of  some,  produces.  Multitudes  accuse  us  of  folly  (1 
Cor.  i  :  18)  in  adhering  to  the  grammatical  construction,  but  they  forget  two  things,  1. 
That  if  the  grammatical  word  contains  foolishness,  then  the  Spirit  is  justly  chargeable  in  its 
prof,^'^  tion  ;  and  2.  That  no  mistakes  of  rigid  literalism,  overlooking  figures  of  speech  con- 
tain. I  (as  alleged  e.g.  against  the  Audiani,  the  followers  of  Audreus),  can  be  compared 
with  the  more  serious  and  dangerous  blunders  of  spiritual  and  mystical  interpretation. 
One  of  the  most  sad  mistakes,  under  the  impression  of  "  spiritual  discernment,"  is 
found  in  the  history  of  Irving's  life  (see  p.  445,  etc.,  and  App.  p.  567,  609,  Irving' s  Life 
by  Mrs.  Oliphant).  The  student,  undoubtedly,  has  noticed  the  multitude  of  interpre- 
tations which  accommodate  Scripture— in  the  manner  of  the  clergyman  who  preached 
before  the  Pretender  at  Perth  from  Isa.  14  :  1,  2— to  ^jresent  existing  circumstances  and 
conditions,  when  the  context,  scope,  etc.,  indicate  no  such  reference.  Professor  Sherer, 
when  he  repudiates  "  the  literal  system  "  as  "  the  theological  baggage,"  and  makes  the 
Spirit  apart  from  (not  in  and  by)  the  Word  the  bestower  of  new  revelations,  new  truths, 
new  doctrines  etc.,  is  only  reproducing  an  old  departure  from  the  Scripture  teaching  ; 
and  when  Castellio,  at  Geneva,  said,  "  The  Spirit  will  eclii:)se  the  light  of  the  Scripture 
as  the  sun  eclipses  the  light  of  a  candle, "  it  is  only  the  rei^etition  of  an  oft-rei^eated 
fanatical  prediction.  It  is  the  spirit  of  the  Jesuit  who  made  the  Pope ''the  greater 
light,"  or  of  the  London  preacher  who  made  Pharaoh  to  mean  God  the  Father,  Joseph 
the  Son  of  God,  and  Potiphar's  wife  sinful  nature  (Ency.  Bib.  Knowl.,  art.  "  Spirit- 
ualize"). 

2  The  spiritualistic  theory,  now  so  prevalent  and  heartily  endorsed  in  the  Church,  is 
bearing  its  deadly  fruit  in  many  a  work  published  under  infidel  and  semi-infidel  aus- 
pices. Thus  e.g.  A.  Coqueral,  Jr.  (Hurst's  Hist.  Rational,  p.  409)  is  the  mouthpiece  of  a 
vast  number  w^lien  he  declares  that  "  authority  does  not  rest  in  the  letter,  or  in  the 
leaves  of  Scripture.  The  Divine  Spirit  acts  in  the  soul  freely  and  independentlj^  of  the 
letter.  It  is  high  time  that  we  renounce  the  i^uerile,  disrespectful,  and  contradictory 
worship  of  the  letter.  The  letter  killeth."  It  is  not  a  sufficient  reply  to  say  that  these 
men  believe  that  every  man  possessing  truth  is  equally  inspired  with  the  apostles,  and 


Prop.  4.]  the  theocratig  kiis-gdom.  63 

hence  do  not  confine  themselves  to  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Word,  but  embrace  their 
own  individual  deductions.  For  this  is  precisely  what  multitudes,  professing  to  be 
Christians  and  not  ranked  with  infidels,  are  doing,  viz.,  giving  an  additional  sense 
to  the  Word  under  the  claim  that"  the  letter  killeth,"  and  that  the  Spirit  is  specially 
given  to  them,  thus  7namifaciuring  a  Bible  of  their  own  out  of  the  Word  consistent  with 
their  own  conceptions  of  what  truth  demands.  We  can,  alas,  point  to  large  organized 
bodies  setting  up  antagonistic  claims  in  this  manner,  while  all  denominations  are, 
more  or  less,  leavened  by  its  spirit  and  practice.  Admitting  the  principle  to  be  a  cor- 
rect one,  how  can  you  meet  in  argument  those  who  claim  that  they  have  the  Spirit 
equally  with  yourself?  You  cannot  appeal  to  the  letter,  for  that  "  killeth  ;"  you  cannot 
appeal  to  the  Spirit,  for  both  profess  to  jDossess  it.  In  fact,  it  leaves  us  no  solid  crite- 
rion by  which  to  judge. 

Ods.  8.  While  urging  a  literal  interpretation,  we  are,  as  already 
intimated,  equally  opposed  to  that  ultra-literalism  which  makes  no  allow- 
ance for  the  figures  of  speech  incident  to  all  language.  Tropical  usage  is 
by  no  means  an  evidence  of  ambiguity  or  weakness  ;  it  is  rather  that  of 
clearness  and  strength,  for  according  to  the  decided  testimony  of  rhetori- 
cians, its  design  and  province  is  (Blair's  Rhet.,  S.  14)  to  "  illustrate  a  sub- 
ject, or  throw  light  upon  it,"  or  (Jamieson's  Rliet.,  p.  138)  "  to  give  us, 
frequently,  a  much  clearer  and  more  striking  view,"  etc.  Hence  to 
reject  them  is  to  evince  a  childish  i^lay,  such  a  puerile  literalism  as  was 
exemplified  in  Origen's  unfortunate  emasculation  (how  much  had  this  to 
do  with  the  after-development  of  his  threefold  sense?),  and  even  in  the 
contest  between  the  great  reformers  Luther  and  Zwingii  on  the  words 
instituting  the  Supper.  This  disclaimer  is  the  more  necessary,  since  in 
numerous  books,  reviews,  and  newspapers,  it  is  alleged  that  Millenarians 
confine  themselves  to  the  exclusive,  rigid,  literal  sense,  admitting  no  other, 
and  denying  that  of  figure.  One  writer  even.  Dr.  Spring,  made  ihe  ■  itterly 
unwarranted  assertion  that  we  "  affirm  that  the  prophetic  and  .ipoca- 
lyptic  writings  which  speak  of  the  Millennium  are  free  from  fi'^;ures, 
symbols,  and  are  altogether  literal."^  The  simple  truth  is,  that 'not  a 
single  Millenarian  author,  from  the  days  of  the  apostles  down,  h:-Vls  to 
such  an  opinion  ;  all  of  them,  without  exception,  fully  recognize  symbols, 
types,  and  figures  of  speech,  notice  their  peculiarities,  and  discriminate 
them  from  the  strictly  literal.  It  is  tlieir  lolain,  unanimous  statement  that 
language  must  be  interpreted  by  the  laws  which  produce  and  regulate  it  : 
if  symbolic,  it  is  to  be  interpreted  by  the  laws  governing  symbols  ;  if 
typical,  then  by  the  Jaws  underlying  types  ;  if  figurative,  then  by  the 
rules  controlling  figures  ;  and  if  rigidly  literal,  then  Ijy  the  laws  of  unfig- 
urative  speech.  Works  specially  directing  attention  to  these  rules  are 
presented  by  Millenarian  writers,  as  e.g.  Brookes,  Bickersteth,  Lord, 
Winthrop,  etc.^ 

^  The  Literary  and  Theological  Journal  of  D.  N.  Lord,  while  published,  did  good 
service  in  correcting  such  unjust  rei^resentations,  both  in  showing  their  groundlessness 
and  in  advocating  the  direct  converse.  To  this  journal  the  reader  is  referred  for  numer- 
ous examples  of  misrepresentations  (like  Spring's,  etc.),  corrected,  for  illustrations  of  the 
manner  in  which  passages  are  explained  by  us  and  our  opponents,  and  for  the  opinions 
of  Duffield,  McNeile,  and  others  on  the  subject.  Bickersteth's  Guide,  Brooke's  Elements 
of  Prophetic  Interpretation,  The  Prophetic  Times,  etc.,  may  also  be  consulted  with  advantage. 

-  It  is  not  necessary  to  reproduce  the  rules  adopted  by  us,  for  these  are  found  in  our 
grammars  and  rhetorics,  introductions  to  the  Bible  (as  Home's,  etc.),  and  in  the  writ- 
ings of  the  class  mentioned.  Let  us  add,  that  the  grammatical  interpretation  of  figure, 
symbol,  type,  is  not  the  spiritual  interpretation  that  we  condemn  ;  but  after  the  lawful 
interpretation  of  such  figure,  etc.,  has  been  ascertained,  to  leave  this  and  "fasten  another 


64  THE  THEOCRATIC  iviNGDo:\r.  [Prop.  4. 

upon  it  -this  so-called  spiritual  sense  we  resist.  While  the  literal  may  be  TinlawfuUy 
made  figurative,  and  the  figurative  by  violence  be  made  literal— mistakes  to  which  all 
are  liable— a  legitimate  literal  and  figurative  interpretation  is  not  to  be  set  aside  for 
another  and  representative  sense  of  something  that  the  words  do  not  express.  It  is  amus- 
ing to  notice  writers  who  cannot  distinguish  between  their  special  superadded  spiritual 
sense  and  a  figurative  one  ;  and  who,  blundering,  call  figure,  symbol,  and  type  spiritual 
language,  or  else  overlook  the  fact  that  as  figurative  language  falls  in  with  the  purely 
grammatical,  they  cannot  justly  charge  us  with  error  in  making  it  such,  when  we  hold  to 
a  literal  fulfilment  of  the  same  after  it  has  been  interpreted  by  the  rules  of  language. 
We  hold  that  rigid  literal  language,  symbol,  type,  and  figure  in  their  plain  grammatical 
interpretation  often  teach  us  spiritual  facts,  etc.,  but  this  they  do  in  the  plain  sense  con- 
veyed. Even  allegory  we  receive  where  it  is  plainly  contained  in  the  language  ;  and  in 
reference  to  the  expression  of  Paul  (Gal.  4  :  2-4),  this  is  no  criterion  to  be  followed  by  us, 
as  is  clearly  stated  by  Albert  Barnes  {Com.  loci.),  to_  which  the  reader  is  referred,  coming 
as  it  does  from  one  who  favored  spiritualizing. 

Ods.  9.  To  prove  that  our  proposition  is  wrong  in  limiting  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  Bible  by  the  laws  of  language,  as  universally  held,  it  must 
be  shown  :  1.  That  the  Bil)le  in  its  usage  of  language  is  an  exception  to 
all  other  books.  2.  That  the  subject-matter,  superior  to  that  contained 
in  other  books,  is  not  conveyed  to  us  through  the  common  channel  of 
language  in  the  ordinary  way.  3.  That  a  sense  beyond  that  given  by  the 
rules  oi  language  is  a  legitimate  one,  and  either,  in  some  manner,  drawn 
from  language  itself  or  found  incorporated  or  announced  in  the  Word. 
4.  Some  rules  or  directions  for  ascertaining  and  applying  this  additional 
sense,  so  that  it  may  be  easily  recognized  and  not  arbitrarily  used.  5. 
Some  decided — not  inferential — examples  of  such  a  sense  being  determined 
and  enforced  by  the  Bible,  in  order  to  elevate  it  to  a  justly  recognizable 
rank.  In  this  way  we  m.ay,  perhaps,  be  enabled  to  appreciate  that  over- 
whelming stream  of  scholasticism,  mysticism,  and  spiritualism  pervading 
our  theological  literature.  Men  laughingly  refer  to  those  enormous 
summaries  of  Divinity  concocted  in  past  ages,  with  their  violations  of 
Scripture  language,  while  they  themselves,  unconsciously,  approvingly 
quote  and  endorse  in  their  formative  theology  many  of  the  erroneous 
interpretations  of  the  Thomists,  Scotists,  Occamites,  etc.  Having  a 
system  of  interpretation  identical  in  many  respects  with  the  scholastics, 
etc.,  it  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  rid  themselves  entirely  of  their 
interpretations.^ 

Another  feature  must  also  be  discarded.  It  has  become  quite  fashion- 
able with  recent  writers,  in  their  efforts  to  find  arguments  against  us,  to 
practically  lower  the  prophetical  portion  of  the  Word  by  placing  the  non- 
prophetical  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  scale  as  far  superior  to  the  former, 
etc." (so  e.g.  Waldegrave,  comp.  Lord's  Journal,  Ap.  1857).  Now,  when- 
ever a  system  is  forced,  in  self-defence,  to  thus  discriminate  between  the 
Scriptures  and  portions  of  them,  exalting  one  part  above  the  other  as 
more  worthy  of  reception  or  credence,  instead  of  receiving  the  ivliole  as 
standing  upon  the  same  ground  of  being  a  revelation  of  God's  will  and 
purpose  (comp.  Prop.  10),  it  is  evidence — decisive — of  weakness  and 
imperfection.  A  substantial  method  does  not  need  sucii  unstable  prop- 
ping. Notwithstanding  its  plausible  and  authoritative  air,  it  becomes,  by 
its  disintegrating  qualities,  a  dangerous  instrumentality.  It  is  the  weapon 
so  freely  employed  by  German  Eationalists  and  others  to  invalidate  the 
credibility  and  authority  of  the  prophetic  writings,  and  to  graft  upon  them 
any  desired  meaning.     To  make  one  portion  of  scripture  to  be  the  sole 


Prop,  4.]  the  theocratic  Krrs'GDOX,  65 

and  exclusive  arbiter  and  interjoreter  of  the  Bible,  is  subversive  of  the 
light  given  in  a  general  analogy  and  a  continuous  Divine  plan.  Such  a 
course  is  like  to  that  of  a  person  who,  in  a  large  room  containing  a 
number  of  windows,  contents  himself  with  the  light  of  one  when  all  are 
avaihible  ;  and  then,  owing  to  the  quantity  of  light  received,  distinguishing 
things  imperfectly,  still  contends  that  such  is  their  true  and  only  appear- 
ance." 

1  Hence  Le  'Roy  Pope  {Modern  Fancies  and  Follies,  p.  337)  takes  the  position,  owing 
to  the  variety  of  interpretation,  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  Bible  cannot  be  obtained 
from  the  hmguage  of  Scripture,  asserting  :  "  The  only  light  which  can  afford  us  this  in- 
dispensable aid,  and  bring  the  religious  world,  which  has  gone  so  far  astray,  back  to  true 
religion,  is  the  light  of  nature."  But  he  forgets  ;  1.  That  the  variety'  of  interpretation 
springs  not  so  much  from  the  grammatical  sense  as  from  the  system  of  spiritualizing  the 
language  ;  2.  That  no  other  book  must  call  in  "  the  light  of  nature"  in  order  to  have  its 
true  sense  presented  ;  3.  That  the  advocates  of  this  "  light  of  nature"  also  bring  in  an 
endless  varietj'  of  interpretations  ;  4.  And  that  he  thus  makes,  allowing  the  claims  of  the 
Bible,  the  lesser  to  be  the  guide  and  instructor  of  the  greater. 

■^  Other  points  worthy  of  notice  might  be  presented,  but  we  briefly  advert  to  another, 
very  common,  viz.,  boldly  to  assert  a  sweeping  accusation  without  giving  any  reasons  or 
facts  to  sustain  it.  Thus  e.g.  Fairbairn  (a  valuable  writer)  On  Prophecy,  Append.  G,  p. 
497,  approvingly  quotes  Hengstenberg,  attemi;)ting  to  make  the  literal  interpretation 
odious,  saj'ing,  "  that  its  strongest  condemnation  consists  in  its  being  the  very  method 
of  interj^retation  which  led  to  the  crucifixion  of  Christ."  If  this  is  its  "  strongest  con- 
demnation," we  are  abundantly  satisfied  to  retain  it.  Allusion  is  evidently  had  to  Jesus 
being  charged  with  His  being  a  king,  etc.,  but  let  the  objector  bear  m  mind  that  Jesus 
never  denied  the  charge,  but  appropriated  the  fact  as  apj^licable.  This  will  be  developed 
under  its  appropriate  head  hereafter  ;  now  it  may  be  said,  the  Jews  rejected  the  literal 
fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  Christ's  forerunner,  in  Cihrist's  birth,  life,  miracles,  entry  into 
Jerusalem,  crucifixion,  death,  burial,  resurrection,  and  ascension.  The  apostles  accuse 
them  of  such  conduct,  and  hence  their  unbelief  is  represented  as  the  more  iiiexcu.sable. 
Their  hatred  toward  and  their  crucifixion  of  Christ,  according  to  the  testimony,  was  based 
neither  on  the  literal  nor  the  spiritual  interpretation  of  prophecy,  but  on  their  unbelief, 
hardness  of  heart,  apprehension  of  the  people  leaving  them  for  Christ,  etc.,  thus  leading 
to  false  and  malicious  charges.  The  best  i^ossible  refutation  of  Fairbairn  is  given  by 
himself,  p.  223-226  of  the  same  work,  where  the  literal  fulfilment  of  jDrophecy  is  lauded, 
and  we  are  told  that  "  it  is  necessary  to  compare  together  i:)rophecy  and  history"  to  see 
the  literal  authentication. 

Obs.  10.  In  our  Introductions  to  the  Bible  it  is  a  generally  admitted 
principle  that  no  important  doctrine  should  be  solely  based  on  figurative 
language  ;  that  to  give  it  certainty  it  ought  to  be  founded  on  the  literal 
meaning  of  the  words.  This  is  a  necessity,  notwithstanding  the  theoriz- 
ing, so  much  impressed,  that  in  every  promulgation  of  doctrine,  men  will 
instinctively  feel  that  if  they  can  secure  the  literal  sense  in  their  favor,  fhe 
strongest  possible  proof  is  thus  obtained.  Why  reject  this  when  we  come 
to  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  ?  Surely,  if  there  is  a  doctrine  in  the 
J5ible  that  ought  to  be  sustained  by  tlie  clearest  evidence,  it  is  the  leading- 
one  of  the  kingdom.  This  is  abundantly  provided,  if  we  Avill  only  consider 
and  receive  it.  Its  simplicity  should  not  deter  us  ;  this  feature  ought 
rather  to  recommend  it  to  our  special  notice.  More  than  this  :  if  we 
reject  it  we  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  same,  just  as  Jesus  held  the 
Jews  accountable  for  the  literal  understanding  of  the  Scrii)tures.  We 
certainly  are  not  amenable  to  a  still  "  higher  sense  "of  interpretation, 
whose  laws  are  not  given  ;  and  certainly  we  are  not  to  be  condemned  for 
rejecting  that  which  is  said  by  men  to  be  concealed,  hidden  under  the 
letter,  and  v/hich  it  is  imj)ossible  to  perceive  in  the  letter  by  the  rules 


m  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  4. 

regulating  that  letter.  Thus  e.g.  out  of  the  many  meanings  engrafted 
upon  the  kingdom  by  the  adoption  of  a  hidden  germ,  etc.,  which  sense 
ought  we  then  to  adopt,  and  what  assurance  have  we  that  it  is,  after  all, 
the  correct  one?  No  !  we  are  only  answerable  to  God's  demand,  how  we 
have  treated  the  very  letter  committed  to  our  trust,  and  this  obligation  presses 
alike  upon  the  learned  and  unlearned.  Our  doctrine,  firmly  adhering  to  one 
system  of  interpretation,  is  found  equally  in  both  Old  and  New  Testament. 
Our  opponents  tell  us  that  the  Jews  understood  the  Okl  Testament  too  liter- 
ally, and  in  place  of  their  belief  we  are  informed  {Essays  and  Reviews^  S. 
7,  p.  406),  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  the  world  to  introduce 
new  truths  into  the  Old  Testament  in  place  of  the  old.  Others  plead 
that  the  primitive  Church  comprehended  the  New  Testament  too  literally 
(Neander,  etc.),  but  that  this  was  merely  a  transition  stage  before  "  the 
husk  "  was  throv/n  off  and  the  genuine  truth  revealed.  Once  for  all  let  us 
say,  that  as  reverent  believers  in  the  Word,  it  is  impossible  to  credit  such 
explanations,  condemnatory  of  God's  Word,  justice,  and  love,  and  cruelly 
unjust  to  His  ancient  people,  as  if  they  were  in  faith  a  deceived  people, 
and  the  deception  grew  out  of  God's  mode  of  teaching.  Never  can  we 
accept,  however  sincere  its  advocates,  of  such  consequential,  evil- tending 
teachmg.  We  desire  not  to  endorse  a  system  which,  in  the  hands  of  a 
God-fearing  man,  may  result  in  comparative  little  injury,  but  which,  in 
the  grasp  of  infidelity,  becomes  a  power,  widely  felt,  in  subverting  all  the 
distinctive  orthodox  doctrines,  the  most  cherished  hopes  of  the  Church, 
and  the  true  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 

The  literal  interpretation  is  especially  valuable  in  argument.  It  gives  the  only  solid 
foundation  for  the  exj^ression  of  opinion  ;  for  a  sense  that  language  bears  upon  its  very 
surface  is  undoubtedly  the  one  intended  by  the  author,  and  however  unwilling  persons 
are  to  admit  it,  yet  they,  notwithstanding,  feel  its  force.  Even  mystics,  etc.,  in  explain- 
ing the  added  spiritual  sense,  wish  us  to  receive  their  own  explanations  in  this  way.  To 
resort  to  added  senses,  engenders  doubt,  or  impresses  the  mind  that  something  evasive 
exists.  Coleridge  {Aids  to  Reflection,  p.  82)  justly  observes  that,  "  in  arguing  with  in- 
fidels, or  the  weak  in  faith,  it  is  the  part  of  religious  prudence,  no  less  than  of  religious 
morality,  to  avoid  whatever  looks  like  an  evasion.  To  retain  tlie  literal  sense,  whenever 
the  harmony  of  Scripture  permits,  and  reason  does  not  forbid,  is  ever  tlie  honester  and, 
nine  times  in  ten,  the  more  rational  and  pregnant  interpretation.  The  contrary  plan  is  an 
easy  and  approved  way  of  getting  rid  of  a  difficulty  ;  but,  nine  times  in  ten,  a  bad  way  of 
solving  it."  Ellicott  {Aids  to  Faith,  Essay  9)  well  says  :  "  The  true  and  honest  method 
of  interpreting  the  Word  of  God — the  literal,  historical,  and  grammatical — has  been  recog- 
nized in  every  age,  and  the  results  are  seen  in  the  agreement  of  numberless  passages  of 
importance  that  may  be  found  in  expositors  of  all  periods,"  and  it  is  this  agreement, 
thus  cemented  by  a  common  bond,  that  adds  force  in  argument. 

Obs.  11.  All  believers  ask  for  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  in  understanding  the 
Scriptures,  but  this  aid  or  enlightenment  is  not  outside  of  the  scriptural 
truth,  but  of  it.  Faith,  in  its  influence  upon  the  heart,  qualifies  the 
believer  to  appreciate  the  W^ord  ;  for  its  truths  can  only  be  properly 
estimated  by  him  who  practically  receives  them  and  experiences  their 
power  in  heart  and  life.  The  higher  our  experience  of  God's  promises, 
the  more  we  are  enabled  to  understand  Holy  Writ  containing  them.  The 
Author  of  the  Scriptures  is  the  Spirit  :  we  honor  Him  by  asking  His  assist- 
ance to  comprehend  them,  and  such  honor  and  reliance  is  only  properly 
exhibited  by  a  personal  stndy  of  them.  Human  helps  are  valuable,  and 
the  Spirit  will  certainly  (as  experience  testifies)  use  them  in  impressing 
the  truth,  provided  the  chief  reliance  is  placed  on  the  Scriptures  them- 


Prop.  4.]  the  theocratic  kij^gdom.  67 

selves  as  given  by  Him  and  the  moral  enlightenment  resulting  from  their 
reception.  This  distinguishes  a  mere  student  from  a  believer,  for  a  man 
may  be  learned  and  able,  and  yet  utterly  fail  to  receive  the  truth  as 
intended  (thus  failing  in  his  apprehension),  while  an  unlearned  believer, 
cordially  accepting  and  appropriating  personally  the  Scriptures,  experi- 
ences their  power  in  his  own  heart  and  life.  ("  If  any  man  will  do  llis 
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctriue,  whether  it  be  of  God,"  John  7  :  17)  ; 
but  hoth  combined,  learning  and  religious  experience,  elevates  the  man  to 
the  highest  plane. 

AVliatever  principle  of  interpretation  is  adopted,  without  appropriating  practical  faith 
and  the  resultant  fruits,  we  cannot  get  the  understanding  that  God  commends.  Unless 
the  Scriptures  make  us  "  wise  to  salvation"  (2  Tim.  2  :  15),  all  our  theoretical  knowledge 
is  vain  {e.g.  Matt.  7  :  21-23  ;  1  Cor,  13  :  1-3,  etc.),  and  only  increases  our  condemnation 
{e.g.  John  3  :  18,  19,  and  12  :  47,  48,  etc.).  The  grand  truths  contained  in  the  j)lain 
grammatical  sense  must — as  God  intended — lead  to  a  heart-felt  obedience,  with  a  coex- 
istent moral,  religious,  spiritual  influence,  and  then  its  preciousness  will  be  self-evident. 
It  is  certain  that  the  Christian  consciousness  possesses  the  Witness  of  the  Spirit,  but 
this  witness  is  not  given  independently  of  the  truth,  but  always  connected  therewith,  and 
hence  is  evidenced  in  the  ordinary  religious  experience^not  by  a  direct  but  indirect,  not 
by  an  immediate  but  mediate  testimony — by  the  work  it  performs,  the  fruits  it  bestows, 
the  experience  it  gives,  the  controlling  love  that  it  imparts.  Any  other  view  opens — as 
history  sadly  shows— the  door  to  fanaticism  and  ten  thousand  visionary  interpretations. 
Let  us  remember,  that  the  Witness  of  the  Spirit,  the  Sealing  of  the  Spirit,  the  Mind 
which  was  in  Christ,  are  all  the  same  (comj).  President  Edwards'  On  the  Affections),  and 
it  materially  aids  us  in  estimating  the  effect  that  the  Scriptures  should  have  upon  our- 
selves by  the  Spirit's  heli^,  and  in  ridding  ourselves  of  that  vast  body  of  interpretation 
presented  to  us  under  the  claim  of  a  special,  supernatural,  inward  teaching  of  the  Spirit. 
An  observance  of  the  rules  common  to  language,  practical  sense,  a  due  regard  to  the  an- 
alog}' of  Scripture  and  Faith,  an  observance  of  the  historical  application  in  reference  to 
opinions  and  views  held,  an  Tinj^rejudiced  mind  and  a  heart  willing,  irresi^ective  of  pre- 
conceived ideas,  to  bring  forth  the  real  meaning  and  intent  of  the  writer — these,  in  con- 
nection with  a  personal  experience  of  the  truth,  are  requisites  to  constitute  a  good  in- 
terpreter. 


68  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDOX.  [PrOP.  5. 


Propositiox  5.      The  doctrine  of  the  l:ingJom  is  hased  on  the 
in$])iratio)i  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  autlieiiticity  and  credibility  of  the  Scriptures  has  been  ably 
defended  in  special  treatises,  so  that,  in  order  to  deline  our  posi- 
tion, it  is  only  necessary  to  give  a  few  observations  on  the  connec- 
tion that  this'^kingdom  "^sustains  to  inspiration.  At  the  conclusion 
of  this  work,  the  subject  will  be  resumed  {e.g.  Prop.  182),  and,  as  a 
result,  the  credibility  and  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures  be  evi- 
denced by  the  continuous  Divine  purpose  as  shown  in  the  king- 
dom. 

Inspiration,  wliile  inclnding,  is  not  based  on  the  gennineness  and  authenticity  of  the 
Bible,  as  Fronde  (Short  Studies)  has  noticed  ;  it  is  not  established  even  fully  by  miracle 
and  prophecy,  although  essential  to  the  supernatural,  for  all  religions  claim  these  ;  but 
it  is  to  be  found  (satisfactory  to  reason)  in  a  revealed  Divine  purpose  or  plan,  clearly  an- 
nounced, carried  on  for  ages  in  the  form  and  manner  j)reviously  stated,  the  same  being 
recognizable  at  any  period  in  the  existing  history  of  the  world,  etc.  Hence,  e.g.,  Froude 
makes  little  of  Co'lenso's  attack  on  the  Pentateuch  and  of  the  replies  to  him,  asserting 
that  the  genuineness  and  authenticity  in  ascription  of  human  authorship  has  no  rele- 
vancy tothe  deeper  one  of  inspiration.  He  takes  the  position  of  a  writer  in  the  West- 
minster Beview  that  any  proof  (as  that  derived  from  the  discoveries  of  Eawlinson)  of 
the  truthfulness  or  knowledge  of  the  Bible  record,  is  no  proof  of  Divine  inspiration.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  the  orthodox  party  have  sometimes  too  hastily  concluded  the  in- 
spiration of  the  Word  from  such  isolated  cases  (seeing  that  a  historical  fact  announced  in 
the  Bible  may  also  be  one  in  possession  of  fallible  man)  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
Froude  and  others  forget  that  they  themselves  would  employ  historical  inaccuracy  as 
evidence  against  inspiration.  The  latter  embraces  the  former.  The  truth  is,  that  noth- 
ing will  satisfy  a  class  of  critics  ;  prove  the  genuineness  and  authenticity,  and  the  reply 
is,  that  such  may  be  the  case,  but  it  still  is  the  sole  work  of  man  :  prove  the  inspiration 
from  doctrine,  unity,  design,  etc.,  and  the  answer  is.  that  the  genuineness  and  aiithen- 
ticity  is  not  yet  proven,  thus  refusing,  what  they  concede  to  be,  the  greater  to  include 
the  lesser.  Ebrard  {Gospel  Hist.,  p.  600)  aptly  says  :  "  We  are  far  from  denying  that 
there  are  men  to  whom  no  one  could  demonstrate  the  genuineness  of  the  New  Testament 
writings.  He  who  will  not  believe  in  the  jRisea  One  will  seek  with  unwearied  diligence 
for  loopholes  by  which  he  may  escape  from  the  positive  jiroofs  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
Gospel  writings  and  the  truth  of  Gospel  history.  The  Gospel  still  remains  to  the  Jews 
a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness  ;  and  conversion  and  regeneration  still 
form  the  porch  of  the  understanding,  even  to  the  literary  understanding,  of  the  Script- 
ures. The  Gospel,  as  Lange  has  well  said,  is  so  inexorably  a  critic  to  everything  that 
springs  from  the  liesh,  that  the  flesh  is  stimulated  to  bring  its  negative  criticism  to  bear 
against  the  Gospel  in  return." 

Obs.  1.  All  that  we  know  of  the  covenanted  kingdom  was  spoken  by 
lioly  men  of  old  as  they  were  professedly  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Bible,  which  contains  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  asserts,  this  as  a  fact. 
How  is  this  fact  to  be  fully  recognized  ?  When  the  man  of  science  looks 
at  the  long-protracted  labors  of  natnre,  how,  in  periods  far  distant,  in 
countries  far  apart,  in  century  after  century,  she  has  been  uniform  in  her 
work,  indicating  continued  unity  of  design  and  purpose  amid  the  exist- 


Prop.  5.]  the  theocratic  KixGDo:\r.  69 

ing  diversity,  he  reasonably  concludes  that  the  unseen  but  felt  (in  results) 
laws,  by  which  she  operates  and  controls  all  things,  truly  exist.  The 
invisibility  of  them  forms  no  objection  to  believing  in  them,  because  their 
effects  are  visible  and  commend  themselves  to  him  as  satisfactory  and 
conclusive  evidence.  The  uniformity  of  their  operation,  esj^ecially,  forces 
upon  him  the  irresistible  conviction  of  their  reality.  The  Bible  claims  tlie 
same  treatment.  It  is  the  product  of  what  we  call  "  inspiration  ;"  and  it 
asserts  that  the  same  invisible  force  or  power  that  produced  this  ''  inspira- 
tion" is  constantly  exerted  in  its  verification.  Now,  if  we  test  this 
Biblical  claim  as  we  do  the  invisible  laws  of  nature,  it  will  also  be  found 
to  possess  a  majestic  reality.  But  how  is  this  test  to  be  applied  ?  Surely 
not  to  the  invisible  law  itself,  for  that  cannot  be  handled,  but  to  the 
effects  that  it  produces,  or  to  the  results  whJch  it  accomj^lishes.  This  can 
be  done  in  two  ways  :  either  to  have  the  effects  or  results  personally 
appropriated,  as  in  nature  to  see,  touch,  taste,  and  feel  the  same,  and  in 
religion  to  experience  its  force  and  power  by  reception  of  the  truth  ;  or 
else  to  imitate  the  man  of  science  as  above  indicated.  Taking  the  latter 
mode  :  as  the  scientist  looks  at  nature,  so  let  him  survey  the  Word,  and 
see  how  men,  separated  by  ages,  countries,  languages,  customs,  habits, 
education,  intelligence,  position  and  rank,  have  continuously  unfolded  a 
redemptive  plan  ;  how  they  have  stated  and  predicted  the  same  things 
with  a  remarkable  unity  amid  a  diversity  of  style,  language,  etc.;  how, 
when  comparison  is  instituted,  and  the  additions  of  one  are  attached  to  the 
other,  a  unity  of  Divine  purpose  is  exhibited  ;  how  this  unity  was 
preserved  in  the  events  that  occurred,  in  the  religion  that  was  established, 
in  the  Christianity  that  was  founded,  in  the  personal  experience  of 
believers,  in  the  hostility  of  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  in  the  progress  of 
the  Gospel,  in  the  internal  and  external  aspect  of  the  Word  itself  :  and 
then  let  him  give  an  adequate  cause  for  all  these  results.  It  has  become 
prevalent  in  some  quarters  to  leave  the  prophetical  portion  of  the  Word 
out  of  the  question,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be  difhcult  to  show, 
either  that  the  events  were  not  antecedent  to  prediction,  or  that  man  had 
not  shaped  their  course  influenced  by  previous  prophecy.  '  Without  yield- 
ing the  solid  and  unanswerable  arguments  based  on  the  past  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  (to  which  God  appeals),  uttered  as  it  was  hundreds  of  years 
previously  and  fulfilled  in  persons  and  nations  unconscious  of  their  anterior 
defined  destiny,  we  ask  the  reader  to  consider  the  present  results  of 
professedly  inspired  pro[)hecy.  Does  not  prophecy  find  its  mate  to-day? 
Look  at  prophecy  what  it  foretells,  and  is  it  not  verified  in  the  continued 
present  removal  of  the  Jews  from  their  land,  in  their  scattering  among 
the  nations,  in  the  existing  times  of  the  Gentiles,  in  Jerusalem  and  Pales- 
tine remaining  nnder  Gentile  control,  down -trodden  and  sadly  cursed,  in 
the  Arabs  continuing  in  their  semi-civilized  condition,  in  the  existing 
Turkish  rule,  in  the  divided  state  and  headless  condition  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  in  the  Church  with  its  institutions  and  ordinances,  the  gathering 
of  an  elect,  the  Antichrists  or  characters  and  powers  portrayed  in  their 
antagonism.  Compare  these  and  similar  fulfilments  with  the  Record,  and  are 
they  not  described  as  things  that  shall  occur  ;  delineated  too  by  writers, 
some  of  whom  lived  thousands  of  years  and  others  at  least  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago  ;  and  realized  in  persons  and  nations  who  either  know 
nothing  of  the  predictions,  or  care  nothing  about  them,  or  deny  their 
credibilit3\     If  these  things  exist,  and  stand  thus  related  to  the  Word,  is 


70  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  5. 

it  unreasonable  to  admit  the  claim  of  that  Word — viz.,  that  they  were  fore- 
told by  God  through  men  who  were  inspired  by  God,  and  thus  enabled  to 
give  them  through  the  medium  of  language.  Man  himself  has  no  power 
to  foresee  the  distant  future  ;  God  alone  possesses  it,  and  in  aiding  man 
respecting  the  unknown,  He  gives  play  to  what  is  called  ''  inspiration" — 
which  is,  an  employing  of  powers  and  language,  already  existing,  in  stat- 
ing Divine  things,  or  things  known  only  to  God.  Such  a  line  of  argument, 
briefly  indicated,  alone  convinces  us  that  the  Bible  is  an  inspired  book, 
confirmed,  as  it  is,  by  its  reasonableness,  necessity,  historical  and  moral 
unity,  worthiness  of  the  Divine  character,  tendency  and  perfection. 

These  are  given  in  Home's  Introduction,  Birk's  Bible  and  Modern  Thought,  Stowe's 
Books  of  the  Bible,  Christlieb's  Modern  Doubt,  Elliott's  Treatise,  Alexander's  Ev- 
idences, Spring's  Bible  Not  of  Man,  Butler's  Analogy,  etc.  We  are  old-fashioned 
enough  to  believe,  with  the  primitive  Church  and  a  long  line  of  revered  names,  that 
inspiration  was  confined  to  a  few  chosen  individuals  (2  Tim.  3  :  16  ;  Acts  1  :  IG  ;  2  :  30  ; 
Heb.  3  :  7  ;  9  :  8  ;  10  :  15  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  11  ;  2  Pet.  1  :21,  etc.),  that  instead  of  being  gen- 
eral it  was  exceptional,  confined  to  a  limited  number.  And,  moreover,  so  wedded 
are  we  to  "  the  old  waj^s/'  ihat  we  believe  that  the  highest  possible  proof  of  inspira- 
tion is  that  found  in  a  personal  appropriation  of  the  truth,  so  that  self-consciousness 
imf)ressed  by  happy  experience  testifies  in  its  favor.  And  in  addition,  we  believe, 
on  the  one  hand,  that  if  the  heart  is  indisposed  to  obedience  all  the  reasoning  in  the 
world  cannot  change  it  to  receive  the  Word  as  insj)ired  ;  and,  on  the  other,  that  a  heart 
can  be  unaffected  even  when  reason  acce^Dts  of  the  Word  as  given  by  God.  In  reference 
to  the  latter  unhappy  class,  it  may  be  well  said,  in  the  expressive  language  of  Bernard 
{Bampton  Lee,  The  Progress  of  Doctrine,  closing  of  Lee.  3d)  :  "  Does  it  wound  our 
hearts  to  see  this  wondrous  record  misapprehended,  its  unity  denied,  its  glory  dark- 
ened ?  Perhaps  it  is  a  sadder  sight  in  the  eye  of  Heaven,  when  its  inspiration  is  vindi- 
cated, its  perfection  appreciated,  its  majesty  asserted  by  one  who  at  the  same  time  neg- 
lects the  great  salvation.  Such  a  case  is  not  impossiiole,  perhaps  is  not  uncommon. 
The  day  will  declare  it.  At  least,  let  it  be  remembered,  that  the  study  of  the  testimony 
is  one  thing,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  salvation  is  another,  and  that  the  record  of  the 
things  which  Jesus  did  and  said  has  attained  its  end  with  those  only  who  believing  have 
life  through  His  name." 

Ois.  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  is  based  on  inspiration,  because  it 
is  a  doctrine  which,  as  delineated,  we  ourselves,  unaided,  could  never  have 
produced  and  developed.  It  embraces  (Prop.  2.)  a  Divine  purpose  or 
plan,  extending  from  creation  into  the  eternal  ages.  The  things  per- 
taining to  the  kingdom  contain  facts,  preparatory  stages,  historical 
connections,  relations  to  the  future,  ideas  above  human  capacity,  that 
could  not  possibly  have  been  known  if  God  had  not  revealed  them. 
The  kingdom  is  simply  that  which  the  Almighty  designs  to  have  accom- 
plished as /Ae  ^rrt7^tZ  result  ot  the  Divine  economy.  From  the  nature  of 
it,  its  dependence  upon  God,  its  being  the  work  of  God  and  not  of  man, 
its  having  a  theocratic  king,  we  must  go  to  God  Himself  to  learn  what  it 
is,  and  hoiu  it  shall  he  manifested.  Man  can  only  throw  light  on  it  as  he 
gives  us  the  ideas  of  Him  who  designed  its  establishment.  The  thoughts, 
purposes,  and  works  of  the  Creator  are  not  ours,  and  can  only  be  known 
and  appreciated  to  the  extent  in  which  He  has  deemed  it  proper  to  disclose 
them.  Realizing  this,  we  cannot  do  otherwise  than  consider  an  appeal, 
if  well  grounded,  to  the  Scriptures  on  the  subject,  or  a  statement  given  by 
the  Bible  respecting  the  kingdom,  as  the  essential  proof  required.  Our 
belief  has  thus  something  to  rest  upon  that  does  not  come  from  fallible 
man,  but  from  Him  who  overrules  all  things.  An  authoritative  argument 
is,  therefore,  only  founded  on  the  express  language  of  Scripture  ;  and  to 


Prop.  5.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  71 

it,  consequently,  application  will  be  made,  claiming  that  only  in  so  far  as 
the  words  of  God  are  produced  in  substantiation  of  our  doctrine,  is  assent 
also  to  be  given.  The  ground  of  such  a  position  and  claim  lies  in  the 
fact  that  "  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  " 
(1  Cor.  2  :  11),  and  that  hence  man  can  only  know  them  as  that  Spirit  has 
divulged  them.  Believing  that  "all  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God  "  (2  Tim.  3  :  16),  that  "  holy  men  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  "  (2  Pet.  1  :  21),  our  doctrine  is  exclusively  derived  from  sucli 
inspired  Scriptures.  Through  our  entire  argument  this  will  be  our 
posture,  and  finally  in  the  concluding  propositions,  after  having  passed 
over  the  record,  there  will  be  submitted  to  the  reader,  as  one  of  the 
strongest  proofs  of  inspiration,  the  harmony  and  intimate  connection 
existing  in  the  historical  progression  relating  to,  and  the  doctrinal  unity 
of,  the  kingdom. 

There  is  no  half-way  house  on  the  inspiration  of  the  prophets,  the  utterances  per- 
taining to  doctrine  and  the  Will  of  God.  It  is  a  dimming  of  the  gold,  a  mere  praising  of 
the  counterfeit,  for  persons  to  profess  to  accept  of  the  utterances  of  Jesns  and  the  say- 
ings of  the  prophets  under  the  color  of  a  universal  human  or  intellectual  inspiration,  to 
eulogize  the  same  most  highly,  and  yet  deny  a  Divine  inspiration.  This,  too,  is  done  for 
purposes  that  are  dishonorable  ;  it  proving  an  insidious  and  expert  way  to  undermine 
Christianity.  Simple  honesty  and  integrity  demand  that  such  utterances  and  sayings 
should  be  received  under  the  claim  assumed  of  being  divinely  inspired,  or  else  they 
should  be  rejected  with  the  already  declined  belief  in  such  inspiration.  Alas,  manj^  are 
critical  only  to  find  fault,  friendly  only  to  stab  more  severelj^  lauding  only  to  lower  and 
demoralize  ;  these  are  prevalent  characteristics  of  the  present  day.  Transformations 
into  religious  forms  of  thought,  but  meaning  naturalistic  things  ;  professed  worship  of 
the  divine  but  denoting  nature  ;  reverence  for  law  and  redemption  but  referring  to  the 
inexorable,  immutable  laws  of  the  universe  and  human  progress — these  and  similar 
phases  are  exhibited  in  those  who  magnify  inspiration,  but  mean  by  it  intellectual  power 
or  the  force  of  genius.  A  careful  perusal  of  the  books  of  such  writers  leaves  the  decided 
impression  that  all  such  Avould  greatly  rejoice  in  the  downfall  of  Christianity.  The 
laudation  of  such  aiithors  by  the  Church  is  a  weakness  ;  for  while  disinclined  to  treat 
them  with  scorn  or  abuse,  yet  those  who  dishonor  Christ  in  this  way  deserve — however 
they  may  j^raise  Christ  as  a  mighty  genius.  Reformer,  etc. — no  eulogy  from  believers. 
If  the  Scriptures  are  to  be  received  at  ail,  they  must,  in  consistency^  be  received  as  the 
Word  of  God.  -  This,  and  this  reiterated,  is  their  foundation,  and  it  cannot  be  ignored 
or  transformed.  And  this  too  should  not  be  applied  to  any  other  book  ;  hence  those 
theories  which  extend  inspiration  to  eminent  men  are  antagonistic  to  the  truth.  Re- 
cently, in  an  edition  of  'Bunyan's  works,  we  are  gravely  told  :  "  Bunyan's  thoughts  are 
inspiration  of  God,  "an  idea  which  Bunyan  would  have  rejected  as  abhorrent.  The 
Christian  Union  (May  21st,  1877)  makes  inspiration  to  be  in  all  things  created,  and  it 
"runs  through  all  ages,  all  climes,  all  nations."  It  scouts  the  idea  of  inspiration  being 
excejitional,  and  says  :  "  The  Bible  is  more  than  a  work  of  genius  ;  it  is  the  work  of 
God,  but  of  God  speaking  in  the  experiences  of  the  devoutest  and  best  instructed 
souls  ;  of  a  God  who  is  not  merely  here  and  there,  in  special  men  and  jDlaces,  but  is  All 
in  all."  This  Pio-pantheistic  theory  is  very  prevalent.  The  looseness  with  which  "  in- 
spiration" is  attributed  to  all  believers — the  same  in  kind,  but  probably  not  in  degree, 
that  was  given  to  holy  men  of  old — is  well  illustrated  in  Beecher's  sermon  {CJirisiian 
Union,  Ajml  10th,  1878\  "  Inspiration  Immanent  and  Universal."  We  reproduce  but  a 
sentence  :  "  So  then,  when  you  ask  me  if  the  inspiration  which  men  receive  from  God 
nowadays  is  the  same  which  men  received  from  Him  in  olden  times,  I  say  that  it  is  the 
same  in  kind.  If  you  ask  me,  whether  it  is  the  same  in  authority,  I  say  yes,  so  far  as 
their  own  conduct  is  concerned,"  etc.  Compare  a  criticism  of  Morell's  Philosophy  of 
Bellgioyi  {North  Brit.  Review,  August,  1849),  who,  while  rejecting  the  extreme  of  Ger- 
hard, Buxtorf,  and  others  (who  made  even  the  vowel  points  inspired),  falls  into  the 
opposite  one  of  making  inspiration  to  consist,  not  in  the  communication  of  God's 
will  but  in  reception.  What  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  such  utterances,  and 
those  of  confirmed  unbelief,  as  expressed  e.g.  in  F.  W.  Newman's  History  of  the  Hebrew 
Monarchy,  or   Greg's   Vi'eed  of    Clirlstendom,    which  make    inspiration  to   be  a  sort  of 


72  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  5. 

"  divine  afflatus  "  peculiar  to  all  men,  specially  believers  and  men  of  genius.  Thus  Greg 
(p.  226  and  235)  remarks  :  "  When  it  is  His  will  that  mankind  should  make  some  great 
step  forward,  should  achieve  some  pregnant  discovery,  He  calls  into  being  some  cerebral 
organization  of  more  than  ordinary  magnitude,  as  that  of  David,  Isaiah,  Plato,  Shakes- 
peare, Bacon,  Newton,  Luther,  Pascal,  which  gives  birth  to  new  ideas  and  grander  con- 
ceptions of  the  truths  vital  to  humanity."  "  In  a  true  and  simple,  but  not  orthodox 
sense,  we  believe  all  the  pure,  wise,  and  mighty  in  soul  to  be  ins^jired,  and  to  be  in- 
spired for  the  instruction  and  elevation  of  mankind."  As  illustrated  in  Greg  himself. 
This  is  but  a  reproduction  of  Parker,  who  affirmed  :  "  It  (insiDiration)  is  coextensive 
wath  the  faithful  use  of  man's  natural  powers.  Now  this  inspiration  is  limited  to  no 
sect,  age,  or  nation.  It  is  wide  as  the  world,  and  common  as  God.  It  is  not  given  to 
a  few  men  in  the  infancy  of  the  world  to  monopolize  insj^iration  and  bar  God  out  of  the 
soul." 

Ohs.  3.  Deny  the  inspiration  of  the  Word,  and  tlien  it  becomes  merely 
the  word  or  conjecture  of  man.  The  kingdom  predicted  in  its  pages  may 
then  fail,  because  man  is  liable  to  mistake.  It  also  will  not  answer  to 
save  inspiration  by  the  principle  of  accommodation  (Farmer),  or  by 
arbitrary  exegesis(Storr),  or  by  moral  interpretation  (Kant),  or  by  allegori- 
cal interpretation  (Steir),  or  by  pan-harmonic  exposition  (German),  or  by 
confining  it  to  essentials  (Herder),  or  by  embracing  mere  belief  and  eleva- 
tion of  soul  (De  AYette),  or  by  making  it  talent  developed  by  speculation 
(Schelling),  or  by  constituting  it  a  rational  spirit  which  receives  more  and 
more  its  due  form  in  succeeding  works  (Billroth),  or  by  contending  for  a 
verbal  inspiration  (Dick),  or  by  restricting  it  to  intuitional  truths 
(Morell),  or  by  identifying  it  with  genius  under  the  influence  of  truth 
(Parker) — because  none  of  these  find  a  support  either  in  the  grammatical 
sense,  or  in  the  declarations  respecting  inspiration  in  the  record  itself, 
or  in  the  contents  of  the  Scripture  taken  as  a  whole.  Formerly,  too, 
inspiration  was  utterly  denied  and  derided  by  infidels  ;  at  present,  under 
the  assumed  leverage  of  comparative  religion,  they  have  shifted  their 
ground,  and  in  numerous  works  admit  that  it  is  inspired,  but  with  the 
same  kind  of  inspiration  that  accompanies  all  truth  and  all  human  efforts  ; 
some  even  adding,  that  men  have  existed  and  now  exist  who  possess  this 
inspiration  to  a  greater  degree  than  the  prophets  and  apostles.  Some, 
through  a  refined  pantheistic  theorizing,  make  it  to  proceed  from  God  and 
loudly  boast  of  their  God-given,  Spirit-derived  inspiration.  While  all 
this  profession  and  misuse  of  old  terms  cannot  affect  the  intelligent 
believer,  it  is  eminently  calculated  to  deceive  and  mislead  the  multitude. 
What  makes  the  rebutting  of  such  claims  the  more  difficult  is  the 
unfortunate  and  ill-considered  position  occupied  by  otherwise  able  leaders 
of  Christianity.  On  the  one  hand,  the  extreme  so  strenuously  con- 
tended for  by  some,  that  even  the  words  themselves  were  inspired,^  is 
evidently  burdening  inspiration  with  a  load  that  is  unnecessary.  Indeed, 
in  the  light  of  the  modest  introduction  of  Luke  (1  :  1-3),  the  request  of 
Paul  for  his  MSS.  and  cloak,  the  jiersonal  references  of  Paul  and  John, 
the  salutations,  the  special  (1  Tim.  5  :  23)  recommendation  to  Timothy, 
the  unimportant  variations  in  the  gospels,  the  differences  in  MSS.,  no  two 
being  exactly  alike,  the  retention  of  a  distinctive  personal  style,  the  diifer- 
ence  of  relation  of  the  same  event — these  things,  dispassionately  considered, 
go  far  to  show  that  we  must  not  necessarily  assume  that  every  word  or 
sentence  is  inspired.  On  the  other  hand,  the  concessions  made  by  many 
intrude  doubt  and  undermine  confidence  in  the  credibility  and  inspiration 
of  the  Old  and  !N"ew  Testaments.     Some  e.g.  maintain  that  only  a  small 


PkOP.  5.]  THE  TIIEOCEATIC    KIIs^CxDOM.  73 

portion  is  directly  inspired,  the  rest  being  of  human  origin  ;  others,  that 
the  record  that  we  now  have  is  given  from  recollection  of  a  previous 
inspired  one  ;  some,  that  the  main  truths  were  given  by  revelation  but  are 
incorporated  with  much  that  is  human  appended  to  it,  including  even 
error  ;  others,  that  the  inspiration  only  consisted  in  a  restraining  influence 
from  error  in  general,  or  a  guidance  into  truth  without  removing  the 
^possibility  of  falling  into  error  ;  some  that  the  moral  portion  is  alone 
inspired  (which  some  contend  is  an  inspiration  common  to  all  religions); 
others,  that  it  only  consists  in  the  Divine  approval  and  adoption  of  writ- 
ings composed  by  men,  because  of  the  important  truths  contained.  The 
most  fanciful  conjectures,  without  proof,  are  submitted  as  theories  to 
satisfy  the  demands  of  inspiration.'  The  only  safe  conclusion  to  which  a 
believer  in  the  Word  can  come,  amid  the  variety  of  conflicting  opinions 
and  on  a  subject  which  certainly  has  its  difficulties,  is  to  adhere  to  the 
utterances  of  the  Word  itself  concerning  it,  and  to  frame  a  definition 
which  neither  exceeds  nor  lessens  the  extent  given  to  it  by  Scripture. 
There  is  no  reason  why  the  definition  given  (e.g.  by  Home,  vol.  1, 
Introd.  p.  92)  long  ago  should  be  discarded — viz.,  that  it  is  "  the  impart- 
ing such  a  degree  of  Divine  assistance,  influence,  or  guidance,  as  should 
enable  the  authors  of  the  Scriptures  to  communicate  religious  knowledge 
to  others,  without  error  or  mistake,  whether  the  subjects  of  such  com- 
munications were  things  then  immediately  revealed  to  those  who  declared 
them,  or  things  with  which  they  were  before  acquainted."  A  definition 
which  embraces  the  ideas  taught,  freedom  from  error,  an  essential  unity 
in  teaching,  sufficiently  covers  the  ground.'  Taking  the  Scriptures  as 
they  teach,  we  must,  if  believers  in  the  same,  receive  them  as  given,  even 
under  the  peculiar  style,  learning,  disposition,  etc.,  of  the  writers,  through 
a  Divine  guidance  and  aid,  so  that  they  contain  revelations  imparted, 
through  human  mediums,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  and  that  the  ideas  or 
truths  are  portrayed  in  words  familiar  to  the  writers,  and  sufficiently 
precise  in  expression  to  give  a  correct  meaning  to  what  God  intended. 
Taking  such  a  view,  it  is  not  necessary  to  insist  that  every  specific  word  or 
phrase  or  sentence  is  directly  inspired  ;  that  God  gave  no  freedom  to  the 
writer  in  choice  of  language,  and  no  latitude  in  the  manner  of  conveying 
ideas.  There  may  even  here  be  an  exception.  In  covenants,  promises, 
distinctive  prophecies,  etc.,  asserted  to  come  directly  from  God  in 
messages  to  individuals,  we  may  reasonably  affirm,  that  being  of  special 
importance  and  significance,  and  coming  thus  from  God,  the  ideas  them- 
selves would  be  clad  in  language  suggested  by  the  Spirit.  The  longer  a 
student  compares  Scripture  with  Scripture,  the  more  will  he  become 
impressed  that  even  in  the  very  language  of  the  more  important  and  essen- 
tial portions  of  the  Word  a'  peculiar  care  has  been  exercised  in  their 
choice,  resulting  in  a  harmony  that  cannot  otherwise  be  explained.^ 

'  Thus  e.g.  Baylee,  Verbal  Inspiration,  Tregelles  in  Preface  to  The  Book  of  Revela- 
tion, Gaussen's  ^Tlieopneustie,  Haldane's  Verhal  Inspiration,  Lord's  Plenary  Inspiration 
of  the  Scriptures,  and  others.  "  The  Believer's  Meeting  for  Bible  Study "  laid 
down  (The  Truth,  vol.  4,  No.  10,  p.  452)  the  following  as  essential  :  "  We  believe  '  that 
all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,'  by  which  we  understand  the  whole  of 
the  book  called  the  Bible  ;  nor  do  we  take  the  statement  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
sometimes  foolishly  said  that  works  of  human  genius  are  inspired,  but  in  the  sense  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  gave  the  very  words  of  the  sacred  writings  to  holy  men  of  old  ;  and  that 
His  divine  inspiration  is  not  in  different  degrees,  but  extends  equally  and  fully  to  all 
l>arts  of  these  writings,  historical,  jjoetical,  doctrinal,  and  prophetical,  and  to  the  smallest 


74  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS-GDOX.  [PrOP.  5. 

icord  and  inflecUon  of  a  xcord,  provided  such  word  is  found  in  the  original  manuscripts. 
2  Tim.  3  :  16,  17  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  21  ;  1  Cor.  2  :  13  ;  Mark  12  :  26,  36,  and  13  :  11  ;  Acts  1  :  16, 
and  2  :  4."  These  brethren,  avoiding  one  extreme,  certainly  fall  into  another  by  press- 
ing the  word  "  all  "  (comp.  usage  in  Scripture)  to  denote  "  the  very  words  ''  and  "  the 
smallest  word  and  inflection  of  a  word,"  thus  loading  the  doctrine  of  inspiration  with  a 
burden  that  the  Word  does  not  impose.  The  statements  in  the  Obs.  already  indicate  this, 
but  it  may  be  added,  that  the  repetitions  of  the  same  ideas  (said  to  have  been  delivered  at 
the  same  time  and  j)lace,  and  stated  to  have  been  given  "  in  these  words"),  with  decided 
verbal  discrepancies,  show  that  the  thought  was  insiaired  and  some  latitude  (covering  style, 
personal  peculiarities)  was  allowed  to  its  expression — the  sense  is  the  same,  although 
differently  expressed.  Moreover  if  this  verbal  theory  be  correct,  then  it  plunges  us  into 
the  greatest  difficulties  to  ascertain  what  is  Scrij)ture  or  inspired.  No  translations  can 
be  really  the  Word  of  God,  for  the  words  in  which  the  same  was  given  are  replaced  by  a 
substitution.  More  than  this  :  what  original  ms.  is  then  authoritative  and  infallible, 
seeing  that  no  two  (of  the  ancient)  are  alike  in  their  verbal  statements.  (It  seems  to 
the  writer  that  if  the  theory  were  true,  then  God  would  have  providentially  j^reserved  a 
sufficient  number  of  mss.  to  be  indicative  of  the  fact. )  The  reason  assigned  by  Lord, 
Carson,  and  others,  in  favor  of  verbal  insi^iration  being  founded  on  the  suj^yposition  that 
thoughts  are  only  conveyed  in  words,  is  sufficiently  met  by  various  writers,  e.g.  article  on 
' '  Inspiration ' '  in  M'  Clintock  and  Strong' s  Cyclopedia.  Eev.  Dr.  Sprecher  ( Groundwork  of 
TheoL,  p.  383,  etc.)  rejects  a  mere  mechanical  theory  and  adojjts  "  the  Plenary  Inspira- 
tion of  the  Scriptures,  as  extending  to  words  as  well  as  things,"  but  he  explains  and 
modifies  as  follows  :  "  The  Bible,  with  all  its  ideas  and  all  its  words,  is  God's  book  of 
revelation  ;  that  is,  He  so  moved,  influenced,  controlled,  and  used  the  faculties,  the 
mode  of  thought,  and  the  style  of  language  of  the  sacred  writers,  as  to  make  them  His 
organs  through  which  to  give  a  written  revelation  of  His  Word,  of  the  plan  of  salvation. 
They  did  not  speak  as  they  were  dldafed  to,  but  they  did  speak  as  they  loere  moved  by,  the 
Holy  Ghost."  He  thus  unites  the  human  and  divine  elements  in  a  definition,  which  he 
thinks  (p.  385  and  389)  is  consistent  with  "  the  little  discrepancies  and  inaccuracies 
which  some  think  they  see  in  the  minor  details  of  historical  circumstances,  etc." 
Being  "  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  "  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  in 
all  cases,  taught  or  dictated  the  identical  words  used,  for  it  seems  that  in  connection 
with  inspiration  (guarding  the  truths  pertaining  to  salvation)  an  ins^Dired  man  could,  as 
Paul  evidences,  introduce  matter  suggested  by  his  own  mind  {e.g.,  m  reference  to  mar- 
riage, greetings,  remembrances,  direction  to  Timothy  respecting  his  health,  requests 
concerning  personal  matters).  Our  position  is  fortified  by  Luke's  introduction  to  his 
Gospel  ;  by  the  liberty  allowed  (preserving  the  idea)  of  quoting  from  the  Septuagint  when 
differing  (thus  indicating  mere  human  origin  unless  the  translators  were  also  divinely 
inspired,  which  no  one  affirms)  from  the  Hebrew  ;  by  the  dift'ering  phraseology  in  which 
the  same  language  (said  to  have  been  uttered  at  the  same  time)  and  the  same  events  are 
recorded  ;  by  the  compression  of  detailed  matter  previously  given  ;  and  by  the  manner  in 
which  some  of  the  writers  refer  to  their  own  writings,  claiming  a  distinct  j)ersonality  in 
their  construction. 

2  It  is  a  sad  illustration  of  human  infirmity  to  notice  not  only  how  inspiration  has  been 
interpreted,  but  even  claimed  from  the  earliest  period  down  to  the  Spiritualists  and 
Parker  school.  Between  those  who  claimed  (l^rop.  4,  Obs.  3  and  notes)  the  direct  Divine 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  Parker  {Discourses,  p.  160-5),  who  asserted  that  God, 
more  or  less,  inspires  all  men,  there  are  indeed  great  diversities,  but  they  can  ail  be 
traced  back  to  a  mystical,  transcendental,  Gnostical  element  held  in  common.  They 
differ  only  as  to  the  agency  employed  and  the  degree  experienced.  Parker,  e.g.  would 
undoubtedly  recoil  from  the  extravagances  of  the  Philadelphian  Society  established  by 
Pordage  (1651),  the  mummeries  of  Antoinette  Bourignon,  Jane  Lead,  Poiset,  Hoker,  "  the 
navel  light ' '  or  illuminations  mentioned  by  Dr.  Young  (Stilling),  the  vagaries  of  the 
French  prophets  (1708-30\  the  Irvingites,  the  Inspiration  Congregation  of  Wetteraw 
(Kurtz,  Ch.  Ills.,  vol.  2,  p.  277),  the  Shakers,  the  Mormons,  Swedenborgians,  Inspiration- 
ists  of  Iowa  (Nordhoff's  Conimunistlc  Societies),  etc.,  but  they  all  held  to  an  "  inward 
vision"— a  reception  of  the  divine — and  this  is  precisely  what  Parker  and  others  do, 
only  in  an  ordinary  manner  and  not  in  the  extraordinary  asserted  by  these  enthusiasts. 
The  difference  is,  that  the  one  occupies  a  lower  plane  than  the  other,  but  they  all  agree 
that  outside  of  the  Bible,  in  their  own  persons,  through  a  divine  bestowal,  they  also  have 
inspiration.  All  that  profess  themselves  to  be  inspired  and  not  entirely  dependent  upon 
the  inspiration  of  the  Word,  can  be  legitimately  placed  in  the  same  category.  The 
Benan,  Parker  idea  of  inspiration  is  only  a  revival  of  an  old  opinion.  The  Spiritualists 
claim  that  through    their  mediums    and  writers   they  obtain  "  Living  Gospels   from 


PeOP.  5.]  THE  THEOCPwATIC   KINGDOM.  75 

Modern  Saints."  A  specimen  can  be  seen  in  Davis'  Sacred  Gospels  of  Ardbula,  form- 
ing Inspirations  of  Original  Saints.  Owen,  the  most  moderate,  still  asserts  (Deb.  Land, 
p.  242,  etc.),  that  this  continued  inspiration  may  be  mixed  with  error.  The  Lon- 
don ,Spiri<uai  Magazine  has  for  its  motto:  "It  (Spiritualism)  recognizes  a  continuous 
divine  inspiration  in  man."  A  convention  of  Spiritualists  at  Eochester,  N.Y.,  Septem- 
ber, 1862,  in  a  resolution  said  :  "  That  no  inspired  communication  in  this  or  any  other 
age  (whatever  claims  may  be  or  have  been  set  up  as  to  its  source)  is  authoritative  any 
•further  than  it  expresses  truth  to  the  individual  consciousness— which  last  is  the  final 
standard  to  which  all  inspired  or  spiritual  teaching  must  be  brought  for  judgment. 
That  inspiration,  or  the  indux  and  promptings  from  the  spiritual  realm,  is  not  a  miracle 
of  a  i^ast  age,  but  a  j^erpetual  fact,  the  ceaseless  method  of  the  divine  economy  for  human 
elevation."  The  Lyceum  (Toledo,  O.,  vol.  1,  No.  11)  says  inspiration  is  a  product  of 
"  the  immortal  souls  of  mortal  men,"  and  says  that  instead  of  ceasing,  "  insj)iration  has 
increased,  for  man  has  attained  higher  spiritual  development  than  he  enjoyed  in  past 
ages."  There  is  a  large  and  growing  class  of  able  writers  (Dean  Stanley,  Eobertson,  Ser- 
vice, Jukes,  Brown,  etc.),  who  endeavor  to  soften  down  and  apologize  for  numerous 
statements  in  the  Word,  on  the  ground  of  making  allowance  for  the  age,  the  traits  of 
character  of  the  writers,  ignorance,  etc.  To  illustrate  :  Mozley's  BuUng  Ideas  in  Early 
Ages,  and  their  Relation  to  Old  Testament  Faith,  interprets  the  Old  Testament  in  such 
a  manner,  in  accommodation  to  prevailing  beliefs  influencing  the  writers,  that  we  must 
often  reject  the  letter,  but  still  can — if  we  wish  to — hold  fast  to  the  spirit.  This  sets 
aside  all  inspiration,  excepting  that  which  is  common  to  all  books.  German  destructive 
critics,  in  order  to  eulogize  and  magnify  Naturalism  (which  to  them  is  a  siifficient  divin- 
ity), teach  a  "Natural  Insx^iration, "  because  it  can  be  made  subservient  to  the  removal 
of  the  supernatural  and  miraculous  element.  "Broad  Church  Liberalism"  in  The 
Monthly  Religious  Magazine,  (quoted  Princeton  Review,  January,  1861,  p.  84)  lauds  the 
writers  of  Essays  and  Reviews,  whose  pernicious  tendencies  are  so  api)arent  and  wide- 
spread, and  gives  the  epitome  of  their  teaching  :  "  Their  doctrine  is,  that  the  race  is  a 
collective  man,  to  outgrow,  in  time,  the  regulative  discipline  of  childhood,  and  be 
moved  by  the  spirit  within,  and  not  subject  to  authority  without  ;  that  the  Bible  is  not 
a  book  of  plenary  inspiration,  or  Christianity  a  universal  religion,  sjoecialty  authenticated 
in  Palestine  ;  but  that  God  inspires  men  ever  and  anywhere  ;  that  there  is  only  one 
kind  of  inspiration,  and  all  good  men  have  it,  as  well  as  prophets  and  apostles  ;  and  that 
the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  such  as  the  Trinity  and  the  fall  of  man,  are  to  be  held  in 
the  light  of  a  'philosophical  rendering.'"  Gail  Hamilton  ( TF7iai  think  ye  of  Christ?) 
affirms  an  inspii-ation  common  to  all  men,  and  gives  us  no  infallible,  authoritative  Word. 
Greg  {T/iC  Creed  of  Christendom)  allows  that  in  religious  doctrine  the  writers  may  have 
been  guarded  against  error,  but  even  vitiates  this  b}^  allowing  human  judgment  to  decide 
what  is.  or  is  not,  inspired.  Thus  writers  from  Ihe  earliest  period  down  to  Priestle}',  and 
from  him  to  Eenan,  have  either  denied  inspiration,  or  made  it  universal,  or  attached  to 
it  such  limitations  as  practically  to  lessen  our  confidence  in  scripture  statements.  This 
v/ork  is  widening  and  extending,  men  and  women,  talented  and  learned,  unbelievers  and 
professedly  believers,  are  engaged  in  it,  presenting  definitions  and  distinctions  which 
are  designed  to  undermine  and  destroy  the  teaching  of  the  Word. 

^  For  alleged  error  and  discrepancies,  see  works  like  Home's  Introd.,  Birks'  Bible  and 
Mod.  Thougld,  etc.,  speciall}^  devoted  to  their  consideration.  The  argument  of  this  work 
is  intended  to  develoi)  from  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  alone,  a  sufacient  proof  for 
inspiration  in  the  remarkable  unity  of  doctrinal  teaching,  and  of  the  revealed  Divine 
Purpose.  This  materially  confirms  the  reasoning  of  Birks,  Home,  etc.,  and  also  shows 
that  the  variations  of  mss.  (pointed  out  hy  the  warmest  friends  of  inspiration,  but  novvr 
seized  by  destructive  criticism)  are  only  incidental  in  transmission,  and  do  not  affect  a 
single  doctrine.  As  illustrative  of  the  diversity  of  views  entertained,  the  reader's  atten- 
tion is  called  to  the  six  articles  on  the  question  "  What  is  Inspiration?"  in  the  2sorth 
American  Review  (1879).  Eev.  Dr.  Hedges'  view  virtually  degrades  the  Bible,  for,  making 
inspiration  to  be  equivalent  to  faith  and  its  expression,  or  the  outgrowth  of  a  divine 
higher  life,  he  reaches  this  conclusion  :  ''  There  are  other  Bibles  than  those  which  con- 
tain the  records  and  the  types  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  faiths."  This  leaves  us  no 
authoritative  and  infallible  rule.  Eev.  Dr.  Washburn  denies  a  verbal  inspiration  ; 
waives  the  question  "What  is  Inspiration?"  and  simply  appeals  to  Christian  experience 
as  evidencing  inspiration.  Eev.  Giles  makes  insj^iration  to  consist  in  the  truths  revealed 
by  the  Lord  to  man,  and  "  a  man  is  inspired  when  the  Lord  takes  such  possession  of  his 
mind  and  utterance,  that  he  writes  or  speaks  what  the  Lord  commands  him  ;  and  what 
he  so  writes  or  sjoeaks  is  divine  truth  in  natural  forms."  He  does  not  sufliciently  dis- 
criminate between  inspiration  and  its  resultant,  and  attaches  to  his  view  the  Swedenbor- 


76  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  5. 

gian  idea  of  "  correspondences."  Eev.  Newman  affirms  inspiration  to  be  "a  divine 
revelation"  which  did  not  dej^ress  or  silence  the  individuality , of  the  sacred  writers,  and 
which  led  into  all  truth.  Sometimes  the  thought  was  divine  and  the  language  human  ; 
again  in  some  instances  so  direct  was  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  that  both  thought  and 
language  were  divinely  impressed  ;  and  then  again  utterances  were  given  without  divine 
aid,  "  as  when  St.  Paul  expressed  his  intention  to  visit  Spain  but  was  providentially 
hindered,  as  when  he  had  forgotten  whether  he  had  '  baptized  any  other,'  as  v.^hen 
St.  John  expressed  the  uncertainty  of  hope:  '  I  hope  to  come  to  you.'"  The  sacred 
writers  were  aided  in  "  recollection,"  in  "  suggestion,"  and  in  "  revelation,"  and  this 
assistance  presents  us  with  an  infallible  record.  The  article  is  excellent,  and  the  only 
serious  objection  to  be  urged  against  it,  is,  that  he  allows  a  continuation  of  inspiration 
by  the  same  Spirit  down  to  the  present  day,  which  (however  guarded  by  the  expression, 
'  No  original  truth  has  been  given  since  John  wrote  his  Apocalypse")  is  too  much  in 
favor  of  unbelieving,  and  special  Spirit-derived,  claims.  The  fifth  article,  by  the  Most 
Rev.  Gibbons  (Archb.  of  Baltimore)  says  :  "  To  the  question  'What  is  Inspiration?'  a 
Catholic  theologian  would  answer,  that  it  is  a  supernatural  help  whereby  God,  at  various 
times,  down  to  the  end  of  the  Apostolic  age,  enlightened  the  minds  of  certain  men  that 
they  might  know  the  truths  which  He  wished  to  deliver  in  writing  to  His  Church,  and 
moved  their  wills  to  write  them  and  nothing  else.  Thus  raised  to  a  supernatural  level, 
these  penmen,  through  divine  assistance,  fulfilled  with  unerring  accuracy  the  counsel 
of  God,  and  consequently  is  He  truly  said  to  be  the  author  of  these  books."  (The  criti- 
cal student  will  be  interested  in  noticing  that  he  expressly  asserts  that  no  books,  saving 
those  thus  given,  whatever  truth  they  may  contain,  can  become  Scripture  and  thus  infal- 
lible authority — and  that  inspiration  is  limited  "  to  the  end  of  the  Apostolic  age,"  How 
this  bears  upon  making  tradition  authoritative  with  the  Scriptures  is  easily  seen,  and 
how  it  opposes  the  claim  of  his  Church  to  continued  inspiration  can  readily  be  appreci- 
ated.) The  article  is  excellent  in  many  respects  and  ably  meets  some  of  the  erroneous 
statements  made  in  the  previous  ones,  but  is  vitiated  by  making  the  Church  the  infallible 
interpreter  of  the  inspired  Word.  The  last  article,  by  John  Fiske,  is  from  the  unbelieving 
stand-point,  and  makes  the  Bible  the  work  of  fallible  men,  denying  divine  inspiration 
and  refusing  to  look  at  the  Scriptures  as  a  whole.  These  and  other  attempts  to  de- 
fine inspiration  remind  us  that  since  the  Scriptures  are  silent  as  to  the  modus  operandi, 
any  effort  to  explain  must  simply  remain  conjecture.  Whatever  truth  there  might  per- 
tain to  degrees  in  inspiration  or  to  no  degrees  (simply  quantity — so  Whately)  in  the 
same,  to  superintendence,  suggestion,  direct  revelation,  invigoration  of  memory,  etc., 
one  thing  is  self-evident  that  the  Scriptures  themselves  claim — what  we  must  allow  — 
a  Plenary  (i.e.,  full,  complete)  Insj^iration,  which  being  miraculous,  is,  as  to  mode,  above 
our  comprehension,  but  commends  itself  to  us  by  its  results  as  evidenced  in  the  book  it- 
self, in  the  history  of  mankind,  and  in  the  personal  experience  of  believers.  (Comp.  the 
writings,  on  inspiration,  of  Elliott,  Candlish,  Harris,  Eadie,  Henderson,  Wescott,  Dick, 
Lord.  The  North  Brit.  Review,  Nov.  1st,  1852,  Browne,  Ellicott,  Woods,  Haldane,  etc.) 
'^  Dean  Alford's  (Gr.  Test.)  view  of  Inspiration,  thus  amended,  seems  to  be  near  the 
truth.  Such  an  emendation  is  required  by  the  greater  importance  of  such  portions  over 
others.  Thus  e.g.  in  the  Covenant  the  singular  "  seed  "  is  purposel}'  chosen  instead  of 
the  plural  form,  which  would  the  most  naturally  suggest  itself  to  man.  The  singular  is 
remarkably  significant,  and,  as  traced,  demanded  in  God's  plan.  Prof.  Christlieb  in  his 
address,  ^' Mod.  Infidelity/'  before  the  Ch.  Alliance,  has  some  good  remarks  on  Inspiration 
and  also  discriminates  between  portions  of  the  Word.  Compare  Home's  Introd.  Ap.  vol. 
1,  p.  443,  etc.,  Knapp's  Theol,  Birks'  Bible  and  Mod.  Thought,  Van  Oosterzee' s  Ch.  Dogmat- 
ics, etc.  The  human  element  must  not  be  discarded,  just  as  little  as  the  language  em- 
ployed, but  while  this  presents  us  peculiar,  distinctive  traits  and  characteristics,  it  at 
the  same  time  includes  freedom  from  positive  error.  Hence  Bp.  Goodwin's  concession 
that  inspiration  mnj  be  consistent  with  inaccuracy  in  physics,  etc.,  must  be  rejected  ; 
for  no  inspired  book  can  contain  decided  error,  although,  without  explaining,  it  may 
employ  language  and  ideas,  as  currently  understood  and  comprehended,  which,  from  a 
purely  scientific  view,  is  not  scientifically  correct.  This  is  done,  more  or  less,  by  all 
writers,  and  is  an  accommodation  to  the  human  element.  Hence  Webster's  andWilken- 
son's  {Introd.  Gr.  Test.)  definition  is  objectionable  :  "  It  will  be  understood,  that  an  in- 
spiration which  may  be  truly  characterized  as  direct,  j^ersonal,  independent,  plenary,  is 
consistent  with  the  use  of  an  inferior  or  provincial  dialect,  with  ignorance  of  scientific 
facts  and  other  secular  matters,  with  mistakes  in  historical  allusions  or  references,  and 
mistakes  in  conduct,  and  with  circumstances  forming  discrepancies  between  inspired  per- 
sons in  relating  discourses,  conversations,  or  events."  We  fail  to  see  how  all  this  can  be 
consistent  with  inspiration.  If  true,  it  leaves  us  no  infallible  guide.  The  truth  lies  in  a  due 


PeOP.  5.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KII^GDOM.  77 

medium  between  those  extreme  views,  recognizing  the  human  element  on  the  one  hand, 
and  on  the  other  the  Divine,  and  the  latter  as  so  controlling  that  nothing  is  presented  to 
justify  decided  error. 

Prof.  Stowe  {The  Books  of  the  Bible,  p.  19)  after  stating  that  the  Bible  is  not  a  specimen 
of  God's  skill  as  a  writer,  adds  :  "  It  is  not  the  words  of  the  Bible  that  were  inspired  ;  it 
is  not  the  thoughts  of  the  Bible  that  were  inspired  ;  it  is  the  men  who  wrote  the  Bible 
that  were  inspired.  Inspiration  acts  not  on  the  man's  words,  not  on  the  man's  thoughts, 
but  on  the  man  himself  ;  so  that  he,  by  his  own  spontaneity,  under  the  impulse  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  conceives  certain  thoughts  and  gives  utterance  to  them  in  certain  words, 
both  the  words  and  thoughts  receiving  the  peculiar  impress  of  the  mind  which  conceived 
and  uttered  them,  and  being  in  fact  just  as  really  his  own,  as  they  could  have  been  if 
there  had  been  no  inspiration  at  all  in  the  case.  The  birth  and  nature  of  Christ  afford 
an  exact  illustration.  The  holy  Infant  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  though  begotten  of 
God  directly  withoiit  any  human  father  (as  it  was  said,  '  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee ')— this  Infant  lived  by  his 
mother's  life,  and  grew  by  the  mother's  growth,  and  partook  of  the  mother's  nature,  and 
was  just  as  much  her  child  as  he  could  have  been  if  Joseph  had  been  his  father,  the 
human  and  the  divine  in  most  intimate  and  insej)arable  conjunction.  It  is  this  very 
fact  of  the  commingled  and  inseparable  union  of  the  human  and  divine  which  consti- 
tutes the  utility,  which  makes  out  the  adaptedness  to  the  wants  of  men,  both  of  the  in- 
carnation of  Christ  and  of  the  gift  of  the  Word.  Inspiration  generally  is  a  purifying  and 
an  elevation  and  an  intensification  of  the  human  intellect  subjective^  rather  than  an 
objective  suggestion  and  communication  ;  though  suggestion  and  communication  are 
not  excluded." 

Ols.  4.  Occupying  this  position  at  the  outset^  we  insist  upon  it  that  the 
apostles  were  fnlly  and  accurately  acquainted  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
kingdom,  i.e.,  as  to  its  nature,  and  hence  were  qualified  to  teach  it. 
Aside  from  their  being  specially  called  to  preach  the  kingdom,  this  in- 
spiration influence  bestowed  upon  them  (e.g.,  Luke  12  :  12,  John  16  :  13, 
14,  15,  Luke  24  :  49,  1  Cor.  2  :  12,  13,  Eph.  3  :  4,  1  Pet.  1  :  12,  etc.) 
would  most  certainly  preserve  them  from  error  on  this  great,  leading  sub- 
ject of  the  Bible.  This  becomes  the  more  important,  seeing  that 
unbelievers,  on  all  sides,  declare  that  they  were  mistaken,  pointing  to  the 
history  of  tlie  Church  as  proof  ;  and  that  many  of  the  greatest  Christian 
Apologists  (Neander,  etc.)  admit  that  they  misconceived  the  subject,  mis- 
apprehended the  doctrine,  and  refer  us  to  the  same  history  as  evidence, 
but  endeavor  to  save  the  credit  of  the  apostles  by  a  philosophical  develop- 
ment theory.  The  express  declarations  of  the  apostles  themselves  that 
they  were  guided  by  the  Spirit,  the  positive  promises  given  to  them  to 
guide  them  into  the  truth,  forbid  our  receiving  such  estimates  of  the 
apostles'  knowledge.  While  they  undoubtedly  could  receive  additional 
revelation  from  time  to  time  as  circumstances  demanded,  yet  this  has 
nothing  to  do  with  their  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  kingdom.  The 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  was  preached  by  them  before  and  after  the  death  of 
Jesus  ;  it  was  a  familiar  subject,  leading  and  fundamental,  and  therefore 
one  that  tliey  must  have  hiumn  sufficiently  to  describe  it  without  mistake 
or  decided  error.  The  object  of  this  work  of  ours  is  to  show  this,  by  an 
appeal  to  Scripture,  receiving  the  plain  grammatical  sense  as  our  guide, 
and  thus  vindicate  the  inspired  teaching  of  the  apostles  both  against  the 
charges  of  infidels  and  the  unAvarranted  concessions  of  Apologists.  The 
reader,  after  passing  over  the  entire  proof  presented,  can  see  for  himself 
whether  this  is  successfully  done  or  not.  It  would  be  premature  to  decide 
on  the  amount  of  knowledge  possessed  by  the  apostles  respecting  the 
nature  of  the  kingdom,  without  first  allowing  the  testimony  contained  in 
the  Bible  to  be  duly  considered  and  weighed. 


78  THE   THEOCEATIC   KIXGDO^E  [PeOP.  5. 

There  is  a  large  and  growing  class  of  works  (like  e.g.  Draper's,  Leckey's,  etc.)  which 
endeavors  to  break  the  force  of  Scriptural  inspiration  by  caricaturing  Eeligion  and  Chris- 
tianity. The  latter  are  made  synonymons  with  bigotrj^  intolerance,  superstition,  igno- 
rance, and  persecution,  and  this  caricature— which  is  not  Christianity — is  attacked  and 
in  their  own  way  satisfactorily  demolished.  The  unreflecting — who  never  consider  that 
inspiration  itself  long  before  foretold  these  things  and  T>-arned  us  against  them — are  im- 
pressed by  the  illogical  reasoning  and  deductions.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  all  the 
Ijainful  evidences  of  human  infirmity  and  passion,  so  learnedly  X)araded  i3y  these  men, 
are  most  pointedly  condemned  hy  inspiration.  (In  view  of  this.  Cook — Leds.  on  Biology, 
p.  183— calls  Draper's  "  His.  of  Conflict,''  etc.,  "  a  most  painfully  unfair  volume."  Fiske 
in  the  Unseen  World — himself  an  unbeliever — severely  criticises  Draper's  method,  saying  : 
'•  the  word  '  religion  '  is  to  him  a  symbol  which  stands  for  unenlightened  bigotry  or  nar- 
row-minded unwillingness  to  look  facts  in  the  face,"  adding  :  "  it  is  nevertheless  a  very 
saperficial  conception,  and  no  book  v\-hich  is  vitiated  by  it  can  have  much  philosophical 
value.")  The  perversions  and  misinteipretations  of  Christianity  are  not  Christianity  ; 
the  tares  mixed  with  the  wheat  do  not  change  the  latter  ;  religion  because  abused  and 
distorted  is  not  the  less  a  reality  ;  the  multitude  (Matt.  7  :  22,  23,  etc.)  who  simply  pro- 
fess to  do  God's  will  and  do  it  not,  only  stand  in  contrast  (Matt.  7  :  21-27,  etc.)  with  "  the 
few"  (Matt.  7  :14:  ;  20  :  16,  etc.)  that  are  truly  obedient  and  faithful. 

Ohs.  5.  The  reader,  also,  is  urged  to  suspend  his  jiulofment  until  he 
comes  to  the  majestic  end  desi,2fned  by  the  kingdom  of  God,  received  in 
its  strict  grammatical  sense.  tJnbelief  is  not  willing  to  wait  nntil  the 
mystery  of  God  is  finished  ;  it  is  not  desirous  of  contemplating  the  grand 
end  designed  ;  it  is  afraid  to  study  the  Divine  plan  as  unfolded  in  this 
doctrine  of  the  kingdom  to  its  consummation,  but  (as  Strauss,  Bauer, 
Renan,  Froude,  etc.)  criticises  details  without  noticing  their  connection 
with  the  end  contemplated,  and  rejects  the  whole  without  due  examination 
because  of  alleged  flaws  in  the  individual  parts.  The  design  intended  is 
kept  out  of  view,  and  the  Divine  i^lan  which  binds  all  together  is 
sedulously  ignored.  The  building  which  God  determines  to  erect  is  not 
observed,  but  attention  is  directed  exclusively  to  the  material  gathered, 
the  preparations  made,  etc.,  without  observing  the  architectural  plan  and 
the  connection  that  such  gathering  and  preparation  sustain  to  the  end. 
Is  this  wise  or  prudent ?  Is  it  doin^^  justice  to  the  \Yord  of  God?  Per- 
fection, completeness,  is  not  found  Id  transmissions,  transcriptions,  trans- 
lations, human  language,  details,  etc.,  but  only  when  the  whole  plan, 
entire  design,  is  receivecL.  It  has  been  justly  observed  by  Martensen  (C7^. 
Dog.,  p.  77),  that  "the  teleological  is  the  fundamental  category  of 
thought  in  its  developed  state,"  and  "  in  its  deepest  significance  it  is  the 
category  of  Christianity  itself."  The  deepest  thinkers  take  this  ground, 
that  immediate  causes  or  present  agencies  must  be  considered  as  moved 
"  by  the  eternal  rational  ends  "  which  God  purposed,  and  that  we  cannot 
even  properly  appreciate  present  realities  without  looking  into  the  future 
to  see  what"^  results  are  to  be  gained  by  them.  This  gives  prophecy — 
which  points  to  the  end  to  be  attained— and  eschatology — which  portrays 
the  end — a  deep  significance  and  prominency. 

Apologists  {e.g.  Eow,  Ch.  Evich,  p.  92;  etc.)  have  weU  stated  that  Christianity  differs 
from  all  other  religions  in  that  it  is  based  on  the  personal  life  of  its  Founder,  and  not, 
as  others,  on  mere  dogmatic  teaching.  The  founders  of  other  religions  (over  whom 
unbelief  professes  to  go  into  ecstacies,  provided  they  can  be  emploj-ed  to  disparage  the 
life  of  Jesus)  may  be  left  out  of  their  respective  systems  without  affecting  them,  but 
Jesus,  "  the  Christ, "  cannot  possibly  be  removed  without  destroying  Christianity.  Upon 
this  fact,  valuable  proof  corroborating  Divine  inspiration  is  based.  But  we  assert  that 
the  doctrine  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  in  which  Jesus  is  the  central  figure,  brings  forth 
equally  forcible  evidence  in  behalf  of  the  same,  seeing  that  in  this  kingdom  exists  the 


Prop.  5.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  79 

realization  of  that  for  wliicli  He  came,  labored,  died,  etc.,  and  for  which  He  shall  return 
again.  The  apologetic  argiiment  limits  itself  too  much  to  the  past  and  present,  and 
overlooks  the  life  of  David's  Son  in  His  own  inheritance  as  predicted  ;  whereas  we 
extend  our  view  to  the  future  life  as  portrayed  to  us  in  this  kingdom,  and,  from  the  per- 
fected liedempt'ion  and  the  consummated  Glory  revealed,  draw  forth  additional  reasons  favor- 
ing the  special  inspiration  of  God's  Word.  We  admire  the  admirable  spirit  of  Ellicott 
{Aids  to  Faith,  Ep.  9— Comp,  Ep.  8),  who  makes  inspiration  to  embrace  such  an  influence 
of  the  Spirit  that  the  will  and  counsels  of  God  are  made  a  matter  of  knowledge,  so  that 
through  the  human  media  the  truth  is  made  recognizable,  and  that,  while  the  individ- 
uality of  the  writer  is  conserved,  the  subject  matter  is  presented  in  the  fittest  manner 
consistent  with  its  commendation  and  reception.  But  to  show — as  in  the  doctrine  of 
the  kingdom — the  Will  and  Counsel  of  God  as  fitted  in  all  respects  to  commend  itself  to 
our  reception,  because  most  wonderfully  adapted  to  man's  necessities,  to  society's  need, 
to  a  nation's  want,  to  the  Church's  help  and  exaltation,  to  the  saint's  hapi:)iness,  and  to 
God's  honor  and  glory— is  forcibly  extending  such  a  definition  in  the  line  indicated  by 
it.     This  we  propose  to  perform. 


80  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  6. 


Proposition"  6.  The  hingdom  of  lieaveii  is  intimately  connected 
loith  the  siiiJernatural. 

Tlie  whole  Bible,  whose  leading  tlieme  is  the  Idngdom,  is 
grounded  on  the  supernatural.  Remove  this,  and  you  destroy,  if 
not  the  book  itself,  the  chief  characteristic,  the  distinguishing  ex- 
cellency of  the  Scriptures. 

By  "the  Supernatural"  we  include  both  the  existence  of  God  as  the  great  First 
Cause  of  all  things,  and  that  He  is  able  to,  and  does,  ^York  above,  in  and  through  what 
are  known  as  "the  laws  of  Nature."  It  is  more  than  "the  Superhuman,"  since  the 
latter  is  found  in  Nature  itself  (i.e.,  in  exerting  jaowers,  introducing  forces,  and  bringing 
forth  results  beyond  man's  ability  and  comprehension),  while  the  former  exists  inde- 
j)endent  of  Nature  (i.e.,  the  seen  and  experienced  in  Creation)  and  yet  sustains  to  the 
Natural  a  most  intimate  relationship  as  its  framer  and  upholder. 

Oljs.  1.  The  Word  begins  with  the  supernatural  (the  presence  of  God) 
and  the  natural  in  harmony.  It  shows  how  an  antagonism  was  produced, 
causing  the  withdrawal  of  the  supernatural  from  the  sight  of  man,  and  yet 
how  in  mercy  it  at  times  exhibited  itself  to  man,  in  and  through  and  for 
man,  especially  in  giving  revelations  of  its  will.  It  even  condescends, 
in  order  to  secure  redemption,  to  veil  itself  in  humanity  and  manifest  the 
fact  by  suitable  demonstrations.  It  indicates  its  presence  by  fulfilment  of 
predictions  and  promises,  by  the  conversion  of  men,  by  the  existence  of 
the  Church,  by  the  consciousness  of  man  excited  in  contact  with  truth  and 
providence.  It  will,  in  a  still  more  striking  and  direct  way,-  exhibit  itself 
in  the  future,  after  all  the  preliminary  preparations  are  made,  in  order  to 
fulfil  the  remainder  of  Holy  Writ.  Now  the  kingdom  being  designed  to 
restore  and  manifest  the  original  concord  once  existing  between  the 
natural  and  supernatural,  the  Bible  closes  with  that  kingdom  in  sucli 
accordance.  Without  the  supernatural  the  kingdom  cannot  be  produced, 
for  it  requires,  as  predicted,  a  super  natural  king,  who  has  been  provided  in 
a  supernatural  manner,  and  rulers  who  have  experienced  a  supernatural 
transforming  power.  Even  in  its  conception  and  the  preparatory 
measures,  as  well  as  in  its  final  manifestation,  is  it  indissolubly  bound 
with  the  Divine.  Death,  which  is  to  be  destroyed  in  it,  tears,  which  are 
to  be  wiped  away  in  it,  nature  which  is  to  be  fashioned  anew  in  it,  these, 
as  well  as  a  multitude  of  other  promises,  can  never  be  reahzed  without  the 
attending  supernatural.  The  kingdom  and  the  supernatural  cannot  possi- 
bly be  dissevered.  The  inception  of  it  arises  from  the  supernatural,  and 
tinder  the  guidance  of  the  same,  consistently  Avith  human  freedom,  not 
only  revelations  are  given,  manifestations  of  its  reality  are  vouchsafed, 
exhibitions  of  its  power  are  foreshown,  but  that  all  these  are  mere  shadow- 
ings,  foretastes  of  a  living,  vital  relationship,  now  invisibly  maintained, 
which  shall  idtimately  le  visiUy  shoum  in  the  kingdom  itself  by  affinity 
no  longer  concealed,  owing  to  the  mediumship  of  a  glorified  humanity, 


Prop.  G.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  81 

wliicli  serves  as  the  connecting  link  between  the  visible  and  invisible.  The 
supernatural  is  held  in  abeyance  as  to  its  outward  manifestation  until  the 
time  arrives  for  the  restoration  of  the  forfeited  blessing,  the  personal 
dwelling  of  God  with  man,  which  will  be  experienced  in  this  kingdom. 
When  Jesus,  of  supernatural  origin  and  glorified  by  supernatural  power, 
shall  come  the  second  time  unto  salvation.  His  supernatural  might  shall 
be  exerted  in  behalf  of  this  kingdom  in  the  most  astounding  manner. 
Holy  Writ  constantly  appeals  to  this  imion,  and  no  scrijotural  conception 
of  it  can  be  obtained  without  conceding  this  fact. 

When  science  confines  itself  to  the  material  universe,  making  law  or  force  the  result 
of  nature  and  not  of  intelligent  will  ;  when  it  rests  satisfied  with  the  material  and 
ignores  a  higher  sphere  indicative  of  conscious  relationship  to  the  Infinite— then  it  can 
and  must  (in  logical  consistency)  deny  the  Supernatural.  (Comp.  Dr.  Sj)recher's  Grotmd- 
work  of  Theol.  Div.  2,  ch.  G.)  But  we  are  not  thus  bound,  preferring  "  the  old  i^aths," 
which  alone  impart  comfort,  hope,  strength,  and  blessing.  It  is  still  true,  as  Theirs 
(Pressense's  Relig.  and  Reign  of  Terror,  p.  326)  remarked  :  "It  is  the  privilege  of  intelli- 
gence to  recognize  marks  of  intelligence  in  the  Universe  ;  and  a  great  mind  is  more  capa- 
ble than  a  narrow  one  of  seeing  God  in  His  works."  The  host  of  intelligent  men,  who 
in  the  past  have  substantiated  this  declaration,  are  witnesses  that  such  a  reverent  recog- 
nition is  in  accord  with  the  highest  mental  development.  Nature,  Religion,  Christianity, 
man's  moral  nature.  Personal  experience,  all  unite  in  calling  for  a  Higher  Will,  Higher  Rea- 
son, a  God,  whom  we  gratefully  acknowledge  as  our  dependence— our  All  in  All.  Prof. 
Bowen  {Modern  Philosophy),  reviewing  the  phases  of  philosophy  from  Descai-tes  down  to 
Hartman,  informs  us  :  "  1  accept  with  unhesitating  conviction  and  belief  the  doctrine  of 
the  being  of  one  personal  God,  the  creator  and  governor  of  the  world,  and  of  one  Lord 
elesus  Christ  in  whom  '  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  ' ;  and  I  have 
found  nothing  whatever  in  the  literature  of  modern  infidelity  which,  to  my  mind,  casts 
even  the  sligiitest  doubt  about  that  belief."  Just  as  in  Nature,  nature  herself  is  sus- 
tained and  interpenetrated  by  forces  which  come  from  vast  distances  beyond  the  earth, 
and  to  which  she  gives  conscious  evidence  in  light,  growth,  etc.,  so  in  moral  and  spiritual 
things  influences  come  from  heaven  itself  which  sustain  light,  life,  growth,  etc.,  and  to 
which  man — if  receptive — consciously  responds.  To  this  selj-consciousness  the  Bible 
confidently  appeals  (Comp,  e.g.  Williamson's  Rud.  Theol.  and  Mor.  Science,  ch.  9),  as  teach- 
ing the  Supernatural. 

Ohs.  2.  Men  may  call  this  foolishness,  incredible,  etc.,  and  we  admit 
that  it  is  a  ''strange  work'''  (Isa.  28  :  21),  ''  a  marvellous  work  and  a 
wonder,  for  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish,  and  the  understand- 
ing of  their  prudent  men  shall  be  hid  "  because  "  their  fear  toward  me  is 
taught  by  the  precept  of  men"  (Isa.  20  :  13,  14).  Moreover,  such  a 
*'  strangeVork  "  is  required  if  the  heart-felt  longings  of  suffering  human- 
ity, and  the  exceeding  precious  promises,  the  only  consolation  we  possess 
in  the  darkest  hours  of  trial,  are  to  be  realized.  It  is  admitted,  that  out- 
side of  Revelation,  we  have  no  decided  promises  tliat  the  groanings  of  crea- 
tion can  ever  be  removed,  and  that,  if  this  is  ever  performed  (e.g.  death 
abolished),  it  must  be  done  by  a  higher  power  than  is  now  manifested  in 
and  through  nature.  The  necessity  for  such  a  power  is  allowed  by  all; 
the  desirableness  of  securing  information  and  knowledge  on  the  subject  is 
granted  by  all  ;  why  not  then  tolerate  the  reasonableness  of  the  Bible  on 
these  points  until  a  clearer,  brighter  light  is  found  ?  In  looking  over  the 
extended  field  of  controversy  between  faith  and  unbelief — while  admitting 
that  faith,  in  its  eagerness  to  vindicate  God's  Word,  has  sometimes,  urged 
on  by  the  consciousness  of  personal  experience,  employed  arguments  that 
are  logically  inadmissible,  yet  we  can  apologize  for  the  same  on  the 
2:round  that  it  evinced  "  zeal  without  knowledge  "  in  an  ill-directed  effort 


82  THE   TIIEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.   6. 

to  sustain  trutli.  On  the  other  hand,  unbelief  has  too  often  shown  a  swift- 
ness and  unnatural  avidity  to  bring  discredit  upon  the  same  Word  ; 
resorting  to  a  most  unscholarly  criticism,  employing  arguments  often 
refuted,  without  the  least  notice  of  attempted  refutations,  ignoring  what  is 
alleged  in  yindication,  etc.,  for  which  we  can  make  no  apology,  seeing 
that  the  effort  itself,  and  the  peculiar  spirit  in  which  it  is  made,  is  indica- 
tive of  a  bitter  hostility  to  the  Gospel.  We  might  the  more  readily  excuse 
them  if,  in  place  of  the  faith  and  hope  so  rudely  and  remorselessly 
destroyed,  they  could  bring  us  light  to  dispel  the  darkness  which  otherwise 
overshadows  man's  destiny.  But  instead  of  light  they  only  give  us 
increased  darkness. 

It  lias  become  quite  faslnonal:]e  to  designate  the  old  method  of  proving  the  existence 
of  God  and  of  the  supernatural  by  an  ajDpeal  to  design,  contrivance,  the  adaptation  of 
means  to  an  end,  etc.,  as  "  the  production  of  a  clock-making  Divinity."  While  it  is  true 
that  the  moral  nature  of  man  affords  us  the  most  decisive  proof  of  a  higher  agency  and 
of  the  moral  nature  of  the  Being  who  has  called  us  into  existence,  j^et  man  is  not  yet  so 
far  advanced  in  knowledge  that  he  can  do  without  the  argument  that  God  in  His  loisdom 
appeals  to,  and  which  has  commanded  the  reason  and  strengthened  the  hearts  of  multi- 
tudes. If  the  argument  in  proof  of  the  Divine  Existence  drawn  from  design  in  Nature 
commends  itself  even  to  such  men  as  John  Stuart  Mill  (Cook's  Lect.  Hvxley  and  Tyndail 
on  Ecohdlon,  p.  30),  then  surely  the  far  more  comprehensive  argument  that  can  be  founded 
on  evidences  of  design  in  the  Divine  Purpose  (as  e.g.  seen  in  the  redemj^tive  arrange- 
ments, the  Theocratic  ordering,  etc. )  ought  specially  to  be  of  force.  Besides  this  :  when 
the  much  lauded  criticism  of  unbelief  plants  itself  upon  the  broad  platform  "  that  the 
Great  First  Cause  never  breaks  through  the  chain  of  finite  causes  by  an  immediate  exer- 
tion of  power,"  it  is  certainly  right  to  wait  for  the  proof  of  such  a  position.  If  the 
boasted  intellectual  groundwork  of  unbelief  can  produce  nothing  better  than  mere 
assumption  to  sustain  such  a  position,'  men  of  reflection  may  well  ask.  Who  informed  the 
creature  that  God  never  interferes,  over  against  the  testimony  of  the  past  and  the  gen- 
eral conviction,  impressed  by  moral  consciousness,  that  He  can  do  so  ?  Supj)ose  this  to 
be  a  fact,  and  that  unbelievers  are  gifted  with  superior  wisdom,  it  then  follows  :  (1)  that 
man  is  firmly  bound  in  an  eternal  chain  of  necessity  and  fatalism  ;  (2)  that  the  motives 
presented  by  religion  and  morality  are  all  vain,  being  under  the  power  of  irreversible 
destiny  ;  (3)  that  the  First  Cause  elevates  His  work  to  an  equality  with  Himself,  or,  at 
least,  subordinates  Himself  to  a  constituted  necessity  ;  (4)  that  a  power  inherent  in  a 
Creator  (the  will  or  pleasure  to  do  as  He  pleases)  is  thus  lost  and  bound  up  in  that 
■which  is  created  ;  (5)  and  that  we  attribute  to  God  less  control  over  His  work  than  man 
exerts  over  the  labor  of  his  hands.  Strauss  lays  it  down  as  an  axiom,  "  that,  according 
to  sound  philosophy,  as  well  as  experience,  the  regular  chain  of  conditional  causes  is  never 
interrupted  by  the  absolute  Causality  through  special  acts."  The  question,  however, 
is  whether  sound  philosophy  or  common-sense  requires  that  the  great  Cause  must  thus 
be  rigorously  bound  by  His  own  creation?  Does  such  a  limitation  of  "  the  Absolute" 
really  constitute  Him  or  "it"  the  Absolute  ?  Does  it  require,  admitting  the  existence  of 
evil  and  the  desirableness  of  its  removal,  that  this  Cause  should  feel  no  interest  in  the 
removal  of  evil  existing  in  creation  ?  Does  it  insist  upon  a  God,  stern,  inflexible,  cold 
and  distant,  binding  humanity  by  unalterable  law  to  a  sad,  dreary,  consecutive  fate,  or 
can  it  bring  this  Cause  into  vital  relationship  with  intelligence,  morality,  religion,  the 
noblest  feelings,  imj)ulses,  aspirations  and  hopes  of  man  ? 

Ohs.  3.  If  we  had  a  Revelation  and  a  kingdom  proposed  by  it,  without  a 
supernatural  element  claimed  and  exerted,  then  the  objection  would  be 
urged,  without  the  possibility  of  contradiction,  that  it  was  merely  of 
human  origin.  God  knew  this,  and  hence  stamps  the  one  given  with 
something  above  nature  and  the  power  of  man.  Some  charge  us  with  super- 
stition and  a  low,  degrading  belief  when,  acquiescing  in  the  supernatural, 
we  look  beyond  the  natural  law  to  its  Creator  or  Institutor.  But  justly 
the  charge  cannot  be  preferred  against  us,  seeing  that  it  is  not  we  who, 
stopping  short  at  the  natural  laws,  regarding  them  as  the  real  causation  of 


Prop.  6.]  the  theocratic  IvI]N'gdo:m.  83 

all  tilings,  and  utterly  unalterable  in  their  workings,  tender  to  the  laws 
what  reverence  and  Avorship  we  are  capable  of,  so  that  the  laws  virtually 
become  our  gods,  our  eternal  divinities,  and  in  tlieir  sum,  totality, 
constitute  the  high-sounding  "  Absolute. '^  Who  is  the  most  superstitious 
or  who  has  faith  the  lowest  in  the  scale,  the  one  who  bows  down  to  physi- 
cal law,  or  the  other  who  looks  beyond  such  laws  to  the  Lawgiver  Him- 
self? Can  it  be  shown,  without  mere  assertion,  that  the  supernatural  never 
exerted  its  power  in  creation — that  these  laws  were  self-producing,  eternal 
— that  man  never  comes  under  its  influence — that  it  is  not  needed — that  its 
manifestations  are  physically  impossible — that  they  are  morally  impracti- 
cable— that  it  is  unworthy  of  God  or  man,  etc.  ?  These  and  similar  ques- 
tions must  \)Q  fairly  answered  before  we  can  give  up  a  precious  faith  and 
hope,  affording  the  richest  of  consolations  and  blessings  needed  in  our 
pilgrimage  here. 

Unbelief  makes  much  of  Natural  Religion,  but  as  Christian  apologists  {e.g.  Bp.  But- 
ler's Analogy)  have  abundantly  shown,  it  is  insufficient  (a^  iinbelief  sadly  confesses)  to 
solve  the  most  essential  problems  concerning  the  present  and  the  future  in  reference  to 
man  s  happiness.  Now  when  Christianity  does  not  destroy  Natural  Religion,  but  con- 
firms it,  adding  to  it  that  which  it  was  impossible  for  it  to  produce,  is  it  not  strange  that 
men  devote  themselves  to  a  persistent,  life-long  exertion  to  demolish  the  labors  of  intel- 
ligent, pious  men,  without  the  least  effort — owing  to,  sometimes  confessed,  inability — 
to  substitute  something  better  ?  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  such  will  deliberately  deny 
the  fundamental  ideas  underlying  our  subjection  to  moral  government,  simply  because 
such  are  constantly  appealed  to  in  Scripture — no  matter  how  destructive  their  repeal 
would  be  to  society  ?  The  Realism,  Utilitarianism,  Naturalism  of  the  day  does  not  stop 
to  consider  hoii:)  necessary  to  man's  welfare  the  Supernatural  is,  in  order  to  insure  deliver- 
ance, complete  and  continued,  from  evil.  A  Religion  that  pro]30ses  such  a  Supernatural- 
ism  connected  with  redemption  (which  unbelief  acknowledges,  in  view  of  the  permanency 
of  natural  law,  is  not  to  be  found  in  Nature)  surely  should  be  met  with  respect  and  not 
with  unrelenting  bitterness. 

Ohs.  4.  The  objection  that  a  supernatural  interference  would  argue 
imperfection  in  creation  and  Providence,  is  purely  one-sided.  It  has  its 
limits,  and  when  pressed  too  far  is  at  once  forged  into  a  double-edged 
sword  which  cuts  both  ways.  Imperfection  is  found  in  nature,  but  this 
is  overlooked  ;  it  is  found  in  man,  but  this  is  ignored,  in  order  to  find  it  in 
the  plan  of  redemption,  and  not  in  the  creature  and  creation  which  it  is 
designed  to  save.*  Is  this  wise  ?  If  the  theory  is  correct,  then  those  eter- 
nal laws,  so  magnified,  should  have  avoided  imperfection — those  complete 
and  perfect  forces  of  nature  should  have  removed  the  ills  and  woes  and 
sufferings  and  antagonisms  now  so  abundantly  prevalent — those  unchange- 
able and  eternal  laws  should,  long  before  this,  from  the  beginning  have 
elevated  man  to  knowledge,  truth  and  happiness,  removing  from  him  igno- 
rance, error,  and  misery.  But  not  satisfied  with  this  objection,  another  is 
brought  from  the  opposite  extreme  (showing  how  eadJy  objections  are 
formed  when  the  heart  desires  them)  viz.,  that  fixed  and  invariable  law 
without  intervention  indicates  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  God,  His 
wisdom,  goodness  (so  Dr.  Draper  and  others),  etc.  In  the  one  case,  inter- 
vention indicates  imperfection  in  the  work  performed  by  God  ;  in  the 
other  it  shows  the  same  in  the  Creator  Himself.  Law  unchangeable,  etc., 
certainly  gives  us  a  high  opinion  of  God,  of  His  absolute  power,  sover- 
eignty, wisdom,  etc.,  that  was  able  thus  to  constitute  them.  But  we  have 
still  a  higher  and  more  majestic  view  of  God,  if  we  regard  (as  the  Bible)  the 
same   power,   sovereignty,    etc.,    equal    to   adding  to,  or   controllings  or 


84  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  6. 

reversing,  or  altering,  or  staying  for  a  brief  period  any  of  the  laws  or 
forces  which  He  has  constituted.  In  the  general  invariableness  is  a  fact 
established  to  enforce  His  government,  to  provide  for  and  contribute  to 
the  happiness  of  His  creatures,  but  in  every  particular  instance  it  is  not 
true  ;  for  if  that  were  the  case  it  would  limit  His  own  power,  and  make 
the  laws  equal  to  if  not  siipcrior  to  the  Lawgiver.  H  we  could  place 
Christianity  and  the  kingdom  whicli  is  to  result  from  it  under  such  law 
without  Divine  interposition  or  aid,  the  foundation  of  all  hope  would  not 
only  be  overturned,  but  men  would  justly  say,  you  can  expect  nothing 
more  than  what  these  laws  can  give  ;  God's  sovereignty  is  only  in  them, 
He  can  do  no  more  for  you,  and  therefore  it  is  idle  to  pray,  to  expect  a 
resurrection,  to  hope  for  freedom  from  evil,  etc.  (This  many  do  say  at 
the  present  time.)  In  brief,  such  a  theory,  put  into  its  mildest  form, 
places  God  in  the  posture  of  a  cruel  Being,  giving  us  unchangeable  law 
from  which  we  can  see  no  escape  from  miser}^  and  this  law  being  eternal, 
we  dare  not  comfort  ourselves  with  the  idea  that  evil  is  temporary,  that 
God  w^ill  ultimately  remove  and  destroy  it.  From  such  hope-crushing 
reasoning,  we  turn  with  relief  and  joy  to  the  comforting  doctrine  of  the 
Word,  that  while  God  has  created  this  world  and  man,  placed  them  under 
laws  which  in  the  general  are  unchangeable,  yet  when  the  time  arrives 
that  the  necessity  of  man  or  the  Divine  purpose  requires  it.  He  can  exert  a 
higher  law  still — His  Oamipotent  Will — and  control  or  bend  or  reverse, 
in  short,  do  what  He  pleases  with  His  own  creation.  Man  cannot  describe 
a  greater,  more  perfect,  more  absolute  sovereign  than  the  Bible  in  its 
simplicity  does,  when  it  makes  Him  so  all-powerful  that  He  is  able,  and 
does,  at  any  time  He  chooses,  intervene  in  His  02v?i  workmanship.  To 
deny  this  is  to  degrade  and  not  ennoble  God.  Believers  in  the  Bible  are 
warned  against  just  such  reasoning.  Thus  e.g.  2  Pet.  3:3,  4,  unmis- 
takably foretells  that  "  scoffers ''*  will  arise  who  shall  claim  that  "  all 
things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  "  (most 
l^robably  with  the  plea  that  otherwise  imperfection  exists  either  in  the 
works  or  in  the  Creator).  The  same  apostle  traces  its  origin  to  luiUingly 
are  ignorant  of — i.e. — wilful  ignorance — desiring,  wishing,  willing  it  ;  and 
charges  us  that  it  is  worthy  of  marked,  special  attention  ("  knowing  this 
first,'''  etc.,)  being  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  last  days.^ 

1  Excepting  by  Mill,  and  some  others,  who,  however,  to  account  for  the  eyil,  boldly 
argne  (as  in  ''Literature  and  Dogma")  that  the  Creator  or  First  Cause  was  limited  in  ability 
to  create — thus  making  an  imperfect,  weak  God,  the  product  of  their  reason  over  against 
the  majestic,  perfect  God  of  the  Bible.  Another  class  also  admit  the  evil,  and  find  no 
hope,  advocating  a  despairing  fate  or  nihilism  over  against  the  cheering  prospects  held 
forth  by  the  Word  of  God.  Generally,  however,  the  position  is  assumed  as  stated  in  the 
text.  In  the  Art.  "  Immortality,''  in  Littell's  Liv.  Age  for  1872,  taken  from  Brit.  Quarterly 
Review,  the  Optimist  Philosophy,  that  evil  will  be  eradicated,  is  opposed. 

2  In  the  i^aper  contributed  by  Merle  D'Aubigne  to  Christ.  Alliance  at  New  York,  refer- 
ence is  made  to  the  wide-spread  nature  of  infidelity  and  the  critical  posture  of  the 
times,  and  to  the  remarkable  characteristic  of  infidelity  of  the  present  period  :  "  Until 
now,  the  eighteenth  century — the  age  of  Voltaire — was  regarded  as  the  epoch  of  most 
decided  infidelity,  but  how  far  does  the  present  time  surpass  it  in  this  respect.  Voltaire 
himself  protested  against  the  philosophy  which  he  called  atheistic,  and  said,  '  God  is 
necessarily  the  Great,  the  Only,  the  Eternal  Artificer  of  all  nature. '    {Dialogues,  xxv. )   But 


*  The  earliest  and  most  reliable  mss.  make  it  still  more  emphatic,  "scoffers  in  scoff- 
ing."—Tischendorfs  N.  T. 


Prop.  6.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  85 

the  pretended  philosophers  of  our  day  leave  such  ideas  far  behind,  and  regard  them  as 
antiquated  superstitions,"  etc.  Taking  Prof.  Tyndall's  eloquent  address  in  favor  of 
materialism,  it  almost  seems  that  we  have  his  atomic  theory  fulfilled  in  himself,  viz., 
that  the  atoms  formerly  composing  Democritus  have  conjoined  again  in  forming  a  Tyn- 
dall.  The  Egyptian  transmigration  theory,  modernized  to  suit  prevailing  tastes,  may,  for 
aught  we  know,  again  be  revived. 

Ohs.  5.  Before  entering  npon  the  consideration  of  the  miraculous,  it  is 
necessary,  first  of  all,  to  come  to  a  decision  respecting  the  supernatural  ; 
whether  indeed  a  Higher  Power  exists  in  addition  to  nature  which  can  in- 
troduce the  miraculous.  The  Bible  takes  this  for  granted  as  something 
indirectly  taught  by  nature  itself  (in  works,  design,  etc.),  but  more  directly 
by  our  mental  and  moral  constitution  (in  moral  and  religious  impulses,  a 
consciousness  of  being  under  moral  law,  etc.).  The  simplicity  of  the  Bible 
teaching,  corroborated  by  the  religious  feeling,  prayer  tendency,  and 
experience  of  ages,  has  not  been  invalidated  by  the  recent  prevailing  attacks 
of  unbelief,  because  reason  itself,  unbiased,  must,  in  the  contest  now  rag- 
ing, determine  in  favor  of  the  Scriptures.  Which,  e.g.,  is  the  most 
reasonable,  to  believe  in  a  Creator  who  takes  a  continued  interest  in  His 
creatures,  and  can  at  pleasure  exert  His  power  in  their  behalf  ;  or  to 
believe  that  nature  has  no  intelligent  personal  Producer,  or  if  it  has  such 
an  One,  that  He  keeps  aloof  from  His  own  workmanship  ?  Which  is  the 
most  reasonable,  to  affirm  that  the  world  is  produced  by  God,  who  can 
order  and  control  it  according  to  His  will ;  or  to  say  that  it  is  somehow 
unexiilaincd,  the  result  of  natural  laws  (also  unexjilained),  and  that  such 
laws  are  alone  causative  and  operative?  Which  is  the  most  reasonable,  to 
declare  that  an  intelligent  Designer,  with  an  ultimate  glorious  end  in  view, 
created  all  things,  and,  to  indicate  and  vindicate  the  intended  end,  gives 
intimations  of  His  power  and  goodness  ;  or  to  say  that  atoms  (necessarily 
endued  with  intelligence)  come  together  by  forces  (also  intelligent),  and 
combine  to  form  an  intelligent,  related  design  (as  seen),  and  this  goes  on 
eternally  .^ '  Which  is  the  most  reasonable,  to  announce  that  reason 
existed  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  designed  it,  and  evidences  itself 
m  the  varied  works  thereof,  and  that  the  same  reason  has  access  to  its 
work,  and  can,  in  accordance  with  an  announced  plan,  manifest  its  pres- 
ence in  new  acts  and  new  performances  ;  or  to  assert  that  reason  is 
only  (Biichner)  in  nature  ?  (Zollman  in  Tlie  Bible  and  Natural  Science 
justly  observes,  that  such  a  theory  virtually  makes  the  atoms  individually 
possess  the  greatest  reasoning  power  because  of  their  forming  combinations 
which  man  is  incapable  of  wholly  searching  out  and  understanding.) 
Which  is  the  most  in  accord  with  reason,  to  acknowledge  that  the  world 
has  a  personal  Sovereign  Euler,  or  that  impersonal,  unexplained  forces  and 
laws  form  such  a  Ruler?  Reason,  as  evidenced  in  the  gifted  intellects 
which  have  bowed  in  reverence  to  revelation  and  in  the  studious  sons  of 
science  who  have  made  nature  subservient  to  the  Word,  can  cordially 
receive,  as  the  highest  reason,  the  biblical  idea  of  a  God,  the  biblical  con- 
ception of  the  power  and  freedom  of  intelligence,  the  biblical  will  as  mani- 
fested in  a  divine  purpose  unfolding  toward  redemption.  It  is  assuming 
too  much  to  suppose,  that  the  reasoning  in  favor  of  the  supernatural  from 
the  earliest  days  down  to  more  recent  writers  (as  Butler,  Argyle,  McGosh, 
Cook,  etc.),  and  that  the  concessions  even  of  the  ablest  opponents  of  the 
miraculous,  of  a  great  first  cause,  existing  prior  to,  and  forming,  nature, 
should  be  but  folly.     The  assumption,  by  its  absurdity  and  antagonism  to 


86  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  6. 

reason,  defeats  itself.  Independent  of  the  Scriptures,  relying  simply  upon 
the  constitution  of  nature  and  man,  our  deepest  thinkers  of  all  classes  and 
ages,  even  those  unprepared  to  receive  the  entire  biblical  conception,  have 
still  taught  a  theism.'  The  acknowledgment  of  the  supernatural  prepares 
us  for  the  next  proposition.  Admit  the  supernatural,  of  a  higher  power  of 
existence  and  intelligence  over  and  above  nature,  and  then  the  way  is  pre- 
pared for  reason  to  accept  of  this  j^ower  manifesting  itself  in  that  sphere 
relating  to  the  highest  interests  of  man.  Reason  finds  a  sufficient  cause  in 
the  God  of  the  Bible  to  explain  not  only  the  existence  and  continued 
operation  of  law,  but  how  the  Creator  of  law  can  exiiibit  His  all-pervading 
power  and  presence,  at  any  desired  moment,  through  the  electric  flashes  of 
a  Divine  Providence,  thus  visibly  manifesting  that  the  creative  spirit  is  a 
God,  not  afar  oif  but  nigh  at  hand.' 

'  To  indicate  the  contrast  between  our  views  and  those  of  the  free-thinking  class,  we 
select  a  recent  writer,  Winwood  Reade,  who  {Martyrdom  of  21<m)  thus  gives  the  final 
result  of  making  man  an  atom,  a  cell  growth  of  nature  :  "  We  teach  that  there  is  a 
heaven  in  the  ages  far  away,  but  not  for  us  single  corjjuscules,  not  for  us  dots  of  ani- 
mated jelly  ;  bat  for  the  One  (i.e.  Humanity)  of  whom  we  are  the  elements,  and  who, 
though  we  perish,  never  dies,  but  grows  from  period  to  period,  and  by  the  united  efforts 
of  single  molecules  called  men,  or  of  those  cell  groujDs  called  nations,  is  raised  toward 
the  Divine  jjower  which  he  will  finally  attain.  Our  Religion,  therefore,  is  Virtue  •  our 
Hope  is  placed  in  the  hapj)iness  of  Posterity  ;  our  Faith  is  the  perfectibility  of  Man," 
With  this  view  is  allied  the  teaching  that  w-e  are  the  product  of  natural  laws,  that  we 
cannot  discover  or  define  the  Creator  or  First  Cause  (if  there  is  such),  and  that  the 
Supreme  Power  is  "  something  for  which  we  have  no  words,  something  for  which  we  have 
no  ideas,''  "  to  whom  it  is  profanity  to  pray,  of  w^hom  it  is  idle  and  irreverent  to  argue 
and  debate,  of  whom  we  should  never  presume  to  think  save  with  humility  and  awe, 
being  that '  Unknown  God,' "  etc.  What  admirable  humility  and  convenient  ignoring 
of  the  testimony  of  man's  moral  nature  and  God's  revelation  ! 

2  Man  cannot  without  violence  to  the  history  of  the  jjast  and  to  his  own  moral  nature 
refuse  such  a  view  of  a  Power  existing  above  Nature.  The  religions  of  the  past  and  the 
present,  the  experience  of  the  civilized  and  uncivilized,  the  expressed  opinions  of  a 
Plato  and  a  Newton,  a  Socrates  and  a  Kant,  a  Xenophon  and  an  Anselm,  a  Cicero  and  a 
Descartes,  a  Galen  and  a  Leibnitz,  an  Aristotle  and  a  Fenelon,  besides  an  innumerable 
multitude,  clearly  indicate  this  feature.  Even  Pantheism,  in  its  varied  forms,  however 
it  may  neutralize  the  biblical  idea,  still  admits  and  enforces  the  notion  of  a  superior, 
infinite  intelligence,  all  pervading,  etc.  Pure  Atheism  is  something  rare,  and  forms  an 
exception,  seldom  found,  to  a  general,  universal  rule.  Those  alleged  to  be  decided 
atheists  sometimes  (as  Voltaire,  J.  Priestley,  etc.)  express  themselves  in  a  manner  indic- 
ative of  Theistical  notions.  Hence  such  a  challenge  as  "  Asmodeus"  gives  in  the  Cm. 
Commercial  of  Dec.  27th,  1875,  is  simply  ridiculous,  viz.,  for  any  one  to  prove  the  exist- 
ence of  a  God  and  His  Personality,  the  existence  of  the  soul  (allowing  only  "  a  higher 
physical  organization"),  and  the  existence  of  sin.  This  is  simply  ignoring,  with  the 
utmost  self-complacency,  w^hat  the  leaders  of  intelligence  have  presented  on  the  subject. 
Some  of  the  followers  of  Darwin  have  been  exercised  that  he  has  not  excluded  the  idea 
that  a  personal  God  may  have  created  the  first  forms  of  vegetable  and  animal  being,  thus 
still  leaving  a  bond  of  union  between  him  and  Kepler,  Newton,  Davy,  Haller,  Cuvier, 
the  Wagners,  Liebig,  etc. 

3  No  mythology,  no  philosophy,  no  human  joroduction  has  ever  presented  such  a  sub- 
lime portraiture  of  the  Deity  and  His  attributes  as  the  Scriptures  give  us.  Take  the 
Bible  conception  and  contrast  it  e.g.  with  Mill's  imperfect,  impotent  God,  and  what  an 
immense  distance  exists  between  them.  Contrast  the  same  with  a  thousand  others,  and 
the  God  of  the  Bible  stands  forth  immeasurably  grand  and  complete — lacking  nothing. 
Contrast  the  perfect,  lovely,  holy  Redeemer  Jesus,  so  simply  but  strikingly  presented  to 
us,  with  the  Saviour  tendered  by  unbelief,  and  the  former  is  light  in  the  midst  of  dark- 
ness. This  alone  is  sufficient,  as  Apologists  have  noticed,  to  vindicate  the  Supernatural 
{e.g.  Roger's  Siiperhimian  Origin  of  the  Bible).  But  allow  this  God  (as  Creator  and  Re- 
deemer) to  present  the  Divine  Purpose,  the  J^nd,  contemplated  by  creation,  theyi  He  is 
seen  in  a  new  aspect  commending  itself  to  reason  and  the  moral  nature  of  man.     Such  a 


Prop.  C]  the  theocratic  kiin-gdom.  87 

presentation  makes  a  necessity  of  revelation  supernaturally  given  and  supported  ;  for  the 
Creator,  and  not  the  creature,  must  inform  us  what  are  the  ends  contemplated  by  an 
Infinite  Mind.  Hence  the  basis  of  Revelation,  indicating  the  intelligent  moral  purposes 
held  in  view,  commends  itself  to  us  as  the  one  required,  and  as  proof  of  its  being  God- 
given.  This  feature  has  additional  weight  given  to  it  when  it  is  observed  that  God 
works  after  a  definitely  laid  down  Plan— a  Plan,  too,  extending  through  many  centuries, 
evidencing  foresight,  provisions,  providences,  etc.  This  Plan,  whose  origin  cannot  be 
accounted  for  as  proceeding  from  the  Jewish  race  ;  which  makes  God  and  His  glory  the 
dominant  idea  ;  which  brings  Him  in  sympathy  with  man  and  expresses  the  highest 
possible  evidence  to  promote  man's  welfare  ;  which  subordinates  ethics  to  theology  (the 
former  being  derived  from  the  idea  of  God,  His  will,  and  our  relations  to  Him)  and 
enforces  as  essential  morality  and  piety  ;  which  ajjpeals  (as  to  a  thing  self-evident)  to  the 
self-consciousness  implanted  by  moral  nature  and  recognized  by  society  ;  which  opens 
before  us  the  most  exalted  destiny  and  eternal  inheritance,  must,  in  the  very  nature  of 
the  case,  demand,  what  unbelief  so  persistently  objects  to,  a  cordial  recognition  of  the 
Divine  rights  and  claims,  and  of  the  dej)endence,  obligations,  and  obedience  of  the  crea- 
ture. If  Revelation  occupied  a  lower  plane  in  its  delineation  of  God  and  in  its  demands, 
infidelity  would  be  the  first  to  indicate  it  as  a  radical  defect.  A  Divine  Revelation  with 
God  and  His  interest  in,  and  relationship  to,  His  own  Creation  stricken  out,  would 
remove  its  heart  and  life,  leaving  the  creature  in  ignorance  and  hopeless.  Man,  bur- 
dened by  the  influence  of  evil,  subject  to  calamity  and  death,  looking  for  some  way  of 
deliverance,  finds  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  the  doctrine  of  this  kingdom  a  Revelation 
most  honorable  to  God  Himself,  and  most  conducive  to  the  highest  interests  and  happi- 
ness of  His  creatures.  Many  receiving  this  in  the  past,  have  found  peace  and  joy  ;  many 
rejecting,  have  realized  unrest  and  unhappiness.  Humility,  such  as  becomes  a  creature, 
is  fundamental  to  gain  the  former  position  ;  pride,  such  as  makes  the  Creator  subject 
to  the  creature's  judgment,  is  invariably  conducive  to  the  latter.  In  reference  to  the 
teaching  of  Science,  its  very  statements  respecting  the  inability  of  discovering  the  intelli- 
gent i)ower  back  of  nature  and  natural  law,  only  indicates,  as  the  Bible  claims,  the 
necessity  of  a  Revelation  to  bring  man  to  a  correct  and  ample  comprehension  of  that 
great  Power.  So  also  the  confession  of  seeing  no  hope  of  release  from  death,  the  grave, 
etc.,  through  the  fixedness  of  law  ;  that  man  being  in  jDOssession  of  a  moral  nature  needs 
more  than  the  facts  of  nature  ;  that  if  God  exists  the  possibility'  of  a  revelation  must  be 
admitted  ;  that  the  non-existence  of  a  God  is  not  susceptible  of  definite  proof  ;  that  if 
an  intelligent  reason  is  back  of  nature,  it  would  be  desirable  for  such  reason  to  reveal 
itself  ;  that  if  such  a  revelation  would  be  made,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  would 
present  us  things  that  man  cannot  discover,  etc. — these  confirm  our  position.  "Whatever 
difficulties — as  alleged — on  the  side  of  pure  reason  there  may  be  to  prove  the  existence 
and  the  revelation  of  God,  far  greater  difficulties  are  met  in  the  effort  to  show  that  there 
is  no  God  or  no  Revelation,  for  the  latter  leaves  nature,  man,  world,  the  Universe  an  in- 
scrutable enigma. 


88  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIjS-GDOM.  [PkOP. 


Proposition  7.   The  kingdom  being  a  manifestation  of  the  super- 
natural^  miracles  are  connected  tvith  it. 

Miracles  are  not  to  be  regarded  simply  as  evidences  of  the  triitli 
— this  it  indeed  subserves — but  as  necessary  parts  of  revelation 
itself,  evincing  with  a  fulness,  stronger  than  language  can  impress, 
that  the  sui^ernatural  is  indispensable  for  the  establishment  of  the 
kingdom,  and  that  it  will  be  exerted  in  miraculous  power  when- 
ever required.  It  is  plainly  declared  in  numerous  passages,  that 
before  this  kingdom  is  set  up,  events  of  an  astounding  miraculous 
nature,  far  exceeding  the  ordinary  x^ower  of  nature,  directly  occur- 
ring through  Divine  agency,  shall  be  witnessed.  In  a  book  record- 
ing such  anticipated  occurrences,  there  would  be  an  evident  lack,  a 
sad  deficiency — which  infidelity  would  eagerly  seize  if  it  existed — 
if  it  contained  no  statements  of  miracles.  Especially  would  this  be 
the  case,  when  He  who  is  the  King  of  the  promised  kingdom  ap- 
pears. The  grave  question  then,  if  no  miracles  were  given,  would 
inevitably  arise  :  What  assurance  have  you  that  those  miraculous 
events  i^redicted  to  take  place  in  the  future — so  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  highest  welfare  and  hapi^iness  of  man — shall  ever 
be  realized,  when  we  have  none  heretofore  displayed  and  described, 
and  none  combined  with  the  X3revious  X3ersonal  coming  of  the 
King  ?  The  cry  would  be  triumx)hantly  raised  :  Your  King  once 
came,  and  as  He  x)erformed  no  miracles,  although  they  are  so  in- 
timately blended  with  His  kingdom,  none  can  be  reasonably 
expected. 

The  correct  position  in  reference  to  miracles  is  that  taken  by  some  recent  writers. 
Thus  e.g.  Fnchs  {Bremen  Lectures,  L.  3)  says  that  "  the  world's  course  requires  miracles" 
owi:ig  to  the  introduction  of  sin  and  evil,  and  to  indicate  and  enforce  the  Plan  devised 
for  the  remov^al  of  the  same  ;  and  that  hence  "  into  the  world's  history  of  sin  and  death 
the  golden  threads  of  Salvation  have  been  interwoven,  a  continued  chain  of  divine  acts  of 
revelation  for  the  saving  of  the  world,  which  form  a  living  organism  of  miracles."  Christ 
Himself,  in  this  connected  series,  is  the  greatest  miracle.  Such  an  attitude,  sustained  by 
a  personal  experience  of  the  preciousness  of  the  greatest  miracle,  Christ,  is  impregnable. 
Our  line  of  argument  is  designed  to  uphold  the  miraculous  as  a  necessity  in  the  world's 
Redemjotion  through  the  Theocratic  Kingdom;  and  therefore  only  presses  the  relationship 
that  the  one  sustains  to  the  other.  When  Prof.  Powell  (Essays  and  Reviews)  tells  us  that 
*'  miracles  were,  in  the  estimation  of  a  former  age,  among  the  chief  supports  of  Christi- 
anity ;  they  are  at  present  among  the  main  difficulties  and  hindrances  to  its  acceptance, " 
the  reply  is,  that  they  still  remain  chief  supports,  and  that  the  latter  arises  from  over- 
looking the  indispensable  connection  that  thej^  sustain  to  the  lohole  Divine  Plan.  Con- 
sidering miracles  isolated  from  the  intent  they  subserve,  is  but  a  narrow  view  ;  and  if 
they  did  not  exist  in  a  Book  relating  to  the  Supernatural,  this  would  be  speedily  claimed 
as  a  main  difficulty  to  its  acceptance.  It  will  not  answer  to  simply  contend,  as  Rohr  (so 
Castellar),  that  we  need  not  give  the  miraculous  to  Christ,  it  being  sufficient  to  follow 
Him,  for  this  utterly  destroys  the  distinctive  Biblical  Christ.  It  is  the  miraculous,  mira- 
cle-working Christ,  or  none  ;  there  is  no  half-way  reception  possible  with  consistency. 


Prop.  7.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  89 

Hence  the  position  of  some  Christian  writers  is  fatal  to  the  integrity  of  Scrii^ture.  Thus 
e.g.  The  Ch.  Union  (July  11th,  1877)  regards  miracles  as  unessential  ;  so  that  Jonah's 
account  (referred  to  and  indorsed  by  Jesus)  may  be  rejected  without  detriment,  and  so 
Elisha's  miracle  of  the  axe-head,  etc.  Such  laxity  invalidates  Scripture,  engendering 
grave  doubt,  etc.  (Comp.  Art.  Recent  Rationalism  in  the  Church  of  England,  in  the  North 
Brit.  Review,  I860)  ;  and  the  antagonism  resulting  is  not  lessened  when  it  is  said  that 
"  the  miracles  are  historic  fact,  but  they  are  not  proofs  of  Christianity"  (so  J.  Freeman 
Clarke  in  The  Ch.  Union,  Sept.  12th,  1877).  Unbelief  and  doubt  is,  as  predicted  (see 
Prop.  180),  extending  itself.  Leathes  {The  Beligion  of  Christ,  Pref.  p.  49,  etc.),  in  reply 
to  the  author  of  ISupern.  Religion,  who  declares  "  the  Revelation  rests  upon  miracles, 
which  have  nothing  to  rest  upon  but  the  Revelation,"  shows  how  the  establishment  of 
Christianity,  before  and  since  the  New  Test,  literature  was  given,  in  and  through  Jesus 
Christ,  is  corroborative  of  the  miraculous,  and  that  the  miraculous  must,  as  an  antecedent, 
have  preceded  in  order  to  account  for  the  literature  and  the  results.  Various  writers 
{e.g.  Row,  Ev.  Chris,  p.  137)  have  remarked  that  those  unbelievers  who  attribute,  owing 
to  the  introduction  of  miracles,  so  much  credulity,  superstition,  and  ignorance  to  the 
Jews  and  primitive  Christians,  only  "  increase  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  moral 
teaching  of  the  New  Test,  as  the  natural  product  of  the  soil."  The  greater  the 
abuse  heaped  upon  the  inspired  writers,  the  greater  the  embarrassments  of  unbelief  to 
explain  how  such  could  possibly  give  us  the  doctrines  produced.  This  obstacle  to  consist- 
ency is  evidently  felt  by  unbelievers,  and,  therefore,  some  of  them  (as  Renan  and  others) 
highly  eulogize  before  condemning,  praise  m  eloquent  terms  while  undermining  the  mi- 
raculous. Dr.  Sprecher  {Groundio.  TJieol.  Div.  2)  points  out  the  contradictions,  conces- 
sions, etc.,  in  which  unbelieving  Theists  involve  themselves  in  trying  to  invalidate  the 
historical  evidence  of  miracles,  and  to  explain  Evangelical  history  without  their  admis- 
sion. In  this  able  Apology  in  behalf  of  Divine  Revelation  and  the  Supernatural,  he  con- 
trasts the  vast  revolution  produced  by  the  same  in  human  life  and  society  with  the 
teachings  and  results  of  the  great  philosophers,  and  asks  Jioio  we  are  to  account  for  the 
great  difference,  whether  through  Naturalism  or  through  Christian  ideas  given  by  special 
revelation  and  supported  by  the  miraculous. 

Obs.  1.  God  ill  kindness  accommodates  Himself  to  human  weakness  ; 
for  telling  ns  that  the  supernatural  is  closely  allied  with  the  natural  in  the 
kingdom  ;  that  the  kingdom  itself  shall  be  pervaded  with  a  power  above 
nature  in  order  to  control,  recreate,  and  make  nature  subserve  the  Divine 
purpose  ;  He,  knowing  that  if  direci  testimony  is  not  given  a  serious  flaw 
will  remain,  bestows  us  evidences,  through  miracles,  of  the  all-pervading 
supernatural.  These  are  so  related  to  the  kingdom  that  they  cannot  be 
separated  from  it  without  mutual  defacement.  Thus  it  is  represented  by 
Jesus  Himself  (Matt.  12  :  28),  "  But  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  (or  as  some,  upon)  you." 
Here  we  have,  1.  The  relationship  existing  between  the  kingdom  and 
miracles  ;  that  without  the  latter  the  former  cannot  be  revealed.  2.  That 
miracles  are  a  manifestation  of  possessed  power,  which  Jesus  will  exert 
when  He  establishes  His  kingdom.  3.  That  the  miraculous  casting  out 
of  devils,  or  Satan,  is  an  event  connected  with  the  kingdom,  and  its  accom- 
plishment through  Jesus  is  thus  verified  as  predicted,  e.g.,  Rev.  20  : 1-6. 
4.  That  the  miraculous  casting  out  of  devils  by  Jesus  is  a  premonition, 
anticipating,  foreshowing,  or  foreshadowing  (Greek,  Lange,  Com.  vol.  1,  p. 
223,  conveys  idea  of  anticipating,  etc.),  like  the  transfiguration,  of  the 
kingdom  itself.  Th(7  miracles  then  are  assurances  vouchsafed  that  the 
kingdom  will  come  as  it  is  predicted.  The  miracles  of  Jesus  are  so  varied 
and  significant  in  the  light  of  the  kingdom  that  it  can  be  readily  perceived 
how  tliey  give  us  the  needed  confidence  in  its  several  requirements  and 
aspects.  The  resurrection  of  dead  ones  is  connected  with  the  kingdom  ; 
that  the  keys  of  death  hang  at  Christ's  girdle  is  shown  in  the  miracles  of 
the  raising  of  the  daughter  of  Jairus,  the  widow's  son,  and  of  Lazarus, 


90  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  7. 

when  just  dead,  carried  out  to  burial,  and  already  in  the  corrupting  em- 
brace of  the  tomb.  Sickness  and  death  are  banished  from  the  inheritors 
of  the  kingdom  ;  the  numerous  miracles  of  healiug  various  sicknesses  and 
of  restoring  the  dying,  establish  the  power  existing  that  can  perform  it. 
The  utmost  perfection  of  body  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  kingdom  ;  this  is 
foreshadowed  by  the  removal  of  blindness,  lameness,  deafness,  and  dumb- 
ness. Hunger,  thirst,  famine,  etc.,  give  place  to  plenty  in  the  kingdom  ; 
the  miracles  of  feeding  thousands  attest  to  the  predicted  power  that  will 
accomplish  it.  The  natural  world  is  to  be  completely  under  the  Messiah's 
control  in  that  kingdom  ;  the  miracles  of  the  draught  of  fishes,  the  tem- 
pest stilled,  the  ship  at  its  destination,  the  walking  on  the  sea,  the  fish 
bringing  the  tribute  money,  the^barren  fig-tree  destroyed,  and  the  much- 
ridiculed  one  of  water  changed  into  wine,  indicate  that  lie  who  sets  up 
this  kingdom  has  indeed  power  over  nature.  The  spiritual,  unseen,  invisi- 
ble world  is  to  be,  as  foretold,  in  contact  and  communication  with  this 
kingdom  ;  and  this  Jesus  verifies  by  the  miracles  of  the  transfiguration, 
the  demoniac  cured,  the  legion  of  devils  cast  out,  passing  uuseen  through 
the  multitude,  and  by  those  of  His  own  death,  resurrection  and  ascension. 
Indeed  there  is  scarcely  a  feature  of  this  kingdom  foretold  which  is  to  be 
formed  by  the  special  work  of  the  Divine,  that  is  not  also  confirmed  to  us 
by  some  glimpses  of  the  Power  that  shall  bring  them  forth.  The  kingdom 
— the  end — is  designed  to  remove  the  curse  from  man  and  nature,  and  to 
impart  the  most  extraordinary  blessings  to  renewed  man  and  nature,  but 
all  this  is  to  be  done  through  One  who,  it  is  said,  shall  exert  supernatural 
power  to  perform  it.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  expect  that  as  part  of 
the  developing  of  the  plan  itself,  that  when  He  first  comes,  through  whom 
man  and  nature  are  to  be  regenerated,  a  manifestation  of  power — more 
abundant  and  superior  to  everything  preceding — over  man  and  nature 
should  be  exhibited,  to  confirm  our  faith  in  Him  and  in  His  kingdom. 
This  is  done,  and  an  appeal  is  made  to  it.  We  are  confident  that  the  best, 
most  logical  defence  of  the  miracles  of  Christ  aud  of  the  Bible  is  in  the 
line  here  stated,  viz.,  regarding  them  as  indicative  and  corroborative  o) 
God^s  promises  relating  to  the  future  destiny  of  the  Churcli  and  ivorlcl. 
The  miracles  are  thus  found  to  be  essential,  to  answer  a  divine  purpose,  to 
supply  a  requisite  evidence  ;  and  hence  in  the  Scriptures  they  are  called 
"  signs  "  {orjjieia)  of  something^  else  intended  ;  signs  that  the  Word  shall  be 
fulfilled  in  the  exertion  of  power. 

We  do  not  hold  with  Paley  and  others  that  the  miracles  were  only  indispensable 
as  the  credentials  of  the  divine  mission  of  Jesus.  At  the  same  time  w^e  have  no  sympa- 
thy with  those  who  assert  {Essays  and  Bevlews)  that  miracles  cannot  prove  that  men  are 
divinely  sent  as  messengers  or  teachers.  As  to  the  former,  they  subserve  much  more  ;  and 
as  to  the  latter,  it  is  sufficient  to  oppose  Christ's  sayings,  Matt.  11  : 5,  20  ;  John  .5  :  36  ; 
Matt.  10  : 1-8  ;  John  20  :  30,  31,  and  10  :  25,  37,  38  ;  Acts  2  :  22,  etc.  They  possess  this 
tendency  to  a  certain  extent  (for,  after  all,  He  was  rejected  as  unbelievers  have  remarked, 
Duke  of  Somerset's  Ch.  Theol.  p.  48),  but  they  retain  a  higher  significancy  which  in- 
cludes that  of  His  coming  from  the  Father  and  the  Father  beiijg  in  Him,  viz.,  that  He 
truly  possessed  the  power  to  establish  the  kingdom  as  foretold^-  and  therefore  these  creden- 
tials  are  operative,  for  believers,  to  the  time  when  this  same  power  will  again  in  large 
measure  be  manifested.  Wardlaw  (On  Miracles)  takes  the  position  that  the  miracle 
proves  the  doctrine,  while  French  (On  Miracles)  makes  the  doctrine  prove  the  miracle. 
Our  view  combines  the  two,  seeing  that  they  are  inseparably  related  (Comp.  Art.  Miracles 
and  their  Counterfeits,  Princeton  Review,  1856).  Doctrine,  as  contained  in  projihecy  and 
promise,  brought  forth  the  miracle,  and  the  latter  confirms  the  truthfulness  of  the 
former.     The  doctrine  developed  the  ''  signs,"  and  the  "  signs"  are  a  testimony  of  the 


Prop.  ?.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  91 

verification  of  the  doctrine.  The  miracle-working  power  of  Jesus  was  the  more  neces- 
sarily exerted  in  view,  as  we  shall  show  hereafter,  of  the  postponement  of  the  kingdom. 
For,  the  Power  not  being  exerted  in  erecting  the  kingdom  as  predicted  by  the  prophets, 
— a  kingdom  free  from  all  suffering  and  evil — a  snffickncy  (John  11  :  11)  is  shown  to  con- 
vince the  thoughtful  and  reflecting  that  it  null  yet  be  accomplished  ;  that  the  teaching  of 
the  Bible  leads  us  to  expect  miracles,  and  that  their  occurrence  shows  that  we  do  not 
misapiarehend  the  things  taught.  They  consequently  have  force  only  with  those  who  are 
willing  to  receive  the  Bible  in  its  connected  teaching.  They  are  not,  in  themselves,  pri- 
mary truths,  but  are  given  to  attest  to  and  enlarge  truth  previously  given,  and  which 
still  remains  to  be  fulfilled.  Such  is  their  position  in  Revelation  itself,  that  fhej  attest 
to  its  truthfulness,  not  only  to  the  past  {e.g.  that  creation  is  a  miracle,  that  proj^hecy  is  Po 
miracle,  etc.),  but  to  the  future  {e.g.  the  kingdom),  and  become  part  of  the  truth  itself, 
revealing  and  manifesting  the  agency  through  which  the  promises  of  God  are  to  be  real- 
ized. Fred.  Den.  Maurice,  in  his  works,  has  well  observed  that  the  signs  of  the  kingdom 
are  identical  with  the  miracles  of  the  kingdom,  but  he  misapprehends  the  nature  of  the 
kingdom  and  makes  the  signs  emblematical  o£  the  coming  of  a  spiritual  power.  They, 
of  course,  include  a  spiritual  power  through  which  they  are  exerted,  bat  the  work  itself, 
as  all  prophecy  and  promise  insists,  will  be  externally  manifested.  The  miracles,  there- 
fore, are  not  types  of  something  else,  but  signs,  real  earnests,  inchoate  foretastes,  of  some- 
thing in  the  same  line,  greater,  in  the  future.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  much  sneered  at  miracle  of 
Cana,  which  some  writers,  in  the  West.  Beview,  assert  cannot  have  any  moral  teaching, 
most  strikingly  shows  Christ's  power  over  nature,  its  subjection  to  His  control,  and  one 
too  which  is  necessary  to  be  wielded  if  the  Millennial  jDredictions  are  ever  to  be  realized 
(ComiD.  Farrar,  Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  ch.  11).  Therefore  the  attack  against  miracles  is  also 
one  of  primary  importance  ;  if  those  attacks  are  successful  and  miracles  are  to  be  dis- 
carded, then  the  truths  which  lead  to  the  miracles,  and  to  which  the  miracles  attest, 
suffer  ;  Christ's  power  is  lessened  and  no  assurance  is  given  of  His  ability  to  fulfil  the 
prophets.  The  miraculous,  however  some  semi-believers  may  close  their  eyes  to  the 
fact,  is  a  vital  one.  But  to  make  the  attack  comi^lete  and  the  defence  perfect,  the  real 
point  for  both  is  too  much  overlooked,  viz..  Does  the  kingdom  which  the  Bible  predicts 
as  the  Divine  Purpose,  really  require  miraculous  intervention,  and  is  such  a  kingdom,  in 
its  Plan  and  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  humanity,  worthy  of  credence  ?  If  it  can  be 
shown  that  the  kingdom  does  not  demand  them,  that  they  are  not  desirable  to  be  pressed 
into  the  service  for  man  and  nature,  that  there  is  some  other  way  to  secure  the  blessings 
contemplated  by  them  instead  of  a  resort,  to  the  Supernatural,  then  the  miraculous  may 
be  discarded  as  a  superfluity,  an  excrescence  ;  otherwise,  until  this  can  be  alleged,  pru- 
dence and  wisdom  dictate  that  they  be  regarded  as  an  indispensable  portion  of  a  con- 
nected Divine  Plan,  an  integral  jxtrt  of  Revelation,  the  main  purpose  of  which  is  to  instruct 
us  concerning  the  kingdom,  giving  us  confidence  in  its  ultimate  establishment.  If  man 
and  nature  can  form  such  a  kingdom,  free  from  existing  evils,  without  miraculous  power, 
or  if  such  a  kingdom  manifested  by  miraculous  power  is  not  desirable,  not  what  man 
craves,  not  worthy  of  man  and  God,  let  this  be  established  by  adducing  proof,  and  it  will 
at  once  destroy,  what  other  arguments  fail  to  do,  the  credibility  of  miracles.  Until  this 
is  done  it  would  be  folly  to  yield  up  that  which  is  founded  on  the  very  nature  and  mani- 
festation of  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  deliverance  and  entrance  of  the  Jews  into  the 
promised  land,  Canaan,  was  preceded  by  miraculous  events  of  the  most  astounding 
nature  ;  these  are  only  "  signs"  of  those  of  a  still  more  extraordinary  character,  under 
the  One  greater  than  Moses,  at  the  future  deliverance  and  entrance  of  the  people  of  God 
into  the  promised  inheritance  of  the  kingdom.  The  Head  of  a  Theocracy  is  a  Supernatu- 
ral Being,  and  when  such  a  Theocracy  is  established,  the  Supernatural  will,  more  or  less, 
exhibit  itself  in  behalf  of  the  same,  and  as  indicative  of  the  existing  Rulership.  But 
however  much  we  may  advance  this  reasoning  in  favor  of  the  miraculous,  it  must  ever  be 
remembered  that  an  a^Dpeal  to  reason  can  never  overcome  prejudice  excited  against  the 
supernatural,  through  aversion  to  moral  and  religious  truth,  so  intimately  blended  with 
it.  Jesus,  who  knew  man,  teaches  us,  in  the  Parable  of  the  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus,  the 
impotency  of  miracles  to  benefit  those  who  wilfully  turn  away  from  the  truth  already 
given.  The  fact  is,  that  to  appreciate  miracles  properly,  there  must  first  be  some  knowl- 
edge of  other  and  x)rececling  truths. 

Obs.  2.  The  number  and  variety  of  definitions  given  to  miracles  indicate 
the  limited  nature  of  human  knowledge  ;  we  are  not  greatly  concerned  in 
the  adoption  of  anyone  specially,  seeing  that  from  our  standpoint  we  could 


92  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  7. 

accept  of  nearly  all,  even  of  some  of  those  given  by  infidels.  Strauss's 
might  he  received,  viz.,  that  a  miracle  is  "an  event  which,  inexplicable 
from  the  operation  of  finite  causalities,  appears  to  be  an  immediate  inter- 
ference of  the  Supreme,  Infinite  Cause,  or  of  God  Himself."  Kenan's 
might  be  adoj)ted,  saving  the  word  "  deranging  "  (which  unbelief  suggests), 
viz.,  that  it  is  "  the  special  interposition  of  Deity  in  the  physical  and 
psychological  order  of  the  world,  deranging  the  course  of  events."  To 
oppose  the  attacks  of  unbelieving  scientists,  some  writers  (as  e.g.  Birks 
in  The  Bible  and  Modern  Thouglit)  oppose  the  old  idea  that  miracles 
are  a  reversal  or  suspension  of  nature,  contending  for  a  higher  law  operat- 
ing in  union  and  harmony  with  nature,  and  that  it  is  not  requisite  to  insist 
in  any  case  upon  "  a  direct  act  of  God  in  contrast  to  all  agency  of  second 
causes,  and  by  an  exercise  of  power  strictly  and  exclusively  divine,"  on  the 
ground  that  it  would  otherwise  require  too  great  knowledge  both  of  nature 
and  God  to  tell  when  a  miracle  is  performed.  Hence  miracles  are  divided 
into  immediate,  mediate,  and  improper,  and  a  definition,  sufficiently  com- 
prehensive, to  include  them  is  given  :  that  they  are  "  unusual  events  not 
within  the  ordinary  power  of  mau,  nor  capable  of  being  foreseen  by  man's 
actual  knowledge  of  second  causes,  and  wrought  or  announced  by  professed 
messengers  of  God  to  confirm  the  reality  of  the  message."  The  explana- 
tions of  the  older  theologians  (excepting  Augustine's  and  a  few  others)  are 
discarded  as  not  covering  objections.  The  interesting  and  valuable 
writings  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle  {^The  Reign  of  Law),  Dr.  McCosh  (77^6 
Supernatural  in  Relation  to  the  JVrt/?ir«Z),  Thompson  {Ch.  Theism),  etc., 
take  the  position,  undoubtedly  correct,  that  laws  exist  outside  of  those 
known,  and  that  the  Divine  Will  can  employ  such  laws  whenever  it  is  de- 
sirable. Others  {e.g.  Proctor,  Other  Worlds  than  Ours)  make  miracles 
a  resultant  of  physical  law,  being  included  in  the  predetermined  scheme. 
The  miraculous  is  therefore  made  a  resultant  of  the  exercise  of  otlier  un- 
known hiAVS  superior  to  those  known  in  nature.  Wliatever  truth  there  is 
in  such  a  position,  and  however  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the  objections 
of  unbelieving  philosophy,    the  biblical  statement  (e.g.  Acts  2  :  22,  Jno. 

3  :  2,  Rom.  15  :  19,  etc.)  does  not  require  it.  The  following  reasons  urge 
us  to  discard  the  commendable  and  suggestive  efforts  in  this  direction  : 
1.  It  too  much  limits  the  power  of  God,  exalting  law  in  place  of  God. 
For  the  Bible,  on  its  face,  assumes  (Ex.  10  :  2,  Eph.  3  :  20)  that  God  is  able 
both  to  work  with  existing,  seen  and  unseen,  means,  agencies,  and  laws, 
and  to  create  and  perform  through  His  2vill  alone  (Heb.  2  :  4,  1  Cor.  12  :  11, 
Dan.  4  :  35)  all  things,  even,  if  necessary,  to  introduce  new  laws  (Matt. 
19  :26,  Mark  10  :  25,  Luke  1  :  37,  and  18  :  27),  etc.  We  are  expressly 
told  not  to  limit  the  ability  of  God  and  not  to  place  the  Creator  in  an  atti- 
tude which  binds  Him  subserviently  to  His  own  creation,  even  if  the  latter 
be   law.      2.  It  in  a  great   measure  destroys  the  personality    {e.g.  Deut. 

4  :  32,  33,  34,  35,  36,  39,  Ex.  15  :  11,  Deut.  3  :  24)  of  Divine  interference, 
attributing  that  to  law  which  the  Bible  represents  as  the  result  of  personal 
Divine  attributes  {e.g.  Dan.  2  :  19-23,  Ex.  7  :  5,  and  15  : 1).  3.  It  dimin- 
ishes the  force  of  scripture  language  that  expressly  asserts  the  immediate 
agency  of  God  {e.g.  Ex.  3  :  20  and  6  :  6,  7,  Phil.  3  :  21,  Gen.  18  :  19). 
4.  It  is  to  some  extent  contradictory,  since  it  in  some  cases  allows  imme- 
diate miracles.  5.  It  lowers  the  validity  of  miracles  by  making  them  the 
results  of  causes  now  beyond  our  knowledge,  but  which  as  knowledge  in- 
creases   may,   after    all,  be  found   natural.     6.  With  all  the  concessions 


Prop.  7.]  the  theocratic  ki]n-gdo:h.  93 

that  it  makes,  it  is  unable  to  point  out  the  laws  through  wliich  the  miracles 
are  performed,  and  asks  us  to  take  them  for  granted.  7.  But  the  main 
reason  which  leads  us  to  a  rejection  of  prevailing  theories  is  the  following  : 
miracles  are  designed  to  throw  light  upon,  and  confirm  the  predictions  of 
God  relating  to  the  final  result,  the  glorious,  miraculous  establishment  of 
the  kingdom.  Now  in  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  this  kingdom  we  have 
the  moRt  explicit  declarations  that  Jesus  Christ  Himself  will  change,  renew, 
re-create  all  things  ;  that  laws  of  nature  now  existing  shall  be  reversed,  or 
modified,  or  suspended  ;  that  new  laws  and  new  forces  shall  be  introduced  ; 
that  the  present  order  of  things  shall  give  place  to  a  renewed  order  ;  and 
that  the  power  which  produces  all  this  is  not  found  in  nature  or  in  laws 
outside  of  nature,  but  only  in  God.  Jesus  is  represented  as  personally 
coming  (jusfc  as  God  personally  came  at  the  establishment  of  the  theocracy 
at  Mt.  Sinai),  and  directly  intervening  in  the  performance  of  this  mighty 
work  of  restoring  forfeited  blessings  and  adding  nev/  ones,  and  this  is 
claimed  as  a  peculiar,  distinctive  j^ersonal  prerogative.  Looking  thus  at 
the  contemplated  end,  and  seeing  how  the  miraculous  power  then  exerted 
is  so  far  removed  from  such  definitions,  it  is  impossible  to  receive  entirely 
explanations  which  attribute  to  law  what  the  Word  applies  to  Christ  per- 
sonally—thus introducing  a  defect,  which,  if  logically  carried  onivard,  for- 
bids our  receiving  the  predictions  relating  to  the  future  as  presented.  The 
final  manifestation  of  the  miraculous,  which  includes  a  re-creation,  a 
removal  of  law  under  which  a  sin-cursed  earth  groans,  determines  for  us 
that  the  miraculous  proofs  given  to  show  that  it  will  be  realized  are  pre- 
cisely in  the  same  category,  and  thus  confirmatory  of  it.  The  unity  of 
Scripture  is  thus  preserved.  By  this  attitude  it  is  not  denied  that  God 
"may  and  does  also  work  through  higher  lav/s  already  established  and  be- 
yond our  present  domain  of  knowledge  (which  Birks,  Dr.  McCosh,  etc., 
have  eloquently  portrayed),  but  Avith  this  it  ]s  insisted  that  He  may  and 
does,  independently  of  established  law,  exercise  His  power  in  the  suspen- 
sion, reversal,  or  removal  of  existing  law,  or,  in  other  words,  that  His 
l^ower  as  Creator,  in  ■  the  domain  of  the  miraculous,  is  not  limited  by 
what  He  has  done  or  has  established,  but  is  exercised  according  to 
His  own  pleasure.  It  seems  to  us,  according  to  the  biblical  idea,  a  low 
estimate  of  God,  which  w^ould  make,  either  in  nature  or  in  that  beyond  it, 
all  things  under  fixed,  invariable,  unchangeable  laws,  through  which  alone 
the  Divine  Institutor  of  them  can  work. 


This  position  of  the  author  may  be  regarded  as  "  ultra"  or  "  old-fashioned  "  after  so 
many  recent  writers  making  miracle  no  violation  or  suspension  of  the  laws  of  Nature,  but 
simply  "  the  intervention  of  some  higher  law,  superseding  the  action  of  some  lower 
one."  This  definition  may  indeed  (Woollaston,  Butler,  Babljage,  Arnold)  api:)ly  to  some 
cases,  but  it  is  too  sweeping  to  embrace  all  ;  it  is  opposed  to  the  notion  of  miracle  as 
entertained  by  the  ordinary  Bible  reader,  and  to  the  conception  of  Omnipotence  as  given 
in  the  Word.  No  one,  unless  urged  to  it  by  a  theory,  can  fail  to  see  that  the  power  to 
work  a  miracle  is  ascribed  to  direct  Divine  power,  for  with  God,  it  is  alleged,  all  things 
are  possible,  nothing  is  too  hard,  and  He  is  placed  above  all  existing  laws,  able  to  sus- 
pend, control,  etc.,  them  at  Will.  The  appeal  only  to  a  higher  law,  however  true  in  some 
instances,  is  not  sustained  by  the  spirit  of  the  narratives.  Thus,  e.g.,  Jesus  is  repre- 
sented as  possessing  the  power  of  working  wonders  in  Himself,  and  not  as  using  and 
applying  some  existing  but  hitherto  unknown  law.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the 
miraculous  conception  of  Jesus,  etc.,  are  not  claimed  as  the  exertion  of  some  higher  law 
making  miracles  "  parts  of  some  more  comprehensive  system,"  but  as  the  result  of  direct 
Divine  power,  introducing  a  new  arrangement  according  with  a  i)revious  i^lan.     The 


94  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  7. 

primitive  and  ordinary  Clinrcli  view  {e.rj.  Bacon,  Boyle,  Newton,  Locke)  of  miracles, 
ascribing  them  to  God's  power,  making  all  laws  subservient  to  His  will,  gives  a  more 
exalted  and  ennobling  conception  of  God,  superior  to  all  law,  etc.,  than  more  modernized 
ideas.  All  concessions,  away  from  the  Biblical  notion,  will  never  make  a  single  convert 
of  unbelievers,  since  such  are  wise  enough  to  see  the  departure  from  the  Scripture,  and 
they  feel  that  the  laws,  so  much  insisted  upon,  are  to  be  received  as  an  inference.*  The 
Word,  if  it  possesses  any  force  whatever,  does  teach  that  miracles  are  the  evidence  or 
result  of  Divine  interposition,  of  the  direct  interference  of  a  Power  which,  notwithstand- 
ing the  ordinary  laws  of  nature  in  existence,  is  able  to  do  all  things.  The  opposition  to 
this  Biblical  conception  is  varied,  extending  from  gross  unbelief  to  concessions  to  un- 
belief. Thus,  e.g.,  we  have  miracles  (1)  denounced  as  imposition  or  ]uggling  tricks  ; 
(2)  denied  as  impossible  and  incredible,  owing  to  the  fixed  laws  of  nature  ;  (3)  rejected 
on  the  ground,  not  of  impossibility  but  of  weakness,  imperfection  in  the  Creator  ; 
(4)  resulting  from  the  intelligence  of  the  parties  performing  them  taking  advantage  of 
laws  of  Nature,  etc.,  unknown  to  their  fellows  ;  (5)  mythical,  being  introduced  to  exalt 
certain  characters  ;  (6)  the  product  of  a  superior  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  of 
spirit,  being  wrought  in  harmony  with  both  ;  (7)  the  work  of  mesmerism,  spiritualism, 
etc.  ;  (8)  phenomena  (Proctor)  that  occurred  in  a  fixed  series  through  laws  which  are 
above  our  comprehension  but  act  in  unison  with  those  of  which  we  have  cognizance  ; 
(9)  a  preformation  (Bonnet)  "  according  to  which  God  has  a  priori  included  the  miracles 
in  the  course  of  nature  ;"  (10)  a  "  quickening  of  the  processes  of  nature" — what 
Olshausen  applies  to  some  are  made  by  others  to  suit  all  ;  (11)  left  undecided  (Kant), 
"  it  being  neither  possible  absolutely  to  prove  the  reality  of  miracles,  nor  can  their  pos- 
sibility be  absolutely  denied  ;"  (12)  deviating  (so  Augustine,  Hagenbach's  His.  of  Dog. 
vol.  1,  s.  118,  and  adopted  by  Schleiermacher)  not  so  much  from  the  order  of  nature  in 
general  as  from  that  particular  order  of  nature  known  to  us  ;  (13)  the  results  of  higher 
and  unknown  laws  either  in  nature  or  in  the  spiritual  world.  These  and  others  (Comp. 
e.g.  Lange's  Com.  vol.  1,  pp.  266  and  271)  are  all  opposed  to  the  Biblical  idea.  This  is 
seen  (a)  in  the  Scripture  language  ;  (6)  in  the  definitions  so  generally  and  at  one  time 
universally  held  as  the  teaching  of  the  Bible,  and  which  were  only  modified  to  suit  mod- 


*  Christian  Apologists,  who  make  such  dangerous  concessions  to  unbelief  (under  the 
delusive  hope  of  conciliating),  may  learn  a  lesson  from  the  acknowledgments  of  un- 
believers. Thus,  e.g.  Dr.  Carpenter  in  his  Art.  On  the  Fallacies  of  Testimony  respect- 
ing the  Supernatural  {Pop.  Science  Monthly  March,  1876)  denounces  the  miraculous,  and, 
referring  to  these  Apologists  who  deem  it  requisite  to  justify  them  by  weakening  their 
force,  scornfully  remarks  that  "  orthodox  theologians"  are  regarding  "  the  miracles  of 
the  New  Test,  rather  as  incumbrances  than  as  props  to  what  is  essential  to  Chris- 
tianity." While  rejecting  miracles  as  a  delusion,  he  frankly  makes  this  acknowledg- 
ment :  "  But  the  Scientific  Theist  who  regards  the  so-called  '  laws  of  Nature  '  as  nothing 
else  than  man's  expressions  of  so  much  of  the  divine  order  as  it  lies  within  his  power  to 
discern,  and  who  looks  at  the  interruptedness  of  this  order  as  the  highest  evidence  of  its 
original  perfection,  need  find  (as  it  seems  to  me)  no  abstract  difficulty  in  the  conception 
that  the  Author  of  Nature  can,  if  He  will,  occasionally  depart  from  it.  And  hence,  as  I 
deem  it  presumptuous  to  deny  that  there  might  be  occasions  which,  in  his  wisdom,  may 
require  such  departure,  I  am  not  conscious  of  any  such  scientific  '  prepossessions*' 
against  miracles  as  would  prevent  me  from  accepting  them  as  facts,  if  trustworthy  evi- 
dence of  their  reality  could  be  adduced.  The  question  with  me,  therefore,  is  simply, 
'  Have  we  any  adequate  historical  ground  for  the  belief  that  such  departure  has  ever 
taken  place  ?  '  "  He  shields  himself  behind  the  "  prepossessions' '  of  the  writers  and  wit- 
nesses, and  makes  a  parade  of  contemporary  wonders  (arising  from  spiritualism,  mesmer- 
ism, etc.),  which  cannot  endure  scientific  scrutiny  (being  explained  by  odylism,  electro- 
biology,  physic-force,  etc.,  as  natural  results),  thus  ignoring  the  higher  testimony,  ap- 
pealing to  reason  in  favor  of  miracles,  viz.,  their  relation  to  a  historical  Divine  Plan, 
which  corroborates  and  enforces  the  witnesses.  He  confines  himself  to  a  continuity  and 
perpetuity  of  nature  which  (as  Mansel  says  of  Schleiermacher's  position)  makes  nature 
rigid,  not  elastic,  opposed  to  the  introduction  of  new  forces  and  incapable  of  adapta- 
tion— an  opinion  contrary  to  experience,  as  seen  in  the  voluntary  actions  of  men. 
(Comp.  Cook's  Lee.  "Huxley  and  Tyndall  on  Evolution,"  M'Cosh's  "  Supernatural  in 
relation  to  the  Natural,"  Fisher's  "  Supernatural  Origin  of  Religion,"  Fowler's  "  Moz- 
ley  and  Tyndall  on  Miracles,"  the  Archb.  of  York  on  "  Limits  of  Philosophical  In- 
quiry," etc.) 


Prop.  7.]  the  theoceatic  ki^-gdom.  95 

ern  thought  ;  and  (c)  in  the  fact  that  the  most  determined  attacks  upon  the  miracles, 
from  the  daj^s  of  Spinoza  and  Hume,  proceed  on  the  assumption  that  if  they  can  be  dis- 
credited, it  goes  far  to  prove  that  there  is  no  overruling  Supernatural  Power  which  can 
and  does  control  all  things.  Miracles  too  are  invariably  represented  as  dependent  upon 
God,  and  not  as  the  result  of  a  fortuitous  or  happy  coincidence.  Hence  such  definitions 
as  given  by  the  Spiritualist  Convention,  held  at  Eochester,  N.Y,,  18G8,  must  be  dis- 
carded, viz.,  that  they"  have  been  produced  in  harmony  with  Universal  laws,  and  hence 
may  be  repeated  at  any  time  under  suitable  conditions."  A  number  of  miracles  are  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  harmonious  working  of  existing  natural  law,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  resiir- 
rection  of  dead  ones,  etc.,  so  that  to  make  miracles  "  nature  transfigured  by  the  spirit," 
*'  nature  controlled  by  the  will,"  or  "  nature  determined  by  the  Spirit,"  is  mere  fancy, 
so  long  as  it  excludes  the  direct  power  of  God.  Therefore  those  definitions  which  in- 
clude a  reference  to  the  Divine  i^ower  are  alone  in  accord  with  the  Scriptures.  One  of 
the  best  is  given  by  Van  Oosterzee  {(Jh.  Dog.  vol.  1,  p.  127)  :  "  A  miracle  is  an  entirely 
extraordinary  phenomenon  in  the  domain  of  natural  or  spiritual  life,  which  cannot  be 
explained  from  the  course  of  nature  as  it  is  known  to  us,  and  must  therefore  have  been 
brought  about  by  a  direct  operation  of  God's  Almighty  Will,  in  order  to  attain  unto  a  defi- 
nite object."  Oosterzee  justly  remarks  that  the  definition  must  be  to  some  extent  defect- 
ive from  our  inability  to  see  one  side  of  the  miracle,  viz.,  its  operating  cause.  This 
defect,  however,  is  supplied  to  the  believer  by  the  Word,  viz.,  that  it  is  the  exertion  of 
God's  power  either  directly  or  as  communicated  to  others.  Fuchs'  definition  {Bremen 
Lectures,  Lee.  3)  opposes  the  defectiveness  of  the  current  view  that  "  a  miracle  is  an 
event  which  cannot  be  explained  from  the  known  laws  of  nature"  on  the  ground  that 
(1)  it  draws  no  firm  line  between  the  miraculous  and  the  natural,  leaving  the  way  open 
of  having,  as  knowledge  progresses,  all  the  former  resolved  into  the  latter  ;  and  (2)  that 
it  is  only  a  negative  definition,  telling  us  what  a  miracle  is  not,  and  leaving  the  nature  of 
the  miracle  untouched.  Hence  he  gives  the  following  :  "  A  miracle  is  the  entrance  of  the 
Supernatural  into  the  connection  of  the  natural,  the  intervention  of  a  higher  order  of 
things  into  the  lower,  the  immediate  interposition  of  a  God  above  the  world  in  the  course  of 
the  world  and  nature."  Looking  at  the  kingdom,  which  is  ultimately  to  be  inaugurated 
by  the  special  intervention  of  the  Supernatural  in  the  Person  of  the  Theocratic  King,  it  is 
easy  to  see  that  the  "  signs"  proceed  from  the  same  Supernatural  source.  Christlieb's 
{Mod.  Douht)  definition  is  excellent  wdth  the  exception  of  the  last  clause.  He  says  : 
*'  Miracles  are  unique  and  extraordinary  manifestations  of  divine  power,  which  influence 
nature  in  a  manner  incomprehensible  to  our  empirical  knowledge,  but  always  in  accord- 
ance with  some  moral  or  spiritual  end.  Or,  more  exactly,  they  are  creative  acts  of  God, 
i.e.,  supernatural  exertions  of  power  upon  certain  points  of  Nature's  domain,  through  which, 
by  virtue  of  His  own  miglit  already  working  in  the  course  of  nature,  God,  for  the  further- 
ance of  His  kingdom,  brings  forth  some  new  thing  which  natural  substances  or  causali- 
ties could  not  have  produced  by  themselves,  but  which — and  this  must  not  be  overlooked 
— as  soon  as  they  have  taken  place,  range  themselves  in  the  natural  course  of  things,  with- 
out any  disturbance  arising  on  their  account."  He  correctly  argues  them  to  be  "  the 
effects  of  God's  power,"  "  supernatural  phenomena,"  "  isolated  manifestations  of  a 
higher  order  of  things,"  "  a  pledge  of  His  truth  and  faithfulness  ;  an  earnest  of  the 
future  consummation  of  His  kingdom,"  etc.,  but  the  last  clause,  "  range  themselves  in 
the  natural  course  of  things,"  is  liable  to  misinterpretation.  If  he  means  that  they  still 
retain,  while  thus  connected  with  the  natural,  their  specific  miraculous  character,  he  is 
correct  ;  but  if  he  conveys  the  idea  that  they  must  necessarily,  when  performed,  thus 
range  themselves  with  the  natural,  be  in  harmony  with  it,  he  is  evidently  wrong,  as  seen, 
e.g.  in  the  Sun's  standing  still  (a  temporary  miracle),  in  the  transfiguration  (a  i:)refigura- 
tion  miracle),  etc.  We  are  not  concerned  in  attempting  to  show  that  a  miracle  does  not 
disturb  or  violate  natxiral  law  ;  indeed  when  we  look  at  the  End,  and  see  that  under  the 
mighty  power  of  the  wonder-working  Messiah  natural  law,  which  is  now  so  conducive  to 
disease,  death,  and  corruption,  shall  be  disturbed,  violated,  and  rooted  out,  it  is  not 
difiicult  to  believe  that  many  of  the  miraculous  "  signs"  w^ere  a  disturbing  of  natural  law, 
showing  how  by  such  a  disturbance  the  cause  could  be  removed,  and  the  kingdom  with 
its  inestimable  blessings  be  introduced.  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  believers  them- 
selves do  not  fully  catch  the  spirit  and  intent  of  those  miracles,  and  are  too  much  disposed 
to  have  them  shorn  of  some  of  their  strength  in  order  to  conciliate  unbelievers.  Let 
such  place  themselves  at  the  proper  stand-point  from  which  to  view  the  miraculous,  and 
this  will  be  noticed  :  Briefly,  this  world  is  under  a  curse — evil  abounds  with  the  good — 
it  forms  one  vast  cemetery  with  its  crushed  hopes,  blasted  life,  dust-returned  bodies, 
etc.,  and  all  this  goes  on  under  natural  law  instituted  by  God.  The  world  needs  restora- 
tion, and  the  Bible  starts  with  this  idea,  a  fallen  world  needing  Eedemption,  and  it  ends 


96  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  7. 

with  a  fallen  world  Eedeemed.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  designed  to  secure  this  deliver- 
ance, but  to  do  this  it  must  necessarily  embrace  a  Supernatural  interference  as  predicted. 
It  was  God  that  entailed  the  curse,  set  its  limits,  enforced  it  by  natural  law,  and  it  must 
he  God  again  who  removes  the  same  ;  but  when  He  does  this  we  are  told  that  He  breaks 
down  the  harriers  set  up  by  Himself  through  natural  law.  Hence  Supernatural  interfer- 
ence {i.e.,  miracles),  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  given  as  "  signs"  of  that  which  is  prom- 
ised, and  is  to  come,  is  really  and  truly  an  interference,  a  suspension,  or  controlling,  for 
the  time  being,  of  natural  law.  They  are  "  signs"  of  redemption  from  the  power  of  natu- 
ral law  which  now  enchains  us,  and  not,  as  many  suj)pose,  "  signs"  which  are  only  to 
co-oj^erate  with  natural  law.  Surveying  the  entire  Eedemptive  Plan,  and  seeing  that  the 
miraculous  is  the  assurance  given  to  us  of  an  ultimate  freedom  from  laws  under  which 
the  millions  upon  millions,  including  the  saints,  of  earth's  inhabitants  have  groaned  for 
ages,  it  is  a  lack  of  faith  to  say  that  miracles  do  not  come  in  direct  conflict  with  natural 
law  and  by  the  force  of  the  Supernatural  in  them  overcome  in  the  blessed  examples  given, 
leaving  the  natural  law,  after  these  isolated  checks,  to  run  on  its  allotted  course  until  the 
Supernatural  comes  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  at  the  Second  Advent,  to  "  make  all  things  new.'" 
Therefore  it  is  that  we  can  so  cordially  receive  nearly  all  definitions,  because  a  miracle 
is  to  be  regarded  as  an  act  of  Divine  power  (so  Nast,  Introd.  Com.  Matt.),  an  event  which 
the  material  laws  of  nature,  without  the  Divine  agency,  could  not  possibly  effect,  which 
event  is  a  "  sign"  or  indication  what  the  Divine  power  will  do  hereafter  when  natural 
law  shall  be  modified,  changed,  etc.,  in  "the  world  to  come."  Hence  we  can  receive 
Dr.  Schtnucker's  {Pop.  Theol.,  p.  29)  definition  :  "  A  miracle  is  a  superhuman  effect,  an 
event  transcending  the  power  of  man,  produced  or  occurring  contrary  to  the  well-known 
and  ordinary  course  of  nature  ;"  or  Home's  {Introd.  vol.  1,  p.  93),  that  "  A  miracle  is 
an  effect  or  event  contrary  to  the  established  constitution  or  course  of  things,  or  a  sensi- 
ble suspension,  or  controlment  of,  or  deviation  from,  the  known  laws  of  nature,  wrought 
either,  by  the  immediate  act,  or  by  the  assistance,  or  by  the  permission  of  God,  and 
accompanied  with  a  previous  notice  or  declaration  that  it  is  performed  according  to  the 
purpose  and  by  the  power  of  God,  for  the  proof  or  evidence  of  some  particular  doctrine, 
or  in  attestation  of  the  authority  or  divine  mission  of  some  particular  person  (Comp.  defi- 
nitions, Dr.  Wardlaw  On  Miracles,  Ency.  Rellg.  Knowl.,  Smith's  Bih.  Die,  Alexander's  Evi- 
dences, Glieg's  His.  Bihle,  etc.).  Those  writers  (as  e.g.  Knapp,  Theol.  p.  59,  M'Clin- 
tock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.  Art.  "  Miracles")  who  are  anxious  to  conciliate  objections,  and 
therefore  make  the  miracles  to  be  accomplished  "  by  means  of  nature"  without  altering, 
disturbing,  or  counteracting  natural  law,  constantly  overlook  not  only  of  what  really  the 
miracles  are  "  signs,"  but  that  many  of  the  miracles  are  the  direct  opposite  of  that 
which  would  result  from  natural  law.  The  continued  force  of  natural  law  and  the  exist- 
ence of  a  miracle  are  in  antagonism,  as  seen,  e.g.,  in  natural  law  producing  death  and 
retaining  the  victim  in  corruption  and  dissolution,  while  a  life-giving  miracle  for  the 
time,  breaks  this  law,  suspends  it,  etc.  The  older  definitions  of  theologians  are  conse- 
quently nearer  the  truth  than  many  {e.g.  Princeton  Peview,  Oct.,  1853  ;  Kow's  "  Ch.  Evi- 
dences ;''  1877,  "  The  Unseen  Universe,")  of  the  modern  ones.  And  finally  may  we  add, 
that  the  use  made  {e.g.  by  Eob.  Dale  Owen  and  others)  of  this  concession  to  natural  law 
not  now  recognized,  is  bearing  its  logical  fruit  in  the  denial  of  any  miraculous  power  to 
Christ,  and  in  the  assertion  that  the  powers  exercised  by  Him  were  all  "  natural,  as 
occurring  strictly  under  law."  *  Our  position  closes  the  door  against  all  such  deductions, 
exalting  the  immediate  agency  and  Will  of  God.     For  miracles  are  designated  ' '  powers" 


*  Thus,  e.g..  Potter  ("  Christianity  and  its  Definitions"),  speaking  of  the  changes  in  be- 
lief, remarks  :  "  Earely  now  by  any  scholarly  writer  of  any  sect  do  we  find  the  old  idea 
of  miracle  advocated.  Instead  of  being  regarded  as  a  direct  abrogation  of  natural  law 
by  supernatural  will,  miracle  is  now  pretty  generally  interpreted  as  the  temporary  action 
of  some  higher  law  just  as  natural  though  rarer  in  its  operations  ;  and  some  theological 
writers  even  go  so  far  as  to  affirm  that  reason  may  yet  explain  miracles— a  concession  that 
substantially  abandons  the  miracle-idea  ;  as  does  also  the  use  by  many  modern  theologians 
of  the  ^Yord  supernatural  in  the  sense  of  spiritual."  Interesting  remarks  illustrative  of 
this  spirit,  and  in  opposition  to  it,  will  be  found  .in  Uhlhorn's  "  Modern  Eepres.  of  the 
Life  of  Jesus,"  Harless's  "  Life  of  Jesus,"  Tholuck's  "Credibility  of  the  Gospel  His- 
tory," Hofman's  "Examination  of  the  Life  of  Jesus  by  Strauss,"  Smith's  "  Faith  and 
Philosophy,"  and  the  writings  on  "  Miracles"  by  Collyer,  Penrose,  Evans,  Litton,  Mount- 
ford,  Upham,  Belcher,  Le  Bas,  Mansel,  Haven,  Eogers,  Twesten,  and  many  others,  in- 
cluding works  on  "  Evidences  ;"  as  Norton,  Ebrard,  etc.,  etc. 


Prop.  7.]  the  theocratic  kixgdoim.  97 

(dunameis),  evidencing  ilie  potency  of  the  Messianic  King  to  introduce  the  Mill,  era  ; 
tliey  are  called  '^works''  (erga),  "  the  works  of  God,"  illustrating  the  divine  ability  to 
accomplish  all  the  promises  of  G-od,  and,  therefore,  instead  of  shrinking  from  the  Biblical 
idea  of  a  miracle,  we  accept  of  it  with  hope  and  joy,  as  indicative  of  glorious  deliver- 
ance. The  miracles  of  the  Old  Test.,  the  subject  of  special  ridicule  (such  as  "  the 
speaking  ass,"  Samson's  exploits,  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  etc.),  are  to 
be  regarded  in  this  light,  viz.,  showing  how  God's  power  will  be  exerted  in  the  future. 

Obs.  3.  Miracles  are  necessary  to  a  revelation  pertaining  to  the  kingdom, 
a  kingdom  which  is  to  be  set  up  by  an  astounding  miraculous  display. 
They  become  parts,  essential  parts  of  the  revelation,  exhibiting  the  earnests 
of  power  that  is  nltimately  to  accomplish  it.  If  they  were  missing,  an 
important  link  would  be  gone.  God  engages  to  establish  a  kingdom  and 
one  too  in  which  the  supernatural  shall  introduce  mighty  changes  ;  He 
promises  a  Messiah  who  is  to  perform  this  work,  and  who,  consequently, 
must  possess  miraculous  power  ;  the  forces  now  at  work  in  nature,  instead 
of  tending  toward  it,  cannot  possibly  accomplish  what  is  foretold  of  the 
future,  and  so  long  as  they  remain  unchanged  the  promises  of  God  con- 
tinue unrealized  ;  when  Jesus  comes  in  accordance  with  Divine  purpose  He 
must  necessarily,  not  only  in  person,  life,  etc.,  but  in  actual  exerted  power 
exhibit  His  ability  to  be  tlie  fulfiller  of  prophecy  ;  His  attestations  of  the 
possession  of  such  power  are  sustained  by  their  connection  with  the  Divine 
plan,  past  and  future  prediction,  moral  aim,  lack  of  self-contradiction, 
public  performance,  etc.  ;  the  power  displayed  is  of  a  character  corre- 
sponding with  that  required  by  the  predictions,  power  over  nature,  over 
evil,  over  all  things  ;  the  unity  of  the  Word,  promising  restoration  from 
evil  now  suffered  under  natural  law,  makes  these  miraculous  representa- 
tions essential,  so  that  we  can  have  faith  and  hope  in  the  promised  king- 
dom, in  His  being  the  promised  Messiah,  who  shall  set  it  up,  and  in  the 
certainty  of  a  future  miraculous  demonstration  in  our  behalf  in  that  king- 
dom— all  which  is  again  corroborated  by  the  fallen  condition  of  man  requir- 
ing Divine  interposition,  by  the  necessity  of  its  possession  to  constitute  a 
perfect  Redeemer,  by  the  personal  experience  of  believers  in  receiving  a 
moral  and  providential  "earnest"  (comp.  remarks  by  Eaton,  Perm,  of 
Christianity,  "  On  General  and  Special  Providence"),  and  by  reason  con- 
ceding that  a  Divine  i>urpose,  extending  from  creation  into  the  eternal  ages 
and  embracing  restitution  as  Us  glorio2ts  end,  cannot  possibly  do  without 
them.  The  general  sentiment  of  mankind  has  always  expressed  itself  as 
favorable  to  the  idea  of  the  miraculous,  because  deliverance  from  evil,  now 
entailed  by  natural  law,  has  ever  been  felt  as  the  special  work  of  the  super- 
natural. Hence  the  miraculous  incorporated,  more  or  less,  with  all  relig- 
ions. 

Designing  simply  to  direct  attention  to  the  relation  that  the  miraculous  sustains  to 
the  kingdom,  several  features  of  the  subject  are  left  for  other  Propositions,  as,  e.g.  the 
Patristic  miracles  (Prop.  168),  the  miracles  of  the  Old  Test.  (Prop.  182).  Some  addi- 
tional reflections  vaa^y  be  presented  respecting  the  methods  employed  to  depreciate  mira- 
cles. We  are  told  by  Renan  and  others  that  the  miraculous  occurred  to  persons  who 
believed  in  the  same,  whose  faith  and  credulity  made  them  incapable  of  a  proper  judg- 
ment. Such,  however,  overlook  (1)  that  "  ignorant  "  men  should  be  able  to  incorporate 
them  as  essentials  in  a  developed  plan  of  Redemption  ;  (2)  that  they  do  this  without 
eulogy,  only  stating  the  simple  facts  vathout  enlarging  ;  (3)  that  they  do  this  against 
their  strongest  Jewish  and  national  prejudices,  as,  e.g..  in  ascribing  these  to  a  dead, 
crucified  Jesus,  in  the  miraculous  conversion  of  Paul,  in  showing  how  little  effect  they 
had  upon  the  nation,  etc. ;  (4)  that  this  was  done  when  it  had  the  tendency  to  crush  the 
fond  expectations  of  a  present  kingdom  as  anticipated,  to  turn  them  from  the  prejudiced 


98  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  7. 

nation  to  the  Gentiles,  to  yield  up  all  and  proclaim  ruin,  etc.,  to  the  chosen  nation  ; 
(5)  that  only  after  the  crowning  miracle  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  showed  them  that 
the  Divine  Procedure  as  covenanted  made  these  miracles  indispcnsahle  links  to  a  compre- 
hension of  the  Redemptive  Plan  in  the  Messiah,  did  they  unhesitatingly  receive  and 
indorse  them  as  the  highest  proofs  of  the  Christship  of  Jesiis.  Froude  {tShori  Studies,  p. 
187)  informs  us  that  the  question  about  miracles  is  simply  "  one  of  evidence,"  and  de- 
mands more  evidence  because  "  antecedently  improbable."  By  this  evidence  he  means, 
as  his  Essay  indicates,  "  human  testimony, "  which  he  proceeds  to  undermine  and  render 
worthless  by  saying  :  "  Human  testimony,  we  repeat,  under  the  most  favorable  circum- 
stances imaginable  knows  nothing  of  absolute  certainty.''  Hence  no  testimony,  no  number 
of  witnesses  can  have  any  weight  with  this  class,  for  they  tell  us,  as  Renan,  that  the 
crucial  test  of  "  conditions  which  science  can  accept  "  {i.e.,  a  repeated  scientific  examina- 
tion or  investigation  by  unbelievers)  has  not  been  complied  with,  and  therefore  i\\ey  can- 
not be  accepted.  (It  is  a  wonder  that  such  do  not  propose  to  subject  the  Plan  of  Redemp- 
tion to  a  scientific  investigation.)  The  old  argument  of  Hume's  is  revived  and  steadily 
urged  without  considering  the  arguments  of  Butler,  Campbell,  Vince,  Adam,  Douglass, 
Alexander,  Home,  and  others,  while  Froude,  Renan,  etc.,  in  their  published  works  con- 
tradict themselves  in  the  acceptance  of  testimony  on  all  subjects  outside  of  the  miracu- 
lous. It  is  true  that  the  main  reason  alleged  for  such  a  rejection  of  testimony  arises 
from  its  supposed  disagreement  to  the  uniform,  unchangeable  laws  of  nature.*  But  are 
those  laws  so  unalterably  fixed  as  these  men  tell  us  ?  If  so,  then  "  the  unchangeable  laws 
of  nature"  that  produced  the  naturalistic  origin  of  man,  beasts,  etc.  (now  such  a  favorite 
with  this  class)  ought  to  have  remained  "  iinchangeable,"  and  they  ought  to-day  under 
our  own  observation  to  originate  such  men,  beasts,  etc.  At  least  we  ought  to  behold 
some  of  the  radical  transformations,  new  modifications,  etc.,  going  on  ;  for  (Comp. 
Martensen,  Cli.  Dog.  S.  77)  eternal  laws  ought  certainly  to  work  as  favorably  and  effect- 
ively now  as  in  ages  past.  Here  then  at  the  very  outset  something  is  taken  for  granted 
as  a  false  premise.  Again,  it  certainly  requires  great  assurance  in  any  man  who  is  utterly 
unable  to  explain  the  nature,  extent,  source  of  power,  etc.,  of  natural  laws  to  arrogate  to 
himself  the  ability  of  deciding  that  those  in  part  known  to  himself  by  exj)erience  are  the 
only  source  of  power  ;  that  nothing  higher,  able  to  modify,  shape,  or  sus23end  these  laws, 
is  in  existence.  It  is  arguing  in  a  small  circle  :  the  testimony  of  a  limited,  iDersonal  expe- 
rience is  emploj^ed  to  upset  the  testimony  of  others'  experience  ;  for  it  is  Hume's, 
Froude's,  Renan's  experience  over  against  Paul's,  Peter's,  and  John's.  The  circle  of  the 
former,  like  the  Asiatic  who  refused  to  believe  that  water  is  changed  to  ice,  refuse  all 
that  is  opposed  to  their  experience  or  notion  of  experience,  and  in  the  act  deliberately 
shut  out  avenues  of  knowledge,  seeing  how  largely  man  is  dependent  upon  testimony. 
If  general  experience  is  appealed  to,  that  is  simply  a  begging  of  the  question,  seeing  that 
the  question  at  issue  is  that  the  experience  of  some  has  made  them  conversant  with 
miracles.  Leaving  this  question  of  testimony  and  experience  for  Treatises  specially  de- 
voted to  its  discussion,  let  the  reader  observe  two  things  :  (1)  That  the  uniformity  of 
nature's  operations  through  established  law  is  one  of  the  essentials  to  enable  us  to  dis- 
criminate a  miracle,  i.e.,  the  latter  is  based  on  and  confirmed  by  the  former.  A  uni- 
formity suddenly  arrested,  and  in  isolated  instances  broken,  and  then  again  resumed,  is 


*  J.  S.  Mill,  in  his  Essay  on  "  Theism"  (and  "  Logic"),  himself  unfriendly  to  the  mi- 
raculous, declares  that  Hume's  argument  against  miracles,  based  on  testimony,  is  of  no 
weight,  provided  the  existence  of  God  is  assumed  and  a  sufiicient  exigency  arises  for 
His  making  an  interposition.  This  concession,  from  such  a  source,  is  valuable,  although 
Mill  refuses  to  consider  the  higher  testimony,  viz.,  the  connection  of  miracles  to  the 
whole.  Even  the  Spiritualists  reject  Hume's  reasoning,  as  seen,  e.g.,  in  Owen's  "  Foot- 
falls," etc.,  ch.  3,  on  "  The  Miraculous."  Rev.  Dr.  Sprecher  (Groundwork  of  Theol. 
Div.  2)  in  a  masterly  argument  shows  that  when  a  theistic  j^osition  is  assumed,  it  is 
utterly  inconsistent  to  deny  the  possibility  of  miracles,  which  alone  can  be  done  from  a 
naturalistic  ground,  introducing  a  hard  mechanical  theory,  such,  e.g.,  as  Fiske  proposes 
in  his  "  Unseen  World,"  Art.  5,  "  A  Word  about  Miracles."  (Hume  has  been  an- 
swered by  Brown,  "  On  Cause  and  Effect,"  Campbell,  "Diss,  on  Miracles,"  Whately's 
"  Logic"  (Ap.)  and  ''  Historic  Doubts,"  Farrar's  "  Crit.  His.  of  Free  Thought,"  Trench's 
"  Notes  on  Miracles,"  and  others.  Comp.  Rev.  Powell's  "Order  of  Nature  considered  in 
reference  to  the  Claims  of  Revelation,"  in  which  Hume's  argument  is  reproduced,  and 
then,  in  reply,  the  Art.  in  the  North  Brit.  Review,  by  Prof.  Baden  Povfell,  "  The  Order 
of  Nature.") 


PeOP.  7.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  99 

requisite.  Uniformity  then  is  one  of  the  conditions  required  in  order  that  a  true  miracle 
may  api:)ear.  (2)  That  to  say,  as  Science  does  through  some  of  its  representatives,  that 
this  uniformity  is  forever  unchangeably  the  same,  that  it  cannot  be  intermitted,  is  to 
pass  from  the  domain  of  facts  (as  evidenced  in  the  naturalistic  theory  of  the  origin  of 
things  when,  it  is  asserted,  law  produced  what  it  does  not  now)  observed,  into  that  of  mere 
inference  and  deduction,  which  may  or  may  not  be  true.  It  is  only  gross  materialism 
that  assumes  this  to  be  true,  and  against  materialism  other  arguments  indicative  of 
Divine  Reason,  Will,  etc.,  are  requisite  before  that  of  miracles  is  touched.  A  writer  in 
BlackwootVs  Mag.  (1873)  on  "  The  Issues  raised"  by  the  Prot.  Synod  of  France,  briefly, 
but  well  expresses  these  last  features.  But,  after  all,  the  miracles  of  the  Bible  are  not 
dependent  on  witnesses,  for  there  is  evidence  immeasurably  more  satisfactory  in  their  be- 
half than  that  derived  from  mere  human  testimony.  Passing  by  that  which  satisfies  the 
believer  (viz.,  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  truth  that  it  has  power,  etc. — for  that 
truth  and  the  miraculous  are  united)  it  may  be  remarked  :  (1)  That  if  the  Divine  Purj^ose 
is  carried  on  for  ages  in  accordance  with  the  Word  given,  then  the  Supernatural  element 
which  brings  forth  and  carries  on  the  said  Purpose  amply  covers  the  subordinate 
ground  of  the  miraculous, as  the  greater  includes  the  lesser.  (2)  That  miracles  in  virtue  of 
such  a  Divine  Purpose  being  carried  out  are  not  "  antecedently  improbable,"  hut  the  most 
reasonable,  being  in  full  accord  with  the  purposed  Plan.  (3)  That  the  Divine  Purpose 
being  not  intended  for  a  scientific  test,  the  adjuncts,  as,  e.g.,  miracles,  were  not  designed 
for  the  same,  but  that  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  necessary  developments  to  insure  faith 
and  hope  in  the  Eedemptive  scheme.  (4)  Hence,  they  can  only,  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  be  confirmatory  of  the  faith  and  hope  of  those  who  receive  the  Eedemj^tive  Plan. 
(5)  And  that  such  adjuncts  are  sustained  {a)  by  a  Plan  that  we  now  see  progressing  toward 
completion  just  as  jDredicted,  and  {b)  by  individual  features  pertaining  to  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose, as,  e.g.,  in  the  condition  of  the  Jews,  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  the  Church,  etc.  It  is 
unscholarly  when  dealing  with  miracles  to  refuse  to  look  at  that  Divine  Plan  which  de- 
velops them,  at  the  intent  ascribed  to  them,  and  at  the  events  connected  with  them 
and  still  perpetuated.  It  is  uncritical  to  overlook  that  miracles  are  addressed  to  an 
already  exercised  faith  in  the  Redemj)tive  Purpose.  It  is  uncandid  to  separate  the  mira- 
cles from  the  Being  and  the  Mission  of  Jesus  Christ  as  represented  in  a  continuous 
Liv'ine  Work. 

The  efforts  to  undermine  miracles  are  suggested  by  the  most  opposite  inferences.  The 
objection  that  a  miracle  is  beyond  our  comprehension  and  therefore  contrarj^  to  reason 
(which  Scientists  waive  when  they  propose  a  scientific  test),  is  now  in  many  quarters 
superseded  in  the  attempt  to  lessen  their  value  by  approvingly  quoting  Augustine  as  say- 
ing that  they  are  not  suited  to  every  age  and  mind,  being  designed  as  proof  only  for  the 
ignorant  and  not  for  the  wise.  In  the  one  objection  reason  cannot  grasp  them,  and  in 
the  other  they  are  only  suitable  for  the  lowest  reason.  And  we  have  been  pained  in 
noticing  semi-believers  and  believers  so  influenced  by  this  leaven  that  they  disjDarage  the 
use  of  the  miraculous.  Thus  even  Farrar  (in  his  excellent  Life  of  Christ,  Pref.  p.  16)  says 
that  "  to  us  such  evidence  is  needless.  To  the  Apostles  they  were  the  credentials  of 
Christ's  mission  ;  to  us  they  are  but  fresh  revelations  of  His  Will.  To  us  they  are  works 
rather  than  signs,  revelations  rather  than  portents."  (In  the  body  of  the  work,  how- 
ever, Farrar  makes  them  both,  and  neutralizes  his  concession,  as,  e.g.,  p.  170,  when  mak- 
ing "  the  miracles  of  Christ  as  resulting  from  the  fact  of  His  Being  and  mission  no  less 
naturally  and  inevitably  than  the  rays  of  light  stream  outward  from  the  sun.")  Regard- 
ing them  as  essential  parts  of  a  consistent  Revelation,  and  as  earnests  of  the  fulfilment  of 
God's  Word,  such  lowering  concessions  of  the  miraculous,  and  such  a  questioning  of  the 
adaptability  of  the  same  must  be  discarded.  They  are  just  as  necessary  for  "  the  wise" 
as  for  the  ignorant  ;  and  if  they  were  missing  certain  "  wise"  ones  would  sj^eedily  detect 
their  essential  nature,  and  would  be  the  first  to  raise  a  cry  at  their  absence,  and  learnedly 
show  that  a  revelation  claiming  to  come  from  a  Supernatural  source  and  a  kingdom  pro- 
posed to  be  set  up  by  Supernatural  j^ower  must  have,  as  necessary  proof  or  adjuncts, 
some  indications  of  the  miraculous.  No  man  is  so  wise  or  learned  that  he  can  possibly 
dispense  with  miracles.  Reason,  common-sense,  tell  us  that  if  lacking  it  would  prov^  a 
grave  defect.  Thus,  e.g.  what  assurance  could  we  have  respecting  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Redemptive  Plan,  as  given,  if  the  miracles  of  Christ's  birth,  person,  and  resurrection  were 
wanting  ?  How  could  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled  without  them  ?  Suppose  proj^hecy  and 
miracle  were  stricken  out  of  the  Record,  what  would  be  the  hope  that  the  future  coiild 
inspire  ?  Let  men  bring  forth  all  the  reasons  that  hostile  ingenuity  can  frame  to  lower 
and  degrade  the  miracles  from  their  prominent  position  ;  let  them,  like  Strauss,  Bauer, 
and  Renan,  declare  that  the  Absolute  Cause  "  never  disturbs  the  chain  of  secondary  causes 
by  single  arbitrary  acts  of  intervention,"  that  God  never  interposes  by  "  any  i^articular 


100  THE   THEOCEATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PeOP.  7. 

intervention,"  but  that  all  tilings  fall  under  eternal  unchangeable  laws  ;  we  fail  to  see 
how  wisdom  is  justified  in  a  course  of  reasoning  (which  coming  from  a  creature  indicates 
"  arbitrary  freedom")  that  removes  by  one  stroke  the  most  positive  knowledge  that  we 
have  of  an  existing  God  (for  if  God  never  intervenes,  our  knowledge  of  Him  must  be 
solely  inferential),  and  that  if  logically  carried  out,  destroys  the  connection  existing  be- 
tween the  Creator  and  creation,  God  and  man,  crushes  the  fondest  hopes  of  humanity  in 
the  giant  arms  of  irresistible  Fate.  The  truth  is,  that  in  a  subject  connected,  as  it  must 
be  (for  no  one  can  explain  how  the  miracles  were  performed)  with  difficulty,  no  explana- 
tion, or  reasoning,  or  argument  can  be  so  complete  but  objections  can  be  urged  against 
it  if  the  heart  desires  it  to  be  done.  If  this  is  true  of  the  simplest  propositions,  how 
much  more  is  this  so  in  a  subject  which  in  some  of  its  aspects  exceeds  human  compre- 
hension—the latter  a  feature,  too,  that  is  requisite  in  order  to  be  indicative  of  a  Super- 
natural element  and  not  of  mere  human  origin.  Hence  the  part  of  wisdom  is,  while  can- 
didly weighing  objections,  not  to  allow  a  destructive  process,  which  removes  from  man 
the  most  cherished  hopes — sustained  by  moral  law^ — unless  they  can  be  replaced  by  more 
substantial  ones.  To  deride  the  faith  or  belief  of  any  one,  without  being  able  to  point 
out  a  better  one,  more  solidly  based,  is  certainly  not  characteristic  either  of  rcisdom  or 
prudence.  To  sit  as  Judge  over  God  and  decide  what  is  proper  and  what  improper  for 
Him  to  do  in  reference  to  His  Creation  or  Purpose,  is,  to  say  the  least,  to  arrogate  to  our- 
selves a  lofty,  giddy  position. 

Ohs.  4.  The  solution  of  miracles  is  found  then  in  their  connection  with 
God  and  His  expressed  Will.  This  Will  is  especially  noticeable  in  the  doc- 
trine of  the  kingdom.  The  kingdom,  as  the  product  of  the  supernatural, 
demands  miracles  ;  so  that  faith  and  hope  in  the  kingdom,  as  covenanted 
and  predicted,  requires  belief  in  the  miraculous.  Faith  in  miracles  is  em- 
braced in  an  intelligent  utterance  of  the  prayer,  "  let  Tliy  luill  he  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,''^  and  the  assurance  that  the  same  will  ultimately 
be  realized  is  expressed  in  ''  Thine  is  the  j^o^uer.''  The  believer  gratefully 
acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to  miracles  ;  for  proceeding  from  the  Divine 
Will,  they  teach  us  in  the  most  forcible  manner  that  in  this  Will  all  forces, 
all  life,  all  things  exist  ;  that  in  this  Will  is  found  an  overruling,  all-per- 
vading Providence  capable  of  general  and  special  energy  and  supervision  ; 
and  that  in  it  will  be  found  the  most  ample  resources  to  meet  the  require- 
ments as  predicted  and  promised,  of  the  blessed  kingdom  itself.  The  mira- 
cles strengthen  faith,  enliven  hope,  and,  amid  the  pressure  of  natural  laws 
which  entail  evil,  cheer  the  heart  of  the  pilgrim  with  joy  at  a  coming 
miraculous  restitution.  The  Scriptures  can  never,  never  be  fulfillGd  with- 
out miracle  ;  the  earth  can  never,  never  be  freed  from  its  curse  without 
miracle  ;  man  can  never,  never  be  delivered  without  miracle  ;  and,  there- 
fore, the  Redeemer  in  whom  we  trust  for  redemption  is,  as  history  to-day 
attests  in  the  minute  and  wondrous  fulfilment  of  His  miraculous  words,  a 
miracle-ivorhing  Saviour.  Let  infidelity  separate  God  and  the  world  from 
each  other  (and  even  deny  that  the  latter  had  a  Creator),  so  that  the  one  is 
not  directly  interested  in  the  other,  it  may  content  itself  Avith  the  unrea- 
sonable, cold,  cheerless,  dark  prospect  that  this  view  imparts,  its  darkness 
only  deepened  by  the  loudly  sung  deceptive  praises  of  "  cosmic  force  "  and 
a  death-devoted  humanity  ;  faith  in  preference  takes  the  soul-inspiring 
Biblical  conception  of  a  creation  that  has  its  origin  and  continuance  in  a 
personal,  intelligent,  loving,  all-powerful  God  ;  that  this  is  sufficiently 
indicated  in  the  Word,  in  miracles  of  knowledge  and  work,  in  history  indi- 
cating a  progressive  plan,  in  the  personal  experience  of  the  believer,  in  the 
person,  doctrine,  and  works  of  the  Messiah  ;  and  that  this  will  ultimately 
be  visibly  manifested  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  ivlien  God  again  dwells  ivith 
man,  man  is  rescued  from  his  ruined  condition,  and  placed  in  a  renewed 


Prop.  7.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  101 

creation  where  no  (unalterable)  natural  law  shall  exist  to  burden  him  with 
evil. 

Such  is  the  importance  of  this  subject  that  some  additional  remarks  are  in  place. 
With  the  author  of  "  Supernatural  Religion,"  we  have  no  sympathy  with  the  argument 
of  Dr.  Irons  and  others,  that  the  miraculous  is  to  be  received  on  the  authority  of  the 
Church.  Nor  do  we  rest,  as  shown,  the  miraculous  upon  mere  human  evidence  ;  for 
while  the  latter  is  a  necessary  adjunct,  yet  testimony,  as  Hume  assumed,  may  be  false. 
Nor  do  we  propose  simply  to  exalt  the  credibility  of  the  miracle  by  the  doctrine  that  it 
sustains,  however  important  the  union  between  them.  Miracles  are  placed  on  higher 
ground,  viz.,  as  reasonable,  requisite  features  or  parts  of  a  developing  and  progressing 
Divine  Plan  (fully  announced)  which  is  now  in  actual  course  of  unfolding  and  in  a  cer- 
tain stage  of  advancement,  so  that  the  ultimate  End  intended  by  the  Plan  is  insured  by 
the  progress  already  made.  The  test  to  be  applied  to  the  miracles,  therefore,  is  the  foi- 
lowing  :  (1)  Observe  the  nature  of  the  Redemptive  Plan,  especially  as  revealed  in  its  con- 
summation as  contemplated  ;  (2)  notice  the  fact  that  its  completion  demands  the  miracu- 
lous, seeing  that  it  proposes  to  do  what  natural  law  in  itself  can  never  accomplish  ; 
(3)  hence,  the  importance  and  necessity  of  sustaining  faith  and  hoj)e  in  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose by  indications,  especially  in  the  Person  of  the  King,  of  the  miraculous.  In  this 
way  reason  apjjreciates  their  pertinency  and  force,  for  their  reality  is  evidenced  by  the 
just  relationship  that  they  sustain  to  a  proposed  perfected  Redemption — teaching  us,  more 
strongly  than  words  that  (being  "  signs"  or  appendages)  the  Supernatural  will  not  be  lack- 
ing in  power  at  the  culminating  period  or  time  of  manifestation.  Locke  in  the  Common- 
place Book  (pub.  bj'Lord  King)  gives  this  aphorism  :  "  The  doctrine  j^roves  the  miracles, 
rather  than  the  miracles  the  doctrine."  Our  view  is  this  :  The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom 
(the  contemplated  Theocratic  ordering)  demands  the  miracles,  and  the  miracles  are  added 
to  enforce  our  faith  in  the  doctrine.  Hence  the  twofold  appeal  in  the  Scriptures,  viz., 
to  believe  the  miraculous  because  of  the  doctrine  associated  with  it,  and  to  believe  m 
the  doctrine  because  of  its  being  justified  by  the  miraculous  connected  with  it.  Taylor 
has  even  in  the  title  of  his  work  (77*6  Miracles :  Helps  to  Faith,  not  Hindrances)  expressed 
an  important  truth,  for  it  is  pre-eminently  true  that  our  faith  in  the  doctrine  delivered 
is  sustained  by  the  miracle  of  knowledge  evidenced  in  the  prophecies,  in  the  Person  and 
Life  of  Jesus,  in  the  signs  or  earnests  given  of  a  glorious  future.  These  form  the  basis 
of  a  firm  hope  of  ultimate  deliverance,  making  the  ])romises  of  a  Sec.  Advent,  resur- 
rection, renewed  earth,  etc.,  realities.  To  all  this  is  added  the  corroborative  personal 
experience  of  every  one  who  receives  and  obeys  the  truth,  which  is  amply  conclusive  evi- 
dence to  every  one,  even  the  most  ignorant,  unable  to  see  how  the  miraculous  is  an  essen- 
tial part  of  a  related  consecutive  Divine  Plan  in  actual  course  of  development  and  fulfil- 
ment. (Comp.  Experimental  evidence  as  presented,  e.g.,  in  Rogers'  Eclipse  of  Faiih, 
Mozley's  Bampton  Lecfs.,  Chalmers'  "  Evidences,"  etc.)  The  self-appropriation  of  the 
truth  (insei^arably  united  with  the  miraculous),  and  the  resultant  experience  in  the  heart 
and  life,  amid  the  trials  and  sorrows  of  earth,  is  in  itself  so  satisfactory  that  the  child 
and  the  philosopher,  the  unlettered  and  the  learned,  alike  feel  and  admit  its  force.  The 
lapse  of  time  instead  of  weakening  (as  some  assert),  really  adds  power  to  the  testimony 
favorable  to  miracles,  seeing  that  the  personal  experience  of  many  has  verified,  century 
after  centur.y,  the  truth  of  revelation.  Reason  and  Faith  both  confirm  the  miraculous. 
As  Walker  (Philos.  of  the  Plan  of  ^Salvation,  ch.  3)  has  well  enforced  by  interesting  consid- 
erations, "  Man  cannot,  in  the  present  constitution  of  his  mind,  believe  that  religion  has 
a  divine  origin,  unless  it  be  accompanied  by  miracles."  Bushnell  [Nature  and  Supernatu- 
ral) has  well  placed,  as  a  conclusive  proof  in  behalf  of  the  miraculous,  faith  (experiment- 
ally realized  in  its  transforming  power)  in  the  Superhuman  character  and  work  of  Christ. 
These  two  united  —reason  appreciating  the  Divine  Plan  and  its  relations,  and  faith  realiz- 
ing the  earnest  bestowed — are  irresistible, — soid-satisfying. 


102  THE   THEOCEATIC   KIITGDOM.  [PeOP.  8. 


Peopositio:n'  8.  The  doctrine  of  the  Mngdom  presii-piyoses  that  of 
sin^  the  apostasy  of  man, 

Tlie  j)ropliets  with  one  voice  i^roclaim,  that  this  kingdom  is  to  be 
established  in  order  that  in  it  man  may  iind  complete,  perfect  de- 
liverance from  sin  and  evil.  The  kingdom  is  to  be  set  np,  so  that 
man  and  natnre  may  be  hai3pily  rescned  from  the  curse  entailed  by 
sin  under  which  both  labor  and  groan. 

Ohs.  1.  It  is  needless  to  discuss  the  difficult  problem  of  sin  ;  the  fact  of 
its  presence  and  power  is  amply  sufficient.  It  is  a  fundamental  fact,  and 
the  superstructure  of  the  Bible  is  in  a  measure  ^  reared  upon  it  ;  for  the 
Bible  is  a  revelation  of  God's  plan  to  save  man  from  his  fallen  condition. 
The  kinadom  in  its  conception,  preparation,  and  ultimate  establishment 
implies,  and  constantly  keeps  in  view,  a  recovery  from  sin  and  its  resultant 
evil.  The  kingdom  originates  in  God's  merciful  desire  to  deliver  us  from 
the  reign  and  power  of  sin  ;  to  bring  us  back  into  a  state  of  entire  restitu- 
tion and  perfect  salvation.  It  is  the  manifestation  of  such  salvation,  in 
which  man's  will  shall  be  in  accord  with  God's,  and  in  which  unspeakable 
blessedness,  flowing  from  such  a  restoration,  shall  be  realized.  It  has  for 
its  chief  ruler  a  Saviour  who  saves  from  sin,  and  for  its  associated  rulers 
and  subjects  those  who  are  redeemed  from  sin.  It  is  a  kingdom  which  in 
its  preparatory  measures  calls  for  rei^entance  of  sin  (Matt.  3:1),  conver- 
sion from  sin  (Matt.  18  : 3),  self-denial  of  sin  (Mark  9  :  47),  perseverance 
against  sin  (Luke  9  :  62),  and  most  emphatically  refuses  admittance  into 
the  kingdom  of  those  who  indulge  in  sin  (1  Cor.  6  :  9,  10).  The  scheme 
of  redemption  is  founded  upon  the  principle  annunciated  by  Jesus  :  "  They 
that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick."  The  disease, 
as  well  as  the  physician  and  remedy,  must  be  kept  in  view  in  order  to  ap- 
preciate the  j)ro vision  made  for  us.^ 

^  Hence  Schleiermacher,  as  Tholuck  (in  Address  to  Evang.  Alliance,  N.  Y.,  Harper's 
i  Ed.)  remarks  :  "  All  philosoi^hical  terms  and  definitions,  all  physical  investigations,  all 
theses  whatever,  that  could  not  be  derived  by  strict  inference  from  the  profound  feeling 
of  sinfulness  and  the  certainty  of  redemption,  were  excluded  from  the  dogmatical  system 
of  Schleiermacher."  Fred.  Den.  Maurice  regards  it  as  a  defect  in  theology  that  it  should 
start  from  and  build  on  sin  instead  of  proceeding  from  God.  While  there  is  force  in  the 
objection,  and  while  we  show  in  this  work  that  the  idea  or  Plan  of  the  kingdom  was 
something  anterior  to  the  fall  of  man,  yet  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  this  Plan  is  pro- 
jected and  developed  in  accordance  with  the  foreknown  fall.  As  the  Bible  is  a  book 
given  to  indicate  the  recovery  of  man  from  the  fall — hence  beginning  with  the  fall  and 
ending  with  the  recovery— the  fact  of  the  fall  should  certainly  be  allowed  its  due  promi- 
nency without  however  overlooking  and  discarding  the  antecedent  facts.  The  true  basis 
is  the  Edenic  state  and  what  it  contemplated.  Sin  intervened,  but  the  Divine  Purpose  is 
to  restore  man  to  the  state  forfeited  by  sin.  Hence  the  Bible  opens  icith  Paradise  and 
ends  until  Paradise  ;  it  does  not  begin  with  sin  and  end  with  sin, 

2  A  believer  in  the  Scriptures  must  concede  that  without  freely  admitting  the  fallen, 
sinful,  ruined  condition  of  man,  the  kingdom  itself  cannot  be  appreciated  ;   that  the 


Prop.  8.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  103 

latter  contains  within  itself  perfected  Redemption,  completed  Salvation  from  the  former 
and  its  direful  results.  Sin  with  its  deadly  train  of  evils  is  found  at  the  opening  of  the 
Bible  ;  the  kingdom,  with  its  attendant  deliverance  and  blessings  of  restitution  at  its 
close  ;  creation  comes  to  us  marred  by  sin,  travails  in  pain  waiting  for  its  rescue,  when 
the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  kingdom  are  manifested.  The  one  precedes  the  other  ; 
and  the  one  calls  forth  the  love  and  mercy  of  God  to  produce  the  other.  While  the 
kingdom  antedates  sin  and  evil  so  far  as  the  Divine  Purpose  is  concerned,  practically  it 
follows  as  a  delivering  medium. 

Ols.  2.  The  introduction  of  sin  and  its  continued  existence  is  a  deep 
mystery.^  The  strongest  intellects  have  endeavored  to  solve  it,  but  in  vain. 
The  most  subtle  theories  respecting  its  eternity,  its  necessity,  its  natural- 
ism, its  fatalism,  its  relation  to  a  moral  system,  its  "  creational  imper- 
fection," its  phenomenal  nature,  its  tendency  as  a  trial  of  faith,  etc.,  arc 
presented,  but  none  of  them  entirely  remove  the  difficulties  connected  with 
the  subject.  It  still  remains  an  unexplained  mystery,  so  much  so  that 
Mill,  rejecting  the  Biblical  conception  of  the  mighty  God,  explains  {Dogma 
and  Literature)  the  introduction  of  evil  by  limiting  the  power  of  the  God  he 
reverences,  and  thus  leaves  the  dreary,  hopeless  prospect  of  no  future  de- 
liverance. The  Bible  makes  7io  effort  to  explain  it  ;  only  speaking  of  it  as 
a  painful  fact,  allowed  by  the  permission  of  an  Omnipotent  God,  and 
which  shall  be  by  His  power  ultimately  crushed.  No  labored  effort  in  the 
way  of  proof  is  given  l3y  inspiration,  but  a  constant  appeal  is  made  to  our 
oiun  consciousness  of  the  necessity  and  truthfulness  of  Divine  interposition 
in  view  of  the  sense  of  moral  guilt,  the  evils  to  which  we  are  subject,  the 
helplessness  and  limited  duration  of  man,  the  otherwise  inexorable  embrace 
of  nature,  etc.  A  fundamental  teaching  on  almost  every  page  is  this  :  that 
man  unaided  cannot  deliver  himself  from  sin  and  its  sad  consequences,  but 
imi^eratively  requires  Divine  help  in  his  need.  This  is  most  unmistakably 
presented  in  the  Word  ;  in  the  conditions  and  limitations  surrounding  us  ; 
and  in  the  experience  and  life  of  every  person  who  will  but  take  time  for 
reflection  and  self-appropriation  of  the  truth.  If  sin,  its  results,  and  the 
need  of  a  Redeemer  are  ignored  or  denied  after  the  dreadful  and  merciful 
language  of  the  Bible  ;  after  the  costly  provision  made  for  us  through 
Jesus  Christ  ;  cfter  the  testimony  given  by  conscience  and  the  world's  his- 
tory ;  after  the  universal  distinction  observed  between  natural  and  moral 
evil,  right  and  wrong,  virtue  and  vice,  merit  and  demerit,  praise  and 
blame  ;  after  the  propitiatory  sacrifices  of  the  ancients  and  heathen  ;  after 
the  manifested  antagonism  to  that  which  is  good  and  holy  exhibited  in  the 
strife  between  duty  and  passion,  love  and  selfishness,  moral  obligation  and 
a  violated  conscience  ;  after  the  confessions  of  the  most  devoted  and  pious 
of  mankind  ;  after  the  ten  thousand  warnings,  threats,  appeals,  and  invita- 
tions pressed  home  to  a  respondent  consciousness  by  the  Supreme  Ruler 
Himself,  tlien  nothing  that  we  can  add  v/ill  influence  the  heart  and  mind  of 
the  unbeliever.* 

^  Compare  the  candid  remarks  of  Hudson  {Dehi  and  Grace,  p.  20)  :  *'  It  (sin)  is  essen- 
tially xoithout  reason — an  act  of  unreason.  To  assign  a  good  reason  for  it  would  be  to 
lustify  it  as  a  thing  reasonable,  which  is  contrary  to  its  nature.  It  knows  no  rational  or 
logical  connection.  It  knows  no  law  ;  it  is  pure  anomaty.  It  is  the  surd  quantity  which 
no  theologic  algebra  can  determine.  It  can  be  reduced  to  no  intelligible  princi2:)le  ;  it 
baffles  explanation."  Hudson  aptly  quotes  Neander  {PL  of  Ch.  B.  6,  ch.  1,  note)  as  say- 
ing :  "  According  to  my  conviction,  the  origin  of  evil  can  only  be  understood  as  a  fad — a 
fact  possible  by  virtue  of  the  freedom  belonging  to  a  created  being,  but  not  to  be  other- 
wise deduced  or  explained.     It  lies  in  the  idea  of  evil  that  it  is  an  utterly  inexplicable  thing. 


104  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  8. 

and  whoever  would  explain  it  nullifies  tlie  very  idea  of  it.  It  is  not  tlie  limits  of  our 
knowledge  which  make  the  origin  of  sin  something  inexplicable  to  us,  but  it  folloAvs 
from  the  essential  nature  of  sin  as  an  act  of  free-will  that  it  must  remain  to  all  eternity 
an  inexplicable  fact.  It  can  only  be  understood  empirically  by  means  of  the  moral  self- 
consciousness."  Julius  Miiller  {The  Ch.  Doc.  of  Sin),  with  Neander,  holds  that  the  exist- 
ence of  evil  is  inconceivahle  in  its  actuality— that  the  abuse  of  free-will  is  essentially  irra- 
tional, an  act  of  unreason.  Bushnell  (iVal  and  Supernat.  p.  128)  concludes  :  "We  find 
then — this  is  the  result  of  our  search — that  sin  can  noicise  be  accounted  for  ;  there  are 
no  positive  grounds,  or  principles  back  of  it,  whence  it  may  have  come."  Schlegel 
{Philos.  of  His.  p.  391)  calls  it  "  the  greatest  historical  mystery — the  deej)est  and  most 
complicated  enigma  of  the  world."  (Comp.  Martensen,  Ch.  Bog.)  The  student's  atten- 
tion is  directed  to  Keerl's  His.  of  Creation  and  Doc.  of  Paradise,  and  Art.  in  Bib.  Sacra, 
Oct.  1863,  Doctrine  of  the  Fall  of  the  World  (with  which  Comj).  Kurtz's  Bible  and  Astron- 
omy, Beecher's  Conflict  of  Ages,  etc.)  Keerl  claims  many  eminent  Philosophers,  Natural- 
ists and  Theologians  as  holding  to  the  idea  that  physical  disorders  and  evil  resulted 
from  the  fall  of  a  previous  (to  this  one)  holy  earth,  which  was  precipitated  into  a  chaotic 
state,  owing  to  the  fallen  estate  of  Satan  and  his  angels.  However  such  a  line  of  defence 
may  be  adapted  to  remove  some  naturalistic  objections  (as,  e.g.,  m  reference  to  death 
existing  previous  to  the  trial  of  Adam,  etc.),  yet  every  appeal  to  a  pre-existent  state  only 
shifts  the  mystery  farther  back  and  leaves  it  unsolved. 

2  Alas,  many  taking  advantage  of  the  mystery  of  evil,  and  overlooking  how  the  terrible 
fact  is  supported  by  incontestible  evidence,  even  in  their  own  exiaerience,  ntterly  deny 
the  existence  of  sin,  and  pronounce  evil  to  be  simply  an  imperfection  of  nature.  Mate- 
rialistic views,  as,  e.g.,  in  Moleschott,  Paine,  Vogt,  etc.,  necessarily  lead  to  such  contra- 
dictory conclusions,  making  conscience  a  delusion,  the  sense  of  moral  obligation  h  vain 
deceit,  and  thus  overriding  the  respect  shown  by  ages  to  moral  law  and  man's  self-con- 
sciousness. It  IS  only  extremists,  who  make  little  of  the  Supernatural,  that  take  such  a 
position  ;  for  multitudes  who  deny  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  still  cling,  under  the  sense 
that  some  kind  of  Religion  is  a  necessity,  to  the  notion  that  sin  and  e^il,  however 
explained,  are  a  resultant  of  our  conneption  with  a  Power  outside  of  us — a  Supernatural 
source — that  has  placed  us  under  moral  law,  and  made  us  susceptible  to  its  behests.  No 
matter  how  the  origin  of  it  is  explained,  as  an  imperfection,  or  a  dualistic  antagonism,  or 
an  eternal  corruption,  or  a  necessary  offset  of  free-will,  or  a  developer  of  good,  trial,  dis- 
cipline, divine  attributes,  etc.,  or  the  result  of  temi^tation,  or  the  necessary  accompani- 
ment of  a  moral  system,  etc.,  both  unbelief  and  belief  cannot  fathom  the  mystery.  Un- 
belief cannot  do  it,  for  it  leaves  us  in  the  dark  why  it  should  be  introduced  in  the  man- 
ner  asserted  by  it  ;  and  belief  is  equally  powerless  to  assign  a  satisfactory  reason.  The 
difficulty,  so  long  as  we  allow  a  Supreme  Being  of  Love  and  mercy  to  have  been  the  Origi- 
nator  of  all  things,  is  beyond  our  solution,  and  perhaps  Laurentius  Calla  (quoted  by  Hud- 
son) was  not  far  wrong  when  he  said,  '•  I  doubt  if  the  angels  themselves  know  it."  Dr. 
Johnson  ( Works,  vol.  2,  p.  604),  in  reviewing  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  Origin  of  evil, 
concludes  :  "  For  the  Evils  of  Life  there  is  some  good  reason,  and  in  confession  that  the 
reason  cannot  be  found." 

Obs.  3.  The  Avisclom  of  the  Bible  is  justified  by  its  silence  respecting  the 
origin  of  evil.  Had  it  condescended  to  such  exphmations  as  are  given  m 
various  theodicies,  it  would  have  indicated  a  mere  human  opinion,  and 
not  a  divine  inspiration.  A  painful  defect  would  then  be  visible,  which 
infidelity  would  eagerly  seize,  and  urge  against  its  authority. 

The  Bible,  therefore,  in  its  reticence  shows  itself  superior  to  the  vain,  limited  efforts 
of  man  in  this  direction  ;  it  simply  states  the  fact,  explains  the  nature  of  sin  (as  the 
transgression  of  the  law,  the  perverse  act  of  the  free-will,  etc.),  tells  us  that  it  was  per- 
mitted by  God,  and  that  He  has  graciously  made  provision  against  it.  The  Scriptures 
teach  that  sin  and  its  results  are  hatefurto  God  ;  that  they  exist  only  through  divine 
sufferance  ;  that  forbearance  and  mercy  now  allow  their  manifestation  ;  that  enduring 
long-suffering  will  at  an  appointed  time  end  ;  and  both  shall  be  rooted  out  of  this  world. 
Pascal  (quoted  by  Dr.  M'Cosh  m  reply  to  Huxley),  after  showing  that  man  has  both  great- 
ness and  misery,  and  that  his  condition  is  not  one  of  absolute  grandeur  or  of  hopeless 
degradation,  adds  :  "  So  manifest  is  it  that  we  were  once  in  a  state  of  perfection  from 
which  we  are  now  unhappily  fallen.  It  is  astonishing  that  the  mystery  which  is  the 
farthest  removed  from  our  knowledge — I  mean  the  transmission  of  original  sin — should 


PeOP.  8.]  THE  THEOCRATIC  KINGDOM.  105 

be  that  without  which  we  can  have  no  true  knowledge  of  ourselves.  It  is  in  this  abyss 
that  the  clue  to  our  condition  takes  its  turnings  and  windings,  insomuch  that  man  is 
more  incomprehensible  without  this  mystery  than  this  mystery  is  incomprehensible  to 
man."  The  painful,  sad  fact  is  one  of  general  conviction,  however  explained  by 
ancients  and  moderns  (Leathes'  Kelig.  of  Christ,  sec.  1).  Williamson  ( Theol.  and  Moral 
Science,  p.  118,  etc.),  a  Universalist  writer,  fully  admits  a  natural  conflict,  into  which 
every  man  falls,  between  the  law  of  love  and  the  law  of  animal  nature,  from  which  per- 
sonal sin  arises,  and  declares,  "  that  conflict  exists  as  a  consiiiutional  fact  in  every  human 
being  ;"  hence,  as  all  men,  more  or  less,  violate  the  law  of  love  in  this  conflict,  all  men 
are  sinners.  However  we  may  attempt  to  expound  this  subject,  the  Biblical  conception 
that  we  are  sinners  needing  Iledemption  is  one  enforced  by  moral  consciousness,  provided 
the  truth  as  given  by  God  is  allowed  to  exert  its  designed  influence  by  self -appropriation.  ^ 
Eogers  {Superhuman  Origin  of  the  Bible,  sec.  2)  assigns  as  one  of  the  reasons  that  the 
Bible  is  given  by  God,  that  the  moral  portrait  of  man  as  presented  in  it  is  one  utterly 
opposed  to  the  natural  man.  The  indictment  that  all  have  gone  astray,  that  all  are  sin- 
ners, that  all  are  worthy  of  condemnation,  is  too  sweeping  for  man — owing  to  pride,  etc. 
— alone  to  have  generated.  To  this  we  add,  that  if  man  had  produced  this  portrait  within 
his  own  knowledge,  he  would,  as  multitudes  in  their  efforts  attest,  have  entered  into 
exi^lanations,  definitions,  interpretations,  opening  out  endless  metaphysical  and  philo- 
sophical discussions.  The  admirable  simplicity  and  silence  of  the  Bible  upon  a  subject, 
which,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  demands  the  highest  intellectual  development,  is  a  col- 
lateral and  decided  proof  of  its  divine  origin,  Man,  unsupported  and  unguided,  would 
have  overstepped  the  limits  assigned,  and  introduced  confusion  and  difficulties. 

Obs.  4.  The  i^roblem  of  evil,  whicli  has  so  greatly  exercised  and  per- 
plexed the  wisest  of  men,  is  connected  with  the  mystery  that  will  be  fin- 
ished (Rev.  10  :  7).  Until  that  predicted  period  arrives,  unsatisfactory 
conjectures  must  suffice.  God  has  not  yet  seen  fit  to  give  us  the  reasons 
for  its  origin  and  continued  existence,  excepting  in  broken  hints  respect- 
ing free  agency,  trial,  mercy,  long-suffering,  etc.,  preferring  to  deal  with 
it  as  a  constantly  experienced  fact.  With  this  we  must  rest  content, 
assured  of  one  thing,  that  in  some  way  it  will  be  found  promotive  of  His 
own  glory.  Reason  can  already  gather  and  assign  (as  various  writers, 
Miiller,  Tholuck,  Oosterzee,  etc.,  have  done)  considerations  and  arguments 
indicative  of  the  same,  but  as  our  object  is  merely  to  direct  attention  to 
those  derived  from  the  kingdom,  such  may  be  passed  by  without  remark. 
The  kingdom  being  designed  to  restore  the  harmony  existing  before  the  fall 
between  God  and  man,  and  man  and  nature,  it  also  deals  with  the  fact  of 
evil  without  entering  into  its  origin.  Looking  at  the  final  result,  the  end 
as  attained  in  the  kingdom,  it  m.ay  well  be  allowed  that  God  permitted  the 
entrance  of  evil  and  its  continuance  because  He  could  overrule  it  gloriously. 
Sin  is  opposed  to  the  theocratic  idea,  it  is  hostile  to  it,  but  God  seeing  that 
He  could  still,  with  honor  to  Himself,  restore  the  designed  theocracy  even  in 
a  most  splendid  manner,  j)ermitted  sin,^  only  restraining  it  within  certain 
limits  by  entailed  enls.  Sin  brought  forth,  as  a  counteracting  potent 
agency  through  extended  love  and  mercy,  the  humanity  of  Jesus,  the 
Christ,  I.e.  it  created  the  necessity,  in  order  to  produce  a  successful  and 
powerful  theocratic  kingdom,  of  God  identifying  Himself  with  man  in  the 
Son  of  David,  thus  bringing  Him  into  a  nearer  and  most  intimate  relation- 
ship with  humanity,  and  preparing  the  way  for  a  manifested  theocratic 
rale  over  the  world.  In  brief,  it  led  to  the  bringing  forth  a  God-man  as  the 
theocratic  King  who  should,  in  virtue  of  His  distinguished  position,  be 
able  to  deliver  us  from  all  evil.  God's  forbearance  and  love  is  justified  in 
this  wonderful  union  of  the  divine  and  human,  and  the  correspondent 
restoration  of  His  theocratic  rule  in  the  form  best  adapted  and  most 
honorable  to  humanity.* 


106  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  8. 

1  We  cannot  limit  the  power  of  God.  Thus,  e.g.,  "Williamson  (Theol.  and  Moral  Science, 
p,  204,  etc.)  endeavors  to  vindicate  God  by  making  evil  a  necessary  result  of  creation, 
and  conceives  it  impossible  for  God  to  have  created  a  universe  like  ours,  limited  in  space 
and  conditioned  by  time,  "  without  involving  the  necessity  of  the  relations  of  evil  that 
emerge  from  its  process  and  movements."  This,  however — Avhile  not  so  derogatory  as 
Mill's  impotent  God— is  too  sweeping,  being  forbidden  hy  a  previous  Faradisaical  state, 
God's  abhorrence  of  sin,  its  entailed  curse,  and  the  future  deliverance  of  creation.  We  must  fall 
back  upon  the  position  assumed  by  Leibnitz  (Knapp's  Theol.  p.  265)  in  his  Theodicy, 
viz.,  to  look  at  the  end  attained,  which,  in  view  of  the  good  results  produced  (e.g.,  in 
the  King  brought  us,  in  the  kings  and  priests  developed,  in  the  Theocracy  it  establishes, 
in  the  Eedemption  of  the  race  it  brings  forth,  in  the  praise  and  glory  it  causes,  etc.), 
influenced  God,  who  knoweth  all  things,  to  allow  its  introduction.  (Comp.  Oosterzee's 
Ch.  Dog.,  Herzog's  Ency.,  Art.  "  Sin,"  Julius  Miiller's  "  Ch.  Doc.  of  Sin.'') 

The  jjcrmission  of  sin— however  it  may  be  founded,  as  eminent  writers  endeavor  to 
show,  on  personal  liberty,  free-will — is  certainly  based  on  the  fact — as  taught  in  the 
Bible — that  God  can  and  does  overrule  it  to  be  ultimately  j^romotive  of  His  own  glory 
(so,  e.g.,  "  Greybeard"  (Graff),  '^Lay  Sermons,"  No.  42,  on  "  The  blessings  of  the  Fall")  ; 
otherwise  He  would  not  have  tolerated  its  existence  for  so  many  burdened  centuries. 

-  God's  ways,  however  mysterious  to  us  now,  will  be  justified  in  "the  age  to  come  ;" 
and  that  justification  will  be  found  in  the  Kingdom  as  constituted  under  the  Messiah. 
Sin  has  beaten  down  and  perverted  the  Theocratic  ordering  of  God  as  originally 
designed,  and  anciently  unfolded  in  its  initiatory  ;  it  caused  the  postjjonement  of  the 
same  for  many  centuries  ;  it  will  resist  with  increased  power  at  the  period  of  its  revela- 
tion ;  it  will  band  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  armies  against  the  Theocratic  King, 
but  it  will  ultimately  be  vanquished,  and  then  the  deep  mystery  will  be  unfolded.  Then 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  strength  of  sin  is  so  great  that  nothing  short  of  Omnipotence  can 
meet  and  destroy  it  ;  that  nothing  less  than  unspeakable  love  and  mercy  can  provide 
means  commensurate  to  overcoming  it  ;  that  nothing  but  the  Theocratic  power  lodged 
in  King  Jesus  can  triumphantly  resist  and  crush  it.  The  co-heirs  with  Christ  have  shown 
their  qualification  by  a  voluntary  renunciation  of  sin  for  co-rulershij)  in  a  kingdom 
which  is  expressly  designed  to  destroy  all  evil.  When  this  time  comes,  then  all  will  be 
made  manifest  ;  until  then  patience  and  hope  must  be  ours.  Now  we  see  "  through  a  glass 
darkly,"  but  then — after  a  few  thousand  years'  exi^erience  showing  that  without  God's 
jjersonal  government,  the  race  cannot  be  happy — all  will  be  explained — ]ust  as  Joseph's 
antecedent  trials — consistently  with  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and  a  superintending  Provi- 
dence. Faith,  with  child-like  trust,  receives  the  fact,  and  leaves  the  explanation  with  a 
returning  God. 

Obs.  5.  Taking  the  Bible  account  of  sin  and  its  results,  it  is  important 
to  notice  what  are  the  forfeited  blessings,  and  then  to  see  whether  the 
kingdom,  which  embraces  the  practical  realization  of  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion, restores  all  that  the  race  lost.  The  enumeration  of  the  most  weighty 
are  the  following  :  1.  The  loss  of  moral  purity  ;  2.  The  entailment  of 
physical  degeneracy  ;  3.  Subjection  to  toil,  disease,  death,  and  corrup- 
tion ;  4.  The  withdrawal  of  the  personal  presence  of  God  ;  5.  Divine 
intercommunication  with  angelic  beings  removed  ;  6.  The  infliction  of  a 
curse  upon  creation  ;  7.  A  struggle  for  life  and  its  blessings  under  uniform 
natural  law,  i.e.  the  special  provision  of  Eden  under  the  supernatural  no 
longer  afforded  ;  8.  The  loss  of  Eden  itself  ;  9.  The  non-perpetuation  of 
the  race  in  a  state  of  innocency  and  purity  ;  10.  The  non-erection  of  a 
perfect  government  because  of  resultant  depravity.  These  are  the  sad 
fruits  of  sin,  impressed  by  the  consciousness  of  guilt.  Now  the  primitive 
Church  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  fully  sustained  by  the  j)lain  teaching  of 
the  Scriptures,  affirms  a  complete  restoration  of  all  these  blessings.  The 
reader's  indulgence  is  asked  until  we  pass  over  the  doctrine  as  given  in  the 
Word,  and  by  the  early  Church.  This  much,  however,  may  be  said, 
1.  That  such  blessings  forfeited  can  only  be  restored  through  Divine  inter- 
ference ;  2.   That   such  a  restitution  indicates   the  completeness  of  the 


Prop.  8.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  107 

Divine  plan  ;  3.  That  such  a  removal  of  evil  shows  forth  the  might  and 
perfection  of  the  Savionr  ;  4.  That  such  a  Divine  purpose  contained  in  the 
Bible  and  established  by  tlie  inestimable  gift  of  a  Redeemer,  ever  keeping 
in  view  this  completeness,  never  contradicting  itself,  extending  through 
every  book  of  the  Scriptures,  and  given  in  successive  ages  and  by  men  in 
varied  circumstances  and  conditions  of  life,  must  be,  as  claimed,  an 
inspired  one. 

In  addition  :  Observing  the  ultimate  end  contemplated  by  the  Divine  Purpose,  and 
noticing  the  remarkable  provision  made  already  for  the  removal  of  sin  and  evil,  several 
things,  resulting  from  a  consideration  of  the  dealings  of  God  in  preparing  for  the  con- 
summation, must  be  impressed  ui^on  our  minds.  (1.)  The  remedial  measures  introduced 
and  enforced  by  Divine  Sovereignt}^  finding  their  climax  in  the  sacrificial  death  of  Jesus 
Christ,  show  that  man  must  have  fallen  from  his  former  estate,  thus  making  them  neces- 
sary. (2.)  The  call  to  repentance  and  faith  to  conform  to  the  remedial  provisions,  indi- 
cates in  the  trial  given  to  man  that  sin  is  voluntar3^  (3.)  A  Plan  of  Redemption 
culminating  in  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom,  and  flowing  from  God's  wisdom,  love,  and 
mercy,  is  eminently  worthy  of  man's  consideration  and  acceptance.  (4.)  This  Plan  to 
be  properly  appreciated  ought  to  be  contemplated  as  a  whole,  and  not  merely  in  some  of 
its  particulars.  (5.)  That  if  the  Plan,  as  a  whole,  is  adapted  to  secure  the  end  designed, 
and  if  carried  out  will  inevitably  produce  the  result  (Redemption  perfected)  aimed  at, 
then  the  subsidiary  parts  (including  the  fall,  etc.)  are  also  worthy  of  recei^tion  as 
being  related  to  it— the  greater  including  the  lesser.  (6.)  The  manifestation  of  a  visi- 
ble Theocratic  ordering  is  alone  capable  of  crushing  sin  and  removing  it  from  the 
world.  (7.)  That  evil  under  which  man  and  the  world  labors — however  subservient  as 
a  punishment,  as  testing  faith,  character,  etc.— is  the  result  of  God's  disapprobation  of 
sin,  and  is  only  tolerated  in  view  of  the  ultimate  result  that  God  brings  forth  from 
its  existence. 

The  favorite  theory  of  many  (Lubbock,  and  others),  to  invalidate  the  Biblical  account 
of  a  fall  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  position,  is  to  advocate  a  constant  and  invariable  rise 
and  progression  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  state,  i.e.,  from  the  lowest  savageism  to  the 
highest  civilization.  But  this  is  only  recognizing  one  factor  in  the  past,  viz.,  that  such 
a  rise  and  progress  can  be  the  result  of  favorable  circumstances  and  proi:)er  moral 
and  religious  appliances.  But  another  factor,  that  vitiates  the  universality  of  the  theory, 
is  purposely  overlooked,  viz.,  that  man  has  also  degenerated  into  savage  life,  dwindled 
from  power  into  weakness,  from  vast  numbers  into  a  small  number  and  even  into  extinc- 
tion,— as  exemplified  in  the  works  of  past  ages,  the  labors  of  extinct  races,  the  remains  of 
past  nations,  Assyrian,  Egyptian,  Persian,  Roman,  Mound-workers,  etc.  Man  (as  e.g. 
Frothingham,  Art.  in  Norlh  Amer.  Review,  1878,  p.  46,  "  Is  man  a  depraved  creature?") 
may  deny  the  natural  depravity  of  man,  and  designate  the  first  Adam  "  a  fiction"  and 
"  myth,"  a  "  creature  of  speculation,  and  as  a  creature  of  speculation  his  existence  dates 
back  no  farther  than  a  century  or  so  (!)  before  Christ."  Our  line  of  argument  will  amply 
meet  such  heart-wrought  objections  ;  for  the  present  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that 
upon  this  "  myth"  is  based  by  "  ignorant  and  designing  men"  a  most  wonderful  plan  of 
restitution,  with  such  a  unity,  so  astounding  in  its  manifestations  through  many  centu- 
ries, and  so  well  attested  by  a  continued  and  existing  fulfilment  of  prophecy  and  of  per- 
sonal experience,  that  such  writers  are  utterly  unable  to  account  for  "  the  fiction"  that 
so  many  esteem  the  precious  truth, 

Ols.  6.  Latterly  it  has  become  fashionable  in  the  works  of  Naturalists, 
Free  Religionists,  etc.,  to  ignore  evil  and  enter  into  a  laudation  of  nature, 
its  harmony,  its  goodness,  uniform  beneficence,  etc.  This  is  purposely 
done,  so  that  Christianity,  which  holds  forth,  in  connection  with  the  good, 
the  dark  side  of  nature,  may  suffer  by  the  comparison.  The  contrast, 
however,  is  imperfect  ;  and  the  spirit  suggesting  it,  if  not  dislike  to  the 
Bible,  at  least  does  injustice  to  its  teachings.  The  ostrich  is  said  to  deem 
itself  out  of  danger  when  its  head  is  thrust  into  the  sand  and  its  pursuer  for 
the  time  is  unseen  ;  so  these,  by  simply  closing  their  eyes  to  the  inevitable 
of  nature,  consider  themselves  the  highly  favored  sons  and  daughters  of 


108  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  8. 

natural  law  and  development.  The  suffering,  misery,  sorrow,  destructive 
agencies,  voracious  grave  entailed  by  and  experienced  through  nature,  are 
sedulously  kept  out  of  view,  and  nature  or  the  absolute  is  nothing  but 
manifested,  realized  love,  while  in  Christianity  the  God,  who  is  repre- 
sented as  making  provision  for  deliverance  from  such  evil,  is  nothing  but 
a  tyrant,  a  gloomy  despot  !  Is  this  fair  or  candid.^  Without  pausing  to 
inquire  how  far  theology  with  its  deductions  and  inferences  added  to  the 
Word  is  responsible  for  driving  men  into  such  a  state  of  antagonism,  it  is 
sufficient  to  say  :  if  nature,  or  the  absolute,  is  all  that  they  claim,  although 
evil  and  death  are  allowed,  why  not  apply  the  same  criticism  to  the  God  of 
Revelation,  who  also  has  permitted  the  same,  that  they  do  to  nature  ?  And 
the  more  so,  because  the  God  of  the  Bible  proposes  a  recovery  from  evil 
which  the  other,  in  no  shape  or  form,  suggests  ?  Evidently,  because  it 
does  not  suit  their  purpose  ;  and  because  it  would  inevitably  weaken  and 
destroy  their  own  argument.  Before  applying  their  destructive  criticism 
to  Eevelation,  let  them  first  reconcile  with  their  own  theory  of  love,  etc., 
the  evil  that  is  in  nature,  its  destroying  forces,  diseases,  pestilences,  agony, 
and  devouring  death.  If  they  cannot  reconcile  this  with  their  own  notion 
of  a  loving  nature  or  absolute,  let  them  frankly  confess  it ;  if  they  can 
explain  and  reconcile  all  this  with  their  theory  of  goodness,  thousands 
would  gladly  welcome  the  solution.  Until  such  a  solution  is  given,  they 
of  all  others,  because  relying  upon  reason,  should  not  object  to  the  mystery 
of  evil  as  related  to  Divine  revelation.  If  a  reconciliation  were  attempted, 
avoiding  ultra  naturalism  and  admitting  an  intelligent  first  cause,  it  would 
evidently  fall  in  the  line  of  those  attempted  in  behalf  of  the  God  of  the 
Bible.  We  are  content  to  receive  the  Biblical  account  that  evil  is  the 
resultant  of  a  rejection  of  the  theocratic  idea  {i.e.^  a  violation  of  God's 
rule),  that  it  continues  until  God  has,  by  a  course  of  testing,  gathered  out 
all  the  material  requisite  to  establish  the  theocracy  in  a  most  glorious  and 
triumphant  manner,  and  that  when  all  things  are  prepared,  the  postpone- 
ment caused  by  sin  will  close  by  tlie  complete  overthrow  of  evil  through  the 
appointed  King  and  Ilis  co- rulers. 

It  is  true  that  those  who  advocate  the  Nihilism  of  the  inclividual  man,  his  perishing, 
admit  the  evil  in  Nature,  and  from  it,  owing  to  unchangeable  law,  are  forced  into  their 
theory  of  gloom.  But  even  such  are  again  divided  into  two  classes.  One  party,  as  some 
German  writers,  present  no  hope  of  the  future,  being  logically  driven  to  it  by  the  fact 
that  the  evils  are  so  inexorably  related  to  eternal  natural  law  that  they  are  beyond  man's 
power  of  removal.  Another  party,  however  (as  e.g.  Winwood  Eeade  in  Martyrdom  of 
Man),  while  giving  no  hope  to  the  individual  man  (mere  "  animated  jelly"),  somehow,  in 
a  Pantheistic  idealism,  dream  of  a  glorious  future  for  Humanit}^  How  illogical  this  is,  * 
needs  no  explanation,  seeing  that  inevitable  natural  law  which  promises  no  deliverance 
from  evil  for  the  individual,  presents  none  for  humanity  in  the  future.  Eather  than 
humbly  to  receive  the  Word  of  God,  men  will  seek  out  and  trust  in  the  most  extravagant 
theories. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  some  unbelieving  philosophers  give  as  dark  a  j)ortraiture  of 
human  nature  as  the  most  ultra  theologian.  Passing  by  the  Nihilists,  we  select  e.g. 
Mill,  who,  in  one  of  his  Essays,  remarks  :  "  Man,  viewed  as  a  simj^le  production  of 
nature,  has  in  him  but  one  good  thing,  the  capacity  of  imi^rovement  ;  he  is  naturally 
devoid  of  a  sense  of  truth,  a  coward,  cruel,  selfish,  and  even  a  lover  of  dirt.  The  truth 
is,  there  is  hardly  a  point  of  excellence  belonging  to  human  character  which  is  not 
decidedly  repugnant  to  the  untutored  feelings  of  human  nature."  "  Whatever  good 
thing  man  now  possesses,  either  in  himself  or  in  his  outward  surroundings,  he  has 
attained  not  from  the  gift  of  nature  but  from  his  having  conquered  and  subdued  her." 
Then  contrast  the  laments  of  Nihilism,  and  the  shading  of  the  picture  is  immensely 
darker  than  that  given  by  the  Word  ;  and  yet  men  accuse  the  Bible  of  gloom,  etc.     Now 


Prop.  8.]  the  theocratic  kijn-gdom.  109 

whicli  class  of  onr  opponents  are  we  to  credit  ?  The  one,  that  eulogizes,  or  the  other, 
that  depreciates  human  nature  ?  Or,  is  it  the  safest  to  take  the  medium  and  explanation 
given  in  the  Word,  viz.,  that  man,  although  fallen,  possesses  noble  characteristics 
Vi^orthy  of  being  redeemed  and  employed  in  his  Creator's  service  ;  that  fallen,  he  is 
unable  to  deliver  himself  from  the  sinfulness  and  evil  entailed  without  Divine  Help  ; 
and  that  accepting  such  aid,  tendered  in  love  and  mercy,  it  restores  him  to  a  position  of 
moral  worthiness  and  excellence  by  directing  his  capacities  and  powers  in  the  wky  of 
holiness  and  love. 

A  word  of  caution  in  conclusion  :  The  attacks  of  unbelief  come  from  all  sides,  and  one 
of  the  most  despicable  that  has  fallen  under  our  observation  is  that  which  endeavors  to 
charge  the  Word  of  God  with  advocating  sin  or  rather  fleshly  lusts.  Whatever  may  have 
been  the  sinful  practices  of  professors  or  of  the  church  in  the  past,  the  Bible  pointedly 
condemyis  all  such,  warns  us  that  they  shall  be  witnessed,  and  urges  us  to  purity  and  holi- 
ness. This  is  so  plain,  that  he  who  denies  it  does  deliberate  violence  to  a  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  the  Scriptures.  The  Word,  which  provides  so  costly  a  i^rovision  for 
sin,  cannot  and  does  not  indulge  it.  Now  it  happens  that  recently  some  writers  (as  e.g. 
the  author  of  Ancient  Sex  Worshii))  endeavor  to  show  that  the  fleshly  tendency  in  human 
nature  to  worship  the  sexual  organs  as  emblematic,  etc.,  is,  more  or  less  endorsed  by 
Christianity,  This  offensive  manner  of  bringing  discredit  upon  the  Word  by  linking 
with  it  the  excesses  of  sex  worship,  defeats  itself  in  the  estimation  of  every  reflecting 
and  sensible  mind,  because  the  Bible  so  pointedly  condemns  all  fleshly  lusts  and  posi- 
tively declares  that  those  entertaining  them  shall  never  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God. 


110  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  9. 


Proposition  9.  The  7iature  of,  and  tJie  tilings  ])ertaining  to  the 
Mngdorn^  can  only  he  ascertained  loitlmi  the  limits  of  Scripture. 

This  kingdom  is  God's  kingdom  ;  it  is  one  that  He  i')roiJoses  to 
establish,  and  being  the  ontgrowth  of  His  Divine  purpose,  we  must 
apply  to  Him  for  information  respecting  it.  This  He  extends  to  ns 
in  His  Word,  and  what  He  has  said,  being  the  only  One  capable  of 
imparting  knowledge  on  the  subject,  is  to  be  received  in  preference 
to  human  opinions!  The  kingdom  itself,  the  subject  of  a  thousand 
prophecies  pertaining  to  the  future,  is,  as  delineated  by  God,  a  pre- 
diction of  that  which  is  to  come,  and  hence  beyond  human  ability 
to  portray,  unless  God's  description  of  it  is  carefully  studied  and 
copied.  Outside  of  the  Scriptures,  nothing  reliable  is  to  be  found, 
only  excepting  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  in  accord  with  Holy  Writ. 
Scripture,  and  that  alone,  contains  the  reliable,  authoritative  infor- 
mation ;  and  therefore,  instead  of  going  to  second  sources,  applica- 
tion should  be  made  to  the  fountain-head  itself  to  appreciate  and 
enjoy  the  issuing  pure  stream  of  covenant  and  prophecy.  God's 
words  in  describing  what  He  intends  to  perform,  are  most  certainly 
to  be  i>ref erred  to  man's.  We  are  justified  in  thus  placing  confi- 
dence alone  in  the  Word  of  God,  seeing  that,  when  this  kingdom  is 
to  be  manifested  in  all  its  glory,  the  King  Himself  has  the  signifi- 
cant name  (Rev.  19  :  13),  in  addition  to  the  one  upon  His  vesture 
and  thigh,  ''The  Word  of  God,""  for  it  is  in  Him,  by  Him,  and 
through  Him  that  the  Word  is  fulfilled  and  realized. 

One  of  the  distinguishing  results  of  the  Reformation  was  "  the  resurrection  of  the 
Bible,"  making  it,  as  in  the  Apostolic  era,  the  object  of  constant  citation  and  appeal. 
In  view  of  this  Chillingworth  (  Works,  c.  4)  said  :  "  The  Bible  only  is  the  Religion  of 
Protestants,"  and  Dorner  {His.  Prot.  Tlieol.  1,  2)  remarks  :  "  Protestantism  seeks, 
indeed,  its  -ultimate  foundation  in  the  nature  of  Christianity,  as  it  is  handed  down  to  us 
in  a  documentary  form  in  the  Scriptures."  With  this  may  be  compared  the  utterances 
of  Protestant  Confessions  and  Symbolical  books,  as  e.g.  Westminster  Conf.,  Art.  of 
Church  of  Eng.,  Conf.  Hel.,  Book  of  Concord,  Neth.  Confess.,  Heidelberg  Cat.,  etc.  For 
the  opinions  of  Luther,  Zwingle,  Calvin,  etc.,  see  Hagenbach's  His.  of  Bodrines,  Vol.  2, 
sec.  240,  M'ho  also  informs  us  (Vol.  1,  sec.  212)  that  "  the  formal  principle  of  the  Refor- 
mation, of  Protestantism  is  subjection  to  the  authority  of  Scripture."  Dr.  Schatf  {TJte 
Principle  of  Protestantism,  p.  70,  etc.)  discusses  this  "  formal  or  knowledge  principle"  in 
an  interesting  manner,  asserting  :  "  If  there  be  then  any  unerring  fountain  of  triith, 
needed  to  satisfy  religious  want,  it  can  be  found  only  in  the  Word  of  God,  who  is  himself 
the  truth  ;  and  this  becomes  thus  consequently  the  highest  norm  and  rule,  by  which  to 
measure  all  human  truth,  all  ecclesiastical  tradition,  and  all  synodical  decrees."  (Comp. 
Art.  "  'The  Apostles'  Creed,''  Princeton  Review,  1852.)  Dr.  Schaff  justly  shows  how  this 
was  a  revival  of  the  position  occupied  by  the  early  church,  by  some  of  the  later  Fathers, 
and  even,  however  obscured  and  fettered  by  subsequent  tradition,  by  some  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  divines,  forcibly  quoting  Moehler,  etc.  The  usual  Romish  view  is  expressed  by 
Bellarmine,  making  the  Church  superior  to  the  Bible,  its  judge  ;  and  this  is  exemplified 
e.g.  in  Heefert  (Hagenbach's  His.  oj  Doc.  Vol.  1,  id.  424)  pronouncing  the  doctrinal  posi- 


Prop.  9.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  Ill 

tion  of  Wycliffe  and  Huss  at  tlieir  trials  (viz.,  as  solely  founded  on  the  Scriptures),  "  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  error."  Hippolytus  (Bunsen's  lllppulytus,  Vol.  2,  p.  144),  says  : 
"  There  is  one  God,  my  brethren,  and  Him  we  know  only  by  the  Holy  Scriptures.  For 
in  a  like  manner  as  he  who  wishes  to  learn  the  wisdom  of  this  world  cannot  accomplish 
it  without  studying  the  doctrines  of  the  i^hilosophers,  thus  all  who  wish  to  practise 
divine  wisdom  will  not  learn  it  from  any  other  source  than  from  the  Word  of  God.  Let 
us  therefore  see  what  the  Holy  Scriptures  pronounce  ;  let  us  understand  what  they 
teach  ;  and  let  us  believe  what  the  Father  wishes  to  be  believed,  and  praise  the  Son  as 
He  wishes  to  be  praised,  and  accept  the  Holy  Spirit  as  He  wishes  to  be  given.  Not 
according  to  our  own  will,  nor  according  to  our  own  reason,  nor  forcing  what  God  has 
given,  but  let  us  see  all  this  as  He  has  willed  to  shew  it  by  the  Holy  Scriptures." 

Ods.  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  being  one  of  the  greatest  in  the 
Bible  (Props.  1  and  2),  it  must,  like  all  pure  Christian  doctrine,  be  found 
within  its  pages.  No  true  or  scripturally  founded  doctrine  of  the  king- 
dom can  possibly  be  at  variance  with  the  express  language  of  Holy  Writ. 
This  is  self-evident,  and  important  use  will  be  made  of  this  principle, 
clearly  showing  as  we  proceed  that  no  doctrine  on  this  subject  excepting 
that  of  the  primitive  Christian  Church  is  in  full  sympathy  with  the  Word. 
This  correspondence,  so  far  as  one  sense,  the  literal,  is  concerned,  our  most 
decided  opponents  frankly  admit. 

This  work  being  largely  composed  of  doctrine,  it  is  proper,  briefly,  to  notice  the 
notion  extensively  held  and  strenuously  advocated  (e.g.  Dr.  Arnold  in  LUemture  and 
Dogma),  that  it  makes  no  material  difference  what  we  believe  only  so  that  the  conduct  is 
right,  for  "  religion  is  conduct,"  etc.  This  is  a  crusade  renewed  against  the  presentation 
of  truth  in  a  dogmatical  or  doctrinal  form,  and  finds  a  champion  in  Prof.  Seely,  who 
raises  the  standard,  "  Christian  morality  without  dogmas."  This  cry  is  raised  in  many 
quarters,  being  duly  appreciated  by  the  sceptical  as  a  blow  at  a  vital  part  of  Christianity. 
(Thus  e.g.  D'Aubigne,  in  his  Address  to  Ch.  Alliance  at  N.  York,  informs  us  that  "  at 
an  important  assembly  held  lately  in  German  Switzerland,  at  which  were  present  many 
men  of  position,  both' in  Chnrch  and  State,  the  basis  of  the  new  religion  was  laid  down  : 
*  No  doctrines,'  w\as  the  watchword  on  that  occasion,  '  No  new  doctrines,  whatever  tliey 
may  be,  in  place  of  the  old  ;  Liberty  alone.'  ")  Freely  conceding  the  difference  between 
doctrine  and  conduct,  doctrine  and  practical  religion,  doctrine  and  Christian  life  ;  cheer- 
fully willing  to  attest  to  the  exceeding  value  of  the  latter,  and  that  it  may  even  exist 
without  the  entertainment  of  a  great  amount  of  doctrinal  knowledge,  yet  it  is  folly  to 
disconnect  doctrine  from  religion,  seeing  that  the  latter  is  a  natural  outgrowth  from  the 
former,  that  they  sustain  a  mutual  relationship,  and  that  to  produce  a  symmetrical  whole 
they  must  be  united.  Doctrine  has  been  aptly  compared  to  the  root,  and  morality  or 
conduct  to  the  growth  ;  for  every  believer  must  accept  of  some  truths  giving  motives  for 
conduct,  whicii  are  either  doctrinally  stated  in  the  Word,  or  dogmatically  presented  in 
the  formulas  of  the  church.  Faith  must,  in  some  form,  have  an  outward,  intellectual 
expression  in  connection  with  its  heart  work.  Mind  and  heart  are  both  enlisted.  Truth 
to  be  apprehended  must  be  formally  stated.  Reason  demands,  intellectual  culture 
requires,  as  its  concomitant,  a  distinctive  statement  in  language  of  those  ideas  which 
are  given  either  as  worthy  of  credence,  or  as  inducements  to  action.  Doctrine  may  in- 
deed exist  without  corresponding  conduct  (which  may  be  the  fault  of  the  man  and  not 
of  the  doctrine),  but  true  Christian  conduct  cannot  be  produced  without  doctrine,  as  e.g. 
the  doctrine  of  God,  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  repentance,  of  faith,  etc.,  influencing  us  to  a 
certain  determined  course  of  life.  To  destroy  this  vital  union,  is  to  sever  the  tree  from 
its  roots,  to  remove  the  building  from  its  foundation,  and  thus  give  us  a  sickly,  dying 
tree  and  a  ruined,  unsafe  building.  The  fact  is,  that  the  very  men  who  strive  to  discon- 
nect what  God  has  joined  together  by  inseparable  laws  ;  who  sneer  at  the  declaration  of 
the  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford  for  saying  that  "  religion  is  no  more  to  be 
severed  from  dogmas  than  light  from  the  sun" — these  men  are  actually  engaged  in  laying 
down  doctrines,  dogmatically  expressed,  for  our  acceptance.  This  feature  alone,  the 
resultant  of  a  law  that  they  cannot  avoid,  indicates  the  connection  between  the  two, 
which,  in  the  very  act  of  an  attempted  destruction,  they  only  confirm.  Graybeard  (Lay 
Serjnons,  Nos.  75  and  76)  urges  "  the  importance  of  maintaining  sound  doctrine,"  assert- 
ing truthfully  that  "  the  great  fundamental  framework  of  the  Scriptures  is  its  doctrines, ' ' 


112  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  9. 

and  comparing  them  to  the  bones  of  the  body,  imparting  consistency  and  form.  He 
concludes  :  "  All  sound  docti'ine  centres  in  Christ,  and  is  founded  on  Christ.  Not  to 
know  its  power  and  value  is  to  be  a  weakling,  and  to  deny  the  imj^ortance  of  it  is  to  dis- 
honor God.  '  Whosoever-  iransgresseth  and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not 
God.  He  that  abideth  in  the  docti'ine  of  Christ  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  ^Son.  If  there 
come  any  man  unto  you,  and  bringeth  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your  house, 
neither  bid  him  God-speed  ;  for  he  that  biddeth  him  Godspeed  is  partaker  of  his  evil 
deeds'  (2  Jno.  9-11)."  The  Bible  commends  "  continuing  steadfastly  in  the  apostles' 
doctrine"  (Acts  2  :42),  and  persevering  in  "  sound  doctrine"  (1  Tim,  1  : 3,  10),  as  pro- 
motive of  strength  and  salvation  (e.g.  1  Tim.  4  :  13-16). 

Obs.  2.  To  comprehend  fully  any  doctrine,  especially  that  of  the  king- 
dom, there  must  be  a  diligent  comparing  of  Scripture  with  Scripture.  Dr. 
Neander  {His.  of  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  623)  says  of  Melanchthon  that  on  occasion 
of  the  Leipzig  disputation  he  stated,  *'  that  it  is  the  duty  to  abide  by  the 
pure  and  simple  meaning  of  the  Holy  Writ,  as,  indeed,  heavenly  truths  are 
always  the  simplest  ;  this  meaning  is  to  be  found  by  comparing  Holy  Writ 
with  itself."  Dr.  Dorner  {His.  Prot.,  vol.  2,  p.  429)  justly  remarks  :  "  The 
work  of  theological  criticism,  especially  in  so  far  as  it  touches  upon  doc- 
trinal matters,  must  always  at  last  become  a  criticism,  or  a  measuring,  of 
Scripture  by  Scripture — in  other  words,  the  self-criticism  of  the  canon 
through  the  instrumentality  of  believers."  ^  The  hermeneutical  canon  of 
the  Reformers  (Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  2,  sec.  240),  ''to  interpret 
and  illustrate  Scripture  by  Scripture,"  is  ours,  imitating  "  The  Noble  Les- 
son" of  the  Waldensians  :  "  The  Scriptures  speak,  and  we  must  believe. 
Look  at  the  Scriptures  from  beginning  to  end." 

^  This  rule  was  early  observed  in  the  church.  Thus  e.g.  Neander  {His.  of  Dog. 
Vol.  1,  p.  77)  says  of  Irenasus  "  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  should  be  explained  by  compar- 
ing one  passage  with  another,  and  that  he  held  them  to  be  the  complete  and  normal 
source  of  the  knowledge  of  Christian  doctrine."  We  follow  Irenteus,  of  whom  Erasmus 
(Eras.  Epist.  prefixed  to  Irenfeus)  says  :  "  Irengeus  fought  against  the  troops  of  heretics 
with  arguments  (munitions)  drawn  from  the  Scriptures  alone."  This  was  only  an  imi- 
tating of  Christ,  the  apostles,  and  prophets,  who  constantly  apjDealed  to,  and  cited  from, 
the  Record,  thus  comparing  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  gratifying  to  see  eminent 
men,  in  Europe  and  this  country,  lay  so  much  stress  on  the  self-interpretation  of  the 
Bible,  by  which  alone  the  trUe  analogy  of  it  can  be  discovered,  and  a  real  profound 
acquaintance  with  its  substance  can  be  acquired.  In  such  a  comparison,  however,  a 
number  of  things  must  be  observed  in  order  to  make  it  consistent  and  successful.  AH 
Scripture  must  be  received,  and  not  a  portion  of  it  be  rejected  (e.g.  as  Acts  and  Pauline 
epistles  by  Swedenborg)  because  we  cannot  make  it  fit  into  our  doctrinal  system.  The 
connected  reasoning  of  the  writer  must  not  give  place  to  deductions  from  mere  fi'ag- 
mentary  or  isolated  passages.  A  doctrine  miist,  by  an  instituted  comparison,  be  in  har- 
mony both  with  the  general  analogy  of  Scripture  and  of  Eaith,  i.e.  it  must  not  be  in 
antagonism  with  the  grammatical  language  or  meaning  of  Scripture,  or  with  its  doctrinal 
teaching.  The  comparison  must  be  made  with  due  reverence  for  Scripture,  so  that  a 
willingness  to  receive  its  meaning,  without  undue  bias  or  prejudice,  may  exist.  Passages 
that  are  strictly  parallel,  and  not  merely  made  such  by  accommodation  or  perversion,  are 
to  be  employed,  and,  in  brief,  the  cautions  and  rules  laid  down  for  a  consistent  doctrinal 
interpretation  by  such  writers  as  Home  {Introd.  of  the  Bible),  Alford  (Hoio  to  Study  the  Nevo 
Test.),  Dunn  {The  Study  of  the  Bible),  Bickerstetli  {Scripture  Help),  Stuart  {Elements  of 
Interpretation,  altered  from  Ernesti's  work),  etc.,  must  be  duly  observed.  With  all  this, 
there  must  be  an  abiding  sense  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Word,  so  that  there  is  no  unjust 
discrimination  between  portions  of  it,  as  e.g.  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments 
(Schleiermacher,  etc.),  between  the  so-called  Narrator  and  the  Commentator  (Eothe,  etc.), 
between  the  Gospels  and  the  Epistles  (Renan,  etc.),  between  the  Bible  and  tradition 
(Bellarmine,  etc.),  between  the  Scriptures  and  human  opinion  (Parker,  etc.),  etc. 

Ols.  3.  The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  being  thus  exclusively  derived  from 
the  Word  for  reasons  already  assigned  (others  will  be  given  hereafter),  an 


PkOP.  9.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDO^I.  113 

earnest  protest  must-,  be  presented  against  a  spirit,  widely  prevalent  among 
eminent  divines,  manifested  in  the  adoption  of  a  tlieory  by  wiiich  a  doc- 
trinal growth  in  the  Church  is  made  to  cover  up  alleged  weaknesses  and 
misapprehensions  of  the  truth  in  the  founders  of  Christianity.  Reference 
is  made  to  "  the  de\^elopment  theory"  as  applied  to  doctrine,  by  which  the 
idea  of  the  kingdom  is  represented  as  "  a  seed  "  or  "  a  germ  "  surrounded 
by  "  a  husk,"  or  "  a  rind  "  {i.e.,  literal  sense),  out  of  which,  however,  Avas 
produced  or  developed  the  perfect  tree  or  fruit  (so  e.g.  Neauder,  Nevin, 
and  others).*  The  reasons,  evidently,  which  actuated  pious  and  able  men 
to  accept  of  this  theory  and  employ  it,  were,  first,  their  inability  otherwise 
to  meet  the  tremendous  shafts  of  infidelity  levelled  at  the  early  Christianity 
(showing  that  doctrinally  it  was  different  from  the  faith  entertained  at 
present) ;  and  second,  the  desire  through  it  to  secure  some  unity  in  their 
conception  of  the  nature,  constitution,  etc.,  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Admitting  that  truth  can  be  obtained  by  a  study  of  nature,  science,  race, 
etc. — by  observing  the  development  of  mind,  experience,  the  Church,  etc., 
yet  all  this  progress,  this  attestation  to  and  amplification  of  truth,  is  not 
to  be  placed  in  comyarison  with  the  truth  given  by  God  Himself.  The 
Scriptures  are  supreme  authority  to  the  believer,  and  no  change,  no  varia- 
tion, no  substitution,  under  the  pretence  of  growth,  is  allowable  unless  we 
have  tlie  same  indicated  hy  God  Himself.  Increase  of  doctrinal  knowledge 
does  not  consist  in  altering  the  form  of  doctrine,  but  in  obtaining  a 
clearer,  more  enlarged  apprehension  of  tlic  unaltered  doctrine.  Oosterzee 
{Ch.  Dog.,  vol.  1,  p.  70)  justly  grounds  progress  upon  "amplification" 
and  not  in  '^  alteration."  Rev.  Bernard  {Bampton  Lectures,  ''  The  Prog- 
ress of  Doctrine  in  the  New  Testament")  forcibly  argues  (Lee.  1)  that  the 
Divine  teaching  coincides  in  extent  with  the  present  canon,  and  that  the 
progress  of  doctrine  in  the  Church  since  such  communication  is  a  progress 
of  ajJj^reliension  by  man.  lie  clearly  shows  that  no  advance  in  Divine 
teaching  after  the  apostolic  age  was  ever  admitted  by  the  Church,  and  that 
all  elucidations,  renewed  definitions,  etc.,  indicative  of  a  clearer  apprehen- 
sion of  the  truth,  are  invariably  based  upon,  and  derived  from,  tJie  origi- 
nal truth  in  the  Old  and  Xew  Testaments.  He  also  etfectively  points  out  that 
innovations  (as  in  Dr.  Newman's  theory  of  development  including  new 
doctrines)  even  are  sustained  by  their  upholders  under  the  plea  of  a  tradi- 
tion enforced  by  extending  it  back  to  apostolic  days,  thus  implying,  or 
inferring,  apostolic  sanction.' 

The  kingdom  is  something  described  by  God  for  us  to  believe  ;  and 
hence  is  not  one  thing  to-day  and  another  to-morrow,  one  thing  under 
the  former  dispensation  and  another  under  this  ordering.  The  description 
of  it  is  unchangeably  the  same,  for  it  is  a  simple  declaration  of  tlie  Divine 
purpose  to  which  it  is  impossible,  without  detriment,  to  add  anything. 
It  is   a   positive   revelation,  portraying  that  when  realized  certain  great 

*  We  leave  one  of  its  advocates  to  eulogize  the  extent  of  tlie  development  theory  enter- 
tained. Lecky  {His.  Rational.,  p.  183)  says  :  "  This  idea  of  continued  and  uninterrupted 
development  is  one  that  seems  absolutely  to  override  the  age.  It  is  scarcely  jjossible  to 
open  any  really  able  book  on  any  subject  without  encountering  it  in  some  form.  It  is 
stirring  all  science  to  its  very  depths  ;  it  is  revolutionizing  all  historical  literature.  Its 
prominence  in  theology  is  so  great  that  there  is  scarcely  any  school  that  is  altogether 
exempt  from  its  influence.  We  have  seen,  in  our  own  day,  the  Church  of  Eome  itself 
defended  in  '  An  Essay  on  Development,'  and  by  a  strong  application  of  the  laws  of 
progress.*' 


114  THE   TTIEOCRATIO   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  9. 

events  are  to  transpire,  certain  promises  are  to  be  joyfully  experienced, 
etc.,  and  therefore,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  it  cannot  be  a  mere 
"germ"  which  is  to  sprout  forth  into  something  else.  The  theory  of 
development,  especially  when  applied  to  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom, 
must  be  regarded  as  an  important  concession  to  infidelity.^ 

1  The  fundamental  Montanistic  notion  (Kurtz,  Ch.  His.  Vol.  1,  p.  132)  that  Divine 
Eevelation  is  gradually  end  constantly  developed,  finds  its  extremes  m  such  doctrinal 
additions  as  are  given  by  Swedenborg,  Joseph  Smith,  Ann  Lee,  etc.  But  even  in  those 
who  are  utterly  opposed  to  all  such  extravagancies,  it  is  still  found  in  a  modified  form.  . 
It  is  enunciated  in  the  principle  laid  down  in  Hagenbach's  His.  o/ i>o«rme  that  "  the 
doctrinal  substance  of  the  Scriptures"  is  "as  a  living  seed,  capable  of  the  most  prolific 
development  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  most  unfavorable  influences  it  retains  the  formative 
energy,  by  which  it  evokes  new  and  living  products  adapted  to  the  times."  Now  while 
this  might  not  be  objectionable  in  one  sense,  yet  when  applied  to  doctrine  it  stands  forth 
really  as  an  effort  to'reconcile  the  departure  of  the  church  (as  e.g.  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
kingdom)  from  the  early  doctrinal  position  to  a  later.  It  is  a  bridge,  conveniently  erected 
by  philosophy,  to  cover  the  w/ly  chasm  between  Primitive  and  Later  Christianity.  The 
parable  of  the  leaven  is  pressed  into  its  service,  as  if  it  delineated  doctrinal  change  or 
growth  in  jdace  of  the  simple  influence,  controlling  power  of  the  truth  (or  of  eiror)  over 
the  heart.  The  seed,  blade,  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,  of  Mark  4  :  26-29,  is  made 
to  cover  doctrinal  deviations,  just  as  if  the  doctrine,  full  grown,  were  to  be  harvested  in 
place  of  the  fruit  developed  by  the  reception  of  thf^  truth.  Much  is  affiimed  respecting 
the  difference  between  the  seed  and  the  tree  and  fruit  ;— this  analogy  holds  good  m 
nature  and  also  in  grace  (when  truth  is  represented  as  the  seed  and  the  results  in 
increased  morality,  piety  as  a  growth  into  fruit),  but  not  in  the  Word  as  to  doctrinal 
growth.  A  Scriptural  doctrine  fully  stated  is  the  whole  doctrine,  or  if  partially  given  so 
much  of  it  as  God  sees  proper  to  reveal,  to  ichich  man  can  add  nothing  ;  and  that  of  the 
kingdom,  dealing  exclusively  in  things  belonging  to  God  and  only  kno\^n  to  Him, 
tails  specially  under  this  category.  If  such  a  doctrine  is  imperfectly  given  or  is  con- 
cealed under  a  covering,  and  it  is  left  to  infirm  man  to  develop  its  real  meaning,  uho,  if 
we  are  to  go  outside  of  the  Scriptures,  has  gained  its  true  meaning?  Gut  of  the  over- 
whelming abundance  of  dogmatic  statements,  which  then  is  the  genuine  fruit  ?  Cr,  are 
they  all  the  legitimate  outgrowth  of  the  same  "germ  ?"  Why  embrace  a  theory  which 
evidently  lowers  the  authority  of  Scripture  by  enveloping  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom 
in  an  unperceived  "germ"  but  a  very  perceptible  "husk  ;"  which  sends  us  away  to 
fallible  man  for  "  the  real  truth  ;  "  which  is  forbidden  by  the  Word  itself  when  declar- 
ing its  doctrines  unchanqeahly  the  same  ;  which  makes  a  particular  doctrine  in  one  century 
to  be  held  in  accordance  with  the  letter  of  the  Word,  and  in  another  and  following 
centuries  directly  the  opposite  to  accord  with  an  alleged  spirit  ;  and  which  deliberately 
fastens  upon  Holy  Writ  the  vagaries  and  dreams  of  man  as  its  natural  outgrowth  ?  The 
development  producing  change  is  not  in  the  doctrine  but  m  the  individual  ;  the  doc- 
trine is  given  to  the  individual  and  to  the  church  that  both  may  grow  thereby,  and  not 
that  the  eloctrine  may  grow  into  something  else  by  the  church.  Doctrine  as  seed  in  the 
heart  is  productive  of  good  works,  and  not  of  doctrinal  change  ;  the  very  seal  given  by 
God  is  to  be  retained  in  the  heart,  and  it  is  not  to  he  exchanged  for  improved  or  developed 
seed  of  man's  proposing.  God  bestf)ws  doctrine  to  instruct,  to  guide,  to  change,  to 
sanctify  man,  and  not  for  man  to  take  it  and  mould  and  transmute  it  according  to  his 
will.  Christian,  Bible  doctrine  ever  remains  the  same,  and  can  only  -be  authoritatively 
changed  by  God  Himself.  It  is  GocVs  truth  and  not  man's.  If  man  could  add  to  it, 
modify  or  alter  it,  or  even  bend  it  in  accommodation,  what  infallible  standard  or  guide 
woukl  there  be  to  protect  us  against  error  and  unbelief?  The  motive  power  to  virtue 
and  holiness  embraced  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  is  deteriorated  just  in  proportion 
as  changes  are  introduced.  The  more  Scriptural  our  faith,  the  more  pious  and  devoted 
the  life,  seeing  that  the  purest  influence  for  good  comes  from  God^s  own  gracious  words. 
(Comp.  e.g.  Mozley's  "  Theory  of  Development,"  in  reply  to  Newman's  "Essay  on  the 
Development  of  Christian  Doctrine,"  Sprecher's  ^^ Groundwork  of  Theol.,'"  etc.) 

'^  It  is  a  concession  to  unbelief,  in  that  it  rejects  the  grammatical  sense  and  makes 
Scripture  language  changeable,  placing  truth  in  a  variety  of  aspects  of  antagonism  (thus 
e.g.  making  the  declaration  of  the  letter  to  conflict  with  that  of  the  spirit).  It  presses 
the  parables  by  an  analogy  drawn  from  the  vegetable  world  until  they  are  comp  ell  eel  to 
"  crawl  on  all  fours."     It  causes  a  direct  conflict  between  the  exx)ress  language  of  Script- 


Prop.  9.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  115 

ure  and  the  idea  or  notion  advocated.  And  it  does  this  to  account  for  the  variations  of 
doctrine  in  the  church  on  the  subject  of  the  kingdom,  and  to  make  the  external  church 
better  than  she  merits.  It  is,  to  say  the  least,  dangerous  to  receive  a  theory  by  which 
we  may  apologize  for  the  introduction  of  new  doctrines  in  the  past  and  for  the  "future  ; 
and  which  leaves  us  no  Divinely  constituted  exponent  of  authority  in  doctrine  but 
allows  the  doctrinal  position  to  be  settled  by  an  interpretation  at  variance  with  a  legiti- 
mate grammatical  sense.  It  presents  us  (as  in  Neander.  etc.,)  the  most  shadowy,  mystical 
conceptions  (e.g.  "  the  consciousness  of  the  Church,  and  its  authoritative  utterances,") 
to  be  the  true  criterion  of  the  truth.  Unbelief  accepts  of  the  favorite  j^hrase  "  Chris- 
tian consciousness"  in  this  development  scheme.  Thus  e.g.  Alger  in  his  Essay  on  Jesus 
{The  SoUiades,  p.  380),  while  praising  Jesus,  fearfully  mutilates  the  Messiah  under  the 
plea  :  "  The  Christian  Consciousness,  the  collective  sense  of  Christendom,  is  comj^etent 
to  determine  what  is  congruous,  what  incongruous,  with  the  true  idea  of  Christ  ;  to  cut 
off  superfluities  and  sl^pply  defects  in  the  transmitted  form,"  etc.  We,  on  the  other 
hand,  assert  that  the  Christ  and  His  kingdom  are  not  to  be  tampered  with  under  any  such 
a  plea,  but  are  to  be  received  just  as  God  has  given  them  to  us.  Besides  this,"  Alger 
informs  us  that  a  few  favored  ones  are  "  the  authoritative  representatives  of  this  totality 
of  Christian  perceiDtion  and  feeling."  We  recognize  no  such  "  authoritative  representa- 
tives" excepting  as  they  fairly  coincide  with  the  authorities  of  the  Bible,  and  as  to  "  the 
collective  sense"  and  "  totality,"  the  diversity  existing  and  the  claims  proposed  forbid 
the  idea  of  such  unity  in  the  church.  The  majority  rule  cannot  apply  to  doctrine  as 
seen  e.g.  in  the  rejection  of  Jesus,  the  dark  ages,  etc.  The  fact  is,  that  the  development 
theory  as  applied  to  doctrine  is  one  that  cannot  be  confined  within  limits  ;  it  is  a  sword 
entirely  too  unwieldy  for  the  believer  to  handle  ;  it  is  a  net  so  widely  sweeping  that  it 
cannot  be  managed,  and  hence,  with  due  deference  to  its  originators  (Hegel,  etc. )  it  may 
be  rejected  without  causing  Christianity  to  suffer.  The  latter  needs  no  such  weapon  for 
defence,  no  such  system  of  apologetics,  for  its  best  defence  and  apo]ogy  is,  as  one 
(Dunn)  aptly  remarked  :  "  The  Bible  can  never  get  behind  the  age."  It  is  true  that  men 
of  great  intellect,  of  vast  learning,  have  and  do  advocate  it,  but  such  too,  as  thousands 
of  cases  past  and  present  testify,  are  liable  to  eiTor.  It  is  the  more  needful  to  direct 
attention  to  this  matter,  seeing  that  our  more  recent  church  histories,  Sys.  Divinities, 
etc.,  are  thoroughly  leavened  with  its  spirit  and  deductions.  So  far  as  it  is  api:>lied  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  we  protest  against  it,  because  the  doctrinal  things  of  the 
kingdom  are  subjects  of  direct  revelation  and  not  of  growth  ;  because  Revelation  itself 
on  this  point  is  not  subject  to  growth,  being  mereJy  declarations  of  God's  purpose  ;  be- 
cause to  make  the  Revelation  in  its  grammatical  sense  a  mere  husk  is  a  virtual  belittling 
of  the  Word  ;  because  doctrinal  truth  is  always  the  same,  and  is  only  to  be  found  in  its 
purity  in  Holy  Writ  ;  and  because  error,  antagonism,  division,  etc.,  find  their  best 
apologist  in  this  theory. 

Surely  believers  ought  to  reject  this  development  theory  when  they  see  how  a  host  of 
men  (Amnion,  Strauss,  Parker,  etc.,)  are  employing  it,  to  show  that  Christianity  is  only 
in  the  course  of  development,  and  must  by  the  aid  of  science  and  reason  give  place  to 
soniething  higher.  When  the  notion  leads  multitudes,  not  to  content  themselves  Mith  a 
legitimate  progress  (drawn  from  study,  comparison,  criticism,  experience,  etc.,)  in  knowl- 
edge, but  to  change  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  (under  the  plea  of  spirit,  reason,  enlight- 
enment, progress,  etc.,)  at  will,  introducing  a  vast  body  of  conflicting  opinions  and  sects; 
when  under  its  influence  the  covenants,  oath-bound,  are  either  denied  in  their  gram- 
matical sense  or  totally  ignored  ;  when  the  theory  is  flatly  contradicted  by  the  predicted 
closing  of  this  age,  for  instead  of  finding  a  childhood,  youth,  manhood,  and  matured 
manhood,  resulting  in  perfectability,  the  outcome  as  given  by  the  Spirit  is  the  direct 
opposite;  when  it  is  utterly  opposed  by  the  manner  of  the 'kingdom's  introduction, 
coming  suddenly  and  supernaturally,  with  numerous  additional  fatal  reasons— we,  cer- 
tainly, can  only  regard  the  theory,  Avith  its  specious  reasoning,  as  one  of  the  most  danger- 
ous ever  broached  ;  and  one,  too,  destined  to  bring  about  still  greater  evil  in  the  hands 
of  recent  writers.  Incorporated  with  this  view,  and  going  hand  in  hand  with  it,  is  that 
of  general,  universal  Inspiration,  under  which  new  revelations  may  be  expected,  and 
though  guarded  (as  Beecher  in  7'he  Ch.  Union,  Ap.  10,  1878)  by  the  declaration  that  such 
must  be  in  accord  with  the  Scriptures,  yet  this  position  (as  shown  Prop.  5)  is  dangerous, 
opening  a  wide  door,  through  which  unbelievers  are  pressing  with  exultant  hopes.  Pelix 
Adler  in  The  North  Amer.  Beview,  Sept. -Oct.  1877,  Art.  "Reformed  Judaism,"  under  the 
influence  of  such  an  inspiration  theory,  discriminating  (as  he  thinks)  between  "  the  letter 
and  the  spirit,"  and  by  adding  "  the  process  of  evolution,"  most  pointedly  denies  the 
covenants  and  predictions  in  their  plain  sense,  resolves  the  Jewish  nation  into  the  Mes- 
siah, etc. 


IIG  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PFwOP.   0. 

Ols.  4.  Allowing  a  development  of  doctrine  in  tlie  Bible  itself  {i.c.^ 
given  in  respective  dispensations,  and  by  different  writers),  made  under  the 
ausjjices  of  the  Spirit,  the  same,  by  the  princij^tle  of  interpretation  adopted 
(Prop.  4),  shows,  by  its  completeness  and  manner  of  presentation,  that 
the  Bible  is  designed  to  be  a  book  for  the  2:>eople,  for  all  men,  both  learned 
and  unlearned.  It  is  addressed  to  the  masses,  to  the  ignorant,  to  all  classes, 
and,  therefore,  is  not  merely  designed  for  the  educated.  It  assumes  upon 
the  very  face  of  it,  that  its  important  doctrines  can  be  easily  compre- 
hended, and  that  to  realize  their  force  and  value  it  is  unnecessary  to  make 
additions  .or  alterations.  It  takes  it  for  granted  that  it  contains  all  that 
is  requisite  for  us  to  know  concerning  the  kingdom,  and  that  every 
person  can  obtain  this  knowledge  by  its  perusal  and  study.  It  assumes, 
that  it  IS  correct  in  its  claim  of  being  an  infallible  guide  (Ps.  119  :  105, 
2  Pet.  1  :  19,  Gal.  1  :  8,  Isa.  8  :  20,  2  Tim.  3  :  17,  etc.),  as  endorsed  by 
the  early  Christians,  Reformers,  etc.,  in  the  things  pertaining  to  God  and 
the  everlasting  happiness  of  man.  It  distinctly  teaches  that  without  a  due 
acceptance  of  its  doctrines,  we  are  regarded  by  the  Almighty  as  those, 
however  learned  in  other  respects,  who  lack  understanding.  It  urges  upon 
us,  in  view  of  its  Divine  origin,  purity,  veracity,  power,  duration,  etc.,  the 
obligation  that  we  are  under  to  know  God's  Word.  It  professes  to 
enlighten  every  one  who  receives  it  respecting  God  and  our  personal 
relationship  to  Him,  the  Messiah  and  our  need  of  Him,  the  kingdom  and 
the  manner  in  which  to  gain  it,  the  duties  pertaining  to  God  and  man, 
the  future  destiny  of  ourselves  and  the  world,  etc.,  and  that  to  obtain  this 
enlightenment  we  do  not  absolutely  require,  valuable  as  they  may  be  in 
many  respects,  those  cumbersome  systems  of  interpretation,  those  diversi- 
fied and  ponderous  exegetical  commentaries,  etc.,  which  are  given  as  helps 
to  the  student. 

The  Bible  assumes,  then,  that  it  can  be  understood,  so  far  as  its  essential,  important 
doctrines  are  concerned,  by  all  men.  If  so,  then  instead  of  a  recondite  meaning  being 
intended,  the  plain  grammatical  sense,  common  to  all  men,  must  undoubtedly  be 
received.  The  infallibility  it  places  in  its  own  utterances  expressed  according  to  the 
usual  laws  of  language,  and  not  in  a  superadded  sense  bestowed  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
interpreter.  It  does  not  allow  it  to  exist  outside  of  itself  in  an  authoritative  decjlaration 
of  the  church  (excepting  only  as  it  corresponds  \\ith  the  Word),  or  in  what  is  called  "  the 
infallible  consciousness."  If  we  were  to  accept  of  the  latter,  in  ivhcd  confession  or  writ- 
ing is  it  incorporated?  The  interpretation  of  the  Word  must  not  be  hampered  by  a 
l^hilosophical  generalit}^  glittering  in  conception  and  well  adapted  to  lead  us  away  from 
Holy  Writ,  and  to  cause  us  to  put  our  faith  in  mere  human  opinion,  thus  also  covering 
up  deficiencies,  difficulties,  antagonisms  suggested  by  the  W^ord.  Such  a  consciousness 
does  not  exist,  as  is  proven  by  the  opposite  confessions  and  theological  writings  of  past 
centuries,  and  which  differences  continue  down  to  the  present  day,  even  on  points  the 
most  important,  as  e.g.  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ,  the  sacraments,  the  order  of  salva- 
tion, etc.  Amid  this  diversity,  the  sad  result  of  human  infirmity,  one  consoling  feature 
alone  remains,  that,  notwithstanding  the  differences  of  opinion,  so  much  of  the  truth  of 
Scripture,  in  its  plain  sense,  is  cordially  received,  that  faith  in,  and  obedience  to,  Christ 
is  characteristic  of  all  believers.  The  failure  to  show  where  this  "  consciousness"  is 
lodged,  in  order  to  make  it  available  for  direct  reference  and  appeal,  should  guard  us 
against  a  th<3ory  well  intended  but  really  derogatory  to  Scripture.  Scripture  must  ever 
retain  its  position  as  paramount,  sole  authority,  and  care  must  be  exercised  lest  the 
helps  intended  to  facilitate  Scriptural  investigation  become  hindrances  instead  ot  valuable 
aids,  by  being  too  much  relied  on  without  a  personal  searching  of  the  Word  of  God.  Any 
substitution  in  place  of  Holy  Writ,  is,  in  so  far,  lowering  the  supreme  standard.  Com- 
pare some  excellent  remarks  on  the  supremacy  of  Scripture  in  Bridges'  Chris.  Ministry, 
Saurin's  Sermon  on  The  Sufficiency  of  Revelation,  Graybeard's  (Graft")  Lay  Sermons,  etc. 
We  reproduce  one  sentence  from  Graff  (No.  62,  "  Search  the  Scriptures")  :  *'  A  man  may 


Prop.  9.]  the  theocratic  kikgdom.  117 

become  a  theological  tinker  by  studying  theological  books  ;  but  in  order  to  become  '  a 
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth,'  there  can 
be  no  substitute  for  the  habitual,  personal  study  of  God's  Word."  How  true  this  is, 
when  we  look  at  the  history  of  godly  men  and  women  of  the  past.  How  many  with  vast 
stores  of  learning  have  been  eclii^sed  in  advancement  of  true  knowledge  and  usefulness, 
by  those  who  have  constantly  drawn  divine  things  from  a  persevering  perusal  and  study 
of  God's  Word. 

Ohs.  5.  All  believers  admit  thafc  in  the  study  of  the  Scriptures  there 
most  be,  to  secure  success,  a  reverent,  prayerful  spirit  maintained,  a 
reliance  upon  Divine  guidance  into  truth.  There  must  be  a  moral  prepara- 
tion (John  8  :  47)  to  appreciate  their  force  and  beauty  (Ps.  119  :  12,  18). 
Such  a  direction,  although  given  by  God  Himself  (Jas.  1  :  5,  Luke  11  : 
13,  etc.),  loses  some  of  its  weight  in  the  estimation  of  unbelief,  since 
parties  the  most  antagonistic  in  doctrine  and  practice  profusely  ^jrofess  to 
have  poured  forth  earnest  prayer,  and  to  have  been  guided  by  the  Spirit  in 
their  expositions.  A  modest  student,  and  one  too  who  really  prays  and  is 
morally  aided,  v/ill  scarcely  set  up  such  a  standard,  or  refer  to  Him  in 
such  a  connection.  Prayerful  study  of  the  Scriptures  will  evidence  itself, 
'fiot  in  profession,  hut  in  fruits.  It,  too,  will  be  found  that  error  may  be 
conjoined 'with  even  fervent  prayer,  if  the  Bible  is  neglected,  if  the 
simplest  rules  are  rejected  for  ascertaining  its  meaning,  if  the  grammatical 
sense  is  violated,  if  reason  is  not  properly  used,  if  intellectual  activity  is 
not  combined  with  faith,  and  if  the  formulas  of  men  are  substituted  for 
the  Word.  Prayer  is  a  help,  but  not  so  directly  that  we  need  not  search 
for  the  truth.  So  also  mistake  may  be  connected  with  the  assumed 
guidance  of  the  Spirit  ;  for  if  a  man  expects  "  direct  spiritual  illumina- 
tion '^  or  an  "  intellectual  light ''  by  which  he  can  know  the  truth  without 
an  acceptance  and  patient  study  o/' /Z(«z^  whic-h  the  Spirit  has  al read i/  given, 
he  only  shows  that  he  is  self -deceived.  Prayer  and  the  Spirit  indeed  are 
of  great  avail  in  their  moral  bearing,  in  preparing  us  for  the  perception 
and  reception  of  the  truth,  but  they  are  not  given  to  supersede  the  search- 
ing of  the  Scriptures  (John  5  :  39),  the  reasoning  out  of  the  Scriptures 
(Acts  17  :  2  ;  18  :  4,  etc.),  the  using  of  our  faculties  in  noting  the  oracles 
of  God  (Heb.  5  :  14),  the  taking  heed  unto  the  Word  given  (2  Pet.  1  :  19), 
the  daily  receiving  and  study  of  Holy  Writ  (Acts  17  :  11).  Indeed  the 
fact  of  our  dependence  upon  the  Spirit  to  enlighten  us  and  enable  us  to 
savingly  appropriate  truth,  to  trust  and  to  rejoice  in  it,  does  not  allow  us 
to  neglect  the  means  of  enlightenment  which  He  has  already  furnished  in 
the  presented  Word.  It  forbids  a  passivity  of  our  mental  faculties,  and 
enjoins  upon  the  man  of  God,  in  order  "  to  be  perfect,  thoroughly 
furnished,''  to  let  both  mind  and  heart  receive  "all  scripture," 
(2  Tim.  3  :  16,  17). 

The  Si^irit  reveals  Himself,  and  the  truth  He  is  commissioned  to  impart  through  the 
Word  already  given,  and  in  proportion  as  that  Word  is  pondered,  studied,  and  received, 
just  in  that  proportion  will  true  enlightenment  follow  ;  and  even  love  will  be  excited 
(2  Tim.  3  :  15,  Luke  24  :  32,  Phil.  1  :  9),  and  growth  promoted  (1  Pet.  2:2,).  For,  if  man 
is  in  a  reverent,  j)rayerful,  teachable  attitude,  desirous  for  the  truth,  the  Spirit  will  im- 
press that  same  truth  given  by  Him,  not  by  directly  revealing  it  (for  that  He  has  already 
done),  but  by  morally  qualifying  him  for  its  reception  and  retention.  (See  this  illus- 
trated in  the  Controversy — Tyerman's  "  Oxford  Methodists,"  p.  95 — between  the  Mora- 
vian Molther  and  Wesley,  on  the  question  whether  penitent  inquirers  should  search  the 
Scriptures — Wesley  affirming,  and  Molther  denying,  the  necessity  and  importance  of  the 
same.)     Bible  truth,  inasmuch  as  it  relates  to  our  moral  constitution,  demands  both 


118  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  9. 

mind  and  heart  to  receive  it.  Three  things  are  requisite  to  make  truth  practically  effec- 
tive. Lord  Bacon  says  :  "  The  inquiry  of  Truth,  which  is  the  love-making  or  wooing  it  ; 
the  knowledge  of  Truth,  which  is  the  presence  of  it  ;  and  the  belief  of  Truth,  which  is 
the  enjoying  of  it  ; — is  the  Sovereign  Good  of  human  nature."  The  Spirit  aids  us  only 
in  the  line  of  revealed  truth,  never  in  coniradistinction  to  the  7'ecorded  thhvjs  of  the  Spirit. 
The  sword  of  the  Spirit  is  the  Word  of  God  (Eph.  6  :  17),  and  there  can  be  no  revelation 
given,  however  plausible  and  advocated,  which  runs  in  opposition  to  Holy  Writ.  There 
is  no  proof  whatever,  amid  the  multitude  of  claims  proposed,  saving  that  atforded  by 
the  personal  assertion  of  the  interested  parties  themselves,  that  a  single  person  since  the 
days  of  the  apostles  has  received  a  new  or  modified  doctrine,  not  found  in  the  Bible, 
directly  from  the  Spiiit.  A  very  susj)icious  fact  in  those  who  claim  it,  is,  that  every  such 
doctrine  advanced  they  still  desire,  in  some  way  or  other,  to  fasten  to  Scriptures  given, 
thus  unconsciously  (e.g.  Mormons,  German  Inspirationists  in  Iowa,  etc.  Comp.  Prop. 
4)  testifying  to  its  supremacy  over  their  own  utterances. 

This  subject  is  the  more  worthy  of  attention,  since  advantage  is  taken  of  this  supposed 
additional  bestowment  of  doctrinal  truth  outside  of  the  Bible  to  lower  the  supremacj^  of 
the  Scriptures.  This  is  done  by  receiving  the  concessions,  intentional  or  not,  of  various 
parties,  opening  a  wide  door  for  endless  additions,  because  of  the  introduction  of  a 
Divine  authority  outside  of  the  Bible.  Those  who  undermine  the  authoritative  position 
of  the  Scriptures,  are  the  following  :  (1.)  It  is  claimed  by  good  men  (as  e.g.  Dr.  Bush- 
nell,  Sermons  o)i  the  New  Life,  p.  46)  that  every  man  is  also  insj^irecl,  not  indeed  having 
the  same  inspiration  as  the  writers  of  the  Bible,  but  still  a  continued  inspiration,  im- 
parted by  the  Spirit,  by  which  we  interpret  the  Scriptures,  etc.  (2.)  Anotlier  class 
{Essays  and  Reviews)  assert  that  "  inspiration  is  a  jDermanent  power  in  the  church"  which 
by  a  constant  "  illumination,"  kindred  to  that  of  the  Bible,  develojjs  confessions,  doc- 
trines, liturgies,  etc.  (3.)  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  affirms  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  so 
given  to  it,  that  the  Pope  in  his  official  or  doctrinal  utterances  cannot  err.  The  same  is 
asserted  by  many  respecting  General  Councils.  Tradition  is  thus  elevated  to  inspired 
truth.*  (4.)  Inlidels  adopt  the  language  of  Scripture,  and  declare  that  all  men  are 
inspired  equal  to  and  even  superior  to  the  apostles,  as  e.g.  the  Parker  school.  (5.)  Men 
of  a  mystical  tendency  in  various  centuries  and  denominations,  who,  j)rofessing  a  special 
guidance  and  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit,  ask  for  their  utterances  a  corresponding  faith. 
The  history  of  Mysticism,  separate  and  combined  with  scholasticism,  presents  numerous 
painful  instances,  of  "an  inner  ligkt "  exalted  to  Scriptural  authority.  (6.)  The  Mor- 
mons, and  other  sects, f  who  give  us  long  pretended  revelations  of  divine  truth. 
(7.)  Swedenborg,  who  constituted  himself  the  first  and  sole  interpreter  of  the  Word, 
whom  the  angels  could  not  instruct  (Div.  Prov.,  pub.  1764,  p.  135),  and  who,  by  an  inner 
sense  and  revelations  professedly  received,  inaugurated  a  new  GosjDel.  The  grammatical 
sense  is  but  a  worthless  husk,  containing  the  highest  mysteries  which  were  revealed  to 
him.  (8.)  The  Society  of  Friends,  who,  with  many  excellencies,  frankly  acknowledge 
the  superior  light  granted  by  the  Spirit.;}:     (9.)  The  Spiritualists,  wdio  elevate  the  revela- 


*  Some  of  the  Popish  bulls,  decisions  of  Councils,  etc.,  directly  claim  to  have  been 
given  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Comp.  Dr.  Doellinger's  Essay  "£« 
CatJiedra"  definitions  in  Ap.  E.  attached  to  '■'■Fahles,  and  Essay  on  Prophetic  Spirit,''  for 
the  infallibility  doctrine.  In  Didron's  Clir.  Iconography,  Vol.  1,  p.  448,  Pope  Gregory 
the  Cireat  is  represented  as  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (the  latter  under  the  form  of  a 
dove\  taken  from  a  French  statue  of  the  XIII.  cent,  in  the  church  of  Notre-Dame  de 
Chartres.  Gregory  VII.  enjoys  the  same  distinction,  and  even  Jerome  is  represented 
with  a  dove  breathing  inspiration  into  his  ear,  reminding  us  of  Mahomet's  tame  pigeon. 

f  E.g.  Joanna  Southcott,  who,  in  her  declaration,  claims,'  "•  that  all  my  writings  came 
from  tiie  Spirit  of  the  Most  High  God  ;"  the  Anabaptists  encountered  by  Luther  {Lives  of 
Luther,  DAubigne's  His.  Bef.,  Giesler,  Ch.  His.,  note  64,  etc.)  ;  the  account  given  by  the 
Shakers  of  Mother  Ann  Lee  ;  the  followers  of  Jane  Leader,  especially  John  Pordage  ; 
besides  others  given  in  our  Eccl.  Histories.  The  extravagances  of  the  past  are  rejieated 
at  the  present  day.  Works  on  Fanaticism,  Religious  Enthusiasm,  etc.,  give  us  gloomy 
details  of  man's  infirmity  and  presumption.  The  most  recent  is  the  folJowing  :  Tlie 
Times-Star,  Oct.  19,  1881,  says,  that  a  new  sect  has  arisen  in  Michigan,  called  "  the  Liv- 
ing Church  of  God  "  or  "  the  Chosen  ;"  and  "the  members  profess  to  possess  some 
grave  secrets  with  reference  to  the  near  approach  of  the  end  of  the  world,  which  they 
say  were  given  to  them  by  inspiration." 

X  The  esteem  that  the  author  has  for  the  amiable  intentions  and  life  of  the  Quakers, 


Prop.  0.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  119 

tions  of  the  spirits,  supposed  to  be  given  for  special  enlightenment,  ahove  the  Bible. 
All  these,  whether  they  design  it  or  not,  bring  to  us  an  authority  equal  to  or  superior  to 
that  of  the  Scriptures.  Advantage  is  quickly  taken  of  this  opening,  by  arguing  (as  e.g. 
Essays  and  Reviews)  that  as  inspiration,  the  imparting  of  the  Spirit  is  now  accompanied 
with  error,  so  it  was  also  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  and,  therefore,  only  so  much 
authority  is  to  be  allowed  to  the  Scriptures  as  good  men  can  approve  of  as  credible,  thus 
really  allowing  no  unity  of  doctrine,  etc.  Advantage  is  also  taken  of  it,  by  pointing  to 
all  these  contradictory  professions,  all  under  professed  spiritual  guidance,  as  evidence  of  the 
uncertainty  of  any  Spirit-derived  truths.  Advantage  is  taken  of  the  wide  gap  thus 
opened  for  pretended  revelations  and  new  doctrines,  for  greater  sanctity,  holiness,  and 
exclusiveness,  until  the  heart  saddens  at  the  fearful  sight.  The  simple  truth  of  God  has 
been  outrageously  perverted,  mutilated,  and  abused  by  these  processes.  No  !  No  !  ! 
our  only  safety  is  in  siridh/  adhering  to  the  Word,  as  containing  all  the  doctrines  in  their 
true  teaching  grammatically  expressed,  and  that  j)rayer  and  all  other  things,  including 
the  moral  aid  of  the  Spirit,  are  subsidiary  to  the  eternal  Word  itself,  acting  only  favora- 
bly and  efficiently  in  connection  with  it. 

But  while  avoiding  one  extreme,  we  must  not  fall  into  another,  and  deny  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  may,  if  He  chooses,  impart  mental  aid,  or  perception,  or  knowledge.  He  did  this 
to  others,  to  prophets,  apostles,  and  others,  and  it  would  limit  His  freedom  and  power 
to  say  that  He  cannot  do  it  now  if  Ik  so  jjleases  ;  especially  He  has  not  told  us  that  He 
will  not  do  it,  and  many  passages  (Eph.  1  :  16,  17,  1  Cor.  12  :  7-11,  James  1  : 5,  1  Kings 
3  :  9-13)  seem  to  indicate  that,  not  however  without  seeking,  prayer,  searching,  that  God 
can  and  will  at  times  directly  aid  in  the  attainment  of  the  truth.  But  let  it  never  be  for- 
gotten that  even  such  aid  and  moral  law,  enforced  by  the  Spirit,  is  placed  within  restric- 
tions, viz.  :  it  is  subsidiary  to  the  Word  itself ;  it  embraces  no  new  revelations  or  new  doc- 
trines, but  only  leads  to  a  fuller  comprehension  and  appreciation  of  the  Revelation 
already  given  ;  it  retains  and  enforces  the  supremacy  of  Holy  Writ.  Dunn  in  his  excel- 
lent treatise  (  The  Study  of  the  Bible)  takes  the  position  that  there  is  no  mental  enlighten- 
ment, no  "direct  spiritu'al  illumination"  to  be  expected  at  the  present  day,  and  brings 
in  the  analogy  that  we  obtain  truth  as  we  do  bread,  "  that  as  God  now  showers  not  bread 
from  heaven 'as  He  did  in  the  wilderness,  so  He  showers  not  truth  upon  our  minds  as  He 
did  upon  the  apostles, "  that  we  must  labor  for  it,  etc.  This  ordinarily  and  generally  is 
true,  but  universally  the  analogy  drawn  from  the  bread  does  not  hold  good,  for  God  did, 
after  the  manna  was  given,  provide  bread  for  Elijah,  the  widow,   and  others,  and  in 


induces  him  to  add  this  note.  How  largely  Barclay  may  be  endorsed  by  them  he  knows 
not,  but  Barclay  in  his  Apology,  Prop.  3,  p.  81,  plainly  asserts  that  the  Scriptures  are  to 
be  subordinated  to  the  spiritual  revealings  given  to  men,  and  hence  they  are  not  "  the 
principal  ground  of  all  truth  and  knowledge,  nor  yet  the  adequate  primary  rule  of  faith  and 
manners,"  but  that  "  they  are  and  may  be  esteemed  a  secondary  rule.'^  Comp.  Gurney's 
*'  Observations,' '  p.  38,  47,  Fox's  ''Journal,''  p.  476,  etc.  The  redeeming  feature,  however, 
is  that  Barclay  insists  upon  it,  that  as  the  Scriptures  are  given  by  the  same  Spirit  the 
revelations  afforded  by  the  inward  light  never  contradict  the  Scriptures.  In  much  of 
their  doctrinal  writings  constant  appeal  is  made  to  Holy  Writ,  so  much  so  that  this  prin- 
ciple seems  to  be  ignored.  The  common  mistake  with  many  persons  is,  that  they  con- 
found the  extraordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit  with  the  ordinary,  the  direct  communi- 
cation of  truth  with  the  moral  appreciation  and  reception  of  the  truth,  the  intellectual 
working  vouchsafed  to  the  few  chosen  ones  with  the  spiritual  apprehension  and  api^lica- 
tion  of  "the  Word.  (Comp.  for  the  Quaker's  statements  in  full,  Art.  The  Doctrine  of  the 
Inward  Light,  in  the  "  Princeton  Review,"  1848,  Rupp's  Orig.  His.  of  Helig.  Denomina- 
tions, where  two  Quaker  writers  affirm  the  subordinate  position  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
Art.  Quakerism,  Past  and  Present,  in  North  Brit.  Review,  1860.)  A  very  plausible  and 
insidious  error  in  this  direction  presented  by  pious  men  (e.g.  Ullman,  etc.)— far  removed 
from  the  position  of  Seb.  Frank  Schwenckfeld,  Tharaer,  and  others,  but  not  the  less 
misleading— is  the  following  :  the  Scriptures  are  not  the  only  or  exclusive  rule  of  faith, 
but  Christ  as  manifested  to  faith  (an  inward  principle)  is  an  additional  rule— thus 
changing  from  the  Quaker  principle  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Christ.  It  is  sufficient  to 
say,  that  we  only  recognize  and  appropriate  Christ  in  His  person,  life,  doctrines  ("  Thou 
hast  the  words  of  eternal  life"),  work,  and  promises  as  they  are  contained  in  the  Scriptures 
and  received  by  faith.  This  self-appropriation  of  the  Scriptural  statements,  produces  the 
fruits,  the  same  mind  which  was  also  in  Him,  and  thus  confirms  the  superiority  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures  as  the  only  infallible  rw?e— Christian  experience  verifying  its  truthfulness. 


120  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  9. 

answer  to  prayer  He  can  yet  do  it,  quite  ont  of  the  ordinary  way,  in  cases  of  necessity, 
without  man  laboring  for  it.  Take  e.g.  Luther,  as  he  painfully  toiled  wp  the  steps  on 
his  knees,  suddenly  impressed  with  "  the  just  shall  live  by  faith,"  or  the  extraordinary 
pre]3aredness  of  the  Sandwich  Islanders  for  the  Gospel,  or  the  remarkable  conversions 
of  some  of  the  heathen  and  others — these  and  other  examples  can  only  be  fully  explained 
by  accepting  of  a  direct  mental  aid  afforded  by  the  Spirit,  but,  in  every  case,  subordinate 
to,  and  in  support  of,  the  Scriptures  given.  Admitting,  therefore,  that  when  necessity 
requires  it,  or  the  pertinacity  of  faith  secures  it,  or  the  pleasure  of  God  bestows  it,  that 
such  may  be  the  case,  yet  we  have  one  decisive  test  to  which  even  these  must  bow,  viz., 
all  enlightenment  must  be  in  the  direct  line  of  the  Scriptures,  not  in  opj^osition  to,  or  in 
conflict  with  them,  because  they  are  given  by  the  same  ISpirit,  and  cannot  be  antagonistic. 
This  e.g.  was  Luther's  position  when  he  encountered  the  fanatics  who  pretended  to  new 
revelations  by  the  Spirit,  that  they  were  contradictory  to  the  utterances  already  bestowed 
by  the  Spirit  and  hence  unreliable,  and  that  being  different,  a  variation  from  the  Bible, 
tixey  were  not  proven  authoritative  by  the  mighty  works  of  the  Spirit  and  therefore  could 
not  supersede  the  truth  presented  (DAubigne's  Jlis.  lief.  Vol.  3.  B.  9).  The  apostles 
themselves  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  given  as  bearing  testimony  that  they  speak  in  the 
Spirit,  in  unison  with  Him,  and  that  the  same  are  abundantly  able  to  afford  us  all  the 
light,  direction,  etc.,  that  we  need.  Any  effort  which  professes  to  be  from  God,  directly 
or  indirectly,  mediately  or  immediately,  if  it  lowers  the  standard,  or  j^laces  in  a  subordi- 
nate position  any  of  the  teaching,  of  Holy  "Writ,  is  oj^en  to  the  gravest  suspicion,  and 
should  at  once  be  rejected.  True  enlightenment  advocates  the  supreme  aTithority  of  the 
Bible  ;  false  revelations  either  endeavor  to  siipplant  it,  or  vrrest  it  from  its  meaning,  or 
attach  to  it  irrelevant,  contradictory,  and  extravagant  matter.  Fortunately  for  the  tnith, 
most  pretended  revelations  and  additions  are  borne  down  by  the  weight  of  their  own 
palpable  ignorance,  foolishness,  and  error.  Calvin  {Jnsii.  Ch.  9,  C.  1)  characto'zes  the 
pretensions  of  immediate  revelations  as  "  subversive  of  every  princiiDle  of  piety  ;'  while 
we  dare  not,  in  charity,  give  so  sweeping  a  criticism,  yet  it  may  be  held  that  they  are 
subversive  of  the  Scriptures,  of  all  hope  of  possessing,  what  man  needs,  an  intelligent, 
reliable,  infallible  doctrinal  guide,  leading  often,  as  illustrated  in  Ochino  and  others,  to 
a  sad  shipwreck.  Infallibility  in  doctrinal  utterances,  whether  claimed  as  a  divine 
right,  or  as  proceeding  from  an  imj^arted  Spirit,  or  as  coming  in  any  other  way,  is  some- 
thing that  belongs  exclusively  to  Holy  "Writ,  Avhich  not  merely  asserts  its  possession  but 
proves  it  in  a  variety  of  ways  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  179-183).  The  subject  matter  of  the 
Bible,  its  entire  tenor  of  teaching,  its  decided  authoritative  statements,  its  injunction  not 
to  add  or  take  from  it,  its  continuous  Divine  Purpose,  its  unity  of  Plan  in  Eedemjition, 
its  provisional  portion  amply  realized  in  j^ersonal  experience  and  the  world's  history — 
all  clearly  show  that  it  is  not  to  be  supplanted  by  any  other  authority.  We  are  therefore 
abundantly  satisfied  with  the  position  occupied  bj^  the  church  for  the  first  three  hundred 
years  (so  Mosheim,  Neander,  Killen,  Giesler,  etc.),  by  the  Reformers,  and  a  host  of  able 
men,  viz.,  that  the  Bible  is  the  sole,  supreme  authority,  and  that  every  Christian  doc- 
trine, including  that  of  the  kingdom,  must  find  its  true  basis  within  its  limits. 

Obs,  6.  It  has  been  sufficiently  intimated  tliat  in  the  elucidation  of  the 
Scriptures,  man's  agency  is  also  required.  It  is  needed  in  a  variety  of 
ways  :  in  the  criticism  of  the  text  to  indicate  its  purity  and  meaning,  in 
securing  the  evidences  pertaining  to  it,  in  comparing  one  portion  with 
another,  etc.  The  Word  is  indeed  given  by  God,  but  to  comprehend  and 
ensure  its  blessings,  we  must,  like  with  His  gift  of  nature,  bestow  upon  it 
thought,  meditation,  labor,  and  research.  It  contains  deep  things  requir- 
ing careful  study,  and  even  mysteries  beyond  our  limits  ;  it  discusses  the 
most  profoundly  interesting  questions  within  our  mental  power  ;  it  gives 
us  plain  statements,  which  are  to  be  contrasted  with  others,  lest  we  fail 
to  realize  their  full  significancy  ;  it  deals  with  the  sublime,  the  beautiful, 
the  emotional,  the  moral,  the  spiritual,  the  eternal,  the  seen  and  the  unseen, 
the  past,  present,  and  future,  and  hence  calls  for  both  mind  and  heart  in 
its  interpretation.  Eeliance  upon  the  Word  does  not  forbid  progress, 
advancement,  but  ensures  it  ;  for  our  entire  argument  indicates,  that  just 
in  proportion  as  man  accepts  of  Holy  Writ,  and  his  writings  or  expositions 


Prop.  9.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  121 

are  based  on  it,  in  that  fwoportion  will  lie  be  in  the  way  of  real  jorogress, 
obtaining  a  clearer,  more  comprehensive  view  of  the  truth.  The  doctrines 
of  the  Bible,  too,  are  corroborated  not  only  by  comparison,  study,  etc.,  but 
by  the  additional  knowledge  bestowed  by  personal  experience  and  the 
history  of  the  Church  and  world,  i.e.  they  are  truths  confirmed  by  a  degree 
of  realization. 

Those  who  object  to  the  Scriptures  being  an  infallible  standard  bring  in  (as  Owen, 
Deb.  Land,  p.  146)  this  comparison  :  "  Science  sets  up  no  infallible  standard  ;  if  she  did, 
there  would  be  an  end  of  all  scientific  progress."  The  fact  is,  that  this  is  both  an  unjust 
comparison  and  conclusion.  Science  cannot  do  so,  since  all  its  knowledge  is  derived 
through  human  instrumentality  ;  it  deals  with  Nature,  and  j'et  amid  the  diversity  of 
scientific  teaching  respecting  Nature,  in  view  of  the  many  unknown  problems  suggested 
by  Nature,  it  would  be  glad  to  avail  itself  of  the  teaching  of  an  infallible  standard,  if  it 
were  possessed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bible,  which  professes  not  to  be  a  teacher  of 
science,  deals  with  another  and  higher  sphere — the  moral,  spiritual,  and  eternal  interests 
of  man,  the  most  essential  for  haj)piness,  and  in  which  man  needs  assistance  and  guid- 
ance. God  condescends,  in  compassion  to  our  necessities,  to  reveal  Himself  authorita- 
tively in  this  direction,  especially  in  view  of  our  being  under  moral  law  to  Him.  But 
this  does  not  forbid  progress  in  man,  in  knowledge,  etc.,  as  is  seen  in  the  results  of  com- 
parison, deduction,  inference,  experience,  etc.  Even  an  infallible  standard  in  science 
would  not  prevent  progress  in  the  same  way.  No  !  the  truth  is,  that  men  wish  to  intro- 
duce and  enforce  novelties,  etc.,  that  are  contradictory  to  the  Word,  and,  therefore,  they 
are  desirous  to  get  rid  of  its  authority  in  order  that  their  own  opinions  may  be  the  more 
readily  received.  Dr.  Schaff  (Principle  of  Protest,  p.  80)  justly  observes  :  "  The  more 
any  one  enters  into  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  the  more  he  learns  to  say  with  Luther,  that 
it  resembles  an  herb  that  by  every  rubbing  becomes  only  the  more  odoriferous,  a  tree  that 
by  every  shaking  throws  down  only  a  richer  supjjly  of  golden  apples.  Every  valuable 
exegetical  work  discloses  to  us  new  treasures,  and  our  Church  (Reformation),  having  lived 
upon  it  already  three  hundred  years,  must  still  with  Paul  exclaim  in  amazement,  '  0  the 
depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God.'  " 


122  THE  THEOCKATIC   KIIN^GDOM.  [PeOP.  10. 


Proposition"  10.  This  hingdom  sliould  he  studied  in  the  liglit  of 
the  Holy  Scriptiires,  and  not  merely  in  that  of  creeds^  confes- 
sions^ formulas  of  doctrine^  etc. 

Tliis  legitimately  follows  from  tlie  preceding  Proposition,  and 
reminds  ns,  (1)  that  to  learn  what  the  kingdom  is,  recourse  must 
be  had  to  the  original  source  of  information,  and  (2)  that,  however 
much  the  Scriptural  idea  of  the  kingdom  may  differ  from  that 
given,  honestly  and  conscientiously,  by  men,  the  former  must  be 
received  in  preference  to  the  latter. 

Cornelius  Agrippa  {On  ihe  Vanity  of  Sciences,  cli,  100)  quaintly  says:  "Wherefore  it 
behoveth  us  to  trie  by  the  Worde  of  God  all  the  disciplines  and  oj^inions  of  sciences,  as 
gold  is  tried  by  the  touchestone,  and  in  all  things  to  tiee  thither  as  to  a  most  stiffe  locke, 
and  out  of  that  alone  to  seeke  for  the  truth  of  ail  thinges,  and  to  judge  of  all  doctrine,  of 
the  opinions  and  expositions  of  all  men,  and  that  we  reade  not  b}^  the  doctrines,  by  the 
gloses,  by  the  expositions,  or  b}^  other  sayings  of  men,  although  i\\ey  be  most  hoi}'  and 
beste  learned,  them  I  meane  which  speake  either  without  or  against  the  authoritee  of 
God's  Worde.  ...  So  great  is  the  majestie,  so  great  is  the  power  of  this  Scripture, 
that  it  alloweth  no  strounge  exposition,  no  gloses  of  men  nor  Angels  :  neither  sutfereth 
it  selfe  to  be  bowed  to  mens  wittes  as  if  it  Avere  of  waxe,  nor  after  the  manier  of  mens 
fables  sufEereth  it  selfe  to  be  transformed  or  changed  into  divers  senses  as  it  were  some 
Poetical  Proteus,  but  sufficiente  of  it  selfe,  doth  expounde  and  interprete  it  selfe,  and 
judging  all  men  of  none  is  judged.  For  the  authoritee  thereof  is  greater  (as  Augustine 
saith)  then  all  the  insight  of  mans  wit  :  for  it  hath  one  constant,  plaine,  and  holy  mean- 
inge,  in  which  alone  the  truth  doth  consiste,  and  in  which  it  lighteth  and  vanquisheth. 
But  other  Moral,  Mystical,  Cosmological,  TjqDical,  Anagogical,  Tropological,  and  Allegor- 
ical meaninges  which  are  without  this,  with  which  many  do  dei)ainte  it  with  sundrie 
and  straunge  coloures,  can  rightlj^  and.  truly  teache  us  some  things,  and  perswade  also 
to  the  edification  of  the  people,  but  they  cannot  x^-ove  any  thing,  or  repugne,  or  rejjrove 
to  establishe  the  authoritee  of  the  Worde  of  God.  For  let  one  bringe  m  controversie  of 
these  senses,  let  him  also  cite  what  substancial  authour  soever  he  liste  thereupon,  let 
him  alleage  an  interpretoure,  let  him  cite  a  glosse,  let  him  alledge  the  exposition  of  all 
the  holy  Fathers,  all  these  thinges  doth  not  so  binde  us,  but  that  we  maye  saj^e  the  con- 
trarie.  But  of  the  letter  of  the  Scripture  :  of  the  draught  and  order  thereof,  bondes  are 
made,  which  no  man  can  breake,  no  man  can  escape  :  but  that  dashinge  and  dissolvinge 
all  the  force  of  argumentes,  dothe  enforce  him  to  saye  and  confesse,  that  it  is  the  finger 
of  God,  that  man  never  spake  in  this  manner,  that  He  speaketh  not  as  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  do,  but  as  one  that  hathe  power." 

Rarpefs  Weekly,  Nov.  3,  1877,  says  that  Dr.  Bellows  at  the  "Ministerial  Institute" 
held  by  the  Unitarians,  Oct.  8  and  9,  at  SiDringfield,  said  :  ' '  The  weakness  of  so-called 
Liberalism  is  its  boast  that  it  will  have  no  dogmatic  system,  and  that  faith  requires  none. 
Any  man  who  truly  formulates  the  truth  and  principles  which  are  now  floating  in  a  senti- 
mental mist,  will  be  a  re-creator  of  the  religious  life  of  the  age." 

Creeds  must  more  or  less  exist.  The  Lidh.  Observer,  Aug.  31,  1877,  after  pointing  out 
how  the  Unitarian  Church  thirty  years  ago  raised  the  cry,  "Down  with  the  creeds  and 
confessions,"  and  the  experience  of  the  past,  points  to  the  utterance  of  the  "  Christian 
Register,"  a  leading  Unitarian  paper,  as  follows  :  "  Let  it  be  said,  in  all  clearness  and 
resoluteness  :  Those  who  will  not  formulate,  will  not  convey  religious  truth  in  essential 
statements — finalities  for  the  time — are  the  real  impeders  of  progress,  are  the  genuine 
obstructionists  of  the  onward  march  of  a  stalwart  and  intelligent  liberalism.  Let  it  be 
pointed  out  that  these  cries  and  deliverances  as  to  more  liberty,  no  doctrinal  teaching, 
etc.,  are  from  chaotic  minds  desiring,  in  their  blindness,  to  sjiread  more  chaos,  and, 
blind  ones  as  they  are,  to  lead  others  into  the  blind-catching  ditches." 


PkOP.  10.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIIS^GDOM.  123 

01)8.  1.  This  Proposition  in  its  definite  statement  is  the  more  needed, 
since  at  the  present  day  multitudes  find  themselves  so  fettered  by  an  undue 
reverence  for  human  authority,  as  presented  in  and  through  the  church, 
that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  get  them  to  consider  any  subject  in  its  true 
scriptural  aspect.  We  have  no  sympathy  with  the  men  who  would,  if  they 
w^ere  able,  destroy  the  memorials  of  the  church's  views  and  struggles.  The 
creeds,  confessions,  formulas  of  doctrine,  systems  of  divinity,  theological 
writings  of  the  past,  however  some  may  be  one-sided,  prolix,  etc.,  are  pre- 
cious heirlooms,  giving  us  in  a  dogmatical  or  systematic  form  the  opinions 
of  noble  men,  in  different  epochs,  entertained  respecting  the  truth.  They, 
too,  subserved  a  great  and  glorious  purpose  in  holding  up  Christ  and  the 
essentials  in  Him,  in  opposing  gross  error,  and  in  resisting  the  torrent  of 
unbelief.  Admitting  that  the  necessities  of  our  spiritual  nature,  "the  thirst 
after  truth,  the  deep  feeling  caused  by  the  realities  of  Kevelation,  the  im- 
pressive ideas  evolved  and  suggested  by  contact  with  the  truth,  the  earnest 
desire  to  extend  and  defend  the  same,  have  caused  fallible  men  to  erect 
these  writings  as  bulwarks  and  barriers  ; — while  receiving  them  with  grati- 
tude, and  acknowledging  our  indebtedness  to  them,  yet  we  cannot,  for  a 
moment,  give  them  the  authority  of  God's  Word.  They,  too,  tlie  ivorlc- 
manshij)  of  man,  must  bow  to  the  supremacy  of  Holy  Writ,  as,  in  nearly 
every  instance,  the  framers  thereof  intended  and  declared  by  appeals  to  the 
Bible,  indicating  it  to  be  the  sole,  paramount  rule  of  faith. 

A  few  examples  must  suffice.  Thus,  in  the  epilogue  of  the  Augsburg  Confession  it  is 
distinctly  announced  that  no  "  dogma"  "  contrary  to  the  Holy  Scriptures"  can  be  admit- 
ted. The  Confession  is  based  upon  the  Eeformation  principle  :  "  There  is  for  articles 
of  faith  no  other  foundation  than  the  Word  of  God."  The  Form  of  Concord,  p.  152, 
says  :  ''  But  all  human  writings  and  symbols  are  not  authorities  like  the  Holy  Script- 
ures ;  but  the}'  are  only  a  testimony  and  explanation  of  our  faith,  showing  the  manner 
in  which  at  any  time  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  understood  and  explained  by  those  who 
then  lived,  in  respect  to  articles  that  had  been  controverted  in  the  Church  of  God,  and 
also  the  grounds  on  which  doctrines,  that  were  opjsosed  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  had 
been  rejected  and  condemned."  This  is  characteristic  of  the  leading  Protestant  Confes- 
sions (Comp.  Fisher's  His.  Bef.,  p.  462  ;  Schaif  s  Principle  of  ProT,  p.  70  ;  Schmucker's 
Luth.  Symbols,  chs.  1  and  2  ;  Standard  Ch.  Histories)  over  against  the  ultra  position  of  the 
Eomish  Church  that  tradition  is  an  equal  source  of  knowledge  and  the  product  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Hagenbach  (His.  of  Doc,  vol.  2,  s.  240)  remarks  :  "  That  the  same  impor- 
tance should  atterward  be  assigned  to  the  symbolical  writings  of  the  Protestant  churches, 
which  was  formerly  ascribed  to  tradition,  was  not  the  intention  of  their  original  authors  ;" 
and  he  refers  (s.  244)  e.g.  to  Luther's  protestation  "  against  any  prominence  being  given 
to  his  name  and  all  aj^peal  to  his  authority,"  and  that  it  was  against  "  the  spirit  of  the 
Confession  of  Faith  to  impose  it  as  a  yoke  upon  the  conscience."  Melanchthon  himself 
(Niemeyer's  Life  of,  p.  14)  said  :  "In  Articles  of  Faith,  some  change  must  be  made,  from 
time  to  time,  and  they  must  be  adapted  to  the  occasions."  Hence  the  idea  of  making 
them  equal  to  Scripture,  or  unalterably  authoritative,  never  entered  his  mind.  Van 
Oosterzee  (Do^.,vol.  1,  p.  20)  j^ertinently  saj-s  of  the  Symbolical  books:  "They  were 
never  intended  to  confine  within  bonds  the  S23irit  of  investigation,  still  less  to  fill  the 
hated  part  of  'a  paper  poj^e.'  "  The  austere  John  Knox  (Stanley's  Lee.  on  His.  Ch.  of 
/Scotland,  p.  113)  made  the  following  profession  :  "  We  protest,  that  if  any  one  will  note 
in  this  our  Confession  any  article  or  sentence  impugning  God's  Holy  Word,  that  it  would 
l^lease  him  of  his  goodness,  and  for  Christian  charity's  sake,  to  admonish  us  of  the  same 
in  writing  ;  and  we,  upon  our  honor  and  fidelity,  do  promise  unto  him  satisfaction  from 
the  mouth  of  God  (that  is,  from  His  Holy  Scriptures),  or  else  reformation  of  that  which 
he  shall  prove  to  he  amiss."  Comp.  Wycliffe  (Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  501,  and  Dr. 
Vaughen's  "  Monograph''),  the  Fathers,  and  others,  as  presented  in  Goode's  Div.  Rule  of 
Faith  and  Practice  (3  vols.,  London,  1853),  the  Waldenses  according  to  the  Centuriators  of 
Magdeburg  (so  Jones's  Ch.  His.,  p.  249);  Dr.  Schaff  in  Covi.  Beview,  1876,  on  Creeds; 
Prof.  Blaike  on  the  proper  limits  of  Creeds  in  "  The  Brit,  and  For.  Evang.  Bevieir,  1873" 
(an  Epitome  of  same  in  Evang.  Eeview,  1873)  ;  Dr.  Mcllvaine's  Christ  and  Paul  in  Bib. 


124  THE  THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PeOP.  10. 

Saora,  1878  ;  Dr.  Hagenbacli' s  Ency.  of  Theol;  Zwingle's  views  in  Hess's  and  Christoffel's 
Lives  of ;  and  numerous  others.  Lord  Bacon  (quoted  "  Lit.  of  Apologetics,"  North  Brit. 
Review,  1851,  p.  184)  remarks  :  "  that  the  Church  has  no  power  over  the  Scriptures,  to 
teach  or  command  anything  contrary  to  the  written  Word,  but  is  as  the  ark  wherein  the 
tables  of  the  first  Testament  were  kept  and  preserved  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Church  hath 
only  the  custody  and  delivery  over  of  the  Scriptures  committed  unto  the  same  ;  together 
with  the  interpretation  of  them,  but  such  only  as  is  conceived  from  themselves."  Milton 
(Treatise  of  Civil  Power  in  Ecd.  Cases)  says  :  "  It  is  the  general  consent  of  all  sound  Prot- 
estant writers  that  neither  traditions,  councils,  nor  canons  of  any  visible  Church,  much 
less  edicts  of  any  magistrate  or  civil  session,  but  the  Scriptures  only,  can  be  the  final 
judge  or  rule  in  matters  of  religion,  and  that  only  in  the  conscience  of  every  Christian  to 
himself.  .  .  .  With  the  name  of  Protestant  hath  ever  been  received  this  doctrine, 
which  prefers  the  Scriptures  before  the  Church,  and  acknowledges  none  but  the  Script- 
ure sole  interpreter  of  itself  to  the  conscience."  The  Westminster  Conf.,  ch.  31,  3,  says  : 
"  All  Synods  or  Councils  since  the  Apostles'  times,  whether  general  or  particular,  may 
err,  and  many  have  erred  ,  therefore  they  are  not  to  be  made  the  rule  of  faith  or  practice, 
but  to  be  used  as  a  help  in  both."  The  "  Standards"  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  make 
the  only  infallible  rule  to  be  the  Word  of  God  (as  in  Conf.,  ch.  1  : 2,  8,  10,  Form  of  Gov. 
ch.  1  : 3,  7,  etc..  Book  of  Dis.  ch.  1  : 3,  4).  Out  of  numerous  citations  of  a  Confessional 
nature,  another  illustration  of  the  general  spirit  manifested,  is  given  as  follows:  2 he  Dec.  of 
Faith  of  the  Congreg.  Churches,  a.d.  1658,  declares  :  "  The  Supreme  Judge,  by  which  all 
controversies  of  religion  are  to  be  determined,  and  all  decrees  of  councils,  opinions  of 
ancient  writers,  doctrines  of  men  and  private  spirits,  are  to  be  examined,  and  in  whose 
sentence  we  are  to  rest,  can  be  no  other  than  the  Holy  Scripture  delivered  by  the  Spirit  ; 
into  which  Scripture,  so  delivered,  our  faith  is  finally  resolved."  The  simple  fact  is,  that 
only  writers  and  bodies  who  endeavor  either  through  a  hierarchical  or  a  mystical  ten- 
dency, to  elevate  the  Church  beyond  its  just  proportions,  take  the  opposite  view. 
Pre-Millenarians,  as  a  class,  adopt  the  opinion  expressed  in  this  work,  and  the  Conven- 
tion held  in  Dr.  Tyng's  Church  (New  York,  1878)  declared  :  "  We  affirm  our  belief  in  the 
supreme  and  absolute  authority  of  the  written  Word  of  God  on  all  questions  of  doctrine 
and  duty."  It  is  strange  that  believers  in  the  Word  should  occupy  any  other  position, 
when  it  is  expressly  asserted  in  it,  that  we  are  to  be  judged  at  the  last  day,  not  by  any 
earthly  creeds,  or  decisions  of  councils,  or  opinions  of  men,  but  by  this  Word  of  God, 
Hence,  while  not  discarding  the  careful  study  of  human  Confessions,  it  is  of  vast  more 
importance  to  'search  the  Scriptures.'"  Compare  Spener's  views  as  given  by  Krauth 
in  Pictures  from  the  Life  of  Philip  Jacob  Spener  (p.  140),  Sprecher's  Groundwork  of  Theol 
(e.g.  pp.  30,  100,  etc.),  Art.  in  Princeton  Review  (July,  1860)  on  The  Bible  its  own  Witness 
and  Literpreter,  the  Address  to  the  Eeader  prefixed  to  King  James'  Version  (with  quota- 
tions from  Tertullian,  Justin,  Basil,  etc.,  on  the  Sufficiency  of  Scripture),  WyclifEe's 
Truth  and  Meaning  of  Scripture,  Whately's  Errors  of  Romanism. 

Ols.  2.  Creeds,  etc.,  yaluable  as  they  are  in  many  respects,  can  only,  at 
best,  give  their  testimony  as  witnesses  to  the  truth  ;  and  they  can  only  tes- 
tify to  as  much  of  it  as  the  f  ramers  themselves  have  seen  and  experienced. 
Professing  to  give  evidence  in  favor  of  the  Bible,  or  to  state  what  the  Bible 
teaches,  that  evidence  or  statement  is  only  proper,  consistent,  and  availa- 
ble in  so  far  as  it  comcides  with  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Knowledge,  there- 
fore, of  the  satisfactory  character  of  the  confessional  statements,  is  only  at- 
tainable by  bringing  them  to  the  crucial  test,  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  a 
bad  indication  when,  in  any  period,  men  will  so  exalt  their  confessions 
that  they  force  the  Scriptures  to  a  secondary  importance,  illustrated  in  one 
era,  when,  as  TuUoch  {Leaders  of  the  Refor.,  p.  87)  remarks  :  "  Scripture 
as  a  witness,  disappeared  behind  the  Augsburg  Confession." 

The  reader  will  be  reminded  of  Luther's  reply  to  Henry  VIII  :  "  As  to  myself,  to  the 
words  of  the  Fathers,  of  men,  of  angels,  of  devils,  I  oppose,  not  old  customs,  nor  the 
multitude  of  men,  but  the  Word  of  Eternal  Majesty,  that  Gospel  which  my  adversaries 
themselves  are  compelled  to  recognize.  There  I  take  my  stand, "  etc.  ' '  I  heed  very 
little  the  words  of  men,  whatever  their  sanctity  may  have  been,  and  as  little  do  I  heed 
tradition  or  custom,  fallacious  custom.  The  Word  of  God  is  superior  to  all  else.  If  I 
have  the  Divine  Majesty  on  my  side,  what  care  I  even  though  a  thousand  Augustines,  a 


PeOP.  10.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  125 

thousand  Cyijrians,  a  thousand  churchfuls  of  Henrys,  rise  up  against  me.  God  cannot 
err  or  deceive  ;  Augustine  and  Cyprian,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  elect,  may  err, 
and  have  erred,"  etc.  So  also  against  "the  Celestial  Prophets"  :  "  The  sjDirit  of  the 
new  prophet  flies  very  high  indeed  ;  it  is  an  audacious  spirit  that  would  have  eaten  up 
the  Holy  Ghost,  feathers  and  all.  Bible  !  sneer  these  fellows,  Bibel  !  Bubal  !  Babel ! 
And  not  only  do  they  reject  the  Bible  thus  contemptuously,  bvit  they  say  that  they 
would  reject  God  too,  if  He  were  not  to  visit  them  as  He  did  the  prophets,"  etc.  (DAu- 
bigne's  Ills.  Bef.,  Michelet's  Life  of  Luther,  etc.)  Luther  thus  manifested  against  all  sides 
the  supremacy  of  the  Bible  (comp..  Introd.  to  West's  '^Analysis  of  Bible"),  and  opposed 
(Michelet,  p.  337)  "  the  papists'  cry,  '  The  Church,  the  Church,  against  and  above  the 
Bible.'  "  In  his  letter  to  Jerome  Dungersheim  on  the  importance  and  authority  of  the 
fathers  of  the  church  (Michelet's  ^p.,  p.  419),  alluding  to  several  of  the  fathers,  the 
Council  of  Nice,  he  asserts  that  "  whilst  I  respect  the  various  authorities,  I  ascend  the 
stream  till  I  reach  the  great  fountain  whence  they  all  take  their  rise."  Zwingle  repeat- 
edly uttered  similar  sentiments  expressive  of  the  authority  of  Scripture,  and  when  in 
the  Conference  with  Melanchthon  at  Marburg,  he  referred  to  the  Council  of  Nice  and  the 
Athanasian  creed,  he  stated  (D'Aubigne's  IJis.  Bef.,  vol.  4,  p.  85):  "We  have  never 
rejected  the  councils,  wheii  they  are  based  on  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God."  All 
the  Eeformers,  without  excej)tion,  entertained  similar  views,  and  received  the  statements 
of  previous  creeds,  councils,  fathers,  etc.,  only  as  they  thought  them  correspondent  with 
the  Word.  How  this  was  afterward  perverted  and  the  Eeformer's  writings  elevated  to 
the  authority  of  Scripture,  or  creeds  exalted,  as  if  inspired,  to  an  infallibility,  is  illus- 
trated in  the  fierce  controversies  (Corner's  His.  Prot.  Theol.,  vol.  2,  p.  211,  etc.)  waged 
during  the  history  of  "Pietism."  How  soon  was  the  spirit  of  Luther  lost,  as  evidenced 
in  his  reply  (drawn  from  Augustine  to  Jerome)  to  Prierias  (DAiibigne's  IBs.,  vol.  1,  p. 
282)  :  "  I  have  learned  to  render  to  the  inspired  Scriptures  alone  the  homage  of  a  firm 
belief,  that  they  have  never  erred  ;  as  to  others,  I  do  not  believe  in  the  things  they  teach 
simply  because  it  is  they  who  teach  them,"  or  his  more  decided  utterance  in  the  "  Smal- 
cald  Articles"  (afterward  used  and  perverted  to  bind  men's  consciences  !) :  "  AVe  ought 
not  to  form  articles  of  faith  out  of  the  words  or  works  of  the  Fathers  ;  otherwise  their 
diet,  their  kinds  of  dress,  their  houses,  etc.,  would  have  to  be  made  articles  of  faith,  as 
men  have  sported  with  the  relics  of  saints.  But  we  have  another  rule,  namely,  that  the 
Word  of  God  forms  articles  of  faith,  and  no  one  else,  not  even  an  angel  (Gal.  1  :  8)." 
Such  a  complete  subordination  of  Creeds  to  Scrij^ture  is  self-evident— (1)  from  the 
authors  of  such  declaring  that  they  derived  them  from  Scripture  as  then  understood  by 
them  ;  (2)  from  distinguishing  between  the  infallibility  of  Scripture  and  the  fallibility 
of  human  productions  ;  (3)  from  their  speaking  of  Confessions  as  only  witnessing  for,  or 
testifying  from,  the  Scrij^tures  ;  (4)  from  their  subjecting  the  testimony  of  creeds  to  the 
test  of  the  Bible  ;  (5)  from  their  urging  others  who  should  subscribe  the  formulated  faith 
to  the  study  of  the  Bible  as  the  best  teacher  ;  (6)  from  the  revisions,  changes,  enlarge- 
ments, etc.,  made  ;  (7)  from  many  of  them  depreciating  a  confessional  standard  in  order 
that  they  might  exalt  Scripture.  Let  us  conclude  with  the  apt  appeal  (illustrating  both 
this  subject  and  Prop.  4)  of  Melanchthon  in  his  "  Apology"  to  the  Parisian  Universitj^  : 
"  Here  is,  as  I  think,  the  sum  of  the  controversy.  And  now  I  ask  you,  my  masters,  has 
the  Scripture  been  given  in  such  a  form  that  its  iindouhted  meaning  may  be  gathered  with- 
out exposition  of  Councils,  Fathers,  and  Schools,  or  not  ?  If  j^ou  deny  that  the  meaning 
of  Scripture  is  certain  by  itself,  without  glosses,  I  see  not  why  the  Scripture  was  given  at 
all,  if  the  Holy  Sj)irit  was  unwilling  to  define  with  certainty  what  he  would  have  us  to 
believe.  Why  do  the  apostles  invite  us  at  all  to  the  study  of  the  Scripture,  if  its  mean- 
ing is  uncertain  ?  Wherefore  do  the  fathers  desire  us  to  believe  them  no  farther  than 
they  fortify  their  statements  by  the  testimonies  of  Scripture  ?  Why,  too,  did  the  ancient 
councils  decree  nothing  without  Scripture,  and  in  this  way  we  distinguish  between  true 
and  false  councils,  that  the  former  agree  with  plain  Scripture,  the  latter  are  contrary  to 
Scripture  ?  .  .  .  Since  the  Word  of  God  must  be  the  rock  on  which  the  soul  reposes, 
what,  I  pray,  shall  the  soul  apprehend  from  it,  if  it  be  not  certain  what  is  the  mind  of 
'the  Spirit  of  God  ?" 

Ods.  3.  The  Bible,  then,  is  our  only  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice, 
as  many  of  the  Confessions  of  Faith  distinctly  declare.  This  is  also  recog- 
nized in  Catechisms,  or  elementary  books  of  instruction,  all  of  which  pro- 
fess to  be  based  dii^ectly  on  the  Word.  Every  man  feels  that  a  doctrinal 
position  is  only  strongly  fortified  by  Scripture  testimony  ;  that  the  injunc- 


126  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  10. 

tion,  **  If  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God,"  1  Pet. 
4  :  11,  is  to  be  observed  in  teaching  divine  things  ;  that  it  is  proper  and 
necessary  to  appeal  "  to  the  law  and  the  testimony  ;  if  they  speak  not  ac- 
cording to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them"  (Isa.  8  :  20). 
This  feeling  is  aroused  by  the  conviction  that  we  (Eph.  2  :  20)  "  are  built 
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself 
being  the  chief  corner  stone."  *  Upon  these,  what  they  have  declared  aud 
done,  must  our  doctrines  be  erected,  and  to  them  appeal  must  be  made  in 
their  support.  It  is  desirable  to  know  how  others  understood  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Bible,  how  they  derived  them,  what  proof  sustains  them,  etc., 
and  it  is  proper  to  acknowledge  our  indebtedness  to  all  such  for  informa- 
tion and  knowledge  imparted,  but  when  these  human  compositions  are  to 
become  the  leading  medium  through  which  to  view  and  interpret  Scripture, 
and  that  Holy  Writ  must  only  be  accepted  as  understood  and  explained  by 
fallible  man,  without  any  appeal  therefrom  on  the  ground  that  they  are 
given  in  the  consciousness  of  the  church  as  a  legitimate  spiritual  outgrowth 
through  pious  and  enlightened  believers,  we  must  decline  such  a  darkening 
of  authority,  such  a  substitution  for  the  Popish  system. 

It  is  amazing  how  the  contrary  is  asserted  in  various  quarters,  overlooking  how  the 
best  of  men,  with  the  purest  of  intentions,  ma}^  under  the  influence  of  jjrior  education, 
ecclesiastical  bias,  an  adoj^ted  jjrinciple  of  interpretation,  etc.,  misinterpret  Scripture. 
It  is  gratifying,  therefore,  to  see  that  men  of  the  greatest  ability  and  eminence,  without 
desiring  to  destroy  the  landmarks  of  the  past  or  to  dishonor  the  noble  legacies  left  by 
the  church,  insist  upon  it  as  honorable  to  the  expressions  and  expositions  of  faith  that 
they  should  not  be  subscribed  to  without  a  declaration  attached  to  them  of  the  sui^erior 
authority  of  the  Word  itself.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Schmucker  {Luth.  Symbols,  p.  59)  quotes 
Koellner  as  saying  that  the  body  of  able  theologians,  "  champions  for  the  doctrines  of  the 
church,"  have  "  departed  from  the  rigid  doctrinal  system  of  the  symbols,"  instancing 
"  such  as  Doederlein,  Morus,  Michaelis,  Keinhard,  Knapp,  Storr,  Schott,  Schwartz, 
Augusti,  Marheinecke,  Hahn,  Olshausen,  Tholuck,  and  Hengstenberg. "  Kosllner  then 
adds:  "  In  like  manner  has  the  public  joledge  to  the  symbols  been  greatly  relaxed,  and 
is  nowhere  unconditional  ;  but  infidelity  to  the  principles  of  Protestantism,  and  guard- 
ing it,  the  obligation  is  always  expressed  with  the  explicit  reservation  of  the  sujjreme 
authority  of  the  Scriptures,  as  is  evident  from  an  inspection  of  the  pledges  j^rescribed  in 
the  different  Protestant  countries."  A  mass  of  evidence  and  a  host  of  names  might  be 
appended^  as  seen,  e.g.  in  Schmucker 's  "  The  Lutheran  Church  in  America'"  (esj^ecially 
noticing  Dr.  Endress'  testimony  and  quotations  from  Melanchthon  and  Luther,  p.  205, 
etc.),  Stuckenberg's  His.  Augsb.  Confession,  Mailer's  Fref.  to  Symbol  Books,  Walch's 
Jntrod.  to  Symb.  Books,  Buddeus  in  Isagoge,  recent  utterances  of  Llihe,  the  Theol.  Faculty 
of  Dorpat,  Guericke,  Dietrich,  etc.  Compare  also  Dorner's  His.  of  Frot.,  1,  12  ;  Leibnitz's 
Theodicy  Fref;  Neander's  Church  His.,  1,  420  ;  Newman's  Arians,  1,  2,  and  ch.  2,  1  ; 
Waterland's '  IFor/c;,  3,  254  ;  Burnet's  His.  Bef.,  vol.  2,  p.  268,  as  well  as  the  writings  of 
Fuller,  Sherlock,  Hodge,  Kurtz,  Auberlen,  etc. 

Mackay  {Frog,  of  Litellect.,  1,  17)  says  :  "Forms  (i.e.  creeds,  etc.)  are  in  their  nature 
transitory  ;  for  being  destitute  of  flexibility  and  power  of  self-accommodation  to  altered 

*  We  give  Barnes'  (Com.  loci)  comment  :  We  learn  "  that  the  traditions  of  men  have 
no  authority  in  the  church,  and  constitute  no  part  of  the  foundation  ;  that  nothing  is  to 
be  regarded  as  a  fundamental  part  of  the  Christian  system,  or  as  binding  on  the  con- 
science, which  cannot  be  found  in  the  '  prophets  and  apostles  ;'  that  is.  as  it  means 
here,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  No  decrees  of  councils  ;  no  ordinances  of  synods  ;  no 
'  standard  '  of  doctrines  ;  no  creed  or  confession,  is  to  be  urged  as  authority  in  forming 
the  opinions  of  men.  They  may  be  valuable  for  some  purposes,  but  not  for  this  ;  they 
may  be  referred  to  as  interesting  parts  of  history,  but  not  to  form  the  faith  of  Christians  ; 
they  may  be  used  in  the  churcli  to  express  its  belief,  not  to  form  it.  What  is  based  on 
the  authority  of  apostles  and  prophets  is  true,  and  always  true,  and  only  true  ;  what 
may  be  found  elsewhere  may  be  valuable  and  true,  or  not,  but,  at  any  rate,  is  not  to  be 
used  to  control  the  faith  of  men." 


Prop.  10.]  the  theoceatic  kii^gbom.  127 

circumstances,  they  become  in  time  unconformable  to  realities,  and  stand  only  as  idle 
landmarks  of  the  past,  or  like  deserted  channels  requiring  to  be  filled  up."  This  is  alto- 
gether too  disparaging,  for,  truth  being  eternal,  true  doctrine  being  ever  the  same,  those 
creeds  and  confessions  that  most  purely  embrace  it,  as  e.g.  Apostles'  Creed,  are  far  from 
being  transitory.  This  will  only  apply  to  lengthy  Confessions,  embracing  numerous 
details,  etc.  Dr.  Wiliams  (Bational  Godliness,  p.  69),  although  liberal  in  thinking, 
expresses  himself  more  reasonably  and  justly  when  he  says  :  "  No  greater  subject  can  in 
our  own  day  emploj'  any  man's  noblest  energies,  than  preservation  or  renewal  of  the 
truth  of  God,  not  fettered  overmuch  by  the  human  accidents  of  our  ancestors  in  the 
faith,  yet  with  reverential  tenderness  even  for  these."  The  truth  is,  that  an  extreme 
position  is  to  be  avoided  on  this  point.  The  history  of  the  church  indicates  that  Confes- 
sions have  subserved  high  ]3urposes  ;  it  is  the  abuse  and  perversion  of  them  that  has  done 
mischief.  To  oppose  creeds  and  denounce  them  as  "  schismatical".is  plainly  contradicted 
by  fact.  Those  who  so  persistently  decry  formulas  of  faith  on  this  ground,  are  as  much 
divided  and  in  as  great  disagreement  as  the  bodies  who  receive  and  adhere  to  Confes- 
sions. Thus  e.g.  tjnitarians  embrace  Arians,  Humanitarians,  Eationalists,  Liberalists, 
etc.;  or  the  Universalists,  Quakers,  Christians,  Campbellites,  Christadelijliians,  and 
others,  who  mutually  reject  each  other,  are  divided  among  themselves  in  view,  and  only 
agree  in  the  denunciation  of  creeds.  Yet  all  these,  without  excei3tion,  have  a  written, 
dogmatical  form  of  faith-  not  called  a  creed,  but  still  virtually  such — penned  by  some 
prominent  leader  or  leaders,  which  is  followed,  slavishly,  by  the  mass.  It  is  proper  for 
the  church  in  certain  stages,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,  of  restraining  error,  of  bringing 
forth  truth,  etc.,  to  define  its  position  in  brief  formulas,  couched  as  much  as  possible  in 
Scripture  language,  but  to  leave  all  such  open  to  improvement  or  change  if  truth  de- 
mands it.  There  is  something  anti-scrij)tural  in  the  position  of  Eomanism,  Symbolic 
Lutheranism,  Anglican  High  Churchism,  Ultra  Calvinism,  Eeformed  Confessionalism — in 
brief,  in  all  attempts  to  bring  in  the  work  of  man  as  an  aidhoritative  inteipreter  of  Script- 
ure. However  well  intentioned  the  design,  it  is  a  virtual  lowering  of  Scripture  to  a 
human  level,  and  an  abridgment  of  true  Christian  liberty.  Thus  e.g.  the  spirit  of  in- 
quiry would  be  comjDletely  fettered  if  the  direction  of  Dr.  Goulbourn  {The  Holy  CatJi. 
Church,  1S74)  were  followed  :  "  The  Pmyer-Book  is  for  us  the  authorized  guide  into  the 
teaching  of  the  Bible,"  assuring  us  that  "  there  would  be  an  end  of  controvers}",  and  a 
good  prospect  of  quiet  growth  in  grace  if  we  could  acquiesce  in  the  Bible  as  inierpreied  hy 
the  Prayer-Book."  Alas  !  a  multitude  of  Symbolical  books  desire  and  claim  this  posi- 
tion, and  their  respective  adherents  invite  us  with  similar  hopes.  Bigotry  and  unchris- 
tian zeal  are  found  in  both  extremes — viz.,  in  an  overdue  reverence  for,  and  exaltation 
of.  Confessions,  and  in  the  total  rejection  of  creeds  as  if  unworthy,  in  so  far  as  based  on 
Scripture,  of  our  acceptance.  Van  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dog.  vol.  1,  p.  223)  justly  says  :  "  One 
may  esteem  it  a  personal  happiness  if  one  can  with  an  honest  theological  conscience 
stand  on  the  ground  of  the  Confession  ;  but  the  honor  of  sound  Orthodoxy,  as  measured 
by  the  standard  of  the  Church  is — regarded  from  a  Christian  standpoint — hj  no  means 
the  highest.  It  may  well  be  that  one  feels  himself,  on  the  ground  of  Scripture  itself, 
and  by  virtue  of  the  Protestant  principle,  hound  in  conscience  to  differ  on  a  certain  point 
from  the  doctrine  of  the  Church.  Heterodox}'-,  in  such  a  case,  is  not  to  be  regarded  at 
once  as  heres}'.  The  rectification  of  the  traditional  creed,  which  is  in  this  way  tested  by 
the  Word,  may  even  lead  to  its  further  develoi^ment,  jirovicled  that  it  is  tested  only  by 
means  of  Holy  Scripture.  Precisely  he  trulj^  holds  to  his  Confession  of  Faith,  in  the 
Evang.  Protestant  sense  of  the  term,  who  recognizes  in  the  Confession  not  tJie  ahsoJuiely 
perfect  form  of  his  religious  conviction,  but  that  which  may  be  constituted  an  ever  more 
perfect  form  of  it  ;  and  who  seeks  to  attain  to  this  higher  perfection  by  an  ever  closer 
attachment,  and  an  ever  deeper  subjection  of  himsef,  to  God's  Word  in  Holy  ScriiDture. 
There  yet  lie  treasures  in  the  gold  mine,  which  await  only  the  well-directed  sj^ade  of  the 
digger,"  etc.  Thus  also  Martensen  {Ch.  Dog.  s.  242)  remarks  in  the  same  strain,  after 
stating  that  tradition  is  an  important  ally  in  the  interpretation  of  Scripture  :  "  But 
though  she  (church)  thus  makes  use  of  the  guidance  of  tradition  in  order  to  the  under- 
standing of  Scripture,  this  by  no  means  violates  her  principle,  that  tradition  must  in 
turn  be  tested,  purified,  and  more  perfectly  developed  by  Holy  Scripture.  It  is  true 
even  of  the  Apostles'  Creed,  that  being  a  work  in  its  present  form  clearlj'^  apostolic,  it 
cannot  possess  the  same  critical  authority  as  Holy  Scripture,"  etc. 

Obs.  4.  Haying  thus  determined  to  occupy  the  only  position  consistent 
with  that  of  a  biblical  student,  viz.:  that  while  duly  reverencing  the  sym- 
bolical books  and  theological  efforts  of  the  past,  yet  they  should  not  be- 


128  THE   THEOCRATIC    KI]S'C4D0X.  [PrOP.  10. 

come  the  infallible  directories  of  the  conscience  and  the  restrainers  of  a  true 
Christian  freedom  to  search  into  and  receiv^  what  God  has  revealed,  even 
if  opposed  to  them  ;  it  is  time  to  notice  what  bearing  this  has  upon  the  sub- 
ject of  the  kingdom.  The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  although  prominently 
in  the  Bible,  is  not  specially  treated  in  the  earlier  Confessions,  as  e.g.  the 
Apostles',  Niceno-Constantinopolitan,  and  Athanasian.  General  expres- 
sions, without  entering  into  details,  are  employed,  which  hoth  Millenarians 
and  Anti-Millenarians  could  subscribe.  The  doctrine  as  npheld  by  us  is 
contained  in  yery  few  Confessions,  is  ignored  by  others,  and  is  misappre- 
hended and  opposed  in  others.  The  result  is,  that  many  persons  are  prej- 
udiced or  biassed  by  a  confessional  standard,  and  are  thus  poorly  prepared 
for  a  dispassionate  inyestigation.  Preparatively  it  may  be  said,  that  when  a 
doctrine  like  ours  has  been  almost  universally  held  by  the  Christian  Church 
for  several  centuries,  and  that  church  points  out  that  it  is  contained  in  the 
grammatical  sense  of  the  Word  ;  that  it  is  a  doctrine  plainly  revealed, 
often  repeated,  incorporated  with  covenant  and  promise,  and  the  subject  of 
enlarged  remark  and  prediction,  it  should  certainly  commend  itself  as  em- 
inently worthy  of  calm  consideration  and  careful  comparison  with  Script- 
ure testimony.  It  is  strange  that  but  few  Confessions  make  the  kingdom 
a  distinctive  article  of  faith,  and  from  this,  no  doubt,  results  in  a  measure 
the  great  variety  and  latitude  of  meanings  given  to  it.  The  reasons  why 
our  doctrine  has  not  received  a  confessional  prominency,  will  be  presented 
under  following  propositions. 

While  all  our  Introductory  Treatises  to  the  Bible  caution  us  to  avoid  apjjroaching  the 
Scriptures,  in  order  to  ascertain  its  sense,  under  the  bias  of  a  previously  constructed 
system  of  doctrine,  yet  it  is  a  rule  almost  constantly  violated,  as  is  too  painfully  evident  in 
commentaries,  expositions,  and  theological  treatises.  So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  very 
few  indeed  escape  entirely  from  its  iniiuence,  manifested  in  anticipating  the  meaning, 
inferring  it,  etc.,  in  accord  with  a  belief  conscientiously  and  sincerely  entertained. 
Man,  with  the  purest  of  motives,  is  still  addicted  to  infirmity,  and  his  weakness  is  pre- 
sented in  more  than  one  confessional  utterance.  Taylor  {Ep.  Bed.  Liberty  of  Prophesying) 
has  observed  :  "  Such  is  the  iniquity"  (we  would  soften  this  by  substituting  misguided 
zeal)  "  of  men,  that  they  suck  in  oj^inions  as  wild  apes  do  the  wind,  without  distin- 
guishing the  wholesome  from  the  corrupted  air,  and  then  live  upon  it  at  a  venture  ;  and 
when  all  their  confidence  is  built  upon  zeal  and  mistake,  yet  therefore  because  they  are 
zealous  and  mistaken,  the}^  are  imj^atient  of  contradiction."  Confessional  exclusiveness 
is  the  most  intolerant,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  destructive  to  true  progress.  It 
virtually  closes  the  Bible  to  advancement  in  knowledge,  being  the  self-constituted  meas- 
urer of  it.  We,  therefore,  appropriate  Martensen's  {Ch.  Bog.,  p.  41)  language:  "We 
maintain,  further,  that  no  reformation  can  ever  be  effected  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  unless 
the  principle  is  accepted,  that  nothing  shall  pass  for  truth  which  cannot  stand  the  final 
test  of  the  Word  of  God  and  the  mind  of  man,  freely  investigating,  in  the  liberty  where- 
with Christ  makes  us  free."  The  inroads  of  infidelity  and  the  respondent  defence,  the 
destructive  criticism  of  both  Scripture  and  Ecclesiastical  matters  and  the  corresponding 
vindication,  have  made  it  requisite  that  the  largest  liberty,  comi^atible  with  the  supremacy 
of  Holy  Writ,  should  be  allowed  in  investigation,  in  order  that  truth,  and  truth  alone, 
may  be  upheld  and  consistently  defended. 

Briefl}-,  it  may  be  proper  to  consider  the  main  reasons  assigned  for  exalting  Confes- 
sions or  traditions  to  an  equality  wath  Scripture,  Those  under  the  plea  of  the  continued 
inspiration,  the  special  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit,  the  constant  impartation  of  Revela- 
tions, have  been  previously  noticed.  Those  of  the  Romish  Church  are  (1)  that  the 
church  is  older  than  the  Scriptures,  and  that  they  proceed  from  her.  The  Divine  Record, 
however,  teaches  us  that  the  Church  itself  sprang  from  God's  Word,  and  that  she  is  only 
the  custodian  of  that  Word,  bound  to  disseminate  it  without  additions,  etc.  (2)  That  it 
is  only  through  tradition  that  we  receive  the  Scriptures  themselves.  But  this  is  no  rea- 
son why  tradition  as  a  medium  should  be  exalted  to  an  equality  with  Scripture,  for  the 
former  does  not  make  the  latter,  and  the  latter  only  recognizes  and  forwards  that  which 
is  bestowed.     (3)  Rejecting  tradition,  the  door  is  opened  to  endless  and  conflicting  in- 


Prop.  10.]  the  theocratic  kiis-gdom.  129 

terpretations.  To  this  it  can  be  said  that  tradition,  as  attested  by  the  facts  of  history, 
only  increases  the  evil.  The  abuse  of  liberty,  the  violation  of  Scripture,  the  principle  of 
interpretation  adopted,  etc.,  are  not  so  controlled  by  tradition  but,  as  seen  in  the  Eomish 
Church  itself,  the  most  divergent  opinions  obtain.  (4)  The  most  plausible  objection  is, 
that  Scripture  itself  is  reproduced  by  the  authority,  and  under  the  Christian  conscious- 
ness of,  the  Church.  To  this  it  is  sufficient  to  reply  :  that  in  so  far  as  there  is  an  actual 
reproduction  of  Scripture  the  church's  utterances  ought  to  be  received,  but  a  comparison 
must  first  be  instituted  with  Holy  Writ  in  order  to  decide  that  it  is  really  and  truly  such. 
In  the  controversy  between  the  Papists  and  the  Reformers,  the  grand  characteristic  was 
noticed  that  the  former  appealed  to  the  Church  and  the  latter  to  the  Scriptures.  Illus- 
trative of  this  are  the  anecdotes  given  by  Michelet  and  D'Aubigne  {Life  of  Luther  Jp.,  p. 
895  and  421,  Hazlett's  ed.,  and  His.  of  Bef.,  vol.  4,  p.  198)  :  "  At  the  Diet  of  Augsburg,' 
Duke  William  of  Bavaria,  who  was  strongly  opposed  to  the  Evang..  doctrine,  asked  Dr. 
Eck,  '  Cannot  we  overthrow  these  opinions  by  the  Holy  Scriptures?  '  '  No,'  said  Eck, 
'  only  by  the  Fathers.'  Whereupon  the  Bishop  of  Mayence  observed,  '  Truly,  our  divines 
are  making  a  pretty  defence  for  us.  The  Lutherans  show  us  their  opinions  in  the  Script- 
ure, chapter  and  verse";  we  are  fain  to  go  elsewhere.'  "  The  advice  of  the  Pope's  court 
fool  to  the  Cardinals — who  were  consulting  how  the  Protestants  could  be  suppressed 
notwithstanding  their  appeal  to  Scripture,  especially  to  the  writings  of  Paul— that  the 
Pope,  by  virtue  of  his  authority,  should  take  Paul  out  of  the  number  of  the  apostles, 
etc.,  so  that  his  dicta  '^  shall  be  no  more  held  for  apostolical."  It  is  well,  in  this  day, 
to  recall  and  impress  the  true  Protestant  princii:)le  of  authority,  for  the  time  is  coming 
when,  amidst  the  bitter  and  overwhelming  j)ersecution  of  the  church,  sole  reliance  upon 
the  Word  will  be  sorely  needed. 

It  is  a  sad  fact,  that  cannot  be  denied,  that  millions  of  professed  Christians  are  bound 
in  the  cast-iron  fetters  of  creeds  ;  not  merely  the  Greek  Church  (see  e.g.  Dr.  Thompson's 
statements  in  the  Chris.  Union  of  Jan.  17,  1877,  of  Russian  "  intolerance  and  persecution, 
against  which  religious  deputations  protested  in  vain"),  or  the  Romish  Church  (see  e.g. 
recent  Encyclicals,  etc.),  but  a  large  portion  of  Protestant  bodies.  The  old  proverb  of 
some  Jews,  "  the  Bible  is  water  ;  the  Mishna  is  wine,"  is  not  dead  ;  for  we  have  plenty 
of  men  with  the  same  spirit,  who  practically,  when  a  Biblical  question  comes  up  for 
decision,  evidence  that"  The  Bible  is  water,  the  Mishna  is  wine" — seeing  that  the  ques- 
tion is  decided  by  human  writings  and  not  by  the  Bible.  While  some  entertain  proper 
views,  feelings,  and  i^ractice,  yet  of  others  it  may  be  said,  that  they  retain  the  mind 
which  made  Cromwell  exclaim  despairingly  :  "  Every  sect  saith.  Give  me  libertj^  ;  but 
give  it  to  him,  and  to  his  power  he  will  not  yield  it  to  anybody  else."  •  Some  are  so  con- 
fessional that  they  will  reject  a  doctrine  if  not  found  in  their  creed,  and  virtually  the  in- 
structions of  the  Bible  are  changed,  so  that  they  seem  to  read  "  Search  the  Confessions" 
(not  the  Scriptures) — "  Earnestly  desiring  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Confession  (not  Word) 
that  ye  may  grow  thereby,"  etc.  It  is  true  in  theory  as  the  Ch.  Intelligencer  (Aug.  4, 
1877,  in  reply  to  an  attack  upon  Creeds  in  Scribner's  Monthly,  Aug.  1877)  declares,  that 
"  all  Protestant  bodies  proclaim  and  hold  their  creeds  as  entirely  subordinate  to  the 
Word  of  God,"  but  practically  many  do  more  than  this — viz.,  constituting  the  creed  the 
standard  or  rule  of  faith.  This  has  been  noticed  by  numerous  writers  m  the  Church  ; 
this  called  forth  the  noble,  protest  of  Macleod  against  the  same  in  his  speech  made  to  the 
Assembly  of  1872  (comp.  remarks  of  rej)resentatives  on  Confession  in  the  Presbyterian 
Alliance  in  Edinburgh,  1877).  Outside  of  the  church  many  also  notice  it,  as  e.g.  Spencer 
in  his  Study  of  Sociology  on  the  Theological  Bias,  Froude  in  his  Flea  for  the  Free  Discussion 
of  Theological  Difficulties  (where  the  sentence  occurs  :  "  It  may  be  that  the  true  teaching 
of  our  Lord  w^as  overlaid  with  doctrines  ;  and  theology,  when  insisting  on  the  recej^tion 
of  its  huge  catena  of  formulas,  may  be  binding  a  yoke  upon  our  necks,  which  neither  we 
nor  our  fathers  w^ere  able  to  bear"),  and  others.  The  student  in  this  direction  will  be 
pleased  to  notice  the  ultra  position  assumed  by  a  Dr.  Stahl,  and  the  deserved  strictures 
received  in  The  North  Brit.  Feview,  Feb.  1856,  in  Art.  "  Bunsen's  Signs  of  the  Times."  A 
proper  medium  is  thus  enforced  by  Dr.  Sprecher  {Groundwork  of  Theol,  ch.  2,  "  Proper 
Estimate  of  Creeds")  :  '*  Creeds  should  not,  therefore,  be  neglected  or  despised,  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  should  they,  on  the  other,  be  allowed  to  have  undue  weight,  or  be  uncon- 
ditionally enforced.  •  Only  the  substance  of  the  faith,  the  great  system  of  doctrine,  and 
not  the  individual  clauses  and  details  of  the  creed,  should  be  made  unconditionally 
binding.  When  they  are  enforced  beyond  this,  they  drive  out  many  of  the  best  men, 
and  hinder  many  of  the  most  conscientious  from  coming  in,  and  thus  fill  the  Church,  at 
last,  with  bigots  on  the  one  hand,  who  will  repress  all  spiritual  life  and  freedom,  and  on 
the  other  hand,  with  careless  men  who  are  as  really  indifferent  to  truth  as  they  are  to 
godliness — men  who  can  subscribe  to  any  creed,  caring  only  for  the  form  of  religion, 


130  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  10. 

while  they  deny  its  power."  Hence,  from  onr  position,  we  have  admired  the  farewell 
Address  of  Pastor  Robison  to  the  Pilgrims  at  Delft  Haven,  advising  them  to  receive  any 
and  every  truth  that  the  Bible  holds  as  it  may  be  preached  to  them  by  his  successors, 
complaining  that  others  will  only  receive  what  the  Reformers  have  taught  and  nothing 
more,  and  thus  expresses  his  faith  :  "  For  I  am  verily  i:)ersuaded  the  Lord  has  more  truth 
yet  to  break  forth  out  of  the  Holy  Word  ;"  and  concludes  with  "  an  article  of  Church 
covenant, "  as  follows  :  "  That  you  shall  be  ready  to  receive  whatever  truth  shall  be  made 
known  to  you  from  the  written  Word." 

OI)s.  5.  In  this  age  of  destructive  criticism,  it  is  proper  to  additionally 
define  our  position.  The  exceeding  multitude  of  interpretations,  with  their 
variegated  hues,  has  led  persons  to  fix  some  limit,  thus  attempting  to  per- 
form wliat  God  has  not  prescribed  outside  of  the  Scriptures,  for  God  holds 
us  only  responsible  for  the  plat7i,  naked,  grmmnatical  sense  of  the  Word,  and 
not  for  recondite,  hidden  senses  that  the  ingenuity  or  imagination  of  man 
may  concoct.  One  party  will  take  refuge  in  the  infallibility  of  the  Pope, 
another  in  the  decisions  of  Councils,  and  a  third  in  the  agreement  of  these 
two.  One  class  cleaves  to  the  oft-repeated  maxim  of  Yicentius,  and  will 
allow  no  interpretation  saving  that  given  by  the  Church  in  "  a  unanimous 
consent  of  the  Fathers,"  which  consent  (retained  in  Romish  profession  of 
faith,  see  e.g.  "  The  Path  to  Paradise,"  authorized  by  Archb.  Hughes,  New 
York,  1856,  p.  34),  on  inspection,  is  found  to  be  a  foregone  conclusion. 
Another  declares  that  the  only  security  is  found  in  private  judgment,  by 
which  they  mean  the  casting  aside  as  a  hindrance  the  interpretation  of  the 
past,  and  a  studying  of  the  Word  for  ourselves  utterly  independent  of  out- 
side help.  The  fruits  of  this  last  attitude  have  been  manifested  in  those 
who  have  professed  it,  either  by  a  many-sided  or  a  one-sided  interpretation, 
just  as  it  happened  to  be  suggested  by  the  temperament,  education,  bias, 
intentions,  etc.,  of  the  interpreter.  Experience  seems  to  teach  us  that 
safety  lies  in  our  avoiding  all  these  extremes.  While  the  Bible  is  the  chief 
object  of  study,  and  its  truths  authoritative  ;  while  private  judgment  is 
inalienable  and  should  be  exercised  ;  while  it  is  reasonable  to  anticipate 
that  others  beside  ourselves  should  see  and  believe  in  the  truth,  it  is  folly, 
on  the  one  hand,  to  look,  owing  to  human  imperfection,  for  a  general  con- 
sent to  the  truth  (especially  after  the  intimations  of  the  Word  itself  that  it 
will  not  exist),  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  give  ourselves  such  license  and 
self -importance  as  not  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  labors,  faith,  experience, 
etc.,  of  our  fellow-believers.  This  we  can  do,  without  yielding  the  suprem- 
acy of  the  Word,  or  sacrificing  our  freedom  in  Christ.  In  our  argument 
for  the  kingdom,  tradition  shall  also  be  brought  to  view,  enforcing  the 
same. 

We  may  be  accused  of  laying  too  great  stress  on  the  Apostolic  Fathers  and  Primitive 
Church  in  our  argument.  Tradition  is  indeed  of  secondary  importance,  but  still  it  is 
valuable  as  confirmatory  evidence.  For  if  a  doctrine — important  and  directly  appertain- 
ing to  the  Plan  of  Kedemption— is  produced  which  has  never  been  entertained  in  any 
other  age  of  the  church,  it  would  be,  to  say  the  very  least,  a  very  suspicious  one.  The 
Fathers  are  not  to  be  received  as  "  arbiters  of  our  faith,"  but  yet  the  testimony  of  the 
earliest,  before  so  many  errors  arose,  is  valuable  simply  because  of  their  having  been  in 
immediate  contact  with  the  apostles,  elders,  and  their  disciples,  and  thus  would  be  likely 
to  know  something,  even  if  imperfectly  expressed,  of  the  doctrines  received  and  the 
belief  entertained.  A  recent  writer  (Killen,  The,  Old  Cath.  Church,  p.  98)  says  :  "It  has 
often  been  asserted  that  those  Fathers  who  lived  nearest  the  times  of  the  apostles  must, 
therefore,  be  the  best  expositors  of  Scripture.  It  might  with  equal  propriety  be  afl&rmed, 
that  the  most  ancient  philosoi^hers  are  the  most  enlightened  interpreters  of  the  works  of 
creation."     While  the  latter  clause  utterly  fails  as  an  argument— being  irrelevant  for  the 


PkOP.  10.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIl^GDOM.  131 

simple  reason  that  those  philosophers  did  not  immediately  follow  an  inspired  and  har- 
monious teaching  of  philosophy',  and  hence  the  cases  are  not  analogous — it  would  be 
•unwise  and  imprudent  to  assert  the  former,  as  presented  by  Dr.  Killen,  viz.  :  that  they 
are  "  the  best  expositors."  They  too  are  to  be  measured  by  Scripture  ;  they  were  falli- 
ble, and  human  weakness  exhibits  itself  in  their  writings  ;  but  notwithstanding  this  we 
hold  that  following  so  closely  after  perfectly  reliable  teachers,  to  whom  .they  constantly 
appeal,  it  is  reasonable  to  exjDect  that  the  truth  concerning  so  significant  and  prominent 
doctrine  as  that  of  the  kingdom  would  also  appear.  Admitting  fully  their  infirmities, 
and  liability  to  error,  that  their  words  are  to  be  carefully  weighed  in  the  Scripture  bal- 
ance, it  is  right  to  suppose,  in  virtue  of  their  nearness  to  the  Christ  and  ajDostles,  that  so 
important  a  subject  as  that  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  should  enter  largely  into  their  doc- 
trinal expositions.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  The  tradition,  therefore,  which  really 
possesses  most  weight  in  deciding  questions  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  is  that  of  the 
first  and  second  centuries.  The  reason  is  apparent  :  if  Holy  Writ  is  the  real  authority 
in  matters  of  doctrine,  then  it  follows,  in  view  of  the  standing  of  the  apostles,  that  it  is 
important  for  us  to  direct  our  attention  to  the  first  churches  who  were  favored  with  their 
instruction,  conversed  with  them,  enjoj'ed  their  supervision,  to  ascertain  how  they  un- 
derstood the  ajjostles,  how  they  explained  the  Kingdom,  and  what  vievv's  they  entertained 
— and  if  there  is  a  correspondence  between  the  Bible  and  themselves,  we  justly  claim  that 
their  utterances  thus  far  are  worthy  of  credence.  This  matter  is  not  to  be  discarded  be- 
cause it  happens,  as  we  shall  show  hereafter,  that  the  Primitive  teaching  corresponded 
with  and  is  confirmatory  of  our  doctrinal  position.  The  reader  must,  if  acquainted  with 
early  history,  know  that  at  the  introduction  of  Christianity  the  great,  leading  subject 
with  the  Jews  was  that  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  This  could  not  be  ignored  or  set 
aside.  Hence,  before  we  proceed  to  their  examination  it  is  just  to  anticipate,  from  their 
proximity  to  inspired  men,  that  they  heard  and  embraced  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom 
as  given  by  the  witnesses  appointed  by  Jesus.  The  desire  to  have  our  views  confirmed 
by  the  faith  of  the  Primitive  Church  is  so  common  with  theologians  that  every  one  seems 
solicitous  to  confirm,  if  possible,  his  doctrine  by  theirs,  thus  indicating  the  desirableness 
of  such  subsidiary  proof.  After  the  third  century  tradition,  owing  to  the  varied  and  con- 
tradictory opinions  introduced,  is  not  so  reliable  or  significant.  Knapj)  {Theol,  Introd. 
s.  7)  remarks  :  "  Augustine  established  the  maxim,  that  tradition  could  not  be  relied 
upon  in  the  ever-increasing  distance  from  the  age  of  the  apostles,  except  when  it  was 
universal  and  i)erfectly  consistent  with  itself.  And  long  before  him,  Irenaus  (Ag.  Her. 
4.-  36)  had  remarked,  that  no  tradition  should  be  received  as  apostolical  unless  founded  in 
the  Holy  Scriptures  and  conformable  to  them."  With  the  evidences  of  the  fallibility 
of  the  Fathers,  something  to  be  expected,  we  are  not  concerned,  but  notwithstanding 
their  sudden  emergence  from  heathenism,  former  habits  of  thought,  etc.,  it  is  the  most 
reasonable  to  look  for  some  truth  mingled  with  it,  and  that  which  is  the  most  worthy  of 
our  acceptance  is  that  truth  in  which  there  was  a  general  union  of  belief,  and  which 
strictly  conforms  to  Bible  teaching.  It  is  but  a  low  device  to  decry  any  Father,  unless 
palpably  in  error,  as  weak-minded,  etc.,  because  he  happens  to  disagree  from  us  ;  and  it 
is  equally  absurd  to  elevate  any  one  as  so  superior  in  attainments  that  his  statements  are 
to  be  received  without  the  direct  endorsement  of  Scripture.  We  use  the  Fathers,  as  e.g. 
(Ecolampadius(D'Aubigne's  His.  Befor.,  vol.  4,  p.  98):  "  If  we  quote  the  Fathers,  it  is  only 
to  free  our  doctrine  from  the  reproach  of  novelty,  and  not  to  support  our  cause  by  their 
authority."  (Comp.  an  Art.  on  Patristic  Theology  and  its  Apologists  in  the  North  Brit. 
Eeview,  May,  1858.) 

It  is  well  to  notice  a  mistake  into  which  some  excellent  writers  have  fallen.  Overlook- 
ing the  fact  that  the  opinions  of  even  great  and  good  men  are  only  doctrinally  valuable 
in  so  far  as  they  are  based  on  Scripture,  they  pick  out  the  weaknesses  and  failings  and 
errors  of  eminent  Christians  and  parade  them  as  if  the  ticriptiires  were  responsible  for 
such  views.  Thus,  e.g.,  evenLeckey  in  his  His.  of  Bationalism  refers  to  Luther,  Melanch- 
thon,  Calvin,  Baxter,  etc.,  and  thus  indirectly  attempts  to  weaken  Christianity  by  con- 
trasts. The  weakness  of  believers  is  only  too  apparent,  and  is  frankly  acknowledged  by 
themselves;  their  strength,  Scripturally  derived,  is,  however,  not  to  be  overlooked. 
Again,  a  large  and  respectable  class,  not  only  in  the  Romish  Church,  but  in  the  Puseyite, 
Ritualistic  movement,  and  in  others,  have  much  to  afiirm  of  the  reproduction  of  Script- 
ure in  the  church,  and  that  we  are  bound  to  receive,  as  "  the  life  blood,"  the  faith  of  the 
church.  But  not  one  of  these  advocates  of  tradition  that  we  have  read,  is  prepared  to 
receive  the  general  tradition  of  the  early  church  respecting  the  Kingdom.  Tradition  is  all 
well  enough  so  long  as  it  does  not  run  counter  to  their  own  views  ;  and  as  the  latter 
agree  with  a  later  period  in  the  history  of  the  church,  they  are  utterly  unwilling  to  ascend 
the  stream  of  tradition  and  receive  it  as  it  comes  from  the  Primitive  church.     How  they 


133  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  10. 

reconcile  this  with  their  own  avowed  reverence  for  tradition,  it  is  impossible  to  see. 
Even  that  early  portion  received,  is  itself  often  interpreted  differently  from  the  under- 
standing of  it  by  the  early  church.  Thus,  e.g.,  take  the  Apostles'  Creed  as  given  to  us  by 
Irenaius,  held  by  Justin  Martyr,  TertuUian,  and  others,  and  the  coming  of  Jesus  to  judge 
and  the  resurrection  were  explained  (as  will  hereafter  be  shown)  very  differently  from 
the  opinions  now  fastened  by  many  to  the  creed.  If  tradition  is  receivable  at  all,  if  it 
possesses  any  weight  in  argument,  the  stream  should  be  ascended  to  its  fountain  head. 
Again,  some  writers  defend  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  too  much  from  an  outside  posi- 
tion, that  is,  in  a  philosophical  manner.  Cheerfully  admitting  that  philosophically  many 
things  can  be  alleged  in  favor  of  Christianity,  and  that  its  truths  can  be  enforced,  yet  dis- 
tinctive Christian  doctrine  must  always  find  its  chief  and  true  support  in  the  Word  which 
is  the  foundation  of  Christianity.  Philosophy  being  the  love  of  wisdom,  and  mani- 
festing itself  in  the  search  after  wisdom,  cannot  be  discarded  (hence  in  using  the 
term  in  this  work  the  historical  sense  implying  the  various  systems  that  have  suc- 
cessively arisen,  is  alone  meant)  without  positive  injury,  yet  it  should  ever  be 
borne  in  mind  that  philosophy  is  not  itself  wisdom  or  its  judge,  but  only  its  useful 
servant,  its  attractive  handmaiden.  The  highest  philosophy  takes  this  position, 
and  therefore  it  is  that  our  greatest  philosophers  have  been  most  humble  men,  feel- 
ing and  acknowledging  that  wisdom  has  been  imperfectly  apprehended  by  them.  In 
Scripture  doctrine  we  need  something  more  conclusive  than  the  mere  deductions,  however 
valuable  or  suggestive,  of  reason.  We  require  facts  announced  by  Revelation,  related  to 
man,  and  interwoven,  recognizable,  with  past  and  present  history.  Taking  up  the 
works,  theological,  of  many  eminent  writers  in  this  country  and  Europe,  it  will  be  found 
that,  although  representing  different  tendencies,  there  is  an  endeavor  to  place  the  Chris- 
tian system  of  faith  upon  a  philosophical  basis.  The  result  of  this  treatment  is  a  great 
diversity,  arising  from  the  philosophical  system  adopted.  A  grave  mistake  is  made  just 
so  soon  as  the  Bible  method  of  presenting  doctrine  is  lost  sight  of  ;  for,  instead  of  philoso- 
phy being  the  introductory  to,  and  the  interpreter  of,  the  Scriptures,  there  should  be, 
first  of  all,  a  historical  statement  of  doctrine  as  presented  in  the  Word,  and  then,  after 
God  has  spoken,  philosophy,  if  so  minded,  may  explain  and  confirm.  A  clear  percep- 
tion of  the  Divine  Purpose,  historically  presented,  must  precede  all  our  own  efforts. 

Ods.  6.  One  of  the  fruits  of  the  Reformation  is  the  recovery  and  firm  re- 
establishment  of  the  principle  that  all  have  the  privilege  of  judging  for 
themselves  in  matters  of  religion.  Roscoe  (Life  of  Leo  X.,  p.  235,  vol.  2) 
declares  :  "  The  most  important  point  which  lie'( Luther)  incessantly  labored 
to  establish  was  the  right  of  private  judgment  in  matters  of  faith.  To  the 
defence  of  this  proposition  lie  was  at  all  times  ready  to  devote  his  learning, 
his  talents,  his  repose,  his  character,  and  his  life  ;  and  the  great  and  ini- 
perishable  merit  of  this  Reformer  consists  in  his  having  demonstrated  it 
by  such  arguments  as  neither  the  efforts  of  his  adversaries,  nor  his  own  sub- 
sequent conduct,  have  been  able  either  to  refute  or  invalidate."  Count 
Bossi  (whom  Roscoe  answers),  and  others,  have  endeavored  to  deny  this 
privilege  as  opposed  to  their  views  of  tradition,  church  authority,  etc.,  but 
only  in  reliance  upon  the  declarations  of  hierarchical  teaching  outside  of 
the  Bible.  The  Scriptures,  while  enjoining  obedience  to  the  church  teach- 
ing, does  this  only  in  so  far  as  such  instruction  is  in  correspondence  with 
itself.  God's  Word  is  supreme.  A  comparison  of  passages  clearly  indicates 
this,  as  e.g.  obedience  to  the  Scriptures  is  the  test  of  fellowship,  2  Thess. 
3  :  14;  2  John  10,  etc.;  ministers  are  only  to  proclaim  the  truth  as  given  to 
them,' Matt.  18  :  19,  2  Cor.  5  :  19,  20,  1  Tim.  1  :  3,  4,  and  6  :  3,  4,  etc.  ; 
believers  themselves  are  strengthened,  etc.,  by  the  Word  in  faith,  John 
20  :  31  ;  in  growth,  2  Tim.  3  :  16,  17,  etc.  ;  believers  are  to  exercise  and 
obtain  wisdom,  etc.,  Phil.  1  :  9-11,  Col.  1  :  9-11,  etc.  ;  wicked  ministers, 
etc.,  shall  exist  and  teach,  Matt.  7  :  22,  23,  2  Tim.  3  :  5,  etc.  ;  men  shall 
proclaim  as  binding  the  commandments  of  men.  Matt.  15  :  9,  Acts  20  :  32, 
Gal.  2  :  4,  5,  Col.  2  :  8,  etc. ;  men  shall  reject  the  words  of  Christ  and  sub- 


Prop.  10.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  133 

stitnte  their  own,  1  Tim.  4  :  1-3  and  6  :  3,  2  Pet.  2  :  1,  2,  etc.  ;  hence,  the 
appeal  is  made  to  us  individually  to  test  or  try  the  doctrine  proclaimed,  1 
John  4  : 1  ;  1  Thess.  5  :  21,  etc.,  and  that  we  can  know  the  truth  by  receiv- 
iug  the  things  of  God,  1  Cor.  2  :  12,  13,  being  urged  to  it  by  the  fact  that 
some  professors,  forsaking  the  Word,  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God,  1 
Cor.  15  :  34,  and  that  we  shall  finally  be  judged  by  the  Word,  John  8  :  48. 
The  entire  framework  of  the  Scriptures  is  erected  on  the  idea  of  personal 
responsibility  enhanced  by  the  ability  to  discern  tiio  truth  for  ourselves. 

A  vast  array  of  Scripture  might  be  presented  bearing  on  this  point,  but  it  is  needless, 
gince  the  whole  question  really  depends  upon  that  of  the  supremacy  of  Scrii^ture  or  the 
supremacy  of  the  church.  Let  this  be  decided  in  favor  of  Holy  Writ,  and  the  right  of 
private  judgment  follows.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Confessions  of  Faith  ought  to  be 
simple,  and  couched  as  much  as  j^ossible  in  Scripture  language.  It  is  a  matter  of  con- 
gratulation that  this  principle  is  a  leading  one  among  Protestants,  and  is  fully  recognized 
and  stated  in  various  confessions.  But  to  make  these  Confessions  in  tiirn  the  interpret- 
ers of  Scripture,  and  absolutely  binding  upon  the  conscience  so  as  to  allow  no  progress 
excepting  in  their  direction  and  under  their  control,  is  a  palpable  violation  of  the  prin- 
cijole  itself  ;  it  is  inconsistent  both  with  Scripture  and  the  Confessional  spirit.  Protes- 
tantism, which  is  a  Protest  to  such  a  fettering  of  the  believer,  never  could  have  arisen  if 
the  shackles  upon  freedom  of  investigation  forged  by  centuries  of  traditional  belief  had 
not  been  broken. 

A  caution  is  requisite  :  in  advocating,  like  Luther  and  a  host  of  others,  the  right  of  pri- 
vate judgment,  we  do  not  mean  unrestricted  license,  for  private  judgment  is  itself  con- 
trolled by  the  contents  of  Scripture  plainly,  grammatically  expressed.  It  gives  us  the 
liberty  of  going  oiirselves  to  the  Bible,  but  it  does  not  allow  lis  the  freedom  of  rejecting 
anything  that  is  clearly  taught  in  it.  It  is  used  only  to  ascertain  by  reading,  searching, 
comparison,  etc.,  what  is  revealed,  and  Avhen  this  is  known  it  acquiesces  in  the  same. 
It  has  not  the  1  liberty,  being  merely  a  servant  of  God's  and  held  accountable  to  Him,  of 
inferring  and  deducing  from  the  Word  what  it  pleases  ;  it  must  itself  be  led  by  a  consis- 
tent interpretation  of  Scripture,  based  on  sound  rules.  Such  a  caution  is  the  more  neces- 
sary, since  the  principle  is  seized  hj  many  and  grossly  perverted  from  its  true  meaning 
and  intent.  It  is  made  the  medium  through  wliich  a  flood  of  destructive  criticism  and 
misleading  doctrine  is  conveyed  to  cover  the  plain  truth.  Some  even  abuse  it  to  mean 
"  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  be  in  the  wrong,"  just  as  if  man's  accountability  to  the  great 
Lawgiver  was  abrogated,  and  as  if  the  Scriptures  could  not  be  properly  apprehended. 
Many,  arraying  themselves  in  its  silken  folds,  place  themselves  on  the  Judge's  bench 
and  undertake  to  decide  what  the  Supreme  Being  ought,  and  what  He  ought  not,  to 
have  revealed.  The  principle  is  pushed  from  its  legitimate  position  to  a  half-way  accom- 
modation, and  to  an  unbelieving  extreme.  Whilst  the  right  is  a  necessary,  inalienable 
one,  making  us  personally  responsible  for  the  reception  or  rejection  of  the  truth,  we  must 
reader  an  account  for  its  proper  use  or  abuse.  The  same  is  true  of  those  who  deny  it  to 
others,  so  that  Luther  once  remarked  :  ' '  The  Papists  must  bear  wath  us,  and  we  with 
them.  If  they  will  not  follow  us,  w^e  have  no  right  to  force  them.  Wherever  they  can, 
they  will  hang,  burn,  behead,  and  strangle  us.  I  shall  be  persecuted  as  long  as  I  live, 
and  most  likely  be  killed.  But  it  must  come  to  this  at  last  :  every  man  must  be  allowed 
to  believe  according  to  his  conscience,  and  answer  for  his  belief  to  his  Maker."  The 
spirit  of  Tetzel,  Wimpina,  or  Prierius  ("D'Aubigne's  His.  Bef.,  vol.  1,  pp.  269,  279),  that 
would  take  such  a  judgment  away  and  give  it  to  a  Pope  only,  or  that  of  those  mIio  make 
it  synonymous  witli  liberty  to  judge  of  the  propriety  of  God's  commands,  etc.  (and  not 
whether  they  are  to  be  found  in  Holy  Scripture  in  order  to  be  received),  are  alike 
opposed  to  tile  simple  attitude  represented  by  the  child  Samuel  :  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth. "  The  Evang.  Alliance  adopted  as  one  of  its  important  and  funda- 
mental principles  :  "  The  right  and  duty  of  private  judgment  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures."  Indeed,  so  widespread  and  essential  is  this  that  even  such  an  exclu- 
sive Church  as  the  Greek  (so  Pinkerton's  Eussia,  p.  41,  taken  from  Philaret's  statement 
— the  Metropolitan  of  Moscow)  affirms  the  Bible  as  sufficient  for  a  rule  of  faith,  and  the 
right  of  private  judgment,  in  interpreting  the  same. 

Ohs.  7.  It  is  also  a  perversion  to  make  (as  in  Essays  and  Reviews)  con- 
science the  supreme  Judge  to  decide  upon  the  meaning,  merits,  authority. 


134  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  10. 

etc.,  of  Scripture,  and  that  the  latter  must  bend  to  the  decisions  of  the  for- 
mer. The  person  who  exercises  private  judgment  ouglit  to  come  to  Reve- 
lation, realizing  (as  conscience  itself  teaches)  that  his  moral  obligations 
are  not  dejjenclent  upon  his  conscience,  but  upon  the  relation  that  he  sus- 
tains to  God  and  man  ;  and  that,  after  ascertaining  by  the  use  of  his  judg- 
ment what  the  truths  of  God  really  are,  conscience  may  aid  in  showing 
their  adaptation  in  the  response  given  to  them,  help  in  impressing  them 
and  in  urging  obedience  to  them.  Moral  law  exists  independently  of  the 
conscience,  and  is  made  for  conscience  to  respond  to  ;  the  former  is  un- 
changeable and  binding  alike  upon  all  ;  the  latter  may  refuse  to  perform  its 
function  in  impressing  that  law,  as  is  evidenced  in  the  power  of  choice  in- 
fluencing the  action  of  conscience.  Hence  the  right  of  private  judgment 
does  not,  as  some  fancy,  release  a  man  from  moral  obligation,  or  lessen  the 
authority  of  the  Bible,  or  place  him  as  a  judge  over  the  things  of  the 
Spirit,  or  give  him  power  to  substitute  his  own  thoughts  and  vagaries  m 
place  of  luliat  is  iDritten.  It  increases,  instead  of  diminishing,  our  respon- 
sibility, by  placing  us  under  greater  obligations  to  pursue  the  truth  in  the 
way  God  Himself  has  indicated.  Those  who  are  to  "  try  the  spirits 
wdiether  they  be  of  God,"  who  "  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you,"  are 
those  who  have  "  searched  the  Scriptures,"  acknowledging  its  claims  and 
bowing  their  judgments  to  its  divine  superiority.  God  appeals  to  every 
man  to  come  personally  to  His  Revelation,  to  read,  study,  and  meditate 
upon  it,  and  this  appeal  is  based  on  its  sacred  origin,  its  adaptedness  to  the 
condition  of  all,  the  possibility  of  its  superhuman  element  being  appre- 
ciated by  all,  and  that  its  truth  can  be  found  by  all,  and  will  commend  it- 
self to  every  one. 

It  is  important  to  notice  this,  since  efforts  are  made  in  various  directions  to  exalt 
conscience  above  Scripture.  Two  illustrations,  out  of  a  multitude,  are  here  presented. 
The  Spiritualists  in  Convention  (Boston,  May,  1864)  adopted  the  following  :  "  Eesolved, 
That  individual  conscience,  under  the  quickening  and  illumining  influences  of  angel  in- 
telligence, is  the  only  reliable  guide  of  faith  and  life."  It  is  significant  that  this  resolu- 
tion followed  another  commending  "the  works  of  Colenso,  Eenan,  and  other  theological 
agitators."  This  specimen  only  j^roves  the  correctness  of  Scripture,  that  the  conscience 
of  men  is  not  so  all-powerful  but  that  it  can  be  made  subservient  to  passion,  self-interest, 
and  abuse  ;  that  its  corrective  and  restraining  power  can  be  materially  lessened  by  turn- 
ing away  from  the  truth,  refusing  to  allow  its  moral  influence  to  be  exerted,  and  desiring 
the  substitution  of  things  not  demanding  so  high  a  standard  of  self-denial,  morality,  and 
piety.  The  Bible  assures  us  what  experience  corroborates,  that  conscience  cannot  only 
be  overridden  but  become  so  seared  that  it  will  no  longer  respond  to  the  truth  as  origi- 
nally designed  (1  Tim.  4:1,  2  ;  Tit.  1  :  5).  The  conscience,  even  of  a  believer,  if  not  prop- 
erly exercised  may  prove  to  be  a  "weak"  one,  1  Cor.  8:12,  and  10  :  28,  29.  Leckey  {His. 
Batlonalism,  -p.  181),  speaking  of  "  Protestant  Rationalism,"  says:  "  Its  central  conception 
is  the  elevation  of  conscience  into  a  position  of  supreme  authority  as  the  religioiis  organ, 
a  verifying  faculty  discriminating  between  truth  and  error."  We  are  not  told,  hoAvever, 
how  this  holds  good  in  the  conscience  of  a  Hindoo,  Mohammedan,  Roman  Catholic, 
Protestant,  etc.,  which  receives  error  instead  of  truth  ;  or  how  it  happens  that  a  Ration- 
alistic conscience  diverges  so  widely  in  ideality,  materialism,  spiritualism,  nihilism,  etc.  ; 
or  how  even  any  unbelieving  conscience  is  not  united  in  the  view  what  constitutes  the 
"  supreme  authority,"  etc.  If  there  were  some  semblance  of  unity,  and  an  array  of 
facts,  to  substantiate  such  an  opinion,  then  it  might  deserve  consideration,  but  finding 
the  guidance  of  conscience  leading  to  the  utmost  diversity  in  the  Rationalistic  ranks,  it 
may  be  dismissed  with  the  single  remark  :  that  whilst  conscience  has,  as  the  Bible 
teaches,  a  discriminating  power,  yet  this  may  be  perverted  and  abused  until  man  pos- 
sesses ^'  an  evil  conscience.'"  Conscience  is  appealed  to  (Rom.  1  and  2)  in  the  Scriptures 
as  something  needing  aid  (Rom,  9  : 1  and  14  :  15),  as  developed  by  the  truth  (John  18  :  37  ; 
Heb.  9  :  14),  and,  therefore,  is  only  presented  to  us  as  that  facult3%  or  arrangement  of  our 
mental  and  moral  constitution,  which  intuitively  responds  to  revelation  when  brought 


PkOP.  10.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  135 

into  contact  with  it,  but  wliicli  can  be  repressed  or  overcome  by  the  will,  passion,  self- 
interest,  etc.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  it  only  becomes  a  icit7iess  of  the  truth  and  not  its 
judge,  thus  corroborating  the  fact  that  both  Creation  and  Revelation  proceed  from  the 
same  God.  We  reproduce  two  admirable  statements  :  Dr.  Schenkel  (quoted  by  Frothing- 
ham  in  The  ISoul  of  Frotesiantism)  says  :  "  The  contents  of  religion  are  in  God  Himself  ; 
and  since  man  is  conscious  of  God  only  as  God  reveals  Himself,  for  man  the  contents  of 
religion  are  in  the  written  revelation.  Most  gloriously  and  completelj'  has  God  mani- 
fested Himself  in  the  person  of  Christ  ;  and  the  Holy  Scriptures  give  the  history  of  that 
manifestation.  The  Holy  Scripture,  as  the  word  or  revelation  of  God,  contains  the 
'  divine  substance.  Conscience  is  free  ;  but  true  freedom  consists  in  obedience  to  the 
truth.  Caprice  is  no  freedom.  That  only  is  genuinely  free  which  is  bound  to  God. 
Hence  the  Protestant  position,  while  appealing  to  conscience,  at  the  same  time  insists 
that  conscience  is  hound  to  God's  Word,  and  can  attain  outside  of  that  to  nothing.  It  is 
therefore  the  special  characteristic  of  Protestantism  to  be  the  religion  of  the  Bible." 
Thus  this  liberal  theologian  endorses  what  Chillingworth  [The  Relig.  of  Protestantism)  said 
long  ago  :  "  The  Bible,  I  say,  the  Bible  only  is  the  religion  of  Protestants.  Whatsoever 
else  they  believe  beside  it  and  the  plain,  irrefragable,  indubitable  consequences  of  it, 
well  may  they  hold  it  as  matter  of  opinion.  I,  for  my  part,  after  a  long  and,  as  I  readily 
believe  and  hope,  impartial  search  of  the  true  waj'  to  eternal  happiness,  do  profess 
plainly  that  I  cannot  find  any  true  test  for  the  sole  of  my  foot  but  upon  this  rock  only. 
Propose  me  anything  out  of  this  book,  and  require  whether  I  believe  it  or  no,  and  seem 
it  never  so  incomjDrehensible  to  human  reason,  I  will  subscribe  to  it  with  hand  and 
heart,  as  knowing  that  no  demonstration  can  be  stronger  than  this  :  God  hath  said  so, 
and  therefore  it  must  be  true.  In  other  things  I  will  take  no  man's  liberty  of  judgment 
from  him,  neither  shall  any  man  take  mine  from  me.  I  will  think  no  man  the  worse 
man,  nor  the  worse  Christian.  I  will  love  no  man  the  less  for  differing  in  opinion  from 
me.  I  am  fully  assured  that  God  does  not,  and  that,  therefore,  men  ought  not  to  require 
any  more  of  any  man  than  this  :  to  believe  that  the  Scriptures  are  God's  Word,  to 
endeavor  to  find  the  true  sense  of  it,  and  to  live  according  to  it." 

Ohs.  8.  The  exaltation  of  reason  to  the  supreme  authority  is  character- 
istic of  numerous  works.  Eulogies  on  the  excellence  of  reason  as  the  sole 
and  final  arbiter  abound  ;  and  such  might  be  deserving,  and  reason  be  ele- 
vated above  Revelation,  provided  it  had,  apart  from  the  Scriptures,  given 
to  us  that  which  alone  can  satisfy  the  moral  and  religious  sense  of  man, 
viz. :  a  religion  equal  in  merit  to  that  contained  in  the  Bible,  or  one  better 
adapted  to  the  wants  and  necessities  of  humanity.  If  such  2:>ersons  as 
Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,  Confucius,  and  a  host  of  others,  could  have  pro- 
duced a  more  noble  portrayal  of  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God,  a  more 
perfect  character  than  Christ,  and  a  more  glorious  salvation  than  that  pre- 
sented in  the  Word,  then  there  might  be  some  force  and  propriety  in  urg- 
ing the  claims  of  reason  to  its  arrogated  position.  Until  this  is  done,  it  is 
the  wisest  course  to  receive  the  manifest  sn2^e7'iority  of  the  Bible  over  all 
mere  human  productions  ;  a  superiority  attested  not  only  by  a  multiplicity 
of  fact  and  experience  (Comp.  Prop.  182),  but  by  comparative  ignorant 
and  unlettered  men  giving  us  a  complete  Plan  of  Redemption,  which,  while 
constantly  dealing  with  the  loftiest  subjects  that  can  be  entertained  by 
mind,  preserves  an  unbroken  unity  amid  detail.  In  the  study  of  Scripture 
and  in  its  reception  it  is  well  to  keep  in  mind  what  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dog., 
vol.  p.  159),  after  Pascal,  says  :  "  Two  extremes  must  be  avoided  ;  the  ex- 
clusion of  reason,  and  the  admission  of  nothing  but  reason." 

Some  additional  remarks  are  proper,  seeing  that  so  much  is  said  respecting  the  supe- 
riority of  Reason.  The  Bible  constantly  appeals  to  man's  reason  ;  Revelation  is  made  to 
Reason,  and  is  designed  to  be  apprehended  by  it.  Not  a  step  can  be  taken  without  its 
aid,  and  therefore  it  is  folly  to  ignore  its  importance  and  value.  But  whilst  acknowl- 
edging the  same,  it  is  foolishness  to  elevate  it  into  an  infallible  guide  and  director,  yea 
into  a  Judge  of  Scripture  itself.     (1)  Reason  is  imperfect,  needing  culture,  training,  dis- 


136  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  10. 

ciioline,  constant  exercise,  etc. ;  it  is  subject  to  growth,  retrogression,  variations,  etc. ;  it  is 
limited  in  its  ability  to  fathom  things,  much  being  utterly  unknown  to  it.  Hence  the 
impropriety  of  making  it  a  supreme  tribunal.  Let  any  one  take  a  glance  at  the  different 
and  successive  forms  of  Philosophy  that  Reason  has  constructed,  and  these  features  of 
imperfection,  variation,  inability,  are  painfully  exhibited.  The  boasted  rale  of  Reason 
is  manifested  in  a  bewildering  diversity,  scarcely  two  of  them  agreeing  in  the  funda- 
mentals. The  ruins  of  the  past,  and  the  numerous  claimants  for  the  present  afford  us 
the  best  answer  to  such  a  claim.  (2)  The  Bible  represents  Reason  as  swayed  and  con- 
trolled by  wicked  impulses,  as  yielding  to  the  influence  of  passion,  self-interest,  and  evil, 
and  as  needing  correction  and  wholesome  restraint.  Experience,  sad  and  boundless, 
corroborates  this  statement.  Men  of  the  highest  intellect,  whose  works  are  the  admira- 
tion of  the  world,  have  been  the  slaves  of  degrading  vice,  and  have  i)rostituted  their 
minds  to  represent  it  in  attractive  forms.  Reason  subject  to  the  degrading  authority  of 
jDassion  ;  which  even  has  undertaken  in  an  alluring  manner  to  prove  that  there  is  no  dis- 
tinction between  vice  and  virtue,  which  has  overriden  conscience  and  the  nobler  feelings 
of  man  in  its  efforts  to  secure  the  ascendency  of  unbelief — is  no  infallible  standard. 

(3)  The  Bible  again  represents  Reason  as  needing  Revelation.  Holy  Writ  is  based  upon 
this  necessity.  Many  facts  indicate  this  truth.  Thus,  e.g.,  outside  of  the  Scrij^tures 
what  light  has  Reason  thrown  into  the  dark  grave,  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God,  the 
deliverance  of  man  and  creation  from  an  all-pervading  and  constantly  experienced  evil, 
etc.  How  these  problems  are  met — problems  jsertaining  to  God,  man,  and  the  world — let 
the  discordant  and  antagonistic  theories,  from  materialism  through  Pantheism,  Idealism, 
etc.,  down  to  the  baldest  Nihilism,  testif3\  When  the  greatest  philosophers  are  contra- 
dictory and  cannot  agree,  when  one  system  after  another  follows,  surely  there  is  need  of 
help.  When  the  most  gifted  minds  are  utterly  tinable  to  fathom  the  things  of  Nature, 
how  a  grain  of  sand  is  held  together,  w^hy  crystallizing  is  invariable,  how  instinct  is  per- 
petuated, how  piind  and  body  mutually  affect  each  other,  with  a  multitude  of  questions 
unanswered,  or  if  answered  only  under  some  glittering  generality,  surely  in  the  higher 
region  of  morals  and  religion,  it  is  most  reasonable  to  anticipate,  just  as  we  find  it,  less 
ah'dify  to  explain,  less  power  to   penetrate  the  deep  things  relating  to  God  and  man. 

(4)  The  Bible  represents  Reason  as  often  unreliable,  even  in  believers,  unless  controlled 
by  the  higher  Reason  pervading  Revelation.  That  is,  when  left  to  itself,  it  may  lead  lis 
to  error  and  folly.  Unbelievers  themselves  point  out  this  peculiarity,  so  unhaj^pily  dis- 
played in  too  many  instances  in  the  chiirch,  forgetting  that  the  Bible  expressly  warns 
us  that  such  exhibitions  of  weakness  in  reason  are  to  be  expected.  But,  if  this  is  so 
with  believers,  how  does  it  stand  with  unbelievers  ?  Let  the  multitude  of  philosoijhers 
reply  ;  let  the  multiplicitj^  of  systems  of  error  testify.  The  truthfulness  of  God's  Word 
is  abundantly  confirmed  both  in  the  church  and  outside  of  it.  (5)  The  Bible  cautions  us 
against  the  pride  of  Reason,  its  self- exaltation,  and  urges  us  to  humility.  How  this  has 
been  exemplified,  both  in  the  church  and  out  of  it,  forms  one  of  the  most  humiliating 
features  of  imperfect  humanity.  Overbearance,  intolerance,  abuse  of  opponents,  lack  of 
charity,  and  even  persecution,  have  been  some  of  its  fruits.  It  has  never  lacked  in  bold 
presumption.  ((3)  The  Bible  assures  us  that  if  Revelation  is  received  as  God  has  de- 
signed, Reason  itself  will  most  fully  acquiesce  in  its  superiority.  The  declaration  of  the 
Saviour,  "//'  any  man  will  do  His  will,  lie  shall  know  of  the  dodrine,"  has  been  tested  by 
such  a  host  of  gifted  minds,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  press  the  matter.  In  the  case  of 
apostates,  etc.,  1  John  2  :4,  is  verified,  whilst  all  others  have  not  even  entertained  the 
essential  preliminaries  to  a  proper  apprehension  of  Scrii:)ture.  (7)  Reason,  with  its 
loftiest  efforts,  can  only  give  us  the  Possible,  the  Probable  ;  and  this  is  unsatisfactory  to 
man  because  it  presents  no  Plan  of  Deliverance  adapted  to  the  common  and  universal 
wants  of  humanity,  it  develops  no  practical  relief  ;  Revelation  bestows  the  Real,  and 
this  is  manifested  both  in  its  perfect  adaptability  to  man's  necessities  and  in  the  blessed 
earnests  of  experience.     The  former  only  finds  its  corroboration — if  truth — in  the  latter. 

(8)  God  warns  us  that  as  we  shall  approach  the  ending  of  this  disjjensation,  Reason 
shall  so  pervert  a  due  veneration  and  knowledge  of  God,  shall  so  array  itself  against  the 
Revealed  Will,  that  it  shall  succeed  in  mustering  the  nations  and  kings  of  the  earth 
against  the  Truth.  Hence  the  efforts  to  exalt  reason,  the  advance  that  such  a  theory  has 
made  in  practically  alienating  a  multitude  from  the  Scriptures,  is  only  in  the  line  of  pre- 
viously given  prediction.  It  is  something  to  be  expected,  and  therefore  its  extensive 
existence  should  give  us  the  stronger  faith  in  Scripture,  which  so  accurately  foretells  it. 

(9)  Reason  ought  not  to  complain  if  there  are  things  bej^ond  its  comprehension,  things 
impossible  for  it  to  explain,  in  the  Word,  for  this  is  precisely  what  ought  to  be  antici- 
pated in  a  Sujiernatural  Revelation.  Besides  this,  it  does  not  reject  Nature  because  of 
its  inability  to  apprehend  it  fully.     Its  pro^^er  attitude,  therefore,  is  that  of  a  learner, 


Prop.  10.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  137 

receiving  truth  from  all  sources,  even  if  unable  to  understand  ''  how  and  wherefore" 
such  and  such  things  exist,  take  place,  etc.  (10)  The  acknowledgments  of  men  of  Rea- 
son indicate  its  utter  unlitness  to  be  the  final  and  supreme  arbiter.  Passing  by  the  de- 
sponding, ho]3eless,  despairing  admissions  by  those  sunken  to  Niliilism,  it  is  sufficient  to 
select  a  single  example,  illustrative  of  many  others.  Thus  e.g.  Hume  (quoted  by  Christ- 
lieb,  3Iod.  Boubt,  j).  127)  pointedly  and  significantly  says  :  "  The  ultimate  fruit  of  all 
philosoiDliy  is  the  observation  of  human  ignorance  and  weakness.*  On  the  other  hand, 
men  of  undoubted  mental  power,  distinguished  for  the  use  of  reason  subservient  to  relig- 
ion (as  Bacon,  etc. ),  have  informed  us  that  the  portions  of  philosophy  really  valuable  are 
those  which  recognize  and  enforce  truths  already  given  to  us  in  Revelation.  (11)  Finally, 
Reason  has  never  succeeded  in  improving  the  lessons  inculcated  by  Scripture.  It  can 
suggest  no  virtue,  no  duty,  no  obligations,  nothing  promotive  of  individual,  social,  and 
national  happiness,  nothing  essential  to  the  welfare  of  man,  that  is  not  already  presented 
and  enforced  by  the  most  powerful  of  motives  in  God's  Word. 

Dr.  Crosby  {On  Preaching,  before  the  Pan-Presbyterian  Council,  1877)  correctly  affirms 
that  "men's  affections,  not  their  intellects,  are  the  hindrances  to  God's  truth,  and 
accordingly  if  the  contest  can  be  brought  into  the  intellectual  field,  and  so  relieve  the 
heart  from  the  pressure  of  spiritual  truth,  men  are  satisfied."  The  Bible,  as  he  forcibly 
urges,  ajjpeals  to  the  heart,  to  our  moral  nature,  more  than  it  does  to  reason,  without, 
however,  discarding  the  latter.  It  has  often  been  noticed  that  men  in  error,  both  in  doc- 
trine and  practice,  love  controversy — something  that  may  engage  reason  and  stifle  the 
demands  of  the  heart.  Such  are  inclined  to  eulogize  "  Practical  Reason,"  "  Moral  Rea- 
son," and  "  The  Transcendent  Sphere  of  Reason."  An  insidious  and  half-true  method 
— eloquently  expressed  (as  e.g.  by  Coleridge  in  "  Confessions  of  an  Enquiring  Spirit  ") — 
is  to  allow  a  partial  inspiration  to  the  Scriptures  and  a  high  degree  of  ordinary  grace  to 
the  rest,  so  that  they  rather  present  themselves  as  the  supply  of  the  deepest  wants  of 
man  than  as  an  authoritative  and  infallible  standard.  But  how  the  soul  can  rest  upon  a 
supply,  lacking  those  essentials,  we  are  not  informed.  Comp.  the  necessity  of  reason, 
etc.,  as  given  by  Row  in  the  Bampton  Leds.  1877,  "  Ch.  Evidences,"  jj.  19,  etc.;  Butler's 
Analogij,  P.  II.,  ch.  3,  etc. 

Ohs.  9.  In  this  study  of  Scripture,  reason  and  faitli  must  be  joined  to- 
gether in  order  to  make  it  effective.  The  two  cannot  be  separated  without 
serious  injury  ;  this  is  God's  own  arrangement,  and,  to  insure  success,  it 
must  be  followed.  They  are  inseparable,  for  there  can  be  no  faith  without 
reason  first  perceiving  the  truth  and  its  adaptability  to  man,  so  that  faith 
may  then  appropriate  it.  Reason  may  refuse  faith,  can  exist  without  it, 
but  faith  cannot  live  without  reason.  Christlieb,  in  view  of  this  intimate 
and  mutual  relationship,  w^ll  says  that  faith  is  "  the  highest  form  of  rea- 
son," seeing  that  it  establishes  and  confirms  reason  by  giving  us  a  more 
certain  knowledge  of  the  supernatural  in  its  appropriating  effects  of  the 
truth  upon  ourselves.  One  part  of  faith  sees  the  truth,  the  other,  the 
crowning  part  which,  constitutes  it  faith,  accepts  and  applies  it,  thus  giv- 
ing cc  'practical,  and  not  a  mere  theoretical  knowledge  of  the  same.  The 
head  and  the  heart  are  combined  in  this  work,  thus  affording  a  realizing, 
abiding  acquaintance  with  the  truth.  Faith  must  have  knowledge,  for  we 
must  first  hnoiD  the  things  that  we  are  to  believe,  and  hence  it  is  also  rep- 
resented as  "  seeing'^  (John  6  :  40,  Heb.  11  :  27).  Cremer  {Bremen  Lect- 
ures, Leo.  2)  remarks  :  "  All  faith  rests  upon  knowledge,  and  when  it  is 
not  produced  by  deduction  or  logical  demonstration,  it  must  ground  itself 
upon  spiritual  perception  and  contact.     Knowledge  and  faith  are  distin- 


*  One  unbeliever  in  reply  to  another,  in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  March  13, 
1875,  makes  the  following  remark  :  "  It  is  futile  to  talk  of  reason  as  an  infallible  stand- 
ard of  religious  truth,  until  mankind  become  so  perfect  in  knowledge  as  never  to  err  in 
the  premises  from  which  they  reason.  Until  then  the  dictates  of  reason  will  be  simply 
every  man's  opinion,  as  it  is  now." 


138  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDO:^.  [PrOP.  10. 

guishecl  from  eacli  other  like  cognition  and  recognition  ;  so  faith  is  an  ex- 
ercise of  obedience,  of  recognition,  and  hence  of  trust,  of  surrender,"  etc. 
Evangelical  faith  includes  more  than  mere  knowledge,  viz. :  the  hearty  self- 
appropriation  of  such  knowledge,  leading  necessarily,  as  the  truth  received 
demands  it,  to  an  obedience  of  the  same.  Such  faith  is  sustained  by  three 
things  :  (1)  by  the  sense  of  trutli,  i.e.  by  reason,  the  ability  to  discern  and 
know  it;  (2)  by  the  sense  of  right,  i.e.  by  conscience,  the  power  of  testify- 
ing to  the  trutli  and  enjoining  responsibility  of  its  acceptance  ;  (3)  and  by 
the  practical  experience  wrought  by  faith,  i.e.  in  the  agreement  of  faith 
with  our  mental  and  moral  constitution  and  the  results  that  it  produces. 

Faith  is  indeed '' the  gift  of  God,"  Christ  is  "  the  author  of  faith,"  the  Spirit  pro- 
duces faith,  etc.,  but  only  in  the  higher  Evangelical,  Biblical  sense  in  those  who  volun- 
tarily receive  the  truth  as  given  by  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit.  No  man  is  forced  into 
faith,  as  appears  from  the  Scriptures  being  designed  for  faith  (John  20  :  31),  the  ministry 
being  a  means  of  faith  (Rom.  10  :  14-17),  the  Gospel  itself  being  called  faith  (Gal.  1  :  23), 
the  promises  given  to  faith  (John  5  :  24),  and  the  want  of  faith  is  reproved  (Mark  16  :  14), 
warned  against  (Heb.  3  :  12),  threatened  (John  3  :  18,  3G),  and  described  as  voluntary 
(John  5  :  44,  46,  47).  Enlightened  by  the  truth  as  given  by  the  Father  in  His  Son  and 
through  the  Spirit,  that  faith,  which  God  commends  and  that  rejoices  the  heart,  is  pos- 
sible ;  without  accepting  the  aid  thus  tendered,  it  cannot  be  produced.  Hence  no  man, 
unless  he  has  experienced  the  power  of  this  faith,  is  able  to  judge  correctly  of  its  merits 
and  its  true  relationship  to  knowledge.  To  make  man  passive  in  the  reception  of  faith, 
is  to  ignore  the  Scriptures  to  the  contrary  and  also  experience  ;  to  make  man  himself  the 
chief  and  sole  instrumentality  in  believing,  is  to  overlook  the  truth  given  to  excite  and 
sustain  it  ;  to  make  faith  the  barrier  to  knowledge,  is  to  forget  that  faith' s  foundation  is 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  and  to  make  faith  fatal  to  progress,  is  to  trample  under  foot 
the  declarations  of  Holy  Writ  and  the  realization  of  believers  that  faith  only  opens  the 
way  to  increased  knowledge.  Indeed,  it  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  in  any  of  the 
spheres  and  pursuits  of  life  there  can  be  knowledge  without  the  addition  of  some  faith, 
and  whether  any  great  achievement  can  be  accomplished  without  suitable  faith.  Zockler 
{Bremen  Lectures,  Sec.  1,  p.  16)  refers  in  such  a  connection  to  the  faith  of  Columbus, 
Copernicus,  Kepler,  Newton,  etc.,  and  remarks  :  "  True  faith  and  actual  knowledge,  so  far 
from  being  contradictory,  always  demand  and  supplement  each  other.  For  faith,  as  the 
immediate  apprehension  of  the  truth  by  the  divinely  illuminated  reason,  is  related  to 
knowledge,  regarded  as  the  acquired  apprehension  of  the  same  truth  by  the  reason  strug- 
gling toward  such  knowledge,  as  the  necessary  condition,  the  starting  point  and  support 
of  all  its  operations.  All  faith  is  undeveloped  knowledge,  and  all  knowledge  is  faith  un- 
folded and  applied  to  the  different  realms  of  reason  and  experience."  All  Evangelical 
writers,  however  they  may  differ  in  details,  unite  in  the  common  opinion  that  faith  is  not 
to  be  separated  from  knowledge,  seeing  that  the  Bible,  in  unison  with  experience,  in- 
cludes in  believing  a  previous  knowledge  of  certain  facts,  as  e.g.  the  Coming  of  Christ, 
His  work  of  grace  in  man's  behalf,  etc.  They  also  unite  in  the  view  that  the  certainty 
of  this  knowledge,  derived  from  reason,  is  made  evident  by  faith  in  its  vital  force  of 
acceptance,  because  through  the  latter  we  experience  its  aduaUti/  in  the  effects — as  prom- 
ised— produced  upon  us  personally.  Thus,  to  illustrate  :  a  medicine  is  presented  to  us 
in  whose  nature  and  efficacy  we  may  believe  on  the  testimony  of  others  ;  here  is  knowl- 
edge and  taith  in  its  lowest  form.  But  let  this  medicine  be  taken,  and  its  efficacy  be 
established  by  personal  use,  then  previous  knowledge  and  faith  of  a  theoretical  cast  gives 
place  to  a  practical  knowledge  and  faith,  derived  from  personal  accej^tance  and  experi- 
ence, that  elevates  the  former  into  real  facts  connected  with  our  own  personality,  which, 
like  existence,  thinking,  feeling,  etc.,  it  is  impossible  any  longer  to  doubt.  This  is  the 
secret  of  the  believer's  strength,  so  that  all  the  arguments  of  unbelief  ccm  never  shake  the 
simple  faith  of  the  iinlearned  but  sincere  Christian.  He  knows,  and  he  believes,  the 
attestation  of  self-consciousness. 

Undoubtedly,  taking  Scripture  as  a  guide,  unbelief  itself  will  finally  accept  of  this 
•union  of  reason  or  knowledge  and  faith.  The  controversy  thus  far  has  clearly  established 
this  fact.  Delitzsch,  Fabri,  Christlieb,  and  many  others  have  shown  that  (as  Fabri  states 
it,  quoted  by  Christlieb  in  3Io(l.  Doubt),  "  As  its  ultimate  basis,  even  the  most  radical  un- 
belief has  one  and  the  same  principle  of  knowledge  with  Christianity  and  every  other 
positive  religion — the  principle  of  belief  in  given  matter  of  fact,  on  the  groxind  of  the 
original  and  direct  testimony  of  the  human  mind,"     Unbelief,  however  much  it  may 


Prop.  10.]  the  theoceatic  kioS-gdom.  139 

deciy  faith,  lives  largely  upon  it,  calls  loudly  for  others  to  exercise  it,  and  denounces 
those  who  refuse  to  entertain  it.  Unbelief  has  sufficient  intelligence  to  perceive  that, 
while  demanding  faith,  it  is  utterly  inconsistent  to  run  a  crusade  against  faith  on  the 
grounds  heretofore  alleged.  The  result  will  be  a  change.  Knowing  that  faith  influences 
the  masses,  that  it  is  the  most  potent  of  powers,  it  will,  as  the  Bible  predicts,  so  shape 
its  future  course  that  a  connection  will  be  allowed  to  exist  between  Eevelation  and  Sea- 
son, between  Faith  and  Reason,  as  evidenced  in  the  coming  worship  of  Antichrist — tlce 
worship  of  Deified  Man.  For  this  worshij)  of  the  last  times,  we  are  assured,  is  to  rely 
largely  upon  pretended  revelations  and  lying  wonders  to  aid  Reason  and  inspire  Faith. 
Denying  the  faith  and  reason  that  God  requires,  their  punishment  will  come  through 
their  oicn  deluded,  self-exalted  reason  and  faith. 

Finally,  all  Christians,  too,  are  agreed  that  faith  in  its  apj)ropriating  form,  is  such  a 
trust  in  God,  that  it  receives  His  Word  and  relies  ujDon  it,  bringing  under  subjection  free 
will,  so  that  it  chooses  the  moral,  the  religious,  the  obedience  required  in  preference  to 
jileasure,  sin,  and  seliishness.  To  attain  such  faith  demands  self-abnegation,  and  this  is 
the  stone  of  siumhlin<j  to  multitudes.  Hence  faith  is  not  the  power  of  choice,  though  it 
leads  to  it  ;  faith  is  not  conscience,  though  it  quickens  it  ;  faith  is  not  reason,  though  it 
is  led  by  it  ;  faith  is  not  the  mere  knowledge  of  the  truth,  though  it  receives  ;  faith  is 
not  goodness,  though  provocative  of  it  ; — it  is  that  act  which  brings  reason,  the  will,  con- 
science, knowledge,  goodness,  all  into  humhle  submission  to  the  Infinite,  and  relies  upon 
the  provision  made  by  God  for  man.  It  is  appropriating  trust.  Such  faith  brings  forth 
its  own  evidences  of  the  Divine  Truth,  in  its  sustaining  reason  (where  it  only  finds  mys- 
teries), in  satisfying  the  moral  nature  of  man  (e.g.  the  dictates  of  conscience),  in  bring- 
ing forth  the  fruits  of  the  Sj^irit  (i.e.  in  experiencing  the  sanctifying  nature  of  the  truth 
received),  in  its  adaptability  to  all  his  circumstances  (in  strengthening,  comforting,  etc.), 
in  transmuting  evil  into  good  (making  it  disciplinary,  j^rovocative  of  good  to  others,  etc.), 
and  in  quickening  the  whole  man  into  newness  of  life  (implanting  supreme  love  to  God 
and  love  to  man).  It  is  a  powerful  instrumentality  ;  it  is  transforming,  corrective,  and  ele- 
vating. It  is  the  purest  and  strongest  where  it  is  joined  to  the  least  error  ;  but  even  with 
error  it  is  all  powerful  when  based  on  the  essentials  of  Christianity.  The  Bible  takes  it 
for  granted  that  strong  faith — faith  testifying  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  to  self- 
consciousness — may  be  allied  with  a  lack  of  knowledge  respecting  things  not  absolutely 
necessary  to  salvation.  A  few  simple  truths  respecting  God,  the  Redeemer,  the  relation 
that  man  sustains  to  God  and  his  fellows-men,  the  moral  obligation  and  resi^onsibility 
of  man — truths  to  which  the  moral  nature  of  man  is  respondent — are  all  sufficient  to 
create  this  faith.  It  is  a  faith  that  all  the  learning  in  the  world  cannot  alone  produce, 
seeing  that  its  vital  power  lies  not  in  the  head,  but  in  the  heart.  It  is  a  faith  common  to 
the  intelligent  and  the  illiterate,  and  cannot  be  circumscribed  or  produced  through  mere 
knowledge.  Therefore  it  is  that  unbelief  and  bigotry  so  gravely  misjudge  the  weakness, 
error,  etc.,  of  believers— just  as  if  faith  was  dependent  upon  uniformity  in  all  things, 
thus  totally  mistaking  its  foundation  and  intent.  Faith  indeed  increases  by  knowledge, 
knowledge  derived  from  the  Word  and  experience,  but  only  as  truth  is  aj^propriated 
and  obeyed.  This  feature  of  obedience  to  the  truth  known,  the  evidence  of  aj^j^ropriat- 
ing  faith,  often,  often  gives  the  unlearned  man  a  power  and  charm  that  the  greatest  philos- 
opher, neglecting  it,  cannot  attain,  Alas  !  that  men  so  persistently  overlook  this  plain 
fact. 

Attention  has  already  been  called  (Prop.  9)  to  the  misapprehension  that  faith  is  not 
connected  with  doctrine,  that  as  M.  Colani  (in  the  Prot.  Synod  of  France,  1872)  said  : 
"  You  place  Christianity  in  certain  beliefs  ;  we  place  it  in  the  heart."  The  Bible,  the 
experience  of  Christians,  unite  the  two  ;  the  denial  of  one  or  the  other  leads  to  an  ex- 
treme, for  the  simplest  act  of  Christianity,  as,  e.g.,  prayer,  cannot  be  performed  without 
some  distinctive  belief  in  doctrine — the  doctrine  respecting  God  and  the  power  of  Christ. 
It  is  true  that  faith  itself  may  be  hampered  by  the  excesses  of  Confessional  zeal  and 
dogma,  curtailing  access  to  God's  truth  or  veiling  it  by  tradition,  but  this  is  not  the  fault 
of  doctrine  per  se,  but  of  doctrine  imperfectly  or  erroneously  presented.  Hence  the  im- 
portance of  presenting  doctrine,  in  a  Confessional  standard,  as  much  as  possible  in  Script- 
ure language,  and  of  making  even  such  subordinate  to  Scripture.  One  reason  for  the 
persistent  attack  against  doctrine,  is  owing  to  its  vital  connection  with  Christianity,  with 
enlightened  faith  ;  for  as  Kurtz  (Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  130)  has  w^ell  remarked  :  "  The  Doc- 
trine of  the  Gospel  is  the  life  blood  of  the  Church,  the  pulsations  of  which  throb  through 
her  entire  organization."  How  faith  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  through  the  truth  given  by 
Him,  has  been  sufficiently  noticed  under  Prop.  9.  Faith  being  largely  a  heart  w^ork,  it 
is  impossible  for  the  sensual,  haughty,  self-confident,  worldly  man  to  exercise  it,  because 
it  demands  as  its  concomitant,  in  order  to  receive  the  things  revealed  by  the  Spirit, 


140  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIJS'GDOM.  [PeOP.  10. 

obedience,  which  pride,  love  for  sin,  etc.,  rejects.  Even  an  Aristotle  appreciated  the 
relation  existing  between  the  indulgence  of  evil  and  the  rejection  of  truth,  when  he  says 
(quoted  by  Bloomfield,  see  Barnes,  1  Cor,  2  :  14)  :  "  For  wickedness  perverts  the  judg- 
ment,  and  makes  men  err  with  respect  to  jaractical  principles  ;  so  that  no  one  can  be  wise 
and  judicious  who  is  not  good," 

A  few  words  may  be  added  respecting  the  charge  that  faith — Evang.  faith — is  destruc- 
tive to  Science.  We  are  unjustly  charged  by  Scientists  and  others  with  disparaging 
learning  and  philosoiDhy  under  the  Scriptural  phrases  "the  wisdom  of  this  world," 
"  oppositions  of  Science  falsely  so  called,"  "  to  the  Greeks  foolishness,"  etc.,  just  as  if 
reason  was  not  to  be  employed  (when  constantly  ajDpealed  to  in  Scripture),  as  if  true 
science  (implied  by  "  falsely  so  called  ")  could  not  exist,  and  as  if  true  philosophy  (by 
which  we  understand  the  love  for,  and  search  after,  wisdom)  was  not  commended  by 
God.  This  charge  is  so  sweeping  that  it  defeats  itself  ;  for,  however  individual  men  or 
organizations  may  have  acted  in  this  matter  under  bigotry  and  mistaken  zeal,  neither 
Eevelation,  nor  a  believer  who  receives  all  that  God  enjoins,  is  resj^onsible  for  the  same. 
The  learning,  worldly  wisdom,  and  Science  that  the  Bible  condemns,  is  only  that  per- 
verted form  that  caters  to  depravity,  making  men  despisers  of  virtue  and  holiness,  and 
leading  them  to  deny  their  obligations  and  responsibility  to  God.  Simple  consistency 
requires  of  us  that,  the  moment  we  accept  of  the  Word  of  God  as  a  divine  Eevelation, 
Holy  Writ  be  allowed  a  precedency  (accorded  by  reason  and  faith)  without  interfering 
with  or  destroying  the  existence  and  relationship  of  truth  wherever  elsewhere  found. 
This  precedency,  indeed,  leads  to  caution,  to  comparison,  and  to  the  rejection  of  posi- 
tive error,  but  it  does  not  depreciate  learning,  scientific  knowledge,  etc.,  as  evidenced  in 
believers  having  been  among  the  most  learned,  wise,  and  scientific.  It  is  not  too  much 
to  say,  that  the  foundation  of  this  objection  lies  in  the  estimate  formed  of  the  relative 
value  of  Revealed  Truth  and  Scientific  Truth.  Believers,  of  course,  finding  the  former 
dealing  with  iJte  higher  interests  of  man  (his  moral,  religious,  and  eternal),  place  it  highest 
in  the  scale  of  truth  ;  the  unbeliever,  rejecting  the  former,  elevates  nature  or  the  facts  of 
humanity  in  that  scale.  Some  Scientists,  having  no  such  preponderating  plea  as  the  be- 
lievers, despise  learning  and  philosophy  (e.g..  Art.  "Nat.  Beligion,"  Macmillan's  Mag., 
1875,  repub.  Pop.  Science  Monthly  May,  1875)  outside  of  their  peculiar  sphere  of  study. 
Scientists  have  too  often  been  as  bigoted  and  one-sided  as  overzealous  believers.  The 
truth  is,  that  both  parties,  belief  and  unbelief,  are  opposed  to  that  form  and  manifesta- 
tion of  learning  and  philosophy  which  is  hostile  and  antagonistic  to  their  respective 
views  ;  and  the  correctness  of  such  opi:)osition  is  to  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the 
things  believed.  Hence  the  relative  value  of  Revelation  and  of  mere  Science  must  first 
be  determined  before  the  question  is  decided  one  way  or  the  other.  The  fact  also  that 
some  truth  is  essential  and  other  truth  non-essential  to  personal  happiness  and  salvation, 
ought  to  be  considered  in  such  a  discussion.  This  does  not  discourage  investigations  in 
all  domains  of  truth,  but  welcomes  them  with  the  hope  and  faith,  insjDired  by  Revelation, 
that  all  truth,  higher  or  lower,  essential  or  non-essential,  will  in  the  end  be  found  in  fra- 
ternal relationship — supplementing  each  other.* 


*  The  student  who  desires  to  read  on  this  subject  is  referred  to  Christlieb's  "  Modern 
Doubt,"  Birk's  "  Bible  and  Mod.  Thought,"  Ulrici's  "  God  and  Nature,"  Rogers'  "Rea- 
son and  Faith,"  Candlish's  "  Reason  and  Revelation,"  etc.  Dr.  McCosh,  Delitzschj 
Fabri,  and  many  other  writers  present  the  most  valuable  thoughts  on  these  points, 
extending  and  ably  defending  what  nearly  every  work  on  the  Evidences  of  Christianity 
also  notices.  The  reader  will  j)ardon  such  digression  in  view  of  their  practical,  funda- 
mental importance.  The  fine  statement  of  faith  and  reason,  p.  463,  etc.,  Debt  and  Grace, 
by  Hudson,  ought  not  to  be  overlooked. 


Prop.  11.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  141 


Proposition  11.  The  mysteries  of  the  Mngdom  were  given  to  tlie 
apostles. 

This  is  plainly  asserted  by  Jesus  Himself  (Mark  4  :  11,  Matt- 
13  :  11),  "  Unto  you  it  is  gwen  to  knoio  the  mystery  of  the  Mng- 
dom of  God,^^  "-it  is  given  unto  you  to  Jcnoio  the  mysteries  of  tlie 
'kingdom  of  heaven^''^  wliich  the  apostles,  including 'Paul,  claimed 
to  liave  been  imparted,  Eph.  1  :  9,  and  3  :  3,  etc.  The  entire  tenor 
of  the  New  Test,  impresses  us,  that  their  superior  qualifications 
as  teachers  arises  from  their  acquaintance  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  kingdom,  resulting  from  the  personal  instructions  received 
from  Christ,  and  the  subsequent  sjoecial  guidance  of  the  Spirit. 

Ols.  1.  We  are  not  concerned,  in  this  stage  of  the  argument,  to  know 
how  much  truth  respecting  the  kingdom  they  obtained  from  Jesus,  and 
how  much,  afterward,  from  the  specially  delegated  Spirit  ;  this  will  forci- 
bly appear  as  we  proceed.  It  may,  however,  be  properly  stated  here,  that 
there  might  be  mysteries  pertaining  to  the  kingdom,  while  the  kingdom 
itself — what  it  denoted — may  be  fully  known.  The  reader  will  carefully 
notice,  that  in  the  early  period  of  their  discipleship,  the  mysteries  relating 
to  the  kingdom  were  already  given  to  them.  It  is  incredible,  utterly  im- 
possible, that  the  kingdom  itself— wAft^^  it  meant — should,  therefore/ have 
been  a  mystery  to  them.  The  express  language  of  Jesus  forbids  it. 
Hence,  that  large  class  of  eminent  writers,  which  teach  that  during  the 
life  of  Jesus  the  apostles  misappreliended  the  kingdom,  are  mistaken,  and 
it  is  the  most  reasonable,  and  the  most  consistent  with  Christ's  words,  to 
conclude  that  the  apostles,  even  then,  had  more  than  the  mere  "  husk,"  or 
the  unrecognized  "  germ." 

Neander,  and  a  host  of  writers,  say,  by  way  of  apologizing  in  behalf  of  the  apostles 
(because  they  did  not  hold  the  modernized  view  of  the  Kingdom),  that  they  only  held 
"the  shell,"  or  "  husk."  But  Jesus  declares  expressly.  Math.  13  :  16  :  '■'But  your  eyes 
see,  and  your  ears  understand"  Comp.  Mark  4  :  11,  etc.  Such  knowledge  is  proper  for 
preachers  of  the  Kingdom. 

Ols.  2.  The  word  "  mystery"  ordinarily  denotes  something  secret,  hid- 
den, or  beyond  our  comprehension,  and  is  frequently  employed  in  Script- 
ure to  denote  truth  formerly  concealed  but  now  revealed.  The  name 
"  mystery"  is  retained  in  view  of  its  having  been  previously  hidden. 
Mysteries  when  disclosed  may  be  perfectly  intelligible,  and  when  not 
divulged,  but  simply  pointed  out,  may  exist  without  our  reason  being  able 
to  understand  their  nature,  meaning,  etc.  That  the  latter  is  not  op'posed 
to  reason,  although  above  reason,  is  apparent  from  the  ten  thousand  un- 
solved mysteries  of  nature.  (Comp.  Elliot's  "  Christian  .Errors,  Infidel 
Arguments,''  Home,  vol.  1,  p.  158,  etc.)     Then,  too,  as  in  the  most  simple 


142  THE  THEOCPwATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  11. 

tilings,  there  may  be  something  inexplicable,  so  in  the  doctrines  of  Revela- 
tion— plainly  stated  and  easily  comprehended — there  may  be  great  depths 
nnsonnded.  To  this  Lnther  referred,  when  he  said  that  he  could  not  fully 
comprehend  even  the  Ten  Commandments,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  etc. 

Ohs.  3.  While  some  mystery,  some  unexplained  or  unrevealed  things  per- 
taining to  the  kingdom,  may  have  existed  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  and 
now  remain  such,  not  given  by  Jesus  or  the  Spirit,  yet  the  assurance  is 
abundantly  ours,  that  the  kingdom  itself,  its  nature,  our  relation  to  it,  all 
things  necessary  for  a  correct  understanding  of  its  meaning,  was  made 
known.  This  is  evident,  e.g.  from  its  having  been  predicted,  taught  to 
the  disciples  and  preached  by  them  to  the  people  ;  the  apostles  and  their 
immediate  followers  professing  themselves  called  to  proclaim  it  so  that  men 
might  be  induced  to  enter,  receive,  and  inherit  it.  All  this,  in  the  nature 
of  the  case,  presupposes  a  correct  understanding  of  it.  The  kingdom  is  the 
great  prize,  reward,  etc.,  held  up  before  them,  and  it  is  most  reasonable 
and  conformable  to  fact  to  believe  that  they  would  have  such  an  adequate 
knowledge  of  its  real  import  as  to  be  able  to  tell  us  what  it  denotes.  Ad- 
mitting mystery  even  now  attached  to  things  relating  to  the  kingdom,  we 
can  know  these  so  far  as  declared,  for  while  "  the  secret  things  belong  unto 
the  Lord  our  God  ;  those  things  which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to 
our  children  forever"  (Deut.  29  :  29). 

Ods.  4.  Carefully  looking  over  the  entire  records  of  discipleship  and 
apostleship,  nothing  is  to  be  found  to  indicate  that  those  mysteries  given 
to  them  related  to  the  kingdom  so  far  as  its  meaning  or  signification  is 
concerned.  The  contrary  indeed  is  largely  inferred,  and  upon  this  un- 
proven  inference  a  massive  superstructure  is  built.  (This  will  be  noticed 
hereafter.)  The  reader  can  soon  verify  our  position  by  a  reference  to  pas- 
sages which  either  directly  or  indirectly  refer  to  mysteries  (i.e.  things  of 
which  they  were  ignorant,  that  had  been  hidden,  etc.),  and  he  will  see 
that  they  allude  to  the  death  of  Christ,  or  to  the  intimate  and  unending 
union  of  the  divine  and  human  in  His  Person,  or  to  the  ascension  and  ex- 
altation of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  to  heaven,  or  to  the  blending  in  the  Script- 
ures of  two  Advents,  the  First  and  Second  seperated  by  an  unknown  in- 
terval of  time,  or  to  the  rejection  of  the  Jews  and  the  call  of  the  Gentiles, 
or  to  the  period  of  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles  and  their  subsequent  over- 
throw, or  to  the  future  restoration  of  the  Jews  and  their  blessing  to  the 
Gentiles,  or  to  the  redemption  of  the  race  progressing  when,  under  Christ's 
dominion,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  exalted  in  the  favor  of  God,  etc., 
but  never  is  the  ki7igdom  introduced  as  a  mystery,  i.e.  as  something  un- 
known. The  reason  for  this  will  appear,  when  we  come  to  the  disciples' 
preaching  the  kingdom.  In  the  mean  time,  the  very  outskirts  of  the 
subject  already  force  the  conclusion  that  those  mysteries  refer  not  to  the 
nature  of  the  kingdom,  but  to  the  manner  of  its  establishment,  the  means 
employed,  the  preparation  for  it,  the  time  for  its  manifestation,  and  such 
related  subjects. 

Obs.  5.  The  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  were  not  all  given  at  once  ;  they 
were  gradually  revealed,  and  some  of  them  were  postponed  and  others  are 
still  withheld  ;  this  again  leads  us  to  the  decided  opinion  that  the  kingdom, 
to  which  they  stand  related,  was  well  known  to  the  disciples  and  apostles. 


Prop.  11.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  143 

Take  away  the  mysteries,  such  as  the  necessity  of  Christ's  death,  the  call 
of  the  Gentiles,  etc.,  made  more  fully  known  after  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus,  and  what  is  left  of  mystery  communicated  to  them  ?  Surely  it  is 
not  the  kingdom;  for  the  least  dispassionate  reflection  will  lead  us  soon  to 
see  that  they  could  not  ha^e  been  ignorant  of  the  main,  leading  subject 
with  which  the  others  stand  connected.  To  suppose,  as  many  do,  that 
they  were,  would  be  contradictory  to  the  revelation  of  the  mysteries,  their 
gradual  bestowal,  and  the  indefinite  postponement  of  some.  For,  if  Jesus 
preached  the  kingdom  to  them  and  proclaimed  its  mysteries,  He  certainly 
must  have  said  something  directly  resjoectiug  the  kingdom,  either  con- 
firmatory or  contradictory  to  the  opinion  already  formed  coneerning  it, 
so  that  they  could  form  a  correct  idea  of  it.  Before  the  kingdom  could  be 
appreciated,  with  its  mysterious  preparatory  stages,  etc.,  the  kingdom  it- 
self must  be  understood,  for  that  was  the  snl)ject  matter  distinctly  an- 
nounced and  illustrated. 

Ohs.  6.  The  mysteries,  therefore,  imply  :  (1)  a  previous  acquaintance 
with  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom,  and  (2)  that  the  mysteries  imparted  be- 
stow a  fuller  knowledge  of  the  subject  in  view  of  the  additions  made.  In 
teaching  science,  art,  etc.,  the  primary  fact  is  either  first  taught,  or  it  is 
taken  for  granted  that  it  is  well  known.  So  Jesus,  in  teaching  the  myste- 
ries of  the  kingdom,  must  base  the  same  on  a  knowledge  previously  attained 
of  the  kingdom.  If  the  apostles  were  to  be  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of 
God  "  under  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  it  was  necessary  for  them,  being  con- 
stituted such,  to  \i\\ov;  first  of  all  what  the  kingdom  itself  was  ;  otherwise 
it  was  impossible  for  them  to  comprehend  the  accessories  belonging  to  it. 
Multitudes  now  believe  that  the  mysteries  were  first  proclaimed,  and  after- 
ward the  kingdom  was  made  plain  ;  some  go  a  step  beyond  this  and  tell 
us  that  the  mysteries  and  kingdom  were  both  so  profound  and  hid  under  a 
veil  that  the  aimstles  themselves  had  a  very  imperfect  notion  respecting  the 
kingdom.  In  following  propositions,  such  will  be  largely  quoted.  We  do 
not,  cannot  believe  that  such  a  mode  of  teaching,  reversing  all  ideas  of 
propriety,  was  adopted  by  the  most  perfect  Teacher,  and  which  is  flatly 
contradicted  by  the  disciples  themselves  'preaching  the  kingdom,  thus  im- 
plying knowledge  concerning  its  nature,  and  by  the  belief  of  the  churches 
planted  by  them,  thus  evincing  a  unity  in  that  preaching. 


144  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  12. 


Proposition  12.  Tliere  is  some  mystery  yet  connected  loitli  the 
tilings  of  the  hingdom. 

This  is  seen,  e.g.  in  Rev.  10  :  7,  where  it  is  declared  that  under 
the  last  period  of  time  in  this  age,  "  the  mystery  of  God  should  be 
finished-^^  which  commentators  generally  ax^ply  to  the  fulfilment 
of  the  Divine  Purpose  in  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  in  a  man- 
ner that  shall  be  universally  acknowledged,  in  vindicating  through 
its  establishment  the  Divine  plan,  etc.  It  indicates  that  some 
things  hitherto  kept  concealed  or  partially  known,  should  now  be 
revealed  or  openly  manifested.  Whatever  meaning  is  attached  to 
the  passage,  it  leaves  the  impression  that  not  everything  pertaining 
to  the  kingdom  is  yet  fully  known. 

Ohs.  1.  Men  who  have  given  the  subject  much  thought,  have  the  idea 
that  the  mystery  here  stated  mainly  refers  to  the  period,  not  definitely 
known,  for  the  outward  manifestation  of  the  kingdom,  but  it  may,  for 
aught  we  know,  include  much  more.  While  the  mystery  does  not  allude 
to  "the  nature  of  the  kingdom  (for  this,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter,  is  ex- 
plained), it  suggests  the  comparative  unknown  time  for  its  glorious  estab- 
lishment, the  events  connected  with  it  of  which  only  broken  hints  are 
given,  the  occurrrence  of  things  not  revealed,  and  the  manner  ni  which 
things  revealed  shall  be  accomplished. 

The  chief  mystery  seems  to  be  this  :  liow  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  and  those  associated 
with  Him  in  regal  power,  there  will  be  a  consolidation,  or  a  most  intimate  blending  of 
the  purest  Theocracy  with  the  restored  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David.  This  union  is 
stated,  and  the  inestimable  blessings  and  honor  tlowing  from  it  are  described,  but  just 
hov)  it  will  be  performed,  what  changes  and  evolutions  result  from  its  organization,  what 
extraordinary  dignity  and  glory  will  be  imparted  to  the  engrafted,  providentially  reared, 
and  elevated  Davidic  Kingdom  in  its  manifested  Divine  relationship,  we  cannot  fully 
tell,  having,  for  the  present,  to  rest  satisfied  with  general  descriptions.  Glimpses  are 
vouchsafed,  promises  are  given,  intimations  of  things  inexpressibly  great,  which  indicate 
that,  however  done  and  whatever  the  results,  it  will  be  a  most  desirable  exhibition  of 
jjovver  and  rule,  a  most  wonderful  revealment  of  mercy,  judgment,  and  love,  a  most  un- 
paralleled outgrowth  of  Redemption  in  a  visible,  indisputable  form.  The  design  of  pre- 
vious dispensations,  the  orderings  of  Providence,  the  probation  of  saints,  the  longsuffer- 
ing  and  patience  of  God,  the  permission  of  evil — in  brief,  all  that  has  preceded,  will  find 
their  solution  in  the  incoming  Kingdom. 

Obs.  2.  The  word  "mystery,"  according  to  Fairbairn  (On  PropJi.,  p. 
372),  "  in  the  quite  uniform  usage  of  Scripture,  denotes  something  which 
lies  beyond  the  ken  of  the  natural  apprehension,  and  is  revealed  only  to 
such  as  have  the  mind  and  spirit  of  God.  So  it  is  used  frequently  by  the 
Apostle  Paul,  Rom.  16  :  25,  1  Cor.  2  :  7,  10,  etc."  Whilst  the  Scriptures 
and  a  devout  mind  are  requisite  to  grasp  the  truth  thus  revealed,  it  still 
remains  true   that   some  things  that   are   mysterious  remain  ;    for  some 


Prop.  12.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  145 

things  are  only  hinted  at,  others  stated  without  explanation,  others  again  so 
allied  with  the  Supernatural,  so  far  beyond  present  experience  that  we  are 
utterly  unable  to  tell  how,  or  in  what  manner  and  time,  they  will  be  ac- 
complished. Hence  down  to  the  end  of  this  age  there  is  still  some  mys- 
tery attached  to  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom.  The  question  of  Nico- 
demus,  ''  Hoiv  can  these  things  be?"  may  be  often  repeated,  without  the 
spirit  of  unbelief,  in  the  way  of  inquiry. 

Comp.,  e.g.,  Bh.  Sanderson's  Works,  vol.  1,  p.  233,  on  the  text,  *'  The  mystery  of 
godliness,"  etc..  Kirk's  Lee.  on  Parables,  on  word  "  Mystery,"  the  Baird  Lecture  for  1874, 
by  Dr.  Crawford,  The  Mysteries  of  Christianity,  etc.  It  may  be  added,  that  Eev.  Hall  in 
his  Review  of  Gregory's  Letters,  sustaining  the  latter's  "  Foiirth  Letter  on  Mysteries  in 
Eeligion,"  adverts  to  the  sophism,.ascribed  to  Dr.  Foster—"  that  where  mystery  begins, 
religion  ends,"  and  then  forcibly  says  :  ' '  The  fact  is,  that  religion  and  mystery  both  begin 
and  end  together — a  portion  of  what  is  inscrutable  to  our  faculties  being  intimately  and 
inseparably  blended  with  its  most  vital  and  operative  truths.  A  religion  without' mys- 
teries is  a  temjDle  without  God."  The  least  reflection  will  indicate  the  truthfulness  of 
such  a  position,  seeing  that  Eeligion  deals  so  largely  with  the  Supernatural  and  the 
future  destiny  of  man.  As  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  embraces  these  as  vital  points, 
mystery  is  necessarily  connected  with  it.  Thus,  e.g.,  mystery  will  attach  itself  to 
revealed  things  (as  the  resurrection),  the  relation  that  one  thing  sustains  to  another  (as 
in  the  Oneness  of  the  Father  and  Son),  the  statement  of  a  fact  (as  the  translation),  ihe 
transcendent  nature  of  the  subject  treated  (as  the  glorification),  the  limited  extent  of 
disclosure  (as  in  the  Antichrist  and  doom),  the  inadequacy  of  language  to  convey  a 
proper  conception  of  certain  things  (as  in  the  Person  of  the  King,  and  His  rule,  and  the 
blessings  resulting),  the  seeming  inconsistency  from  our  being  incapable  (owing  to  finite- 
ness)  to  place  ourselves  in  the  largeness  of  tlie  Spirit  in  its  infinite  concejDtions  (as  in 
time,  dispensational  orderings,  etc.). 

Ohs.  3.  A  multitude  of  writers  attest  to  the  existence  of  mysteries,  their 
necessity,  their  vahie,  and  usefulness  ;  and  correctly  affirm,  that  without 
them  a  ^decided iwoof  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  Bible  would  be  lacking,  a 
sublime  display  of  Divine  perfection  would  be  wanting,  and  that  the  scope 
for  faith,  hope,  reverence,  humility,  etc.,  would  be  seriously  narrowed. 
This  is  especially  true  of  the  kingdom,  in  view  of  the  Theocratic  King  and 
His  glorified  co-rulers,  and  the  realization  of  Redemption  through  their 
power  and  rule.  If  there  is  mystery  connected  with  the  operations  of 
nature,  contained  even  in  the  growth  of  the  smallest  plant  and  in  the 
structure  of  a  grain  of  sand,  most  certainly  they  will  be  found  in  a  subject 
so  vast  and  comprehensive  (Props.  1  and  2)  as  that  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom."  Bogue  {Essay  on  Div.  Autlior  of  the  N.  Test.,  p.  249)  has 
well  said,  when  comparing  the  mysteries  of  nature  with  those  of  Revela- 
tion :  "  Without  mysteries,  the  Gospel  would  not  be  like  the  works  of 
God."  Bish.  Butler  {Anal,,  1.  c.  1),  speaking  of  mysteries  necessarily 
connected  with  Religion,  calls  them  "clouds  on  the  mercy  seat,"  capable 
of  only  an  imperfect  explanation,  owing  to  our  limited  capacities  and  ex- 
perience. Eaton  {Permanence  of  Christianity)  asserts  :  "  Mysteries  are 
the  properties  of  all  genuine  religions,  in  regard  to  which  the  believer 
walks  by  faith  and  not  by  sight." 

Comp.  Campbell's  Prel.  Diss,  to  Gospels,  vol.  1,  p.  383,  Burr's  Pater  Mundi,  sec.  6, 
South' s  Sermons,  ser.  6,  vol.  3,  Bh.  Newton's  Works,  vol.  4,  Diss.  35,  Mansel's  '^Limits  of 
Eelig.  Thought  Examined,''  in  Bampton  Lects.,  1858,  as  well  as  the  writings  of  Hall,  Stil- 
lingfleet,  Claude,  McCosh,  etc.,  and  works  specially  devoted  to  presenting  the  Evidences 
of  Christianity.  It  may  be  remarked  that  a  few  writers  (as,  e.g.,  Knapp,  Ch.  Theol.,  p. 
36)  say  that  the  Scriptures,  although  containing  mysteries,  must  not  "  necessarily  con- 
tain" them,  and  that  their  existence  is  "  a  question  of  fact."    But  this  is  taking  a  low 


J 


146  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  12. 

estimate  of  the  subjects  which  a  Revelation— to  be  adequate— mnst  contain  (pertaining 
to  the  Infinite),  and  it  also  ignores  that  their  very  existence  in  the  Word  indicates  that  in 
God's  wisdom  they  were  requisite  for  His  purposes.  Comp.  Rogers'  Superhuman  Origin 
of  the  Bible,  p.  403,  commencing  :  "  A  Revelation  without  mystery  is  not  even  conceiva- 
ble.    A  revelation,  if  it  deserves  the  name,  must  make  known  some  new  truths,"  etc. 

Obs.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  thus  containing  mysteries,  con- 
firms the  position  taken,  that  to  its  proper  understanding,  we  must  apply 
to  the  Scriptures,  and  seek  within  its  limits  for  the  things  appertaining  to 
it,  Props.  9,  and  10. 

Obs.  5.  It  is  difficult  to  satisfy  the  cavils  of  unbelief  on  this  point, 
seeing  that  the  most  opposite  objections  are  urged  against  mysteries.  The 
manner  in  which  they  are  presented,  indicate  that  they  come  more  from 
the  heart  (i.e.  are  desired)  than  from  the  head  (i.e.  intelligently  based). 

Some  object  to  the  Scriptures  because  they  contain  mysteries.  This  has  been  shown 
(as,  e.g.,  Vinet,  Miscel.  Art.,  "  The  Mysteries  of  Christianity,"  and  many  others)  to  be 
both  unjust  and  unreasonable  ;  and  it  has  been  conclusively  proven  (Eaton,  Perm,  of 
Chris.,  Home's  Inirod.,  etc.)  that  "  mysteries  are  not  contradictions  to  reason  or  to  fact." 
Those  who  discard  them  take  the  same  ground  occupied  by  Toland,  the  English  Deist, 
who  in  his  work  "■Christianity  not  Mysterious,"  charges  the  mysteries  to  the  craft  and  am- 
bition of  priests  and  philosophers.  So  also  Annet,  in  Judging  for  Ourselves,  pronounces 
"  mysteries  a  fraud."  This  is  a  one-sided  statement,  violating  all  analogy  and  the  rea- 
soning and  facts  of  common  life.  It  is  scarcely  worthy  of  the  attention  that  it  has 
received.  Toland,  Annet,  and  others  like  them,  if  mysteries  were  lacking,  would  quickly 
and  eagerly  have  built  a  really  forcible  argument  upon  such  an  absence,  by  pressing  into 
their  service  the  abundant  analogies  found  in  nature.  But  then  we  have  the  objection 
in  another  form,  brought  from  the  opposite  extreme,  viz.  :  that  there  is  no  mystery  in 
the  Bible,  and  consequently  it  cannot  be  accepted.  After  admitting  that  there  is  mys- 
tery, and  hence  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  received,  because  it  is  unreasonable,  the  work 
of  men,  etc.,  the  information  is  gravely  imparted,  that  there  is  none,  and  that,  in  conse- 
quence, the  Word  is  unreliable.  This  feature  is  mainly  based  on  the  idea  that  we  can- 
not believe  in  a  mystery,  and  is  founded  thus  :  "  A  proposition  to  be  believed,  must  be 
expressed  in  intelligible  terms,  and  that  if  the  terms  are  intelligible,  the  thing  signified 
cannot  be  mysterious."  This  is  a  Thesis  that  very  well  ansM^ers  their  purpose  to  apjjly 
to  Holy  Writ,  but  which  they  do  not  refer  to  nature,  to  themselves,  or  to  a  Supreme 
Cause.  It  is  palpably  absurd.  The  key-note  of  a  prevailing  oiDinion,  that  all  things 
relating  to  Christianity  are  so  readily  understood  that  a  child  can  comprehend  them,  is 
found  in  this  direction.  This  unscriptural  view  first  originated  in  unbelief,  Avas  seized 
by  philosophy  (see  Locke.  Mansel  on  Free  Thinking),  and  urged  as  an  objection  to  Chris- 
tianity, without  distinguishing  between  essentials  to  Salvation  and  Knowledge  in  gen- 
eral. Hence  two  objections  are  to  be  met  :  (1)  That  there  is  mystery  ;  (2)  that  there  is 
none.  Extremes  are  to  be  avoided  ;  thus,  e.g.,  the  adage  used  by  some.  "  that  that  only 
is  truth  which  we  can  fully  understand  "  (for  this  limits  our  knowledge),  and  the  other 
"  omnia  exeunt  in  mysterium"  (which  would  make  all  knowledge  end  in  mystery). 

Obs,  6.  It  is  a  strange  fact,  that  unbelievers  of  the  past  and  present, 
who  reject  the  mysteries  of  the  Bible,  call  upon  us  to  accept  of  the  incom- 
prehensible, the  mysterious,  the  hypothetical  in  their  several  theories. 
Thus  e.g.  their  readers  are  invited  to  believe  in  some  unexplained  "  living 
principle,"  or  "  substance,"  or  "  forces,"  or  "  chance,"  or  "laws  ;"  they 
are  urged  to  receive  as  the  highest  wisdom  a  mysterious  "  self -creative 
world  matter,"  "origin  of  things  by  self-development,"  "self-developing 
man,"  "hypotheses  of  science,"  etc.  Mystery,  the  inexplicable,  the  un- 
explained, the  impenetrable,  gives  them  no  trouble,  and  is  not  opposed  to 
reason  or  facts,  but  when  found  in  the  Bible,  is  to  be  rejected  as  incompat- 
ible with  reason  and  fact. 


Prop.  12.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  147 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  such  men  as  Spencer,  Tyndall,  etc.,  recognize  an  "  insoluble 
mystery,"  "  the  Unknowable,"  "  the  inscrutable,"  something  beyond  the  power  of  man 
fully  to  grasp — something  which  is,  "  in  all  probability,"  the  Great  Cause  of  all  the  man- 
ifestations seen  and  experienced.  This  acknowledgment  even  of  "  a  mystery"  by  such 
talented  men,  does  not  suit  a  wing  of  the  Rationalistic  Progress  party.  The  latter  party 
takes  the  former  to  task  (as,  e.g.,  in  Abbott's  Index)  for  thus  erecting  "  a  quasi-God,"  a 
something  that  must  be  received  "  on  faith,"  alleging  that  Science  virtually  "  cuts  her 
own  throat"  by  the  confession  or  concession  that  "  the  manifestation  of  anything  under 
heaven  is  '  inscrutable  '  to  her."  They  contend,  over  against  Tyndall,  etc.,  that  "  mys- 
tery" is  to  be  abolished,  that  "  the  knowable"  is  to  be  the  grand  solvent  of  progress,  and 
that  such  concessions,  pronounced  to  be  "  empty  gibberish"  and  "  meaningless  jargon," 
are  to  be  utterly  discarded.  Surely  the  wise  man,  in  such  an  exposition  of  arrogance, 
has  food  for  reflection  over  the  vanity  and  pride  of  the  creature. 

As  an  example  how  men  will  flatly  contradict  themselves  on  this  point,  when  not 
directly  arguing  against  the  Bible  or  Christianity,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Straiiss  [The 
Old  Faith  and  the  Xew,  p.  306),  who,  when  speaking  of  the  forms  of  government,  advocat- 
ing adhesion  to  the  monarchy,  remarks  :  "  There  is  something  enigmatic — nay,  seem- 
ingly absurd — in  a  monarchy.  But  just  in  this  consists  the  mystery  of  Its  suijeriority. 
Every  mystery  appears  absurd  ;  and  yet  nothing  jDrofound,  either  in  life,  in  the  arts,  or 
in  the  State,  is  devoid  of  mystery."  A  Reviewer,  in  the  Edinburgh  EevieiD,  justly  says,  that 
Strauss  never  thought  of  this  in  his  Life  of  Jesus— tor  then,  it  seems,  the  reverse  of 
this  was  truth  with  him.  Figuier,  in  his  World  before  the  Deluge,  is  not  opposed  to  "  mys- 
tery," for  he  closes  the  same  by  "suggesting,  without  hoping  to  solve,  this  formidable 
problem, "  viz.  :  whether  after  the  four  preceding  Kingdoms  (as  in  the  Primary  epoch 
the  vegetable,  in  the  Secondary  and  Tertiary  epochs  the  vegetable  and  animal,  and  in  the 
Quaternary  epoch  the  human  kingdom)  another  and  "  new  kingdom"  is  to  appear.  He 
pronounces  this  "  an  impenetrable  mystery,"  and  adds  :  "  It  is  a  great  mystery,  which, 
according  to  the  fine  expression  of  Pliny,  '  lies  hid  in  the  majesty  of  nature '  ;  or,  to 
speak  more  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  Philosophy,  it  is  known  only  to  the  Almighty  Crea- 
tor of  the  Universe."  Alas  !  that  men  are  unwilling  to  receive  "  the  mystery"  as  revealed 
by  this  Creator. 

Obs.  7.  Some  writers  (as  e.g.  Eeiiss,  His.  Cli.  Tlieol.  of  Apos.  Age,  p. 
149)  connect  the  mystery  with  a  change  of  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  so 
that  a  new  meaning  is  to  be  attached  to  it  ;  it  inchides,  at  least,  such  new 
cliaracteristics  added,  such  modifications  or  alterations,  that  it  is  comj^letely 
transformed.  Admitting  additions  and  changes  to  it  as  predicted,  yet  it 
remains  nnproven  that  there  is  a  change  in  its  nature  or  meaning.  This 
already  appears,  but  will  be  more  conclusively  shown  by  the  preaching  of 
Jesus  and  His  disciples,  etc.  The  Church-Kingdom  theory  suggested  such 
an  opinion  Ity  way  of  apology  for  its  lacking  the  characteristics  of  the  King- 
dom as  given  m  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  prophets.  The  mysteries, 
however,  were  those  respecting  the  gathering  out  of  the  elect  who  should 
inherit  the  Kingdom,  the  death  of  the  King,  the  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom,  the  continued  desolation  of  the  Davidic  house  until  the  Times 
of  the  Gentiles  were  fulfilled,  the  ultimate  re-establishment  of  the  King- 
dom after  the  rise,  progress,  and  conflict  with  the  Antichrist,  etc.,  and 
they  do  not  refer  to  a  change  of  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom.  It  is,  and  ever 
remains  tlie  uncliangeahle  Tlieocratic  Kingdom,  manifested  in  a  covenanted 
line  and  through  a  covenanted  nation.  If  such  a  change  was  intended  or 
made  in  the  most  important  of  matters,  there  certainly  would  be  some- 
thing direct  on  the  subject,  and  it  would  not  be  left  to  mere  inference  ta 
deduce  it. 


148  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIIN^GDOM.  [PrOP.  13. 


Proposition  13.  Some  tiling  %  pertaining  to  the  Mngdom^  inten- 
tionally revealed  someivJiat  obscurely. 

Admitting  tlie  Scriptures  to  be  tlie  Word  of  God,  and  that,  as 
many  writers  liave  noticed,  some  indistinctness,  a  degree  of  obscu- 
rity, relating  to  time,  explanations,  etc.,  is  manifested  in  the  things 
of  the  kingdom,  these  facts  are  indicative  of  design  in  the  same. 

Ohs.  1.  In  answer  to  the  question,  frequently  asked,  why  the  revelations 
respecting  the  Messiah's  Kingdom  were  at  first  so  obscure,  were  so  gradually- 
unfolded,  and  that  some  things,  to  be  fully  understood,  require  additional 
light,  it  has  been  said,  that  God  makes  long  and  secret  preparations  for 
important  events  ;  that  He  adapts  His  revelations  to  the  necessities  and 
circumstances  of  particular  times,  etc.  Reflection  will  teach  us  an 
additional  reason,  viz. :  that  the  depravity  of  man,  exhibited  in  the  pursuit 
of  selfishness,  would,  hitherto,  have  rejected  a  phiiner  revelation,  or  else 
would  have  made  it  the  basis  of  a  continuous  cruel  persecution.  If  every- 
thing relating  to  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  clearly  revealed,  in  a  sys- 
tematic order,  we  are  confident  that  such  would  have  been  the  hatred  of 
earthly  kingdoms  toward  it,  that  no  believer  in  it  would  have  been  safe, 
and,  in  consequence,  the  work  of  gathering  out  the  elect  would  have  been 
seriously  impeded.  The  existence  of  Gentile  domination,  especially  the 
hostile  and  jealous  Roman  power,  prevented  (as  we  shall  show  in  the  prop- 
er place)  a  plainer  statement  of  various  particulars,  lest  it  should  unneces- 
sarily excite  unremitting  persecation.  This  Kingdom  will  be  better  un- 
derstood as  the  Primitive  view  is  revived  ;  its  nature  and  the  things  per- 
taining to  it  will  be  better  comprehended  as  the  Scriptures  are  compared  ; 
and  the  result  will  be,  as  prophecy  teaches  us  (e.g.  Rev.  19,  etc.),  that  tlie 
Icings  and  mighty  of  the  eartli  will  be  arrayed  against  its  re-establishment. 
God,  foreseeing  this  antagonism  as  directed  by  "  the  god  of  this  world," 
does  not  unnecessarily  excite  it  by  a  premature  disclosure  of  all  things,  but 
gives  us  the  tr'uth  in  detached  portions,  some  of  it  veiled  under  prophecy, 
others  under  symbolical  language,  etc.,  so  that  His  preparations,  patiently 
conducted,  may  go  on  to  a  successful  completion,  and  the  Kingdom  be 
suddenly — unexpectedly  to  many — manifested.  The  history  of  the  world 
in  its  rejection  of  the  truth,  is  evidence  to  justify  such  a  conclusion. 

Ols.  2.  Again,  another  reason  for  the  same  may  be  found  in  human 
freedom.  Omnipotence  inspired  by  mercy  has  given  continued  moral  free- 
dom, and  it  will  do  nothing,  even  by  way  of  revelation,  to  exert  an  undue 
force  upon  the  will.  Preiswerk  (quoted  by  Auberlen  BanT.  and  Rev.y  p. 
84)  says  :  "  The  Lord  has  always  represented  the  events  He  announced  by 
the  prophets  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  were  sufficiently  clear  for  him 
who  .approached  with  reverence  and  careful  thought,   and  yet  sufficiently 


Prop.  13.]  the  theockatic  kingdom.  149 

dark  and  veiled  not  to  limit  the  freedom  of  human  action.  For  if  the 
unchangeable  decrees  of  the  Eternal  were  presented  to  our  eyes  in  unveiled 
features,  ivliat  would  become  of  the  responsibility  of  man,  of  the  free 
movements  of  human  life,  wliat  of  courage,  and  hope,  and  joy?"  Hence 
it  is,  e.g.  that  prophecies  which  particularly  describe  the  time  of  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  Kingdom  are  given  somewhat  obscurely,  as  in  Daniel 
and  the  Apocalypse.  This,  and  other  reasons,  will  become  more  apparent, 
when  considering  certain  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  especially  the 
postponement,  the  ordering  of  the  future  Kingdom,  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews,  the  Antichrist,  etc. 

Ohs.  3.  The  blending  of  the  two  Advents,  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  the 
Jews,  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  etc.,  these  indicate  the  feature  alluded  to  so 
far  as  the  past  is  concerned.  As  to  the  future,  among  a  variety,  time  may 
be  selected,  the  time  of  the  Kingdom's  manifestation,  as  an  illustration. 
The  exact  period  when  it  will  be  set  up,  is  not  known  to  us,  although  ap- 
proximately revealed.  It  is  only  fully  known  to  God,  and  an  indefinite- 
7iess  is  purposely  thrown  around  it  to  keep  us  in  the  posture  of  constant 
expectation  and  watching.  Chronology  has  purposely  its  chasms,  the 
general  signs  of  the  Advent  of  the  King  are  those  nearly  always  prevalent, 
although  at  the  time  of  fulfilment  more  intensive,  and  prophecy,  in  its 
guarded  language  and  in  its  accomplishment,  is  so  conducted  that  almost 
at  any  time  may  be  witnessed  the  ushering  in  of  the  glorious  Kingdom. 

Obs.  4.  The  restoration  of  the  Jews  being  intimately  connected  with 
the  Kingdom,  an  essential  accessory  to  its  re-establishment,  a  degree  of 
obscurity  is  thrown  around  the  subject  (as  e.g.  to  the  exact  manner  of 
occurrence,  the  time,  etc.),  in  order  that  it  may  prove  "  a  siiare'^  and  "  « 
net^'  for  the  nations,  who,  at  the  consummation,  shall  be  arrayed  against 
it  and  the  saints  and  God,  saying,  ""Come  and  let  us  cut  them  off  from 
being  a  nation;  that  the  namQ  of  Israel  may  be  no  more  in  remembrance''' 
(Ps.  83  :  4). 

Obs.  5.  Care,  however,  must  be  taken  to  avoid  the  extreme  of  conclud- 
ing some  things  to  be  obscure  which  the  Spirit  intended  to  be  plainly  un- 
derstood. This  is  illustrated  by  the  predictions  referring  to  the  humilia- 
tion, sufferings,  and  death  of  Jesus,  which,  although  plainly  given,  were 
not  comprehended  by  even  the  disciples  until  fulfilled.  When  the  gram- 
matical sense  is  observed  to  teach  a  thing  clearly  and  unequivocally,  that 
meaning  must  be  retained,  as  the  history  of  the  past  proclaims.  Brookes 
(El.  of  Proph.  Inter.,  p.  113)  presents  some  admirable  cautions  on  this 
point,  which  are  the  more  needed,  since  multitudes  make  that  obscure, 
mystical,  or  spiritual,  that  is  to  be  comprehended  in  its  literal  import,  as 
the  analogy  of  Scripture  and  Faith  proves. 

The  student  will  add  the  reason  assigned  under  the  previous  Proposition,  viz,  :  that 
a  revelation,  as  a  matter  of  self-confirmation,  must  contain  some  mystery.  We  must 
quote  the  admirable  language  of  Row  {Bampton  Lectures,  1877,  "  Christian  Evidences," 
Lee.  1,  p.  5)  :  "  Can  we  wonder  that  the  Christian  revelation  should  contain  truths,  of 
which  the  fulness,  like  the  great  works  of  creation  and  providence,  can  only  be  fully 
recognized  after  the  lapse  of  time,  and  as  the  result  of  careful  investigation  ?  That  great 
reasoner,  Bh.  Butler,  clearly  perceived  that  it  is  only  in  conformity  with  the  analogy  of 


150  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  13. 

nature,  that  a  book  which  has  been  so  long  in  the  possession  of  mankind  as  the  Bible,  if 
it  contains  a  Revelation  from  God,  should  contain  truths  as  yet  undiscovered  ;  and  that 
events,  as  they  come  to  pass,  should  open  and  ascertain  the  meaning  of  Scripture  ;  and 
that  such  discoveries  should  be  made  '  in  the  same  way  as  all  other  knowledge  is  ascer- 
tained, by  particular  persons  attending  to,  comparing,  and  pursuing  intimations,  scat- 
tered up  and  down  in  it,  which  are  overlooked  and  disregarded  by  the  generality  of  the 
world.'  " 


PeOP.  14.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  151 


Proposition  14.  Some  things  jpertaining  to  the  hhigdom  not  so 
easily  comprehended  as  many  suppose. 

This  is  already  seen  by  the  greatness  of  the  subject  (Props.  1  and 
2),  by  the  differences  of  opinion  (Prop.  3)  entertained,  the  connec- 
tion it  sustains  to  the  supernatural  (Props.  6  and  7)  and  to  mys- 
teries (Props.  11,  12,  and  13). 

018.  1.  Taking  the  word  "  m3^stery"  to  denote,  as  theologians  state, 
something  revealed  that  was  before  unknown.  Revelation  itself  must  be 
carefully  scanned  and  compared  to  appreciate  these.  At  the  same  time, 
whilst  a  fact  is  disclosed,  or  an  ordering  is  divulged,  yet  the  reason  tvliy  it 
will,  or  the  manner  in  which  it  may,  be  accomjolished  is  either  not  ex- 
plained or  merely  hinted  at,  thus  leaving  large  room  for  attentive  study 
and  reflection.  Besides  this,  many  things — the  great  burden — relating  to 
the  Kingdom  are  still  in  the  shape  of  unfulfilled  prophecy  and  promise, 
requiring  discrimination  to  distinguish  what  belongs  to  different  dispensa- 
tions, to  the  two  Advents,  to  the  past,  present,  and  future,  so  that  we  may 
form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  preparatory  stages  and  of  the  Kingdom  it- 
self. The  Apocalypse,  with  its  varied  and  discordant  interpretations, 
alone  proves  our  proposition. 

Van  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dog.,  vol.  1,  p.  105)  correctly  observes:  "Now,  indeed,  we  see 
from  the  natnre  of  the  case,  that  even  a  revealed  mystery'  may  have  its  dark  sides  ;  the 
sun  come  forth  from  behind  the  clouds  nevertheless  still  dazzles  our  eyes.  But  Holy 
Scripture  nowhere  teaches  that  mystery  as  such  lies,  and  must  necessarily  lie,  entirely 
beyond  the  reach  of  all  human  ken  ;  the  contrary  is  evident  from  1  Cor.  13:2;  Ej^h.  3  : 4. 
Mystery,  too,  though  never  wholly  penetrated,  may  still  be  known,  but  only  by  means  of 
Eevelation."  This  corroborates  our  position,  viz.  :  that  the  things  of  the  Kingdom  can 
only  be  found  within  the  limits  of  Scripture,  and  can  only  be  understood  to  the  extent 
that  God  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  and  explain  them. 

Ohs.  2.  Some  persons  confidently  tell  us  that  "  the  Gospel  of  the  King- 
dom''^ is  readily  understood  by  all  men,  forgetting  how  variously  it  is  in- 
terpreted and  preached.  This  assertion  is  contradicted  by  the  remark  of 
Jesus,  that  the  revelations  concerning  the  Kingdom  were  only  given  to  be- 
lievers and  not  to  those  without  (Mark  4  :  11,  etc.),  and  by  the  declaration 
(John  3  :  13),  that  the  things  relating  to  it  must  be  received  exclusively 
on  the  testimony  of  Ilim  who  declared  them.  All  men  are  not  believers, 
and  even  multitudes,  who  profess  to  believe,  do  not  receive  this  testimony, 
(as  e.g.  witness  the  rejection  of  much  of  His  Word,  and  of  His  last  revela- 
tion as  given  in  the  Apocalypse).  Even  among  believers,  the  apostle  dis- 
tinguishes between  the  weak  and  the  strong  (Heb.  5  :  12),  between  the  un- 
learned and  the  understanding  (2  Pet.  3  :  16),  and  many  exhortations  are 
based  on  a  growth  of  knowledge  and  the  avoidance  of  ignorance.  We  are 
exhorted  that  there  "  are  some  things  hard  to  be  understood"  (2  Pet. 
3  :  16),  some  things  exceeding  the  measure  of  the  wisest,  some  things  be- 


152  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  14. 

yond  our  experience,  some  things  so  grand  in  conception  and  associated 
with  the  Infinite,  that  they  can  only  be  apprehended  by  faith.  Ko  one, 
therefore,  excepting  a  believer,  who  receives  the  word  as  spoken,  the  testi- 
mony as  delivered,  can  duly  appreciate  the  whole  Gospel — good  news — per- 
taining to  it.  Those  who  make  the  above  assertion,  are  led  to  it  by  mis- 
taking repentance,  faith,  obedience,  etc.,  the  adjuncts  or  preparatives  of 
the  Kingdom, /or  the  Kingdom  itself.  We  must  discriminate  hetweeyi  the 
means  employed  by  which  the  Kingdom  can  be  obtained — which  is  also 
Gospel  or  glad  tidings — and  the  Kingdom  itself — which  proclaimed  is  the 
Gospel  in  its  fullest  sense. 

Ods.  3.  There  is  no  systematic  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom in  the  Bible.  It  is  given  in  brief  covenants,  in  separate  prophecies, 
in  detached  portions,  in  fragments,  in  hints,  in  promises,  in  concise  out- 
lines, and  to  bring  all  these  together  in  their  regular  order  much  labor  is 
requisite.  Without  diligent  comparison,  no  progress  can  be  made.  A  de- 
vout recognition  of  much  that  is  now  regarded  trivial,  or  of  little  practical 
value,  is  demanded.  Unless  there  is  a  deep  conviction  that  the  Bible  is  a 
Divine  Eecord,  and  that,  in  consequence,  everything  that  it  contains 
should  be  duly  weighed  and  placed  in  its  connection  with  the  Divine  Pur- 
2)ose,  it  is  impossible  to  harmonize  the  Word  :  some  discordant  elements 
will  inevitably  appear  to  prevent  unity. 

This  is  illustrated  by  supposing  that  we  had  lived  just  previous  to,  and  during,  the 
First  Advent.  Had  we  then  taken  up  the  Old  Test,  to  search  after  the  Messiah,  and 
passed  by  the  lesser,  even  minute,  particulars,  and  the  detached,  isolated  hints,  referring 
to  the  birth,  life,  betrayal,  scourging,  crucifixion,  etc.,  and  confined  ourselves  to  the 
moral  enlarged  Messianic  descrpitions  (as,  e.g.,  those  representing  His  glory),  we,  too, 
like  the  Jews,  would  have  failed  to  comprehend  the  matter  as  it  was  to  be  realized.  So 
now,  unless  there  is  a  careful  collation  of  all  passages  that  legitimately  refer  to  the  King- 
dom, error  may,  more  or  less,  be  advanced.  If,  as  claimed,  the  Scriptures  are  the  Word 
of  God,  then  every  word — conceding  that  the  truth  is  given  through  the  language  and 
style  most  familiar  to  the  writer — is  of  importance.  Being  engaged  in  examining  wit- 
nesses for  the  truth,  in  weighing  testimony,  to  do  justice  both  to  the  writers  and  ourselves 
—yea,  to  God  Himself — this  cannot  be  omitted  with  safety.  This  caution  becomes  the 
more  imperative,  since  it  is  pointedly  predicted,  that  many  shall,  by  a  neglect  of  the 
truth,  reject  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  and  have  no  faith  even  in  the  coming 
of  the  King. 

Obs.  4.  Avoiding,  on  the  one  hand,  the  opinion  of  the  Romish  Church 
that  the  Scriptures  are  so  unintelligible,  so  obscure  that  they  need  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  Church,  of  Councils,  of  the  Fathers,  or  of  the  Pope  ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  view  of  some  Protestant  divines,  and  others, 
that  all  things  are  clear  and  intelligible  to  him  who  is  in  the  Spirit — it  is  best 
to  preserve  the  due  medium,  that  whilst  many  things  are  plainly  stated, 
yet  others,  for  the  reasons  given,  can  only  be  ascertained  by  laborious  re- 
search, or,  as  some  old  writers  have  quaintly  observed,  by  ''  digging  for 
hid  treasures."  The  Kingdom,  forming  the  subject-matter  of  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  Bible,  cannot  be  correctly  apprehended  in  its  totality  without 
the  student  passing  over  all  that  the  different  sacred  writers  have  to  say 
concerning  it. 

Obs.  5.  "  The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,''  as  intimated,  includes  "  the 
mystery  of  God,"  i.e.  the  final,  closing  act  as  presented  Rev.  10  :  7,  em- 
bracing the  ultimate  realization  of  the  previously  ordained  provisionary  in- 


PkOP.  14.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  153 

stitutions.  This  is  seen  in  the  language  employed,  for  the  word  in  our  ver- 
sion "  declared  "  is  used  to  denote  the  declaration  of  good  tidings,  glad 
news,  so  that  some  (as  e.g.  Editor  of  Propli.  Times,  vol.  10,  p.  190)  ren- 
der the  phrase  :  "The  mystery  of  God  is  (to  be)  fulfilled,  even  as  he 
preached  glad  tidings  to  his  servants  the  prophets."  However  translated, 
the  Gospel  undoubtedly  comprehends  the  grand  consummation,  the  per- 
fected Eedemption  realized  only  in  the  Kingdom. 


154  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  15. 


PROPOSiTioiq'  15.   The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  can  become  hetter 
understood  and  appreciated. 

TMs  follows  from  the  previous  Propositions.  For,  while  it  is  a 
doctrine  exclusively  found  in  Scripture,  and  which  cannot  be  modi- 
fied or  changed  to  suit  the  theories  of  men  without  doing  violence 
to  the  Word,  yet,  as  has  been  shown,  it  is  not  so  clearly  appre- 
hended in  all  its  details,  in  all  its  depth  and  vastness,  but  that 
additional  light  may  be  thrown  upon  it — a  light,  too,  borrowed 
from  the  same  Word. 

Ohs.  1.  Some  think  that  religions  trnth  is  stationary,  and  this  is  a  favor- 
ite charge  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity,  npon  which  is  founded  the  ex- 
pressions "  antiquated,"  "  stale,"  "  worn  out,"  etc.  Admitting  tliat  any 
doctrinal  matter  contained  m  Holy  Writ  is  final  in  authority,  and  that  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  are  only  to  be  found  in  their  purity  in  the  Revelation 
given  by  that  Spirit,  yet  these  same  truths  may  become  more  and  more 
clear  and  distinctive  by  careful  study,  comparison,  analogy,  induction,  de- 
duction, by  considering  their  relationship  to  history,  the  constant  develop- 
ment of  God's  purposes,  the  continued  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  the  experi- 
ence of  mankind,  and  the  gathering  of  the  elect.  It  is  the  universal  testi- 
mony of  believers  that  a  searching  of  the  Scriptures  has  always  added  to 
our  religious  knowledge,  and  every  Christian  student  must  gratefully 
acknowledge  his  indebtedness  to  this  feature.  The  Bible  is  a  tvonderful 
hook  in  this  respect. 

The  most  reliable  writers  on  the  side  of  Keligion  declare  (e.g.,  Bh.  Butler,  Analogy, 
2,  c.  3)  that  "truths  yet  undiscerned  "  are  contained  in  the  Scrijatures  ;  that  (Rogers' 
Essays,  vol.  2,  p.  335)  "  fragments  of  new  truth,  or  more  exact  adjustments  of  old  truths 
may  be  perpetually  expected  ;"  that  (Eaton,  Perm,  of  Ch.,  p.  219)  "  the  scheme  of  Reve- 
lation admits  of  endless  advance  and  indefinite  augmentation."  Comp.  Dorner's  His. 
Prot.  Theol.,  vol.  2,  p.  4,  Bh.  Law's  Theory  of  Belig.,  p.  145,  Dean  Stanley's  Sermons  on 
the  Bible,  p.  112,  Dunn's  Study  of  the  Bible,  and  the  writings  of  Birks,  Bickersteth,  Bh. 
Newton,  Schaff,  etc.  Works  specially  designed  for  the  Christian  ministry,  such  as 
Bridge's  On  the  Ch.  Ministry,  Herbert's  Parson,  Mather's  Student  and  Parson,  etc.,  and 
the  Memoirs  and  Lives  of  eminent  Christians  unmistakably  indicate  how  advance  in 
knowledge  is  increased  by  renewed  and  unremitting  study  of  God's  Word  ;  which  many 
truthfully  compare  to  a  precious  mine  revealing  its  treasures  by  "  digging"  for  them,  or 
to  a  constant  flowing  stream  whose  placid  depths  and  extent  can  only  be  appreciated  by 
passing  over  its  course  and  sounding  its  clear  waters. 

Ohs.  2.  If  it  is  true,  in  the  general,  that  knowledge  can  be  increased,  it 
certainly  must  apply  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  so  largely  the  sub- 
ject of  prediction  and  promise  ;  so  extensive  in  its  aims,  preparations,  and 
end  ;  so  complicated  in  its  numerous  details,  hints,  and  obscure  allusions ; 
so  described  under  literal,  figurative,  and  symbolical  lan^ruage  ;  and  so 
varied  in  its  relationship  to  God  and  man,  to  the  Divine  Will  and  human 


Prop.  15.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  155 

imperfection.  A  doctrine  which  embraces  the  King,  the  inheritors,  and 
the  subjects,  the  provisionary  dispensations  and  the  final  consummation, 
the  loftiest  topics  and  the  most  precious  promises  that  can  enter  the  mind 
or  encourage  the  hope  of  man,  is,  iw  the  nature  of  the  case,  susceptible  of 
being  better  apprehended  in  proportion  as  attention  and  meditation  is 
given  to  it.  Here,  if  anywhere,  there  is  plenty  of  room  for  the  deepest 
study,  the  most  guarded  discrimination,  the  keenest  perception,  the  most 
patient  comparison,  and  the  most  childlike  faith.  Then  an  increase  of 
knowledge — as  the  rich  experience  of  many  testifies — will  also  come. 

It  is  a  matter  of  regret,  that  good  men,  who  insist  in  their  writings  upon  our  deriv- 
ing doctrine  from  the  study  of  the  Bible,  who  lament  that  others  give  a  greater  promi- 
nency to  man's  writings  and  systems  than  to  the  Word,  while  theoretically  right,  in  prac- 
tice largely  ignore  this  very  feature.  A  doctrine  that  does  not  suit  the  religious  system 
already  adopted,  no  matter  how  strongly  presented,  is  at  once  ignored  or  rejected.  This, 
too,  is  evidence  of  human  infirmity — a  weakness  predicted  in  God's  Word. 

Obs.  3.  Divine  Truth,  surely,  cannot  be  circumscribed,  when  even,  as 
Chalmers  {Bridg.  Treatise,  p.  1)  has  said  in  relation  to  natural  science  : 
"  Each  science,  though  definite  in  its  commencement,  has  its  outgoings  in 
the  Infinite  and  the  Eternal."  We  will  allow,  although  subject  to  perver- 
sion, the  claims  of  scientists  in  reference  to  the  extension  of  truth  in  all 
departments  of  science,  but  they  must  also  grant  to  us  that  theological 
truth,  having  a  higher,  nobler  origin  and  design,  is  not  to  be  restrained  in 
its  advancement.  Nature,  and  not  mere  speculation  or  fancy,  is  the 
abundant  source  from  w^hence  true  and  increased  knowledge  is  drawn  for 
the  natural  sciences,  so  also  the  Bible  forms  "  the  inexhaustible  store- 
house" from  whence  biblical  theology  derives  its  solid  foundation  and 
growing  superstructure — the  latter  strengthened  by  the  results  manifested 
in  historical  connection,  etc. 

Ohs.  4.  In  the  Proposition  it  is  purposely  said,  "  can  become  better  un- 
derstood," for  several  reasons  :  (1)  There  is  no  subject  like  this  so  covered 
with  human  additions,  speculations,  and  prejudice.  Hence  it  is  so  diffi- 
cult to  approach,  divested  of  all  bias  and  preconceived  opinions.  The 
greatest  care  is  necessary,  owing  to  the  extent  and  infiuence  of  prevailing 
views,  and  no  step  should  be  taken  without  substantial  scriptural  proof  to 
sustain  it.  (2)  Conclusions  respecting  the  Kingdom  should  only  be  drawn 
after  having  traced  the  subject  from  the  earliest  point  of  its  introduction 
down,  through  the  prophets,  to  the  final  testimony  of  Jesus  given  by  John 
the  Eevelator.  Multitudes,  including  most  eminent  men  (as  will  be 
shown  hereafter),  take  an  isolated  passage  and,  without  caring  for  its  con- 
nection, build  an  exclusive  theory  upon  it.  (3)  Covenants,  in  view  of 
their  special  importance  and  fundamental  bearing,  should  have  the  prefer- 
ence in  determining  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom.  This,  however,  is  too 
much  overlooked.  (4)  Some  tilings  are  underrated,  owing  to  their  sim- 
plicity (i.e.  "  too  Jewish")  :  others  are  rejected  because  utterly  opposed  to 
human  expectations  (i.e.  "  How  can  these  things  be  ?")  ;  and  others  again 
are  declined  as  utterly  unreasonable,  not  realizing  that  faith  should  appre- 
hend them  simply  because  they  are  recorded  in  the  truthful  Word  of  God 
(i.e.  with  all  the  "laudation  of  faith,  there  is  very  little  Abrahamic  faith  in 
the  world).  (5)  The  difficulties  already  enumerated  in  previous  Propo- 
sitions are  not  sufficiently  considered  ;  difficulties,  not  relating  to  the  na- 


156  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  15. 

tureof  the  Kingdom,  but  to  the  provisions  made  for  it,  the  time  of  its  man- 
ifestation, the  events  connected  with  its  exhibition,  the  symbolical  por- 
traiture of  its  realization,  the  manner  of  its  divine  administration  (the 
divine  and  human  being  united),  and  the  remarkable  and  astounding  inter- 
positions of  the  Supernatural  introducing  and  carrying  it  forward  into  the 
eternal  ages— all  of  which  ought  to  be  duly  considered  in  order  that  in- 
creased light  may  be  thrown  upon  the  subject.  With  such  a  spirit,  and 
such  a  posture  of  recognition  and  appreciation  of  the  matter  before  us, 
there  is  a  prospect  before  the  student  of  a  better  understanding  of  the 
doctrine. 


Prop.  16.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  157 


Proposition  1 6.  Tliis  Mngdom  cannot  he  prajyerly  com]yreliended 
ivithout  acknowledging  an  intimate  and  irdernal  connection 
existing  hettveen  the  Old  and  New  Testanients. 

The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  is  first  taught  by  covenant,  theo- 
cratic ordering,  and  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  it  is  taken 
for  granted  in  the  J^ew  Testament  as  a  subject  derived  from  the 
Old  testament  and  well  understood  ;  for  the  kingdom  is  preached 
without  any  appended  explanation. 

Ohs.  1.  This  Proposition  is  the  more  needed,  since  some  recent  works 
(as  e.g.  Fairbairn  On  Proph.,  p.  164,  etc.)  have  made  efforts  to  depreciate 
th€  value  of  tlie  Old  Test,  as  an  instructor,  telling  us  that  it  \^fa7'  inferior 
to  the  New  Test.,  thafc  its  light  is  dim  and  its  utterances  indistinct  in 
comparison  with  the  N"ew,  etc.  This,  in  view  of  our  so  largely  relying 
upon  the  Old  Test.,  is  done  with  such  evident  satisfaction  that  a  canon  of 
interpretation  is  adopted  which  reads  :  "  Everything  which  affects  the  con- 
stitution and  destiny  of  the  New  Test.  Church  has  its  clearest  determina- 
tion in  the  New  Test.  Scriptures."  While  we  cheerfully  admit  that  on 
many  points  (as  e.g.  the  birth,  life,  sufferings,  death,  etc.,  of  Jesus,  the 
present  ordering  during  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles,  etc.)  the  New  Test, 
gives  additional  and  clearer  light,  yet  such  a  canon  is  exceedingly  nnjust 
to  the  Old  Test.,  which  so  largely  deals,  e.g.  in  the  consummation  of  the 
Church's  glory. 

It  is  gratifying  to  find  that  in  many  recent  works,  especially  in  the  department  of 
Bib.  Theology,  the  Old  Test,  is  restored  to  its  proper  position,  thus  corroborating  the 
declarations  found  in  various  Commentaries,  Introductions  to  the  Bible,  etc.,  respecting 
the  fundamerdnl  station  of  the  Old  Test,  in  Scripture.  Such  writers  as  Hengstenberg, 
Havernick,  Tholiick,  Auberlen,  Hofmann,  Kurtz,  Delitzsch,  Stanley,  Bonar,  Baumgarten, 
etc.,  have  done  much  in  this  direction,  and  even  Fairbairn,  in  other  places,  enforces  this 
relationship.  The  old  Marcionitic  notion  (comp.  Lardner's  Works,  vol.  9,  p.  256-288, 
giving  also  the  alterations  of  the  New  Test,  by  Marcion)  of  separating  the  Old  Test,  from 
the  New,  while  not  carried  to  the  absurd  extent  (as,  under  the  plea  that  the  God  of  the 
Old  Test,  was  di£ferent  from  that  of  the  New)  of  ancient  times,  yet  is  still  felt  and  ex- 
pressed in  modern  times  in  various  ways,  especially  in  a  species  of  exalting  the  New  to  a 
wrongful  disparagement  of  the  Old.  Thus  the  Spiritualists,  Free  Eeligionists,  etc., 
boldly  proclaim  (as,  e.g.,  Oliver  Porter,  in  Eeligio-Philosoph.  Journal  for  1874)  that  the  Old 
and  New  Tests,  should  be  separated,  and  not  even  bound  together  in  the  same  book,  be- 
cause of  their  being  hostile,  antagonistic  to  each  other;  adding,  that  to  join  them  "is 
like  putting  new  cloth  into  old  garments,  to  be  rent  asunder.  A  divorce,  doubtless,  will 
some  time  be  made."  A  writer  in  the  Edinh.  Beview,  Oct.,  1873,  reviewing  Strauss'  work, 
recommends  that  "  Gentile  Christianity"  should  not  make  itself  responsible  for  the  Old 
Test.,  saying  :  "  We  are  not  Jews,"  etc.,  and  that  "  the  Jewish  Scriptures  do  not  belong 
to  us,  and  that  we  are  in  no  way  responsible  for  them."  Comp.  Prof.  Norton,  Genuine- 
ness of  the  Gospels,  vol.  2,  p.  402,  Carpenter  On  Mind  and  Will  in  Nature,  Contemp.  Re- 
view, '1872.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  all  such  fail  to  view  the  Eedemptive  Purpose 
as  a  grand  whole,  the  portrayal  of  which  alike  demands  the  Old  and  New  Tests. 


158  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  16. 

Ohs.  2.  Our  entire  argument,  as  we  proceed,  is  a  refutation  of  this  low- 
ering of  the  Old  Test.  A  few  reasons  now  stated,  will  indicate  the  one- 
sidedness  of  those  who  resist  the  claims  of  the  Old  Test,  to  the  same  rank 
and  dignity  of  the  New.  (1)  The  Old  foretells  the  New,  and  the  New 
confirms  the  Old — both  are  indispensably  necessary.  (2)  The  Covenants 
out  of  which,  and  in  which,  the  New  stands,  are  only  contained  in  the 
Old.  (3)  The  prophecies  and  promises  descriptiye  of  the  New,  are  found 
in  the  Old.  (4)  Both  are  the  Word  of  God,  and  should,  therefore,  be 
received  on  equal  footing,  and  possess  equal  value.  (5)  The  New,  taking 
a  familiar  acquaintance  of  the  Old  for  granted,  and  proceeding  on  this 
supposition,  does  not  sujiersede  the  Old.  (6)  The  continued  quotation 
from  the  Old  in  the  New,  the  constant  references  to  the  covenanted  prom- 
ises of  the  Old,  the  general  appeal  to  the  predictions  of  the  Old,  the  ex- 
ample of  Jesus  and  of  the  apostles  in  estimating  the  value  of  the  Old — all 
this  proves  its  vital  importance.  (7)  The  express  injunction  to  search 
and  study  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures.  (8)  The  declaration  of  Jesus  that 
He  came  to  fulfil  and  not  to  destroy  it,  and  that  every  jot  and  tittle  of  it 
was  precious.  (9)  A  large  portion  of  the  Old,  embracing  entire  chapters 
and  continuous  prophecies,  has  not  yet  been  fulfilled,  owing  to  the  post- 
ponement of  the  Kingdom  and  the  designs  of  mercy,  and  hence — as  will  be 
shown  hereafter — the  period  of  the  Christian  Church  is  an  intercalary  oije, 
extending  through  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles,  and  if  we  desire  to  know  its 
destiny,  its  ultimate  condition  in  the  consummation,  the  Old  must  be  com- 
pared with  the  New.  (10)  Many  things  contained  in  the  Old  yet  to  be 
•fulfilled,  are  only  slightly  hinted  at  or  taken  for  granted  in  the  New  ; 
others  of  magnitude  and  vast  importance,  are  not  even  mentioned,  it  being 
supposed  that  every  believer,  as  eiijoi?ied,  would  find  them  in  the  Old  and 
incorporate  them.  (11)  The  New  only  professes  to  be  a  continuation  of 
the  Divine  Plan  of  Salvation  ;  it  is  a  necessary  supplement  to  the  Old,  but 
not  a  superseding  of  the  Old,  excepting  only  in  the  ordaining  of  certain 
provisionary  and  typical  measures.  (12)  The  destiny  of  all  the  elect,  both 
under  the  Old  and  New,  is  the  same,  showing  that  the  same  truth  leading 
to  the  same  end,  is  virtually  contained  in  both  Tests.,  however  one  may 
add  to  the  other.  (13)  The  unity  of  Divine  Purpose  can  only  be  ascer- 
tained by  their  combination  ;  without  the  Old  many  of  the  allusions  in 
the  New  could  not  be  understood,  and  without  the  New  much  that  is  in 
the  Old  could  not  be  properly  appreciated.  (14)  The  New,  as  evidenced 
by  our  remarks,  is  built  on  the  Old  as  on  a  foundation,  and  if  separated 
from  the  latter,  its  strength  and  stability  is  diminished,  if  not  destroyed. 
By  this  removal,  as  seen  in  too  many  works,  its  light  is  dimmed  and  its 
testimony  to  the  truth  is  fearfully  weakened.  Hence  no  rule  or  interjn-e- 
tation  should  be  endured  which  arbitrarily  distinguishes  between,  virtually 
severs,  the  same  Word  of  God,  but  we  must  regard  the  Scriptures  as  one 
luhole,  all  significant,  i??iportant,  and  weighty,  giving  only  when  in  com- 
bination, in  firm  union,  the  steady,  brilliant  light  that  we  need. 

Comp.  Dorner's  His.  Prot.  TheoL,  vol.  2,  p,  435,  etc.,  and  Oosterzee's,  Schmid's,  and 
Eeuss'  Bib.  Theols.  of  the  New  Test.  Dorner  has  also  remarked  (p.  404,  vol.  2),  that  a 
Bib.  Theol.  of  the  Old  Test,  is  still  lacking,  and  until  this  want  is  skilfully  supplied, 
many  will  fail  to  see  the  vast  stores  of  treasures  contained  within  it,  essential  to  a  correct 
apprehension  of  many  doctrinal  points  and  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation.  In  this  respect  a 
lesson  can  be  learned  from  the  early  church  (Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  87)  : 
"  They  frequently  appeal  to  the  connection  existing  between  the  Old  and  New  Tests,  (e.g., 
Irenteus,  Adv.  Hcer.,  4,  9,  etc.),  consequently  implying  that  the  two  parts  of  Scripture 


Prop.  16.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  159 

belong  together."  They  do  more  than  this,  they  so  employ  the  Old  Test,  as  to  indicate 
in  its  covenants  and  prophecies  that  it  contains  stronger  proof  and  clearer  light  in  refer- 
ence to  some  things  that  are  yet  to  be  fulfilled  than  the  New  Test.  While  this  is  so,  the 
extreme  (Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  2,  sec.  292,  note)  miist  be  avoided  of  preferring 
the  Old  to  the  New  as  illustrated,  so  stated  by  Hagenbach,  in  the  writings  of  Herder,  De 
Wette,  and  Umbreit.  The  truth  is,  that  each  gives  a  strong  light  that  must  be  com- 
bined ;  that  the  one  illustrates,  enforces,  and  confirms  the  other. 

Ohs.  3.  The  criticism,  then,  of  Ernesti  and  others,  that  the  Old  Test, 
might  indeed  have  been  of  some  use  to  the  Jews,  but  certainly  was  not  in- 
tended for  all  mankind,  is  sadly  defective  and  demoralizing,  seeing  that  on 
the  fulfilment  of  the  Old  Test,  promises  depends  our  completed  Salvation, 
our  hope  of  perfected  Redemption,  the  expectation  of  the  final  restitution 
of  all  things.  The  Old  Test,  is  full  of  anticipated,  covenanted,  prophesied 
Salvation  ;  the  New  is  full  of  the  inestimable  provision  made  for  the 
same  ;  loth  unite  in  showing  how  and  when  it  will  be  fully  accomplished. 

The  waiter  has  been  pained  to  find  excellent  writers  express  themselves  incau- 
tiously, when,  e.g.,  referring  to  the  Old  Test,  as  prej)arative  to  the  New  (which  is  also 
true),  they  inform  (as  Pressense,  T7ie  Redeemer,  p.  38)  us  "  that  the  Old  Test,  speaks  to  us 
of  the  preparation  for  Salvation,  whilst  the  New  Test,  speaks  of  its  realization."  This  is 
only  a  half  truth  ;  in  point  of  fact  both  speak  the  same  language  ;  and  the  Old  Test.,  as 
comparison  abundantly  shows,  has  more  to  say  of  the  final  realization  than  the  New. 
Row  (Barnpfon  Lectures,  1877,  p.  22)  presents  an  injurious  limitation,  as  follows  :  "  So 
likewise  I  accept  Paley's  general  positions,  that  the  Christian  advocate  is  only  concerned 
with  the  Old  Test,  so  far  as  j)ortions  of  it  have  received  the  direct  sanction  of  our  Lord." 
The  other  portions  he  thinks  important  only  in  the  "  elaboration  of  a  true  Christian  the- 
ology." But  this  is  too  restrictive,  and  at  once  trammels  the  study  of  the  Christ,  the 
Kingdom,  etc.  Some  recent  writers  might  learn  a  lesson  from  even  De  Wette  (quoted  b}^ 
Bahr  and  requoted  by  Fairbairn  Typology,  p.  34),  who,  with  all  his  liberalism,  could 
say  :  -'  Christianity  sprang  out  of  Judaism.  Long  before  Christ  appeared,  the  world  was 
prepared  for  His  ajjpearance  ;  the  entire  Old  Test,  is  a  great  proj^hecy,  a  great  type  of 
Him  who  was  to  come  and  has  come.  Who  can  deny  that  the  holy  seers  of  the  Old  Test, 
saw  in  spirit  the  Advent  of  Christ  long  before  He  came,  and,  in  prophetic  anticipations, 
sometimes  more,  sometimes  less  clear,  descried  the  new  doctrine  ?  The  typological  com- 
parison, also,  of  the  Old  Test,  with  the  New,  was  by  no  means  a  mere  play  of  fancy,  nor 
can  it  be  regarded  as  altogether  the  result  of  accident,  that  the  evangelical  history,  in 
the  most  important  particulars,  runs  parallel  with  the  Mosaic,  Christianity  lay  in  Juda- 
ism as  leaves  and  fruits  do  in  tlie  seed,  though  certainly  it  needed  the  divine  sun  to  bring 
them  forth." 

Obs.  4.  Unbelievers,  wise  in  perceiving  the  intimate  and  abiding  con- 
nection existing  between  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  attack  the  Old  wiUi  the 
correct  opinion,  that  just  in  proportion  as  they  can  show  that  the  Old  is 
"antiquated,  unreliable,  uncertain"  in  its  utterances,  etc.,  to  the  same 
extent  will  they  lessen  the  authority  and  force  of  the  New.  Knowing  full 
well,  as  the  majority  of  writers  on  Inspiration  hold,  that  both  are  equally 
inspired  and  of  equal  authority,  and  that  both  are  to  be  interpreted  as  the 
continuous  Word  of  God,  they  believe  that  if  one  falls  the  other  must  also 
suffer.  This  teaches  us,  therefore,  how  guarded  we  should  be  in  lowering 
the  standard  of  the  Old,  lest  by  so  doing,  in  so  far  the  efforts  of  destructive 
tendencies  are  countenanced. 

Here,  as  our  argument  will  develop  more  fully  hereafter,  is  the  fatal  defect  in  the 
system  of  the  Socinians  (Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol,  2,  sec.  242),  who  receive  only  the 
New  Test,  as  canonical  ;  the  Old  Test,  having  only  a  historical  value,  useful  but  not 
necessary  to  be  read,  etc.  Its  importance  and  exceeding  value  as  a  doctrinal  basis,  is  by 
them,  and  others,  too  much  ignored  ;  and  the  inevitable  result  is,  the  utter  impossibility 
of  recognizing  the  Theocratic  Personage  in  Jesus  as  covenanted.     It  is  well  to  notice, 


160  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  16. 

that  at  the  \ery  time  God  is  raising  up  eminent  men  to  defend  the  necessary  intimate 
relationship  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  and  that  both  must  be  conjoined  to  give  us  a 
true  conception  of  the  Divine  Purpose  in  Redemption — both  being  indispensable — prom- 
inent persons  also  arise  (even  in  the  pale  of,  and  enjoying  the  emoluments  of  the  church), 
who  persistently  attack  the  authenticity,  credibility^  and  inspiration  of  the  Old  Test., 
especially  of  the  Pentateuch,  The  recent  efforts  of  Colenso  in  this  direction  are  fresh 
in  the  reader's  mind.  The  attack,  if  successful,  would  invalidate  the  truth  of  Chris- 
tianity itself  ;  for  such  is  the  connection  existing  between  Moses  and  Christ  that  both 
stand  or  fall  together.  An  eminent  Jewish  Rabbi  in  the  Jewish  Chronicle,  quoted  in  l^he 
Israelite  Indeed  tor  Oct.,  1863,  argues,  justly,  that  if  the  Pentateuch  is  not  in  the  main  the 
product  of  Moses,  or  at  least  worthy  of  receiDtion  as  divine,  then  it  must  be  an  "  impu- 
dent forgery,"  and  the  prophets,  Jesus,  and  the  Evangelists,  who  all  received  it  "  in  its 
present  shape"  as  genuine,  etc.,  are  all  equally  guilty  of  gross  decei^tion.  The  Rabbi 
presses  this,  quoting  Luke  16  :  31,  etc.,  and  shows  the  inconsistency  of  Colenso's  position 
(still  retaining  the  New  Test,  as  inspired)  by  stating  that  if  Jesus  was  not  inspired  when 
He  assumed  the  truth  of  the  Pentateuch  and  applied  it  in  teaching,  "  neither  can  He  be 
regarded  as  infallible  with  respect  to  His  api^lication  of  passages  from  the  prophets  of 
Judah  and  the  Psalms. ' '  There  is  no  logical  escape  from  this  dilemma  ;  any  lowering 
of  the  Old  Test,  inevitably  recoils  upon  the  New.  Conway,  in  correspondence  with  Cin. 
Com.,  May  31,  1879,  says  :  "  The  learned  Prof,  Sepp,  of  Munich  University,  is  writing  a 
remarkable  series  of  articles  in  the  Allgemeine  Zeitmu/,  in  which  he  advocates  the  discard- 
ing of  the  Old  Test,  altogether  as  the  basis  of  Christianity,"  "Dr.  David  Asher,  a 
learned  Jew,  answers  :  '  If  he  (Sepp)  should  carry  his  jsoint,  he  would,  indeed,  widen  the 
breach  between  Judaism  and  Christianity,  But  the  question  is.  Who  would  be  the 
greater  loser  by  the  process?'"  Draper  (His.  Conflict,  p.  225)  very  coolly  advises  the 
Christian  Church  not  to  burden  itself  with  the  Pentateuch,  but  to  relegate  it  back  to  the 
Jews  ;  and  if  this  gratuitous  counsel  (so  sagely  i)roffered)  were  adopted,  he  would  be  the 
first  to  show  how  destructive,  in  its  logical  sequence,  it  would  be  to  Christianit3\  Others, 
observing  the  disintegrating  efforts  of  professed  believers  which  destroy  the  unity,  sar- 
castically (as  Mill)  refer  to  those  who  believe  the  Bible  to  be  one  hook  ;  some  sneeringly 
assert  that  the  only  union  to  be  found  existing  is  that  in  the  line  of  "  Jewish  ideas  and 
prejudices."  Rogers  {Superh.  Orig.  of  the  Bible,  Ap.  p.  441)  refers  to  Alexander's  Connection 
and  Harmony  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  Lord  Hatherley's  Continuity  of  the  Bible,  and  to  a 
work  entitled  Divine  Footprints  in  the  Bible,  as  enforcing  this  intimate  connection,  and 
then  adds  :  "Many  in  our  day,  as  well  as  some  informer  times,  would  endeavor  to  extri- 
cate Christianity  from  certain  difficulties  by  cutting  the  ligaments  between  it  and  Juda- 
ism. They  would  displace  it  from  what  they  regard  its  precarious  foundations  in  the 
Old  Test.  I  am  profoundly  convinced  that  this  cannot  be  done  without  leaving  both  in 
ruins."  He  then  quotes  Herder  (Pref.  to  Sx)irit  of  Ileb.  Poetry),  who,  notwithstanding  his 
free  spirit  of  criticism,  writes  :  "  Der  Grund  der  Theologie  ist  die  Bibel,  und  der  Grund 
des  N.  T.  ist  das  alte.  Unmoglich  verstehen  wir  jenes  recht,  wenn  wir  dieses  nicht 
verstehen  ;  denn  Christenthum  ist  aus  dem  Judenthum  hervorgegangen,  der  Genius  der 
Sprache  ist  in  beiderlei  Biichern  derselbe,"  etc. 

Ohs.  5.  Martensen,  a  most  estimable  writer,  gives  the  keynote  to  a  pre- 
vailing treatment  of  the  Old  Test.  He,  whilst  recognizing  the  importance 
and  value  of  the  Old,  makes  it  too  subsidiary  to  the  New,  opening  a  wide 
gap  for  varied  interpretation,  in  declaring,  that  *'the  contents  (of  the  Old) 
cannot  be  received  by  the  Christian  mind  as  present  truths  without  being 
regenerated  by  the  new  Spirit  of  Christianity,  and  in  various  respects  re- 
constructed.^'' Alas!  to  this  specious  "  regeneration"  and  to  this  sultle 
*'  spirit  of  reconstruction,"  which  is  only  another  mode  of  expressing  a 
spiritualizing  and  accommodating  interpretation,  we  are  indebted  for  an 
ignoring  of  the  plain  oath-bound  covenants  of  God  the  covenanted  and 
predicted  Messianic  Kingdom. 

This  position,  so  unjust  to  the  Old  Test.,  is  based  on  the  idea  that  the  Old  Test,  is 
superseded  by  the  New,  and  that  the  interpretation  of  the  Old,  as  once  held  by  the 
Jews,  is  antagonistic  to  the  New,  and  that,  consequently,  the  literal,  grammatical  sense 
must  give  place  to  another,  additional  one  grafted  upon  the  Old.  This  whole  theory  is  a 
violation  of  the  laws  of  language,  of  the  Revelation  of  God's  Purposes  as  given  to  ancient 


Prop.  16.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  161 

believers  and  tnistecl  in  by  them,  and  it  places  the  Israelites,  before  the  Advent,  in  the 
l^osture  of  an  ignorant,  self-deceived  people  who  trusted  in  a  grammatical  sense  which  is 
a  lie— in  plainly  expressed  covenants  and  promises  which,  as  understood  by  them,  they 
never  comprehended.  In  brief,  it  makes  God  teaching  what  they  could  not  understand, 
jarophesying  what  they  could  not  apprehend,  and  developing  a  faith  and  hope  that  can 
never'  be  realized.  Besides  this,  the  reader  will  observe  that  Martensen's  notion  takes  it 
for  granted  that  the  New  Test,  is  well  understood.  This  idea  forms  one  of  the  rules 
that  Waldegrave  presents  in  his  Lectures  on  New  Test.  Millenarianism  ;  but  unfortunately 
for  its  successful  application,  those  wdio  employ  it — owing  to  the  various  engrafted 
senses— are  not  agreed  among  themselves  respecting  large  portions  of  the  New  Test., 
because  of  their  adoj^ted  system  of  interpretation.  Briefly,  no  student  can  afford  to 
occupy  such  an  exclusive  position  ;  the  true  scholarly  method,  commended  by  common 
sense  and  due  respect  for  God's  whole  Word,  is  to  interpret  both  by  the  same  laws  of  lan- 
guage, and  to  observe,  on  any  given  subject,  which  jjart,  the  Old  or  the  Ne\\%  advances 
the  most  revelation  or  information,  receiving  the  same  as  of  equal  authority. 

Obs.  6.  The  Kingdom  being  a  leading  subject  of  many  portions  of  the 
Old  Test.,  a  subject  specially  mentioned  in  covenant  and  prophecy,  it  is 
utterly  impossible  to  understand  it  properly  without  2:)assing  over  the 
same.  This  is  realized  the  more,  if  it  is  considered  that  the  doctrine 
originates  in  the  Old  Test.  ;  that  the  New  Test,  in  its  opening  takes  a 
knowledge  of  the  Old  /or  granted ;  that  in  view  of  such  a  previous  ob- 
tained information  important  details  given  in  the  Old  are  either  slightly 
presented  or  omitted  in  the  Xew  ;  and  that,  aside  from  the  Apocalypse, 
the  most  glowing  and  extended  descriptions  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom, 
as  God's  predictions  relating  to  it  receive  an  ample  verification,  are  still 
found  in  the  Old.  It  is  not  uncharitable  to  suspect,  that  one  reason  why 
so  many  meanings  and  contradictory  definitions  are  given  to  the  Kingdom, 
arises  from  the  neglect — conscious  or  unconscious,  designed  or  unde- 
signed— of  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures,  or,  from  an  artful,  misleading,  but 
well-intended  exaltation  of  the  New  over  the  Old,  as  if  some  great  and 
vital  difference  existed  between  them  instead  of  their  being  inse'para'bly 
one. 

Many  have  the  mistaken  notion  that  the  instruction  of  the  Old  Test,  is  solely  element- 
ary, being  supplemented  by  that  of  the  New  Test.  This  is  taught  in  many  of  our  Sys- 
tematic Tlieologies  (e.g.,  Knapp,  etc.)  ;  but  this  is  evidently  an  error,  seeing  that  much 
of  the  Old  Test,  remains  yet  to  be  fulfilled  ;  that  Peter  (2  Pet.  1  :  19)  tells  believers  to 
take  heed  of  the  sure  word  of  prophecy  as  to  a  light  until  the  day  of  Christ  appears  ;  that 
Paul  (2  Tim.  3  :  14-17)  exhorts  a  minister  to  apply  himself  to  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures, 
not  to  obtain  elementary  knowledge  but  to  perfect  himself  ;  that  Christians  are  directed 
by  the  apostles  to  find  the  hope  of  Salvation,  the  promises  of  completed  Eedemi^tion  in 
the  Scriptures  previously  given  ;  and  that  constant  reference  is  made  to  the  Old  Test,  as 
the  storehouse  of  promised  deliverance  given  in  covenant  and  prophecy.  It  is  true  that 
some  things  in  the  Old  Test,  are  elementary,  such  as  typical  and  provisionary  institu- 
tions, but  to  make  all  fall  into  the  same  category  is  doing  the  grossest  violence  to  its  con- 
tents and  the  examj^le  of  the  first  believers.  It  appears  that  the  main  passage  of  Script- 
ure, which  led  to  such  an  unjust  inference  and  discrimination,  is  the  one  in  Matt. 
11  :  11.  How  this  verse  is  to  be  understood  will  ajjpear  hereafter,  as  we  shall  examine 
it  in  detail,  on  account  of  the  varied  use  to  which  it  is  put.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
able  advocates  of  Christianity  fall  into  this  notion.  Thus,  e.g.,  Van  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dog., 
vol.  1,  p.  17)  says,  that  "  the  writings  of  the  New  Test,  must  be  placed  before  those  of 
the  Old,"  and  approvingly  quotes  J.  Miiller  :  "  It  is  to  the  writings  of  the  New  Test,  that 
the  dogmatic  proof  must  return  to  found  its  dogmas  securely  on  Christ  Himself."  This 
is  simply,  as  already  shown,  a  one-sided  discrimination.  Now  whilst  the  New  Test,  is 
exceedingly  precious,  cannot  be  neglected  without  vital  defect,  gives  us  the  desired  proof 
in  and  through  Jesus  Christ  how  the  Old  Test,  and  New  Test,  promises  can  be  fulfilled, 
and  teaches  us  in  the  plainest  manner  how  to  attain  Salvation  through  Jesus,  etc.,  yet 
much,  very  much  doctrinally  expressed  in  the  New  finds  its  tnie  basis  back  in  the  Old. 
This  the  apostles,  the  Evangelists,  yea,  Jesus,  teach  us  when  appealing  to  the  Old  as  ful- 


162  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  1G. 

filled,  e.g.,  in  the  Person,  character,  life,  sufferings,  etc.,  of  Jesus.  The  Messiahship  of 
the  promised  David's  Son  is  delineated  in  the  Old  Test.,  and  in  deciding  the  doctrinal 
question  of  the  Messiahshijj  of  Jesus,  the  question  must  be  answered,  whether  the  Christ 
of  the  New  Test,  corresponds  in  all  respects  loith  the  Christ  covenanted  and  promised  in  the 
Old.  This  simple  illustration  shows  that  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  exalt  the  one  joortion 
above  the  other,  but  that  both  are  indispensable  and  mutually  confirm  each  other.  Ad- 
mitting fully  that  the  New  contains  in  a  large  measure  the  sufficient  provisionary  for  SaWa- 
tion,  yet  the  grand  theme  of  both  is  Salvation,  and  the  Old,  in  view  of  its  unfulfilled  por- 
tions, etc.,  is  far  more  than  a  "  i^reliminary  training."  If  the  rule  given  by  Oosterzee 
(C7i.  Dog.,  vol.  1,  p.  169)  be  admitted,  it  will,  if  logically  applied,  give  the  preference  to 
the  Old  instead  of  the  New.  The  rule  is  :  "A  part  of  Scripture  has  so  much  the  higher 
value  in  proportion  as  it  is  of  greater  importance  for  our  knoioledge  of  the  Kingdom  of  God." 
For,  as  will  be  shown,  the  covenants  and  prophecies  (which  the  New  Test,  takes  so 
largely  for  granted  as  well  known)  relating  to  the  Kingdom,  and  fundamental  to  its  com- 
prehension, are  in  the  Old  Test. — yea,  our  chief  knowledge  is  derived  therefrom,  and, 
therefore,  the  Old  cannot  be  inferior  to  the  New.  Oosterzee  and  Midler  forget  where  the 
dogmatical  ground  was  in  the  quite  early  church,  before  the  New  Test,  was  written,  or 
formed  into  a  canon. 


PllOP.  17.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  163 


Proposition  17.    Without  study  of  the  prophecies^  no  adequate 
idea  can  he  obtained  of  the  kingdom. 

The  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  is  a  revelation  from  God,  and  '^  God 
spaJce  by  the  Prophets ^^^  for  "  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time 
hi/  the  iDill  of  man.,  but  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost''  (Luke  1 :  70,  2  Pet.  1 ;  21,  2  Tim.  8  :  16,  etc.). 
The  descriptions  of  it  come  to  lis  mainly  through  i3rediction,  em- 
bracing a  Divine  Purpose  pertaining  to  the  future  beyond  the  iDower 
of  human  sagacity  and  knowledge  to  discern  and  portray. 

Pairbairn  {On  Proph.)  has  the  correct  idea,  when,  as  the  Amer.  editor  remarks,  "  We 
find  as  the  result  that  projahecy  i&  a  sublime  portraiture  of  the  Kingdom  of  God."  How 
faithfully  he  followed  the  prophetic  portraiture  is  another  question. 

Obs.  1.  Hence  arises  the  necessity,  if  accurate  knowledge  of  the  King- 
dom is  desired,  of  receiving  what  God,  through  the  prophets,  has  revealed 
concerning  it.  Jesus  was  the  subject  of  projjhecy,  and  we  know  that  He 
truly  came  because  in  Him  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  His  First  Advent 
were  strictly  fulfilled.  Jesus  and  the  apostles  constantly  appeal  to  this  : 
that  the  Scriptures  testified  concerning  Him,  and  that  their  testimony  was 
true,  being  verified.  Precisely  so  with  this  Kingdom  ;  for  it  is  the  great 
theme  of  the  prophets,  and  we  can  only  know  that  it  has  really  come  ivhen 
the  predictions  relating  to  it  are  realized. 

Prophecy  has  been  compared  (Wilson's  Three  Sermons,  p.  6,  quoted  bj^  Stanley)  "  to 
a  golden  thread  "  stretching  to  the  end  of  the  web.  Biit  in  our  estimation  it  is  more 
than  this  :  it  is  the  warp,  the  golden  chain  into  which  time  fills  and  weaves  its  threads, 
the  latter  interlinked  and  supi^orted  by  the  former.  It  contains  the  substance  of  Eeve- 
lation  and  History.  Strike  out  of  the  Scriptures  Prophecy,  fulfilled  and  unfulfilled,  and 
the  very  essence  of  them  the  most  precious  portion — is  also  removed.  The  early  Fathers, 
when  they  designated  the  Piophets  "Theologians,"  were  evidently  impressed  by  the 
profound  relationship  that  their  utterances  sustained  to  oxw  knowlecfge  of  divine  things. 
The  church,  if  it  desires  an  increase  of  knowledge,  must  return  to  this  Scriptural  attitude. 
Some  writers  in  their  haste  and  eagerness  to  oppose  the  study  of  Prophecy  (^ because  we 
lay  much  stress  on  it),  tell  us  that  its  doctrinal  aspect  is  of  little  account,  and  dare 
to  assert,  that  "  tiie  folly  of  basing  a  tenet  upon  unfulfilled  prophecy  has  grown  to  be  an 
axiom  in  theology."  Such  an  axiom  was  unknown  to  ancient  worthies  before  and  imme- 
diately after  the  First  Advent,  and  is  discarded  hj  a  sound  theology  since  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Christian  Church,  seeing  that  quite  a  number  of  doctrines  are  dependent 
upon  unfulfilled  prophecy,  as,  e.g.,  the  Second  Advent,  the  Antichrist,  the  restoration 
of  the  Jews,  the  Millennial  age,  the  consummation,  the  judgment  day,  the  resurrection, 
the  realization  of  eternal  life  in  the  final  restitution,  the  New  Heavens  and  New  Earth, 
the  New  Jerusalem,  etc.  The  promises  of  the  New  Test,  relating  to  the  future  are  based 
on  unfulfilled  predictions  of  the  Old,  are  repetitions  of  the  same,  and  thus  renewed  pre- 
dictions. Surely  if  angelic  beings  take  a  deep  interest  in  the  divine  predictions— if  the 
redeemed  are  represented  as  rejoicing  in  their  bestowal  and  realization,  we,  who  need 
their  light,  ought  to  receive  the  bright  assurances  with  gratitude  and  joy. 

Obs.  2.  Prophecy  takes  higher  ground  than  that  of  merely  being  a  pre- 
diction of  the  future,  or  a  witness  to  the  truth,  or  a  message  of  hope. 


164  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  17. 

Whilst  all  this,  it  is  above  all  a  B.evelation  of  Ood's  Will  and  Purijose  ; 
and,  therefore,  while  the  preceding  flow  from  it,  a  still  grander  result  is 
attained  when  combining  and  linking  together  the  predictions  of  God. 
Then  we  find,  from  first  to  last,  that  they  publish  a  predetermined  counsel 
of  God,  a  great  Redemjjtive  Process,  all  centering  in  the  predestined  King 
and  Kingdom. 

Negative  criticism  endeavors  here  and  there  to  break  this  connected  chain  ;  tinavail- 
ingly,  however,  seeing  that  "  all  the  prophets  witness,"  and  their  united  testimony,  sepa- 
rated by  centuries  and  ages,  form  an  unbroken  unity.  God  has  given  us  numerous 
l^rophecies,  some  in  detached  portions,  others  in  brief  fragments,  which  require  special 
attention  to  systematize,  but  when  once  brought  together  and  compared  evince  a  most 
blessed  design,  a  most  glorious  Plan,  such  as  man  and  creation  needs  to  secure  perma- 
nent, everlasting  hapioiness.  Together  they  form  "  a  sure  word,"  something  "  where- 
unto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,"  being  eminently  worthy  of  the  most  careful  investi- 
gation. Together  they  give  "a  light"  (comp.  Barnes'  admirable  remarks  on  2  Pet. 
1  :  19),  which  is  the  only  safe  guide  until  the  greater  illumination  of  the  coming  day.  It 
is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  so  many  professed  Theologies  either  ignore  or  slightly 
touch  this  God-given  "  light."  Within  the  limits  and  design  of  this  work  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  give  the  rules  for  interpreting  Prophecy  ;  and,  indeed,  they  are  not  needed,  seeing 
that  we  have  various  works  on  the  subject.  The  principle  of  Interpretation  adopted 
(Proj).  4)  by  us  sufficiently  exjDlains  our  position,  showing  that  the  ordinary  rules  for 
interpreting  literal,  figurative,  symbolic,  and  typical  language  are  to  be  observed.  The 
reader  will  find  these  presented  in  Bickersteth's  Guide,  Brooke's  El.  of  Froph.  Inter., 
Lord's  Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal,  and  Introd.  to  the  Apoc,  Home's  Introd.,  Winthrop's  Pre- 
mium  Essay  on  Proph.  Symbols,  Stuart's  El.  of  Interp.,  etc.  Davison's  Dis.  on  Proph. 
fixes  a  "  Criterion  of  Prophecy,"  and  ably  shows  its  application  to  Jesus  at  the  First 
Advent,  to  the  Church,  Jewish  Nation,  etc. 

In  reference  to  the  definitions,  a  few  words  are  in  place.  Home  (Intro.,  vol.  1,  p.  119) 
says  :  "  Prophecy  is  a  miracle  of  knowledge,  a  declaration,  or  description,  or  representa- 
tion of  something  future,  beyond  the  power  of  human  sagacity  to  discern  or  to  calculate, 
and  it  is  the  highest  evidence  that  can  be  given  of  supernatural  communion  with  the 
Deity,  and  of  the  truth  of  a  revelation  from  God."  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop). 
defines  it :  "  God's  communication  to  the  Church,  to  be  her  light  and  comfort  in  time  of 
trouble  and  perplexity,"  and  adds  the  following,  from  Vitringa  :  "  A  prediction  of  some 
contingent  circumstance  or  event  in  the  future,  received  by  immediate  or  direct  revela- 
tion" ;  Dr.  Pye  Smith  :  "  A  declaration  made  by  a  creature  under  the  inspiration  and 
commission  of  the  omniscient  God  relating  to  an  event  or  series  of  events  which  have 
not  taken  place  at  the  time  the  prophecy  is  uttered,  and  which  could  not  have  been  cer- 
tainly foreknown  by  any  science  or  wisdom  of  man  ;"  other  writers  :  "  Prophecy  is 
nothing  but  the  history  of  events  before  they  come  to  pass."  It  refers  also  to  Dean 
Magee  as  dissenting  "  from  this  popular  but  erroneous  view,"  and  making  the  prophet 
to  be  "  the  religious  teacher  of  his  age,  whose  aim  is  the  religious  education  of  those 
whom  he  addresses."  This  is  a  fair  specimen  of  numerous  similar  definitions,  and 
there  is  an  element  of  truth  in  all  of  them.  But,  after  all,  they  only  give  a  partial  view, 
for  while  neither  ignoring  the  predictive  character,  nor  its  evidential  nature,  nor  the 
moral  element  (the  religious  instruction  of  the  age  in  which  delivered  and  of  successive 
ages),  it  is  self-evident  that  prophecy  is  largely  intended  to  reveal  the  Divine  Purpose  relat- 
ing to  the  Plan  of  Redemption.  To  illustrate  our  meaning  by  a  single  prophecy  :  take 
Deut.  32,  and  we  have  not  merely  a  prediction  of  a  series  of  events  and  valuable  religious 
instruction,  but  we  have  a  divine  explanation  of  the  manner  in  which  ultimately — after 
a  terrible  trial,  etc. — covenanted  promises  are  to  be  realized.  Hence  prophecy  is  an 
essential  part  of  the  system  of  revelation,  revealing,  incorporating,  and  systematizing 
truths,  which  could  in  no  other  way  be  obtained.  Therefore  in  Theology  proper,  in 
order  to  comprehend  God's  purpose  in  Redemption  and  present  a  systematic  statement 
of  the  Plan  of  Salvation,  it  should  be  brought  forth  prominently,  and  subjected  to  careful 
study.  The  lack  of  this  presents  us  with  serious  defects  in  the  various  systems  of  The- 
ology,  especially  in  the  part  pertaining  to  Eschatology. 

Williamson  {Letters  to  a  Millenarian,  p.  177)  informs  us  that  the  restoration  of  the  King- 
dom and  Christ's  future  reign  (i.e.,  its  proper  conception)  is  not  dependent  on  "  the 
meaning  of  certain  predictions  of  the  prophets,  .for  I  am  no  student  of  the  prophets,  but  on 
the  question.  Who  are  the  lawful  heirs  of  the  bequests  made  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  ? 


Prop.  17.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  165 

This  seems  to  be  a  qnestion  totally  distinct  from  the  question,  What  are  the  contents  of 
the  will  ?  and  should  surely  be  definitely  settled  before  we  look  at  the  contents  of  the 
will  ;  for  before  I  know  whether  I  am  an  heir,  the  contents  of  the  will  are  of  little  conse- 
quence to  me."  This  author,  an  amiable  writer,  and  free  from  the  usual  reproaches 
against  us,  in  striving  to  wrest  from  us  our  vantage  ground  on  prophecy,  makes  a  con- 
fession that  vitiates  his  own  labor.  If  no  student  of  the  proi)hets,  how  can  he  even 
undertake  the  expounding  of  his  prior  question,  seeing  that  the  prophets  enter  largely  in 
both  questions,  respecting  the  will  (to  use  his  figure)  and  the  heirship— they  being  the 
expounders  of  the  Divine  Purpose  concerning  both.  This  lack  is  seen  throughout  his 
^^ Letters,''  reversing  a  logical  consideration  of  the  whole  subject.  He  overlooks  two 
essential  points  :  (1)  That  before  we  are  heirs,  we  are  invited  by  prophets  and  apostles 
to  consider  and  study  this  "  Will,"  in  order  that  we  may  be  induced  to  become  heirs 
through  the  acceptance  of  the  Christ,  and  (2)  that  the  contents  of  the  will  are  of  j^rimary 
importance,  because  unless  \\e  first  "  look  at  the  contents"  it  is  impossible  to  determine 
the  heirship.  It  certainly  needs  no  discussion,  that  the  contents  of  the  will  precede  the 
heirship,  and  that,  therefore,  the  first  question  to  be  decided  is  that  referring  to  the  will 
itself.  When  it  is  found  that  a  will  is  really  made,  and  that  we  are  noticed  in  it,  being 
assured  of  an  heirship  under  certain  conditions  imposed  by  the  testator,  a  deepened  in- 
terest arises  to  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  all  the  details,  and  worthy  of  its  provi- 
sions, and  this  will  correspondingly — inevitably — make  us  students  of  prophecy.  (In  ref. 
to  his  view  of  the  heirship,  see  Proj).  64.) 

Ohs.  3.  Conceding  that  Prophecy  has  thus  a  higher  province  than  that 
of  merely  foretelling  future  events,  yet  every  believer  in  the  "Word  ought  to 
insist,  that  such  a  foretelling  is  a  most  important,  essential  feature  and 
j)roof  of  the  Prophet's  mission.  That  spirit  of  compromising  with 
llationalism,  by  which,  under  the  shallow  pretence  that  the  Prophets  had 
nobler  duties  to  perform  than  that  of  predicting,  the  predictions  them- 
selves are  lowered  or  set  aside,  is  to  be  avoided  as  derogatory  to  the  pro- 
phetical office. 

As  we  shall  largely  use  their  predictive  authority  in  our  argument,  placing  it  in  the 
front  rank  where  the  Bible  and  the  early  Fathers  set  it,  some  additional  remarks  may  be 
needed.  Infidels,  next  to  miracles,  have  most  violently  assaulted  jjrophecy  (also  a  mira- 
cle). Seeing  how  largely  the  Word  of  God  is  dependent  upon  it,  how  believers  have 
appealed  to  it  as  evidence  of  its  credibility  and  inspiration,  how  the  very  life  of  Chris- 
tianity is  bound  up  with  it,  they  directed  their  attack  with  the  cry  that  it  was  either 
disparaging  to  God,  or  a  tender  to  fatalism,  or  incredible  to  reason,  or  mere  foolishness, 
or  the  natural  suggestions,  shrewd  foresight  and  guesses  of  man  ;  some  predictions  were 
given  after  the  events,  others  w^ere  never  fulfilled,  some  were  so  obscure  that  they  are 
utterly  unreliable,  others  were  interpolations  of  a  succeeding  age  to  subserve  political  or 
religious  purposes,  etc.  With  such  men  it  is,  of  course,  vain  to  reason,  for  the  case  is 
prejudged  ;  and  any  move  to  get  rid  of,  or  weaken,  its  testimony,  is  deemed  honorable. 
To  appeal  to  prophecies  fulfilled,  such  as  related  to  Babylon,  Tyre,  Nineveh,  Jerusalem, 
etc.  (showing  also  that  the  writers  lived  long  before  the  events  transpired),  is  to  exhibit 
our  ignorance  ;  to  show  that  prophecies  are  now  fulfilling  in  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews, 
in  the  continued  down-treading  of  Jerusalem  under  Gentile  feet,  in  Mohammedanism 
and  the  Turkish  Empire,  in  Gentile  domination,  in  the  Papacy,  in  the  condition  o£  the 
church  and  the  world,  etc.,  is  to  manifest  our  credulity  ;  to  indicate  the  relationship 
that  individual  prophecy  sustains  to  the  whole,  and  to  point  to  the  future  as  the  period 
when  those,  claimed  by  them  as  unfulfilled,  shall  be  realized,  is  to  display  an  unreason- 
able faith.  So  be  it  then,  if  men  desire  to  elevate  themselves  to  the  judgment  seat,  deem- 
ing themselves  perfectly  adequate  to  decide  what  is  proper  and  what  improper  for  the 
Almighty  to  perform  ;  what  is  worthy  and  what  unworthy  of  credence  in  His  Word.  The 
opposite  reasons,  influencing  them  in  their  rejection,  are  aptly  delineated  by  Isaiah  (ch. 
29  :  11,  12)  :  "  The  vision  of  all  is  become  unto  you  as  the  words  of  a  book  that  is  sealed, 
which  men  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,  Eead  this,  I  pray  thee  ;  and  he  saith,  I 
cannot,  for  it  is  sealed  ;  and  the  book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not  learned,  saying, 
Eead  this,  I  pray  thee  ;  and  he  saith,  I  am  not  learned."  It  is  impossible  to  conciliate 
such  a  class,  for  the  objections  come  more  from  the  heart  than  from  the  mind,  rather 
from  indisposition,  lack  of  moral  sympathy  than  from  careful  study,  and  every  effort  in 
the  way  of  concession  to  their  demands,  is  only  hailed  as  an  evidence  of  weakness. 


166  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  17. 

There  has  been  a  tendency,  especially  in  German  Theology,  arising  from  the  contest 
between  Rationalism  and  Orthodoxy,  to  settle  down  in  the  conviction  that  Christianity 
cannot  be  demonstrated  by  historical  proofs,  as  many  authors  and  ajiologists  have  at- 
tempted ;  and  that  as  Twesten  (quoted  by  Dorner,  His.  Prof.,  vol.  2,  p.  428)  remarks  : 
"  It  is  not  possible  to  prove,  independent  of  Christian  faith,  that  there  is  a  Divine  Rev- 
elation, and  that  this  is  deposited  in  Holy  Scripture,  nor  can  such  proof  be  the  founda- 
tion of  faith,"  etc.  While  freely  admitting  the  higher  and  more  satisfactory  testimony 
of  Evangelical  faith,  which  produces  a  personal,  j^ractical  knowledge  of  the  truth  and 
thus  impresses  its  divine  origin,  yet  such  a  statement  is  far  too  sweeping,  removing  the 
responsibility  laid  upon  all  men  to  receive  God's  Revelation,  rejecting  the  evidence 
afforded  by  the  experience  of  men  that  many  have  been  led  by  the  reading  and  study  of 
the  Word  to  acknowledge,  without  and  before  such  faith,  that  God's  Word  is  truth  ;  and 
discarding  the  labors  of  Apologists  and  others  whose  works,  as  the  conversion  of  many 
testifies,  have  not  been  in  vain.  Indeed,  the  very  men  w^ho  insist  u]3on  such  a  theory 
constantly  violate  their  own  rule  by  appealing  to  historical  proofs,  or  by  bringing  an 
array  of  evidence  obtained  through  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  to  substantiate  revelation 
against  unbelief.  In  their  writings  there  is  a  constant  appeal  to  reason  in  behalf  of  the 
positions  taken  by  them.  It  is  one  thing  to  lay  down  a  one-sided  rule,  but  it  is  quite 
another  to  apply  it.  The  Bible  speaks  of  two  kinds  of  evidence  ;  one,  the  most  gratif}'- 
ing,  comes  from  faith,  but  this,  ^n  many  aspects,  must  be  sustained  b}^  the  other  ;  the 
other  is  derived  from  historical  evidence,'  including  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  the  deal- 
ings of  God,  the  works  performed,  etc.  God  Himself  appeals  to  the  latter  evidence  as 
desirable,  as  introductory  to  the  other,  and  also  as  condemnatory  if  not  received.  The 
first  preaching  of  the  apostles  is  based  on  it  ;  Stephen's  address  is  full  of  it  ;  Christ 
refers  the  Jews  to  it  ;  the  Jews  themselves  received  the  Old  Test,  in  view  of  it  ;  the  New 
Test,  is  a  record  of  its  value  ;  believers  have  been  first  led  to  faith  by  it  ;  even  the  devils 
themselves  are  under  its  influence,  and  unbelief  has  often,  in  the  dying  hour,  confessed 
its  claims.  We  cannot  do  without  such  an  attestation  to  existing  Revelation,  for  even 
the  way  of  Evangelical  faith  (which  simply  appropriates  to  self  what  the  other  brings)  is 
prepared  by  due  reference  to  historical  facts,  as,  e.g.,  the  fall,  the  sinfulness  of  man,  the 
foretelling  and  coming  of  the  Messiah,  etc.,  so  that  every  Christian  writer,  whatever  his 
theory  in  the  study,  will  practically,  more  or  less,  endeavor  to  secure  the  approval  of 
reason  by  the  use  of  such  testimony,  a  process  favored  by  our  mental  and  moral  consti- 
tution. 

It  is,  therefore,  with  deep  regret  that  we  see  eminent  and  devoted  men,  for  the  sake  of 
gaining  the  good-will  of  unbelievers,  forsake  a  principle  of  prophetic  interpretation  and 
application,  that  God  Himself  has  laid  down,  viz.  :  the  strict  grammatical  interpretation 
of  prophecy  and  a  literal  fulfilment  of  the  same.  Thus,  e.g.,  Dr.  Dorner  {His.  Prot. 
Theol,  p.  445)  in  view  of  Rationalism  in  some  quarters  declaring  "  that  a  transference  of 
Old  Test,  occurrences,  images,  and  Messianic  features  to  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth, is  the  source  of  the  Gospel,"  asserts  :  "  the  more  literal  the  fulfilment  of  Old  Test, 
sayings  found  in  the  New,  the  more  difficult  will  it  be  to  dispel  the  suspicion  that  the 
former  is  the  source  of  the  latter. '^  *  To  rid  ourselves  of  so  unjust  a  "  suspicion,"  it  is 
requisite  to  accommodate  ourselves  to  unbelief,  and  yield  up  everything  that  may  be  too 
"  Jewish."  This  theory  is  opposed  (1)  to  the  facts  in  the  case  ;  for  (a)  if  this  literal 
fulfilment  were  missing,  the  unbelievers  would  be  the  first  to  take  advantage  of  it  ;  (b)  it 
can  be  proven  that  the  prophecies  preceded,  and  hence  the  fulfilment  the  more  obvious  ; 
(c)  it  can  be  shown,  as  an  essential  element  in  the  Divine  Plan,  that  both  the  prediction 
and  the  literal  fulfilment  are  a  necessity  to  constitute  Jesus  the  Messiah  ;  (d)  it  can  be 
pointed  out,  that  the  fulfilment,  in  most  cases,  is  one  adverse  to  the  anticipations  of 
Jewish  opinion  based  on  Jewish  Scriptures,  and  yet  necessary  in  the  Divine  Purpose  ; 
(e)  it  can  be  boldly  assumed,  that  without  such  a  correspondence  we  can  have  no  assur- 
ance that  the  Christ  came  ;  (/ )  it  can  be  affirmed,  that  such  concessions  do  iio  good  to 
the  class  for  whom  they  are  intended,  but  that  they  rather  confirm  them  in  unbelief. 
Then,  again,  the  theory  is  opposed  (2)  to  the  criterion  established  by  God  ;  for  (a)  the 
plainest  and  most  triumphant  exhibition  of  veracity  and  union  with  the  Divine  is  a  lit- 
eral fulfilment  of  prediction,  and  hence  the  failure  of  such  is  the  test  of  a  false  i^rophet  ; 


*  This  i3  quoted  from  the  Eng.  Transl.,  which  may  do  Dr.  Dorner  injustice  ;  for  my 
friend  Dr.  Sprecher,  ex-Pres.  of  Wit.  College,  informs  me  that  in  comparing  it  with  the 
original,  he  found  it  in  various  places  imperfect,  and  in  several  instances  stating  the 
reverse  of  the  original. 


PkOP.  17.]  THE   TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  167 

{b)  a  literal  fulfilment  is  adapted  to  all  classes  of  minds,  for  whicli  the  Bible  is  designed  ; 
(c)  the  literal  fulfilment  manifests  the  Divine  Will,  and  is  a  part  of  the  Divine  Purjoose, 
and  as  such  is  ajDpealed  to  in  order  to  indicate  it  ;  (cZ)  Jesus  and  the  apostles  represent  it 
as  a  decided  proof  and  reality  of  the  Divine,  thus  flatly  controverting  the  far-fetched 
"  suspicions"  of  early  and  later  opposers  of  Christianity  ;  (e)  if  it  were  desirable  to  avoid 
such  an  objection,  the  Bible,  the  product  of  Divine  wisdom,  knowing  how  to  reach  men's 
minds  and  hearts,  would  not  lay  stress  upon  it  ;  (/)  it  is  not  a  literal  fulfilment  that 
leads  to  such  "  suspicions,"  but  the  heart  desires  them  to  silence  the  sense  of  responsi- 
bility ;  (g)  it  forms,  then,  a  substantial  reason— for  if  missing  the  chain  would  be  broken 
—in  behalf  of  Christianity  ;  adapted  to  all  minds  ;  preserving  the  unity  of  Ihe  Eecord  ; 
attesting  to  the  Divine  Plan  ;  giving  a  proper  insight  into  Bedemptio'n  ;  revealing  the 
future  history  of  the  race  and  the  ultimate  triumph  of  truth  and  holiness  over  error  and 
evil  ;  and  practically  illustrating  the  j)ower  of  an  all-pervading  Providence  in  the  most 
forcible  manner.  Let  it  be  relocated  :  it  is  impossible  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  opposing 
parties.  Objection  is  made  that  there  is  too  literal  a  fulfilment,  which  is  adduced  as  evi- 
dence of  collusion,  etc.  Frazer  (Key  to  the  Prophecies)  informs  us  of  some  infidels,  who 
object  to  Revelation  because  there  is  no  accurate,  literal  fulfilment  of  its  own  predictions. 
So  Renan  also  objects,  and  claims  that  Jesus  was  disappointed  in  His  fond  anticipations. 
The  Jews  also  objected  to  Christ  that  all  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  the  Messiah  were 
not  literally  fulfilled  at  the  First  Advent.  Here,  then,  are  two  objections,  the  exact  oppo- 
site of  each  other  :  the  one  rejecting  Scripture  because  of  a  too  literal  fulfilment,  the 
other  doing  the  same  on  the  ground  that  a  sufficiently  literal  aspect  is  wanting.  This 
should  teach  us  to  accept  of  God's  wisdom  in  the  matter,  receiving  His  testimony  as 
superior  to  man's,  and  not  weaken  its  force  in  the  vain  attempt  of  conciliating  unbelievers. 
It  is  comparatively  easy  to  endure  the  reproaches  of  unbelievers,  but  not  so  readily 
those  of  excellent  men,  believers,  who,  by  their  sweeping  statements,  are  justly  charge- 
able with  moulding  the  minds  of  multitudes  to  a  rejection  of  a  true,  consistent  interiire- 
tation  of  Scripture,  jireparing  the  masses  of  the  church  to  have  no  faith  when  the  Saviour 
comes.  Unable  to  reconcile  with  their  views  of  Scripture  and  of  the  future,  a  literal 
fulfilment  of  prophecy,  such  Prophecy  must  submit  its  grammatical  sense  to  another  that 
is  more  accommodating.  But  this  is  not  all  :  the  most  ultra  positions  are  taken  to  sus- 
tain such  a  departure.  Thus,  e.g.,  Pressense  (The  Iledeemer,  p.  100)  asserts  :  "Literal 
interpretation  of  prophecy  is,  therefore,  nonsense,"  etc.,  declaring  that  all  i^rophecy  is 
in  its  "  form  essentially  symbolical,"  and  adduces  the  Psalms  relating  to  Christ  as  first 
applicable  to  David  (?),  then  to  Solomon  (?),  and  finally  to  Christ.  Yet  he  is  inconsistent 
with  himself,  for  in  other  places  and  works  he  repeatedly  presents  this  same  "  non- 
sense," i.e.,  literal  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  as  evidence  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus. 
Adojit  his  rule,  and  it  plunges  us  at  once  into  the  most  varied  and  contradictory  inter- 
pretation, and  makes  it  impossible  to  meet  the  arguments  of  infidels  against  proi)hecy 
without  a  pitiful  retreat  into  mystical  subterfuges  and  the  plainest  violation  of  the  laws 
of  language.  Alas  !  otherwise  able  works  abound  in  this  species  of  damaging  statement, 
and  set  themselves  in  direct  antagonism  to  Jesus  (John  14  :  29)  :  "^nd  now  I  have  told  you 
before  it  come  too  pass,  that  when  it  come  to  ^Mss,  ye  might  believe.'" 

Ohs.  4.  The  propliecies  referring  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,  as  now  inter- 
preted by  the  large  majority  of  Christians,  afford  the  strongest  leverage 
employed  by  unbelievers  against  Christianity.  Unfortunately,  unbelief  is 
often  logically  correct.  Thus  e.g.  it  eagerly  points  to  the  pre'dictions  per- 
taining to  David's  Son,  showing  that,  if  language  has  any  legitmate  mean- 
ing, and  words  are  adequate  to  express  an  idea,  they  unmistaTcally  predict 
the  restoration  of  David's  throne  and  kingdom,  etc.,  and  then  trium- 
phantly declare  that  it  was  not  realized  (so  Strauss,  Baur,  Eenan,  Parker, 
etc.).  They  mock  the  expectation  of  the  Jews,  of  Simeon,  the  preaching 
of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples,  the  anticipations  of  the  early  Church, 
and  hastily  conclude,  sustained  by  tlie  present  faitli  of  the  Charch  (except- 
ing only  a  few),  that  tliey  will  never  he  fnlfilled ;  and  that,  therefore,  the 
prophecies,  the  foundation  upon  which  the  superstructure  rests,  are  false, 
and  of  human  concoction.  The  manner  of  meeting  such  objections  is 
liumiUating  to  the  Word  and  Reason  ;  for  it  discards  the  plain  grammati- 


168  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  17. 

cal  sense  as  unreliable,  and,  to  save  the  credit  of  the  Word,  insists  upon 
interpreting  all  snch  prophecies  by  adding  to  them,  under  the  claim  of 
spiritual,  a  sense  which  is  not  contained  in  tlie  language,  but  suits  the  re- 
ligious system  adopted.  Unbelief  is  not  slow  in  seizing  tlie  advantage  thus 
given,  gleefully  pointing  out  how  this  introduced  change  makes  the 
ancient  faith  an  ignorant  one,  the  early  Church  occupying  a  false  position, 
and  the  Bible  a  book  to  which  man  adds  any  sense,  under  the  plea  of 
spiritual,  that  may  be  deemed  necessary  for  its  defence. 

Some  unbelievers  even  go  to  the  length  of  denouncing  the  Saviour  and  the  apostles 
as  being  "  deceivers,"  "  Indian  jugglers,"  etc.,  who  endeavored,  without  success,  to  ap- 
I)roi)riate  the  predictions  to  themselves.  Others  inform  us  that  the  j^rophecies  inflamed 
the  imagination  of  Jesus,  and  that  under  their  influence  His  ministry  started,  but  that 
He  discarded  much  as  unable  to  be  realized  in  the  condition  of  things  then  existing. 
This  is  a  favorite  topic  of  Kenan's,  the  result  of  his  own  unreliable  imaginings.  Parker 
and  his  followers,  of  course,  tell  us  that  there  are  "  prophecies  which  have  not  been, 
and  never  will  be  fulfilled,"  referring  especially  to  those  relating  to  the  Kingdom  prom- 
ised to  David's  Son.  The  Liberalist,  M.  Grotz,  and  others,  advise  us  to  keep  prophecy  in 
the  background  as  a  very  minor  question,  and  not  worthy  of  sei;ious  consideration — i.e. 
it  is  only  worthy  the  contempt  of  the  enlightened.  Even  Schleiermacher  {Hys.  of  Doc- 
trines) objects  to  nearly  all  the  prophecies,  especially  the  more  prominent,  as  proceeding 
from  a  material  spirit  of  the  people,  and  hence  places  the  Old  Test,  containing  them  far 
below  the  New.  As  we  proceed,  there  will  be  found  abundant  and  painful  evidence  of 
this  spirit  and  lack  of  faith  in  the  Word  of  God,  extending  from  the  most  virulent  of 
unbelievers  down  to  semi-unbelievers  and  even  believers.  It  is  a  lamentable  fact  that 
prophecies,  en  masse,  which  have  no  relation  to  the  church  as  organized  at  present,  are 
aj)proi3riated  and  applied  to  the  church  as  now  existing,  that  cannot  and  do  not  tJius  apply, 
and  that  this  has  necessarily  caused  unbelief  in  many  who  detect,  easily,  the  utter  dis- 
crepancy. We  only  now  say,  that  there  must  be  a  sad  defect  somewhere  in  human  sys- 
tems, which  causes  prophecies  to  promise,  plainly  too,  one  thing  and  yet  mean  quite  an- 
other ;  this,  we  aOirm,  is  an  imperfection  existing,  not  in  the  language  of  the  prophets, 
but  only  in  the  interpretation  of  them,  and  in  the  limiting  of  their  fulfilment  to  the  past 
and  present,  as  if  God  was  unable  to  carry  out  His  purposes  in  the  future.  A  renewed 
study,  a  thorough  examination  of  them,  and  a  return  to  the  grammatical  sense,  will  alone 
enable  us  to  close  the  wide  gap  left  open  for  opposers  to  enter. 

The  student  will  observe  also  that  the  evidence  in  behalf  of  the  predictive  nature  of 
prophecy  is  not  dependent — as  in  alleged  human — upon  single  or  isolated  predictions, 
but  brings  to  its  support  a  grand  series  of  predictions,  one  hinging  upon  the  other.  In 
this  work  we  shall  frequently  avail  ourselves  of  this  connected  succession.  The  destruc- 
tive theories  respecting  prophecy  (e.g.  in  Davidson's  Introduction,  with  which  comp.  the 
"  Reply"  in  The  Princeton  Review,  Jan.,  18G4),  which  bring  it  down  to  something  like 
human  sagacity,  are  fully  met  by  the  simple  fact  of  this  divine  order,  and  their  forming 
integral  parts  of  a  divine  system,  imparting  to  us  a  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Pui'iDose. 
The  fulfilment  of  prediction  is  evidence  of  the  truth  (Arclib.  Sumner's  Essay  on  Propfi., 
etc),  and  in  the  prejiaratory  measures  relating  to  the  Kingdom,  confirms  the  office  of 
prophecy  (Kurtz's  Sac.  His.,  p.  32). 

Obs,  5.  Multitudes  are  found,  who  deliberately  and  persistently  refuse 
to  study  the  Prophecies.  To  such,  at  least  in  part,  applies  the  language 
of  Bengel  {Gnomon,  Apoc.  c.  1  :  1),  who,  after  directing  attention  to  the 
fact  that  Revelation  is  given  "  to  shew  unto  his  servants,"  etc.,  says  :  "  He 
who  does  not  permit  the  things  which  must  come  to  pass  to  be  shewn  to 
him,  is  wanting  i7i  the  duty  of  a  servant."  There  is  propriety  and  force 
in  the  remark,  which  those  who  object  to  our  making  these  things  a 
special  subject  of  study,  would  do  well  to  ponder.  A  servant  cannot,  with- 
out injury  to  himself,  neglect  a  large  portion  of  Serijiture,  which  God, 
with  a  merciful  object  in  view,  kindly  presents  to  him.  He  will  rather 
imitate  the  Prophets  themselves,  who  "  inquired  and  searched  dili- 
geyitly^'' — not  a  mere  cursory  examination,  but  a  profound  and  extended 


Prop.  17.]  the  theocratic  kiis-gdom.' 

inquiry — into  the  revelations  made  to  them  (1  Pet.  1  :  10,  11).  God's 
wisdom  and  poive7'  (Isa.  43  :  9,  13)  is  found  in  prophecy  ;  to  many,  how- 
ever, it  is  foolishness.  Blessedness  is  attached  to  it  (Apoc.  1  :  3,  comp. 
Bengel,  Barnes,  etc.),  but  to  many  it  is  evil  and  drudgery. 

Instead  of  a  careful  investigation,  some  refuse  to  receive  it  ;  others  quote  isolated  pas- 
sages to  suj^port  some  doctrine  or  opinion,  without  the  least  idea  of  the  context  or  real 
prophetical  meaning.  Popes,  e.g.,  have  applied  prophetic  announcements  pertaining  to 
the  Messiah  to  themselves  ;  Papists  and  Protestants  have  appropriated  what  exclusively 
belongs  to  the  Jewish  nation  ;  sects  and  individuals  have  presumptuously  claimed  as 
belonging  to  themselves  what  really  is  predicted  of  "  the  age  to  come."  Prophecy  has 
been  made  a  plastic  mortar  to  daub  over  the  crudest  and  most  mystical  conceiJtions. 
Rejection  or  misconception  has  triumphed,  and  thus  it  will  continue  down  to  the  harvest 
itself.  Pious  and  able  men,  such  as  Bh.  Newton,  Meade,  Bengel,  etc.,  are  ridiculed  for 
having  studied  and  written  on  the  subject.  Voltaire's  sneer  at  Sir  I.  Newton,  that  he 
wrote  on.  the  AjDocalypse  to  console  mankind  for  his  superiority  in  other  matters,  has  been 
reproduced  in  another  form  by  Renan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  138)  :  "  Newton  thought  his  crazy 
exposition  of  the  Apoc.  as  certain  as  his  system  of  the  world."  ("Which  clearly  shows 
that  Renan  never  read  Newton's  book,  which  claims  no  such  certainty,  but  rejiresents 
itself  as  a  humble  attemjDt  to  approximately  elucidate,  if  possible,  a  difficult  siibject,  con- 
taining both  modesty  and  valuable  suggestions.  The  remark  reveals  the  animus  of 
Renan.)  Valuable  information  and  suggestions  imparted  by  such  a  class  of  writers  is 
studiously  ignored,  and  mistakes,  to  which  the  best  of  men  are  liable,  are  joyfully 
paraded  as  evidence  of  the  sad  results  of  prophetical  study.  How  true  it  is  that  to  the 
mass  of  mankind  and  to  many  believers,  it  is  a  matter  of  the  idmost  indifference  whether 
Jesus  opened  the  seals  of  the  book  or  not,  whether  He  gave  a  farewell  testimony  or  not, 
whether  He  enjoined  special  attention  to  it  or  not,  whether  John  was  deei3ly  affected, 
even  to  tears,  or  not.  John  wept  because  the  things  fastened  by  the  seals  could  not  be 
revealed,  and  he  rejoiced  when  Christ  ojiened  them  ;  but  now,  although  those  things  are 
plainly  recorded,  it  is  deemed  foolishness  to  be  in  sympathy  with  John,  or  to  search 
into  them  with  an  interest  becoming  the  subject.  Let  a  man  enter  this  field  of  investiga- 
tion with  sobriety,  honesty,  and  humility,  and  epithets  the  most  derogatory  are  heaped 
upon  him  indicative  of  "folly,"  "weak-mindedness,"  visionary,"  "  fanatical,"  etc.,  so 
that  it  requires  some  degree  of  courage  to  face  the  obloquy,  to  endure  the  loss  of  sympa- 
thy, to  suffer  the  reproaches  of  withdrawn  confidence,  and  to  receive  the  imputations  of 
mental  and  moral  weakness.  Rashness,  however,  consists  not  only  in  attemj)ting  to  in- 
terpret in  a  trifling  way,  without  due  comparison,  reflection,  moderation,  etc.,  but  is 
equally  to  be  found  in  neglecting  or  despising  prophetical  truth  ;  indeed,  the  latter  ex- 
ceeds the  former  in  one  respect  since  it  lacks  even  the  respect  shown  to  prophecy  by  the 
most  injudicious  of  interpreters.  Alas  !  how  comparatively  few  have,  at  present,  the 
spirit  of  Daniel  (2  :  19-23),  who  manifested  his  reverence  and  gratitude  for  and  interest 
in  the  j^rophecies  given.  Indeed,  such  as  ancient  believers  received  with  faith  and 
praise,  are  now  regarded  either  with  unbelief,  or  indifference,  or  scorn  and  rejDroach,  and 
"  the  tesilmony  of  Jesiis  {which)  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy"  (Rev.  19  :  10)  is  not  only  rejected, 
pronounced  unworthy  of  special  study,  but  rebukes  are  heaped  upon  those  who  devote 
time  and  labor  to  its  elucidation  and  enforcement.  It  is  true  of  prophecy,  as  of  all 
God's  works  :  "  The  works  of  the  Lord  are  great  (vast  in  magnitude),  sought  out  (inves- 
tigated) of  all  them  that  have  pleasure  therein'  (Ps.  Ill  :  2). 

Ols.  6.  It  is  the  united  testimony  of  all  who  have  devoted  much  time 
to  the  study  of  prophecy,  that  it  is  exceedingly  j^rofitahJe  in  many  respects  ; 
and  they  exhort  others,  in  view  of  personal  benefit  derived  therefrom,  to 
devote  special  attention  to  the  same.  This  testimony  is  the  more  worthy 
of  consideration,  since  it  comes  from  the  most  talented,  scholarly,  devoted 
men  that  the  Church  has  produced,  and  fully  accords  with  the  promises  of 
the  Word.  Fully  acknowledging  the  correctness  of  Stanley  {His.  of  Jew- 
ish Church),  Payne  Smith  {Mess.  Inter,  of  Isa.,  Introd.),  Fairbairn  {On 
Proph.),  and  others,  that  the  teaching  of  the  Future  or  simple  prediction 
was  only  one  part  of  the  Prophetic  office  or  duty,  we  firmly  hold  that, 
viewed  correctly,  this  is  far  from  being  "  subordinate."     Eeflection  shows 


170  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  17. 

that  its  distinguishing  peculiarity  consists  in  this  :  under  the  form  of 
Prophecy,  the  Divine  Pur^iose,  not  merely  in  particular  cases,  but  as  a 
grand  wlioJe,  is  developed.  Therefore  it  is,  that  he  who  studies  and  com- 
l^ares  Prophecy  (teaching  respecting  the  future),  keej^ing  in  view  that  it 
is  far  more  than  mere  prediction  (in  the  sense  of  foretelling  to  convince 
men  of  the  truth,  etc.),  that  it  is  designed  to  teach  a  system  of  truth  (one 
part  adjusting  itself  to  another  in  the  thus  revealed  Plan),  will  obtain  a 
deeper  and  more  satisfactory  insight  into  Redemption,  as  carried  on  and 
finally  realized.  We  cannot  call  that  "  subordinate"  which  materially 
aids — is  essential — to  such  knowledge. 

It  may  be  well,  in  the  briefest  terms,  to  enumerate  the  reasons  why  the  study  of 
Prophecy  is  important.  (1)  It  evinces  due  respect  for  "  all  "  Scripture.  (2)  It  showfi 
that  we  believe  that  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  (3)  That  it  is 
"  a  sure  word."  (4)  It  affords  the  satisfaction  of  performing  a  duty.  (5)  It  is  fruitful 
in  bringing  forth  treasure.  (6)  It  increases  faith,  hope,  and  Jove.  (7)  It  exalts  our 
conceptions  of  the  attributes  of  God,  His  knowledge  and  power.  (8)  It  reveals  the  re- 
sults of  depravity.  (9)  It  teaches  forbearance  and  patience  under  the  trials  to  which  the 
church  and  believer  are  subject.     (10)  It  gives  the  Second  Advent  its  due  prominency. 

(11)  It  enforces  the  motives,  hopes,  etc.,  grounded  on  the  Second  Advent.  (11)  It  en- 
lightens us  respecting  the  mission  of  the  First  Advent,  and  shows  how  it  is  preparatory. 

(12)  It  imparts  accurate  information  concerning  the  Kingdom  of  God,  its  nature  and  re- 
establishment.  (13)  It  explains  the  intercalary  period,  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles.  (14) 
It  teaches  us  more  clearly  upon  what  the  engrafting  of  the  Gentiles  dei)ends.  (15)  It 
presents  us  with  the  career  of  the  church  and  anti-Christian  powers.  (16)  It  gives  us 
distinctive  knowledge  of  God's  Redemptive  Purpose.  (17)  It  secures  the  blessedness  of 
obedience  to  the  truth,  if  received,  hereafter.  (18)  It  increases  the  range  of  prayer,  and 
stimulates  to  its  employment.  (19)  It  is  a  preservative  from  sin.  (20)  It  leads  to  sepa- 
ration from  the  world,  but  to  labor  for  its  warning  and  welfare.  (21)  It  preserves  us 
from  the  rebuke  given  to  the  non-discerning  Pharisees.  (22)  It  alone  will  prepare  be- 
lievers for  the  terrible  trials  of  the  still  future  great  tribulation.  (23)  Being  received  by 
faith  and  appropriated,  we  may,  according  to  Promise,  escaj)e  from  the  sad  scenes  to  be 
ushered  in  (this  will  be  explained  under  the  Translation).  (24)  Its  tendency  is  to  pro- 
duce love  toward  the  brethren,  sinking  the  present  into  the  future.  (25)  Its  revelations 
may.  when  presented  to  others,  warn,  instruct,  and  guide  to  the  knowledge,  service,  and 
obedience  of  God.  (26)  It  prominently  holds  forth  the  Theocratic  relationship  of  Jesus. 
(27)  It  specifically  instructs  us  concerning  the  Jewish  nation,  the  true  people  of  God, 
and  the  enemies  of  Christ.  (2S)  The  design  of  the  present  dispensation,  its  introductory 
character,  etc.,  are  delineated  by  it.  (29)  It  enforces  and  contirms  the  covenants.  (30) 
It  tells  us  when  we  are  to  be  rewarded,  when  we  shall  inherit.  (31)  It  makes  the  prom- 
ises of  God  consistent  and  more  precious.     (32)  It  materially  aids  to  explain  Scripture. 

(33)  It  shows  us  how  Redemption  is  complete— a  recovery  from  all  the  effects  of  the  fall. 

(34)  It  gives  us  a  clearer  idea  of  the  resurrection,  translation,  judgment  daj',  etc.  (35)  It 
enables  us  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  reign  of  the  saints.  (36)  It  indicates  the 
ending  of  Gentile  domination  and  the  supremacy  of  the  Theocratic  ordering.  (37)  It 
presents  us  v/ith  a  more  enlarged  view  of  the  future  agency  and, power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  (38)  It  vindicates  the  glory  of  God  in  the  Salvation  portrayed  in  its  sublime  lan- 
guage. (39)  It  makes  the  Bible  a  harmonious  whole.  (40)  It  prevents  us  from  predict- 
ing falsely.  (41)  It  helps  us  to  meet  the  objections  urged  by  infidels,  Jews,  etc.  (42)  It 
serves  to  explain,  more  satisfactorily,  the  world's  history.  (43)  It  honors,  exalts  the 
mighty  King,  giving  us  the  most  enlarged  views  of  His  majesty  and  power.  Considering 
the  value  of  such  study,  it  is  inexcusable  to  neglect  it.  The  remarks  of  Dr.  Schmucker 
{Proph.  His.  of  the  Ch.  Relig.,  p.  44,  on  Apoc.  1  :  3)  are  but  too  applicable  :  "  Oh  !  the 
guilty  backwardness  of  many  in  our  days,  to  read  and  study  this  invaluable  treasure  of 
the  Christian,  for  fear  of  incurring  the  ridicule  of  infidels,  or  the  piteous  smile  of  the 
wise  men  of  the  world.  Some  in  our  days  neglect  this  kind  of  study  even  from  hj^joc- 
risy.  They  assume  a  superior  air  of  sanctity,  as  if  their  minds  were  employed  in  mat- 
ters of  far  greater  moment  than  this,  and  therefore  pray  to  be  excused.  Should  a  mor- 
tal presume  to  know  better,  what  he  ought  to  read  than  God  ?  However  the  study  of 
the  prophecies  should  not  be  our  first  care  ;  for  what  will  all  this  knowledge  avail,  if  we 
die  in  our  sins  at  last.     Our  first  duty  is  to  seek  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His  right- 


PllOP.  17.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KITiGDOM.  171 

eousness,  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  must  be  experimentally  acqtiaintecl  with 
the  ways  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  derive  real  beneht  from  knowledge  of  this  kind. 
He  whose  eternal  interest  is  truly  settled  will  study  the  prophecies  to  the  advantage  of 
his  soul's  concerns,  when  the  unconverted  speculation  only  satisfies  vain  curiosity." 
This  rebuke  and  caution  is  well  deserved  ;  for  neglect,  on  the  one  hand  is  criminal, 
whilst,  on  the  other,  without  an  appropriating  of  Christ,  the  sum  of  all  prophecy,  by  the 
elementary  principles  of  repentance  and  faith,  its  study  only  increases  our  condemna- 
tion, (Comp.  Commentators,  generally,  on  Apoc.  1:3.)  In  view  of  the  general  neglect 
of  proi3hecy,  even  by  ministers  eminent  for  ability,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  Daniel's  prayer 
is  applicable  (Dan.  9:6):  '^Neither  have  we  hearkened  unto  Thy  serirmts,  ilie  propJiets, 
which  spake  in  Thy  name  to  our  kings,  our  princes,  and  our  fathers,  and  to  all  the  peo- 
ple of  the  land."  For  if  Daniel  could  include  this  in  a  confession  of  sin  and  unworthi- 
ness,  how  much  more  pertinent  is  it,  when  regarding  the  additions  made  to  prophecy 
since  Daniel's  time,  some  even  given  under  the  direct  auspices  of  Jesus  Himself  and 
called  His  "  testimony"?  Jesus  (Matt.  24  :  15)  refers  to  Daniel's  prophecy,  saying, 
'•"  Whoso  readeth,  let  him  understand,''  and  both  He  and  the  apostles  allude  to  unfulfilled 
prophecj'-,  calling  attention  to  it,  aad  assuming  that  it  was  imjDarted  to  secure  knowledge 
of  God's  ways.  Indeed,  we  have  intimations  that  in  the  private  and  unrecorded  instruc- 
tions much  stress  was  laid  on  the  study  of  prophecy  (e.g.  as  to  Jesus,  Luke  24  :  25-27  ; 
as  to  the  apostles,  2  Tliess.  2  :  5).  Comp.  "  On  the  Importance  of  Prophecy,"  Brookes' s 
Maranatha,  Seiss's  Last  Times,  and  kindred  works. 

Obs.  7.  The  nature,  characteristics,  etc.,  of  the  Kingdom,  should  not  be 
determined  by  one,  two,  or  even  more,  predictions,  unless  very  specific, 
but  by  a  comparison  of  all,  or  at  least  a  large  number  of,  the  predictions 
relating  to  it.  One  or  more,  taken  separately,  may  give  us  but  slight  evi- 
dence, whilst  the  whole,  or  a  large  proportion,  will  present  such  abundant 
proof  that  the  correctness  of  view  will  be  fortified  against  assault.  The 
neglect  of  this  caution  has  been  fruitful  in  mistake  ;  a  passage  or  two  is 
selected  and  a  plausible  theory  is  erected  upon  it,  which,  however,  cannot 
bear  the  test  of  accumulated  light.  Inferential  or  one-sided  testimony 
must  give  place  to  the  direct  and  abounding. 

Bh.  Horsley  {Sermons,  vol.  2,  p.  13),  showing  that  the  prophecies  were  parts  of  a  sys- 
tem which  pointed  to  tlie  establishment  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  takes  2  Pet.  1  :  20  to 
express  :  "Not  any  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  self -interpretation"  (i.e.  isolated  from 
others),  but  must  be  interpreted  in  its  unity  with  others  or  the  whole  (so  also  Faber, 
etc.).  However  the  passage  is  rendered,  the  rule  of  comparison  is  essential  to  preserve 
from  error.  Home  (Tntrod.)  adopts  this  as  the  first  rule  for  ascertaining  the  sense  of 
prophetic  writers.  (Many  authors  indorse  Horsley's  rendering,  whilst  others  make  it  to 
denote  "  that  what  they  communicated  was  not  of  their  own  disclosure  ;"  "  that  the 
prophecy  cannot  be  understood  until  compared  with  the  event,"  etc.  (Barnes'  Com. 
loci.).  Fairbairn  {On  Proph.  Ap.  G.  p.  496)  interprets  it  to  mean  :  "No  Scripture  comes 
of  one's  own  solution  ;"  and  he  refers  it  not,  as  others,  "  how  the  meaning  of  prophecy 
is  made  out,  or  interpreted,  but  how  prophecy  itself  came  into  existence,  whence  it 
drew  its  origin,"  etc.  The  Roman  Cath.  application  of  the  passage  is  refuted  by  Barnes 
and  others.  Bh.  Van  Mildert  says  :  "  That  the  sense  of  no  prophecy  is  to  be  determined 
by  an  abstract  consideration  of  the  passage  itself  ;  but  by  taking  it  in  conjunction  with 
other  portions  of  Scripture  relating  to  the  subject."  Comp.  Bioomfield,  loci,  who 
quotes  Van  Mildert,  but  agrees  with  Horsley,  who,  in  addition,  includes  more  than 
mere  comparison,  viz. :  that  in  virtue  of  its  divine  origin,  it  sustains  a  necessary  relation 
to  a  system  of  truth  and  must  find  its  true  interpretation  in  that  relationship,  and  in  the 
history  (fulfilment  of  the  world).*     In  reference  to  the   double  fulfilment  of  prophecy, 


*  The  Orit.  Eng.  Test  renders  "  private  interpretation"  by  "merely  human  interpreta- 
tion." The  editor  of  the  Liith.  Observer  (Dec.  8th,  1876)  translates  :  "  Knowing  this 
first,  that  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of  its  own  origin  (starting,  revelation,  disclos- 
ure). For,"  etc.  The  Latin  Vidgate  in  the  Dublin  translation  is  made  to  say  :  "  Under- 
standing this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  made  by  private  interpretation." 


172  THE  THEOCRATIC  Kiis'GDo:\r.  [Pkop.  17. 

while  we  would  not  entirely  reject  it,  yet  great  caution  is  required  in  its  application,  be- 
ing convinced  that  in  many  instances  it  is  faulty  and  erroneously  applied.  Our  argu- 
ment makes  it  unnecessary  to  be  employed  by  us,  and  therefore  we  refer  the  reader  to 
works  that  adopt  it,  as  Bh.  Newton's  Diss,  on  Froph.,  vol.  1,  p.  70  ;  and  vol.  2,  p.  92  ; 
Home's  Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  390  ;  Bacon's  Adv.  of  Learning,  B.  2  ;  Bickersteth's  Guide; 
Brookes 's  El  Froph.  Inter.,  etc. 

It  may  be  added  that  the  very  cautions  given  respecting  the  study  of  prophecy,  indi- 
cate that  no  man  can  make  himself  conversant  with  the  same  without  considerable  labor 
and  time.  The  Bible  implies  this  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is  given,  and  clearly 
teaches  us  that  God  exercises  the  talent  and  wisdom  of  His  people  m  the  searching  of 
His  Word  ;  and  that  in  condescending  to  such  revelations  He  leaves  us  to  investigate 
in  order  that  the  wise  only  may  understand.  The  labor  necessarily  bestowed  causes  the 
laborer  to  appreciate  the  treasures  dug  out,  and,  at  the  same  time,  jjrevents  those  who 
are  the  sj)ecial  subjects  of  prophetic  judgments — owing  to  sin — to  see  and  understand 
the  imj)ending  doom.  The  range  of  propUecy,  dealing  with  the  deepest  and  most  vital 
theological  questions,  with  the  highest  and  noblest  things  j)ertaining  to  man  and  his  des- 
tiny, demands,  to  insure  successful  prosecution,  a  cultivated  mind  as  well  as  a  heart  of 
faith.  In  its  relationship  to  history  it  calls  for  an  acquaintance  with  ancient  and  mod- 
ern, sacred  and  profane  history.  For,  as  Bh.  Newton  remarks  :  "  Prophecy  is  history 
anticipated  and  contracted  ;  history  is  jDrophecy  accomplished  and  dilated."  Von  Bol- 
linger [Essay  on  Froph.  Spirit)  calls  the  historian  "  a  prophet  looking  behind. ' '  In  ad- 
dition to  this,  its  relationship  to,  as  an  essential  part  of,  a  great  redemptive  system, 
calls  for  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  numeroiis  details,  fitting  them  into  their  several 
designed  places,  and  bringing  forth  the  unity  of  design  exhibited.  While  all  men  can 
derive  benefit  from  its  study,  yet  few  men  are  really  qualified  to  perform  the  amount  of 
labor  reqviired  to  bring  together  prophecy  connectedly  and  systematically.  And  among 
the  few,  nearly  all,  possessing  the  requisite  talent  and  ability,  are  so  occupied  xnth 
other  labors  that  they  cannot  bestow  the  time  that  the  subject  demands. 

Obs.  8.  In  almost  every  work  written  against  the  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom as  held  by  us,  great  stress  is  laid  on  the  obscurity  of  prophetic  an- 
nouncements arising  from  their  figurative  or  symbolic  language.  Some 
even  go  so  far  as  to  say,  that  prophecy  can  only  be  understood  after  its 
fulfilment.  Admitting  a  degree  of  obscurity  in  some  details,  in  the  order 
of  some  events,  in  the  manner  in  which  some  things  are  to  be  fulfilled, 
etc.,  it  is  sufficient  to  reply,  that  the  objection  only  has  force  when  applied 
to  our  method  of  interpretation,  but  is  forgotten  and  overridden  when  the 
substitution  of  a  spiritualistic  interpretation  is  attempted. 

This  requires  some  additional  remarks.  It  has  already  been  shown  under  several 
Propositions  that  there  is  mystery  attached  to  some  things,  that  a  degree  of  obscurity  is 
intentionally  given,  that  laborious  study  and  diligent  comparison  is  required,  etc.,  but 
have  also  stated  (which  will  hereafter  clearly  appear)  that  this  mystery  and  obscurity 
does  not  refer  to  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  but  to  events  connected  therewith,  the  ex- 
act order  to  be  observed,  the  time  of  accomplishment,  the  brevity  of  expression,  the 
figurative  language  used,  etc.  Bh.  Newton,  who  gave  much  thought  and  attention  to 
the  subject,  justly  says  (On  Froph.,  vol.  2,  p.  91)  :  "  Though  some  parts  are  obscure 
enough  to  exercise  the  church,  yet  others  are  sufficiently  clear  to  illuminate  it  ;  and  the 
obscure  parts,  the  more  the^^  are  fulfilled,  the  better  they  can  be  understood.  In  this 
respect,  as  the  world  groweth  older,  it  groweth  wiser."     The  present  and  past  fulfilment 


Fuller  {Calv.  and  Socin.  Sys.  Comp.,  Let.  12)  explains:  "  It  is  not  to  be  considered  as  the  pri- 
vate opinion  of  a  fallible  man,  as  the  case  is  with  other  productions."  Some  few  make 
"  private  interpretation"  to  mean  "  that  we  cannot  interpret  proi^hecy,  unless  we  are  en- 
lightened by  the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  hence  plead  in  behalf  of  themselves  a  special  ilhimi- 
nation  which  fits  them  for  expositors.  Fausset  (Com.  loci)  has,  "  private  (the  mere  indi- 
vidual writer's  uninspired)  interpretation,"  i.e.  they  were  not  the  words  of  themselves 
to  be  interpreted  by  themselves,  but  the  words  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Alford  (Com.)  ex- 
jDlains  :  "  springs  not  out  of  human  interpretations,"  i.e.  is  not  the  result  of  "  a  man 
knowing  what  he  means  when  he  utters  it,"  etc. 


Prop.  17.]  the  tiieocPwAtic  kiistgdom.  173 

of  prophecy  gives  us  a  clue  to  its  language  and  the  expressions  peculiar  to  itself,  and 
thus  constantly  enlarges  the  facilities  for  comprehending  the  same.  Without  diligent 
study  of  the  more  obscure  allusions,  it  would  be  impossible  to  predicate  a  fulfilment  of 
them  when  accomplished,  unless  i^roper  comparison  were  instituted.  It  was,  probably, 
in  view  of  this,  that  Sir  I.  Newton,  Obs.  Apoc,  ch.  1,  p.  253)  said :  "  Amongst  the  inter- 
preters of  the  last  age  there  is  scarce  one  of  note  who  has  not  made  some  discovery 
worth  knowing." 

The  objection  grounded  on  alleged  obscurity  is  urged  to  evince  that  we  can  know 
but  little  concerning  it,  and  that,  therefore,  our  explanations  are  worthless.  For  the 
present,  it  is  only  necessary  to  rejDly  :  (1)  How  comes  it,  then,  that  if  they  are  necessarily 
so  obscure  that  nothing  certain  can  be  gained  respecting  the  Kingdom  and  its  manifesta- 
tion, they  themselves  so  C(»ijidently  appeal  to  and  interpret  them  concerning  the  same  ? 
Thus  e.g.  every  one  of  them  brings  forward  a  favorite  theory  of  the  Kingdom  and  Millen- 
nium, and  to  sustain  his  position  largely  quotes  the  figurative  and  even  the  symbolical 
proiDhecies,  and  these,  when  thus  apjDlied  by  themselves,  are  no  longer  ohacnre  ;  nay,  more, 
are  become  so  decidedly  clear  that  they  are  used  in  preaching,  prayer,  and  singing. 
Singular  change  !  In  sermons,  prayers,  and  hymns,  when  confidently  used  by  them- 
selves, prophecy  is  easily  apprehended,  but  when  Millenarians  refer  to  it  and  endeavor  to 
show  its  relationship  to  the  future,  then,  all  at  once,  it  is  considered  too  dark  and  incom- 
prehensible !  Alas  !  men  of  ability  resort  to  so  pitiful  a  subterfuge,  and  actually  influ- 
ence the  ignorant  by  it.  (2)  They  themselves,  being  the  judges,  decide  after  all  that  if 
desirous  to  become  acquainted  with  what  God  has  revealed  concerning  the  Kingdom 
and  its  glory,  we  must  turn  to  the  i:»rophecies  abounding  in  figure.  Hence  censure  in 
this  direction  is  scarcely  conqDatible  with  their  own  course,  they  themselves  affirming 
that  "  vagueness"  gives  place,  by  comparison  and  studj',  to  certainty.  (3)  That  when 
not  directly  writing  against  us,  they  overlook  this  obscurity,  making  all  the  concessions 
that  are  needed.  (Comp.  e.g.  Barnes,  Co7n.  on  2  Pet.  1  :  20,  21  ;  Kev.  1:1;  The  Pres- 
hyterian  Quarterly  Ileview  for  1853,  quoted  by  Lord  in  Theol.  and  Lit.  Journal  for  1853,  p. 
258  ;  Stiiart's  Com.  on  Apoc.  ch.  1  :  1-5  ;  in  brief,  conqDare  their  expositions  of  such 
passages  and  all  others  urging  us  to  the  study  of  proj)hecy.)  (4)  That  really  there  exists 
but  little  difference — if  any — between  us  so  far  as  the  (jrammalical  and  rlieiorical  meaning 
is  concerned  ;  and  the  same  is  trae  even  in  many  cases  of  the  symbols  employed  ;  we 
both  are  agreed  how  the  tropical  language  is  to  be  interpreted,  viz. :  by  the  ordinary 
rules  governing  all  language.  The  difference  between  us  lies  in  the  fact  that  after  the 
jjlain,  unobscure  sense  is  presented,  then,  in  opposition  to  us  who  hold  to  the  sense 
thus  conveyed,  another  ungrammatical  and  unrhetorical  operation  must  be  performed, 
viz.:  this  sense  thus  obtained  must  have  engrafted  upon  it  (as  e.g.  David's  throne  and 
kingdom)  a  different  and  very  spiritual  or  mystical  meaning  ;  must  be  tortured  by  the 
Origenistic  process  until  it  evolves  something  that  suits  the  taste  or  option  of  the  inter- 
preter ;  must,  in  brief,  be  exijlained  by  a  mode  that  has  never  been  applied  to  any  other 
written  document  in  existence,  and  which  is  utterly  unknown  to  the  laws  of  language. 
Here  is  where  the  obscurity  obtains — certainly  not  on  the  side  which  limits  itself  by 
regular,  well-known  law,  but  on  that  which  passes  beyond  those  ascertained  rules,  and 
allows  in  addition  a  sense  which  is  unconfined  and  unlimited  in  variety  at  the  discretion 
of  spiritualistic  assumption,  making  the  plainest  of  passages  inflated,  involved,  and 
transcendental.  The  writer  does  not  exaggerate  on  so  important  a  point,  for  the  proof 
of  its  being  unconfined  and  unlimited  consists  in  this  :  that  no  work,  addicted  to  spirit- 
ualizing, is  in  existence  (within  the  knowledge  of  the  author)  that  gives  the  laics  regulat- 
ing the  obtaining  and  applying  of  such  an  added  sense,  thus  leaving  it  unconfined  at  the 
pleasure  of  the  expositor  ;  the  unlimited  variety  can  be  readily  seen  in  e.g.  the  mean- 
ings attached  to  the  Kingdom,  in  various  commentaries,  in  Swedenborg's  works,  in  the 
writings  of  the  mystics,  etc.,  numerous  examples  of  which  will  be  quoted  as  we 
proceed. 

In  reference  to  the  old  and  oft-refuted  objection,  making  a  total  obscurity — "  that 
prophecy  is  so  arranged  that  it  is  not  to  be  understood  until  its  fulfilment" — this  too  is 
already  answered  by  the  course  of  our  opponents,  who  against  this  alleged  axiom  profess 
themselves  able  to  express  a  confident  opinion  as  to  fulfilment.  Some  professed  Chris- 
tians almost  seem  to  have  adopted,  with  reference  to  unfulfilled  prophecy,  the  inscrip- 
tion C  nil  scire  tutissima  fides")  over  the  gateway  of  the  famous  mansion  of  Claas  van 
Olden  Barneveld,  exi3ressive  of  the  faith  that  to  know  nothing  is  the  safest  belief.  Let 
those  who  urge  such  objections  answer  questions  like  the  following  :  What  propriety 
and  force  is  there  in  Amos  4  :  7,  8,  Hos.  14  :  9,  Dan.  12  :  4,  Apoc.  1  :  3,  and  kindred  pas- 
sages ?  Where  is  the  Scripture  that  contains  such  a  rule  for  our  guidance  ?  Why  are  we 
so  exj)ressly  exhorted  to  read  and  study  it,  and  why  is  the  non-discerning  and  neglect  of 


174  THE  THEOCRATIC   KliS^GDOM.  [PrOP.  17. 

it  so  rebuked,  if  we  can  know  nothing  about  it  until  fulfilled  ?  How  can  prophecy  be  a 
light,  if  it  is  dark?  What  encouragement,  profit,  hope,  etc.,  is  to  be  derived  from  it 
previous  to  fulfilment  ?  Why  do  some  of  these  very  men  rashly  attempt  to  elucidate 
prophecy,  as  in  commentaries,  sermons,  books  on  prophecy,  etc.  ?  Why  confidently 
declare  that  we  are  certainly  wrong,  if  they  know  nothing  about  it  ;  for  might  we  not 
even  happily  guess  at  the  true  meaning  ?  Why,  in  contending  with  unbelievers,  quote 
prophecy  against  them,  if  it  has  no  more  weight  than  this  ?  Why  refer  to  it  in  encourag- 
ing the  faith  and  hojje  of  the  church  ?  The  reader  must  not  censure  because  so  much 
space  is  occuiDied  with  such  objections,  for  the  writer  has  been  often  pained  to  find 
good  and  learned  men  urge  them  against  us,  and  then  turn  around  and,  in  the  same 
book,  plead  the  usefulness  and  benefit  of  prophecy  in  throwing  light  upon  the,  what 
would  be  otherwise  a  dark,  future.  Some  are  like  Sir  Tliom.  Browne  {Christian  Morals, 
s.  13),  who  said  :  "  Study  prophecies  when  they  are  become  histories,  and  past  hovering 
in  their  causes  ;"  but  they  do  not  assign  as  a  reason  one  given  by  him  :  "  The  greatest 
part  of  time  being  already  wrapt  up  in  things  behind  us,  it's  now  somewhat  late  to  bait 
after  things  before  us  ;  for  futurity  still  shortens,  and  time  present  sucks  in  time  to 
come."  .  .  ,  "  If  the  expected  Elias  should  appear,  he  might  say  much  of  what  is 
f)ast,  not  much  of  what's  to  come."  On  the  other  hand,  Moody  [How  to  Study  the  Bible) 
remarks  :  "  If  God  did  not  wish  us  to  understand  the  Revelation,  He  would  not  have 
given  it  us  at  all.  A  good  many  say  that  it  is  so  dark  and  mysterious  common  readers 
cannot  understand  it.  Let  us  only  keep  digging  away  at  it,  and  it  will  unfold  itself  by 
and  by.  Some  one  says  it  is  the  only  book  in  the  whole  Bible  that  tells  about  the 
devil  being  chained  ;  and  as  the  devil  knows  that,  he  goes  up  and  down  Christendom, 
and  says  :  '  It  is  no  use,  you  reading  the  Revelation  ;  you  cannot  understand  the  book  ; 
it's  too  hard  for  you.'  The  fact  is,  he  doesn't  want  you  to  understand  about  his  own 
defeat." 

Another  and  favorite  mode  of  discrediting  prophecy  as  employed  by  Millenarians 
must,  in  justice  to  ourselves,  be  briefly  noticed.  It  is  charged  that  its  study  has  led  to 
foolish  interpretations  and  rash  expositions.  This,  alas,  is  true,  and  one  of  the  results 
of  human  infirmity.  But  the  abuse,  the  perversion  does  not  discredit  a  proper  use  of 
the  truth,  for  otherwise  no  truth— for  what  has  escaped — v,^ould  be  left  to  us.  After 
many  years  of  careful  study  and  reading,  embracing  the  writings  of  all  classes,  it  is  cor- 
rect to  assert  as  a  well-weighed  opinion,  that  if  we  were  to  measure  the  extravagance  of 
Anti- and  Post-Millenarians— our  opponents — with  that  of  Millenarian  writers,  the  for- 
mer would  greatly  exceed  in  the  scale  of  folly  and  rashness.  Thus  e.g.  Pres.  Edwards 
{His.  of  Rede mp.)  employing  prophecy  to  make  this  earth  (to  which  prophecy  offers  re- 
demption) the  future,  eternal  hell  ;  Prof.  Stuart's  Neroic  theory  ;  Dr.  Berg  making  the 
Fifth  Kingdom  of  Daniel  the  United  States  ;  Swedenborg's  appropriation  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  prophecies  ;  "  the  Apoc.  Unveiled,"  making  the  angel  of  Rev.  10  the  symbol 
of  "  the  present  age  of  steam-power  and  the  magnetic  telegraph,"  etc.,  etc. 

Obs.  9.  Millenarians,  in  order  to  secure  the  belief  of  others,  constantly 
appeal  to  a  literal  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  They  indorse  the  language  of 
Tertullian  {Apol.  ch.  20)  :  "  The  daily  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is,  surely,  a 
full  proof  of  revelation.  Hence,  then,  we  have  a  well-founded  belief  in 
many  things  which  are  yet  to  come,  namely,  the  confidence  arising  from 
our  knowledge  of  the  past,  because  some  events,  still  future,  were  foretold 
at  the  same  time  with  others  which  are  past.  The  voice  of  prophecy 
speaks  alike  of  each  ;  the  Scriptures  record  them  equally  ;  the  same  Spirit 
taught  the  prophets  both.  In  the  predictions  there  is  no  distinction  of 
time  ;  if  there  be  any  such  distinction,  it  is  made  by  men  ;  while  the  grad- 
ual course  of  time  makes  that  present  which  was  future,  and  that  past  which 
was  present.  How  can  we,  then,  be  blamed  for  believing  also  what  is  pre- 
dicted respecting  the  future,  Avhen  our  confidence  is  founded  upon  the  ful- 
filment of  prophecies  relating  to  the  present  and  the  past"  (quoted  by 
Cumming's  Lect.  on  Dan.,  p.  425,  from  Chevallier's  Trans.).  We  lay 
much  stress  on  this  feature  in  the  present  work. 

In  view  of  this  fact,  something  more  may  be  said  to  impress  its  value.  No  one  can 
fail  to  see  that  prophecy  in  the  past  and  present  has  been  minutely  fulfilled— i.e.  fulfilled 


PeOP.  17.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  175 

according  to  the  plain  grammatical  sense  contained  in  it.  Analogy,  logically  applied,  de- 
mands, as  Tertnllian  asserts,  a  confident  belief  that  that  portion  relating  to  the  future 
will  be  fulfilled  in  the  same  manner.  The  same  God  gave  both,  and  the  same  power  will 
be  exerted  in  fulfilment.  The  value  of  prophecy  in  this  direction  arises  from  the  ful- 
filment according  with  the  grammatical  sense — the  one  that  the  language  obviously  con- 
veys, for  then  only  can  it  be  legitimately  employed  as  an  argument  against  unbelief. 
Thus  e.g.  in  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  Tyre,  Babylon,  Nineveh,  Jerusalem,  the  Jewish 
nation,  the  church,  Rome,  etc.,  all  writers  lay  great  stress  upon  history  accurately  cor- 
responding with  the  predictions  in  their  grammatical  sense.  No  one  doubts  the  propriety 
and  force  of  this  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the  past  and  present,  but  just  so  soon  as  we  under- 
take to  insist  upon//ie  same  grammatical  sense  pertaining  to  prophecies  describing  the  fu- 
ture, then  a  multitude  arises  and  derides  our  system  of  interpretation  as  crude,  unreason- 
able, Jewish,  etc.  The  experience  of  the  past  and  present  is  set  aside,  the  appeal  of  Script- 
ure to  such  a  fulfilment  is  ignored,  in  order  that  a  favorite  system  of  Eschatology,  incon- 
sistent with  a  continued  ajjplication  of  this  sound  principle,  may  be  saved.  Our  adherence 
to  such  a  literal  interpretation  is  pronounced  extravagant,  enthusiastic,  and  even  fanati- 
cal, because,  forsooth,  in  every  case  we  may  be  unable  to  explain  just  how  the  things  pre- 
dicted are  to  be  accomplished.  Our  faith  in  God  taking  care  that  His  Word  shall  he  fulfilled 
when  the  time  arrives  is  decided  as  childish  and  unworthy  of  intelligent  piety.  Sober- 
ness, intelligence,  and  piety,  they  inform  us,  call  for  a  figiarative,  spiritual,  or  mystical 
interpretation  of  these  proiDhecies.  Alas  !  what  exhibition  of  faith  in  God's  Word  ! 
Learning,  ability,  piety,  are  joined  in  resisting  one  of  the  plainest  and  safest  rules  of  in- 
terpretation given  in  Scripture  and  corroborated  by  history,  and  no  sarcasm  or  ridicule 
is  spared  to  make  our  position  odious.  Let  it  be  so  ;  nothing  that  we  can  say  or  do  will 
alter  the  Word  or  retard  its  fulfilment.  Wisdom  will  be  justified  by  her  children.  But 
may  we  ajDpeal  to  such  by  making  a  supposition  :  Suppose  that  we  and  our  oi:>ponents 
lived  just  before  the  First  Advent  of  Jesus,  with  our  respective  systems  of  interpretation. 
Suppose  these  systems  be  applied  by  us  to  the  j^rophecies  pertaining  to  the  coming  Mes- 
siah, what  would  be  the  inevitable  result  ?  Our  literal  system  would,  of  course,  bring 
out  the  birth,  life,  sufferings,  death,  burial,  etc.,  of  Jesus  as  they  took  place.  The 
other  system,  spiritualizing  on  account  of  supposed  difficulties,  would  necessarily  make 
figurative  or  symbolic  the  facts  as  predicted.  The  supposition  shows  how  contradictory 
the  one  system  would  be  to  fulfilment.  But  to  neutralize  this  supjDosed  case,  it  will, 
perhaps,  be  said,  that  we  are  under  another  dispensation,  and  that  the  history  of  the 
church  indicates  that  much  is  also  to  be  spiritually  understood  to  make  it  harmonize 
with  the  Scriptures.  As  this  matter  will  hereafter  be  fully  answered  in  our  line  of 
argument,  it  is  sufficient  now  to  say  that  the  change  of  dispensation  does  not  affect  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  Word,  no  change  of  the  latter  being  anywhere  intimated  ;  and  that  the 
reason  why  so  much  is  spiritualized  respecting  the  church,  etc.,  is  simply  owing  to  the 
sad  fact  that  predictions  solely  relating  to  the  future,  to  another  dispensation,  to  the  Jew- 
ish nation,  to  the  period  after  the  Sec.  Advent,  men  apply  to  the  present  time,  to  this 
dispensation,  to  the  Gentiles,  and  to  the  church,  and  the  result  unavoidably  is,  that  an 
immense  amount  of  spiritualizing  and  accommodation  must  take  place  to  cause  these 
things  to  fit  into  their  system  of  belief.  A  system  of  interpreting  prophecy  that  cannot 
be  equally  available  in  any  period  of  history,  in  any  dispensation,  is  open,  at  once,  to  the 
gravest  suspicion  of  unsoundness.  We,  at  least,  with  the  early  church,  reject  it  as 
entirely  untrustworthy,  and  in  the  following  pages  assign  our  reasons  for  the  same. 


176  THE   THEOCRATIC    KI:N^GD0M.  [PkOP.  18. 


Proposition  18.  The  ijropliecies  relating  to  the  establishment  of 
the  Kingdom  of  God  are  both  conditioned  and  unconditioned. 

By  this  paradox  is  simi^ly  meant  tliat  tliey  are  conditioned  in 
their  fiifilment  by  the  antecedent  gathering  of  the  elect,  and  lience 
susceptible  of  postponement  (as  will  be  shown,  e.g..  Props.  58-68) ; 
and  that  they  are  unconditioned  so  far  as  their  ultimate  fulfilment 
is  concerned,  which  the  conduct  or  action  of  man  cannot  turn  aside 
(as  is  seen,  e.g.,  at  the  very  time  of  the  kingdom's  manifestation, 
the  nations,  Rev.  19,  will  be  arrayed  against  it).  The  kingdom 
itself  pertains  to  the  Divine  Purpose,  is  the  subject  of  sacred  cove- 
nants, is  confirmed  by  solemn  oath,  is  to  be  the  result  or  end  de- 
signed in  the  redemptive  process,  and  therefore  cannot,  lolll  not, 
fall.  The  inheritors  of  the  kingdom,  however,  are  conditioned — a 
certain  number  known  only  to  God — and  the  kingdom  itself, 
although  predetermined  (Prop.  2),  is  dependent  (for  this  also  is 
God's  purpose)  as  to  its  manifestation  upon  their  being  obtained 
(the  time  when  this  will  be  accomplished  being  also  known  to  God). 

Obs.  1.  Some  writers  (e.g.  Hengstenberg,  Art.  Pro2:)liecy,  ^itto' ^  Ency., 
referred  to  by  Fairbairu,  On  Proph.,  p.  72)  hold  that  all  prophecy  is  un- 
conditional ;  others  (e.  g.  Olshausen,  Com.  Matt.  24,  vol.  2,  p.  255)  make 
it  conditional  ;  others  again  (e.g.  Fairbairn,  On  Proph.,  p.  72)  argue  that 
some  are  conditional  and  some  are  unconditional.  There  is  truth  in  all 
these  positions,  and  by  combining  them  the  whole  truth  will  appear. 

Let  the  reader  notice  :  (1)  To  make  all  prophecy  tinconditional  is  to  contradict  the 
case  of  Jonah  and  Nineveh,  Ilezekiah,  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jews,  the  temple 
service  of  Ezekiel,  etc.  Take  e.g.  that  of  Nineveh  :  the  language  was  absolute,  "  yet 
forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown. "  Jonah  understood  it  as  absolute.  But 
Jonah  did  not  understand  what  Jeremiah  (ch.  18  :  7-9)  afterward  declared,  that  under- 
neath predictions  which  related  to  the  moral  condition  of  man  there  is  involved  a  moral 
principle  of  government  which  God,  in  justice  to  His  own  character  and  attributes,  and 
also  in  behalf  of  the  good  of  man,  necessarily  cherishes,  viz. :  that  the  good  or  evil  pre- 
dicted of  any  person  or  people  is  dependent  upon  their  moral  action.  The  language  of 
Jeremiah,  as  Fairbairn  justly  observes,  cannot  be  otherwise  explained  :  "At  what  in- 
stant I  shall  speak  concerning  a  nation  and  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  pluck  up,  and  to 
pull  down,  and  to  destroy  it,"  etc.  (2)  It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  all  prediction  is 
limited  by  such  a  restriction,  and  hence  in  its  fulfilment  is  conditioned  by  the  action  of 
man.  This  would  be  to  narrow  it  down  to  mere  contingency.  If  dependent  on  the  re- 
pentance and  faith  of  man,  then  there  coiild  be  no  certaintj^  of  its  truthfulness,  for  it  may 
fail,  or  it  may  not,  according  to  the  use  made  of  moral  freedom.  Whilst  this  condition- 
ality  is  evidently  true  so  far  as  man  is  personally  or  individually  concerned,  to  apply 
this  to  those  predictions  referring  to  the  Divine  Plan  of  Bedemption  is  at  once  to  limit  the 
foreknowledge  of  God,  making  it  impossible  to  prove  that  He  foreknew  the  end  from 
the  beginning.  Such  a  process  would  lower  prophecy  to  a  very  indecisive  proof  of  God's 
Omniscience  and  Power.  But  if  God,  on  the  other  Iiand,  evinces  His  foreknowledge  by 
showing  in  His  predictions  (as  many  do)  what  this  freedom  of  man's  will  accomplish 
(without  interfering  with,  or  curtailing  it),  and  that  He  can,  and  often  does,  overrule  it  so 


PeOP.  18.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  177 

that  it  shall  not  interfere  with  a  set  purpose  (as  e.g.  Rev.  17  :  17),  then  there  is  a  most 
decisive  proof  of  God's  Omiscience  and  Power,  of  a  fixed  design  which  icUl  altimaiely  be 
realized  ;  and  then,  too,  His  appeals  to  predictions  possess  a  validity  and  force  which, 
if  altogether  conditioned,  they  otherwise  conld  not  possess.  (3)  While  both  facts  are 
found  to  be  true,  conditioned  as  to  personal  freedom  and  unconditioned  as  to  God's 
ultimate  purpose,  some  take  advantage  of  this  feature,  and  under  its  shelter  make  more 
of  the  prophecies  conditional  (e.g.  in  reference  to  Jewish  nation,  kingdom,  etc.)  than, 
is  allowable  by  the  positive  declarations  concerning  the  Divine  Purpose  in  the  Redemp- 
tion of  man  and  the  world.  The  student,  then,  must  be  guarded  in  the  application  of 
the  principles  which  underlie  the  prophecies. 

Obs.  2.  The  passages  (Numb.  23  :  19,  1  Sam.  15  :  29,  etc.)  which  speak 
of  predictions  as  unconditional,  and  those  (Jer.  18  :  7-10,  etc.)  which  in- 
timate their  conditional] ty,  are  easily  reconcilable  from  the  simple  fact, 
that  the  purposes  of  God  run  in  connection  with  moral  freedom,  aud  that 
wdiilst  the  former  is  not  set  aside  by  the  action  of  the  latter,  yet  in  the  cases 
of  individuals  and  even  nations  sufficient  latitude  is  given  so  that  there  shall 
be  no  violation  of  that  freedom.  It  may  be  proper  to  give  some  marks  by 
which  we  may  distinguish  predictions  that  will  finally  be  fulfilled  from 
those  that  are  merely  conditional.  They  are  the  following  :  1.  Predictions 
that  are  bound  up  with  the  Divine  Plan  of  Redemption,  as  e.g.  those  re- 
fering  to  Christ's  birth,  life,  death,  etc.  2.  Those  which  are  confirmed  by 
solemn  affirmations  or  by  an  oath,  as  e.g.  Numb.  14  :  20,  28,  Heb.  6  :  17, 
etc.  3.  Those  that  are  incorporated  in  the  Covenants,  as  e.g.  the  Abra- 
hamic  and  Davidic  covenants.  4.  Predictions  which  expressly  declare  that 
they  will  take  place  irrespective  of  what  man  will  do,  as  e.g.  Dan.  chs.  2 
and  7,  the  Apocalypse,  Ps.  89  :  33,  34,  etc.  5.  Predictions  that  form  the 
basis  of  succeeding  ones  and  of  promises,  as  e.g.  Nathan  to  David,  2  Sam. 
7  :  5-17  (this  at  first  sight  might  seem  an  exception,  but  in  another  place 
its  due  fulfilment  will  be  proven).  6.  Those  that  are  illustrated  by  a  par- 
able, as  e.g.  parable  of  the  tares,  net,  nobleman,  etc.  (the  parable  enforces, 
or  takes  the  fulfilment  for  granted).  7.  Predictions  relating  to  the  des- 
tiny of  the  good,  whoever  they  may  be.  8.  Those  referring  to  the  destiny 
of  "the  wicked,  whoever  they  are.  9.  Prophecies  given  to  the  Jews  re- 
specting other  nations,  and  not  to  those  nations  themselves  for  purposes  of 
repentance,  as  e.g.,  Babylon,  Tyre,  etc.  10.  Those  that  relate  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  being  a  revelation  of  God's  will  and 
pleasure  respecting  redemptive  ordering.  11.  Those  that  describe  the 
final  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  this  being  (as  will  be  fully  shown 
hereafter)  essential  to  secure  the  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom  and  the 
Salvation  of  the  Gentiles. 

Stillingfleet  gives  (Orig.  Sac,  quoted  by  Fairbairn,  On  Proph.,  App.  D.)  four  marks 
for  prophecies  of  an  absolute  character,  viz.:  1.  A  prediction  accompanied  by  a  miracle, 
by  which  authenticated  as  God's  fixed  purpose,  1  Kings  13  :  3.  2.  A  prediction,  when 
the  things  foretold  exceed  all  the  probabilities  of  second  causes,  as  deliverance  from 
E^vpt  Babvlon,  etc.  3.  A  prediction  confirmed  by  an  oath,  Numb.  14  :  28  ;  Ps. 
89''':  31-36  ;  Heb.  6  :  17.  4.  Predictions  concerning  blessings  merely  spiritual,  because 
such  blessings  flow  from  grace  and  not  merit. 

A  number  of  writers,  in  opposition  to  us,  make  prophecy  conditional,  ihis  arises 
from  (1)  applying  nearly  all  predictions  (pertaining  to  the  future)  to  the  present  dispen- 
sation, and  not  seeing  them  verified  as  given,  claim  that  they  are  conditional  (2)  From 
not  noticing  that  God  has  a  fixed  Purpose,  and  that  the  unbehef  of  individuals  and  ot 
nations  cannot  defeat  that  Purpose.  (3)  In  not  distinguishing  between  what  relates  to 
the  individual  and  what  to  the  Divine  Purpose,  as  e.g.  God  purposes  to  make  a  certain 
number  of  Kings  and  Priests,  which  number  will  be  made  up  notwithstanding  the  i^mbe- 
lief  of  many      (4)  In  not  observing  that  the  postisonement  of  fulfilment,  occasioned  by 


178  THE  THEOCRATIC    KIIN-GDOM.  [PrOP.  18. 

the  unbelief  of  man,  does  not  warrant  the  belief  that  there  will  be  no  fulfilment.  (5)  In 
not  perceiving  that  if  God's  promises  relating  to  the  future  are  conditional,  then  His 
Word  becomes  unreliable  to  such  an  extent  that  fulfilment  cannot  be  predicated  of  it, 
and  hence  history  fails  to  become  the  witness  that  God  claims.  (6)  In  not  noticing  that 
they  lower  the  foreknowledge  of  God  ;  for  if  He  promises  in  explicit  form  a  certain 
event  that  is  to  take  place  and  it  does  not,  owing  to  man's  action,  then  if. prophecy  is  to 
be  a  comfirmatory  witness  as  intended,  the  failure,  or  the  reason  for  the  same,  ought 
also  to  be  stated.  (7)  In  not  seeing  that  they  reverse  the  test  given  by  God  Himself 
(Deut.  18  :  21,  22),  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  If  thou  say  in  thy  heart.  How  sliall  we 
know  the  word  which  the  Lord  hath  not  sj)oken  ?  When  a  prophet  speaketh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  if  the  tl dug  follow  not,  nor  come  to  pass,  thai  is  the  ihing  ichich  the  Lord  hath 
not  spoken,  but  the  projihet  hath  spoken  it  presumptuously."  (8)  In  not  considering 
how  they  themselves  constantly  violate  such  a  rule  when  referring  to  Christ,  their  view 
of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  claiming  that  the  things  believed  by  them  were  predicted  and  thus 
realized.  A  writer  in  the  Princeton  Review,  Jan.,  1861,  on  "  The  Fulfilment  of  Prophecy," 
opposes  the  notion  of  conditionality  on  the  ground  that  (1)  it  is  opposed  to  the  inspired 
criterion,  Deut.  18  :  22  ;  (2)  Jeremiah  18  :  7-10  did  not  nullify  this  test,  as  appears  Jer. 
28  :  9  ;  (3)  the  specific  nature  of  jDrophecy  demands  it  ;  (4)  Nineveh  no  objection,  for,  as 
Hengstenberg  observes,  we  have  onl}'^  the  general  statement  of  the  preaching,  and  not  the 
preaching  itself.     Comp,  p.  12,  Lange's  Com.  on  Hosea. 

Ohs.  3.  In  Yievv  of  the  important  bearing  that  this  j^oint  has  upon  sev- 
eral subjects  connected  with  the  Kingdom,  it  may  prove  desirable  to  an- 
swer, briefly,  a  few  of  tiie  more  generally  used  objections  urged  against  our 
position.  Fairbairn  (avoiding  the  extremes  of  many  writers,  and  more  or 
less  favoring  a  due  medium)  says  (p.  GO,  On  Proph.)  :  "The  announce- 
ments, consisting  of  direct  promises  of  good  things  to  come,  can  only  be 
expected  to  meet  with  fulfilment  in  so  far  as  the  church  is  true  to  her 
calling."  This  is  only  a  half-truth  ;  the  promises  of  future  good  will  be 
fulfilled,  notwithstanding  the  church's  failings,  for  this  God  expressly 
declares  (Lev.  26  :  44,  45,  Lev.  5  :  42,  Isa.  62,  Ezek.  14  :  22,  23,  and  in 
numerous  passages),  not  indeed  in  the  unfaithful,  but  only  (and  here  is  the 
condition)  in  the  faithful.  The  objection  stops  short  at  this  half  truth, 
forgetting  to  add  (which  makes  it  unconditional,  i.e.  not  de])enclent  on 
man)  that  God  will  secure  the  faithful  in  whoui  the  promise,  to  its  full- 
est extent,  will  be  realized. 

To  indicate  the  correctness  of  our  position,  reference  is  made  to  Fairbairn' s  conces- 
sion {On  Proph.,  p.  62),  when  he  tells  us  that  the  rule  applied  to  good  things  does  not 
hold  good  when  evil  is  threatened,  for  the  latter  is  unconditional.  But  this  is  a  distinc- 
tion without  any  difference  ;  for  if  the  blessing  can  be  forfeited  by  evil  doing,  then  also 
the  punishment  can  be  averted  by  repentance  and  well  doing.  The  truth  appears  to  be 
this  :  they  are  conditional  as  to  individuals,  who,  according  to  their  action,  will  be  blessed 
or  punished  ;  and  they  are  at  the  same  time  unconditional  so  far  an  the  purjjose  of  God  is 
concerned,  which  is  to  fulfil  His  i^romises  to  the  good  and  His  threats  to  the  evil,  i.e. 
the  promises  and  threats  both  will  inevitably  be  verified  in  actual  realization.  This  also 
covers  the  leading  objection  urged  by  Olshausen  {Com.  Matt.  24)  :  "  Everything  future,  as 
far  as  it  concerns  man,  can  only  be  regarded  as  conditional  upon  the  use  of  this  free- 
dom." This  is  most  certainly  true,  but  only  to  a  certain  extent,  so  far  as  the  individual 
personally  is  concerned,  and  does  not  affect  the  prediction  or  promise  itself  which  is 
based  on  two  things  :  (1)  God's  purpose,  and  (2)  those  will  be  raised  up  in  whom  it  will  be 
carried  out.  So  far  as  we  are  personally  concerned  it  is  conditional,  for  we  can  choose, 
etc.,  but  in  reference  to  man  even  it  is  unconditional  on  the  ground  that  it  is  based  on 
the  foreknown  fact  that  some  men  would  experience  it.  This  really  is,  after  all,  both 
Olshausen's  and  Fairbairn' s  view,  although  advantage  is  taken  by  others  to  press  their 
language  beyond  their  intention.  Thus,  to  illustrate,  an  inheritance  is  predicted  and 
promised  to  the  saints.  The  saints  are  conditioned  (i.e.  they  must  possess  the  required 
characteristics  conditioned),  but  not  the  predicted  inheritance,  which  will  most  assuredly 
be  given  to  those  (others,  if  necessary)  for  whom  it  is  intended.  The  future  things, 
therefore,  in  themselves  are  not  conditioned,  only  our  personal  relationship  to  the  same. 


PkOP.  18.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  179 

The  promise  and  the  threat  both  remain  on  the  same  footing,  seeing  that  both  will  be 
experienced  by  some.  Even  when  the  individual  is  specifically  mentioned  or  hinted  at 
(as  e.g.  Paul,  Judas,  Peter,  John  the  Baptist),  the  foreknowledge  of  God  embraces  the 
fact  that  the  person  designated  will,  with  use  of  freedom,  perform  or  experience  M'hat  is 
predicted.  Matt.  19:  28  is  no  exception,  seeing  that  Judas  (who  proved  unfaithful)  is 
carefully  excluded  by  the  expression  :  "Ye  which  have  followed  me." 

Ohs.  4.  The  Kingdom  itself  is  not  dependent  on  the  acceptance  or  re- 
jection of  its  doctrine  by  man.  Man's  entrance  into  and  enjoyment  of  it 
is  conditioned  on  his  character,  hut  the  Kingdom  itself  will  most  certainly, 
at  the  appointed  time,  appear.  It  belongs  to  Jesus  the  Christ  ;  it  is  His  in- 
heritance, the  result  and  product  of  Eternal  Wisdom  in  behalf  of  man  and 
the  world.  Jews  may  reject  it  (some  Jews  also,  Knapp's  TheoL,  \i.  324, 
reject  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  and  account  for  the  non-appearance  of  the  Mes- 
siah and  Kingdom  on  the  ground  of  the  conditionality  of  the  promises — 
sinfulness  preventing  their  realization),  Gentiles  may  pass  it  by  as  unwor- 
thy of  credence,  men  may  even  ridicule  it  as  fantastical,  etc.,  but  its  estab- 
lishment is  so  certain,  that  if  absolute  necessity  required  it,  God  would, 
rather  than  failure  should  intervene,  raise  up  children  for  it  by  an  imme- 
diate (Matt.  3  :  9),  supernatural  creation.  We  hold  that  (Rom.  11  :  29) 
^' the  gifts  a7id  calling  of  God  are  ivithout  repentance,'^''  i.e.  God  changes 
not  ;  man  may  change,  but  God's  purposes  to  bestow  gifts  upon  man 
through  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Kingdom  shall  never  fail,  for  (Xumb. 
23  :  19)  "  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie  j  neither  the  Son  of  man  that 
He  should  rej^eut ;  hath  He  not  said,  and  shall  He  not  do  it?  or  hath  He 
siioTcen  and  shall  He  not  make  it  good?''  (Comp.  Zecli.  1:5,  6  ;  Isa. 
14  :  24,  27  ;  Ezek.  24  :  14  ;  1  Sam.  15  :  29  ;  Isa.  46  :  9,  10  ;  Ps.  89  :  35, 
36  ;  Isa.  48  :  3-6  ;  Tit.  1:2;  Heb.  6  :  18  ;  Jam.  1  :  17,  etc.)  Hence  two 
extremes  are  to  be  avoided  :  one  is  to  press  the  conditional  side  so  far  as  to 
involve  no  settled  purpose  in  God  concerning  Redemption  ;  the  other,  to 
urge  the  unconditional  aspect  until  it  gives  hope  where  none  exists. 

Let  the  reader  carefully  observe  this  fact,  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  itself  is  not  con- 
ditioned, because  the  promises  pertain,  in  inheriting  it,  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  for  if 
the  natural  seed  at  any  time  makes  itself  unworthy  of  it,  a  seed,  engrafted,  will  be 
raised  up  unto  Abraham.  The  promises  of  God  fail  not  because  of  the  unworthiness  of 
any  to  whom  they  are  tendered.  He  will  provide,  as  will  be  abundantly  shown  hereaf- 
ter, the  requisite  regal  body  by  which  the  Kingdom  shall  be  powerfully  and  triumph- 
antly manifested.  The  inheriting,  and  not  the  Kingdom,  is  conditioned.  In  this  con- 
nection, to  avoid  mistake,  another  feature  must  be  constantly  kept  in  view,  viz. :  that  the 
Kingdom  is  intimately  and  essentially  connected  with  ihe  Jewish  Commonicealih,  that  it  is 
the  Theocratic  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  restored  under  the  mighty  Theocratic  Per- 
sonage Jesus  Christ,  and  that  hence  (1)  all  inheritors  must  he  engrafted,  and  (2)  the  Jewish 
nation  itself  must  wevitahly  be  restored  to  its  land.  This  at  once  indicates  the  logical 
and  scriptural  position  of  the  early  church,  which  insisted  that  the  prophecies  pertaining 
to  the  Jewish  nation,  whilst  conditional  as  to  individuals,  and  to  the  nation  for  a  certain 
determined  period,  would  finally  be  realized  as  given.  Therefore,  one  of  the  essential 
elements  of  prophetical  interpretation  is  this  :  to  observe  that  the  prophecies  relating  to 
the  future  glory  of  the  Jewish  nation— indeed  postponed  on  account  of  sinfulness— are 
not  conditional,  but  present  us  an  ultimate  purpose,  which  shall  be  verified  in  its  actual 
history. 

Attention  is  thus  early  in  the  argument  called  to  this  feature,  that  the  student  may 
keep  it  before  him  as  we  proceed  in  the  development  of  scriptural  facts  and  statements. 
The  importance  of  this  is  not  overestimated,  seeing  that  neglect  of  these  cautions  has 
embarrassed  and  vitiated  the  interpretation  of  much  Scripture.  Two  illustrations  may 
suffice  :  Dr.  Alexander,  Com.  on  Isa.,  following  others  in  elucidating  the  predictions 
pertaining  to  the  Jewish  nation,  is  very  careful  to  show  how  the  curses  were  fulfilled  in 
the  history  of  that  nation,  but  with  equal  care  bestows  the  blessings  promised  to  ihe  iden- 


180  THE  THEOCRATIC  KI^STGDOM.  [PrOP.  18. 

ileal  nation — to  tiie  cliurcli.  The  Christian  church  is  substitidediov  the  Jewish  nation,  and 
prophecy  is  lavishly  accommodated  to  the  substitution.  Thus  e.g.  one  of  the  strongest 
efforts  in  this  direction  is  found  in  the  comments  of  Isa.  63,  but  he  overlooks  the  entire 
connection — who  is  pleading,  whose  cities  are  wasted,  who  is  to  be  restored  to  the  land, 
the  reference  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  day  of  vengeance  and  year  of  Jubilee,  in  which  de- 
liverance to  a  down-trodden  people  is  given.  As  this  passage  will  be  considered  at  length 
hereafter,  it  is  passed  by  with  the  remark  that  all  such  interpretations  assume  as  their 
foundation  that  the  promises  to  the  Jewish  nation  are  conditional,  and  the  nation  failing 
in  meeting  the  conditions,  it  will  never  be  restored,  and  it  will  never  realize  the  fulfil- 
ment. But  strange,  it  is  still  supposed  that  the  promises  themselves  remain  intact  when 
appropriated  to  the  church,  provided  some  incongruities  are  let  alone,  such  as  the  prom- 
ises of  the  return  of  material  prosperity  to  a  down-trodden  land,  etc.,  which  is  to  be 
siDiritualized.  Waggoner  {Ref.  of  the  Age  to  Come,  p.  74)  plainly  says  under  the  heading, 
"  The  conditional  nature  of  the  promises  made  to  the  Jews  :"  "  It  may  be  remarked  that 
all  of  God's  promises  to  man  are  conditional.  To  deny  this  is  to  advocate  Universalism, 
and  even  to  deny  Free  A^gency,"  etc.,  quoting  in  proof  of  such  conditionalityEx.  19:  5-8, 
and  then  argues  that  the  Jews  being  disobedient,  not  complying  with  imi3osed  condi- 
tions, the  promises  of  God  will  ever  remain  unfulfilled.  This  is  taking  a  one-sided  view 
of  the  case  ;  it  is  true  to  a  certain  extent  and  within  a  given  time,  but  idierly  untrue  in 
so  far  as  it  implicates  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  promises  ultimately  to  the  nation.  For 
the  promises  of  God,  given  with  the  foreknown  knowledge  of  the  defection  of  the  nation 
and  its  resultant  rejection  during  "  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles,"  are  based  on  and  con- 
firmed by  the  oath  of  God  (Ps.  89,  etc.).  As  already  shown,  the  Divine  Purposes  are  not 
limited  by  what  man  does.  Thus  e.g.  in  reference  to  the  Kingdom,  with  which  the  Jew- 
ish nation  is  allied,  and  in  which  the  nation  is  promised  a  pre-eminent  commanding 
position,  the  promise  is  most  specific  ;  and  hence,  no  matter  how  many  reject  the  con- 
ditions, or  how  the  nation  must  suft'er  a  prolonged  punishment  for  sin,  a  sufficient  num- 
ber will  be  gathered  out  of  the  obedient  who  will  form  its  ruling  force,  and  the  nation 
itself  will,  as  also  promised,  be  brought  to  repentance  and  faith,  resulting  in  its  glory  as 
predicted.  We  must  leave  the  discussion  of  the  restoration  to  Props.  122,  123,  and  124. 
It  may,  however,  be  added  :  if  the  Kingdom  and  the  promises  pertaining  thereto  de- 
pend merely  upon  the  reception  or  rejection  of  the  truth  by  the  Jewish  nation,  how  are 
God's  promises  to  be  verified  to  the  believing  portion  of  the  nation  and  to  that  engrafted 
line  ?  If  the  fulfilment  is  conditioned  by  the  disobedience  of  the  unfaithful  portion,  are 
the  pious  Jews  to  miss  the  promises  of  the  Kingdom  on  account  of  the  wickedness  of 
others  ?  Are  the  promises  given  to  David  made  null  and  void  ?  This  opens  an  abyss 
for  our  opponents.  At  present,  it  may  only  be  said  that  such  a  course  would  neither 
he  just  to  man  nor  honorable  to  the  oath-hound  promises  of  God.  Therefore,  the  Bible 
teaches  us  that  God,  foreseeing  this  defection  of  the  large  portion  of  the  nation,  postpones 
this  Kingdom,  both  as  a  punishment  to  the  nation  and  as  a  merciful  provision,  that  He 
may  gather  out  from  among  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  the  people  necessary  for  its  re-estab- 
lishment upon  a  glorious  and  triumphant  basis.  The  truth  is,  that  this  whole  matter 
rests  on  the  question  whether  the  covenants  which  declare  this  Kingdom  to  pertain  to 
the  Jewish  nation  are  temporary  or  not.  This  will  be  discussed  in  its  jDroper  place,  and 
then  the  reader  will  be  prepared  to  decide  whether  the  Jewish  nation  is  entitled  to  any 
special  privileges  in  virtue  of  its  covenant  relationship.  Some  writers  cannot,  and  do 
not,  distinguish  between  the  Mosaic  covenant  and  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic,  placing 
all  in  the  same  category.  Hence  a  confusion,  and  worse,  a  corresponding  restricted  in- 
terj)retation,  which  quotes  prophecy  just  as  it  can  accommodate  it  to  the  church. 


Prop.  19.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  181 


Proposition  19.  The  Neio  Testament  hegim  the  announcement  of 
the  hingdom  in  terms  exjpressive  of  its  heing  lyrevioiisly  ivell 
hioivn. 

This  is  an  important  feature.  Any  theory  at  variance  with  this 
fact  is,  to  say  the  least,  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  defective. 
The  statement  in  the  Proposition  is  one  tliat  has  been  noticed  and 
duly  acknowledged  by  numerous  writers  of  almost  every  shade  of 
opinion.  The  preaching  of  the  kingdom,  its  simple  announcement, 
without  the  least  attempt  to  explain  its  meaning  or  nature,  the 
very  language  in  which  it  was  conveyed  to  the  Jews — all  presuj)- 
posed  that  it  was  a  subject  familiar  to  them.  John  the  Baptist, 
Jesus,  and  the  Seventy,  all  proclaimed  the  kingdom  in  a  way, 
without  definition  or  explanation,  that  indicated  that  their  hearers 
were  acquainted  with  its  meaning. 

Ohs.  1.  On  the  face  of  the  opening  images  of  the  New  Test,  it  is  taken 
for  granted  that  the  Kingdom  was  something  zvell  hiotvn,  already  the  ob- 
ject of  faith  and  hope.  Theologians  generally,  either  unable  to  reconcile 
this  with  their  church  theories,  or  deeming  it  unimportant  while  acknowl- 
edging the  fact,  pass  it  by  in  silence,  or  give  us  some  apologetics  to  ac- 
count for  it,  vdiich  are  derogatory  to  the  age,  to  the  believers  then  living, 
and  to  the  Word.  The  destructive  critics,  seeing  here  a  point  of  leverage, 
insist  upon  it  that  this  was  evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  "  Jewish  forms,"' 
and  scoff  at  it  as  a  decided  indication  of  weakness  and  failure.  By  us — for 
we  make  no  apology,  needing  none — it  is  regarded  as  prerequisite  and 
essential  to  the  truthfulness  and  unity  of  our  doctrine. 

Ohs.  2.  The  feature  in  the  Prop,  is  aii  indispensaUe  accessory.  With- 
out it,  there  would  be  a  flaw,  a  missing  link  in  the  chain  ;  with  it  there  is 
completeness  ; — for  if  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  understood  in  its  literal  cove- 
nanted aspects  as  predicted  by  the  prophets,  then  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
New  Test,  consistently  announces  the  same.  If  the  Kingdom,  however,  is 
what  the  multitude  now  believe  and  teach,  the^i  the  announcement  is  sin- 
gular, strained,  and  even  inconsistent  with  the  circumstances  of  the  age, 
the  true  meaning  of  the  Kingdom,  the  preaching  presented,  and  the  alleged 
substitution.  Nothing,  if  the  latter  is  correct,  in  the  shape  of  apologetics 
can  save  it  from  the  condemnation  and  jeers  of  unbelievers,  for,  at  the 
most,  it  would  be  a  mere  humiliating  accommodation  to  Jewish  prejudice 
and  ignorance.     There  is  no  escape  from  this  dilemma. 

We  are  willing  to  accept  of  the  strictures  passed  on  this  feature  of  the  New  Test, 
(viz.:  its  accommodation  to  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Old  Test.)  by  Strauss,  Baur, 
Renan,  etc.,  and  instead  of  seeking  out  so7ne  way  of  escape  which  in  itself  lowers  the 
truth  and  the  character  of  God  in  giving  such  a  sense,  find  in  them  (avoiding  their  unjust 


182  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [Pp.OP.  19. 

conclusions)  renewed  sirength  and  power.  As  the  objections  of  unbelief  will  hereafter  be 
met  in  detail,  it  is  sufficient,  for  the  present,  to  say  that  Von  Amnion  {Bib.  TheoL),  and 
after  him  manj'  others,  throw  doubt  on  the  credibility  of  the  Scrii^tures  on  the  ground 
that  the  New  Test,  in  the  very  outset  indicates  that  John  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  and  the 
disciples  w^ere  susceptible  to  the  errors  and  prejudices  of  their  Jewish  forerunners  and 
hearers,  and  that  consequently,  instead  of  there  being  one  great  design  relating  to  the 
future  as  attributed  to  them,  we  have,  in  view  of  the  subsequent  change  in  the  meaning  of 
the  Kingdom  (i.e.  in  the  discarding  of  the  strictly  grammatical  sense  and  the  substitution 
of  a  spiritual  sense),  only  detached,  isolated  positions,  lacking  cohesion  and  unity. 
Sherer  {Mis.  of  Relig.  Crit.)  takes  the  same  view,  objecting  to  the  authority  of  the  New 
Test.,  because  it  thus  evinces  the  influence  of  Jewish  traditions,  Rabbinical  arguments, 
Messianic  hoj)es  and  expectations  not  in  accordance  with  external  facts.  Numerous  tes- 
timonies of  a  similar  nature  might  be  adduced  from  recent  writers  ;  these,  avoiding 
their  deductions,  we  will  accept,  and  show,  step  by  step,  in  a  logical,  scriptural  man- 
ner, (1)  how  they  take  the  unreal  nature  of  the  exj)ected  and  preached  Messianic  King- 
dom/o?^  granted,  and  (2)  how  every  writer  unjustly  overlooks  the  expressly  j^'i'^dided  post- 
ponement of  the  realization  of  those  Messianic  hopes,  and  from  such  a  cleliberate  ignor- 
ing of  a  scriptural  fact  draws  inferences  to  suit  his  own  fancy  and  theory, 

Ohs.  3.  To  impress  this  point,  let  us  place  ourselves  in  tlie  position  oc- 
cupied by  the  first  hearers  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom."  Consider 
that  the  Old  Test,  is  alone  in  our  hands,  and  that  the  plain  grammatical 
sense  is  the  one  in  which  we  receive  the  predictions  of  the  Kingdom.  Sup- 
pose, under  such  circumstances,  we  would  have  heard  John,  Jesus,  and 
the  disciples  preach  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  manner  indicated,  what 
would  have  been  the  impressions  made  upon  our  minds  ?  Certainly,  among 
other  things,  that  we  already  kneiu  what  the  Kingdom  was,  viz. :  the  The- 
ocracy as  it  existed  previously,  permanently  united  with  the  Davidic  throne 
and  kingdom.  The  preaching,  let  us  not  forget,  directly  appeals  to  a  ivell- 
Tcnown  kingdom,  and  surely  we,  too,  would  have,  under  its  influence,  im- 
bibed the  very  vieius  of  the  Kingdom,  which  the  mass  of  the  church  now 
regards  as  a  Jewish  weakness,  a  lack  of  discernment,  in  the  early  history 
of  this  subject.  But  the  question,  which  but  few  ever  consider,  is, 
whether,  after  all,  this  tuas  an  error.  The  answer  will  follow,  in  detail, 
with  proof  attached. 

Obs.  4.  If  the  Kingciom,  as  multitudes  maintain,  was  not  thus  known  ; 
if  it  is  correct  to  assert  that  the  Jews  and  the  disciples  at  first  utterly 
misapprehended  its  meaning  ;  if  the  announcement  denoted  one  thing  to 
the  hearers  and  yet  contained  in  itself  a  spiritual  idea  which  the  future 
was  to  develop — how  comes  it,  then,  that  Christ  could  send  out  disciples  to 
preach  the  Kinydom.  without  previous  instruction  as  to  its  real  meaning  ; 
and  even  invite  strangers  (Luke  9  :  56,  57,  60)  to  "6^o  and  preach  the 
Kingdom  of  God.^'  Why  does  not  John  and  the  disciples  first  receive  pre- 
liminary counsel,  so  that,  themselves  freed  from  alleged  error,  they  may 
properly  teach  others  respecting  the  Kingdom  ?  It  can  be  safely  asserted 
(the  proof  following,  as  the  argument  is  continued)  that  it  is  a  well-grounded 
belief  that  the  Kingdom  was  something  that  they  were  acquainted  with, 
and  concerning  which,  as  to  its  nature  or  meaning,  they  needed  not,  owing 
to  its  plain  portrayal  in  the  Old  Test.,  any  special  instruction.  No  other 
explanation  will  cover  the  facts  in  the  case,  or  sustain  the  character  and 
position  of  the  first  preachers  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom.^'' 


PkOP.  20.]  THE  TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  183 


Proposition  20.  To  comprehend  the  subject  of  the  Mngdom,  it  is 
necessary  to  notice  the  belief  and  the  expectations  of  the  more 
pious  portion  of  the  Jexos. 

This  is  a  rule,  covering  doctrine,  laid  down  by  the  ablest  of 
writers  ;  it  is  found  in  works  introductory  to  the  Bible  or  in  de- 
fence of  the  Scriptures  {e.g.^  Home's  Introduction^  vol.  i.,  p. 
393,  Birk's  Bible  and  Modern  Thought^  ch.  12,  Dunn's  How 
to  Study  the  Bible^  etc.),  as  a  leading  one  in  the  doctrinal  inter- 
pretation of  the  Word  ;  its  importance  and  value  are  urged  by 
various  considerations  as  the  only  possible  way  to  attain  to  a  con- 
sistent sense  of  a  doctrine.  If  the  rule  applies  to  doctrine  in  gen- 
eral, especially  ought  it  to  be  observed  in  that  of  the  kingdom. 

Modern  systems  of  theology  are  erected  in  such  an  elaborate  and  systematic  mode,  a 
scientific  and  philosophical  manner,  that  they  are  widely  different  from  the  simple  and 
unscientific  —yet  purposely  designed — treatment  of  doctrine  in  the  Bible.  The  effect 
sometimes  is,  that  the  student,  attracted  by  the  elegance  and  magnitude  of  the  super- 
structure of  such  systems,  underrates  the  more  rugged  but  firmer  stones  of  the  founda- 
tion in  the  Scriptures.  Impressed  by  modern  modes  of  thinking  and  the  results  of 
modern  thought,  he  forgets  to  transport  himself  back  to  the  ancient  manner  of  thinking 
and  expression.  He  lives  in  a  world  very  different  from  that  which  existed  when 
prophets  predicted  and  disciples  preached.  This  naturally  leads  to  misconception  and 
misinterpretation  of  the  Scriptures.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  rule  (which  Home,  in  Inirod., 
justly  remarks,  is  constantly  violated  by  commentators  and  others)  ajDpropriately  com- 
mends itself  :  "  We  must  endeavor  to  carry  ourselves  back  to  the  very  times  and  places 
in  M'hich  they  (the  Scrij)tures)  were  written,  and  realize  the  ideas  and  modes  of  thinking 
of  the  sacred  writers." 

Obs.  1.  It  is  universally  admitted  by  writers  of  prominence  (e.g.  Nean- 
der,  Hagenbach,  Scliaff,  Kurtz,  etc.),  whatever  their  respective  views  con- 
cerning the  Kingdom  itself,  that  the  Jews,  including  the  pious,  held  to  a 
personal  coming  of  the  Messiah,  the  literal  restoration  of  the  Davidic 
throne  and  kingdom,  the  personal  reign  of  Messiah  on  DavicVs  throne,  the 
resultant  exaltation  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  fulfilment 
of  the  Millennial  descriptions  in  that  reign.  It  is  also  acknowledged  that 
the  utterances  of  Luke  1  :  71  ;  Acts  1:6;  Luke  2  :  26,  30,  etc.,  include 
the  ahove  helief,  and  that  down,  at  least  to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  Jews, 
the  disciples,  and  even  the  apostles  Ae/cZ  to  such  a  view.  It  is  not  denied,  by 
able  Protestant  or  Romanist,  Christian  or  Unbeliever,  that  they  regarded 
the  prophecies  and  covenanted  promises  as  literal  (i.e.  in  their  naked 
grammatical  sense)  ;  and,  believing  in  their  fulfilment,  looked /or  such  a 
restoratio7i  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  with  an  increased 
power  and  glory  befitting  the  majesty  of  the  predicted  King  ;  and  also 
that  the  pious  of  former  ages  would  "be  raised  tip  from  the  dead  to  enjoy 
the  same. 


184  THE   THEOCRATIC   KI^N-GDOM.  [PeOP.  20. 

Ohs.  2.  It  is  noticeable,  that  in  all  the  rebukes  given  to  the  Jews  by 
John  the  Baptist,  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles,  not  one  refers  to  their  belief 
and  expectations  concerning  the  Kingdom.  The  rebukes  pertain  to  their 
superstition,  traditions,  bigotry,  liypocrisy,  pride,  ostentation,  violation 
of  duty,  etc.,  but  nothing  is  alleged  that  they  mimppvehended  the  King- 
dom of  the  prophets  in  its  fundamental  aspects.  This  is  indeed  abun- 
dantly taken /or  grantedhy  theologians,  but  without  the  least  proof  to  sus- 
tain it.  The  student  will  see,  as  the  argument  proceeds,  that  such  sup- 
posed ignorance  would  reflect  severely  upon  the  covenants,  prophecies,  and 
preaching  of  the  first  preachers  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom." 

Ohs.  3.  A  few  brief  testimonies  are  annexed  :  Van  Oosterzee  (Tlieol. 
Neiu  Test.,  p.  53-55),  alluding  to  the  belief  of  the  Jews,  informs  us  that 
they  held  to  Messiah's  coming  in  a  time  of  tribulation  (which  the  New 
Test,  confirms  at  the  Sec.  Advent),  when  Antichrist  was  reigning,  and 
which  would  result  in  a  great  battle  (so  also  Rev.  19,  etc.)  with  hostile 
world  powers.  The  Christ  will  be  a  descendant  of  David's,  ^\\\\  be 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  set  up  his  Kingdom  in  Israel,  will  remove 
evil  and  suffering,  will  introduce  peace  and  blessedness,  perform  great 
miracles,  awake  first  the  pious  dead  Israelites,  triumph  over  the  heathen, 
and  allow  also  non-Israelite  nations  to  enjoy  salvation.  He  then  adds  : 
"  Of  this  Salvation,  Jerusalem  will  he  the  centre ;  the  j^urified  earth,  the 
theatre;  and  the  restoration  of  all  tftings,  the  crown.'"  Reuss  [His.  Ch. 
Theol.,  p.  115),  under  the  title"  "  Messianic  hopes,"  says  :  "  The  object  of 
Christ's  coming  may  be  stated  in  general  terms  to  be  the  foundation  of 
the  Kingdom  of  God."  ''  There  was  needed,  first,  a  politiccd,  moral,  and 
religious  restoration  of  Israel,  such  as  the  ancient  prophets  had  foretold," 
including  "  the  recall  of  the  dispersed  Jews,"  and  "  tlie  rc-estaUishment 
of  the  throne  of  David."  Schmid  {Bib.  Theol.  N.  Test.)  declares  that  the 
Jewish  faith  embraced  the  idea  of  "  «  Kingdom  of  kings  and  priests  ;  in- 
deed of  a  Theocracy  binder  a  monarchical  form,^^ — ''  a)i  ideally  reed  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom  of  the  Messiah.^' 

Knapp  {Ch.  Theol.,  p.  323)  has  a  singular  statement.  First,  lie  acknowledges  that 
"  the  ancient  opinion"  of  the  Jews  was  that  "  He  (Christ)  would  be  a  temporal  deliverer 
and  a  king  of  the  Jews,  and  indeed  a  universal  monarch,  who  would  reign  over  all  nations. 
Thus  they  interpreted  Ps.  2:2,  6,  8  ;  Jer.  23  :  5,  6  ;  Zech.  9  :  4,  seq."  Secondly,  he 
confesses:  ''The  apostles  themselves  held  this  opinion  ^irUll  after  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  Matt.  20  :  20,  21  ;  Luke  24  :  21  ;  Acts  1  :  6."  Thirdly,  he  endeavors,  as  a  sup- 
I)ort  to  his  own  theory  of  the  Kingdom,  to  make  out  that  a  small  number,  instancing 
Simeon  and  the  malefactor  on  the  cross,  did  not  so  much  expect  an  earthly  kingdom  as 
spiritual  blessings.  Fourthly,  he  makes  out  that  many  united  the  idea  of  an  earthly  king- 
dom and  spiritual  blessings.  His  concessions  are  all  that  we  need  ;  the  effort  to  intro- 
duce the  modern  spiritualistic  view  in  the  case  of  Simeon  and  the  malefactor  fails — (1) 
because  all  Jews  believed  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  covenant  and  prophecy  ;  and 
(2)  because  otherwise  he  makes  these  two  to  take  a  higher  rank  in  the  true  knowledge  of 
the  Kingdom  than  the  apostles  (comp.  above  his  concession),  who  were  specially  in- 
structed in  and  preached  the  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  4.  Some  writers  (as  e.g.  Thompson,  Theol.  of  Christ,  p.  33)  take 
the  unwarranted  liberty  of  assuming,  that  at  the  First  Advent  the  Jews 
(Nicodemus  is  instanced)  believed  themselves  to  be  "  already  in  the  King- 
dom of  God  by  virtue  of  their  birth  in  the  lineage  of  Abraham,"  and 
therefore  only  "  looked  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  for  a  higher  assertion 
of  that  Kingdom."     This  is  misleading.     Where  is  the  slightest  proof  for 


Prop.  20.]  the  theocratic  kingdo:^!.  185 

so  sweeping  an  assertion  ?  All  testimony  is  opposed  to  it.  Instead  of  the 
Jews  believing  themselves  to  le  in  the  Kingdom,  they  were  looking  for 
it  to  come.  In  the  very  natnre  of  the  case,  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  since 
all  the  prophets  foretold  its  doionfall,  and  its  re-establishment  under  the 
Messiah.  While  holding  that  their  relationship  to  Abraham  w^ould  give 
them  admittance  therein  when  it  arrived,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that 
a  single  /ew  believed  himself  to  be  "  alreadij  in''  the  Kingdom.  On  the 
other  hand,  we  have  the  most  abundant  testimony  to  the  contrary  in  Jew- 
ish faith,  Jewish  tradition,  and  the  intimations  of  their  belief  in  the  New 
Test.  Xicodemus,  thus  singled  out  and  a  foreign  faith  thrust  upon  him, 
v,^as  a  Pharisee,  and  the  Pharisees  (Luke  17  :  20),  instead  of  holding  that 
the  Kingdom  w^as  already  here  and  that  they  were  in  it,  demanded  of 
Christ  "  ivlien  the  Kingdom  of  God  shoxdd  come.''' 

As  intimated  under  Obs.  3,  some  writers  endeavor  to  smooth  over  tliis  Jewish  faith  as 
much  as  possible.  Knapp  has  been  instanced.  Another  specimen  in  the  same  direction  is 
to  be  found  under  Sec.  99,  1  (4),  in  his  CVi.  Theol,  where  he  tells  us  that  some  of  the  Jews 
gave  to  the  Kingdom  "  a  moral  and  spiritual  sense,  denoting  and  comprehending  all  the 
divine  appointments  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  men,  for  their  happiness  in  this  and  the 
future  life,"  etc.  The  truth  is,  that  this  is  taking  a  modern  spiritualistic  conception  of 
the  Kingdom  and  fastening  it  upon  the  Jews,  who  never  thus  entertained  it.  Knapp 
gives  no  proof  for  his  assertions,  and  they  are  not  susceptible  of  any.  All  Jev%s  held  to 
the  Messiah's  Kingdom  in  the  same  way,  viz.  :  as  the  re-establishment  of  the  Theocracy, 
allied  with  the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom,  and  whilst  some  laid  more  stress  on  the 
temporal  advantages  and  blessings  resulting  therefrom,  others  united  with  those  the 
highest  spiritual  and  moral  happiness.  The  student,  at  the  vestibule  of  our  argument, 
cannot  be  too  cautious  in  receiving  such  statements  unguardedly  made  by  good  men. 
Attention  is  thus  called  to  them,  since  they  have  an  important  bearing  in  shaping  the 
interpretation  of  Scripture.  Farrar  {Lfe  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  105),  admitting  that  the 
phrases  "Kingdom  of  heaven"  and  "  coming  time"  "  were  frequent  at  this  time  on  pious 
lips,"  adds  :  "  It  seems  clear  that  Ewald,  Hilgenfeld,  Keim  (as  against  Volkmar,  etc.), 
are  right  in  believing  that  there  was  at  this  time  (at  the  First  Advent)  a  fully  developed 
Messianic  tradition."  Aside  from  the  direct  arguments  adduced  in  favor  of  such  a  view, 
the  manner  in  which  the  New  Test,  begins  (Prop.  19)  is  amply  sufficient  to  prove  it. 
Hence  we  deprecate  such  misleading  statements  as  the  following:  Walker  {I'ltilos.  of 
the  Plan  of  ISalv.,  p.  128),  after  referring  to  the  views  of  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ's 
appearance  (viz.  :  that  they  believed  that  the  Messiah  "  would  deliver  them  from  subjec- 
tion to  Gentile  nations  and  place  the  Jewish  power  in  the  ascendant  among  the  nations 
of  the  earth,"  etc.),  says  :  "  Although  some  of  the  common  people  may  have  had  some 
understanding  of  the  true  nature  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  yet  the  prominent  men  of 
the  nation,  and  the  great  body  of  the  people  of  all  classes,  were  not  expecting  that  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ  would  be  inirely  spiritual,  but  that  it  would  be  mainly  temporal." 
Now  where  is  a  particle  of  evidence  that  any  Jew— much  less  "  some"— had  the  slightest 
idea  of  a  "  purely  spiritual  "  Kingdom.  If  it  existed,  the  favorers  of  such  a  spiritual 
ideal  would  only  be  too  happy  to  produce  it  as  favoring  their  own  view.  They,  by  such 
efforts  to  link  their  modern  conceptions  of  the  Kingdom  with  some  unknown  Jews,  only 
increase  the  difficulties  of  their  view,  for  they  make  these  unknown  persons /or  superior  to 
the  twelve,  who,  although  enjoying  special  teaching  and  revelation,  and  actual  preachers  of 
the  Kingdom,  entertained  (e.g.  Acts  1  :  6)  the  Jewish  view  down  to  the  ascension  of  Jesus. 

Obs.  5.  If,  in  support  of  our  Prop.,  Jews  were  selected,  who  are  not  ap- 
provingly mentioned  in  the  New  Test.,  it  might  be  alleged  that  they 
misconceived  the  truth.  It  is  proper,  therefore,  to  confine  ourselves  to  such 
as  are  evidently  spoken  of  with  divine  approbation  ;  who  were  under  the 
divine  guidance,  and  whose  statements  remain  uncontradicted.  Being 
pious,  accredited  believers,  their  testimony,  whatever  it  may  be,  should 
have  considerable  weight,  and  be  received  as  reliable.  In  confirmation  of 
our  position,  we  appeal  to  the  expressed  views  of  Elizabeth  and  Zacharias, 
of  Mary  and  Joseph. 


186  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  20. 

Let  this  be  amplified.  Take  Elizabetli  and  Zacharias,  who  were  "  righteous"  and 
"  blameless,"  and  the  phraseology  of  both  fully  accords  with  the  idea  of  the  literal  King- 
dom believed  in  by  the  Jews.  When  e.g.  appealing  to  the  prophets  as  predicting  a  horn 
of  salvation  in  the  house  of  David  to  save  the  nation  from  its  enemies,  to  perform  the 
covenant  made  with  Abraham,  etc.,  what  was  their  understanding  of  this  matter  ?  Cer- 
tainly an  implicit  trust  through  the  Spirit,  that  all  that  the  prophets  jjredicted  would  be 
verified— not  something  else,  but  the  real  predicted  subject  matter  conveyed  by  their  ex- 
jjressions,  received  in  strict  usage  with  the  common  laws  of  language.  That  is,  they  un- 
derstood the  prophecies  in  their  j^^ciin  grammaiical  sense,  and  thus  trusted  in  a  literal, 
earthly  kingdom  to  be  erected.  The  proof  that  they  did  so  is  very  evident  in  the  his- 
tory of  their  son  John  the  Baptist.  The  son  could  not  receive,  being  instructed  by 
them,  any  other  idea  of  the  Kingdom  than  they  themselves  possessed.  Now  it  happens 
that  the  very  writers  who  so  significantly  laud  and  magnify  "  the  enlightened  piety"  of 
Elizabeth  and  Zacharias,  and  endeavor  to  engraft  upon  their  language  modernized  notions 
respecting  the  Kingdom,  all,  without  exception,  estimate  John's  knowledge  of  the  King- 
dom as  very  "  limited  and  Jewish."  Well  may  we  ask.  How  comes  it,  if  the  parents  were 
so  enlightened  that  the  son,  specicdJy  consecrated,  etc.,  failed  in  obtaining  the  same  views  ? 
The  simple  fact  is,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom  in  both  parents  and  son  did  not 
materially  differ  from  that  entertained  by  Nathanael,  Nicodemus,  or  the  Jews  generally. 
Next,  take  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  from  the  announcement  of  the  angel  down  to  the  very 
last — just  like  the  apostles  Acts  1  :  G— they  believed  literally  (what  has  since  become  so 
unfashionable,  and  is  stigmatized  even  by  pious  men  as  a  mere  "Jewish  form"  or 
"  husk")  that  "  the  Lord  God  icill  give  unto  Him  the  throne  of  His  father  David,  and  He 
shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever,"  etc.  Why  they  thus  believed,  and  whether 
they  were  correct  in  it,  will  be  apparent  when  we  come  to  consider  the  covenants  and 
promises.  The  comments  of  men  that  these  Jews  were  miserably  mistaken  and  self-de- 
ceived are  far-fetched  and  derogatory  to  the  W^ord  ;  and  if  they  onlj^  came  from  unbeliev- 
ers it  might  be  safely  passed  by  ;  but  coming  also,  as  they  do,  from  able  advocates  and 
defenders  of  Christianity,  it  is  depressing  to  the  truth.  It  gives  a  deplorable  cast  to  the 
age  and  to  the  Scriptures,  which,  on  their  face,  encouraged  such  faith  and  expectations. 
It  ignores  the  express  declarations  that  some  of  these  Jews  (as  e.g.  John  the  Baptist) 
were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  when  they  held  to  this  faith,  and  boastingly  asserts  the 
modern  supremacy  over  these  "  ignorant"  Jews.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  deeply  feel  that 
respect  for  the  Messiah-announcing  angel,  due  regard  for  the  utterances  of  the  Spirit,  a 
proper  estimation  of  the  character  of  those  ancients,  require  us  to  insist  that  these  Jews 
loell  knew  what  their  own  language  indicated,  and  that  they  were  not  deceived  in  its 
application.  Consequently  we  object  to  the  statements  made  by  the  writer  of  the  Art. 
"  Kingdom  of  God"  (M"Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclo2).)  :  "  In  these  (prophetic)  passages 
the  reign  of  the  Messiah  is  figuratively  described  as  a  golden  age,  when  the  true  religion, 
and  with  it  the  Jewish  Theocracy,  should  be  re-established  in  more  than  pristine  purity, 
and  universal  peace  and  happiness  prevail.  All  this  was  doubtless  to  be  understood  in 
a  spiritual  sense;  and  so  the  devout  Jews  of  our  Saviour's  time  appear  to  have  under- 
stood it,  as  Zacharias,  Simeon,  Anna,  and  Joseph."  Afterward  he  confesses  that  "this 
Jewish  temporal  sense  appears  to  have  been  also  held  by  the  apostles  before  the  day  of 
Pentecost."  Observe  :  (1)  The  confusing  of  "  figurative"  with  "spiritual  ;"  (2)  that' the 
apostles  not  holding  to  this  spiritual  conception  before  the  day  of  Pentecost  were  not 
"  devout  Jews  ;"  (3)  that  it  is  admitted  that  the  langage  predicts  a  Jewish  Theocracy, 
true  religion,  peace,  and  happiness,  but  this,  grammatically  taught,  is  to  be  spiritualized  ; 
(4)  that  the  four  persons  named  thus  spiritualized  it  (!),  having  higher  spiritual  attain- 
ments than  the  Twelve — at  least,  being  more  "  devout." 

Obs.  6.  A  large  class,  to  make  the  ancient  Jewish  faith  unreliable  and 
inapplicable,  fully  admit  the  same,  but  then  gravely  misjudge  the  belief 
by  pointing  to  the  result,  i.e.  the  non-realization  oi  their  faith,  as  evidence 
that  the  Jews  were  mistaken  and  wholly  ignorant  of  the  true  idea  of  the 
Kingdom.  No  such  Kingdom  as  they  anticipated  was  raised  up  under 
the  Messiah,  and,  therefore,  this  evidences  either  the  human  origin  of  their 
faith,  or  else  that  the  language  must  in  some  way  be  susceptible  of  a 
meaning  different  from  that  contained  in  its  legitimate  grammatical  sense, 
which  they,  in  their  ignorance,  could  not  understand.  But  the  question 
is,  were  they  mistalcen^     This  is  too  much  taken /or  granted,  and  upon  its 


Prop.  20.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  187 

a$sumj)tion  a  huge  superstructure  arises.  Briefly  and  anticipating! j  :  the 
non-fulfilment  thus  far  is  no  evidence  against  the  faith,  for  there  are  valid 
and  satisfactory  reasons  given  in  the  New  Test,  why  it  should  not  down  to 
the  present  time  be  realized.  This  is  far  from  saying  that  it  never  will  he 
attained.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  ahideth  forever, ^^  and  every  ^^  jot  and 
tittle'^  will  be  fulfilled  in  God's  own  time  and  way.  This  is  simply  pre- 
judging the  case  from  unreliable  data — a  jumping  to  conclusions  from 
false  premises.  The  reader  may,  prematurely  in  our  argument,  endeavor 
to  decide  hoiv  it  comes  then  that  this  Jewish  faith,  if  so  erroneous  and 
shown  to  be  void  by  what  actually  occurred  under  the  Messiah,  still  con- 
tinued generally,  almost  universally,  in  the  Primitive  Church  for  three 
centuries. 

Ols.  7.  Another  large  class,  agreeing  with  the  former  in  the  result,  in- 
form us  that  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  Jewish  Messianic  Kingdom  expecta- 
tions, indicates  a  Jewish  misapprehension  of  Scripture  language  ;  and  that 
hence,  however  the  grammatical  construction  may  demand  it,  the  lan- 
guage, covenant  and  prophetical,  expressive  of  such  a  faith  must  be  inter- 
preted to  correspond  with  the  result  thus  far  attained.  The  non-fulfil- 
ment becomes  both  the  rejecter  of  the  ancient  faith  and  the  apologist  for 
applying  a  spiritualistic  interpretation.  It  is  assumed  that  tlie  prophecies 
relied  on  by  the  Jews  to  sustain  their  faith  must  mean  something  very 
different  from  its  natural  meaning — in  brief,  words,  phrases,  and  sentences 
that  had  a  definite  meaning  for  centuries  are,  under  the  impulse  of  this 
misconception  of  the  actual  facts  in  the  case,  transmuted  into  something 
else  to  suit  existing  circumstances.  This,  too,  is  represented  as  faith  in 
the  Word — a  reception  of  its  divine  teachings  with  implicit  confidence. 
Need  we  be  surprised  at  infidelity  exulting  in  the  gross  confusion  thus 
occasioned,  and  the  more  gross  by  implicating  as  utterly  unreliable  repre- 
sentative men,  men  of  faith  in  the  ancient  church. 

The  question  returns,  "Were  the  Jews  really  mistaken  and  is  any  one  authorized  to 
engraft  another  and  diverse  meaning  upon  the  prophecies  which  excited  their  faith,  in 
order  that  the  language  may  be  reconciled  with  a  certain  siipposed  result  ?  The  sim- 
ple, sad  fact  is  this  :  in  this  whole  matter  the  Word  of  God  is  unfairly  handled  by  the 
multitude.  According  to  their  notion  of  the  church  as  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom, 
both  the  primitive  and  Jewish  faith  must  be  discarded,  and  the  predictions  of  the  Word 
oniist  be  made  to  accommodate  themselves  to  this  Church-Kingdom  theory.  The  true  and 
honorable  method  is  the  following  :  If  the  events  did  not  take  j)lace,  and  have  not  yet 
occurred  as  predicted  and  believed  in  by  these  ancient  worthies  (i.e.,  as  far  as  relates^  to 
the  Kingdom),  it  ought  to  suggest  the  inquiry,  Why  have  they  not  been  realized  ?  and  iheii 
receiving  the  plain  reasons  presented  in  tlie  Word  why  they  have  been  withholden,  deeply 
ponder  them,  and  allow  them  the  ^ceight  that  divine  teaching  possesses.  It  is  premature 
to  assume,  without  mature  examination,  the  foregone  conclusion  that  they  will  never  be 
verified  in  the  believed-in  grammatical  sense,  and  thus  bring  reproach  on  the  Scriptures 
containing  and  leading  to  such  a  sense  ;  thus  heap  discredit  on  the  belief  of  those 
ancient  saints,  making  them  misguided  and  ignorant  Jews  ;  thus  hold  uj)  to  scorn  the 
faith  of  the  Primitive  Church,  regarding  it  as  mistaken  in  the  leading  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom  ;  and  then,  as  a  resort  against  infidelity,  search  for  some  accommodation  theory  to 
shelter  those  believers  and  the  Scriptures.  How  can  it  be  shown,  with  the  reasons  be- 
fore us  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  that  God  will  not,  as  predicted, 
ultimately  perform  this  glorious  work?  Instead  of  spiritualizing  the  language  of  the 
Word  away  into  vagueness  ;  instead  of  decrying  the  hopes  of  the  pious  of  former  ages 
(with  well-intentioned  motives  and  feelings),  would  it  not  be  better  to  look  at  the  most 
solemnly  given  assurances,  coming  from  the  Christ  Himself,  that  these  things  are  pur- 
posely postponed  ?  Some  preliminaries  miist  first  be  logically  passed  over  before  we  are 
fully  prepared  to  discuss  this  postponement  ;  if  the  student  will  patiently  follow  our 


188  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  20. 

steps  he  will  be  enabled  to  appreciate  the  irres'istlhle  force  of  the  reasons  assigned— rea- 
sons which  for  several  centuries  influenced  and  pervaded  the  Christian  Church, 

Obs.  8.  The  Apologetics  of  the  Church  makes  too  many  concessions  to 
unbelievers  respecting  the  Jewish  and  Primitive  faith,  and,  alas,  too  many- 
sneers — according  well  with  the  ridicule'  of  infidelity — are  cast  at  their 
"low,"  ^' grovelling,"  "carnal"  views  of  the  Kingdom.  Gentiles,  in 
their  self -approbation  of  position  and  favor,  forget  the  caution  given  by 
Paul  in  Rom.  11  :  20. 

Would  it  not  be  well  to  reflect  over  that  which  Peter  tells  us  (1  Pet.  1  :  10-12),  and 
not  hastily  accuse  those  to  whom  things  were  revealed,  and  to  whom  the  proclamation 
of  the  Kingdom  was  intrusted,  as  knowing  nothing  of  the  true  nature  of  the  Kingdom 
and  its  resultant  salvation.  We,  having  the  advantage  of  additional  revelations  and 
fulfilment,  know  indeed  more  respecting  the  method  of  God's  procedure,  the  duration 
of  the  postponement,  the  manner  in  which  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  manifested,  the  events 
which  are  to  precede  and  accompany  it  ;  but  they,  as  well  as  we  now  can,  knew  the 
main,  leading  predictions  concerning  the  Kingdom,  correctly  apprehended  the  great 
outlines,  perfectly  comprehended  its  nature  and  relationship)  to  Christ— for  all  these 
loere  •plainly  given  in  the  Scriptures,  connected  with  covenanted  promises  and  con- 
firmed by  oath.  The  difficulties  of  distinguishing  between  the  First  and  Sec.  Advents 
(which  many  eminent  men  now  experience  in  appropriating  proi:)hecies  to  the  First  that 
only  pertain  to  the  Second),  a  smitten  and  triumphant  Saviour,  a  crucified  and  exalted 
King,  etc.,  did  not,  by  any  means,  efface  a  scri^Dtural  view  of  the  Kingdom  itself.  This 
is  already  shown  by  the  preceding  Proposition  ;  for,  if  otherwise,  then  no  satisfactory 
reason  can  be  assigned  for  the  extraordinary  manner  in  which  the  New  Test,  opens, 
taking,  as  it  does,  a  previous  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom  for  granted.  If  they  did  make 
a  mistake  in  their  absorbing  contemplation  of  the  glorious  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  so 
as  to  overlook  the  antecedent  humiliation,  suffering,  and  death  of  the  King,  let  not 
the  man  accuse  them  of  ignorance  concerning  the  Kingdom,  which  led  to  such  a  re- 
strainment  of  prediction,  v/hen  he  to-day  reverses  their  conduct  by  confining  himself 
so  much  to  the  sacrifice  that  he  overlooks  the  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  9.  The  force  of  Prop.  16,  begins  to  appear.  The  knowledge  that 
we  have  of  this  Kingdom  is  invariably  attributed  to  the  Old  Test.  Jewish 
and  Primitive  belief — over  against  the  modern  notion  which  would  only 
find  it  in  the  N"ew  Test,  and  then  hy  inference — based  itself  upon  what  the 
Old  Test,  declared  concerning  it.  This  fact  meets  us  at  the  very  begin- 
ning of  the  Grospels,  and  comes  to  us  directly  in  the  early  preaching  of 
"  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom."  What  Kingdom  is  taken  for  granted  as 
known  ?  Evidently  the  one  predicted  in  the  older  Scriptures,  and  hence, 
without  an  investigation  of  the  Old  Test.,  from  wiience  the  Jews  and  the 
first  Christians  obtained  their  views  and  expectations,  it  is  simply  im- 
possible to  obtain  a  correct  idea  of  the  Kingdom.  The  Xew  Test, 
begins  with  the  conviction  that  the  source  of  all  true  knowledge  concern- 
ing it  is  to  be  found  in  the  Word  of  God  previously  given.  ^  And  this  in- 
formation imparted  is  not  merely  elementary  in  the  sense  that  it  is  to  be 
superseded  by  something  else,  for,  as  we  shall  show,  it  is  so  encompassed 
by  covenant  and  prophecy,  s.o  imbedded  in  the  Divine  Purpose  as  unfolded 
and  attested  to  hy  oath,  that  it  becomes  and  ever  remains  unchangecibly 
essential  and  fundamental  in  its  nature.  God  will  not,  cannot  produce  a 
faith  by  the  unvarnished  grammatical  sense  of  His  Word,  existing  for  many 
centuries,  and  then  supersede  it  by  another  through  men  engrafting  a 
different  meaning  upon  the  identical  Scriptures  which  led  to  the  former. 
Multitudes,  indeed,  dream  that  this  actually  takes  place,  but  it  is  a  vain, 
idle  vision,  productive  of  vast  injury  to  the  truth. 


Prop.  20.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  189 

•  One  of  the  greatest  marks  of  declension  in  Churcli  Theology  was  the  neglect  that 
the  Old  Test,  received  in  certain  ages,  and  one  of  the  most  recent  signs  of  imj)rove- 
ment  is  the  great  attention  which  it  now  receives  from  many  able  writers  in  Europe  and 
this  country.  This  was  brought  about,  in  a  great  measure,  by  the  severe  attack  of 
Rationalists,  etc.,  ujDon  that  portion  of  Holy  Writ.  Whatever  may  have  originated  the 
valuable  contributions,  especiallj^  by  German  theologians,  in  this  direction,  it  is  now 
fully  conceded  that  without  the  Old  it  is  impossible  to  properly  comprehend  the  New, 
and  that  both  are  indispensable  to  preserve  a  unity  in  the  Divine  Purj^ose.  It  is 
suitable  to  add,  that  this  is  specially  and  pre-eminently  true  of  the  leading  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom. 

Ohs.  10.  The  belief  in  this  Kingdom  had  a  preservative  inflnence  upon 
the  Jewish  nation.  For,  inspired  by  the  hopes  set  forth  in  projihecy,  it 
preserved  even  under  the  most  adverse  circumstances  a  tenacious  trust 
which  largely  contributed  in  keeping  them  from  the  enervating  influences 
and  the  idolatry  of  Asiatic  nations.  It  kept  them  also,  as  Mill  observes 
{Rej^f. Gov.,  p.  41),  from  "  being  stationary  like  other  Asiatics."  The  hope 
of  the  future,  as  prophetically  allied  with  the  nation,  served  as  a  bond  of 
union,  imparted  patience  under  trial,  and  kept  them  separate  and  distinct 
among  other  nations. 


190  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  21. 


Proposition   21.     The  Prophecies  of  the  Kingdom^  interpreted 
liteixdly,  sustain  the  expectations  and  hopes  of  the  pious  Jews. 

This  is  universally  admitted,  even  by  tliose  who  contend  that  the 
same  prophecies  are  susceptible  of  a  different  interi)retation.  The 
plain  literal  sense  expressly  teaches  wliat  the  Jews  anticipated  ; 
and  no  autlior  has  yet  arisen  who  has  dared  to  assert  that  the 
grammatical  construction  of  the  Old  Testament  language,  received 
according  to  the  usual  laws,  does  not  convey  the  meaning  found 
therein  of  a  literal  restoration  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and 
kingdom  as  exj^ected  by  the  believing  Israelites.  Even  after  the 
attempted  undue  advantage  taken  of  this  circumstance  by  unbe- 
lieving writers,  and  after  Apologists  have  informed  us  that  this 
naked  sense  is  only  "  the  husk"  to  be  discarded,  no  one  has 
attempted  to  call  the  fact  of  such  an  existing  sense  into  question. 

Believers,  infidels,  and  semi-infidels  teach  this  fact  ;  every  author  and  commentator 
consulted,  every  Life  of  Christ,  every  Introd.  to  the  Bible,  etc.,  fully  admits  it.  With 
infidels  it  is  a  standing  joke  that  the  prophets  predicted  such  a  Kingdom.  Thus  e.g. 
Eenan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  86)  calls  it  "  a  gigantic  dream  for  centuries,"  and  "  they 
dreamed  of  the  restoration  of  the  house  of  David,  the  reconciliation  of  the  two  fragments 
of  the  people,  and  the  triumph  of  the  Theocracy,"  etc.  "  They  dreamed  of  the  Messiah 
as  judge  and  avenger  of  the  nations,"  of  "  a  renewal  of  all  things."  In  view  of  this,  he 
informs  us  (p.  266)  that  "  the  first  Christian  generation  lived  entirely  ujjon  expectations 
and  dreams,"  and  that  it  required  "  more  than  a  centurj^"  for  the  church  to  disengage 
itself  from  such  "  dreams,"  which,  however  (p.  251),  were  more  or  less  held,  although 
but  "  a  fantastic  Kingdom  of  God, "  etc.  All  that  our  argument  at  present  requires  is 
simply  to  direct  attention  to  the  concession,  however  scornfully  piit,  or  however  at- 
tempted to  be  weakened  by  accommodation,  that  the  Jewish  and  Primitive  faith  is  based 
on  an  acknoidedged  grammatical  sense.  We  are  not  concerned  at  the  protest,  that  if  the 
covenant  and  prophecies  are  thus  understood,  then  there  is  presented  "  an  ideal  Jewish 
King,"  "  languid  dreams,"  "  impracticable  pedantries,"  "  carnality,"  etc.  The  conces- 
sion is  all  that  is  required  at  this  stage  of  the  argument,  forming  a  necessary  and  important 
link,  for  it  evinces  a  correspondence  existing  between  the  Word  and  the  early  belief. 

Ohs.  1.  Here,  then,  is  something  that  all,  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  frankly 
admit,  however  some  may  afterward  attempt  to  break  its  force  and  con- 
tinued application.  Let  the  reader  keep  this  point  in  \iew  :  here  is  a  sense 
(let  it  bo  despised  and  rejected)  that  all  acknowledge  does  exist ;  and  this 
sense,  thus  contained  in  the  Word  and  for  many  centuries  received  by  the 
pious,  is  tlie  one  that  we  receive,  until  it  is  proven  that  there  is  a  command 
or  revelation  from  God  to  set  it  aside,  or  until  it  is  shown  that  it  is  in 
direct  conflict  with  Revelation  itself.  We  have  by  its  adoption  (Prop.  4)  a 
sure  foundation  for  interpretation,  based  on  a  sense  which  all  are  forced, 
willingly  or  unwillingly,  to  concede  is  found  in  the  Scriptures  ;  and  one, 
too,  which,  with  a  proper  theory  of  the  divine  and  inspired,  cannot  be 
easily  discarded  without  doing  violence  to  the  Word  and  to  the  wisdom  of 


PllOP.  21.]  THE   TlIEOCPwATIC    KINGDOM.  191 

God  in  bestowing  it.     This   sense  ohviously  contained  in  the  Scriptures 
formed  the  scriptiirally  derived  basis  of  the  Jewish  hopes. 

Having  this  allowed  sense — i.e.  the  grammatical — one  that  the  words  naturally  con- 
tain, the  student  is  placed  on  ground,  acknowledged  to  pertain  to  Scripture,  by  which 
he  can  test  other  alleged  senses,  varied  in  form,  that  others  engraft  upon  it.  H  the  care- 
ful reader  finds  that  this  literal  sense  produces  a  harmonious  whole,  an  unbroken  unity  in 
the  Divine  Purpose  (the  great  test  after  all),  he  surely  is  authorized,  in  confirmation  of 
faith,  to  receive  and  treasure  it  as  a  most  precious  guide. 

Obs.  2.  Two  chisses  array  themselves  against  this  obvious,  admitted 
sense  entertained  for  centuries.  The  one  party,  enemies  of  the  revealed 
truth,  honestly  accept  of  it  as  existing,  but  discard  it  on  the  ground  of  its 
conveying  human,  not  divine,  notions  and  expectations.  The  other  class, 
friends  of  the  truth,  also  find  and  admit  this  sense,  but  believing  it  to  be 
"  gross  and  carnal,"  endeavor  to  adapt  its  language  to  their  own  ideas  of 
the  fitness  of  things,  and  hence  attach  to  it  anot]iei%  distinct,  sepcirate  sense 
(some  even  adding  two  or  more),  which,  rejecting  the  grammatical,  we  are 
to  receive  as  the  true  intended  one. 

May  it  be  allowed,  without  reflecting  upon  any  writer,  to  say,  that  siich  an  Origen- 
istic  appliance  of  language  which  casts  us  loose  from  a  sense  actually  contained  in  the  in- 
spired Eecord,  is  taking  dangerous  and  undue  liberty  with  the  Word  of  God.  Look  at  its 
sad  results  in  the  overwhelming  mass  of  mystical  interpretation  which  a  taxed  ingenuity 
and  an  apparently  profound  learning  have  heaped  upon  the  Scriptures,  rejecting  the 
visible,  outward  Kingdom  taught  by  the  prophecies  and  substituting  for  it  the  vaguest  of 
explanations,  and  making  it  appear  that  God  said  one  thing  but  meant  quite  another ;  the 
Jews,  John  the  Baptist,  the  disciples,  being  deceived  by  what  was  said,  not  being  able  to 
comprehend  the  sinritual  and  mystical  interpretation  that  afterward  such  men  as  Origen, 
Jerome,  Augustine,  and  others  bestowed  upon  the  grammatical  sense.  If  we  reject  this 
one  fully  acknowledged  sense,  who  can  prove  to  us  that  any  other  of  the  conflicting 
senses,  added  by  men  afterward,  is  inspired,  is  truly  the  Word  of  God?  What  guide  have 
we  then— man's  added  sense,  or  the  one  given  by  God?  Thus  e.g.  if  David's  throne  and 
kingdom  is  not  David's  throne  and  kingdom  as  the  words  indicate,  and  as  fondly  believed 
in  for  centuries,  but  is,  as  men  in  their  wisdom  afterward  developed,  the  Father's  throne 
in  heaven  and  the  Father's  Kingdom  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  how  then  can  we  reconcile  it 
with  God's  own  assurances  of  veracity,  desire  to  instruct,  undeviating  truthfulness,  etc., 
that  He  would  clothe  His  own  gracious  and  merciful  words  in  a  dress  calculated  to  deceive, 
and  which  did  beguile  the  Jews  and  Primitive  Christians,  His  children,  into  a  false  faith 
and  hope.  No  !  never,  never  can  we  receive  any  theory,  however  plausibly  and  learnedly 
presented,  which  thus  reflects  on  God's  goodness,  makes  Him  virtually  a  party  to  gross  de- 
ception, and  which  degrades  the  intelligence  and  piety  of  former  saints.  Who  can  cen- 
sure us  for  believing  in  a  sense  so  generally  admitted  as  given  by  God  Himself,  placing 
ourselves  where  prophets,  pious  Jews,  and  the  early  Christians  stood  ?  Having  thus  in 
the  outset  a  vantage  ground,  needing  not  to  prove  what  multitudes  already  concede,  let 
us  lay  aside  our  "  worldly  wisdom,"  and  in  a  childlike  dispostion  for  instruction,  fol- 
low this  grammatical  interjDretation,  carefiilly  gathering  up  the  detached  portions,  and  see 
where  it  will  lead  lis.  It  will  reveal  a  strangeness  most  surprising,  a  sublimity  most  in- 
spiring, and  a  beauty  most  delightful,  in  God's  work. 

Obs.  3.  In  view  of  the  faith  of  the  Jews,  and  from  whence  derived,  it 
may  well  be  asked  :  Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  God  would  give  utter- 
ances by  His  prophets  respecting  a  Kingdom,  which,  taken  in  their  usual 
literal  sense  (making  due  allowance  for  the  usage  of  figures  common  to  all 
languages),  positively  denote  the  re-estaUishnent,  in  a  most  glorious  form 
under  a  Son  of  David's,  of  David's  cast-down  throne  and  'kingdom,  etc., 
and  yet  that  all  these  assurances  must  be  taken  in  a  different  sense? 
Men,  eminent  for  ability  and  piety,  tell  us  that  such  a  transformation  is 
demanded.     They  may,   under  the    specious  garb  of  "  a  higher   sense" 


192  THE   THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  21. 

honestly  tliink  to  elevate  our  notions  of  the  predictions,  but  in  reality  it 
is  a  lowering  of  the  sense  actually  contained  in  the  Word  ;  for  attributing 
to  it  (through  human  authority)  another  sense,  it  virtually  assumes  the 
position  that  Holy  AYrit  contains  language  and  ideas  that  cannot  be  main- 
tained ;  that  God,  foreknowing  the  result,  intentionally  conveyed  one 
meaning  whilst  (like  the  Delphic  oracle)  another  was  intended. 

Let  the  careful  stiiclent,  at  the  threshold  of  our  subject,  reflect  whether  such  a  dis- 
crei3ancy  is  not  sufficient  of  itself  to  cause  a  thorough  reinvestigation  of  this  matter.  If 
the  Kingdom  is  not  such  as  these  Jews  held  it  to  be,  who  is  justly  chargeable  with  their 
error,  if  it  be  not  the  great  Author  of  those  prophecies  ?  Every  reflection  cast  uj^on  the 
Jewish  faith  in  this  direction  in  fact  recoils  back  upon  the  Giver  of  the  predictions, 
seeing  that  on  their  surface  is  the  meaning  which  led  to  the  universal  belief.  Now  in  all 
honesty,  every  believer,  desirous  to  vindicate  both  the  Scriptures  and  the  Author  of 
them,  must  turn  away  from  theories  which  necessarily  reflect  upon  the  Bible,  its 
Author,  and  the  hopes  excited  by  its  plain  grammatical  sense.  In  the  following  pages 
it  will  be  shown  at  length,  every  step  supported  by  Scripture,  that  God  gave  the  prophe- 
cies as  truth,  couched  in  truthful  language  in  their  grammatical  sense  ;  that  all,  as  loriiten, 
will  yet  be  fulfilled  ;  and  that  the  hopes  of  His  people,  excited  and  fostered  by  the  ex- 
press language,  will  not,  as  multitudes  hold,  be  disappointed.  We  may  hesitate  to  adopt, 
under  all  circumstances,  the  bold  expression  of  Pascal  :  "  God  owes  it  to  mankind  not  to 
lead  them  into  error  ;"  for  God,  in  the  provisions  made  and  m  the  truth  given,  does  not 
encroach  upon  an  element  of  liberty,  freedom  of  choice,  in  human  destiny  from  which 
may  arise  error  and  even  crime  (by  perversion,  etc.),  as  the  painful  history  of  Christianit}'' 
and  the  world  attests.  While  this  may  be  viewed  as  permissive  and  in  accord  with 
moral  freedom,  yet  Pascal  is  correct  if  the  language  is  applied  to  a  revelation  given  by 
God.  His  language,  or  the  ideas  conveyed  by  the  same,  involve  the  God  directly,  person- 
ally, and,  therefore  we  cannot,  dare  not,  believe  that  He  will  give  a  revelation  that  will, 
if  the  grammatical  sense  is  received,  lead  into  error. 

Obs.  4.  As  intimated  under  i3revious  Props,  and  above  (Obs.  2),  this 
grammatical  sense  thus  received  and  introduced  into  the  New  Test,  with- 
out any  declaration  of  a  change,  is  seized  by  unbelief  as  evidence  of  the 
non-inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.  Thus  e.g.  Morgan  (Moral  Pliilosoplier) 
finds,  what  Baur  and  others  have  developed,  decided  indications  that  por- 
tions of  tlie  New  Test,  contain  a  deposit  of  Jetuish- Messianic  ideas,  ob- 
tained through  adhesion  to  the  plain  sense  of  the  Old  Test.  The  Swiss 
Eationalists  (Hurst's  His.  Rational.,  p.  436)  declare  on  this  ground  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  the  Messiah  foretold  by  the  Prophets  and  preached  by 
the  Apostles,  simply  because  He  did  not  establish  the  Kingdom  as  plainly 
predicted,  etc.  They,  and  others,  insist  that  a  fatal  discrepancy  exists 
which  is  not  removed  by  the  Christ  and  the  spiritual  Kingdom  created  by 
theologians.  We  acknowledge,  as  essential,  this  "  Jewish -Messianic"  de- 
posit ;  we  admit  that  under  a  misapprehension  of  the  actual  postponement 
of  the  Kingdom  and  the  still  future  realization  of  those  "Jewish-Mes- 
sianic" predictions,  theologians  have  too  readily  spiritualized  the  proph- 
ecies to  make  them  applicable  to  Christ,  and  to  the  Church  at  present  (and 
thus  make  the  Messiah  and  Kingdom  assume  characteristics  very  different 
to  those  assigned  in  prophecy)  ;  but  we  beg  all  such  to  consider,  what  they 
on  both  sides  carefully  ignore,  the  express  promises  that  all  such  Messianic 
expectations  are  only  to  be  realized  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  verification  of 
them,  owing  to  sinfulness,  ^uas  postponed,  and  the  object  of  following 
Propositions  is  to  bring  forth  this  truth  prominently  as  given  by  Jesus 
Himself. 

Obs.  5.  Men,  in  their  eagerness  to  rid  themselves  of  the  grammatical  sense 
of  the  Old  Test,  prophecies  and  the  consequent  Jewish  belief,  resort  to  the 


Prop.  21.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  193 

most  desperate  arguments  and  reasoning.  Some  of  these  have  already  been 
given  ;  others  will  be  presented  hereafter  ;  one  may  be  appropriately  men- 
tioned in  this  connection.  It  is  said  (and  even  Martensen,  Ch.  Dog.,  p. 
235,  falls  in  with  the  notion)  that  "  the  prophecies  themselves  are  typical." 
This  conveniently  enables  the  student  to  reject  the  literal  sense,  and  en- 
graft upon  it  whatever  he  may  consider  a  suitable  fulfilment  of  the  type. 
It  is  a  dangerous  procedure,  opening  a  wide  door  to  arbitrary  interpretation, 
and  it  is  pointedly  condemned  by  the  rules  (comp.  Introds.  to  the  Bible) 
specifying  and  controlling  types. 

This  assumption  is  a  modern  philosophical  conceit  that  admirably  answers  to  cover 
up  deficiencies  in  making  out  the  (Jhurch-Kingdom  theory— i.e.  it  attempts  to  reconcile 
prophecy  with  an  alleged  fulfilment  in  the  church.  But  it  is  unscriptuval  and  destructive 
to  i^rophecy  ;  it  removes  the  veracity  of  God's  Word  in  its  grammatical  sense  by  leaving 
the  fulfilment  at  the  option  of  the  interpreter  ;  it  weakens  an  appeal  to  prophecy,  under- 
mining its  strength  as  proof.  While  there  are  a  few  prophetical  types  (e.g.  Isa.  22  :  2  ; 
Jer.  13  :  1-7  ;  Jer.  IG  :  2,  etc.),  these  are  but  rare,  exceptional  cases  ;  the  immense  mass 
of  prophec}^  in  no  shape  or  sense,  is  tj'pical,  but  real  descriptions  or  representations  in 
language  of  things  to  come.  Prophecy  is  a  delineation  of  the  future,  and  not  an  adum- 
bration of  a  thing  tyjDified,  not  something  that  in  itself  represents  an  antitype,  excepting 
only  in  so  far  as  language  ordinarily  may  by  us 3  of  figure  or  symbol  rej)resent  the 
future.  Strictly  speaking,  however.  Prophecy  when  employing  symbols  or  figures  of 
speech  is  not  typical  (Comp.  Sec.  3,  Part  2,  Book  2,  Horne\s  Jntrod.),  and  to  make  it 
such  gives  place  to  endless  mystical  exegesis.  Martensen  himself  aftords  an  illustration 
of  the  latter,  when,  in  suj^port  of  the  typical  nature  of  Prophecy,  he  quotes  1  Cor.  13  :  9, 
jn-oi^hecy  being  also  "  in  part,"  overlooking  its  plain  meaning  that  our  present  limited 
knowledge  is  only  compared  by  the  apostle  with  what  it  will  be  hereafter,  there  being  no 
allusion  to  the  characteristics  of  Prophecy.  Having  previously  shown  the  nature  and 
intent  of  Prophecy  (Prop.  17,  etc.)  as  the  grand  guide  into  the  Divine  Purpose,  it  is  un- 
necessary to  repeat. 

Ohs.  6.  It  is  only  when  we  retain  tJie  expressed  sense  of  prophecy  as  held 
by  the  Jews  and  Primitive  Church,  and  as  admitted  to  be  contained  in  it, 
that  one  of  the  offices  of  Prophecy  is  fully  maintained.  Thus  e.g.  Kurtz 
{Sac.  His.,  p.  32)  justly  observes  that  "it  is  the  pre-eminent  design  of 
prophecy  both  to  furnish  the  age  to  which  it  is  given  with  a  knowledge  of 
itself,  that  is,  of  its  position  and  obhgations,  and  also  to  render  the  same 
service  to  every  succeeding  age,  in  so  far  as  its  condition,  wants,  and  obli- 
gations are  similar  to  those  of  the  former."  He  explains  this  by  adding 
tnat  "  Prophecy  designs,  by  means  of  its  divine  knowledge,  to  inform  the 
generation  of  men  to  whom  it  is  given,  respecting  both  their  present  acqui- 
sitions and  also  their  actual  wants,  for  the  purpose  of  guiding  alike  in 
the  right  employment  of  the  former,  and  in  an  earnest  search  after  all  that 
must  yet  be  acquired,  before  their  wants  are  supplied."  Take,  now,  for 
granted  the  supposition  of  the  multitude  that  for  many  centuries  the  Jews 
miserably  misunderstood  the  prophecies,  that  they  had  no  correct  ideas  of 
the  Messiah  or  of  His  Kingdom,  etc.,  and  ivhat  becomes  of  the  instruction 
of  prophecy  to  the  generations  of  men  who  held  to  the  grammatical  sense  ? 
And  if  the  office  of  prophecy  really  was  to  impart  information,  to  give  cer- 
tain knowledge,  to  clearly  indicate  the  present  and  future  state,  how 
could  such  an  office  be  compatible  with  tlie  unjust  inference  now  made  by 
theologians,  viz. :  that  this  information  and  knowledge  was  concealed  in 
an  inner,  hidden  sense,  which  would  require  the  raising  up  of  sucli  men  as 
Origen,  Jerome,  etc.,  to  bring  it  forth  out  of  its  "  hnsk,"  and  that  for 
ages  men,  eminent  for  piety,  must  be  content  with  "  the  outward  shell." 


194  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  21. 

Never  can  we  receive  any  theory  whicli  thus  degrades  "the  light"  that 
God  has  given  ;  and,  briefly,  it  would  be  well  for  us  to  be  guarded,  lest  by 
rejecting  what  all  are  agreed  the  prophecies  really  contain,  we  place  our- 
selves in  the  posture  of,  and  ultimately  receive  the  rebuke  given  to,  the 
disciples  :  ''fools  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  what  the  prophets  had 
spoken''  (Luke  24  :  25). 


Prop.  22.]  tiie  theocratic  kingdo:\i.  195 


Propositiois-  22.  John  the  Baptist^  Jesus,  and  the  disciples,  em- 
ployed the  plircises  "  Kingdom  of  heaven^''  "  Kingdom  of  God^' 
etc.,  in  accordance  loitli  the  usage  of  the  Jews. 

It  is  admitted  by  all  authorities  tliat  tliis  phraseology  was  cur- 
rent among  the  Jews,  and  was  adopted  by  the  first  preachers  of  the 
Kingdom. 

Compare  e.g.  Knapp's  Ch.  Theol.,  p.  323  and  353  ;  Pres.  Edwards's  His.  Bedemp.,  p. 
395  ;  Neander's  Li^e  of  Christ,  also,  His.  Chr.  Ch.,  His.  of  Dogmas,  etc.  Commentaries, 
Apologetical  works,  Dogmatics,  etc.,  distinctly  announce  this  fact.  Parkhurst's  Gr.  Lex. 
refers,  as  all  do,  the  phrases  to  a  derivation  from  Dan.  2  :  44  and  7  :  13,  14.  Meyer  (  Com. 
Matt.  3:2)  says  that  the  Eabbins  often  used  it  (referring  to  Targ,  Mich.  4  :  8,  Wetstein, 
p.  256,  with  which  comp.  the  Mishna)  to  designate  the  Kingdom  of  David's  Son.  But 
we  allow  an  opponent  (already  criticised,  Proj).  20,  Obs.  5,  note)  to  testify.  Art. 
•'  Kingd.  of  God''  (M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.),  which  spiritualizes  these  phrases 
makes  this  frank  confession  :  "  There  is  reason  to  believe  not  only  that  the  expression 
*  Kingdom  of  heaven,'  as  used  in  the  N.  T.,  was  employed  as  synonymous  with  '  King- 
dom of  God,'  as  referred  to  in  the  Old  Test.,  but  that  the  former  expression  had  become 
common  among  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  for  denoting  the  state  of  things  expected  to 
be  brought  in  by  the  Messiah.  The  mere  use  of  the  expression  as  it  first  occurs  in 
Matthew,  uttered  apparently  by  John  the  Baptist  and  our  Lord  Himself,  without  a  note  of 
explanation,  as  if  all  perfectly  understood  what  was  meant  by  it,  seems  alone  conclusive  evidence 
of  this." 

Obs.  1.  The  Prop,  needs  no  proof,  for  the  fact  is  self-evident.  First  is 
to  he  found  the  well-known  expectations  of  the  Jews  based  on  a  literal  in- 
terpretation of  the  prophecies  ;  next,  these  are  summed  up  in  the  expressive 
phrases  "  Kingdom  of  heaven,"  etc.,  taken,  as  numerous  writers  inform  us, 
from  Dan.  7  :  13,  14  ;  tinally,  John,  Jesus,  and  others  take  the  very  phra- 
seology adopted  by  the  Jews  to  designate  a  certain  definite  Kingdom,  and 
use  it  without  the  slightest  intimation  or  explanation  of  a  change  in  its 
meaning  ;  and  this  employment  of  the  phrases,  with  a  correspondent  Jew- 
ish meaning  attached,  continued  (as  admitted  by  our  opponents,  e.g.  Prop. 
20,  Obs.  3,  n.  1)  at  least  down  (Acts  1  :  6)  to  the  ascension  of  Christ. 

Some,  indeed,  tell  us  that  Christ  had  a  different  conception  of  it  ;  but  they  give  us 
no  direct  proof,  but  only  the  most  remote  inferences  of  their  own.  The  Scripture  relied 
upon  for  such  a  view  wall  be  examined  hereafter  in  detail.  At  present  it  is  sufficient  to 
say,  that  even  those  addicted  to  the  theory  that  Jesus  gradually  engrafted  a  new  mean- 
ing, i.e.  spiritual,  upon  the  notion  of  the  Kingdom,  still  frankly  admit  that  Jesus  em- 
l^loyed  the  Jewish  mode  of  expression  (Neander  calls  them  "  Jewish  forms,"  as  e.g.  in 
"  Ser.  on  the  Mt.").  Additional  proof  and  illustrations  will  be  given,  to  save  repetition, 
under  the  Props,  relating  to  the  first  preaching  of  the  Kingdom.  Our  argument  and 
doctrinal  position  demands  that  the  language  of  the  Jews  by  which  their  anticipations 
were  expressed  and  the  language  of  John  and  Jesus  should  happily  correspond.  Explain 
it  as  we  may,  this  certainly  is  tiie  case,  and  thus  far  decidedly  in  our  favor. 

Obs.  2.  Here,  at  the  very  fountain  head,  in  the  presence  and  under  tho 
sanction  of  the  Master  Himself,  there  must  be  no  discrejoancy.     The  fond 


196  THE  THEOCEATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  22. 

hopes  and  tlie  ardent  anticipations,  aroused  by  the  speech  of  the  prophets, 
are  too  dear  to  be  trifled  with,  or  to  be  confirmed  by  a  mere  spirit  of  ac- 
commodation. It  would,  if  the  Jews  were  in  error  on  so  fiindainental  a 
point,  be  simply  cruel  to  adopt  their  expressive  language  and  tlius  confirm 
them  in  an  alleged  blunder,  a  vital  mistake. 

With  due  resjject  and  love  toward  the  eminent  men  who  differ  from  us,  it  can  be  un- 
hesitatingly said,  that  an  error  here,  and  continued  for  several  centuries  in  the  churches 
established  by  the  apostles,  cannot  but  vitiate  the  entire  succession.  A  rule  in  law,  often 
quoted,  holds  good  in  this  place  :  "  Quod  initio  vitiosum  est,  tractu  temporis  convales- 
cere  non  potest,"  or  the  old  adage  is  aj)plicable  :  "As  the  fountain,  so  the  stream."  Men 
tell  us  that  the  phraseology  used,  "  the  Jewish  forms,"  employed,  was  only  "  the  husk  ;'* 
Id  it  he  so,  we  claim  it  to  be  a  God-given  "  husk,"  amply  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  longings 
of  humanity.  No  !  if  these  noble  j^reachers  of  the  Kingdom  are  to  inspire  unshaken 
confidence,  we  must  not,  with  infidels,  acknowledge  that  they  believed  in,  and  pro- 
claimed, "  Jewish  error."  For,  if  this  is  done,  the  fountain  head  itself  is  corrupted, 
and  all  the  sophistical  glosses,  philosophical  conceits,  additional  senses  developed, 
heaped  upon  it  by  way  of  exj)lanation,  extenuation,  or  aj)ology,  cannot  hide  from  cap- 
tious critics  the  ugly  feature — one,  too,  so  glaring  and  wide-reaching  that  no  person, 
addicted  to  reflection,  can  pass  it  by  without  serious  misgivings. 

Obs.  3.  When  significantly  pointing  to  the  fact,  that  the  idea  of  a  King- 
dom of  God  was  familiar  to  every  pious  Jew,  for  which  he  longed,  and 
prayed,  and  waited,  and  that  the  first  preachers  adopted  the  very  language 
in  familiar  use  by  the  Jew  to  signify  his  hope.  Apologists  inform  us  {Bcce 
Deus,  p.  329)  that  ''  Christ  came  to  give  that  conception  a  profounder  in- 
terpretation, and  a  more  intensely  spiritual  bearing,''  that  '"  the  Jew  had 
a  carnal  idea  of  a  spiritual  fact.''  But  where  is  the  yroof  of  this  carnality 
and  substitution  ?  Neander,  and  others,  in  reply,  tell  us,  that  it  is  found 
in  the  higher  spiritual  conception  being  wrought  out  aftei'ward  in  "the 
consciousness  of  the  church."  When,  where,  and  by  what  instrumentali- 
ties, was  this  accomplished  ?  Was  it  done  by  Origen,  or  Jerome,  or  the 
Popes,  or  the  Councils,  or  shall  we  allow  the  "claims  of  Swedenborg  and  a 
host  of  fallible  men  in  this  direction?  Admit  this,  and  we  plunge  our- 
selves into  (Di  ahijss  of  pretensions  and  demands,  exalting  uninspired  men 
above  those  who  were  under  the  special  guidance  of  the  Spirit. 

It  is  impossible,  with  consistency  and  safety,  to  leave  the  original  Record,  and  seek  for 
a  doctrinal  position  is  so  important  a  matter,  derived  from  men  who  lived  after  the  apos- 
tolic period.  If  the  notion  of  a  Kingdom,  such  as  was  afterward  developed  by  the  Alex- 
andrian school,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Gospels,  in  the  opening  of  the  New  Test.,  as 
recent  valuable  works  on  the  Life  of  Christ  frankly  confess,  then  surely  it  is  not  taking 
unwarranted  liberty  to  reject  it  as  unreliable,  contradictory,  and  the  mere  added  opinion 
of  fallible  men. 

Ohs.  4.  In  view  of  this  alleged  change  in  the  meaning  of  the  Kmgaom, 
the  Liberalists,  etc.  (as  e.g.  Johnson's  Orient.  Religs.^  p.  794),  assert, 
that  Christ  proclaimed  a  Kingdom  to  come,  but  "  of  the  institutional 
meaning  of  the  approaching  change,  and  of  the  special  ways  in  which  his 
own  name  would  be  exalted  therein,  his  record  gives  no  sign  that  he  had 
the  least  presentiment."  This  indicates  unfamiliarity  with  the  covenants 
and  the  prophecies,  the  Jewish  faith  and  that  of  the  *Xew  Test.,  for  (1)  it 
was  not  necessary  to  enter  into  any  explanation  concerning  the  nature  of 
tlie  Kingdom,  it  being  something  that  was  well  understood,  as  seen  by  the 
adoption  of  Jewish  language,  etc.  ;  (2)  it  is  utterly  unfair  to  pass  by  the 
Scripture  given  by  Jesus  illustrative  of  the  reasons  luhy  the  Kingdom  was 


Prop.  22.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  197 

not  then  realized  as  anticipated  by  the  Jews  and  disciples  ;  and  (3)  it  is 
nncandid  to  ignore  tlie  exjjress  declaratio?is  (which  will  be  presented  in 
their  place  hereafter)  of  a  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  believed  in  until 
the  allotted  times  of  the  Gentiles  had  expired,  because  of  Christ's  rejec- 
tion by  the  nation. 

The  usual  method  of  dealing  with  Johnson's  objection  is  to  urge  that  the  time  for 
developing  the  true  idea  of  the  Kingdom  had  not  yet  arrived,  and,  therefore,  but  little  is 
said  respecting  it,  because  the  Jews  and  even  the  apostles  themselves  were  (Acts  1  :  6) 
unprepared  for  it.  Thus  e.g.  Schlegel  (P/ii/.  of  His.,  Lee.  10)  fully  admits  the  views  of 
the  Jews  concerning  the  Kingdom  and  apologizes  for  their  opinions  by  saying  :  that  the 
portrait  of  the  Deliverer  was  drawn  by  the  prophets  "  in  such  vivid  colors  in  those  ancient 
prophecies,  that  the  description  might,  in  many  passages  at  least,  be  easily  mistaken  for 
one  of  an  earthly  monarch  ;"  and  adds,  that  the  Jews  were  the  more  excusable  since 
"  all  the  followers  of  our  Saviour  and  His  most  trusty  disciples,  were  at  first  under  the 
same  delusion,"  etc.,  and  finally  explains  these  discrepancies  by  taking  refuge  in  some 
generalities,  especially  that  of  "  a  higher  spiritual  signification"  being  ultimately  at- 
tained. But  what  force  has  such  reasoning  with  the  unbeliever,  which  places  the  Divine 
Teacher,  His  forerunner,  the  disciples,  and  believing  Jews  in  a  most  unenviable  position — 
one  opposed  to  all  our  notions  of  propriety  and  honor?  Let  the  reader  keep  in  view,  as 
additional  reasons  are  presented  in  the  progress  of  our  argument,  the  utter  inability  of 
the  prevailing  view  to  reconcile  this  early  belief  and  usage  of  language  with  its  modern 
transformations  and  substitutions. 

Obs.  5.  The  student  is  directed  to  a  proof  that  this  subject  affords  in  be- 
half of  the  early  origin  of  the  Gospels.  In  looking  at  the  opening  of  the 
New  Test.,  the  subject-matter  of  the  Kingdom,  how  it  was  introduced  and 
retained  its  "  Jewish  forms,"  it  shows  how  unfounded  is  the  view  of  Edel- 
man,  etc.,  that  the  New  Test,  was  written  in  the  time  of  Constantine, 
or  that  of  more  recent  Avriters  who  make  the  Gospels  proceed  from  the 
Alexandrian  school,  or  to  be  an  offshoot  of  the  latter  part  of  the  second,  or 
the  production  of  the  third  century.  The  Alexandrian  school  could  not 
possibly,  with  their  ideas  of  the  Kmgdom,  have  originated  the  Gospels,  and 
this  is  true  of  all  the  later  periods  assigned. 

Thus  e.g.  the  later  origin  of  the  Gospels  is  sufficiently  disproven  by  the  exclusive 
preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jewish  nation  (Comp.  Prop.  54),  Such 
an  idea  of  exclusiveness  could  not,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  have  originated  at  so  late  a 
period  as  that  assigned  by  Strauss,  Baur,  etc.,  it  being  opposed  to  the  actual  condition 
of  things  then  existing.  Sentences  confining  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  only  to  the 
Jewish  nation,  ascribing  salvation  to  the  Jews,  etc.,  could  not  have  been  concocted  at  the 
times  assigned  ;  it  is  opposed  to  the  habits  and  mode  of  thinking  already  introduced. 
Unbelievers  themselves  acknowledge  this,  as  e.g.  the  Duke  of  Somerset  ( C7i.  Theol.  and 
Mod.  Skep.,  ch.  4),  who  refers  to  "  a  Jewish  kingdom  under  a  national  Sovereign,"  as 
clearly  taught,  and  then  gives  us  some  reasoning,  based  on  this  fact,  in  favor  of  the  early 
production  of  the  Gospels.  (1)  He  tells  us  that  the  first  generations  of  Christians  had 
in  many  respects  "  the  distinctive  features  of  Judaism,"  especially  in  their  notion  of 
the  Kingdom.  (2)  That  in  "a  subseqtient  generation"  "  the  whole  character  of  Chris- 
tianity was  already  changed."  (3)  Hence,  "this  chronological  testimony  appears  to  re- 
fate  the  theories  which  ascribe  the  Gospels  to  a  later  period." 


198  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIIN-GDOM.  [PllOP.  23. 


Proposition  23.    Tliere  must  he  some  substantial  reason  %ohy  the 
jplirases  ''^Kingdom  of  GoiV^'  etc.,  were  thus  adopted. 

Amid  the  diverse  and  antagonistic  theories,  the  only  one  that 
rescues  the  Word  from  unjust  suspicions,  that  preserves  the  integ- 
rity of  the  New  Testament  from  entangling  concessions  and 
alliances,  that  honors  the  faith  and  intelligent  piety  of  ancient  be- 
lievers, is  that  which  affirms  tliat  the  truth  itself  was  contained  in 
the  derivation  of  this  phraseology,  in  the  hopes  excited  by  it,  and 
in  the  subsequent  adojDtion  of  it. 

One  party  (e.g.  Apostolic  Fathers,  with  whom  we  agree)  holds,  that  the  adoption  of 
the  Jewish  phraseology  precisely  covered  the  truth,  and  that,  although  not  realized  at 
the  time/or  certain  good  reasons,  it  will  yet  be  verified.  Another  party  (e.g.  Rationalists, 
Ereethin'kers,  etc.)  asserts  that  no  reasonable  excuse  can  be  given  for  the  use  of  such 
language,  and  that  all  the  parties  employing  it  were  under  a  delusion.  Some  (e.g.  Sem- 
ler,  etc. )  explain  it  by  the  accommodation  theory  :  that  John,  Jesus,  and  the  aj)ostles 
accommodated  themselves  to  the  prejudices  and  ignorance  of  the  Jews.  Others  again 
(e.g.  Neander,  etc.)  find  reason  for  its  use  in  the  development  theory,  that  an  outward 
envelopment  of  "  husk"  was  well  adapted  for  future  growth,  the  requisite  preliminary. 
Some  (e.g.  Thompson,  etc.)  suppose  that  a  very  spiritual  conception  was  really  taught 
while  the  old  form  was  only  held  in  phrase.  Others  (e.g.  Barnes,  etc.)  admit  the  diffi- 
culty, but  without  attempting  an  explanation  or  removal  of  it,  confine  themselves  to  the 
new  enlightenment  given  at  the  day  of  Pentecost,  which  they  declare  transmuted  the 
meaning.  Still  others  (e.g.  Renan,  etc.)  declare  that  the  language  was  used  at  first  in 
good  faith  as  the  Jews  themselves  understood  it,  but  that  Jesus,  finding  His  own  hopes 
and  expectations  unrealized  by  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  changed  His  plan  and  a  new 
meaning  was  introduced.  To  indicate  the  extremity  to  which  men  are  often  pushed  in 
the  attempt  to  assign  a  reason,  an  extreme  and  far-fetched  one — proven  mistaken  by  the 
facts— is  that  of  Fleck  {De  Regno  Div.,  noticed  by  Lange,  Com.  Matt.  3  :  1-12),  who  says 
that  Matthew  chose  this  phrase  "  in  order  to  distinguish  the  Christian  Kingdom  of  God 
more  fully  from  the  Jewish  theocracy."     Acts  1  :  6  is  a  sufficient  answer. 

Ods.  1.  The  attacks  of  Rationalistic  criticism  has  induced  the  advocacy, 
by  many,  of  the  accommodation  theory.  This,  however,  is  a  virtual  con- 
cession to  the  force  of  destructive  criticism,  and,  as  such,  is  hailed  as  a 
decided  indication  of  weakness.  It  is  reluctantly  wruns^  from  the  advo- 
cates of  Christianity,  because,  with  their  theories  of  the  Kingdom  of  God, 
with  their  rejection  of  the  Primitive  view,  they  could  not  invent  a  better 
refuge  from  their  assailants.  It  is  but  a  sorry  refuge  in  the  end,  seeing 
that  it  teaches,  when  stripped  of  its  circumlocutoiy  and  apologetic  dress, 
that  the  Jews  held  one  notion  of  the  Kingdom  and  Christ  entertained 
another  ;  and  that  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  who  were  unprepared  through 
prejudice  to  appreciate  the  Kingdom,  Jesus  adopted  their  language,  saying 
0716  tiling^  but  all  the  time  meaning  something  else.  Or,  in  other  words.  He 
taught,  under  a  borrowed  garb,  what  the  language  did  not  and  could  not 
indicate  to  the  Jew,  as  evidenced  in  the  history  of  His  own  disciples,  Acts 
1  :  6.  But  is  such  a  hypothesis,  for  a  moment,  tenable  9  Can  we  enter- 
tain the  idea  that  teachers  of  the  character  and  profession  like  John, 


Prop.  23.1  the  theocratic  kingdom.  199 

Jesus,  and  the  disciples,  would  directly  or  indirectly  connive  at  that  which 
is  false  ?  The  moral  and  divine  position  of  the  persons  makes  the  sup- 
position inadmissible.  If  it  were  allowable  to  do  so  in  reference  to  so  vital 
a  subject  as  the  Kingxlom,  Jioic  can  we  be  sure  that  other  declarations  are 
not  also  an  accommodation  ?  What  criteria  could  be  given  to  distinguish  be- 
tween the  false  and  the  true  ?  Xo  :  such  a  theory,  however  well  intentioned, 
is  a  virtual  lowerin^^  of  the  divine  teaching  of  Jesus,  a  rendering  of  the 
utterances  of  the  first  preachers  an  uncertainty,  and  a  yielding  of  Kevela- 
tion  to  the  sneers  of  unbelief  at  its  lack  of  coherence. 

It  is  the  fashion  of  a  large  class  of  modern  critics  and  historians  (in  otherwise  esti- 
mable writings),  nnable  to  reconcile  the  preaching  of  John,  etc.,  with  their  own  notions 
of  what  the  Kingdom  should  be,  to  inform  ns  that  the  first  preachers  of  the  Gosjjel  of 
the  Kingdom  accommodated  themselves  in  the  doctrinal  exj)osition  of  the  Kingdom  to 
the  prevailing  opinions  and  prejudices  of  the  Jews,  waiting  for  time  and  cautiously 
given  lessons  to  enlighten  them  by  degrees,  etc.  Many  who  censure  Semler  for  pressing 
his  theory  beyond  the  bounds  of  iDroj)riety,  and  have  even  written  against  his  more  gross 
departures  and  denials  of  truth,  do  not  mend  the  matter  when  they  themselves,  on  the 
leading  subject  of  the  Kingdom, /u//y  admii  such  an  accommodation,  on  the  ground  that 
the  Jews  were  not  prepared  for  the  real  truth.  For,  receive  this,  and  then  it  logically  fol- 
lows :  (1)  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples  must  have  taught  error,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the 
outward  form  and  the  Jews  were  concerned  ;  how  else,  unless  in  their  iis}ial  (icceptatiov, 
could  the  Jews  understand  their  words?  (2)  If  the  Jews  misunderstood  Ihem,  }(0W  could 
they  be  held  accountable  for  it,  when  thus  tempted  to  a  misapj)rehension  by  the  ambig- 
iious  use  of  current  language?  (3)  The  pure  character  of  Jesus  is  presented  to  us  in  an 
invidious  and  disrei^utable  light.  So  long  as  the  theory  is  advanced,  so  long  a  dark 
flaw  appears,  and  all  the  apologies  annexed  to  it  cannot  sustain  His  spotless  reputation. 
The  only  accommodation  in  Jesus,  and  from  whence  this  theory  is  inferred,  consisted  in 
His  concealiug,  or  not  avowing,  certain  truths  i)ertaining  to  His  Person  and  the  King- 
dom until  His  disciples  were  better  prepared  for  them,  but  never  did  He  speak  without 
uttering  the  truth  itself,  both  as  to  His  Person  and  the  Kingdom,  sometimes  plainly,  some- 
times in  figure  ;  never  did  He  use  language  which  was  specially  adapted  to  lead  into 
and  confirm  error  on  account  of  the  prejudices  of  others.  It  cannot  be  proven  that  He 
in  any  way  sought  refuge  in  words,  that  were  outwardly  compliant  with  "  Jewish  error." 
If  this  were  so,  then  Eevelation  itself  would  become  involved  in  uncertainty,  no  one  be- 
ing able  to  discriminate  between  mere  accommodation  and  its  opposite.  (Comp.  Knapp, 
Home,  Schmucker,  Storr,  Titman,  Heringa,  and  others,  who  expose  this  fallacy.) 

Obs.  2.  In  immediate  connection  with  the  accommodation  theory,  not 
pressed  however  to  the  same  extreme,  is  that  of  the  development  theory. 
While  noticed  under  Prop.  4,  yet  its  important  bearing  to  our  subject 
and  its  extended  use,  will  allow  additional  remarks.  To  avoid  misappre- 
hension, let  it  be  premised  that  we  also  believe  in  development,  in  the 
progress  of  Christianity,  in  the  continuous  gathering  of  the  elect,  of  "  them 
that  believe."  We  also  hold  to  doctrinal  progress  in  a  certain  sense,  dis- 
tinguishing between  the  primary  and  inferred  truths  ;  the  foimer  being 
solely  contained  in  the  Scriptures  and  obtained  by  comparison  of  them  ; 
the  latter  being  the  result  of  reasoning  induced  by  such  comparison,  by  ob- 
serving the  statements,  history,  analogy,  etc.,  of  doctrine.  The  former  be- 
longs more  to  the  vision  of  faith,  the  latter  to  that  of  reason  ;  for  the  one 
contains  things  beyond  human  knowledge,  and  the  other  is  the  outgrowth 
of  the  activity  of  man's  mind,  arising  from  induction,  deduction,  infer- 
ence, etc.  Having  already  defined  our  position  under  Props.  9,  10,  15,  it 
is  sufficient  to  add,  that  we  cordially  accept  of  the  truthful  utterance  of 
Dr.  Schaff  (quoted  Hurst's  His.  Rational.)  :  "  Christianity  itself,  the  sav- 
ing truth  of  God,  is  ahoays  the  same  and  needs  no  change,  yet  this  can 
by  no  means  be  affirmed  of  the  api^rehension  of  this  truth  by  the  human 


200  THE   TIIEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  23. 

mind  in  the  different  ages  of  the  church."  Two  cautions  are  only  to  be 
observed  :  (1)  never  to  elevate  this  apprehension  of  the  truth  by  the  human 
mind  and  expressed  in  books,  writings,  etc.,  to  the  same  standard  of  excel- 
lency as  that  of  the  Scriptures  themselves  ;  and  (2)  never  to  allow  such  an 
apprehension  to  be  rated  as  a  legitimate  progression  of  divine  inspiration. 
On  these  two  points,  the  development  theory  pushed  to  an  extreme, 
offends.     This  will  be  presented,  to  save  space,  in  the  following  note. 

It  may  be  well,  first  of  all,  to  notice  that  this  notion  of  doctrinal  growth,  under  the 
development  theory,  from  the  imperfect  conception  of  the  ajiostles  to  the  full  revealed 
truth  in  "church  consciousness"  (whatever  this  glittering  generality  may  mean),  is 
sought  to  be  based  on  two  passages  of  Scripture,  viz.:  Mark  4  :  26-29  ;  Matt.  13  :  31-33. 
The  Parables  will  be  examined  in  detail  hereafter  ;  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  on  the  first 
one,  which  is  regarded  (Neander,  Introd.  to  Ch.  His.)  as  the  keystone  of  the  arch,  that 
the  seed  sown,  the  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,  have  no  reference  whatever  to 
doctrinal  j)rogress  or  development,  for  if  it  had,  then,  logically,  the  harvest  at  the  end 
would  be  a  harvest  of  doctrines  fully  grown,  an  evident  absurdity.  What  is  here  meant 
is  clearly  seen  by  the  parallel  passage  in  Matt.  13  :  24-30,  when  the  tares  and  wheat  are 
separated,  etc.  Truth,  doctrinal  truth,  the  same  that  Jesus  and  apostles  taught,  is  the 
seed  deposited  in  the  heart,  and  its  moral  influence  is  delineated.  The  parable  clearly, 
in  its  connection  and  design,  shows  that  the  seed  has  its  effect  on  the  man,  its  germ  be- 
ing holiness,  producing  piety  in  the  individual,  which  enlarges  and  develops.  The  seed 
of  truth  is  always  the  same — it  changes  not — being  the  same  to-day  that  John,  Jesus, 
and  the  apostles  sowed  ;  otherwise,  taking  the  development  for  granted  we  would 
sow,  not  seed,  but  the  blade  or  the  ear,  or  even  the  full  corn,  whicli  is  an  absurdity. 
The  analogy  that  they  seek  to  draw  out  of  it,  does  not  hold  good  ;  the  growth  is  rep- 
resented as  continuous,  but  such  a  doctrinal  growth  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  church, 
for  as  the  history  of  the  church  attests,  faith  in  some  very  important  points  was 
frequently  shifted  and  became  antagonistic. 

The  development  theory,  virtually  taking  a  low  estimate  of  the  contents  of  Scripture, 
and  yet  anxious  in  some  way  to  honor  them,  has  recourse  to  a  divine  outgrowth  from 
them  in  man  in  order  to  obtain  decisive  truth  ;  and  this  alleged  result  of  outgrowth  it 
elevates  to  an  equality  with,  and  even,  m  many  instances,  above  the  Scriptures.  Take 
the  most  guarded  and  able  expositor  of  this  theory,  as  Dr.  Neander,  and  the  student 
becomes  painfully  conscious  that  something  sadly  defective  must  exist  in  a  system  which 
causes  so  good  a  man  to  teach  that  the  mental  and  moral  condition  of  the  Jews,  the 
disciples,  and  the  apostles  was  such  that  Jesus  had  to  give  them  the  truth  in  a  very 
dihited  form— so  fine  indeed  that  it  was  only  "  the  germ,"  and  this  surrounded  by  "  a 
materialistic  husk."  Gravely,  honestly,  naively  we  are  told,  that  this  "  husk"  was  the 
only  thing  that  was  perceived  and  api^reciated  until  a  process  of  growth  removed  it. 
Conceding  that  some  things  were  not  revealed  until  a  later  period,  that  other  things 
were  purposely  given  with  obscurity  (comp.  Props.  11-15),  it  is  an  unfounded  and  da,m- 
aging  opinion  that  a  leading  doctrine,  the  prominent  subject  of  preaching,  the  opening 
doctrine  of  the  New  Test.,  was  thus  confined  in  "  a  husk,"  and  finally  correctly  appre- 
hended. The  tendency  of  such  a  theory  is  to  disparage  the  early  ministry  to  the  Jews 
and  to  lower  the  apostolic  times,  showing  that  by  growth  the  church  has  undergone  ma- 
terial modifications  in  doctrine,  and  then  defending  such  radical  changes  on  the  ground  of 
progress,  and  appealing  for  proof,  to  sustain  all  this  load,  to  the  authority  of  "  church 
consciousness."  While  admitting  the  idea  of  progress  and  growth,  but  in  a  different 
way,  it  does  not  follow  that  such  modifications,  because  they  took  place  in  the  church, 
are  indicative  of  true  progress.  Indeed  in  the  Word  itself  we  are  warned  against  doc- 
trinal and  other  changes  as  productive  in  error,  fruitful  of  unbelief,  and  prolific  of  evil. 
Under  the  plastic  hand  of  this  theory,  some  venture  even  to  take  the  relapses,  divisions, 
weakness,  etc.,  of  the  church,  and  turn  them  into  signs  of  life  and  vigor,  telling  us  that 
these  things  were  necessary  for  the  age  as  educators,  forerunners,  etc.,  in  order  that 
greater  good  might  result  therefrom.  In  a  specious  philosophical  manner  attempts  are 
made,  in  violation  of  all  order,  to  weave  into  the  web  of  Christianity,  as  essential  to  prog- 
ress, conflicting  theologies,  rival  sects,  the  corruptions  of  man,  etc.,  until  finally,  as 
Eaton  {Perm,  of  Chris.,  p.  45)  says  :  "It  is  like  a  tree  drawing  its  growth  from  its  own 
dead  leaves."  Men  of  ability  will,  in  this  direction,  sagely  declare  that  what  was  once 
truth  in  one  age  must,  in  the  march  of  progress,  give  place  to  other  truth  better 
adapted  to  the  knowledge  and  wants  of  man — the  successive  shells  give  place  to  new- 


PkOP.  23.]  THE   TTIEOCRxVTIC    KINGDOM.  201 

fledged  oiitcomers.  This  nonsense — for  it  is  nothing  less — passes  for  wisdom  with  many 
who  profess  intelligence,  not  seeing  that  it  strikes  a  vital  blow  at  all  established  truth,  and 
leaves  ns  no  firm  scriptural  foundation  for  our  feet.  Let  ns  not  credit  such  palpable 
absurdities,  which,  intended  by  amiable  men  as  a  defence  of  Christianity,  strike  deadly 
blows  at  the  very  heart  of  all  scriptural  truth,  and  ultimately  find  their  resting  place  in 
a  disguised  formula  that  evil  in  growth  is  a  necessary  adjunct  to  produce  the  good,  ob- 
tain the  proper  symmetry,  etc. 

The  last  expressed  thought  is  abundantly  justified  by  the  use  to  which  this  theory 
has  been  applied.  Under  the  friendly  manipulations  of  men  like  Dr.  Neander,  under 
the  amiable,  kindly  handling  of  Dr.  Nevin,  under  the  pious  touch  of  Eev.  Miller,  it 
might  not  result  in  great  injur}',  however  it  prevented  a  reception  of  apostolic  truth  be- 
cause of  its  supposed  incipient  state.  But  this  fascinating  favorite  of  so  many  of  the 
Orthodox  happens  to  be  a  double  edged  sword,  that  cuts  both  ways.  The  Hegelian  view 
that  every  development  of  life  starts  from  its  lowest,  poorest  form  to  rise  to  a  higher  and 
richer  one  by  slow  degrees,  and  which  was  deemed  so  appropriate  to  cover  iip  supposed 
(not  existing)  deficiencies  in  doctrine,  has  been  seized  by  the  Tubingen  Baur  and 
others,  and  has  been  applied  with  tremendous  force  to  the  apostolic  times,  so  that  the 
multitude,  misled  by  the  caricature  given  of  its  beginning  (the  lowest  form),  and  tram- 
melled by  its  apparent  contradictions,  violently  oppose  the  Bible  itself.  Christianity, 
too,  is  put  down  as  a  development  in  the  history  of  universal  religion,  which  in  this  on- 
ward growth,  constant  advancement,  irresistible  progress,  must  give  place  to  "  the  full 
ear  in  the  corn."  Leckey  {His.  Rational.)  inlonoiH  us  that  in  the  progress  of  the  race, 
Christianity  was  indeed  a  necessary  but  still  imperfect  development,  and  that  the  high- 
est will  be  found  in  reason  accei^ting  from  all  the  past  forms  of  belief  that  which  best 
corresponds  with  the  freedom  of  progressive  reason.  This  is  a  favorite  theory  with 
Freethinkers  (e.g.  Essays  and  Reviews)  of  every  class  (as  e.g.  Biichner,  etc.),  and  under 
its  ample  folds  they  find  congenial  shelter  and  warmth  for  their  various  systems.  With 
united  voice,  aided  and  strengthened  by  honest  and  unsuspecting  believers,  they  tell  us 
that  the  early  church  did  not  clearly  apprehend  the  truths  of  Christianity,  especially  not 
that  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  ;  that  it  was  enveloped  in  Jewish  forms  and  Jewish 
thought  ;  and  that  it  required  centuries  of  natural  progress  from  the  lower  to  the  higher 
before  the  truth  could  be  fully  presented  ;  and  which  truth,  finally  in  the  shape  of  well 
grown  "  wheat,"  is  harvested  by  themselves.  How  large  a  number  of  books  are  issued 
to-day  full  of  this  plausible  theory,  in  which  unbelief  characterizes  doctrinal  Christianity 
as  "  a  stage  of  progression  in  the  human  mind,"  and  portrays  "  all  religious  truth  as  nec- 
essarily i^rogressive, "  so  that  we,  by  development,  can  improve  upon  the  "germs"  given 
by  God  and  His  Son.  It  acts  out  this  spirit  by  changing,  adding,  striking  awaj^  and 
substituting,  until  it  glories  in  producing  a  vew  religion,  the  much  boasted  one  of 
humanity.     Its  humanity  can  be  safely  admitted. 

Let  no  firm  believer  of  the  Supremacy  of  the  Word,  even  if  in  a  Christianized  form 
addicted  to  this  theorizing,  censure  us  for  writing  so  plainly  our  convictions.  It  is  a 
subject  uiDon  which  we  deeply  feel,  knowing  full  well  that  it  is  the  great  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  intelligent  men  to  a  return  to  the  Primitive  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  that  it 
is  the  grand  source  from  whence  issue  the  shafts  poured  against  the  teaching  of  the  apos- 
tolic church.  Its  ramifications  are  found  everywhere  and  its  adherents  form  the  im- 
mense majority.  Leckey  (///.s.  Rational.,]).  183)  thus  eulogizes  its  extent:  "This  idea 
of  continued  and  uninterrupted  development  is  one  that  seems  absolutely  to  override 
the  age.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  open  any  really  able  book  on  any  subject  without  en- 
countering it  in  some  form.  It  is  stirring  all  science  to  its  depths  ;  it  is  revolutionizing 
all  historical  literature.  Its  prominence  in  theology  is  so  great  that  there  is  scarcely  any 
school  that  is  altogether  exempt  from  its  influence.  We  have  seen  in  our  own  day  the 
Church  of  Rome  itself  defended  in  'An  Essay  on  Develoi^ment,'  and  by  a  strange  appli- 
cation of  the  laws  of  progress."  Every  student  knows  the  tremendous  influence  that 
this  theory  is  now  exerting  in  its  modified  or  extreme,  Christianized  or  rationalistic, 
forms.  Eioting  in  its  afiswved  intelligence,  it  starts  out  with  the  princijDle,  often  glossed 
over  and  refined  with  velvety  language,  that  the  writers  of  the  New  Test,  were  not  infal- 
lible, for  in  some  things  (e.g.  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom)  the^'^  were  in  error,  encom- 
passed by  "Jewish  forms;"  then  it  advances  the  self-satisfying  notion  that  in  and 
through  the  church  there  is  a  progressive  revelation  of  the  truth,  so  that  as  the  Gronin- 
gen  school  (re-endorsed  by  the  Parker  school,  etc.)  boldly  proclaims,  Augustine  stands 
higher  and  knew  more  of  the  truth  than  John  or  Paul,  Luther  had  far  more  than  Augus- 
tine, more  recent  divines  of  eminence  have  more  than  Luther,  and,  to  keep  up  the  in- 
tended comparison,  these  Groningens  (Parkerites,  etc. )  have  more  truth  than  all  the 
rest  that  preceded.     Here,  at  least,  is  modesty  in  a  modified,  develojDed  form  !     How 


!2()2  THE   TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  23. 

prevalent  to-day,  under  its  influence,  in  organized  bodies,  sects,  conventions,  etc.,  is  the 
spirit  of  the  Lej^den  school  (Hurst's  His.  Rat.)  that,  owing  to  these  "  husks"  found  in  the 
early  mistaken  preaching,  we  must  distinguish  between  the  Scriptures  and  the  Word  of 
God  ;  that  the  former  are  human  compositions,  containing  some  truth,  it  is  true,  but  that 
the  latter,  which  God  reveals  in  the  human  spirit  and  in  the  progress  of  man,  is  to  be 
vastly  preferred  ;  thus  opening  the  cry  from  ten  thousand  thousand  throats,  "  We  have 
the  revealed  Word  of  God  in  its  advanced  and  latest  form."  From  whence  mainly  come 
those  questionings  of  the  Primitive  view  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  ;  those  assertions  that 
the  Jews,  disciples,  and  early  Christians  grossly  misapprehended  the  Kingdom  ;  those 
affirmations  that  the  Reformation  showed  its  weakness  and  inconsistenc}^  by  substitut- 
ing the  authority  of  the  letter  for  that  of  the  Spirit  ;  those  claims  of  the  exclusive  pos- 
session of  the  truth  to  the  disj)aragement  of  "  holy  men  of  old  ;"  those  epithets  of  scorn 
and  derision  so  liberally  applied  to  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Scriptures  ?  They 
spring  chiefly  from  this  development  theory,  forming  "the  Modern  Theology,"  "  the 
Liberal  Theology,"  "  the  Free  Religion,"  "  the  New  Church,"  etc.  The  theory  itself  is 
abundantly  developing  fruit  in  the  hands  of  infidelity,  making  men  wiser  than  the  Script- 
ures, far  better  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  than  John  the  Baptist,  disciples 
and  apostles  ;  and  this  is  either  elegantly  or  offensively  maintained  according  to  the  cult- 
ure of  the  adherent,  thus  calling  upon  us  to  jDut  our  trust  in  men  as  the^'  successively 
arise.  AVe  desire,  however,  a  more  solid  foundation  than  the  shifting  utterances  of  men, 
one  superseding  another  in  endless  succession,  and  this  we  find  only  in  the  plain  teach- 
ing of  Revelation,  embraced  even  in  the  first  preaching  of  the  first  great  teachers  com- 
missioned by  heaven.  For  us,  the  develojoment  theory,  as  currently  expounded  and  in- 
corporated in  theologies,  is  ioo  latitiidinarlan  either  for  doctrine,  well-grounded  con- 
scious belief,  logical  connection  of  Scripture  and  historj^  and  honorable,  consistent  de- 
fence of  the  truth.  Pushed  to  its  extreme,  it  constantly  shifts  its  position,  claims  new 
and  antagonistic  doctrine  (or  none  at  all),  casts  aside  faith  and  exalts  reason,  glories  not 
in  prophets  and  apostles,  but  in  modern  scientists,  buries  itself  in  hj'potheses,  mere  spec- 
ulations, and  calls  such  divine  revelations.  In  all  its  varied  forms,  one  distinguishing 
feature  appears,  viz. :  that  it  is  destructive  to  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures  by  raising 
above  it  the  utterances  of  fallible  men.  This  is  clearly  seen  in  the  history  of  the  leading 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom. 

The  development  theory  is  also  becoming  patronized  bj^  Roman  Catholic  theologians 
(e.g.  Dr.  Newman),  for  it  becomes  the  best  medium  through  which  to  apologize  for  doc- 
trines unknown  to  the  first  teachers  of  Christianity,  and  for  the  non-recei^tion  of  doc- 
trines (e.g.  Millenarianism)  once  generally  held  in  the  church.  It  is  admirably  adapted 
to  excuse  and  gloss  over  the  recent  authoritative  doctrines  of  the  Immaculate  Concep- 
tion and  Papal  Infallibility.  J.  H. 'Newman  [Essays,  etc.)  tells  us  that  Christianity  re- 
quired time  for  its  comprehension  and  j^erfection,  and  hence,  to  understand  it,  a  growth 
is  necessary,  so  that  we  in  this  age,  availing  ourselves  of  the  teachings  (growth)  of  the 
church,  understand  divine  truth  better  than  apostolic  fathers,  etc.,  because  time  enables 
it  to  free  itself  from  all  foreign  elements,  etc.  This  then  is  ai^plied  to  the  doctrinal  state- 
ments of  the  Bible— e.g.  the  early  preaching  of  this  Kingdom— and  we  are  justified  in 
receiving  "  the  traditions  of  men''  in  their  place.  "  Liberal  Christianity"  desires  no  better 
basis  than  this  to  rest  itself  upon  ;  and  numerous  recent  works  abundantly  avail  them- 
selves of  it.  Even  if  the  mildest  form  of  its  advocacy  by  Neander  and  others  is  care- 
fully examined,  it  leads  us  precisely  to  this  Roman  exaltation  of  church  authority.  It, 
too,  begins  with  a  lower  form  and  rises  during  the  centuries  to  a  higher  ;  it  also  tells  us 
that  the  noticeable  deficiency  of  true  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom  in  John,  the  disciples, 
and  apostles— this  presentation  of  "  the  husk"  containing  the  still  unappreciated 
"  germ" — is  to  be  fully  made  up  in  the  aftergrowth  of  the  church,  i.e.  in  its  teaching  and 
consciousness.  If  we  ask,  whose  teaching  or  consciousness  is  to  be  followed  as  a  guide, 
the  Romanist's  response  comes  back  to  us  :  that  of  the  church  in  the  decisions  of  Popes 
or  General  Councils  ;  the  Protestant,  wedded  to  this  conceit,  answers  :  that  of  the 
church  as  contained  in  Councils,  Synods,  Creeds,  etc.  ;  and  both  in  the  reception  of  a 
doctrine  (e.g.  of  the  Kingdom)  afterward  fastened  upon  the  church,  elevate  this  to  an  in- 
spired position,  making  it  of  equal  weight  with  the  Scriptures,  and  if  it  happens  to  be 
opi^osed  to  Holy  Writ,  even  placing  it  above  the  Word.  Practically  there  is  no  differ- 
ence between  the  two  ;  both  profess  that  their  church  decisions  emanate  from  the  Holy 
Spirit  ;  both  claim  that  the  truth  developed  hj  growth  is  superior  to  the  germinal  doc- 
trine of  the  Kingdom  ;  both  decide  that  the  utterances  of  the  prophets  (i.e.  the  inter- 
pretation), the  expectations  of  the  Jews,  the  first  preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  the  faith  of 
the  disciples,  must  be  tested,  as  to  the  amount  of  truthfulness,  by  what  the  church  said 
and  decreed  long  after  ;  both  attempt  to  correct  the  grammatical  sense  by  an  added  one 


Prop.  23.]  tup:  theocratic  kingdom.  203 

to  make  it  a  little  more  accordant  to  present  views  ;  and  both,  by  such  a  judgment  of 
doctrine  tinder  the  plea  of  growth,  degrade  God's  own  revelation  to  a  secondary  place. 
This  may  answer  to  prop  up  a  tottering  system,  but  we  earnestly  protest  against  this 
leavening  i3rocess  being  introduced  into — with  the  purest  of  motives — Protestantism — a 
process  by  which,  under  the  plea  of  progress  and  development,  the  authority  of  Bible 
truth  is  certainly  undermined.  Let  us  be  sure  of  this  :  that  any  professed  increase  of 
knowledge  which  coiijiids  with  the  plain  meaning  of  the  Bible  is  not  in  the  direction  of 
true  development. 

Even  men  who  are  strongly  inclined  to  our  views,  and  in  many  places  admirably  sus- 
tain them,  fall  into  this  develoi3ment  theory.  Thus  e.g.,  to  indicate  how  it  influences 
even  the  minds  of  earnest  thinkers,  let  the  reader  calmly  consider  Lange  {Com.,  vol.  1, 
p.  236-7)  where  the  parables,  under  this  notion,  are  treated  as  representing  a  historical 
succession  of  periods  or  stages  m  the  church.  This  can  only  be  done  by  an  arbitrary 
use  of  the  parables,  forcing  them  from  their  legitimate  design,  and  making  them  incon- 
sistent one  with  the  other.  They  indeed  represent  or  illustrate  things  jaertaining  to  the 
church,  individual  and  world,  in  relation  to  the  Kingdom,  but  no  such  succession  can  be 
possibly  obtained  from  them  without  violence.  Many  examples,  where  this  theory  is 
pressed  into  the  aid  of  interpretation  or  application  of  Scrijiture,  will  suggest  themselves 
to  the  reader.  "We  may  conclude,  then,  by  saying,  that  a  theory  which  can  take  a  once 
universally  entertained  faith  of  the  church  (as  in  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom)  and  sub- 
stitute another  for  it  without  the  express  warrant  of  God's  own  Word,  is  certainly  unre- 
liable and  defective.  And  any  theory  which,  under  the  specious  plea  of  progression  and 
perfection,  promises  constantly  increasing  and  advancing  knowledge  until  the  develop- 
ment brings  forth  the  blaze  of  the  noonday  Sun,  runs  directly  against  the  plainest  teachings 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  inform  us  of  the  contrary.  If  there  is  a  truth  clearlj^  taught 
it  is  this  :  instead  of  looking  for  such  pleasing  growth,  we  are  exhorted  to  look  for  con- 
tinued apostasy,  rejection  of  the  truth,  etc.,  until  it  culminates  in  the  opjDression  of  the 
church,  the  martyrdom  of  saints,  and  such  fearful  woe  that  the  Lord  Christ  Himself 
shall  come  in  vengeance  as  the  Deliverer.  Alas  !  why  will  men  allow  some  favorite 
theory  to  obscure  the  clearest  announcements  of  heaven  ? 

Obs.  3.  Others  arise  who  totally  ignore  any  reason  whatever  for  snch 
phraseology.  Advocates  of  progress,  they  do  not  even  seek  to  employ  the 
phrases  as  expressive  of  a  higher  or  deeper  meaning,  gradually  evolved  in 
the  advancement  toward  perfection  of  knowledge.  Like  the  Parker  school, 
they  tell  us  that  God  is  constantly  issuing  Xew  Testaments,  inspired  by  the 
same  common,  universal  inspiration,  and.  the  later  supersede  the  earlier. 
The  Kingdom  once  preached  is  an  idle  dream,  fit  for  ignorant  Jews  and 
disciples  ;  for  inspiration  in  others  (as  e.g.  Renan)  has  announced  it  to  be 
"a  chimera."  Many,  too,  that  would  recoil,  justly,  from  being  classed 
with  such  men,  adopt  theories  respecting  the  Kingdom  and  the  early  be- 
lief, which  logically  and  consistently  places  them  on  a  leading  doctrine  of 
the  Bible  in  the  same  category.  Allusion  has  been  made  to  such  under 
Prop.  5,  and  it  is  found  that  they  all  claim,  under  special  enlightenment, 
the  liberty  of  rejecting  the  meaning  attached  to  the  Kingdom  before,  and 
at,  the  Pirst  Advent,  and  for  several  centuries  following.  They  assume 
the  additional  liberty  of  substituting  a  meaning,  which  to  them  seems  cor- 
respondent with  their  ideas  of  things  now  existing. 

It  is  a  sad  fact,  that  it  has  become  fashionable  to  place  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  and 
the  i^rophets  in  a  purely  moral  light,  and  the  more  spiritual  it  can  be  made  to  appear,  the 
more  satisfactory  the  explanation.  The  literal  aspect  of  the  subject  is  overlooked,  passed 
by  in  silence,  or  obtains  a  subordinate  toleration,  both  as  it  refers  to  the  First  and  the 
Sec.  Advent.  The  great  boast  of  the  age,  coming  from  the  most  adverse  directions,  is  the 
loonderfid  increase  of  spiritual  knowledge — a  spiritual  illumination  that  smiles  at  and 
ridicules  the  simplicity  and  credulity  that  can  believe  what  the  plain  grammatical  lan- 
guage of  the  opening  New  Test,  teaches.  Men  arise,  and,  under  the  seductive  influences 
of  mystical  conceptions,  gravely  claim  that  they,  like — yea,  some  even  more  than — the 
apostles,  are  led  into  all  truth  by  the  Spirit.     For  all  such  there  is  an  unerring  test  :   if 


204  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  23. 

any  teaching  is  directly  opposed  to  that  which  is  recorded  in  Holy  Writ,  it  is  to  be  re- 
jected at  once,  because  the  Spirit  will  not  be  in  conflict  with  triith  previoiisly  given. 
Truth  is  harmonious  and  not  discordant  ;  the  Spirit  is  not  antagonistic  to  itself.  Ad- 
mitting progressive  knowledge  in  some  things,  it  is  derogatory  to  true  knowledge  to  say, 
as  do  others  {Ecce  Deus.,  p.  39),  that  the  men  of  to-day  know  everything  Concerning  the 
Kingdom  better  than  the  original  disciples  and  apostles  ;  which,  echoed  from  many  a 
platform,  is  levelled  at  the  fo^^ndation  of  scriptural  authority  in  order  to  secure  its  over- 
throw. For,  if  we  are  better  witnesses,  more  competent  to  state  the  truth  than  those 
specially  selected  for  this  purpose  by  Jesus,  what  force  can  their  words  possess?  To  avoid 
this  destructive  rock  of  unbelief,  it  is  necessary  to  hold  that  true  progressive  knowledge 
must  be  in  strict  accordance  and  sympathy  with  the  first  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Cast  down  the  position  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  contain  the  doctiinal  truth,  and  the 
wide  door  is  opened  either  to  boasting  unbelief,  or  to  the  traditionalism  of  Roman  Cathol- 
icism, or  to  the  vagaries  of  mysticism,  Swedenborgianism,  Fox,  Ann  Lee,  Joseph  Smith, 
and  a  thousand  others  (including  the  latest,  J.  T.  Curry  of  Georgia,  the  so-called 
"prophet  and  apostle  of  a  new  dispensation"),  together  with  the  speculations  of  Spirit- 
ualists, Liberals,  Freethinkers,  Friends  of  Light,  etc.  If  we  once  cast  loose  from  the 
anchor  provided  by  heaven,  there  is  no  end  to  the  claims  made  upon  our  belief —every 
one,  too,  assuring  us  that  he  has  the  truth.  The  simple  fact  is  this  :  it  requires  an 
immense  amount  of  assurance  and  pride  (without  questioning  the  honesty  and  motives 
of  the  i^arties)  to  think  that  we  know  far  more  than  Peter,  John,  Paul,  etc.,  when  all  our 
knowledge  of  divine  things  is  based  on  that  given  by  them,  and  when  we  really  have 
but  a  small  portion  of  that  which  they  possessed  under  the  special  guidance  of  the  Spirit. 
Hence,  we  repeat,  that  increase,  growth  in  our  knowledge  must,  so  long  as  we  receive  the 
Scriptures  as  divine  and  authoritative,  be  in  unison  with  them.  Every  enlargement  of 
doctrinal  apprehension,  every  conception  of  doctrinal  truth,  must  find  its  affinity,  its 
foundation  in  the  Word  of  God.  In  he  d^.vf^opment  of  view,  that  which  occurs  outside 
and  as  a  consequence  of  the  Divine  Kjcc  I,  the  expression  of  human  opinion,  must  be 
carefully  distinguished  from  a  c'^ctrin:.l  grov  ,,i  legitimately  (i.e.  by  comparison,  analogy, 
etc.)  derived  from  Holy  Writ  (comp.  Prop.  9^  Obs.  3,  on  Doctrine).  Any  growth  un- 
natural to  the  Word  itself  (i.e.  not  plainly  contained  in  it)  may  be  set  down  as  a  foreign 
growth,  produced  by  graf i  ing  en  the  stock  a  branch  taken  from  an  outside  source.  Men 
in  search  of  truth  must  xsturn  to  the  old-fashioned  notion  that  God's  words  are  "-pure 
ivords,"  and  that  His  doctrine  does  not  require  the  devices  of  human  wisdom  either  to  be 
remodelled,  or  changed,  or  burnished.     They  speak  for  themselves. 

Obs.  4.  Others,  again,  under  the  plea  of  non-essential,  pass  by  this  early 
nse  of  phraseology  and  its  resultant  effect  on  the  church.  In  the  reaction 
against  formalism,  intidelit}^  etc.,  they  go  to  the  extreme  of  asserting  that 
a  few  elementary  truths,  sufficient  to  reach  the  masses,  such  as  repentance 
and  faith,  are  all  that  are  requisite.  Their  theological  sphere  is  the  most  nar- 
row and  contracted,  and  the  great  fundamental  theological  questions  relat- 
ing to  the  Divine  Purpose  in  Redemption  are  totally  ignored.  This  class 
finds  r  0  difficulty  whatever  in  the  early  preaching  ;  for  whatever  does  not 
direct  y  teach  their  view  of  the  Kingdom  is  easily  made  to  do  so  by  sjiirit- 
ualiz  ig  the  grammatical  sense. 

Obs.  5.  One  of  the  most  skilful,  but  abortive,  efforts  to  reconcile  the  ut- 
terances and  expectations  of  the  disciples  and  apostles  with  the  notion  of  a 
present  spiritual  Kingdom,  is  given  by  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  Tlieol.  of  A^jos. 
Age).  He  frankly  acknowledges,  what  he  calls  their  Judaistic  views,  etc., 
but  in  the  attempt  to  explain  the  matter,  most  amazingly  sacrifices  the 
character  of  the  apostles.  Their  reputation  and  scriptural  standing  as  in- 
spired teachers,  suffers  in  many  a  sentence,  and  a  devout  believer  of  the 
Word  arises  from  the  i3erusal  of  "the  work  with  a  deep  feeling,  that  if  Chris- 
tianity needs  a  defense  so  depressiyigly  apologetic,^  and  so  sliocMngly  de- 
grading to  the  first  teachers  of  it,  then  something  is  radically  wroyig  in  its 
fundamental  source.     It  will  not  answer  to  find,  with  a  Hegelian  micro- 


Prop.  23.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  205 

scopic  yision,  a  germ  liere  and  a  germ  there  enveloped  in  a  rude  "husk." 
Truth,  when  thus  handled,  must,  and  does,  suffer  in  the  house  of  its 
friends. 

Many  writers  of  eminence  fully  admit  what  they  call  "  Christianity  circumscribed  at 
first  within  the  narrow  limits  of  a  peojole's  hopes,"  but  assert  as  Reuss,  "  The  more  con- 
version'and  faith  were  recognized  as  the  essential  elements  of  the  Gospel,  the  more  did 
mere  hope  become  subsidiary."  Right  here  is  one  of  the  difficulties:  hope,  which  is 
also  one  of  the  essentials  ("  we  are  saved  by  hope,"'  etc.)  of  the  Gospel,  is  placed  in  the 
background  because  deemed  "  circumscribed,"  and  individual  religious  experience, 
mystical  conceptions,  etc.,  take  its  jalace.  Illustrations  drawn  from  various  authors  will 
follow  in  succeeding  Props. 

Ols.  6.  We  are  indebted  to  Jerome,  and  others  like  him,  for  the  pecul- 
iar style — now  so  familiar — in  which  the  old  views  respecting  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven  are  sought  to  be  eradicated,  as  based  on  no  solid  reason,  by  using 
the  epithet  "  Judaizers."  Thus  e.g.  in  his  note  on  Isa.  11  :  10-16,  he 
lays  down  the  broad,  erroneous  canon  (which  Fairbairn,  On  Projjh.,  p. 
254,  seems  approvingly  to  quote)  :  "Let  the  wise  and  Christian  reader 
take  this  rule  for  prophetical  promises,  that  those  things  which  the  Jews 
and  ours,  not  ours  (but)  Judaizers,  hold  to  be  going  to  take  place  carnally, 
we  should  teach  to  have  already  taken  i^lace  spiritually,  lest  by  occasion 
of  fables  and  inexplicable  questions  of  that  sort  (as  the  apostle  calls  them), 
we  should  be  compelled  to  Judaize.'''  Vi.at  an  admirable  guide  !  Under 
the  plea  of  carnality,  which  is  ma.:  to  cover  the  grammatical  sense  and 
literal  fulfilment,  the  prophecies  are  to  be  spiritualized,  no  matter  how, 
only  so  that  they  teach  nothing  which  may  be  accounted  "eJewish." 
Need  we  wonder  that  the  truth  was  overpowed  by  such  tactics  of  interpre- 
tation. 

Ol)s.  7.  All  these  methods  assume  as  fundamental,  that  the  Jews  and 
early  believers  were  certainly  mistaken  and  deluded.  Not  one  attempts  to 
give  a  valid  reason  for  the  belief  entertained.  Now  the  impression  made 
to  cover  up  a  supposed  deficiency  in  the  Jews  and  first  preachers,  and  also 
produced  by  the  rejection  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  (held  for  several 
centuries),  on  the  specious  but  treacherous  ground  of  superior  knowledge 
— no  matter  how  obtained,  by  growth,  spirit,  reason,  spiritualizing,  etc. — is 
this  :  that  if  the  Word  of  God  is  really  founded  on  what  it  professes,  viz. : 
the  inspiration  of  holy  men,  it  must  not  contain  so  glaring  an  i  ^consis- 
tency. We  shall  now  proceed  step  by  step,  continually  fortified  by  'script- 
ure, to  show  that  the  inconsistency  only  exists  in  the  imagination  ot  men  ; 
that  the  grammatical  and  historical  sense  is  fully  sustained  by  a  continu- 
ous Divine  Purpose  ;  that  the  first  preachers  of  the  Kingdom,  although 
not  acquainted  with  all  the  designs  of  God  in  relation  to  the  Kingdom, 
were  not  in  error  on  the  natiire  of  the  Kingdom  itself  ;  and  that  neither 
they,  nor  Jesus,  by  the  use  of  the  literal  sense,  accommodated  themselves 
to  the  prejudices,  etc.,  of  the  Jews,  depending  on  a  future  development 
or  revelation  for  a  purer  doctrine.  To  do  this,  constant  appeal  shall  be 
made  "  to  the  laiu  and  the  testimony ;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this 
luord,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  thenV^  (Isa.  8  :  20)  ;  but  while 
thus  employed,  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader  will  not  fail  to  imitate  the 
noble  Bereans  (Acts  17  :  11),  who,  instead  of  looking  outside  of  the  Script- 
ures for  growth,  etc.,  "  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  and 


206  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  23. 

searched  the  Scriptures  daily  to  see  whether  these  things  were  so.^'  Such  a 
position  is  the  more  necessary,  since  many  professing  to  make  this  appeal 
darken  the  simf^le  testimomj  of  Holy  Writ  to  sustain  an  honestly  entertain- 
ed theory— a  failing  to  which,  through  infirmity,  we  are  all  liable.  Hence 
the  greater  need  of  caution,  and  of  a  personal  reference  to  the  Word. 


PeOP.  24.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KIT^GDOM.  207 


Peoposition  24.    The  Kingdom  is  offered  to  an  elect  nation^  viz, : 
the  Jewish  nation. 

This  election  is  so  plainly  stated  in  Scripture,  and  it  is  so  cur- 
rently admitted  in  our  theological  works,  that  it  needs  no  proof. 
Such  passages  as  Deut.  7  :  6  and  14  :  2,  Rom.  11  :  28  and  9  :  11,  etc., 
are  decisive,  that  the  sovereignty  of  God  chose  in  the  descendants 
of  Abraham,  the  Jews,  a  people  through  whom  should  be  mani- 
fested his  Divine  purpose  in  the  salvation  of  man.  Kurtz 
{Sac.  His.,  p.  71)  has  aptly  said,  in  view  of  children  being 
raised  ujj  to  Abraham  against  the  course  of  nature  :  "  He,  there- 
fore, chose  in  Abraham  a  people  which  was  called  into  existence 
only  by  his  almighty  creative  power."  This  election  is  not  to  be 
regarded,  as  some  tell  us,  an  act  of  favoritism,  but  as  founded  in 
that  wisdom  which  adopted  it  (as  the  end  will  manifest)  as  the  best 
means,  under  the  circumstances  in  which  fallen  humanity  was 
placed,  to  reach,  consistently  with  moral  freedom,  the  largest  por- 
tion of  mankind,  having  in  view  the  ultimate  establishment  and 
triumph — in  oi^position  to  depravity — of  God's  Kingdom. 

The  Kingdom  was  offered  to  this  chosen,  elected  nation,  as  is 
evinced,  e.g.,  in  Ex.  19  :  5,  6,  where  it  is  declared  that  if  faithful 
and  obedient,  it  should  be  God's  '''peculiar  treasure  above  all  peo- 
ple .^"^^  audit  should  become  "a  kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy 
nation.'^ 

The  reason  for  such  election  is  given,  e.g.  Deut.  7  :  7-11,  and  the  assurance  of  its 
perpetuation  is  also  presented  in  God's  love  and  oath.  The  reader  ought  not  to  over- 
look this,  as  it  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  subject  of  the  Kingdom,  as  developed 
more  fully  hereafter.  Some  infidels  ridicule  the  smallness  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  this 
connection,  as  if  it  was  unworthy  of  Deity  to  stoop  so  low  and  exhibit  such  interest  to  a 
few  people  ;  but  the  Spirit  expressly  asserts  that  the  nation  was  not  chosen  "  because  ye 
were  more  in  number  than  anj^  people  ;  for  ye  \vere  the  fewest  of  all  the  people."  God 
thus  forestalls  the  wretched  attempt  at  witticism  so  current  in  recent  books.  In  refer- 
ence to  the  passage  Eom.  9  :  11,  Schmucker  {Pop.  Theol,  p.  117)  justly  argues  that  it 
does  not  relate  to  personal  salvation,  but  has  a  national  aspect.  But  he,  with  many 
others,  emasculates  the  force  of  the  election  when  he  only  makes  this  nation  God's  "  ex- 
ternal, visible  people,  whom  He  determined  to  separate  from  the  rest  of  mankind  and 
make  the  depositories  of  His  religion."  This,  as  the  reader  will  see,  is  only  a  small  por- 
tion appertaining  to  their  election. 

OI)s.  1.  The  Kingdom  itself  thus  offered  to  them  is  a  divine-political 
(church  and  state  united)  dominion,  over  which  God  Himself,  as  an  earthly 
Ruler,  presides  or  rules  as  the  Supreme.  Mosos  and  the  Prophets  clearly 
show  this  by  constantly  uniting  the  divine  and  the  political  in  their  instruc- 
tions ;  by  making  God's  commands,  both  civil  and  religious,  the  soA'ereign 
law  ;  by  stating  that  the  object  of  the  nation's  call,  and  the  bestowment 


208  THE   TnEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  24. 

of  peculiar  privileges  and  power,  was  the  overruling  and  su]3erseding  of  all 
earthly  governments,  thus  exalting  their  God  and  King  over  all ;  and  by 
teaching  that  through  the  Kingdom  thus  established,  all  nations  should 
ultimately  be  brought  under  the  subjection  and  allegiance  of  the  great 
King. 

As  we  proceed,  the  Scriptures  teacliing  this  will  be  abundantly  adduced  ;  for  the 
present  it  is  sufficient  to  direct  attention  to  the  beginning  and  end  of  God's  plan.  Who 
doubts  that  this  was  the  purpose  (i.e.  to  make  it  a  universal  dominion  over  the  earth) 
when  God  determined  this  kingdom  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  ?  Theologians 
justly  tell  us  that  anything  less  would  have  been  derogatory  to  the  honor,  the  sovereignty 
of  God.  Why,  then,  gloss  over  Dan.  2  :  44  and  7  :  14,  18,  27,  etc.,  and  deny  that  God 
ever  contemplated  for  this  Kingdom  such  a  union  of  church  and  state,  a  political  dominion 
wholly  under  divine  control  ?  It  is  a  refreshing  omen  to  see  men  hostile  to  our  views,  still 
admit,  as  Neander,  etc.,  that  God's  purposes  in  relation  to  this  Kingdom  must  inevitably 
— if  Scripture  is  fulfilled— exhibit  itself  in  a  great,  oidward politiccd  world  dominion,  under 
divine  rule  and  guidance.  Hundreds  of  quotations  (some  will  be  given  hereafter)  from 
eminent  men  attest  that  such  is  the  scriptural  idea.  Men,  too,  like  Dr.  Arnold,  feel  that 
the  biblical  idea  of  such  a  dominion  has  been  kejDt  in  the  background,  and  they  strive  to 
revive  it,  but  mistake  the  time  and  manner  of  its  manifestation,  attributing  to  this  dis- 
jjensation  and  to  present  means  ichcd  Holy  Writ  ascribes  to  the  following  dispensation 
and  to  Jesus  the  Christ.  Such  deep  thinkers  as  Eothe  are  nearer  the  truth,  and  coincide 
with  prophecy,  when  they  make  the  church,  as  now  existing,  but  a  temporary  institu- 
tion, making  it  to  be  united  with  the  state  in  one  great  theocratic  ordering,  and  the 
realization  of  siich  a  permanent  union  depending  on  the  future  personal  manifestation 
of  the  Saviour  Jesus.  Look  at  the  end  contemplated,  as  predicted  by  the  prophets  (e.g. 
Zech.  14  :  9,  etc.),  and  given  in  the  last  testimony  of  Jesus  (Apoc.  11  :  15,  etc.),  and  this 
is  the  grand  position  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  to  attain  :  absolute  control  over  all 
the  kingdoms  of  the  earth — such  a  world-wide  dominion  that  all  nations  shall  bend  in 
joyful,  blessed  obedience  to  its  behests.  This  was  the  Kingdom  offered  to  the  Jewish 
nation. 

01)8.  2.  The  attention  is  now  directed  to  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  nation  is 
an  elect  nation  to  whom  a  Kingdom  is  offered — which  election,  although 
occupying  an  important  place  in  the  consideration  of  the  Kingdom,  is 
passed  over  or  ignored  in  many  theologies,  even  in  recent  Bib.  Theolo- 
gies, just  as  if  it  was  not  reconfirmed  by  the  apostles.  Explain  it  as  we 
may,  this  election  is  a  fundamental  fact,  which  (as  will  be  proven  here- 
after) has  a  deep  and  permanent  signiiicancy  in  relation  to  the  Kingdom. 

The  infidel,  of  course,  rejects  the  claim,  and  makes  it  the  subject  of  ridicule.  The 
extreme  Calvinist  finds  here  a  very  tender  place,  in  which  (as  e.g.  Pres.  Edwards,  etc.)  he 
manifests  a  glaring  inconsistency.  With  his  views  of  election  in  reference  to  the  indi- 
vidual, viz. :  that  it  is  fixed  and  eternal,  he  cannot  possibly  explain  this  election  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  so  long  as  he  claims  that  it  was  transient,  failed,  etc.,  and  takes  the  bless- 
ings promised  to  this  elect  nation  and  heaps  them  upon  Gentiles.  Hence  it  is  that  for 
the  sake  of  theory  he  wisely  (?)  passes  it  by  as  a  discordant  element.  The  low  Armin- 
ian,  who  makes  all  election  to  consist  in  foreknown  belief,  etc.,  finds  in  this  subject 
some  stubborn  facts,  indicating  that  God's  ultimate  purposes  are  not  invariably  thus 
conditioned,  and  he,  too,  turns  from  it  as  unwelcome.  The  student  willing  to  receive — 
whether  Calvinist  or  Arminian,  irrespective  of  previously  formed  opinions — the  teach- 
ings of  Scripture,  will  not  turn  away  from  this  point. 

Ods.  3.  Briefly,  let  some  of  the  reasons  underlying  the  Prop,  be  pre- 
sented. (1)  The  Jewish  nation,  as  a  nation,  was  thus  chosen  ;  for  the 
Kingdom  having  in  view,  as  intimated,  a  divine  political  world  dominion, 
it  \^  pre-eminently  suitable  that  a  nation — alone  susceptible  of  kingly  gov- 
ernment, etc. — should  be  selected  for  its  acceptance  and  final  realization. 
God  in  His  Sovereignty  and  mercy  raised  up  this  nation.     It  is  customary 


Prop.  24.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  209 

Avith  some  writers  to  designate  this  election  "  a  liistorical  claim,"  which, 
indeed,  may  be  allowed,  but  has  no  particular  signification.  (2)  Admit- 
ting cheerfully  the  historical  connection  as  indispensable,  we  see  in  it  a 
deeper  design,  out  of  which  history  itself  arises.  The  election  embraces  a 
nationality^  viz.  :  the  natural  descendants  of  Abraham  in  their  associated 
capacity.  It  includes  them  all,  so  far  as  descent  in  a  certain  line  is  con- 
cerned (as  well  as  those  who  may  be  adopted  by  the  nation),  which  is 
clearly  seen  by  what  some  term  "  exclasiveness"  (but  actually  necessary, 
indispensably  so,  to  preserve  a  unity  in  the  intended  dominion),  or  by 
"  the  middle  wall  of  partition"  which  divided  them  from  other  nations,  or 
by  the  declaration  of  Paul  (Rom.  9  :  4  and  11  :  28),  that  even  to  the  unbe- 
lieving Jews  pertained  "  tlie  adoption,''''  i.e.  this  election  in  view  of  national 
connection,  and  that,  although  "enemies"  yet,  "^,9  touching  the  election 
(i.e.  this  choice  of  the  nation),  they  are  beloved  for  the  father's  sake." 
In  other  words,  none  but  a  member  of  this  nation,  being  a  Jew,  had  this 
Kingdom  offered  to  him  until  the  election — unmistakably  enlarged — 
embraced  others  by  way  of  adoption  as  the  seed  of  Abraham.  (3)  This 
election  of  the  Jewish  nation  was  an  absolute,  unconditional  (i.e.  relating 
to  the  Purpose  of  God)  election  so  far  as  its  national  descent  from  Abra- 
ham is  affected,  i.e.  the  kingdom  is  solely  promised  to  the  descendants  of 
^^r«/^«?7i  in  their  national  aspect- (which  is  verified,  as  we  shall  see  here- 
after, by  the  covenants,  confirmed  iy  oath)  ;  and  hence  arises  the  necessity 
of  Gentiles  (as  we  shall  show),  who  shall  participate  in  this  Kingdom, 
heing  grafted  in,  becoming  members  of,  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  (4) 
The  unbelief  and  sinfulness  of  the  nation  may,  indeed,  for  a  while  remove 
the  mercy  and  favor  of  God,  but  it  does  not  remove  the  election;  for  when 
the  children  of  Abraham,  composing  this  nation,  are  gathered  out,  both 
natural  and  engrafted,  the  election,  never  set  aside,  conditions  the  restora- 
tion of  the  nation  in  order  that  the  promises  to  the  natio7i,  as  such,  and  to 
the  faithful  Jews,  as  mxcmbers  of  the  nation,  may  he  fulfilled.  Hence  the 
restoration  of  the  nation  is  invariably  linked  with  tlie  setting  up  of  the 
Kingdom.^  (5)  The  Scripture  indicative  of  this  continued  election  will 
be  brought  forth  as  our  argument  advances.  It  is  amply  sufficient  at  this 
stage  to  direct  the  earnest  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  last,  solemn,  most 
intensely  impressive  words  of  Moses,  Detit.  32  :  1-43,  in  which  the  elect 
condition  of  the  nation  is  delineated,  then  a  deep  and  long-continued  apos- 
tasy is  represented  as  pertaining  to  this  favored  nation,  followed  by  pro- 
longed punishment  ;  but  this  does  not  vitiate  the  nation's  election,  for 
God's  Purpose  in  reference  to  it  still  stands  good,  and  the  promise  of  the 
Eternal,  Unchangeable  is  recorded,  that  the  same  elect  nation,  chastened 
and  scourged,  scattered  and  dispersed,  sliall  be  recalled  and  exalted  in 
glory.  (G)  While  the  nation,  comprising  the  natural  descendants  of 
Abraham,  is  thus  chosen,  it  does  not  follow  that  every  individual  in  it  is 
thus  personally  elected.  The  election  is  tioofold — in  its  reach  after  the 
nationality,  and  in  its  application  to  the  individual  member  of  the  nation. 
It,  in  the  latter  case,  only  pertains  to  the  believing,  obedient  portion  of 
the  nation.  This  Paul,  in  Rom.  9  and  11,  distinctly  teaches.  The  nation 
in  its  corporate  capacity  may  reject  the  truth,  but  God,  when  for  a  time 
punishing  the  nation,  instead  of  raising  up  children  to  Abraham  out  of 
stones  (Matt.  3  :  9)  to  keep  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham,  gathers  them  out 
from  among  the  Gentiles,  grafting  them  in,  acloj)ting  them  with  pre- 
ceding believers  as  the  nation,   restores  the  Jewish   nationality  as   pre- 


210  THE  TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  24. 

dieted,  and  gives  to  tliem  the  Kingdom — His  Divine  Purpose  is  carried  out ; 
His  election  fails  not.  But  with  the  individual  it  is  far  otherwise  : 
God  chooses  him  conditioned  to  faith  and  obedience,  and  if  these  fail,  if 
the  conditions  are  unfulfilled,  then  God  has  no  other  purpose  ;  the  indi- 
vidual fails  to  become  of  the  elect,  the  chosen,  the  predetermined  number, 
to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  given.  In  the  case  of  the  nation  the  ultimate 
Divine  Purpose  is  unalterable  ;  even  if  the  nation  for  a  time  prove  unfaith- 
ful, that  Purpose  is  assumed  by  the  Saviour  (e.g.  Matt.  19  :  28)  as  un- 
cliangeaUe  ;  but  this  \^  not  50  with  the  individual,  for  in  this  particular 
the  assumption  is,  that  he  may  not  receive  the  Kingdom — some  other  one 
(Rev.  3  :  11)  may  obtain  the  crown.'-'  (7)  The  election  is  made  in  view  of 
this  Icingdom,  so  that  it  can  be  established  and  manifested.  Through  the 
elect  Jewish  nation,  in  its  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  under 
the  personal  rule  of  David's  Son  in  glorified  humanity,  and  through  the 
elect  (natural  and  engrafted)  Jews,  who  are  "  chosen  in  Him  (Christ)  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world  "  (i.e.  they  being  predetermined  associated 
rulers  with  Christ),  shall  this  divinely  constituted  tvorld  dominion  be  ex- 
hibited. These  particulars,  thus  epitomized,  will  be  fully  confirmed  by 
the  Propositions  following,  the  Scripture  proof  being  given  and  the  vari- 
ous objections  answered. 

^  Baldwin  {Armageddon,  p.  88)  totally  misapprehends  the  elect  condition  of  the  nation 
in  the  Divine  Purpose,  and  hence  gives  place  to  such  ideas  as  the  following  :  "  The  sole 
and  simple  secret  of  their  (Jews)  existence,  as  a  distinct  j^eople,  is  their  infidelity.  And 
God  has  no  further  interfered  in  this  preservation  than  may  be  implied  in  His  making 
their  sin  their  curse."  According  to  this  new  theory — advanced  by  various  writers  and 
held  by  some  sects — unbelief  is  a  most  excellent  national  preservative  !  Those  who  deny 
the  future  restoration  of  the  nation  are  met  in  their  denial  by  this  election  and  its 
design. 

'^  Reference  is  made  to  the  doctrine  of  election  to  distinguish  between  that  pertaining 
to  the  nation  and  personal  election  or  choice.  How  the  latter  is  produced,  etc.,  does 
not  fall  within  our  discussion.  The  temperate  view  of  Home  (Jntrod.,  vol.  1,  p.  23,  foot- 
note) is  ours  ;  to  which  we  may  add,  that  persons  discussing  the  subject  of  personal 
election  too  much  overlook  the  foiindation  of  this  term  as  seen  in  the  predetermined  num- 
ber of  inheritors  of  this  very  Kingdom.  In  this  conection  it  may  also  be  said,  that  some 
of  the  Jews  recognizing  the  election  of  the  nation,  so  distinctively  taught,  made  it  cover 
the  personal  election  of  the  individual — thus  relieving  him  of  resi3onsil)ility,  and  making 
birth  a  sufficient  test  and  merit.  Thus  e.g.  Turretin  (quoted  by  Home,  Introd.,  vol.  1, 
p.  394)  gives  a  passage  from  the  Codex  Sanhedrin,  which  affirms  :  "  that  every  Jew  had  a 
portion  in  the  future  world,"  and  another  from  the  Talmud,  which  says  :  "  that  Abra- 
ham is  sitting  near  the  gates  of  hell,  and  does  not  permit  any  Israelite,  however  wicked 
he  may  be,  to  descend  into  hell."  The  mere  sign  of  circumcision,  although  a  sign 
pertaining  to  the  elect  people,  did  not  in  its  outward  application  make  one  of  the  elect 
unless  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  moral  and  religious  spirit.  So  Jesus  teaches, 
John  7  :  34-44.  But  still  the  elect  were  circumcised  as  a  sign  of  covenant  relationship. 
The  same  is  now  true  of  baptism  ;  the  outward,  unless  accompanied  by  the  inward, 
avails  nothing,  although  every  believer  receives  it  as  indicative  of  covenant  relationship. 

Obs.  4.  Eecent  writers  (e.g.  Fairbairn,  On  Proph.,  p.  60)  speak  very 
disparagingly  of  reckoning  the  natural  descent  from  Abraham  as  part  of 
the  election,  stating  that  the  election  had  sole  reference  to  a  higher,  viz.: 
a  spiritual  distinction  and  significance.  But  this  is  antagonistic  to  the 
Word  and  the  facts  as  given.  How  comes  it,  then,  that  the  covenants  are 
given  to  the  Jewish  race  ?  That  this  election  is  confined  to  the  Jeivish  race 
and  those  adopted  into  that  race?  That  the  election  is  traced  directly 
through  the  descendants  of  Abraham  and  those  incorporated  as  Abraham'' s 
seed  ?     That  all  the  prophets,  all  the  inspired  teachers,  Jesus  and    the 


PeOP.  24.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  211 

apostles,  are  Jetvs  9  That  the  election  of  the  nation  is  recognized  hy  Jesus 
and  the  apostles,  and  that  the  Gentiles  were  only  afterward  admitted  hy 
special  revelation,  and  then  only  as  the  achnoivledged  cliildreji  of  Abraham  ? 
These  and  similar  questions  must  first  be  answered  before  we  can  possibly 
accept  of  such  a  theory.  The  misapprehension  arises  from  not  discrimi- 
nating that  the  true  seed  are  faithful  Jews,  or  become  such  by  faith,  being 
the  actual  descendants  of  Abraham,  or  accounted  such — "part  of  the  race  to 
whom  the  covenants  are  given.  It  does  not  follow,  because  God  designs  to 
exalt  and  bless  the  nation,  that  a  disobedient  Jew  will  obtain  the  blessings 
of  election  ;  for  while  the  race,  as  a  race,  is  chosen,  it  is  not  said  that 
every  individual  of  the  race  is  also  ultimately  chosen.  The  fact  is,  that 
very  few,  comparatively,  may  avail  themselves  of  the  op^oortunity  afforded  ; 
but  that  does  not  vitiate  the  election  of  the  portion  of  the  race  that  is  faith- 
ful, and  it  does  not  alter  God's  final  purpose  in  reference  to  the  nation  it- 
self. If  we  reject  this,  then  we  surround  the  calling  and  separation  of  the 
Jewish  race  with  insurmountable  difficulties.  The  effort  to  spiritualize  it 
away  is  not  sustained  by  a  single  fact.  Let  the  reader  but  consider  :  if 
the  election  only  embraced  the  pious,  irresjjective  of  Jewish  descent,  why 
was  the  election  hedged  around  by  the  restriction  of  descent  ?  why  was  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles  2^ostponed  to  a  definite  time?  why  forbid  the  first 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  to  go  to  the  Gentiles,  etc.  ? 

Theologians  speak  most  depreciatingly  of  this  election,  and  of  the  Jewish  view  based 
on  it.  It  is  true  that  some  Jews  perverted  it  to  the  extent,  that  personal  salvation,  no 
matter  what  the  life,  was  deduced  from  it.  But  the  perversion  does  not  affect  the  doc- 
trine. Dr.  Knaj)p  {Ch.  Theology,  p.  319),  misajjprehending  the  election  in  its  reference 
to  the  Jewish  nation,  thus  endeavors  to  rebuke  Jewish  belief  :  "  The  national  pride  of 
the  Jews  led  them  into  the  mistake  that  God  had  a  special  regard  for  them  ;  that  they 
were  more  agreeable  to  him  than  other  nations  ;  that  they  exclusively  were  his  chil'dren  ; 
and  that  the  Messiah  was  only  designed  for  them,"  etc.  That  God  had  "a  sjDecial  re- 
gard for  them,"  that  He  esteemed  them  beyond  other  nations,  that  they  were  specially 
under  His  fatherly  care,  that  the  Messiah  was  from  them  and  for  them,  etc.,  is  specifically 
asserted,  and  the  Jewish  covenant  relationship  conclusively  proves  it.  Even  Knapp  him- 
self, if  ever  saved  with  perfected  Redemption,  will  be  saved  as  an  adopted  so7i  oj  Abra- 
ham's. Knapp's  references  to  sustain  his  rebuke  have  no  force  argumentative! y,  for  the 
one  based  on  the  rejection  of  the  Kingdom  by  the  JeM's,  and  the  other  on  the  foreknown 
rejection  of  the  nation  and  call  of  the  Gentiles,  overlook  the  predictions  and  prom- 
ises that  such  a  rejection  is  only  temporary — the  nation  is  punished  for  its  unbelief  and 
sinfulness.  Gentiles,  alas,  forget  the  relationship  that  they  sustain,  as  believers,  to  this 
very  nation  ;  and  such  rebukes  fall,  unjustly,  upon  the  foundations  of  our  hope.  On  he 
other  hand,  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  Jews  are  so  unappreciative  of  their  most  hon- 
orable extraction,  that  some  foolishly  endeavor  to  conceal  their  Jewish  origin,  even  to 
the  changing  of  their  names,  as  e.g.  from  Abraham  to  Braham,  etc.  The  day  will  come 
(comp.  Prop.  114)  when  such  conduct  will  be  reprobated. 

Obs.  5.  The  saying  of  Augustine,  quoted  with  such  evident  approbation 
by  Fairbairn,  "  The  faith  of  Abraham  is  the  seed  of  Abraham,"  has  been 
received  by  multitudes  as  containing  the  whole  sum  of  truth,  when,  in 
2)oint  of  fact,  it  simjoly  grazes  the  truth.  If  Augustine  is  correct,  why 
confine  the  election  to  a  certain  period  exclusively  to  the  Jewish  race,  and 
why,  wdien  afterward  the  election  embraced  the  Gentiles,  have  the  believ- 
ing Gentiles  held  as  grafted  in  and  adopted  as  one  with  that  same  Jewish 
race  ?  This  at  once  removes  volumes  of  sophistical  reasoning  on  this  sub- 
ject. The  Jew,  if  faithful,  was  of  the  election  ;  the  Jew,  if  unfaithful, 
was  reckoned  as  a  heathen  ;  but  it  was  still  the  Jeii\  the  actual  descendant 
of  Abraham,  that  was  saved.      Why  the  Jew?     Because  God  made  a  cove- 


212  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  24. 

iiaiit  with  tlieir  ancestor,  and  gave  certain  promises  through  that  covenant 
'pertaining  to  that  ancestor's  seed.  If  any  one  says  (as,  ahas,  many  do), 
perverting  the  language  of  Paul  applicatjle  to  another  feature,  that  the 
having  the  hlood  of  Abraham  in  their  veins  amounted  to  nothing  (which 
is  true,  when  accompanied  by  unbelief,  as  Jesus  taught),  he  simply  fails 
to  recognize  the  plain  tact  that  Jetvs  were  called,  and  not  Gentiles  ;  a  cove- 
nant was  made  with  Jews,  and  not  with  Gentiles  ;  the  promises  were  given 
to  Jeivs^  and  not  to  Gentiles  ;  that  salvation  is  of  the  Jews,  and  not  of  the 
Gentiles  ;  that  this  salvation  is  yet  to  be  openly  manifested  through  the  Jews, 
and  not  through  the  Gentiles  ;  and  that  Gentiles  receive  and  inherit  with 
the  natural  descendants  of  Abraham  o)ily  as  they  are  incorporated.  If  some, 
or  many,  of  the  Jews  made  themselves  unworthy  to  receive  the  promises, 
that  does  not  alter  the  unchangeaUe  fact,  that  the  worthy  descendants,  and 
engrafted  ones,  of  Abraham  do  obcain  them.  Hence  we  dare  not  say  : 
"  Their  condition  did  not  essentially  differ  from  that  of  the  heathen," 
because /rt6*/s  are  against  it. 

Obs.  G.  Therefore  it  is  inconsistent  to  make  (as  e.g.  Fairbairn,  Whate- 
ly  and  others)  this  elect  people  a  type  of  others — the  type  of  a  future 
people — thus  misapplying  the  word  "  Israel."  The  reason  is  apparent  :  a 
type  preligures  or  foreshadows  something  that  is  to  be  accomplished  or 
realized  in  the  future,  but  the  election  made  out  an  accomplished,  con- 
stantly realized  fact  ;  for  they  themselves  were  chosen,  and  not  typically 
chosen  to  represent  some  future  choosing  ;  and  hence,  as  we  shall  show, 
the  elect  in  the  future,  i.e.  in  this  dispensation,  are  held  up  to  us  as  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  elect  nation — of  the  same  divine  purpose  in  selecting  a 
p)eople  who,  ancient  and  modern,  are  to  be  constituted  members  of  the  same 
covenanted  people,  and  thus,  by  virtue  of  their  rela'tionship,  the  inheritors 
of  God's  Kingdom.  If  they  are  such  members  and  heirs,  it  is  folly,  de- 
structive to  a  proper  apprehension  of  much  Scripture,  to  make  them  types. 

The  typical  arrangements  ("  the  shadow  of  things  to  coma"),  which  were  designed  to 
sustain  the  faith  of  these  elect,  are  unnecessarily  confounded  wiih  the  elect  themselves,  and 
this  introduces  confusion,  breaking  the  unity  of  the  Word.  If  a  Moses,  or  Aaron,  or 
Joshua,  in  their  official  capacity  sustained  the  relation  of  types,  it  does  not  follow  that  their 
election  is  also  typical,  for  if  it  were,  then  the  natural  result  of  types  would  appear,  viz, : 
that  when  the'  antetype  is  revealed  the  type  itself  must  vanish,  thus  destroying  the 
hopes,  etc.,  of  these  ancient  worthies.  It  is  therefore  misleading  to  say,  as  Martensen 
(67i.  Dog.,  p.  233),  that  the  Jewish  nation  is  "  the  typical  people."  The  nation  is  no  type, 
for  it  composes  the  real  Kingdom  of  God  when  the  Theocracy  is  manifested  within  it  ;  and, 
hence  in  view  of  this  relationship,  the  necessity  of  incorporation  with  it.  If  it  were 
merely  typical  of  another  people  (viz. :  Christian  believers  in  the  church),  why  must  such 
a  people  a/,90  ^erjo/ne  Abraham' s  seed?  The  only  Scriptures  adduced  bj^  Martensen  in 
support  of  his  opinion,  say  nothing  of  the  typical  character  of  the  nation,  but  refer  to 
certain  acts  (1  Cor.  10  :  11)  that  were  typical,  and  (Heb.  10)  that  even  in  the  Theocratic 
ordering  some  incorporated  religious  rites  were  only  a  foreshadowing  of  "  good  things  to 
come."  Nowhere  is  the  nation  itself  made  a  type,  for  this,  if  done,  would  be  fundamentally 
opposed  to  covenant  and  promise.  This  misapprehension  of  an  important  fact  by  so  care- 
ful a  writer  as  Martensen,  and  which  necessarily  colors  the  interpretation  of  much  Script- 
ure, only  reminds  us  how  careful  man  ought  to  be  when  dealing  with  the  things  of 
God.  Even  Macknight  {Com.  Horn.  9:8)  declares  :  "  The  natural  seed  (is)  the  type  of 
the  spiritual,  and  the  temporal  blessings  the  emblems  of  the  eternal."  Our  argument,  as 
we  proceed,  will  conclusively  show  that  the  Theocratic  ordering  alone,  inseparably  joined 
to  the  nation,  proves  the  nation  no  type. 

Obs.  7.  Pressense  {The  Redeemer,  p.  61)  says  :  ''The  election  of  a  family 
and  of  a  people  has  not  for  its  object  to  create  a  privileged  race.'''     This 


Prop.  24.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  213 

against  Deut.  7:6;  Rom.  9  :  3-5  and  ch.  11,  and  a  host  of  passages,  be- 
sides the  important  part  this  people  is  yet  to  play  (Prop.  114)  in  the 
world's  history.  He  endeavors  to  show  that  the  election  is  a  ministry  by 
which  others  "^are  to  be  blessed.  AVhile  most  cheerfully  and  reverently 
acknowledging  that  the  present  and  ultimate  purpose  of  this  election  is  to 
bless  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  yet  to  effect  this  very  design  one  object 
is  to  raise  up  a  privileged  class,  tlirougli  tvhom  this  shall  be  effectually  and 
permanently  accomplished.  This  will  be  seen  under  the  Propositions  re- 
lating to  the  Covenants,  the  Kingship  and  Priesthood  of  the  saints,  etc. 
Even  Pressense  contradicts  himself  when  afterward  he  speaks  of  the  Jews' 
isolation,  receiving  revelations,  promises,  etc.,  above  all  other  nations, 
which  certainly  indicates  them  to  have  been  a  highly  privileged  people. 
Failing  to  perceive  that  the  election  itself  is  bound  up  in  and  part— out- 
wardly exi:)ressed — of  the  Divine  Purpose,  he  boldly  adds  the  following  : 
*'A  transient  (?)  fact  (viz.  :  election)  having  a  special  object  is  converted  into 
a  permanent  fact.  They  (certain  interpreters)  make  the  church  a  satel- 
lite of  Judaism,  called  to  shine  in  the  future  only  (?)  with  the  brightness 
which  it  borrows  from  that  system.  That  there  are  blessings  reserved 
(why?)  for  this  people,  we  cordially  concede,  but  that  their  destiny  shall 
forever  be  as  if  it  were  the  axis  of  universal  religious  history,  we  deny, 
even  in  the  name  of  Abraham's  election."  Alas  !  when  the  stock  upon 
which  we  are  grafted  is  thus  slightingly  treated  !  How  largely  it  affects 
the  interpretation  of  God's  Word  and  Purpose  !  Our  reply  to  this— as  well 
as  to  the  expression  :  "  Humanity  exists  only  for  the  Jews,  and  not  tho 
Jews  for  humanity" — will  be  found  under  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  cov- 
enants and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  for  our  reliance  is  ujDOn  Scriptural 
evidence. 

It  is  proper  to  refer  to  this  matter  in  this  connection,  that  the  reader  may  clearly  see 
the  fundamental  questions  that  must,  preparatively,  be  discussed.  Theology,  departing 
from  the  Primitive  Church  view,  has  too  often  grossly  misconceived  and  perverted  the 
election  of  the  Jews,  because  all  the  purposes  contemplated  by  that  election  have  not  yet 
been  made  manifest.  And  some  deny  that  it  any  longer  exists,  being,  as  Pressense  as- 
serts, "  a  IransienV  matter.  Our  faith  in  this  national  election  must  be  like  Paul's  (Eom. 
11),  that,  cut  off  from  its  realization  for  a  period,  it  is  still  sure,  and  will  be  openly 
shown  by  their  being  re-engrafted,  because  God  s  pnrjioses  are  uyichangeable,  and  cannot 
be  defeated  by  man.  If  the  election  is  "  transient  "  and  not  continued  in  engrafting 
Gentiles,  who  are  to  inherit  the  promises  given  to  the  elect  Jews  ;  how  do  Pressense 
and  others  indulge  the  hope  of  inheriting  the  promises  with  the  Patriarchs  ?  It  is  still 
true  to-day,  if  we  proi^erly  apprehend  the  foundations  of  our  hope,  what  God  puts  in  the 
mouth  of  man,  as  a  suitable,  comprehensive  petition  in  Ps.  104:  :  4,  5.  It  is  vain  to 
interpose  our  own  systems,  as  if  they  were  God's  arrangements. 

Obs.  8.  "The  middle  wall  of  partition"  proves  both  the  election  and 
the  elevation  to  a  privileged  class.  But  many  writers  (e.g.  Hodge,  Sys. 
Div.,  vol.  3,  p.  810)  boldly  and  self-confidently  assert,  without  the  least 
Scripture  to  sustain  it  (being  sheer  inference),  that  this  "  middle  wall"  was 
broken  down  between  the  Jewish  nation  and  other  nations.  This  is  a  grave 
mistake,  as  every  one  can  readily  see  by  a  comparison  of  passages  relating  to 
it.  The  Scriptures  simply  declare,  that  the  "  wall"  is  broken  down  between 
natural  Jewish  and  Gentile  believers,  so  that  all  of  every  nationality,  tvhen 
exercising  faith  in  Jesus,  become  one  in  Christ.  Instead  of  being  broken 
down  between  nations,  the  fact  is  asserted  o??/?/  respecting  believers  ;  and  this 
is  proven  by  the  additional  fact,  that?iO  other  nation  sustains  the  same  rela- 
tionship to  God  that  the  Jewish  does,  i.e.  is  a  covenanted  nation,  etc.     We 


214  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  24. 

are  informed,  however,  by  our  opponents,  that  the  expression  means  that 
all  the  restrictions  between  Jew  and  Gentile  were  removed.  The  Word 
teaches  the  exact  reverse,  that  some  still  remain.  Thus  e.g.  to  the  natural 
descendants  of  Abraham  is  exclusively  given  a  covenant  with  certain  prom- 
ises ;  only  those  who  are  identified  with  the  nation — this  distinctive  race — 
have  any  right  to  the  covenanted  blessings.  The  nation  is  chosen  not 
merely  as  a  depositary  of  the  truth,  but  as  the  vehicle  or  medium  through 
which  the  Saviour  is  to  come,  and  finally  completed  Redemption  in  a  7nan- 
ifested  Kingdom  under  the  reign  of  that  Redeemer  ;  for,  somehow,  all  the 
prophets  link,  the  glory  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ^vith  the  Jewish  race. 
The  individual  Jew,  on  the  principle  of  faith,  can  only  justly  claim  the 
promises  given  by  covenant  to  his  people.  But  now  an  emergency  arises  to 
test  the  validity  and  perpetuity  of  covenant  relationship."  The  nation 
proves  unfaithful,  and  now  God,  to  fulfil  this  same  covenant  and  the  iden- 
tical j^romises  given  to  this  people  to  be  realized  through  them,  extends  this 
principle  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles,  7iot  by  demolishing  the  covenant  and  prom- 
ises and  election,  not  by  taking  the  same  away  from  the  race  (for  then  the 
election,  confirmedhy  oath,  would  prove  a  nullity,  and  God  had  undertaken 
what  He  could  not  accomplish),  but,  as  Paul  expressly  informs  us,  hj  graft- 
ing the  Gentile  into  the  Jewish  stock,  by  adojiting  him  (in  law)  as  a  veri- 
table child,  legally  constituted  descendant  of  Abraham,  and  entitled  by  vir- 
tue of  such  adoption  to  the  privileges  and  blessings  promised,  through 
Abraham,  to  his  seed,  the  Jewish  race.  If  there  is  710  restriction,  why  is  it 
necessary  to  l)ecomeachildofAbraham\^,  and  thus  inherit  the  promises 
with  the  faithful  Jews  ?  This  very  incori:)oration,  so  much  insisted  on  and 
regarded  as  essential,  proves  that  "  the  wall  "  is  only  broken  down  heticeen 
believers  ;  and  to  facilitate  this  incorporation  or  engrafting,  the  rampart 
itself,  i.e.  the  Mosaic  ritual,  was  removed,  giving  Gentiles  better  access 
whercA^er  they  are.  The  Mosaic  economy — likened  also  to  a  wall  or  forti- 
fication— introduced  to  preserve  intact  the  elect  nation,  owing  to  its  sep- 
arating and  exclusive  injunctions,  is  not  the  election  ;  it  is  only  a  tempo- 
rary outgrowth  from  it,  and  hence  may  be  abolished  without  in  the  least 
aifecting  the  foundations,  which  lie  beyond  it  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant. 
This  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed  with  the  argument. 

This  most  effectually  answers  the  objections  urged  by  Hengstenberg  in  The  Jeics  and 
the  Christian  Church,  when  he  makes  "  the  type  of  Jewish  nationality  stamped  on  all 
nations  that  entered  into  the  Church  of  Christ,"  so  that,  at  the  Christian  era,  "their 
true  nationality  terminated."  The  Church  of  Christ  is  not  composed  of  nations, 
but  of  individuals  out  of  the  nations,  and  those  very  individual  believers  are  incor- 
porated into  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  i.e.  they  are  by  faith  engrafted,  and  this, 
now  accepted  by  faith  as  in  God's  purjiose,  will  be  openly  manifested  at  the  restoration  of 
the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom.  And  then  it  will  be  seen,  that  instead  of  "  their  orig- 
nal  nationality  having  become  the  common  property  of  all  Christians"  in  the  sense  of 
"  Christian  nations,"  it  belongs  exclusively  to  believers.  The  objections  urged  against 
our  view,  and  the  resultant  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  which  inevitably  must  fol- 
low, are  inferential,  and  are  chiefly  drawn  from  the  present  state  of  the  nation,  over- 
looking that  this  period  is  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  which  are  to  end  so  that  God's 
purposes  concerning  the  Jewish  nation  may  be  manifested.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  in 
this  respect  Hengstenberg,  and  others,  look  at  the  Eecord  in  the  light  of  a  preconceived 
idea  of  the  Christian  Church  being  the  properly  covenanted  Kingdom  of  God,  and  this 
influences  the  interpretation  of  election,  covenant,  and  prophecy. 

Ohs.  9.   In  this  connection,  most  briefly  we  say,  that  the  election  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  and  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  to  it,  ^^ositively  requires,  if 


PkOP.  24.]  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  215 

the  purposes  of  tliafc  election  are  ever  carried  out,  the  -perpetuation  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  even  if  it  be  in  a  very  reduced  form,  comprising  a  mere 
remnant.  The  natural  seed  itself  mud  he  preserved,  in  order  that  God's 
faithfulness  in  promise  may  be  exhibited  in  and  through  the  nation. 
Hence,  this  is  most  strilvingly  represented  in  Isa.  6  :  9-13,  where,  after  pre- 
dicting the  unbelief  of  the  nation  and  the  consequent  devastation  and  re- 
moval/or a  time  from  the  land,  this  giving  up  "  to  destruction  (is)  like  the 
terebinth  and  like  the  oak,  of  which  when  they  are  cut  down,  only  a  root 
stump  remains :  such  a  root-stump  is  a  holy  seed."  That  is,  it  is  regarded 
sacred,  and  will  ultimately  become  holy.  Following  Propositions  will,  at 
length,  indicate  ivhy  and  hoio  this  is  done.  God  will  never  lUteidy  forsake 
them,  but  will  remember  what  He  has  so  often  declared,  as  e.g.  2  Sam. 
7  :  24.  The  punishment,  the  scattering  and  desolation,  of  the  Jewish 
nation  is  itself  proof  of  their  election  as,  e.g.  Amos  (ch.  3  :  2),  declares  : 
' '  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  :  therefore  I  will 
punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  This  casting  oS  is  only  ie7nporary, 
as  evidence  e.g.  Zech.  10  :  6,  etc. 


216  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  25. 


Proposition  25.     The  Theocracy  was  an  earnest^  introductory^ 
or  initiatory  form  of  this  I^ingdom, 

The  Theocracy,  which  had  typical  and  ceremonial  observances,  as 
Paul  teaches,  that  were  to  be  removed  in  Christ,  had  a  form  of 
government  which,  prophecy  instructs  ns,  is  to  he  fully  exhibited 
in  all  its  beauty  and  excellency  under  the  Messiah,  the  great 
Jewish  king,  David's  son.  A  host  of  able  writers,  as,  e.g.,  Mar- 
tensen  (C7^.  Dog.,  p.  230),  call  ''the  Theocracy  the  Kingdom  of 
God.'' 

Provisionary  in  some  of  its  aspects,  the  Theocracy  still  possessed  the  essential  elements 
of  God's  Kingdom,  and  gave  an  earnest  only  of  what  God  intends.  It  was  a  form  of 
government  under  the  sole,  accessible  Headship  of  God  Himself  (Dent.  5,  etc.).  He  was 
the  Supreme  Lawgiver  in  civil  and  religious  affairs  (Deut.  4  :  12  and  12  :  32),  and  when 
difficult  cases  required  it  (Deut.  17  :  8-13),  the  Divine  Arbiter  or  Judge.  In  brief,  the 
legislative,  emcative,  and  judicial  power  was  vested  in  Him,  and  partially  delegated  to  others, 
to  be  exercised  under  a  restricted  form  (Deut.  16  :  18,  etc.).  All  the  people  (Deut. 
29  :  10-13),  in  their  civil,  religious,  social,  and  family  relations,  w^ere  to  acknowledge,  and 
be  obedient  to  His  expressed  will.  He  communicated  His  W'ill  according  to  an  or- 
dained manner,  and  when  not  declared,  or  where  there  was  doubt,  the  princes  or  lead- 
ers could  come  for  inquiry  and  receive  speciiic  directions.  As  an  indication  and  re- 
minder of  this  Supremacy,  all  the  peoj^le  were  required  at  certain  times  in  the  year 
(Deut  16  :  16,  etc. )  to  visit  the  place  of  special  manifestation,  and  renew  their  vows  of 
allegiance.  The  projjhets  (e.g.  Isa.  1  :  21-24)  spoke  for  God  to  the  highest  and  lowest, 
and  their  rebukes  were  in  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Head.  M'Clintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  Art.  "Monarchy,  Israelitish, "  says:  "According  to  the  sense  of  the  Mosaic 
constitution,  the  Hebrews  were  erected  into  a  kind  of  republic  under  the  immediate 
dominion  of  Jehovah,  forming  a  strict  theocracy."  Fairbairn  {Typology,  vol.  2,  p.  391)  gives 
as  the  true  idea,  and  distinctive  nature  of  a  Theocracy,  "  the  formal  exhibition  of  God  as 
King,  or  Supreme  Head  of  the  Commonwealth ;  so  that  all  authority  and  law  emanated 
from  Him,  and,  by  necessary  consequence,  there  w^ere  not  two  societies  in  the  ordinary 
sense,  civil  and  religiovis,  but  a  fusion  of  the  two  into  one  body"  (comp.  his  able  article 
on  "  The  Jewish  Theocracy"  and  Locke's  definition  in  "  Treat,  on  Toleration"). 

Obs.  1.  Kurtz  {Sac.  His.,  p.  113)  has  aptly  defined  :  the  "  Theocracy  is 
a  government  of  the  State  hij  the  immediate  direction  of  God  ;  Jehovah  con- 
descended to  reign  over  Israel  in  the  same  direct  manner  in  which  an 
earthly  king  reigns  over  his  people."  Gleig  {His.  Bible,  vol.  1/  p.  218) 
says  :  '*  With  wisdom  worthy  of  Himself,  He  assumed  not  merely  a 
religious,  but  a  political,  superiority,  over  the  descendants  of  Abraham  ; 
He  constituted  Himself,  i7i  the  strictest  sense  of  the  phrase.  King  of 
Israel,  and  the  government  of  Israel  became,  in  consequence,  strictly  and 
literally,  a  Theocracy.''' 

Comp.  Home's  Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  41,  Art.  "  Theocracy''  in  Smith's  Die;  Kitto's, 
Calmet's,  etc.,  Cyclops.  Indeed,  many,  unaware  how  fundamental  an  accurate  knowl- 
edge of  the  Theocracy  is  for  a  jjroper  understanding  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  how 
largely  it  enters  into  the  comjDosition  of  the  Millenarian  argument,  make  all  the  conces- 
sions possible,  viz. :  that  it  is  the  Kingdom  of  God,  a  kingdom  on  earth,  over  which  God 
rules  in  a  special,  direct  manner  as  an  earthly  king,  etc.  Eeferences  in  abundance 
might  be  adduced,  for  good  definitions  are  to  be  found  in  many  able  works,     Josephus 


Prop.  25.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  217 

(C.  Ap.  2  :  17)  appropriately  called  this  government  of  God's  over  their  nation,  so  differ- 
ent from  a  simple  monarchy,  oligarchy,  democracy,  or  any  other  form,  "  a  Theocracy," 
which  expresses  the  leading  fact,  that  of  God  Himself  being  the  recognized  King.  Some 
definitions  are  defective,  and  lead  to  error  on  an  important  point.  Thus  e.g.  Dixon 
(quoted  by  Stanley,  His.  Jewish  Ch.)  pronounces  it  to  be  "a  government  b}^  priests, 
conducted  in  the  name  of  God."  Stanley  (Lee.  7)  forcibly  shows  that  this  is  oi:)]30sed 
by  the  facts,  and  then  correctly  says  :  "  The  Theocracy  of  Moses  was  not  a  government 
by  priests  as  opposed  to  kings  ;  it  was  a  government  by  God  Himself,  as  opposed  to  the 
government  by  priests  or  kings.  It  was,  indeed,  in  its  highest  sense,  as  api^eared  after- 
ward in  the  time  of  David,  com^jatible  both  with  regal  and  sacerdotal  rule."  Originally 
and  primarily  all  civil  and  religious  law  proceeded  from  God,  and  others  in  the  govern- 
ment were  subordinates  to  carry  into  execution  the  supreme  will  of  the  King,  i.e.  God.  The 
Theocracy  is  something  then  very  different  from  the  Divine  Sovereignty,  and  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  same,  as  e.g.  is  done  by  the  able  lecturer  Cook  who  (as  quoted  in 
Cin.  Gazette,  March  27th,  1877)  saj^s  :  "  We  must  assert,  that  the  fact  of  the  Divine  Im- 
manence in  matter  and  mind  makes  the  world  and  nations  a  Theocracy."  The  word  is 
abundantly  perverted  ;  Romanists  apj^ly  it  to  their  church  ;  Protestants,  to  the  Christian 
Church  ;  Unbelievers,  to  priestly  rule  ;  writers,  to  Christian  states,  and  even  (as  Milli- 
gen)  to  the  Turkish  state,  etc.,  thus  violating  the  fundamental  and  essential  idea  involved 
in  its  meaning.  Baring-Gould  (Orig.  and  Devel.  of  Relig.  Belief,  p.  134)  correctly  gives 
the  meaning,  when  he  says  that  "  Jehovah,  the  Most  High,  was  the  Sovereign  of  the 
race,  reigning  directly  by  Himself,  and  indirectly  through  Prophet,  Levites,  Judges, 
Kings,  and  the  Law  ;"  but  he  fails  in  two  points  :  (1)  when  he  makes  the  Theocratic 
form  to  have  already  existed  in  the  days  of  the  Patriarchs,  and  (2)  when  he  remarks  : 
"  the  apostolic  and  sub-apostolic  age  was  one  of  pure  divine  theocracy.  To  this  succeeded 
the  sacerdotal  theocracy  of  the  Middle  Ages,  gradually  tending  toward  the  regal  theoc- 
racy, exhibiting  itself  in  the  consecration  of  kings  and  resignation  to  their  hands  of  the 
ai^pointment  of  prelates  and  the  regulation  of  ecclesiastical  discipline."  The  simple 
fact  is,  that  since  the  overthrow  of  the  Hebrew  Theocracy,  God  has  not  acted  in  the 
capacity  of  earthly  Ruler,  with  a  set  form  of  government,  for  any  nation  or  people  on 
earth  ;  and  the  application  of  the  word  to  any  nation  or  joeople,  or  organization  since 
then,  is  a  perversion  and  prostitution  of  its  pjlain  meaning.  Rogers  {Supjerh.  Grig,  of  the  Bible, 
p.  77)  justly  observes  :  "  The  Jewish  system  of  government  was  a  genuine  Theocracy. 
God  was  presumed  to  have  constituted  Himself  Monarch  of  the  State,  and  hence  its  con- 
trast with  every  other  form  of  government  in  the  ancient  world.  It  was  an  anomaly. 
Politics  were  identified  with  religion,  the  sacred  and  civil  codes  were  essentially  one,  and 
the  priestly  functions  assumed  a  paramount  imj)ortance.  God  was  the  invisible  but  real 
Sovereign.  Moses  himself  was  merely  His  servant  and  administrator  ;  he  did  not  affect 
to  be,  like  the  Grand  Lama,  or  even  the  Pope,  the  visible  representative  and  vicegerent 
of  God. "  As  this  Theocratic  idea  will  form,  an  important  element  in  our  argument  as  it 
advances,  a  few  more  references  may  be  in  place.  The  Ancient  His.  of  the  East,  p.  99, 
says  :  "  The  fundamental  principle  of  this  legislation  is  the  supreme  authority  of  God 
over  the  people  of  Israel  (1  Sam.  8  :  7  ;  12  :  12).  He  was  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  icord 
their  Sovereign  ;  and  all  other  authorit3%  both  in  political  and  civil  affairs,  was  subordinate 
to  the  continual  acknowledgment  of  His  own."  Wines  {Co7n.  Heb.  Laws,  p.  48-9)  says 
that  Jehovah  was  "  the  Civil  Head  of  the  State"  ;  ''  God  was,  by  the  compact  which  we 
have  been  considering,  constituted  King  of  the  Hebrews,  a  defection  from  Him  was  a  de- 
fection from  their  rightful  sovereign."  And  (p.  2G8)  "  God  was  the  temp>oral  Sovereign  of 
the  Israelites  ;"  (p.  456),  "  Jehovah  was  the  Civil  Head  of  the  Hebrew  state,"  "  the  law- 
making power  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  state  were  vested  in  Him"  ;  (p.  481),  "  God 
condescended  to  assume  the  title  and  relation  to  the  Hebrew  people  of  chief  Civil  Ruler. 
He  established  a  Civil  Sovereignty  over  them  ;"  (p.  538),  "  The  supreme  authority  of  the 
Hebrew  state  was  in  Jehovah — God  Himself  was  properly  King  of  Israel.'"  But  Wines 
makes  it  "a  restricted  Theocracy"  and  no  "pure  Theocracy, "  because  it  had  other 
"  civil  rulers,  men  who  exercised  authority  over  other  men,  and  were  acknowledged  and 
obeyed  as  lawful  magistrates."  But  the  institution  of  such  subordinate  rulers  is  an 
integrcd  part  of  a  pure  Theocracy  (as  evidenced  in  the  re-establishment),  leaving  the 
Supremacy  untouched  and  fully  acknowledged.  The  purest  Theocracy,  adapted  to  the 
government  of  nations,  that  reason  can  suggest,  must  necessarily,  as  a  means  of  honor- 
ing the  Sui^reme  Ruler  and  advancing  His  authority,  etc.,  have  its  subordinate  rulers. 

Ols.  2.  The  Theocracy,  as  once  established,  is  only  the  earnest,  or  initi- 
atory or  introductory  form,   giving  the  grand  outlines  or  fundamental 


218  THE  THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  25. 

lirinciyles,  because  it  still  lacked  some  features  to  perfect  it,  that  God  in- 
tended (as  will  be  shown  hereafter)  to  develop  afterward.  Typical  observ- 
ances were  to  give  place  to  the  antitype  ;  religious  ceremonials  were  to  be 
superseded  by  others.  The  King,  too,  was  invisible  ;  His  majesty  could 
not  be  revealed  because  a  perfect  Mediator  was  lacking— a  satisfactory 
atonement  of  sin  was  wanting.  But  when  the  Redeemer  appointed  has 
come,  when  the  atonement  is  made,  when  the  Mediator  is  God  manifested 
in  humanity,  tlien  provision  is  made  to  insure,  when  the  time  arrives,  the 
visibility  of  the  Theocratic  King  Himself.  Briefly,  turn  to  the  Theocracy 
as  it  existed,  and  then  read  what  the  Prophets  declare  of  this  same  Theoc- 
racy as  it  shall  l)e  manifested  under  the  reign  of  the  Messiah,  and  it  will 
be  seen  that,  while  the  fundamentals  which  constitute  it  a  Theocracy  re- 
main intact,  yet  glorious  additions  productive  of  happiness  and  blessing 
are  incorporated  with  it  at  its  future  re-establishment. 

Ohs.  3.  Here  is  v/here  eminent  writers  fall  into  a  mistake,  that  greatly 
influences  subsequent  interpretation  of  Scripture.  Thus,  e.g.  Lange  {Com. 
Matt.  3  :  2)  calls  the  Theocracy  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  its  typical  form. 
(So  Fairbairn,  Typology,  vol.  2,  ch.  4  ;  Neander  Fl.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  1,  p. 
499.)  What,  perhaps,  leads  to  such  an  error,  is  the  fact  that  typical  rites 
and  temporary  observances  were  connected  with  the  Theocracy.  But  while 
this  is  so,  the  Theocratic  ordering  or  government,  which  for  the  time 
adopted  these  rites  and  observances,  is  never  represented  as  a  type.  This  is 
utterly  opposed  by  covenant,  and  prophecy,  and  fact.  The  Theocracy  did 
not  adumbrate  something  else,  hwt  was  itself  the  Kingdom  of  Godm  its 
initiatory  form — a  commencement  of  that  rule  of  God's  as  earthly  King, 
which,  if  the  Jews  had  rendered  the  obedience  required,  would  have  ex- 
tended and  widened  itself  until  all  nations  had  been  brought  under  its  in- 
fluence and  subjection.  This  is  seen  in  various  promises  to  the  Jews. 
The  real  existence  of  the  Kingdom  as  something  that  existed  and  shall, 
although  now  set  aside  for  a  time  on  account  of  the  sinfulness  of  nations, 
exist  hereafter,  is  seen,  e.g.  (1)  in  the  actual  exercise  of  Sovereignty  by 
God,  which  is  no  type,  but  a  reality  ;  (2)  in  its  acceptance  by  the  nation  in 
its  associated  capacity  (Deut.  5,  etc.),  which  was  7io  type;  (3)  in  the 
realization  of  such  rule,  and  in  God  calling  them  (Deut.  26  :  18)  "  His 
peculiar  people,'''  etc.,  which  was  no  type;  (4)  for  when  this  Theocracy 
was  overthrown,  all  the  prophets,  with  one  mind  and  voice,  proclaim  that 
the  same  identical  Theocracy  shall  he  restored  again  with  increased  splen- 
dor and  glory  ;  (5)  it  is  covenanted  to  the  Christ  as  David's  Son,  and  is, 
therefore,  His  real  inheritance. 

Renss  {Els.  Ch.  Theol,  p.  29)  forcibly  says  :  "  The  fundamental  and  formative  idea 
of  the  prophetic  teaching  was  that  of  the  Theocracy."  The  restoration  of  the  Theocracy 
is  the  key  note  of  projohecy.  Well  may  it  be  asked,  tcliy  change  all  this  by  spiritualizing  the 
prophecies  to  make  them  applicable  to  a  Church- Kingdom  i)\eovy,  which,  against  the 
plainest  predictions  taken  in  their  grammatical  sense,  is  suj)posed  to  fill  ont  the  measure 
of  the  Theocracy  under  the  Messiah.  The  reader  is  exhorted  to  notice  that,  as  the  nature 
of  the  case  absolutely  demands,  every  prophet  unites  the  restoration  of  the  Theocracy  with 
the  Jewish  nation.  It  is  assuming  quite  a  responsibility  to  deny  this,  and  thus  pave  the 
way  for  confusion  and  misconception  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  But  we  let  Reuss  tell 
us:  "The  j^rophets  set  forth  as  the  end  or  the  law  of  that  national  life,  a  state  of 
society  in  which  all  the  citizens  should  be  brought  into  a  direct  relation  with  Jehovah, 
accepting  His  will  as  the  sole  rule  of  their  actions,  whether  collective  or  individual,  and 
receiving  in  return  for  this  unbounded  obedience,  the  promise  of  peculiar  divine  protec- 
tion.    Israel,  according  to  this  ideal  conception  of  it,  was  to  be  a  jjeople  of  saints  and 


PkOP.  25.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KIJS^GDOM.  219 

priests."  Precisely  so  ;  and  this  divine  portraiture  of  the  future  will,  most  certainly,  be 
realized  in  all  its  fulness  and  preciousness, /or  God's  words  are  faithful  and  true.  It  is  in- 
dicative of  great  weaJiness  that  many  professed  treatises  of  Theology  have  much  to  say 
about  the  Universal  Divine  Sovereignty,  the  Attributes  of  God,  but  absolutely  nothing 
respecting  the  only  form  of  government  in  which  He  condescends  to  manifest  Himself,  un- 
less it  be  in  the  way  of  typical  application.  In  this  connection  the  critical  student  is 
reminded  that  our  position  is  fortified  by  the  very  account  given  by  Moses  ;  for  the 
Theocratic  ordering  and  its  laws  are  contained  in,  and  enveloped  by,  a  regular  historical 
narration,  or  as  a  writer  {Bib.  Repos.,  Jan.,  1848)  phrases  it  :  "  It  is  a  code  of  laws  in  a 
frame  of  history. ' ' 

Obs.  4.  The  Theocracy  hasbeeu  a  matter  of  ridicule  to  unbelievers,  who, 
unable  to  see  in  it  a  far-reaching  and  most  merciful  Divine  Purpose,  re- 
ject it  as  utterly  unworthy  of  the  Almighty.  It  is  impossible,  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  for  any  man  to  appreciate  a  Theocratic  ordering,  whose 
heart  rebels  against  the  demands  of  obedience  necessitated  by  such  a  form 
of  government.  This  is  the  source  of  the  attempted  witticisms  in  this 
direction,  so  dishonorable  to  the  persons  indulging  in  them,  to  the  dearest 
feelings  of  believers,  to  the  dignity  of  mere  history,  and  to  God.  It  is  the 
beginning  of  just  such  a7i  infallible  rule  as  humanity  needs  ;  and  in  its  per- 
manent distinctive  features  is  indicative  of  wisdom  transcendently  supe- 
rior to  that  exhibited  in  ail  other  forms  of  government.  This  has  been 
noticed  by  various  writers,  and  will  be  referred  to  hereafter. 

Thus  e.g.  Milman  {His.  Jews,  Ap.  vol,  3,  p.  44)  observes  that  "  a  great  step  in  civil 
imjorovement  was  made  in  the  Hebrew  polity  ;"  and  adduces  it  as  an  evidence  of  the 
overruling  goodness  of  God,  that — in  opposition  to  the  Oriental  desjjotism,  the  abuse  of 
patriarchal  rule,  and  the  tyranny  of  aristocratical  castes — the  welfare  of  the  whole  com- 
munity was  assumed  as  the  great  end  in  view.  This  is  true,  for  the  lowest  as  well  as  the 
highest,  the  poorest  as  well  as  the  richest,  was  protected  in  his  rights,  and  oppression, 
tyranny,  etc.  was  impossible  (Deut.  16  :  18-20,  etc.)  under  its  constitution.  But  it  was 
far  more  than  a  mere  "  step"  in  the  right  direction— it  was  the  form  of  government, 
given  with  broad  outlines,  which  God- -who  knows  best — regards  as  most  desirable  for 
man,  indicated  (1)  b}'  its  first  establishment,  and  (2)  by  its  final  re-establishment.  To 
have  God  directly  for  a  Ruler,  is  both  an  unspeakable  honor  and  inestbnable  blessing. 

The  "  Oracular  Kesponse"  is  especially  the  subject  of  unbelieving  ridicule,  pretending 
it  to  be  on  a  level  with  pagan  oracles.  For  a  discussion  of  the  same  see  e.g.  Wines'  Gom. 
and  the  ch.  entitled  "  The  Hebrew  Oracle,''  and  other  works  devoted  to  the  Hebrew  Com- 
monwealth ;  Bib.  Diets.,  Arts.  "  Urim  and  Thummim,"  etc.  For  the  student  two  remarks 
suggest  themselves.  1.  The  "  Urim  and  Thummim,"  and  the  mode  of  oracular  response  is 
unknown,  as  also  the  manner  of  response  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  by  which  the  Theo- 
cratic orders  and  will  were  communicated.  This  lack  of  knowledge  is  providential  and 
designed.  These  things  foreshadowed  the  Theocratic  ordering  in  the  Person  of  the  God- 
man — whose  union  is  undescribed — and  this  total  silence  of  description,  as  well  as  over- 
ruling any  description  to  be  given  by  participants,  is  purposely  intended  in  order  to  pre- 
vent its  being  claimed,  perverted,  and  abused,  as  it  inevitably  would  have  been  in  the 
history  of  the  past.  It  is  something  so  high,  and  personally  related  to  God,  that  a  judi- 
cious silence  preserves  it  from  blasphemous  use  and  being  made  the  engine  of  ecclesias- 
tical tyranny.  2.  The  replies  usually  given  to  infidels  by  AjDologists  to  defend  these 
Oracular  Responses  from  being  classed  with  the  Delphic  Oracles,  etc.,  are  sufficiently 
ample  to  cover  the  ground,  although  the  main,  essential  reason  for  distinguishing  be- 
tween the  two  is  either  ignored  or  indirectly  touched.  The  King  being,  from  the  nature 
of  the  case,  invisible,  and  yet,  as  the  occasions  of  the  state  required,  accessible,  some 
mode  of  communication  between  the  King  and  nation  was  demanded.  The  Divine 
Oracle  is,  therefore,  a  necessary  part  of  a  Theocratic  government  ;  its  absence  would  at 
once,  and  justly  too,  lead  the  infidel  to  reject  its  Theocratic  nature.  Now  the  manner  in 
M^hich  this  oracle  was  presented  in  the  magnificent  and  typical  Holy  of  Holies  and  the 
breastplate  of  the  High-Priest  (accessible  at  all  times  as  the  exigencies  required,  and 
that  without  making  it — as  heathen  oracles — a  source  of  revenue  to  the  priests),  accords 
fidly  with  the  Theocratic  idea,  and  without  it  a  Theocracy  could  not  possibly  exist.  It 
is  customary  for  some  writers  to  say  that  this  form  of  communication  was  adapted  to 


220  THE  THEOCEATIC  KIISTGDOM.  [PeOP.  25. 

the  infancy  or  cMldliood  of  the  nation  and  race,  calling  it  a  "  condescending  method  " 
of  instruction  and  discipline,  but  the  student  will  find  that  immensely  higher  considera- 
tions— which  do  not  lower  the  intelligence  and  understanding  of  the  ancients,  in  order 
to  flatter  our  superiority — influenced  its  adoption,  viz. :  the  Theocratic  ordering. 

Ols.  5.  The  blessings  annexed  to  the  Theocracy  are  numerous,  and 
precisely  such  (e.g.  Levit.  ch.  26,  Deut.  chs.  28,  30,  etc.)  as  a  people 
here  on  the  earth  earnestly  desire  to  attain.  They  culminate  in  the  ex- 
pression (Levit.  26  :  12)  :  "  I  luill  tualk  a7no?ig  you,  and  toill  le  your  God, 
and  ye  shall  he  7ny  people,^^  which  is  again  reiterated  (Rev.  21  :  3)  at  the 
restoration  of  the  Theocracy. 

It  has  been  maintained  that  all  the  blessings  were  of  a  purely  earthly  nature,  prom- 
ises of  abundance,  peace,  etc.,  but  this  is  not  correct,  since  spiritual  blessings,  such  as  the 
forgiveness  of  sin,  the  consciousness  of  faith,  hope,  love,  adoption,  etc.,  were  pre-emi- 
nently enjoyed,  as  the  experience  of  Moses  and  the  ancient  worthies  testifies.  Excejition 
is  taken  by  some  because  nothing  is  directly  (as  in  the  New  Test.)  said  concerning  the 
resurrection  or  the  future  life  ;  and  from  this  unbelief,  unable  to  discern  the  consistent 
policy  of  God  in  such  reticence,  has  charged  the  record  with  inconsistency.  But  an  ex- 
act and  beautiful  consistency  is  strictly  observed.  The  reason  why  these  things,  alluded 
to,  could  not  be  directly  revealed  is  this  :  the  Kingdom  is  established  in  its  initiatory 
form,  and  under  the  blessings  received  through  it,  God  wishes  His  people  to  attain  unto 
Abraliamic  faith  (in  the  case  of  Isaac),  and  trust  that  the  blessings  of  the  future — for 
the  resurrection  and  future  life  are  included  in  them  —shall,  in  God's  way  and  time,  be  real- 
ized. Faith  in  the  King  is  to  be  developed.  The  test  applied  to  Abraham  is  continued, 
viz. :  to  secure  an  unbounded  confidence  in  God  that  His  covenant  promises  to  Abraham. 
would  be  fulfilled,  even  if  they  required  (as  is  the  case)  a  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
The  resurrection  and  the  future  life  (as  will  be  shown  under  the  covenant)  is  most 
strongly  implied,  and,  indeed,  without  them  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  the  promises  can 
be  realized.  But  as  this  Kingdom  was  tendered  to  those  then  living,  it  would  have  been 
incongruous  to  have  told  them  at  that  period,  before  the  unbelief  of  the  nation  and  the 
downfall  of  the  kingdom  made  it  necessary  to  particularize  God's  purposes  and  to  ex- 
plain more  in  detail  the  manner  of  accomplishment,  that  they  could  only  inherit  the 
Kingdom  at  the  period  of  the  resurrection.  It  would  have  been  inconsistent  (for  thej^ 
the  future  not  known,  could  not  have  understood  it),  as  they  already  enjoj^ed  the  earnest 
form  of  the  Kingdom.  This,  however,  did  not  prevent  Moses  from  giving  intimations 
in  his  last  addresses,  that  the  faithful  of  all  ages — without  entering  into  particulars  how 
God  will  accomplish  it,  after  great  evils  had  befallen  the  nation,  after  the  calling  of 
others,  after  a  period  of  terrible  vengeance — would  enjoy  God's  special  favor  with  the 
nation  itself  restored.  After  the  Kingdom  was  overthrown,  then  circumstances,  to  en- 
courage the  believing,  called  for  a  more  extended  statement  of  the  resurrection,  which 
received  its  fullest  need  of  being  plainly  taught  when  the  Messiah  came,  tendered  the 
Kingdom  and  was  rejected.  But  these  subjects  were  not  ignored  in  the  first  place,  as 
will  be  shown  when  we  come  to  them  in  regular  order.  The  objection  that  all  the  bless- 
ings, in  some  way,  related  to  this  earth,  has  no  force,  because  the  Kingdom  of  God  ^gj^ 
Kingdom  here  on  the  earth,  and  in  its  final  re-establishment  is  still  on  the  earth,  but  an  t  ^^^ 
redeemed  from  the  curse. 

Obs.  6.  Briefly,  attention  is  directed  to  the  fact  that  while  this 
Theocracy  was  a  Kingdom  oji  or  i?i  the  earth,  it  cannot  be  strictly  called 
an  earthly  kingdom.  Many  writers  (e.g.  Barrow's  Works,  vol.  2,  p.  705) 
pronounce  it  an  "  earthly  kingdom,"  which  is  a  mistake,  made  and  in- 
dulged to  exalt  the  church  by  way  of  comparison.  The  Theocracy  is  from 
God;  it  was  not  of  earthly  or  human  origin,  for  it  was  divine,  directly 
instituted  hy  God,  and  having  God  for  its  Ruler.  The  Bible,  through  the 
prophets,  insists  upon  this  point,  which  a  believer  in  the  Word,  seeing  its 
foundation  and  siqder structure,  must  concede.  Hence  Jesus,  who  is  the 
promised  King  of  this  re-established  Theocracy,  well  says  that  His  King- 
dom is  not  of  this  world,  etc. 


Prop.  25.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  221 

It  may  be  suitable  to  remark  that  some  writers  (e.g.  Castelar,  The  BepuUican  Move- 
ment  in  Europe,  p.  98,  Harper's  Mag.,  Dec.  1874)  endeavor  to  make  the  Theocracy  a  Re- 
public, but  the  Theocracy,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  is  not  a  Republic.  "While  it  is  not 
a  monarchy  in  the  sense  adverted  to  by  Samuel,  viz. :  of  purely  human  origin,  yet  it  is 
a  monarchy  in  the  highest  sense.  It  is  not  a  Rej^ublic,  for  the  legislative,  executive,  and 
judicial  i30wer  is  not  potentially  lodged  in  the  people,  but  in  God  the  King  ;  and  yet  it  em- 
braces in  itself  the  elements  both  of  a  Monarchy  and  of  a  Republic  ; — a  Monarchy  in 
that  the  absolute  Sovereignty  is  lodged  in  the  person  of  the  One  great  King,  to  which  all  the 
rest  are  subordinated,  but  Republican  in  this,  that  it  embraces  a  Republican  element  in 
preserving  the  rights  of  every  individual,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  and  in  bringing  the 
peojDle,  in  their  individuality,  to  participate  in  the  govermneni  by  the  nation,  as  such,  orig- 
inally choosing  the  form  of  government,  showing  themselves  to  be  "  a  willing  people," 
and  aiding  in  electing  the  subordinate  rulers.  In  other  words,  by  a  happy  combination, 
Monarchy  under  divine  direction,  hence  infallible,  brings  in  the  blessings  that  would 
result  from  a  well-directed  ideally  Republican  form  of  government,  but  which  the  latter 
can  never  inWy,  of  itself,  realize,  owing  to  the  depravity  and  diversity  of  man.  Baldwin 
{Armageddon,  p.  47),  to  make  out  his  parallel  between  the  Hebrew  Theocracy  and  Amer- 
ican Republicanism,  declares  :  "  Church  and  State  were  disunited  by  the  Hebrew  Consti- 
tution, and  placed  in  the  relation  of  associates."  This  is  totally  incorrect,  as  any  work  on 
the  Theocracy  shows  by  reference  to  the  laws  and  their  practical  workings.  Such  a  notion 
is  directly  opi^osed  to  the  meaning  of  a  Theocracy. 


pJaii. 
tor- 
in 


222  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  26. 


Peoposition  26.  The  Tlieocraci/  thus  instituted  would  have  heen 
^permanently  established.,  if  thepeoj^le^  in  their  national  capacity^ 
had  heen  faithful  in  obedience. 

By  this  is  meant,  not  that  the  typical  and  provisionary  adjuncts 
would  have  remained  unchanged,  but  that  the  direct,  personal 
rulership  of  God  (i.  e. ,  the  distinctive  features  which  constituted  it 
a  theocracy)  would  never  have  been,  for  a  time,  set  aside,  and  that 
the  blessings  promised  under  a  Theocratic  rule  woukl  have  been 
amply  realized.  No  humble  believer  of  the  Word,  reading  the 
covenant  made  at  Horeb  and  i)ondering  the  blessings  and  curses 
announced  by  Moses,  can  doubt  this  supposition.  It  is  true  God 
forelvnew  the  nation's  defection,  which  is  already  freely  predicted 
by  Moses  in  his  last  addresses,  but  this  does  not  prevent  him  from 
offering  this  Kingdom  for  their  continued  acceptance  and  retention 
in  accordance  with  moral  freedom. 

What  God  would  have  done,  in  case  the  nation  had  ever  proven  faithful,  in  provid- 
ing for  the  Salvation  of  man  (i.e.  by  way  of  atonement),  we  are  not  concerned,  for,  while 
feeling  that  His  wisdom  would  have  been  equal  to  the  development  of  a  plan  to  correspond 
with  such  faithfulness,  we  do  know  (and  this  confirms  our  faith)  that  this  Theocracy  it- 
self is  formed  in  an  initiatory  manner  in  view  of  ih.Q  foreknown  apostasy,  and  that  out  of 
it,  in  the  royal  line,  might  come  the  Saviour — thus  vindicating  the  knowledge  of  God, 
We  also  are  assured,  that  this  same  Theocracy— rejected  by  some — contains  a  divine 
plan  for  the  accomplishment  of  great  ends,  reaching  from  and  through  the  Jewish  nation 
over  the  earth  ;  and  that  the  unfaithfulness  of  man,  however  it  may  delay  the  final  re- 
sult, cannot  alter  or  reverse  it.  Objections  based  upon  what  might  have  been,  or  how, 
in  certain  contingencies,  God  would  have  ordered  things,  are  always  unsafe  ;  seeing 
that  we  must  take  affairs  as  they  have  transpired  and  trace  God's  overruling  Providence 
in  them.  Taking  this  scriptural  view,  it  is  impossible  to  break  the  force,  e.g.  of  Isa. 
ch.  58  or  of  Jer.  17  :  25,  which  sustain  our  Proposition.  The  expressive  language  e.g.  of 
Ps.  81  :  13-16  is  sufficient  :  "  O  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto  Me,  and  Israel 
had  walked  in  My  ways  !  I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  enemies,  and  turned  My 
hand  against  their  adversaries.  The  haters  of  the  Lord  should  have  submitted  them- 
selves unto  Him  ;  but  their  time  should  have  endured  forever.  He  should  have  fed  them 
also  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat  ;  and  with  honey  out  of  the  rock  should  I  have  satisfied 
thee." 

Ohs.  1.  The  erection  of  the  Theocracy,  and  the  exceeding  great  promises 
annexed  to  it  just  before  entering  Canaan,  where  the  matter  was  to  be 
tested — promises,  too,  which,  if  experienced,  would  exalt  the  nation  above 
all  otlier  nations  in  power,  wealth,  plenty,  etc. — has  been  pronounced  by 
unbelievers  as  exceedingly  extravagant,  full  of  Oriental  hyperbole.  Some 
late  writers  take  the  liberty  of  sneering  at  God's  "  little  Kingdom"  as 
contrasted  with  the  mighty  empires  of  "the  poor  heathen,"  and  sarcas- 
tically compare  the  power  and  resources  of  the  Jewish  judges  and  kings  to 
that  of  present  Arab  sheiks.  This  attempt  at  wit  fails,  because  it  does  not 
allow  the  Record  to  speak.    The  comparison,  unjust  in  several  particulars;^ 


Prop.  26.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  223 

does  not  notice  that  the  reason  why  such  promises  were  not  experienced 
and  became  history,  lies  in  the  non-performance  of  certain  imposed  con- 
ditions— in  tlie  recorded  unfaithfulness  of  the  Jews. 

When  obedient,  sufficient  assurances  are  given  in  the  history  of  the  Jews  to  indicate 
that,  if  they  had  continued  so,  God  also  would  have  been  faithful  to  His  promises  in 
elevating  the  nation.  And  in  justice  to  God  Himself,  it  must  be  kept  in  mind,  that  the 
measure  of  their  success  was  proportioned  to  His  foreknown  knowledge  of  the  coming 
hardness  of  their  hearts.  It  would  have  been  unwise  to  exalt  the  Jews  to  a  degree  for 
which  nationally  they  were  unprepared  ;  and,  therefore,  in  all  His  dealings  with  them, 
He  keeps  in  view  the  final  purpose,  viz. :  to  bestow  without  stint  all  blessings  when  the 
time  had  fully  come  that  this  same  Theocracy,  under  the  Eulership  of  an  immortal  King 
and  subordinate  rulers,  would  be  established  on  a  basis  of  stabilit}^  and  perpetuity,  in 
which  it  woiild  be  impossible  ever  to  pervert  them.  He,  who  sees  the  end  from  the  begin- 
ning could  not,  owing  to  the  depravity  of  man,  and  the  moral  constitution  of  man  under 
government,  shower  His  rich  blessings  profusely  until  He  had  first  a  reliable,  tried,  re- 
deemed, God-fearing  and  serving  race  gathered  out  of  the  Jews  and  other  nations,  who, 
by  their  station,  power,  influence,  etc.,  icould  insure  a  complete  and  perfect  fulfilment  of 
God's  own  idea  of  government  associated  with  Redemption.  When  we  come  to  the  final 
restoration  of  the  Theocracy,  this  fact  (as  we  shall  show)  exhibits  itself  prominently,  and 
vindicates  the  wisdom,  mercy,  and  justice  of  God  in  the  past. 

Obs.  2.  The  institution  of  the  Theocracy  with  the  claims  annexed  to  it, 
and  the  laudation  put  upon  it  by  God  Himself,  marks  not  ouly  its  desira- 
hleness,  but  that  it  is  the  settled  jmrpose  of  God  ultimately  to  establish  its 
su])remacy.^  Its  development,  final  attainment,  is  conditioned  only  by  the 
2:atbering  of  a  people,  who  will  "  le  willing  in  the  day  of  His  'poicer.^'' 
God,  too,  cannot  and  will  not  violate  His  own  character,  His  moral  gov- 
ernment, and  man's  free  agency,  by  forcing  this  Kingdom  with  its  blessings 
upon  an  unwilling  people.  He  may  employ  persuasion  and  correction  to  a 
certain  limit,  but  beyond  that  He  never  proceeds.  However  we  may  ex- 
plain this — for  some  things  in  this  conection  are  probably  beyond  human 
comprehension,  and  honest  differences  of  opinion  may  arise — the  fact  itself 
is  historical.^ 

'  For  God  never  fails  in  any  of  His  undertakings.  If  we  are  to  believe  men  who  reject 
this  Theocracy,  then  He  failed  to  establish  a  Theocracy  commensurate  with  the  promises, 
being  insignificant  in  civil  and  political  power  when  contrasted  with  earthly  empires. 
We  are,  however,  content  to  await  (rocfs  oiai  time  for  its  re-establishment  (Comp.  Prop- 
osition 201). 

2  The  Theocratic  promises  could  not  be  realized,  because  the  supreme  love  for  the  Ruler 
was  lacking  in  the  nation.  However  excited  in  individuals,  the  nation  by  its  sinfulness 
showed  itself  unworthy  of  it.  Hence  God's  plan  for  developing  it  in  the  future,  which 
plan  we  propose  to  follow  to  its  consummation.  The  Theocracy  was  not  simj)ly  prei^ara- 
tory  but  initial,  in  the  sense  of  its  being  a  real  Kingdom  of  God,  which  was  established 
in  order  to  show  forth  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  the  distinguished  blessings  flowing 
from  it.  Had  the  Jewish  nation  been  faithful  to  its  engagements  to  the  Supreme  King, 
had  the  subordinate  rulers  obeyed  the  Supreme  Will,  then  the  nation  would— as  iDromised 
— have  multiplied  its  blessings,  enlarged  its  advantages  and  power,  secured  a  supremacy 
over  all  other  people,  and  become  the  benefactors  of  the  race  in  disseminating  the 
knowledge  and  truth  of  God.  The  place  of  its  manifestation  geographicalh^  considered 
(centrally  located),  the  form  of  government,  the  special  promises  given  to  it,  the  King 
at  its  head,  etc.,  evidence  tliis,  but,  alas !  depraved  human  nature  forbade  its 
realization. 

The  student  will  observe  the  language  employed  by  us  in  the  previous  Prop,  and  in 
this  one  respecting  the  Theocracy,  viz.:  that  it  was  initiatory,  by  which  we  mean  that  in 
some  of  its  laws  and  provisions  it  was  susceptible  of  changes  (but  not  in  its  funda- 
mentals). Jesus  Himself  intimates  only  the  relative  goodness  of  some  of  the  laws.  Matt. 
19  :  8  ;  Mark  10  :  5  ;  comp.  Ezek.  20  :  25,  w^hich  Wines  and  others  claim  as  teaching  that 
some  of  the  laws  were  "  not  absolutely  the  best,  though  they  were  relatively  so."     Mon- 


224  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  26. 

tesquien  (quoted  by  Wines,  Com.,  p.  119)  sagaciously  observes  that  this  passage  "  is  the 
sponge  that  wipes  out  all  the  dilhculties  which  are  found  in  the  law  of  Moses."  The 
entire  spirit  of  the  Bible  clearly  indicates  that  while  the  Theocratic  idea  and  its  main 
supports  are  retained,  special  statutes  and  provisions  were  given  because  deemed  the  best 
adapted  for  the  age  and  people.  For  some  of  the  laws  were  changed  and  others  annulled 
(see  Wines,  Michaelis,  and  others  specially  devoted  to  the  Laws),  as  the  advanced  and 
altered  condition  of  the  nation  made  requisite.  (The  phrase  "  forever"  appended  to  re- 
pealed laws — e.g.  comp.  Lev.  17  :  7  and  Deut.  12  :  20,  21 — simply  indicates  that  laws  re- 
main only  in  force  until  repealed  or  annulled  by  the  Lawgiver.  Hence  if  the  Jews  had 
remained  faithful,  other  changes,  adapted  to  altered  circumstances,  might  reasonably 
have  been  anticipated,  just  as  changes  will  be  introduced  at  the  restoration,  without 
affecting  the  Theocratic  form.) 

Obs.  3.  The  reader  will  carefully  observe  (as  use  will  be  made  of  it 
hereafter)  that  this  Theocracy  is  very  diiferent  from  God's  universal,  gen- 
eral sovereignty  exercised  by  virtue  of  His  being  the  Creator.  Kurtz  {His, 
Old  Cov.y  vol.  3,  p.  104)  says  :  "  As  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the 
world,  He  was  the  Lord  and  King  of  every  nation,  but  He  did  not  base  His 
kingly  relation  to  Israel  upon  this  foundation  ;  He  founded  it  rather  upon 
what  "^  He  had  done  especially  for  Israel  :  it  was  not  as  Elohim,  but  as 
Jehovah,  that  He  desired  to  reign  over  Israel,"  etc.  ;  He  also  distinguishes 
between  a  rule,  the  result  of  "  unconditional  necessity,"  and  one  the 
"consequence  of  the  free  concurrence  of  the  people" — one  arising  from 
Creation,  the  other  from  Redemption.  Kurtz  is  right  in  thus  discriminat- 
ing ;  but  to  make  it  more  accurate,  it  is  proper  to  add,  that  God  also 
founds  this  Theocratic  rule  upon  His  having  produced  this  nation,  as  in 
Isaac's  birth,  out  of  due  course  of  nature,  and  He  appeals  to  His  Creator- 
ship  (e.g.  Deut.  32  :  8,  15,  and  30  :  20),  as  a  reason  why  this  Theocratic 
rule  should  be  accepted  ;  but  the  main  consideration  urged  is,  that  through 
the  Theocracy,  God's  rule  thus  specially  manifested  through  one  nation, 
and  finally  embracing  all  nations,  tlie  Redemptive  Purpose  shall  he  accom- 
plished dnd  God's  Sovereignty  in  all  its  fulness  he  recognized  hy  every 
creature.  Attention  is  directed  to  this  now  to  show  :  (1)  that  a  special, 
significant  Kingdom  was  instituted  ;  (2)  this  Kingdom  was  pre-eminently 
the  Kingdom  of  God,  to  distinguish  it  from  mere  earthly  kingdoms  ;  (3) 
such  a  Kingdom,  differing  from  all  others  in  that  it  had  God  Himself  act- 
ing as  earthly  Ruler,  was  given  to  the  Jewish  nation  as  a  specicd  favor  and 
blessing,  with  the  idea  of  extending  it,  eventually,  over  the  earth  ;  (4)  that 
if  rejected  or  withdrawn  from  the  nation,  for  a  time,  on  account  of  un- 
worthiness,  the  nation  is  still  under  God's  general  sovereignty  ;  (5)  that 
anything  less  than  such  a  Theocratic  rule,  in  which  God  is  personally  ac- 
cessible and  rules  over  the  nation,  is  a  lowering  of  condition,  the  non-be- 
stowment  of  a  most  distinguishing  ])rivilege.  The  propriety  and  force  of 
this,  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed  in  the  argument. 

Suppose  e.g.  that  the  Jewish  nation  is  again  restored  to  God's  favor  and  their  land 
without  a  restoration  of  the  Theocracy,  then  no  matter  what  church  privileges  are  be- 
stowed, the  nation,  as  such,  forfeits  its  highest,  dearest,  noblest  privilege  and  blessing. 
And  yet  such  is  the  position  accorded  to  it  by  various  writers,  over  against— as  will  be 
shown — the  most  express  promises  to  the  contrary. 

Ols.  4,  The  mournful  comments  and  sad  rebukes  of  the  Prophets  over 
the  unfaithfulness  of  the  nation,  its  lack  of  appreciating  Theocratic  priv- 
ileges, and  the  resultant  withdrawal  of  the  Ruler,  are  sorrowful  evidences 
of  the  truth  of  our  Proposition.     Nearly  every  one,  in  this  connection, 


Prop.  26.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  225 

points  out  two  things  :  (1)  that  a  return  to  God  with  full  allegiance  to  Him 
in  the  Theocratic  order,  would  secure  a  return  of  God's  blessing  (thus 
showing  God's  purpose  to  be  a  continuous  one),  and  (2)  that  upon  such  a 
return  at  some  period,  indefinitely  stated,  in  the  future,  this  Theocratic 
rule — a  special,  distinguishing  privilege — is  invariably  connected  with  the 
nation,  where  God  chose  to  place  it.  (Thus  e.g.  comp.  Mai.,  chs.  3  and  4 ; 
Levit.  26,  noticing  v.  42  ;  Deut.  chs.  30,  31,  32,  and  33.) 

The  Jews  themselves,  in  e.g.  "  The  Liturgy  of  the  Jews"  (Art.  on,  LiilelVs  Liv.  Age, 
Oct.  7th,  1876),  acknowledge  their  sinfulness  :  "  We  acknowledge  that  we  have  sinned  ; 
that  we  have  acted  wickedly.  O  Lord,  according  to  all  Thy  righteousness,  we  beseech 
Thee,  let  Thy  anger  and  Thy  wrath  be  turned  away  from  Jerusalem,  Thy  City  and  Thy 
Holy  Mountain  ;  for  it  is  on  account  of  our  sins  and  the  iniquities  of  our  ancestors  that 
Jerusalem  and  Thy  people  are  become  objects  of  reproach  to  all  around  us,"  etc. 


226  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  27. 


Proposition  27.  The  demand  of  the  nation  for  an  earthly  hing 
was  a  virtual  ahandonment  of  this  Theocratic  lining dom  by  the 
nation. 

This  is  explicitly  stated  ;  for  when  (1  Sam.  8  :  4-9)  the  elders  of 
Israel  desired  a  king,  God  told  Samnel,  "  they  Jiave  rejected  Me, 
that  I  should  not  reign  over  them,^^  and  entered  against  it  a  '^  sol- 
emn protest. "  On  the  day  of  presentation  (1  Sam.  10  :  17-19), 
Samuel  protested  :  "Ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,''''  in  this 
matter  of  asking  for  a  king.  To  show  the  nation  ''the  great 
wickedness"  it  was  guilty  of  "in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  in  asking 
you  a  king,"  to  Samuel's  word  was  added  (1  Sam.  12  :  16-19),  by 
way  of  attestation,  a  severe  thunder-storm  in  harvest  time.  The 
sinfulness  consisted  (ch.  12  :  12)  in  saying  that  "  a  king  shall  reign 
over  us,  when  the  Lord  your  God  was  your  King.'' ' 

This  desire  for  a  King,  like  other  earthly  kings,  was  expressed  before,  but  regarded  as 
sinful.  Gideon'  (Judg.  8  :  22,  23)  was  offered  the  Kingship  a  hereditary  monarchy,  but 
he,  appreciating  the  honor  of  the  instituted  Theocratic  ordering,  refused  it,  saying  : 
"  fhe,  Lord  shall  rule  over  you.''  Kitto's  Bible  His.,  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  make 
Abimelech  the  first  King  of  Israel.  The  question  was  proposed  to  the  Ch.  Union,  and  it 
correctly  replied  (Aug.  22,  1877)  that  Abimelech  exercised  authority  during  the  anarchic 
days  described  by  Judges,  but  that  in  no  proper  sense  could  he  be  called  King  of  Israel, 
being  a  mere  chieftain,  a  Judge,  and  that  Saul  was  the  first  of  the  Kings  who  exercised 
royal  authority, 

Ols.  1.  No  deeper  insult  could  scarcely  be  offered  to  God  than  such  a 
request  indicated.  This  is  seen  by  considering  the  Being  who  conde- 
scended to  be  their  Euler,  the  blessings  that  He  promised,  and  the  design 
He  had  in  view  in  thus  becoming,  in  a  direct  manner,  King  over  the 
nation.  The  only  extenuation  for  such  ''  wickedness,"  as  Samuel  in- 
timates, is  found  in  their  distressed  circumstances,  also  brought  upon 
them  by  unbelief. 

Schlegel  {Philos.  of  His.,  Lee.  6),  speaking  of  the  Jewish  Theocracy,  says :  "  This  con- 
stitution has  been  called  a  Theocracy,  and  so  it  was  in  the  right  and  old  signification  of 
that  word,  by  which  was  meant  a  government  under  the  special  and  immediate  Provi- 
dence of  God."  This,  excellent  as  it  is,  is  only  a  half-truth,  for  the  Providence  of  God 
is  thus  exerted  in  behalf  of  the  nation  because  it  is  a  government  of  which  He  Himself  is 
the  acknowledged  Euler.  This  is  proven  by  our  Propositions.  This,  too,  seems  to  be 
Schlegel' s  idea  in  the  phrase  quoted,  for  he  correctly  rejects  the  interpretation  (now  even 
used  by  many  respectable  writers)  which  gives  sucli  a  latitude  to  the  word  as  to  make  it 
a  priestly  dominion,  or  which  confines  it  too  much,  or  even  exclusively,  to  the  priest- 
hood (saying  that  Moses  was  no  priest,  etc.).  Then,  justly,  he  regards. the  desire  of  the 
Hebrews  to  have  a  king  like  other  nations,  "  a  wish  which,  in  the  higher  views  of  Holy 
Writ,  was  regarded  as  the  culpable  illusion  of  a  carnal  sense."  The  student,  therefore, 
will  keep  in  view  the  fact  that  a  Theocracy  is  far  more  than  the  exercise  of  a  special  and 
immediate  providence  ;  it  is  an  earthly  relationship  of  Kingship  over  a  nation  in  which 
the  honor  and  glory  of  the  King  is  deeply  concerned. 


PkOP.  27.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  227 

Obs.  2.  Some  writers  when  adverting  to  this  point  are  not  sufficiently- 
precise  in  their  language.  Burt  {Redemp.  Dmvn,  p.  242)  says  :  "  The  idea 
of  an  earthly  monarchy  does  not  seem  to  have  entered  the  Mosaic  constitu- 
tion," and  "  the  idea  of  a  monarchy  did  not  enter  the  Mosaic  system,  and 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  natural  develojoment  of  that  system."  "  Jahn  and 
others  declare  that  an  "  earthly  monarchy  was  out  of  harmony  with  the 
Mosaic  economy."  Such  views  are  the  result  of  stoi:)ping  short  at  Samuel's 
protest  and  not  carefully  noticing  wliat  followed.  On  the  other  hand, 
Hengstenberg  and  others  maintain  that  the  monarchy  was  a  necessary 
development  of  that  constitution  or  system.  Such  plainly  ignore  the 
protest  of  God,  which,  if  it  means  anything,  certainly  denotes  that  God  did 
not  deem  it  necessary.  Hence  neither  party  are  correct,  although  both  have 
a  portion  of  the  truth.  Notice  :  1.  The  Theocracy  was  a  monarchy,  but  God 
was  the  monarch.  This  is  so  clearly  evidenced  by  the  facts  that  it  is  now 
acknowledged  by  talented  writers,  as  e.g.  Wines  {Com.  on  the  Laws  of  the 
Anc.  Hel).),  who  says  that  God  was  accepted  by  the  nation  as  their  "Civil 
Euler,  Monarch,  and  Political  Head;"  "the  Sovereignty  of  the  nation 
was  vested  in  Him."  2.  It  was  a  monarchy  over  a  nation  here  on  earth — 
the  kingdom  was  here  and  not  elsewhere,  as  the  rule,  decisions,  etc.,  were 
administered  here,  so  that  while  divinely  constituted  it  also  sustained  an 
earthly  relationship.  3.  While  the  idea  of  a  monarchy  was  bound  up  with 
the  Theocracy  ("  the  Lord  yo2ir  God  was  yonr  Lviny"),  it  was  not  requisite, 
nor  was  it  a  natural  development  of  the  Theocratic  idea,  that  this  style  of 
monarchy  should  be  yielded  up  for  another  merely  human,  or  for  one 
acting  in  conjunction  with  the  other  ;  this  the  express  language  and 
rebukes  of  Samuel  forbid.  4.  But  while  the  yielding  of  God  to  the  desire 
of  the  Jews  doesnot  evince  a  natural  or  legitimate  outgrowth  (His  protest 
being  sufficient  to  indicate  this),  yet  we  shall  show,  step  by  step,  how,  by 
not  conceding  His  authority  to  another,  etc.,  He  could,  in  mercy  and 
forgiveness,  engraft  even  such  a  kingship  into  the  Theocracy  itself.  5. 
God,  foreseeing  this  very  sin  of  the  nation,  made  provision  for  it  already 
through  Moses  (thus  evidencing  both  His  foreknowledge  and  a  Divine 
Purpose  to  be  accomplished).  To  avert  the  evil,  and  overrule  it  for  good. 
He  gave  express  directions  (Dent.  17  :  14-20)  that  the  choosing  of  such  a 
King  should  be  under  His  exclusive  control,  and  that  such  a  King  vnisf 
acknowtedge  the  Theocracy  as  existing — i.e.  God's  supremacy  in  the  King- 
dom— making  his  rule  subordinate  in  all  respects  to  that  of  the  Chief 
Ruler.  6.  God  could  do  this  the  more  consistently  and  engraft  this  King- 
ship into  the  Theocracy,  because  the  Theocracy  contemplated  its  latest  and 
most  glorious  manifestations  to  be  a  Rulership  of  God  in  the  man  Jesns, 
Thus,  at  some  future  time,  in  the  line  of  the  kingly  race  selected,  the 
Theocratic  idea  would  be  openly  exhibited,  and  the  two  elements  be 
perfectly  blended  in  one,  enhancing  the  glory  and  majesty  of  the  King. 
The  contemplation  of  such  a  Plan  ought  to  produce  the  most  profoundly 
reverent  and  grateful  feelings. 

Newman,  in  his  His.  of  the  Hebreic  Monarchy,  passes  by  the  Theocracy,  and  begins,  as 
the  starting-point  of  connected  history,  at  the  election  of  Saul.  He  entirely  overlooks 
the  essential  part  of  a  Theocracy,  viz. :  God  ruling  over  the  nation  as  an  earthly  king,  and 
that,  as  we  shall  show,  this  Theocratic  idea  was  enforced  over  the  kings.  Hence  his 
work  is  vitiated  by  a  fundamental  error,  nullifying  his  destructive  criticism.  The  same 
is  true  of  numerous  works,  otherwise  able,  that  have  a  moulding  influence  over  many. 


228  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  28. 


Propositioi^  28.    God  makes   the    Jewish  King  subordinate  to 
His  own  Theocracy. 

According  to  Samuers  statement,  God  pardons  the  nation  on  the 
conditions  that  it  still,  with  the  king  included,  acknowledges  him 
as  the  continuous  Supreme  Monarch,  and  that  the  king  chosen 
shall  enforce  the  laws  given  by  his  superior  in  authority.  In  this 
entire  transaction  God's  theocratic  rule  is  preserved  intact.  The 
earthly  king  was  under  certain  imposed  restrictions,  and  was 
threatened,  in  case  of  disobedience,  with  the  displeasure  of,  and 
punishment  from,  the  stilt  recognized  Civil  Head  of  the  nation. 
This  was  felt  and  freely  confessed  by  Saul  (1  Sam.  13  :  12,  and 
28  :  15),  David  (1  Sam.  6  :  20,  and  7  :  23-26,  etc.),  Solomon  (1  Kings 
3  :  8,  9,  and  6  :  12-14,  also  ch.  8,  etc.),  and  others. 

This  submission  is  indicated,  e.g.  by  building  "a  house  unto  the  Lord,"  in  and 
through  which  the  Will  of  the  great  Euler  might  be  obtained  and  confirmed.  When  the 
kings  forgot  their  position  and  trust,  or  directly  rebelled  against  their  Head  or  Chief,  the 
result  was  that  the  prosperity  of  the  king  and  nation  was  checked,  the  original  blessings 
were  withdrawn,  intended  good  was  withheld,  and  the  curses  given  through  Moses  were 
experienced.  Solomon  (2  Chron.  9:8)  acknowledges  this  subordinate  position,  when 
he  accepted  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba's  expression  (the  knowledge  of  which  had  evidently 
been  previously  imparted),  that  he  was,  "  set  to  he  king  for  the  Lord  his  God."  The  reader 
will  not  fail  to  observe  that  the  nation  receiving  Saul  as  king,  then  concurring  in  his 
rejection,  and  then  accepting  of  David,  clearly  indicates  that  it  realized  its  Theocratic 
position  as  a  nation.  The  prom^Dt  acquiescence  in  Samuel's  apijointments  shows  that  it 
believed  him  to  act  under  the  divine  direction  of  the  Chief  Ruler,  and  this  was  evi- 
denced to  them  by  the  miraculous  thunder-storm  (a  storm  ridiculed  by  unbelief,  but 
highly  proper  and  Theocratic  in  the  grave  crisis).  In  addition  to  the  references  given 
under  the  previous  Props.,  we  add  the  following.  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  Art. 
"  Monarchy,"  speaking  of  the  change  introduced,  says  :  "  The  King,  however,  was  only 
empowered  to  administer  the  Theocratic  government  as  a  Viceroy  of  Jehovah,  the  heavenly 
Sovereign,  and  was  bound  to  this  law  as  the  highest  authority,  so  as  to  exclude  the  idea 
of  an  independent  and  alysolute  monarch."  Wines  [Com.  on  the  Laws,  p.  548,  etc.)  remarks 
on  the  foreseen  provision  of  Deut.  17  :  14-20,  that  "  Monarchy  was  permitted  to  the 
Israelites  ;"  that  the  choice  of  a  king  was  limited,  so  that  the  nation  "  was  not  to  ap- 
point any  one  as  king  who  was  not  chosen  of  God  ;"  and  that  "  the  law,  and  not  the 
king's  own  will  and  pleasure,  was  to  be  the  rule  of  his  administration.' '  The  student  will 
find  m  Deut.  17  :  14-20  express  provision  made  by  fundamental  law,  defining  and  limit- 
ing the  power  of  future  kings,  obligating  them  to  keep  the  law  of  God,  thus,  in  the  same 
vindicating  both  the  supremacy  of  the  Head  of  the  nation  as  Chief  Ruler,  and  His  fore- 
knowledge of  the  result  when  the  nation  was  "  come  unto  the  land  "  which  their  Ruler 
gave  it. 

Obs.  1.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  Joseplnis  (Ant.  6  :  3  §§  2,  3),  and 
those  who  receive  his  view,  are  mistaken  when  they  end  the  Theocracy 
with  the  Judges.  The  concession,  made  by  the  nation  and  earthly  king, 
was  such  that  God  could,  in  equity,  pardon  the  people  and  continue  His 
august,  special  rule. 


PkOP.  28.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  229 

Fulton,  in  Government:  Human  and  Divine,  p.  20,  makes  this  mistake,  saying  :  ''The 
very  Kingdom  of  Israel  was  a  professed  Theocracy,  with  God  as  King  and  the  man  who 
filled  the  throne  on  earth  only  vice-king  or  deputy  ;  we  say  professed  Theocracy,  he,- 
csLMse  the  real  Theocracy  of  the  Jews  ceased  when  they  chose  a  human  king."  Now  the 
reverse  of  this  is  the  truth,  as  abundantly  seen  in  Clod's  own  words.  This  will  be  more 
clearly  seen  as  we  proceed.  For  the  present,  over  against  Fulton  we  quote  Oosterzee 
(C'/i.  Bog.,  vol.  1,  p.  467),  who  well  observes  that  the  rise  of  royalty  (i.e.  the  reign  of  the 
earthly  kings)  was  not  "  the  end  of  the  Theocracy,''  but  "  rather  its  modification,  and  at 
the  same  time  its  development  ;"  and  "  that  the  King  over  this  people  must  not  be  an 
autocrat,  hwt  rather  a  theocrat,  par  excellence,  a  viceroy  and  minister  of  God."  We  may 
add,  as  a  hint,  that  this  very  Theocratic  feeling  and  submission,  so  characteristic  of 
David,  is  what  jDre-eminently  constituted  him  a  man  after  God's  heart,  notwithstanding 
his  lapses, 

Obs.  2.  In  addition  to  the  priesthood,  the  given  law,  and  the  access  to 
God  on  particular  occasions,  a  safeguard  was  thrown  around  this  subor- 
dinate kingship  to  prevent  it,  either  in  its  hereditary  character  (in  case  of 
wicked  successors),  or  in  its  State  and  Religious  officials  (in  designing, 
ambitious  men),  from  interfering  with  the  rights,  laws,  truths,  etc.,  of  the 
Supreme  Ruler.  This  was  done  by  what  Augustine  {City  of  God,  17  :  1) 
and  Stanley  {His.  Jeic.  Ch.,  1  Ser.  S.  18)  have  called  a  "  prophetical  dis- 
pensation, which  ran  parallel  with  the  monarchy  from  the  first  to  the 
last  King."  King  and  priest  were  to  yield  to  the  authority  of  the 
Prophet,  simply  because  the  latter  directly  revealed  the  will  of  the  Supreme 
King. 

This  has  been  noticed  by  numerous  writers,  as  e.g.  Kurtz  (in  Sac.  His.  and  His.  of 
Old  Gov.),  Delitzsch,  Auberlen,  Hengstenberg,  etc.  Hence,  too,  Stanley  (Lee.  18,  His. 
Jew.  Ch.)  calls  it  a  "  vulgar  error"  to  represent  "  the  conflict  of  Samuel  with  Saul  as  a 
conflict  between  the  regal  and  sacerdotal  power,"  for,  as  he  observes,  Samuel  was  no 
jDriest,  and  it  was  doubtful  whether  he  was  of  Levitical  descent.  It  was  as  a  prophet  that 
Samuel  spoke,  as  one  directly  commissioned  by  God.  The  priesthood,  indeed,  served 
as  a  check  and  as  directors,  but  as  they,  too,  were  liable  to  forget  their  allegiance  and 
duty,  the  prophet  was  the  purest  revealer  of  the  King's  will  and  pleasure.  J.  Stuart 
Mill  (Bep.  Government,  p.  41)  curiously  observes  the  practical  effect  of  this  safeguard  in 
these  words  :  "  Under  the  protection,  generally  though  not  always  effectual,  of  their 
sacred  character,  the  Prophets  were  a  power  in  the  nation,  often  more  than  a  match  for 
kings  and  priests,  and  kept  up,  in  that  little  corner  of  the  earth,  the  antagonism  of  in- 
fluences which  is  the  only  real  security  for  continued  progress." 

Dean  Graves  {On  the  Pentateuch,  Pt.  1.  Lee.  1)  has  framed  a  strong  argument  (repro- 
duced by  Wines  in  Com.,  p.  ISO,  etc.)  on  the  ancient  existence  of  the  Pentateuch,  derived 
from  the  fact  that  the  regal  form  was  subsequently  introduced,  and  that  it  placed  such 
restraints  upon  the  kings,  abridging  prerogatives,  curbing  their  power,  so  that  the  im- 
probability  of  any  king  (as  e.g.  Josiah,  etc.)  forging  it,  or  accepting  it  from  others,  with 
its  imposed  conditions,  is  self-evident.  We  may  add  that  a  form  of  government,  such 
as  delineated  in  the  Pentateuch,  with  its  peculiar  code  of  laws,  punishments,  etc.,  is  so 
patent  a  matter  for  a  whole  nation  to  consider,  that  a  fabrication  of  the  same,  and  its 
imposition  upon  a  nation  as  something  that  had  previously  existed,  when  it  is  false,  is 
simply  an  utter  impossibility.  Men  are  never  willing  to  place  themselves  under  such 
restraints  (or  to  trace  their  disasters  to  a  violation  of  them)  unless  they  are  authorita- 
tive, and  they  know  the  source  and  legitimacy  of  the  same — thus  confirming  the  testi- 
mony of  Jewish  quotations,  commemorative  rites,  festivals,  etc. 


230  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  29. 


Proposition  29.  Tliis  Theocracy  or  Kingdom  is  exclusively 
given  to  the  natural  descendants  of  Ahraliam^  in  their  corporate 
capacity. 

This  follows  from  the  preceding  Propositions,  and  cannot  be 
denied  by  any  one  without  doing  violence  to  the  Scriptures.  For 
the  entire  tenor  of  the  Word  shows  that  the  nation  was  selected 
and  favored  in  tills  respect  beyond  all  other  nations.  No  others 
could  enjoy  the  privileges  and  blessings  which  it  conferred,  and 
contemplated  to  confer,  without  being  adopted  into  the  nation,  and 
X)rovision  for  such  a  contingency  was  early  (Ex.  12  :  48,  Numb. 
9  :  14)  made. 

Obs.  1.  The  Proposition  simply  repeats,  in  another  form,  an  idea  to 
which  it  is  desirable  to  give  some  prominence,  since  it  has  an  important 
bearing  in  tracing  the  proper  conception  of  the  Kingdom.  It  teaches  that 
the  Kingdom  is  solely  given  to  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Avhich  embraced  the 
Jews.  For  God  condescended  only  to  act  as  earthly  Rider  in  behalf  of 
that  one  nation,  the  election  being  thus  practically  demonstrated  in  their 
nationality.  If  this  Kingdom  is  to  be  given  to  any  other  than  a  believing 
Jew,  we  certainly,  in  view  of  the  plain  language  confining  it  to  such 
(Comp.  Prop.  24),  ought  to  have  the  matter  stated  m  the  most  express 
manner.  If  G-entiles,  as  Gentiles,  without  adojition  or  engrafting,  so  that 
they  shall  be  legcdhj  regarded  as  Abraham's  seed,  can  receive  this  kingdom, 
then,  in  view  of  the  numerous  counter  statements  to  the  contrary,  the 
most  precise  and  determinate  instructions  should  be  presented,  affirming 
the  same.  Now  the  lack  of  these — our  opponents  relying  on  pure  in- 
ference— is  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  our  position,  that  the  Kingdom 
belongs  to  the  faithful  Jews  and  to  those  who  are  received  as  such  because 
of  faith  in  the  Messiah.  Abraham's  seed,  however  produced,  natural  or 
engraftedy  receive  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  2.  So  sure  is  this  Kingdom  to  the  seed  of  Abraham,  by  virtue  of 
covenant  and  oath,  that  when  the  Lord  was  displeased  with  the  nation  at 
the  establishment  of  the  Theocracy  and  threatened  its  extermination,  yet, 
to  insure  the  fulfilment  of  H\^  pledged  woyH,  He  proposed  that  of  Moses  He 
would  raise  up  such  a  nation.  The  same  is  intimated  by  John  the  Baptist 
(Matt,  3  :  9)  when,  the  Jews  refusing  to  repent,  he  told  tiiem  that  God 
could,  if  it  was  requisite,  raise  up  children  to  Abraham  by  supernatural 
power.  Such  instances  teach  that,  rather  than  fail,  God  can  work  to  any 
extent  demanded,  but  cdways  in  the  Jeimsh  line — i.e.  all  avIio  are  ever  to 
enjoy  His  special  Theocratic  favor  must,  in  some  way,  be  regarded  as  the 
descendants,  the  children  of  Abraham. 


Prop.  29.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  231 

Ohs.  3.  This  gives  us  one  of  the  reasons  why  intermarriages  with  heathen 
were  forbidden,  why  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  manifested  such  zeal  in  purging 
the  Jewish  nation,  why  the  amalgamation  of  the  Jewish  with  other  nations 
was  prohibited.  The  introduction  of  others  into  the  nation  could  only  be 
hiwf Lilly  preferred  in  accord  with  a  proper  confession  of  faith,  and  then 
could  they  participate  in  the  Theocratic  privileges  and  blessings. 

Obs.  4.  iSTo  reader  of  the  Old  Test,  can  fail  to  see  that  the  Theocratic 
idea  is  the  natioiVs  foundation  jwincijjUy  permeating  all  that  pertains  to  it. 

Why  is  it  that  in  the  Scriptures  God  passes  by  (excepting  in  a  few  hostile  predic- 
tions) the  mighty  monarchies  and  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  which  are  the  boast  and  pride  of 
profane  historj^  and  centres  His  interest  alone  in  the  small  Jewish  nation  ?  Unbelievers 
consider  this  a  great  defect,  and  ridicule  its  occurrance.  But  the  answer  is  a  consistent 
and  logical  one  :  God,  in  virtue  of  covenant  and  relationship,  could  not  consistently  take 
any  other  position  in  honor  to  Himself,  and  the  nation  which  forms  the  basis  of  His 
Theocratic  rule  and  manifestation. 

Ois.  5.  This  feature,  the  Theocracy  alone  pertaining  to  the  Jews,  was 
their  proud  boast,  as  seen  e.g.  Deut.  4  :  32-40,  Ps.  147  :  20. 

Ohs.  6.  This  is  the  Key  to  the  significant  superscription  of  the  cross  : 
"  T/iis  is  the  King  of  the  Jeivs^  But  whilst  we  must  not  forestall  coming 
phases  in  our  argument,  leaving  them  to  arrive  in  their  regular  historical 
and  logical  order,  yet  it  may  be  in  place  to  urge  the  reader  to  consider  why 
Jesus  should  be  specifically  designated  on  the  cross  Ofily  as  "  the  King  of  the 
Jeius,^^  and  not  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  or  of  nations  generally.  There  must 
be  some  valid  reason  why,  as  the  King  of  the  Jews,  He  becomes  the  King 
over  all  nations. 


232  THE  THEOCRATIC  KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  30. 


Proposition  30.  TJie  Prophets^  lioivevei%  loitJiout  specifying  the 
maimer  of  introduction,  predict  that  the  Gentiles  shall  partici- 
pate in  the  hlessings  of  this  Theocracy  or  Kingdom. 

This  needs  no  special  proof,  for  the  fact  is  satisfactorily  evi- 
denced that,  although  the  prophets  announced  it  and  Jesus  de- 
clared it,  the  apostles  even  did  not  understand  hoio  it  could  consis- 
tently (in  view  of  our  i3receding  Propositions)  be  done,  until  the 
principle  and  order  under  which  it  could  be  accomj)lished  were 
revealed  to  Peter  (Acts  10  and  11),  and  acknowledged  in  a  council 
(Acts  15).     Hence  it  is  called  a  mystery  revealed  (Eph.  3). 

Ols.  1.  If  these  predictions  were  not  given,  a  strong  proof  of  God's  fore- 
knowledge and  determination  to  carry  on  His  Divine  Purpose  would  be 
lacking.  Even  already  by  Moses  (Deut.  32  :  21,  43)  it  is  foretold,  and  as 
the  anticipated  unbelief  and  perversion  of  the  nation  arises  and  its  rejec- 
tion for  a  time  is  insured,  the  announcement  becomes  more  bold  and 
frequent. 

Obs.  2,  If  such  prophecies  were  wanting,  then  the  objection  would 
arise  that  God  had  not  revealed  a  definite  Plan,  or  made  'provision  in  that 
Plan  for  tlie  temporary  failure  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Therefore,  aside  from 
their  relationship  to  us  believing  Gentiles,  they  are  exceeding  precious 
predictions,  indicating  conqMeiiess  in  the  Divine  Purpose. 

Obs.  3.  The  very  manner  in  which  the  predictions  are  given  manifest 
the  wisdom  of  God.  One  feature  is  carefully  kept  in  the  background 
until  the  time  has  arrived  for  fulfilment,  viz.  :  hoiv  the  Gentiles  are  to 
have  part  in  the  blessings  of  Abraham,  seeing  that  the  promises  pertain  to 
Abraham's  seed.  While  the  kingdom  belongs  to  the  Jews,  and  the  nation 
renders  itself  unworthy  of  it,  and  God's  Purpose  is  to  turn  to  the 
Gentiles,  yet  the  mode  of  incorporating  these  Gentiles  is  left  for 
future  revelation.  The  call  of  the  Gentiles  is  given  in  a  way  that 
implies  that  certain  events  connected  with  it  must  first  be  fulfilled  and 
additional  revelation  be  given  before  it  can  be  properly  comprehended.  In 
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  for  if  every  event, 
link  after  link  in  the  chain  of  Providence,  had  been  revealed  systematic- 
ally and  minutely,  it  would  have  interfered  with  the  moral  freedom  of 
man,  or  it  would  have  placed  him  in  a  position  from  which  to  consider 
himself  the  victim  of  unalterable  predestinated  circumstances.  Thus  e.g. 
had  the  Word  predicted  all  the  events  respecting  the  First  Advent  and  its 
result,  the  conduct  of  the  Jews,  Romans,  etc.,  in  such  a  form,  as  necessary 
preliminaries  to  the  call,  it  would  have  been  terribly  depressing,  and  it 
would  materially  (2   Cor.  2  :  8)   have   interfered  with   the  fulfilment  of 


Prop.  30.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  233 

events.  There  is,  consequently,  a  deep  wisdom,  such  as  man  could  not 
evince,  in  those  isolated,  broken  predictions.  A  blessed  sufficiencij  is  given 
to  vindicate  God's  knowledge,  to  impress  His  mercy,  and  to  invite  trust 
in  His  Power,  that  the  Messiah  will  be  (as  the  Jews  also  held,  Mac.  2  :  7, 
14)  "  the  King  of  the  world." 

Ols.  4.  The  reader  will  notice,  too,  that  this  calling  of  the  Gentiles, 
while  in  a  few  places  spoken  of  as  a  result  of  Jewish  unbelief  and  punish- 
ment (as  e.g.  Deut.  32  :  21),  is  more  generally,  almost  universally,  pre- 
dicted by  the  prophets  to  occur  in  connection  icitli  the  Jewish  nationality. 
It  is  a  matter  either  taken  for  granted  or  directly  mentioned  in  immediate 
combination  with  the  Jewish  nation.  The  reason  for  this  is,  that  while  the 
Gentiles  enjoy  special  favor  during  the  period  of  the  nation's  dispersion, 
yet,  as  Paul  (Rom.  11  :  12,  15)  asserts,  they  shall  realize  immeasurably 
greater  blessings  when  God's  kindness  and  faithfulness  shall  restore  the 
nation  to  its  former  Theocratic  position.  The  privileges  and  rich  results  of 
the  Theocracy  restored  are  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  Gentiles  (thus  e.g.  Isa. 
11  :  10-16,  chs.  60,  55,  62,  etc.). 

Ols.  5.  The  Kingdom  being  given  to  the  nation,  and  this  being  based 
on  covenants  and  promises  confirmed  hy  oath,  (1)  no  other  nation  can 
obtain  it  without  a  recall  of  the  covenant  relationship  ;  (2)  such  a  recall  is 
nowhere  asserted,  but  the  jyerpetuity  of  the  same  is  most  explicitly  and 
repeatedly  affirmed  ;  (3)  the  nation,  for  a  time  suffering  the  withdrawal 
of  God's  special  Theocratic  ordering,  does  not  vitiate  the  covenant  relation- 
ship ;  (4)  hence,  the  participation  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  covenanted  re- 
lationship (and  through  this,  to  an  inheriting  of  the  blessings  of  the 
Kingdom),  must  depend  (as  has  been  stated)  upon  their  being,  in  some 
way,  ado2)ted  as  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Precisely  here  was  the  mystery, 
which  baffled  even  the  apostles  until  S]}ecicOdy  enlightened. 

Ohs.  6.  The  original  bestowment  of  the  Theocracy  being  in  a  most 
solemn,  public  manner,  if  ever  the  Jewish  nation  is  to  forfeit  its  relation- 
ship to  tliat  Theocracy,  this  must  be  done  in  as  public  manner,  or,  at  least, 
the  most  explicit  statement  must  come  from  God  to  this  effect.  This  has 
not,  cannotho,  done — although  multitudes,  misled  by  the  temjjorary^wm^h- 
ment  of  the  nation,  infer  it — without  violating  God's  pledged  word. 
Hence,  the  importance  of  closely  tracing  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
noticing  its  connection  with  the  Jewish  nation. 

Obs.  7.  Infidelity  has  never  yet  attempted  to  explain  by  what  mental 
process  the  prophets  could  predict  this  call  of  the  Gentiles  when  so  directly 
opposed  to  Jewish  election  and  covenanted  relationship.  Unbelief  cares 
not  to  study  the  delicate  and  most  admirable  traits  of  Divine  Wisdom  in 
the  predictions,  given  in  general  terms,  and  leaving,  for  the  best  of 
reasons,  the  filling  up  of  the  web  of  events  to  the  time  of  fulfilment. 
Unbelief  cares  not  to  contemplate  prophecies  given  thousands  of  years  ago, 
and  most  wonderfully  fulfilling,  without  interfering  with  moral  freedom, 
for  this  would  lead  to  the  supernatural. 


234  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIIS^GDOM.  [PrOP.  31. 


Peoposition  31.     This  Theocracy  or  Kingdom  was  identified 
ivith  the  DavidiG  Kingdom. 

Passing  by  the  Davidic  covenant  (to  be  adduced  hereafter),  which 
distinctly  exhibits  this,  it  is  sufficient,  for  the  present,  to  remark 
that  after  the  Theocratic  Ruler  deposed  Saul,  owing  to  disobedience, 
he  chose  David,  and  having  made  for  wise  reasons  (e.g.,  in  view  of 
the  prospective  seed  of  David,  Jesus,  "  the  Christ")  the  Kingdom 
hereditary  in  David's  family,  he  received  that  throne  and  Kingdom 
and  adopted  the  same  as  His  oion  throne  and  Kingdom.  The 
Theocracy  and  Davidic  kingdom,  in  virtue  of  a  special  and  peculiar 
covenant  relcdionship  between  the  two,  were  regarded  as  one,  and 
in  the  future  so  identical  in  destiny  that  they  are  inseparably 
linked  together. 

Comp.  Props.  27  and  28.  This  union,  and  the  subordination  of  the  kings,  as  well  as 
the  divine  right  running  only  in  the  line  of  God's  own  choosing,  shows  how  we  are  to 
estimate  the  unfounded  assertions  of  those  who  make  this  Kingship  a  despotic  or  unlim- 
ited monarchy,  with  the  notion  of  thereby  enforcing"  the  divine  right  of  kings"  and 
"  the  passive  obedience  of  subjects."  What  terrible  outrages  on  humanity  have  been 
committed,  under  the  false  claim  that  they  were  sanctioned  by  the  governmental  institu- 
tions of  God  !  How  tyrants  have  ruled  and  crushed  their  subjects,  under  the  pretence  of 
being  a  legitimate  outgrowth  of  Theocratic  ordering  ;  and  how  crimes  of  the  deepest  dye 
have  been  condoned  under  the  plea  that  "  the  anointing  oil"  of  priestcraft  made  them 
per  se  "  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord  !"     (Comp.  Props.  164  and  1G3.) 

Obs.  1.  This  is  also  evidenced  by  three  things— (1)  Tlie  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom  is  called  the  Lord's.  Thus,  e.g.  in  1  Chron.  28  :  5,  it  is 
"  the  throne  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Lord  over  Israel''  ;  in  2  Chron.  13  :  8, 
"  the  Kingdom  of  the  Lord''  ;  and  in  2  Chron.  9  :  8,  the  King  is  placed  bv 
God  "  on  His  throne  to  le  King  for  the  Lord  thy  God."  (2)  The  King  was 
expressly  designated  ''the  Lord's  Anointed"  (1  Sam.  24:6,  2  Sam. 
19  :  21,  etc.).  (3)  The  Prophets,  after  the  establishment  of  the  Davidic 
throne  and  kingdom,  invariably  identify  the  glorions  Kingdom  of  God,  the 
blessed  Theocratic  rule,  as  manifested  through  the  same,  as  e.g.  Jer.,  chs. 
33  and  36,  Amos  9,  etc.  The  reason  for  this  lies  in  the  firm  and  per- 
petual union. 

Wines  {Com.  on  the  Laws,  p.  506-7),  to  carry  out  his  theory  ot  an  election  by  the  peo- 
ple, m  order  to  make  out  a  parallel  with  American  Kepublicanisra,  makes  David  to  have 
been  elected  by  the  voice  of  the  people  to  that  high  dignity"  (2  Sam.,  chs.  3,  4,  5.  and 
12),  and  that  the  anointing  of  Samuel  was  a  sort  of  "  prophetic  anointing,"  which  did 
not  inaugurate  him  as  king,  or  confer  any  authority  upon  him."  "  It  was  rather  a  pro- 
l)hecy  in  action,  foreshadowing  his  future  elevation  to  the  throne."  We  contend  from  the 
historical  account  given,  and  the  particular  narrative  of  the  choosing  of  David,  that  it  was 
more  than  this  :  the  anointing  gave  him  a  right,  from  the  Chief  Euler,  to  the  Kingdom 
and  over  the  Kingdom,  although  the  realization  of  the  same  was  delayed  for  a  time. 
God  had  thus  designated  His  choice,  and  it  was,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  infallible.  The 
consent  of  the  tribes,  one  after  the  other,  was  not  merely  a  matter  of  prudence  and 


PbOP.  31.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  235 

policy  to  bind  them  cordially  to  David,  but  resulted,  as  tlie  history  shows,  in  view  of 
God  havin-  ^iven  him  this  right,  evidenced  by  his  anointing.  The  anointing  con.sMu^ed 
him  the  King,  however  delayed,  and  this  kingship,  in  the  divine  line,  con  mued  the 
re^gnized  one,  although  afterward  the  majority  of  the  tribes  revolted  from  the  Davidic 
house.     The  majority  did  not  change  God's  plan,  etc. 

Obs  2  The  King  was  under  God's  special  care,  and  treason  against  the 
King 'was  treason  against  God  ;  it  was  only  when  engaged  m  sin  that  God  s 
care  was  removed  and  the  people  were  exhorted  to  resist  wickedness  even  in 
the  chief.  The  diminishing  of  the  Kingdom  (as  in  the  days  ot  Jeroboam, 
which  was  not  to  be  forever,  seeing  that  no  promises  of  perpetuity  were 
ffiven  as  to  David),  and  the  final  overthrow  of  the  Kingdom— indeed  all 
the  great,  leading,  vital  aifairs  pertaining  to  it,  are  always  represented  as 
occurring  under  the  direction  and  control  of  the  mighty  iheocratic  Ruler, 
—He  being  fully  and  legitimately  identified  \N'\t\\  its  successes  and  reverses, 
exaltation  and  debasement,  union  and  divisions,  etc. 

One  reason  why  greater  favor  was  shown  to  the  tribes  adhering  to  the  kingly  line 
cho^n  by  GodThL^to  those  tribes  that  revolted  and  sought  out  their  own  l^e  springs 
fi^mthe'f act  that  the  one  party,  with  all  their  faults,  kept  closer  to  the  Theocratic  older- 
mg  than  the  other.  Some  works  (as  Baldwin's  Armageddon),  m  then  ^l^^of  ^^^  ^o  ^^^ 
monarchy,  and  desire  to  make  out  the  Theocracy  a  Republic  ir:l^f^l^„;|  ,\%^°^V'^^^^^^ 
in  a  few  details),  speak  of  the  Davidic  monarchy  as  if  it  were  smful,  ^nc^  God  hated 
it,  etc.  This  is  simply  to  ignore  the  historical  statements  the  covenant,  the  «^ousand 
promises,  connected  Vith  it.  God  was  only  displeased  ^-^t^^*;  ^^^^\P^;^^  J^^^  '^\l^^'^;, 
ever  it  forgot  its  Theocratical  position  and  subordination.  Any  other  vie^^  is  a  peiver 
sion  of  fact. 

OM  3  This  Theocratic  union  is  shown  also  in  the  fact  that  not  only 
all  the  Theocratic  laws  and  arrangements,  previously  made,  remained  in 
full  force,  and  the  King  obligated  himself  to  see  them  enforced  but  m 
important  matters  pertaining  to  the  nation  the  King  was  to  consult  with, 
and  obey  the  imparted  instructions  of,  the  Chief  Ruler.  The  numbering 
of  the  people  (2  Sam.  24  and  1  Chron.  21)  by  David '^6V^//o?^^  di vine  per- 
mission, being  an  infringement  of  Theocratic  order,  an  act  of  insubordina- 
tion to  his  Superior,  was  correspondingly  severely  punished. 

Celsus,  Voltaire,  and  a  host  of  unbelievers,  with  assumed  "g^^^^^^^  .^f^^f {J^lf  °^' j^;- 
sist  that  David  having  alone  sinned  in  numbering  the  people,  it  was  unjiYt  t^^at  t^^^  "^- 
nocent  people  should  have  suffered  the  punishment  due  to  him      feo  ^^^^  ^^'^^^^^  ^^^J 
taking  Uriah's  wife,  the  innocent  husband  perished,  and  David  enjoyed  l^i^  poil      B  t 
iet  it  be  noticed  :  l'.  The  end  is  not  yet :  the  future  destmy  of  those  ^ jnocent  ones  .  lU 
in  the  coming  Kingdom,  make  ample  amends  for  their  misfortune.     .2-  Ho:^  laigelj  th^ 
future  station,  rank,  kingship,  and  priesthood  of  David  may  be  '^^f  ,^/^^^-^;j^;/^^^f  °1,^ 
not-a  just  balance  will  be  struck.     3.  David's  sms  are  specifically  ^Jen^unced   and  he 
heartily  repented   of   them.     4.    He  suffered  severely  m  person  because   of  them.     5 
oZohl7Tu:\e  former-was  an  insult  to  his  Sovereign  Ruler,  -d  ^e  pumshm 
was  designed  to  exhibit  its  magnitude.     6._  David  was  preserved,  ^^^f^^'^^^^^t^dm^^ 
sins,  because  of  his  relation  as  Theocratic  King  and  the  ^^^tmed  f ore   inner  of  a  f uti^^^ 
glor  ous  Theocratic  King  in  his  line.     7.  That  the  reasons  ±or  theocratic  clemencYand 
severity  are  not  given  in  detail,  and  that  it  ill  becomes  us  to  sit  m  judgment  ;n^ on  them 
8    The  non-conc^ealment  of  David's  guilt  (so  different  from  human  ^3^1;^^);^^^^^^^^*^ 
result   stamps  the  record  with  truthfulness,  and  gives  hope  and  comfort  to  repenting 


sinners. 


Ohs.  4.  The  identity  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  with  the  Da^jdic  is 
taken  for  granted  in  the  New  Test,  as  an  indisputable  fact.  This  will 
appear,  as  our  argument  progresses  ;  for  some  preliminaries  must  tirst  be 


236  THE   THEOCRATIC   K^GDOM.  [PrOP.  31. 

considered  in  their  historical  connection.     The  announcing  angel  states 
the  fact  (Luke  1  :  32,  33),  and  Zacharias  intimates  it  (y.  68-74). 

The  reader  will  observe  two  features  connected  with  this  subject.  The  Theocracv 
did  not  remain  in  Saul's  ine,  and  it  was  not  in  the  line  of  the  kiigs  over  the  revoS 
tribes   for  the  special  union  and  the  promises  connected  with  it  art  found  only  in  the 

S.pri'%     '•   /^/'.  ''  ^  '""^'T^  ''^^^  *^  N^™'^^  (^^■^-  ^^^'^'  Monarchy,  p  lo Who 
accuses  Samuel  of  treason  m  deposing  Saul  and  choosing  David,  totally  overlookL  the 

the'weme°??.W?°\r"''f-''  "^V^^  Samuel  was  acting  under  the^;.ec.a^  orde'rs  of 
the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  nation.  The  question  is  sometimes  asked,  lohi  was  Saul  thus 
chosen,  when  God  foreknew  his  speedy  fall  and  the  selection  of  David  in  his  place  ?  The 
question  is  not  answered  by  saying  that  "  Saul's  self-will  caused  him  to  forget  his  Theo^ 
cratic  position  when  he  presumed  to  sacrifice  himself  and  disobey  divine  commands 
the  significance  of  which  {The  Anc.  Ills,  of  (he  Mist,  vol.  1,  p.  132)  was  that  '  it  a  med  at 
estabhshing  the  monarchy  of  Israel  on  the  same  basis  as  helthen  kingdoms,"  mal  ^g  the 
Theocraic  ordering  subservient  to  the  caprice  of  the  subordinate%uler  All  thfs  is 
true,  bu    God  foreknew  all  this,  and  still  selected  Saul.     Kurtz  (Sac   Ills  ,  p   177  says 

Since  hey  demand  a  king  without  a  divine  intimation,  God  gives  them  a  kin'  eve/as 
they  wish,  not  after  Uis  own  heart  (1  Sam.  13  :  14),  hut  after  the  heart  of  the  people  no? 
one  that  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  but  one  who  was  higher  than  any  of  the  people 
from  his  shoulders  and  upward  (10  :  23)."  But  God  did  directly  choose^  hm  and  no? 
the  people,  and  the  proof  is  found  in  1  Sam.  9  :  15-27  and  10  :  1-26  ;  for  4mud'express?v 
-T  L  hi'hf;^ cW,.f  rV  h'  "-'t  ^-^^-^o-n."  Newman  (Ills.  Ileb^Z:;:!:^^ 
mr^^^!ilf\JJ^f     ]   '^^^^^^  was  chosen  either  by  God  or  by  Samuel,''  for  he 

hWlf  o  l''Zl  f""'^  "^  ^f'  his  stature  and  beauty,  and  then  Samuel  reconciled 
himself  to  a    necessity,  and    declared-a  pious  fraud-that  God  also  chose  him  •  thus 

ffiXlial^tat'et''^^^^^^^  ""'"'I'T  "°*  '''^  ^^  ^^^  P-P^^  until  aftei- "he  lot 

L  ^e  lanntT^w'  fT""^""'  ^^^^  ^^^J^^  ^end  before  destructive  criticism,  which 
nas  the  happy  ta  ent  of  knowing  precisely  how  things  ought  to  have  been  done.  The 
fhP  ?/^;^'l^''''''  by  vanous  writers  (e.g.  Farbairn's  Typology,  p.  96),  seems  to  be  this^ 
thP  D  v?n^^  ''^^''  ''^-  '^  ^.'"''^'^  ^^^^  vicegerent  nature  to  be  perpetuated,  -  and  to  render 
the  ?nv  1  nlfn^^r^  '^^^•  '  TK^?^  ^^^^^^^^  *°  ^^^  ^^^  ^^'^  ^^^^  *«  ^^^  and  ears  to  hear^ 
ea^thlv  Ifilnr     ^''^^'^  *^^^\^  ^^.^^"  who-asthe  representative  of  the  people's 

wm  and  on  bnVr  f^^^^^^-^^^  little  disposed  to  rule  in  humble  subordination  to  the 
will  and  authority  of  heaven  and  was  therefore  supplanted  by  another,  who  should  act 
wnS.  ^^'7f  ^e^t^V?'  ?^^^  ^'^^  distinctively  the  name  of  'His  servant.'  "  In  other 
words  God  designed  to  show  in  this  first  king,  and  impress  it  by  a  signal  experience 
contin^f/^T."''  ^he  Supreme  King,  and  the  government,  under  thl  kin^  sWd 
continue  a  Theocracy.  The  lesson  was  purposely  chosen  before  the  Davidic  line  was 
nfnnf  T^'  ^''^  ^^^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^«  too  soon  forgotten.  It  was  illustrated,  too?  ^n  theclse 
of  one  whom  men  admired  (owing  to  stature  and  beauty). 


Prop.  32.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  237 


Proposition  32.  This  Theocratic  Kingdom^  thiis  incorporated 
loith  the  Davidic^  is  removed  when  the  Davidic  J{ingdoni  is 
overthrown. 

The  spirit  of  prophecy,  whicli  expresses  the  opinion  of  God  in 
this  matter,  is  emphatic  and  clear.  Thus  e.g.  take  Ps.  89,  and  the 
Davidic  throne,  which  it  is  asserted  the  Messiah,  "  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel,"  shall  occupy,  is  represented  as  completely  removed,  the 
throne  and  crown  cast  down,  God  himself  having  withdrawn  in  his 
wrath  at  the  nation's  sinfulness.  JN^umerous  predictions,  to  avoid 
repetition,  will  be  given  hereafter. 

Ols.  1.  The  Proi:)Osition  is  evidenced,  (1)  by  the  continued  overthrow 
of  what  God  called  His  throne  and  Kingdom  (Ezek.  21  :  25-27,  Hos. 
3  :  4,  5,  etc.)  ;  (2)  by  the  Prophets  not  recognizing  any  other  Theocratic 
Kingdom  than  the  one  thus  connected  ;  (3)  by  the  restoration  from 
Babylon,  building  of  the  temple,  etc.,  being  never  likened  to  this  King- 
dom, for  although  blessings  were  vouchsafed  to  the  nation  f>.'om  God 
through  His  general  divine  Sovereignty,  yet  God  did  not  act  as  their  King, 
which  is  seen,  e.g.  in  the  Jews  being  still  "  servants"  and  others  had 
"  dominion  over  them"  (Neh.  9  :  36,  37),  being  placed  under  tribute, 
(Ezra  4  :  13  and  7  :  24)  ;  (4)  by  the  simple  fact  that  neither  in  the  temple 
rebuilt  nor  in  any  subsequent  political  position  of  the  Jews,  was  God 
directly  accessible  as  Euler,  to  be  consulted,  etc.  ;  (5)  by  the  Jews  them- 
selves, in  their  future  political  and  religious  status,  never  supposing,  after 
the  overthrow  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom,  that  it  or  the  Theocracy  connected 
with  it  was  restored,  but  constantly  and  ardently  looked  for  its  re-establish- 
ment ;  (6)  by  the  withdrawal  of  God,  more  and  more  decided,  so  that  even 
for  centuries  the  voice  of  prophecy  was  silent.  In  brief,  all  the  circum- 
stances indicated,  that  the  distinctive  features  which  manifested  a  The- 
ocracy, were  withdrawn,  and  the  religious,  the  ceremonial,  indispensably 
necessary  for  the  moral  preparation  and  culture  of  man,  was  alone 
continued.  The  nation  was  undergoing  divine  punishment  for  its  non- 
a'p^preciation  of  Tlieocratic  jivivileges. 

Some  "writers,  evidently  through  inadvertency,  misuse  the  word  "  Theocracy,"  when 
they  speak  of  the  "  re-establishment  of  the  Theocracy"  at  the  return  of  Ezra  to  Jerusa- 
lem B.  c.  -157,  distinguishing  it  from  "  a  free  and  independent  Theocracy"  by  designat- 
ing it  "  a  dependent"  one.  This  is  to  make  a  partial  restoration  of  the  nation  and  re- 
ligious rites  a  Theocracy,  when  Ezra  and  the  nation  were  subjects  to  the  sway  of  Baby- 
lon, etc.  The  least  reflection  shows  the  misuse  of  the  term,  and  especially  to  make  it 
"  dependent,"  without  restoration  (as  we  shall  show)  of  David's  throne,  etc. 

Obs.  2.  The  highest  position,  politically,  occupied  by  the  nation  after- 
ward under  the    brilliant    reign  of    the  Maccabean  Princes,  was  never 


238  THE  THEOCRATIC    KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  32. 

regarded  as  a  return  to  the  Davidic  or  Theocratic  rule.  The  A.smoneans 
were  not  in  the  Davidic  line,  and  God  was  not  the  Theocratic  King  as  once 
before. 

The  Theocracy,  the  Kingdom  of  God,  being  withdrawn  is  the  reason  why  (comp.  Obs. 
4  below)  Daniel's  prophecies,  which  give  an  epitome  of  the  world's  history  down  to  the 
re-establishment  of  tliis  Theocracy  under  the  Messiah,  make  no  mention  (as  they  con- 
sistently could  not)  of  a  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth  running  contemporaneously  (as  many 
would  have  us  to  believe  against  fact)  with  the  Gentile  empires  delineated  by  the  Proph- 
et.    God's  Spirit  does  not  contradict  itself. 

Ods.  3.  The  highest  religious  position  afterward  arrived  at,  when  the 
Temple  Avas  restored  with  magnificence,  did  not  meet  the  Theocratic 
features.  The  second  Temple,  among  other  deficiencies,  possessed  not  the 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  Presence  of  the  great  King  in  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  and  gave  not  forth,  as  the  first  Temple,  the  responses  of  an  earthly 
Ruler.  With  all  the  veneration  attached  to  it  by  the  Jews,  they  never 
regarded  its  erection  and  their  worship  there,  as  the  enjoyment  of  a  restored 
Theocratic  government.  They  still  lamented  the  loss  of  the  once  enjoyed 
precious  boon. 

Warburton  {Div.  Leg.,  B.  5,  S.  5)  labors  to  show  that  the  Theocracy  existed  down  to 
the  Coming  of  the  Christ.  A  more  recent  writer  (Wines,  Com.  onihe  Laws,  p.  495,  etc.)  in- 
dorses this  iinhistorical  view,  and  says  :  "  It  (Theocracy)  was  democratical  till  the  time  of 
Saul,  monarchical  from  his  accession  to  the  throne  till  the  captivity,  and  aristocratically 
after  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  their  own  country  ;  but  through  all  these  revolutions 
it  retained  the  Theocratic  feature."  This  is  a  serious  mistake,  utterly  opjiosed  to  his  own 
definitions  (which  we  have  freely  given.  Props.  25,  26.  etc.)  of  a  Theocracy,  which  he 
leaves  for  a  lower  one  of  his  own  framing.  It  utterly  ignores  the  Scripture  testimony  ; 
it  vitiates  the  predictions  of  a  restoration  ;  it  makes  it  impossible  to  understand  the 
covenant  and  prophecies  ;  and  it  presents  us  a  Theocracy  with  its  life  taken  out,  its 
essential  meaning  removed,  its  throne  and  Kingdom  overthrown.  Alas  !  that  men  of 
ability  are  so  misleading. 

Obs.  4.  The  reader,  although  perhaps  premature  in  our  line  of  argu- 
ment, will  notice  that  this  feature  has  its  decided  influence  in  shaping  the 
peculiar  and  striking  manner  in  which  the  Bible  is  written  and  placed 
together.  Unbelief  has  made  itself  merry  at  the  early  historical  narrative 
of  the  Jewish  nation  when  contrasted  with  the  mighty  empires  of  the 
world,  at  the  sudden  breaking  off  of  the  same,  its  non-resumption  (in  the 
Bible)  to  present  the  splendid  achievements  of  the  Maccabees,  etc.  But 
under  all  this  lies  a  profound  reason.  The  mighty  empires  of  the  world 
are  as  nothing  to  God  when  compared  to  His  initiatory  Theocratic  ordering. 
Small  as  the  latter  is  when  contrasted  with  Kingdoms  that  embraced 
immense  territories  and  a  multitude  of  nations  ;  weak  as  the  subordinate 
Theocratic  kings  were  when  compared  with  an  Alexander  or  Cyrus  or 
Caesar,  yet  in  the  estimation  of  Deity,  there  was  in  this  nucleus,  this 
earnest  of  government,  something  that  outweighed  the  grandeur  of  all 
earthly  Kingdoms.  This  was  the  Theocracy.  God  shows  due  respect  to  His 
own  ordering,  and  hence  confines  Himself  almost  exclusively  to  the  history 
of  the  Jewish  nation.  Other  Kingdoms  are,  indeed,  mentioned,  but  only 
to  show  their  relationship  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  to  pronounce  their 
doom,  or  the  final  result  when  the  Theocracy  shall  be  triumphantly  re- 
established. This  gives  the  Bible  its  remarkable  cast  of  expression  and  its 
historical  connection.  Thus  e.g.  there  is  a  regular  tracing  of  the  rise  of 
the  nation,  the  establishment  of  the  Theocracy,  and  then  comes  the  regular 


PeOP.  32.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KII^GDOM.  239 

history  of  tlie  Theocracy  to  its  downfall  or  rather  withdrawal.  Everything 
which  led  to  it,  that  was  connected  with  it,  that  led  to  its  abandonment,  is 
given  as  a  matter  of  interest.  Briefly,  but  boldly,  the  outlines,  the  essen- 
tials, for  a  correct  apprehension,  are  presented  down  to  the  last  King. 
Then  follows  the  account  of  the  Captivity  ;  of  a  partial  restoration  ;  of  the 
return  not  meeting  the  requirements  of  a  restored  Theocracy  ;  of  God's 
fulfilling  His  Word  in  punishing  ;  of  prophets  who  predict  the  re-extaUi^li- 
ment  of  the  Theocracy  ;  of  a  long  silence  of  centuries,  a  sufficiency  of 
prediction  having  been  given  and  the  history  of  the  nation  being  unworthy 
of  record  ;  of  what  occurred  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  mention 
of  continued  punishment,  of  a  few  predictions  confirmatory  of  the  Old 
Test.,  but  no  attempt  to  verify  them,  for  in  the  unbroken  silence,  the 
dignity  of  prophecy  is  exhanced  by  the  fulfilment  being  taken  for  granted 
as  something  needing  no  proof,  being  ever  present  in  history. 


240  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  33. 


Proposition  33.  The  ProplieU^  some  even  hefore  the  Captivity^ 
foreseeing  the  overthroio  of  the  Kingdom^  both  foretell  its  doion- 
fall  and  its  final  restoration. 

Thus,  e.g.,  Isaiah,  Hosea,  Joel,  Amos,  and  Micah  deliberately  pre- 
dict the  withdrawal  of  Gfod's  protection  as  Ruler  on  account  of  the 
rebellious  spirit  of  the  nation,  the  abolishment  of  the  Kingdom,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  very  place  of  the  Ruler's  special  manifesta- 
tion. But  they  also  announce,  just  as  distinctly,  that  at  some 
I)eriod  in  the  future  there  shall  be  a  complete  restoration  of  the 
same  Kingdom  under  David's  son,  and  a  restoration,  too,  pre-emi- 
nently glorious. 

OJ)s.  1.  This,  from  what  preceded  and  will  follow,  needs  no  special 
proof.  Such  passages  as  Amos  9  :  11,  Luke  1  :  32,  33,  Ezek.  37  :  21,  22, 
Jer.  33  :  14,  etc.,  it  is  admitted  by  all  men,  do  m  their  ^Min  grammatical 
sense  distinctively  teach  such  downfall  and  restoration.  This  is  denied  by 
no  one  ;  but  we  are  informed  by  eminent  and  pious  men,  that  this  is  not 
the  sense  (excepting  only  as  it  pertains  to  downfall)  intended  by  God. 
Aside  from  the  inconsistency  of  charging  God  with  emj)loying  a  sense — 
the  one,  too,  in  common  usage  between  men — that  fairly  expresses  this 
idea  and  fosters  corresponding  hopes,  we  hold  with  the  Primitive  Church, 
and  shall  prove  as  we  proceed,  that  it  is  the  only  sense  which  consistently 
maintains  God's  covenant,  oath,  promises,  and  election  of  the  nation. 

Ohs.  2.  Let  the  reader  but  pause  and  consider  :  God  has  had  a  veritable 
Kingdom  here  on  earth  ;  He  was  the  earthly  Ruler  of  the  nation  exhibited 
in  and  through  this  Kingdom  ;  now  is  it  conceivable  that  He,  owing  to 
unbelief  and  sin  of  the  nation,  will  give  up  this  Kingdom  forever — that 
He  will  permit  Himself  to  he  defeated  in  the  establishment  of  such  an  open, 
outward,  manifested  Theocracy  ?  Men,  the  multitude,  say  such  is  the  fact, 
but  we  do  not  read  the  Bible  as  asserting  the  same,  for  this  would  be 
dishonoring  to  God,  making  Him  to  undertake  a  work  that  He  is  unable 
to  accomplish,  and  this  would  make  the  Prophets  predict  falsely,  making 
them  plainly  to  prophecy  what  shall  never  come  to  pass.  (Oomp.  Prop. 
201.) 

Ohs.  3.  It  has  been  generally  acknowledged  (no  matter  how  afterward 
explained  or  spiritualized)  that  the  basis  of  prophetical  teaching  is 
this  Kingdom  constantly  and  uniformly  connected  with  the  National  and 
Religio-Political  constitution  of  the  people  of  Israel.  Why,  then,  dare  to 
reverse  this,  without  the  most  explicit  and  direct  command  from  God? 
The  change  that  is  made  by  the  many  in  these  prophetical  utterances,  as 
will  be   shown,  is   based   purely  on   inference.     Solemnly,  sadly    is    the 


Prop.  33.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  241 

protest  given  :  Should  we  not,  in  so  weighty  a  matter,  liave  far  more  than 
merely  inferential  proof  ?  If  the  grammatical  meaning  of  the  Word  is  to 
be  changed,  should  not  God  Himself  j9/«/^i/i/  tell  us  of  the  change,  and  not 
leave  it  to  uninspired  men,  centuries  after  the  canon  is  completed,  to 
inform  us  of  it  ? 

Obs.  4.  When  the  elements  of  disunion,  disruption,  etc.,  appeared  in 
the  David ic  Kingdom,  then  also  a  change  took  place  in  the  Prophetic 
voice.  This  has  been  noticed  by  Kurtz  {Sac.  His.,  p.  228,  etc.)  and 
others  ;  it  is  only  necessary  to  add,  that  in  view  of  the  now  foreseen  and 
determined  withdrawal  of  the  Kingdom,  much  more  is  said,  by  way  of 
encouragement  under  coming  trial,  respecting  the  period,  when,  under  the 
promised  Messiah,  the  Kingdom  should  be  restored  never  more  to  end. 
This  was  a  token  of  mercy  to  stimulate  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  repentant, 
pious  portion  of  the  nation  ;  for  while  God  withdrew  the  Kingdom  and 
attendant  blessings,  He  did  not,  as  He  promised  even  by  Moses,  utterly 
forsake  the  nation. 


242  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  34. 


Proposition  34.  The  Prophets  describe  this  restored  Kingdom, 
its  extension^  9^ory,  etc.,  without  distinguishing  between  the 
First  and  Second  A  d/vents. 

This  peculiar  feature  has  often  been  noticed  by  writers  ;  and 
attention  is  called  to  it  in  this  connection,  because  it  is  o/*  great 
moment  to  understand  this  distinctive,  significant  method  of 
prophecy. 

Ohs.  1.  Learned  men,  feeling  the  force  of  this  uniformity,  have  sup- 
posed, correctly,  that  some  good  reason  produced  it,  and  to  assign  one,  tell 
us  how  prophetic  vision  glances  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  hills,  passing 
over  the  intermediate  valleys,  etc.,  thus  presenting  a  beautiful  and  glowing 
picture  of  ecstatic  vision.  While  there  is  truth  in  this  description,  it 
utterly  fails  to  assign  (i'?^^  reason  for  it,  only  presenting  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  done.  The  leading  motive  for  such  a  non-discrimination  of  First 
and  Second  Advent  will  be  found  in  the  ojfer  of  this  same  Kingdom  to  the 
Jewish  nation  at  the  First  Advent  (comp.  Props.  55-57,  etc.),  and,  upon 
its  rejection  by  the  nation,  in  its  postponement  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  The 
proof  for  this  will  be  abundantly  forthcoming  ;  at  the  present  it  is  desir- 
able that  this  characteristic  of  the  prophets  be  constantly  kept  in  mind, 
because  it  evinces  a  predetermined  offer  of  the  Kingdom,  in  view  of  the 
election  of  the  nation,  at  the  First  Advent  ;  and  tlie  issue  also  being  fore- 
known (amazing  knowledge  !  a  postponing  to  the  Sec.  Advent),  it  con- 
ditioned the  necessity  of  only  speaking  of  the  Advent,  without  directly 
specifying  a  First  or  a  Second.  This  intermingling  and  blending  of 
Advents,  or  rather,  this  non-discrimination  of  Advents,  is  purposely  done, 
(1)  to  allow  full  latitude  to  the  freedom  of  the  nation  ;  (2)  to  evince  the 
foreknowledge,  truthfulness,  and  faithfulness  of  God  ;  (3)  to  test  the 
faith  of  His  people  ;  (4)  to  throw  the  responsibility  of  Christ's  rejection 
upon  the  nation  ;  (5)  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  engrafting  of  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  (6)  to  avoid  the  despondency,  etc.,  that  must  arise,  if  the  long 
intervening  period  of  time  were  presented. 

It  was  extremely  difficult  for  a  Jew  to  reconcile  the  glorious  predictions  relating  to 
the  Messianic  Kingdom  with  those  pertaining  to  a  suffering  Messiah.  This  was  so  greatly 
felt  that  we  read  of  the  idea  of  two  Messiahs  being  broaclied— a  suffering  one,  followed 
by  a  triumphant  one  ;  others  united  both  in  the  same  person,  but  without  attempting  a 
reconciliation.  The  question  might  well  be  asked  of  unbelief,  whether  it  is  credible  that 
the  Prophets,  so  devoted  to  their  alleged  "  Jewish  prejudices"  and  ' '  Jewish  forms,' '  could 
by  their  own  wisdom  have  concocted  such  a  humiliated,  suffering  Redeemer  of  the 
nation  to  bring  it  to  glory  by  restoring  its  Theocratic  relationship,  when  it  seemed,  to 
all  human  appearances,  antagonistic  arid  fatal  to  all  such  expectations  V 

Ohs.  2.  This  peculiarity  of  the  prophecies  impresses  the  injunction 
given   by   numerous  writers,    viz.  :  to   be   careful   in   discriminating  the 


Prop.  34.]  the  theockatic  kijs^gdom.  243 

Scriptures  that  belong  to  different  dispensations,  e.g.  that  which  pertains 
to  the  First  Advent  and  the  time  following,  and  that  which  relates  to  the 
Sec.  Advent  and  the  age  following  it. 

Ohs.  3.  Living  at  this  period,  so  long  after  the  First  Advent,  we  are  the 
better  prepared,  owing  to  fulfilments,  to  discriminate  between  the  Script- 
ures, and  make  a  correct  application  of  them.  God's  sincerity  in  tendering 
the  Kingdom  to  the  Jewish  nation  is  evidenced  by  the  very  manner  in 
which  the  nation's  rejection  of  the  Messiah  at  the  First  Advent  is  de- 
lineated ;  it  is  rather  implied  than  directly  taught,  and  in  such  a  way, 
that  while  now  we  see  the  guilt  of  the  nation  unmistakably  presented,  yet 
before  the  fulfilment  it  was — to  avoid  interfering  with  freedom  of  choice — 
more  or  less  a  mystery.     To  us,  it  is  a  mystery  fully  revealed. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  owing  to  the  terrible  period  of  punishment  for  the  rejection 
of  "  the  Christ,"  etc.,  no  distinction  of  First  and  Second  Advent  is  made,  and  a  little  re- 
flection will  show  the  great  wisdom  and  mercy  of  God  in  not  making  it.  Had  it  been 
made,  its  revelation  would  have  had  crushing  force,  and  would  have  interfered  with 
moral  freedom.  We  regard  this  very  feature,  so  delicately  handled,  as  a  decisive  proof 
of  divine  inspiration. 

Ohs.  4.  The  manner  in  which  the  prophecies  were  fulfilled  at  the  First 
Advent  teaches  us  hoio  we  may  expect  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  the 
Second  to  be  realized,  viz.  :  in  the  strict  grammatical  sense  contained  in 
them. 

Obs.  5.  Another  reason  why  the  Prophets  simply  announce  the  Advent 
without  discriminating  is,  that  both  Advents  are  really  necessary  for  per- 
fected Redemption— the  one,  we  can  now  see,  is  preparatory  for  the  other. 
Hence  Bh.  Horsley  {Works,  vol.  1,  p.  83)  and  others  have  pointed  out  the 
fact  that  we  can  not  properly  interpret  the  ancient  prophecies  without 
referring  to  the  tvv^o  Advents  ;  they  stand  related  to  each  other,  and  in 
several  places  are  spoken  of  without  any  intimation  of  the  long  centuries 
that  shall  intervene  between  them.  Fairbairn  (0;^  Proph.,  p.  183)  justly 
observes  :  "It  is  only  by  the  facts  and  revelations  of  the  New  Test.', 
that  ancient  prophecy  has  been  found  conclusively  to  require  for  its  com- 
plete verification  two  disparate  manifestations  of  the  Godhead  ;  the  one  in 
humiliation,  the  other  in  glory."  But  we  must  never  forget  that  the 
Prophets  unite  the  two  as  essential  to  the  Salvation  of  man,  and  the  ex- 
perience of  that  Salvation,  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  restored  in  splendor. 
The  two  Advents  are  the  two  main  instrumentalities  for  accomplishing 
Redemption  ;  each  one  has  its  appropriate  sphere  of  action,  and  ''  the 
glory"  of  the  Second  is  the  reward  subsequent  to  obedience  and  suffering 
at  the  First. 

Ols.  6.  The  Kingdom  berng  rejected  by  the  Jews  at  the  First  Advent,  an 
intercalary  period  intervenes,  and  "the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  con- 
tinued on  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  This  is  the  reason  why  in  some  of  the 
prophecies,  when  direct  reference  is  made  to  the  First  Advent,  the  interven- 
ing period  to  the  Second  is  passed  by,  and  attention  is  directed  to  the 
Second  with  its  results,  as  e.g.  Ps.  69,  Isa.  53  connected  with  ch.  54,  etc. 
The  Divine  Plan  thus  nnites  the  two  as  incorporated  with  it,  and  teaches 
hoiv,  in  the  light  of  God's  Word,  this   intercalary  period  ought  to  be 


244  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  34. 

regarded,  so  far  as  God's  Purpose  is  concerned — i.e.  while  exceeding 
precious  to  us  who  believe  and  who  are  adopted  as  the  seed  of  Abraham, 
yet  it  is  still  a  time  of  ''  waiting, ^^  and  that  it  is,  by  no  means,  to  be 
exalted  into  that  disproportioned  and  exaggerated  position  that  it  holds  in 
so  many  systems  of  Theology. 

01)^.  7.  The  Kingdom  is  noiDliere  (although  it  is  currently  believed) 
directly  asserted  to  be  a  resultant  of  the  First  Advent,  but  in  the  declara- 
tions of  Christ  and  the  apostles  it  is  distinctly  linked  ivitli  the  Sec.  Advent, 
as  e.g.  Matt.  25  :  34,  2  Tim.  4  :  1,  etc. 

Ohs.  8.  This  characteristic  of  not  distinguishing  between  the  two 
Advents,  excepting  as  the  events  connected  with  one  or  the  other  now  (in 
view  of  fulfilment)  enables  us  to  discriminate  between  them,  has  been  often 
ridiculed  by  Unbelief  as  an  evidence  of  weakness.  We,  on  the  other  hand, 
find  in  it  a  i^ofound  meaning  and  an  indication  of  the  highest  wisdom  and 
the  greatest  strength.  Indeed,  when  properly  comj)rehended  in  its  true 
relationship  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  the  Theocracy,  it  forms  a  strong 
jrroof  of  inspiration,  being  a  j)hase ^heyond  human  conceiAion  and  con- 
tinuance. Foreknowing  the  facts,  it  carefully  avoids  contradiction  in  the 
least  particular  ;  aware  of  the  result,  it  gives  due  latitude  to  moral  free- 
dom ;  and  conscious  of  a  postponement  resulting  from  the  conduct  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  it  still  proclaims  that  God's  Plan  shall  be  ultimately 
accomplished.  Divine  Wisdom  alone  could  devise  such  a  wonderful  way 
of  predicting  the  future. 

Ols.  9.  Unbelief  has  not  yet  been  able  to  explain  the  anomaly  presented 
in  these  two  Advents.  The  last  (Second),  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  most 
eulogistic  terms,  it  may  ascribe  to  human  desire  and  consequent  Oriental 
imagination,  but  it  is  completely  at  fault  with  the  First  Advent.  For  it 
cannot  show  how  it  is  possible  for  Jews,  with  Jewish  expectations  and  hopes 
(based  on  covenant  promise),  to  describe  a  Messiah  coming  in  humiliation, 
rejection,  suffering,  and  death. 


Prop.  35.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  245 


Proposition  35.  Tlie  Prophets  describe  hut  one  Kingdom. 

The  language  and  whole  tenor  of  the  Word  is  so  explicit  that 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles  thus  understand  it.  Whatever  views  may 
be  entertained  respecting  the  interpretation  of  the  prophecies  them- 
selves, there  is  no  ^vriter,  within  our  knowledge,  who  has  ventured 
to  suggest  that  tioo  Kingdoms  are  denoted. 

Obs.  1.  There  is  one  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  David's  Son  and 
Lord,  in  some  way  linked  with  the  election  of  the  Jewish  nationality, 
which  is  tlie  great  hurden  of  prophecy. 

Obs.  2.  This  Kingdom,  too,  according  to  the  grammatical  sense,  is 
one  here  on  tlie  eartli,  not  somewhere  else,  as  e.g.  in  the  third  heaven  or 
the  Universe.  Take  the  most  vivid  descriptions,  such  as  are  contained  in 
Isa.  60,  or  Dan.  7,  etc.,  and  they  refer  this  Kingdom  exchisively  to  this 
earth,  which,  of  course,  follows  naturally  from  the  relation  that  this 
Kingdom  sustains  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  Davidic  throne.  Any  other 
portraiture  of  it  would  be  incongruous,  and  hostile  to  covenant  and  fact. 

Obs.  3.  If  it  is  one  Kingdom,  and  thus  related,  it  must,  of  necessity, 
embrace  the  following  features  :  (1)  Notwithstanding  the  removal  of  the 
Kingdom  and  the  severe  tribulation  of  the  nation,  the  preservation  of  the 
race  must  be  announced,  for  otherwise  the  election  would  fail  and  the 
Kingdom,  as  predicted,  could  not  be  restored.  This  is  done  in  the  most 
positive  manner,  as  e.g.  Jer.  31  :  35-37,  and  33  :  19-26,  Isa.  54  :  9-10,  etc. 
(comp.  Prop.  122).  (2)  The  restoration  of  the  Jews,  notwithstanding 
their  sinfulness  and  punishment,  ought  to  be  distinctively  presented,  because 
David's  Kingdom  is  based  on  it.  This  also  is  predicted,  as  e.g.  Ezek. 
36  :  22,  24,  and  ch.  37,  Jer.,  chs.  31,  32,  and  33,  etc.  (comp.  Props.  Ill, 
112,  113,  and  114).  (3)  And  as  David's  throne  was  in  Jerusalem,  and  was 
adopted  as  God's  throne,  when  His  Son  shall  reign,  the  city  ought  to  be 
specially  honored  in  such  a  revelation  of  the  Kingdom,  seeing  that  it 
stands  intimately  related  to  it.  The  Prophets  thus  distinguish  it  in  the 
future,  as  e.g.  Jer.  3  :  17,  Isa.  24  :  23,  Joel  3  :  17,  etc.  (comp.  Prop.  168, 
etc.).  Indeed,  all  the  particulars  needed  for  a  fidl  identification  of  the 
identical  Kingdom,  once  established  but  now  overthrown,  are  thus  given 
in  the  most  simiM  language.  Why,  following  the  Origenistic  method, 
change  this  language,  and  make  David's  throne  and  kingdom,  Jewish 
restoration,  Jerusalem,  etc.,  mean  something  else  than  the  words  jjlainly 
convey,  without  a  direct  revelation  from  God  that  such  a  change  is  in- 
tended? 

Obs.  4.  The  Prophets  describing  one  Kingdom,  here  on  the  earth,  at 
some  time  in  the  future  under  the  Messiah,  and  associated  with  the  Jewish 


246  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  35. 

nation  and  the  Davidic  throne,  it  is  a  gross  violation  of  all  propriety  to 
take  these  prophetic  descriptions  and  arbitrarily  apply  them,  as  many  do, 
by  dividing  them — one  part  to  the  earth,  another  to  the  third  heaven  ;  one 
portion  to  the  present  time,  and  another  to  the  distant  future.  This 
separation  and  disintegration  of  things  that  belong  together,  and  relate  to 
the  same  period  of  time  and  to  the  same  locality,  being  even  exhibited  in  the 
same  sentence,  as  e.g.  Isa.  25  :  8,  where  the  abolishmg  of  death  is  put  in 
the  future,  and  the  rest  is  applied,  without  warrant,  to  the  church  as  now 
constituted. 

The  only  ingenious  defence  that  we  have  found  for  this  impropriety  is  in  Dr.  Alex- 
ander's (Jom  on  Isaiah  (p.  38,  Pref.  to  vol.  2),  which  hides  this  defect,  of  dividing  and 
locating  in  diverse  places  and  times  the  Millennial  descriptions,  under  a  generalizing  rule, 
hy  which  such  iDrophecies  are  to  be  aj^plied  to  the  condition  of  the  cliurch,  and  which 
condition  is  •'  considered  not  in  its  elements,  but  as  a  whole  ;  not  in  the  way  of  chrono- 
logical succession,  but  at  one  view  ;  not  so  much  in  itself  as  in  contrast  with  the  tempo- 
rary system  that  preceded  it."  In  some  respects  true,  it  is  unsound  to  apply  this  indis- 
criminately and  obtain  a  correct  interpretation  ;  for  (1)  particulars  and  elements  are 
also  predicted,  and  are  to  be  considered  in  order  to  form  a  proper  estimate  of  the  whole 
— they  cannot  be  safely  omitted.  (2)  The  predictions,  with  few  exceptions,  do  refer  to  a 
chronological  period  and  succession,  and  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  we  can  locate  these  that 
the  prophecies  themselves  can  be  properly  aj^preciated.  Thus  e.g.  to  discriminate  what 
belongs  to  the  period  preceding  the  First  Advent,  what  to  that  Advent,  what  to  the  Sec. 
Advent,  what  to  intervening  time,  etc.,  these  are  all  important  chronological  data, 
and  without  some  (at  least  approximative)  knowledge  of  the  position  in  time  occupied 
by  the  prophecy  in  fulfilment,  we  are  at  once  involved  in  confusion.  There  is  no  proph- 
ecy given,  but  it  stands  chronologically  related.  So  that  while  in  Prophecy  there  is 
only  a  general,  indefinite  appeal  to  chronology  (excepting  Daniel  and  the  Apoc),  as  e.g. 
"  in  that  da}'-,  ■'  "in  that  time,"  etc.,  yet  this  phraseology  has  a  decided  reference  to 
time,  a  set  time,  to  which  we  must  give  heed  if  desirous  to  understand.  (3)  The  last 
clause  of  Alexander's  canon  overlooks  some  permanent  things  in  the  preceding  system, 
held  in  abeyance  until  the  time  of  restoration  ;  and  if  true,  lessens  the  force  of  the  pre- 
dictions themselves  by  directing  attention  to  "  the  contrast  "  and  not  to  the  reality  of 
the  things  portrayed.  Some  writers  (as  e.g.  Alexander  On  Isaiah)  have  denounced  as  an 
"  erroneous  hypothesis"  the  rule  laid  down  by  Vitringa,  "  that  every  prophecy  must  be 
specific,  and  must  have  its  fulfilment  in  a  certain  period  of  historj'."  Now  without  adopt- 
ing some  of  Vitringa's  interpretations  based  on  this  rule,  and  withoiit  asserting  that  all 
prophecies  are  delivered  in  chronological  order  (which  cannot  be  sustained),  we  still 
hold  that  such  a  canon  has  the  strongest  possible  reasons  for  its  support.  The  denial  of 
the  rule  materially  aids  the  spiritualizing  of  proj^hecy.  But  if  we  allow  that  the  proph- 
ecies are  to  be  generalized,  and  that  they  have  no  particular  reference  to  certain  eras  in 
the  history  of  the  church  and  the  world  (as  e.g.  those  pertaining  to  the  First  or  Sec.  Ad- 
vent, etc.),  then  we  are  at  once  sent  adrift  in  an  ocean  of  vague,  unsatisfactory  interpre- 
tation. From  the  decided  and  specific  fnJfihnent  of  prophecy  in  the  past,  it  is  proper  to 
hold  that  the  remainder  will  also  thus  be  verified,  and  this  in  itself,  aside  from  other  and 
weighty  reasons  (such  as  making  the  Divine  Plan  indefinite,  weakening  the  proof  of 
God's  foreknowledge,  frittering  away  the  precise  language  of  the  prophets,  etc.),  is  amply 
sufficient  to  cause  us  to  reject  so  arljitrary  a  conclusion  as  the  above, 

Obs.  5.  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  we  make  much  of  the  proper 
comparison  and  union  of  Prophecy,  and  especially  lay  stress  on  the  same- 
ness of  language,  ideas,  etc.,  existing  between  Isaiah  and  the  Apocalypse 
(as  e.g.  comp.  I^a.  60  with  Rev.,  chs.  21  and  22.).  Our  opponents,  feeling 
the  force  of  this,  endeavor  to  rid  themselves  of  the  identity  of  these  predic- 
tions based  upon  their  similarity — which  strongly  prove  the  one  Kingdom 
to  which  we  hold— by  asserting  that  they  are  prophecies  referring  to  dis- 
similar things  and  times.  Let  it  be  candidly  said,  that  any  system  of  inter- 
J)retation  which  will  drive  good  men  to  ignore  one  of  the  plainest  and  most 
valuable  guides  in  the  interpretation  of  prophecy,  is  most  certainly  defective. 


PkOP.  35.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  247 

Some  commentators  (e.g.  Alexander  On  Isa.,  vol.  1,  Pref.,  p.  56),  object  to  the  efforts 
of  others  in  attempting  to  illustrate  and  interpret  some  of  the  predictions  of  the  Proph- 
ets by  the  aid  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  ground  their  objection  on  the  alleged  fact  of  the 
latter  being  "  an  independent  prophecy."  But  how  it  becomes  "  independent"  they 
fail  to  tell  us.  The  trutti  is,  that  it  is  not  such,  for  it  is  given  by  the  same  Spirit  of 
Truth  that  gave  the  rest,  and  it  has  reference  to  the  same  Eedemption,  same  ultimate  end 
and  glory,  described  in  numerous  other  prophecies.  It  is  a  coniinuaiion  and  amplification  of 
some  of  the  predictions  of  Isaiah  and  others,  and  hence  it  is  eminently  proper  for  an  exposi- 
tor to  avail  himself  of  later  Revelations,  if,  on  aay  points,  they  may  throw  light  on  pre- 
ceding ones.  Prophecy  is  designed  to  reveal  the  Divine  Purpose,  to  indicate  and  vindi- 
cate its  unity  of  design,  and  therefore,  instead  of  being  "  independent,"  one  of  another, 
all  the  predictions  of  God's  Word  relating  to  the  Eedemptive  process,  and  the  history  of 
His  people,  are  mutually  dependent  upon  each  other.  If  an  Interpreter  neglects  this  con- 
nection, confining  himself  to  one  prophet  or  book  without  considering  what  others  have 
to  say,  he  at  once  makes  himself  unreliable  and  an  unsafe  guide.  The  excellence  of  Dr. 
Alexander  consists  in  his  having  often  violated  his  own  theory. 

Ohs.  6.  Even  in  David's  and  Solomon's  time  this  Kingdom  was,  in 
view  of  the  foreseen  rebellion  of  the  nation,  predicted  as  a  future  restored 
one  under  one  of  David's  descendants  ;  and  this  was  based  on  the  peculiar 
covenanted  relationship  of  the  nation  and  then  existing  Davidic  dynasty, 
as  e.g.  Ps.  89  :  20-52,  Ps.  132  :  11-18,  etc.  This,  as  previously  intimated, 
was  done  intentionally,  and,  among  other  reasons,  to  show  us  convincingly 
that  God  forekneiu  the  defection  of  the  nation,  and  in  His  Plan  iwovided 
for  it.  If  these  predictions  had  all  been  given  after  the  overthrow  of  the 
Kingdom,  we  would  not  have  as  strong  a  proof  of  their  inspiration  as  we 
now  possess.  Thus,  e.g.  would  it  be  in  accordance  with  human  nature  for 
David,  when  receiving  a  Theocratic  favored  Kingdom,  to  predict,  during 
his  lifetime,  such  an  one  as  was  destined  to  an  overthrow,  to  a  lengthy 
forsaking  of  God,  etc.  ?  No  !  men  are  disposed  to  laud  and  magnify  their 
possessions,  and  predict  perpetuity  in  their  behalf.  The  predictions  are  in 
opposition  to  the  prejudices  and  desires  of  human  nature. 


248  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  36. 


Peoposition  36.  TJie  Prophets^  with  one  voice^  describe  this 
one  Kingdom^  thus  restored^  in  terms  expressive  of  the  most 
glorious  additions. 

They  predict,  from  the  Psalmist  down  to  Malachi,  a  restoration 
of  the  identical  overthrown  Kingdom,  linked  with  the  most 
astounding  events,  which  shall  produce  a  blessedness  and  glory 
tmexampled  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  resurrec- 
tion is  united  with  this  restoration,  as  in  Dan.  12  :  2,  Isa.  25  :  8  (the 
latter  located  by  Paul,  1  Cor.  15  :  "  then  shall  be  fulfilled  the  say- 
ing written,"  etc.),  and  the  new  creation  is  allied  with  it,  as  in  Isa. 
m  :  17,  and  QQ  :  22. 

Ohs.  1.  It  is,  therefore,  reasonable  to  suppose  that  such  remarkable 
events  (as,  e.g.,  the  resurrection  of  the  saints,  the  restitution  or  re- 
creation) Duist  accompany/  and  he  identified  with  the  re-establishment  of 
this  Kingdom.  The  Prophets  itnite  them,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to 
separate  them  ;  any  theory  that  does  this,  is  certainly  unworthy  of 
credence. 

Some  feel  the  force  of  this  sufficiently  to  try  and  evade  it.  Thus  e.g.  Pres.  Edwards 
{His.  of  Eedemp.)  endeavors  to  make  out  a  kind  of  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth"  now 
created,  but  fails  in  locating  it  properly,  because  the  descriptions  of  the  prophets  are  not 
now  realized  in  the  church  or  earth.  The  same  is  true  of  Swedenborgianism  and  others, 
which  make  the  same  kind  of  application  to  the  present.  So  also  with  making  out  a 
present  spiritual  resurrection,  etc.  The  only  way  in  which  such  applications  can  pos- 
sibly be  made  is  to  forsake  the  grammatical  sense  and  impose  a  spiritual  or  mystical  to 
suit  the  line  of  interpretation. 

Obs.  2.  Since  the  overthrow  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  these 
predicted  events  have  not  taken  place  as  delineated,  and,  therefore,  the 
predicted,  covenanted  Kingdom  has  7iot  yet  appeared  (although  the  multi- 
tude, by  forsaking  the  grammatical,  and  cleaving  to  the  mystical  sense, 
hold  to  the  contrary). 

Obs.  3.  It  is  the  same  Kingdom  overthrown  that  receives  those  ad- 
ditions, and  not  anotlier  Kingdom  that  obtains  them  ;  hence,  no  professed 
Kingdom,  however  loudly  proclaimed  and  learnedly  presented,  should, 
lacking  these,  be  accepted  by  us. 

Obs.  4.  Those  additions  are  so  great  in  their  nature,  so  striking  in  their 
characteristics,  so  manifesting  the  interference  of  the  Supernatural,  that 
no  one  can  ^i^wsibly  mistake  lulien  this  Kingdom  is  restored. 

Obs^  'l'iA^ter\  the  downfall  of  the  Pavidic  Kingdom,  the  Prophets 
predic    ^^'s  iCin^ldom    as  future.     They  employ  general  terms  with  an 


Prop.  36.]  the  theocratic  kiis^gdom.  249 

allusion  to  some  definite,  fixed  time,  as  "  in  that  day,^''  etc.  The  only 
direct  allusions  to  its  nearness  are  contained  in  the  statements  that 
certain  events  must  intervene,  and  that  certain  periods  of  time,  then 
enshrouded  in  mystery,  must  elapse  previous  to  its  restoration.  The 
prophetical  periods  themselves  were  at  first  necessarily  obscure,  because 
many  of  the  events  from  which  they  were  to  be  dated  were  also  in  the 
future.  But  while  thus  careful  in  reference  to  time  to  conceal  it  for  wise 
reasons,  the  same  motives  did  not  exist  m  reference  to  events,  so  that  the 
latter  are  given  in  lengthy  and  detailed  accounts. 

Some  may  think  that  the  definitive  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel  form  an  exception.  But 
this  prophecy  says  nothing  (except  by  implication)  of  the  setting  up  of  the  Kingdom  ;  it 
therefore  falls  m  with  the  rest,  seeing  that  it  only  refers  to  the  First  Advent,  the  de- 
struction of  the  city,  and  to  the  desolation  which  is  to  follow,  even  down  to  the  consum- 
mation. From  other  i^rophecies,  however,  like  Zech.  14,  etc.,  we  learn  that  at  the  fear- 
ful consummation  of  the  end,  the  Sec.  Advent  and  Kingdom  will  come.  A  mystery  is 
thrown  around  the  exact  period  of  desolation,  even  if  (like  Baxter,  etc.)  we  divide  the 
last  week  from  the  remainder  and  insert  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles  as  intervening,  we 
must,  to  ascertain  explicit  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom,  refer  to  other  predictions  and 
attach  them. 

Ohs.  6.  The  Prophets,  too,  describe  this  Kingdom  as  erected,  and  these 
additions  as  made,  not  by  a  Saviour  coming  in  humiliation  and  suffering, 
but  by  a  Redeemer  coming  in  glory  with  all  Ilis  saints,  as  e.g.  Zech.  1'4  :  5, 
Rev.  19  :  11-16,  etc. 

Ohs.  7.  This  causes  then  the  singular  prophetical  procedure,  viz.  :  only 
a  few  of  the  Prophets  refer  to  the  First  Advent  and  its  mournful  partic- 
ulars, as  if  conscious  (which  is  strongly  intimated)  of  the  rejection  of  the 
Messiah  and  the  long-continued  downfall  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and,  hence, 
enlarged  and  vivid  descriptions  of  this  restored  Kingdom  are  confined  to 
another  and  distinctive  Advent  (which  from  the  New  Test,  account  is 
designated  the  Second),  which  portraiture  of  the  Kingdom  has,  to  this 
time,  not  yet  been  realized.  The  Sec.  Advent,  with  its  glorious  additions, 
its  happiness  and  blessedness,  was  a  more  eminently  desirable  theme  of  the 
Spirit  than  the  First,  with  its  mournful  consequences.  Exceedingly 
precious  as  the  First  is,  the  Second  exceeds  it  in  glory,  and,  therefore, 
the  latter  is  pre-eminently  "  tlie  Messed  hope.''^ 

Ohs.  8.  The  results  of  the  First  Advent,  the  accurate  fulfilment  down  to 
the  present  day,  the  personal  appropriation  of  the  truths  relating  to  it, 
impress  us  with  a  deep  and  abiding  sense  of  the  reality  of  that  fore- 
knowledge of  the  future  which  promises  so  much  connected  with  a  Second 
coming  of  the  same  Jesus. 


250  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  37. 


Proposition  37.    The  Kingdom,  thus  predicted  and  promised, 
■was  not  in  existence  ivhen  the  Forerunner  of  Jesus  appeared. 

Many  books  positively  assert  that  tlie  covenanted  Kingdom  of 
God  continuously  existed,  subject  only  to  some  changes.  Eminent 
men  (whom  we  shall  largely  quote)  declare  the  same,  and  make  the 
church  (after  the  overthrow  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom)  its 
continuation.  They,  however,  have  not  adduced  a  single  direct 
passage  of  Scripture  in  support  of  their  theory  ;  and  the  facts,  as 
already  stated,  all  clearly  prove  the  contrary.  They  have  mistaken 
the  original  Divine  Sovereignty  lodged  in  the  Creator  for  the  King- 
dom of  promise,  i.e.,  for  the  special  reign  of  God  over  a  nation, 
which  alone  is  the  covenanted  Kingdom  ;  or  else,  Jed  by  a  precon- 
ceived development  theory,  they  are  forced  to  seek  out  and  engraft 
such  a  Kingdom,  and  elevate  the  church  into  the  same. 

Ohs.  1.  The  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  is  tJie  Kingdom  of  God  ;  this 
has  been  proven.  Now  this  Kingdom  was  fallen,  and  it  continued  thus 
down  to  John  the  Baptist. 

Ohs.  2.  The  church,  which  was  continued  after  the  fall  of  the  Davidic 
Kingdom,  is  nowhere  directly  designated  the  Kingdom  of  God.  While 
under  the  care  of  the  Divine  Sovereignty,  it  is  not,  and,  according  to 
covienant,  it  cannot  be,  this  Kingdom. 

01)s.  3.  The  Prophets,  in  this  church,  instead  of  pointing  out  an 
existing  Kingdom,  invariably  represent  it  as  fallen,  and  its  restoration  as 
future. 

Obs.  4.  This  same  Kingdom  was  promised  in  its  restored  form  to  a 
certain  descendant  of  David.  He  was  to  be  its  Restorer.  Now  it  is  folly 
to  hold,  that  the  Kingdom  existed  just  before  His  appearance.  His 
Advent  and  the  Kingdom  are  inseparably  linked  together,  so  that  the 
offspring  of  David,  the  long  promised  Son,  must  first  appear,  and  then  the 
Kingdom.  This  is  the  order  laid  down  by  all  the  Prophets.  The  King- 
dom is  promised  to  the  Son  of  Man,  and  He  must  first  come  as  man. 

Obs.  5.  The  greatest  looseness  and  latitude  of  opinion  exist  among  able 
writers.  In  Prop.  20,  Obs.  4,  notice  was  taken  how  Thompson  assumes 
the  existence  of  a  Kingdom,  and  that  the  Jews  (against  all  historical  fact) 
Mieved  themselves  to  be  in  it.  The  Jews  had  no  knowledge  of  a  then  existing 
Kingdom,  for  they  looked,  longed  and  prayed  for  the  Davidic  restored  un- 
der the  Messiah.  Many  writers  imitate  Thompson,  and  even  exceed  him,  for 
they  have  a  continuous  Kingdom  of  God  from  Paradise  down  to  the  present 


Prop.  37.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  251 

day,  making  no  distinction  whatever.  Others  are  a  little  more  moderate, 
as  e.g.  Proi.  Hengstenberg  {The  Jews  and  the  Ch.  Church),  who  locate 
''  the  very  beginning  of  the  Kingdom  of  God"  in  the  times  of  Abraham, 
i.e.  long  before  the  Theocracy  was  established.  Of  course,  such  a  writer 
continues  it  on  regardless  of  the  Kingdom's  distinctive  features  and  the 
utterances  of  prophecy. 

The  writer  has  often  been  pained  at  the  recklessness  of  statement  on  this  subject. 
Many  excellent  authors,  not  distinguishing  what  really  constitutes  a  Theocracy  (viz,  : 
God's  condescending  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler,  etc.),  make  the  Theocracy 
or  Kingdom  existing  down  to  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  then  coolly  transfer  it  over  to 
the  Christian  Churcli.  No  solid  advancement  can  be  made  in  Theology  until  such  utterly 
unfounded  positions  are  relinquished, 

Obs.  6.  Auberlen  {The  Froph.  of  Daniel)hsis  presented  no  prof ounder 
thought  for  tlie  proper  conception  of  the  prophecies  of  Daniel,  than  that 
which  carefully  discriminates  in  this  matter,  saying  :  "  According  to  what 
the  book  (Dan.)  says  of  itself,  it  intends  to  represent  something  mfinitely 
deeper  and  more  sublime,  namely,  the  relation  of  the  two  fundamental 
powers  of  universal  history,  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  the  kingdom  of  the 
world,  from  the  time  when  the  Kingdom  of  God  ceases  to  exist  as  a 
separate  state,  till  the  time  when  it  shall  bo  re-established  as  such  in  glory." 
Daniel  gives  us  an  epitome  of  the  time,  chronologically,  during  which  the 
Kingdom  does  not  exist  down  to  the  period  of  its  re-establisliment,  thus 
supplying  important  links  in  the  prophetical  delineation  of  the  Divine 
Purpose.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  it  includes,  at  least,  the 
period  down  to  John  the  Baptist. 

Even  if  we  were  to  take  the  usual  interpretation  given,  by  our  opponents,  to  Daniel 
(e,g,  chs.  2  and  7)  respecting  the  setting  up  of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  viz.  :  at  the  First  Ad- 
vent, it  would  sustain  the  i^osition  of  our  Proposition.  The  prediction  of  establishing 
the  Kingdom  at  a  particular,  sj^ecified  era  is  sufficient  evidence  that  for  some  time,  at 
least,  previously  it  must  not  have  been  in  existence.  The  i^rophecies  indicate  the  Divine 
Sovereignty  controlling  all  things,  even  while  the  Kingdom  of  God  did  not  exist  on 
earth  as  promised. 

Obs.  7.  Let  the  reader  consider,  what  is  too  much  overlooked,  that  this 
Kingdom  is  one  of  promise  and  here  on  the  earth,  and  hence  does  not  refer 
to  the  divine  nature  of  the  Father  or  of  Christ  considered  in  itself,  sepa^'fite 
and  apart  from  the  expressed  covenanted  relationship  (comp.  Props.  80  adis- 
81).  For,  as  Dr.  Storrs  {Diss,  on  Kingdom)  has  well  remarked,  that  govern?? 
ment  solely  arising  from,  or  inherent  in,  the  Divine  Nature  ''  could  not  be 
the  subject  of  promise  or  expectation."  God's  Sovereignty,  necessarily 
and  eternally  inherent  in  Him  and  j^ervading  all  things,  is  never  promised, 
only  as  connected  and  abiding  with  David's  seed  in  this  Kingdom.  This 
is  confirmed  by  what  is  said  in  Hebrews  respecting  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  (comp.  Props.  82-8Jr). 

Obs.  8.  The  only  Kingdom  of  God,  distinctively  announced  as  such,  is 
that  one  in  which,  as  we  have  shown,  God  Himself  condescends  to  act  in 
the  capacity  of  an  earthly  King,  exhibiting  directly  the  functions  of  such 
a  King  in  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  action.  After  the  overthrow 
of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  none  such  existed  on  earth,  but  a 
sad,  mournful  vacancy  transpired. 


252  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  37. 

Ohs.  9.  This  Kingdom  was  not  preaclied  to  the  people  immediately 
before  John  the  Baptist  came.  Luke  (16  :  16)  says  that  Jesus  declared  : 
*'  The  law  and  the  prophets  were  until  John  ;  since  tJiat  time  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  preached."  In  whatever  way  this  is  explained  (see  Judge  Jones's 
Notes,  p.  110,  etc.,  and  Com.  on  Matt.  11  :  12,  13),  it  certainly  implies  a 
period  of  time  preceding  when  the  Kingdom  was  not  directly  offered  for 
acceptance.  The  legitimate  inference  follows,  that  it  was  not  in  existence. 
It  was,  indeed,  predicted,  promised,  believed  in,  and  expected,  but  it  was 
not  authoritatively  offered  for  present  acceptance  and  realization,  as  was 
done  by  John  and  those  following  him. 

Ohs.  10.  That  the  Kingdom  did  not  thus  exist,  is  very  apparent  from 
the  language  of  John  himself  (Matt.  3:2):  "  Repent  ye,  for  the  King- 
dom of  heaven  is  at  hcind,^^  implying,  forcibly,  that  for  some  time  it  had 
not  been  near,  seeing  that  it  now  drew  nigh. 

Ohs.  11.  This  teaches  us  in  what  light  to  consider  the  notion  entertained 
by  numerous  eminent  writers  (as  e.g.  Hengstenberg  in  Tlie  Jews  and  the 
Ch.  Churcli),  viz.  :  that  the  Christian  Church,  as  the  Kingdom  of  God,  is 
simply  a  continuance  of  an  existing  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  Jewish  nation. 
It  is  fundament  ally  erroneous,  and  most  seriously  affects  the  interpretation 
of  Scripture.     (Comp.  Props,  on  th^  Church.) 

Ols.  12.  Many  able  theologiar  ^'  folly  indorse  our  Proposition  as  a  self- 
evident  fact.  Thus  e.g.  Van  Oosterzee  (Theol.  N.  I'e^/.)  makes  the  King- 
dom of  God  something  "  neiD,'"'  not  a  mere  uninterrupted  continuation, 
"  for  it  has  first  come  nigh  in  the  fulness  of  time  (Matt.  4  :  17) ;  it  did  not 
before  exist  on  earth."  While  guarding  against  one  extreme  (i.e.  to  make 
out  the  Ch.  Church  a  continuation  of  the  Kingdom),  he  falls,  however, 
into  another  when  he  asserts  that  "  it  did  not  before  exist  on  earth,"  which 
is  pointedly  contradicted  by  the  previous  establishment  of  the  Theocracy, 
that  was,  jmr  excellence y  the  Kingdom  of  God,  by  its  ivithdrawal  and 
2)rom  ised  restoration. 


QC 


Prop.  38.]  the  TnEOCRATic  kingdom.  253 


Proposition  38.  John  the  Ba2)tist  iweached  that  this  Kingdoin, 
j^redicted  hy  the  Prophets^  was  "  nigh  at  hand  J'' 

This  Kingdom  was  to  be  offered  to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  John' s 
mission  was  to  prepare  the  nation  for  its  acceptance.  However  men 
may  exjDlain  the  Kingxlom  itseK,  the  fact  stated  is  not  disputed. 

Obs.  1.  But  right  here,  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  New  Test,  narrative, 
pious  and  good  men,  under  a  mistaken  view  of  the  Kingdom  to  which 
«Tohn's  preaching  does  not  correspond,  endeavor  to  lessen  the  knowledge  and 
the  importance  of  John.  This  is  done  by  misapplying  a  passage  of 
Scripture,  so  that  the  idea  is  boldly  advanced  that  John's  teaching,  in 
comparison  Avith  what  is  now  taught,  is  of  cofnjjarative  little  value.  One 
commentator  even  informs  us  that  the  lowest  teacher  in  the  church — a 
Sunday-school  teacher  is  mentioned — st  .nds  higher  than  John.  So  long 
as  men  can  degrade  a  Jieai'e?i-appointed/^jieiicheY  of  the  Kingdom  to  so  low 
a  scale  in  knowledge  and  standing,  it  is  vain  to  expect  them  to  give  us  a 
consistent  and  scriptural  view  of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

Before  proceeding,  it  is  necessary  to  vindicate  the  standing  of  the  first  N.  Test, 
preacher  from  the  disparaging  views  announced  by  Barnes  (the  commentat  or  alluded  to), 
Scott,  Clarke,  Nast,  and  others,  and  found  in  almost  every  Life  of  Christ.  It  is  a  gross 
mistake  to  make  (as  Farrar,  L}fe  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  294)  "  the  humblest  child  of  the 
New  Covenant  more  richly  endowed  than  the  greatest  j^rophet  of  the  Old."  Lange, 
Matt.  11  :  7-15,  gives  several  interpretations,  all  more  or  less  defective.  Dr.  SchafP, 
foot-note  to  Lange' s  Corn.,  Matt.  3:1,  unable  to  follow  the  wild  interpretations  usually 
presented,  justly  makes  the  comparison  one  of  "  standpoint  and  official  station,"  but 
hampered  by  the  idea  of  its  being  still  in  some  way  related  to  the  present  church  weak- 
ens its  force.  Jones,  Notes  on  Scripture  {]y.  65),  gives  the  best  comment  and  interj^reta- 
tion  that  we  have  seen  consistent  with  fact  and  the  analogy  of  Scripture.  Hengstenberg 
(ChristoL,  B.  3,  S.  460)  defends  the  higher  character,  etc.,  of  John.  The  passage  referred 
to,  supposed  to  teach  the  low  standard  of  John  in  comparison  with  believers  of  this  dis- 
pensation, is  found  in  Matt.  11  :  11  and  Luke  7  :  28  :  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  among 
them  that  are  born  of  women  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist  ; 
notwithstanding  he  that  is  least  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  Our  Saviour, 
undoubtedly,  refers  to  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  as  it  will  be  established  at  Bis  Second  Ad- 
vent, as  our  Propositions  tend  to  show,  for  the  church  is  only  preparative  to  that  still 
future,  coming  Kingdom,  in  which  the  least  that  inherits  is  greater  in  official  standing, 
more  highly  honored,  than  John  was  in  his  official  position.  Leaving  what  follows  to 
indicate  the  truthfulness  of  this  application  of  a  perverted  passage,  it  may  be  onlj' 
added  :  it  certainly  requires  great  assurance  for  any  one,  teacher  or  not,  to  assert,  from 
the  language  of  Jesus,  that  he  is,  or  that  his  fellows  are,  superior  to  John,  in  view  of 
John's  character,  inspiration,  and  mission.  Admitting  fully  the  blessings,  privileges, 
and  increased  knowledge  of  some  things  that  we  now  enjoj',  yet  a  little  reflection  over 
the  constant  attendance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  sublimity  of  that  authoritative  preaching 
by  which  he  commanded  all  to  repent,  the  consciousness  of  His  being  a  Forerunner  of 
the  Messiah,  the  spotless  character  maintained,  the  faithfulness  unto  death,  should 
cause  persons  to  suspect,  at  once,  that  reference  is  made  to  those  who  actually  inherit  the 
Kingdom  ;  who  have  actually  become,  and  realize  their  honor  and  glory  as  kings  and 
priests  ;  who  will  then  be  greater  than  John  in  every  respect,  while  John,  also,  in  that 


2o4  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PPwOP.  38. 

Kingdom  will  occupy  a  still  higher  position  than  the  one  sustained  at  the  First  Advent 
(Comp.  following  Propositions.)  Fairbairn  {Typology,  p.  48)  accords  with  the  present 
general  view  that  "the  most  eminent  in  spiritual  light  and  privilege  before  were  still 
decidedly  inferior  even  to  the  less  distinguished  members  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom" 
(i.e.  according  to  his  view  of  the  Kingdom,  the  present  Church).  But'  feeling  a  certain 
incongruity  in  such  an  application  (which  so  unjustly  contrasts,  an  inspired  man  with 
uninspired),  he  gives  us  the  following  note  which  speaks  for  itself  :  "  Matt.  11  :  11, 
where  it  is  said  respecting  John  the  Baptist  '  notwithstanding  he  that  is  least  in"  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven,  is  greater  than  he.'  The  older  English  versions  retain  the  com- 
parative, and  rendered  '  he  that  is  less  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven'  (Wycliffe,  Tyndale, 
Cranmer,  the  Geneva)  ;  and  so  also  Winer,  Greek  Gr.,  §  36,  3,  'he  who  occupies  some 
lower  place  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.'  Lightfoot,  Hengstenberg,  and  many  others  ap- 
prove of  this  7nilder  sense,  as  it  may  be  called  ;but  Alfordinhis  recent  Com.  adheres  still 
to  the  stronger  '  the  least  ;'  and  so  does  Steir  in  his  '  Eeden  Jesu,'  who  in  illustrating 
the  thought,  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  '  a  mere  child  that  knows  the  catechism,  and  can  say 
the  Lord's  prayer,  both  knows  and  possesses  more  than  the  Old  Test,  can  give,  and  so 
far  stands  higher  and  nearer  to  God  than  John  the  Baptist. '  One  cannot  but  feel  that 
this  is  putting  something  like  a  strain  on  our  Lord's  declaration."  Fairbairn  indeed  re- 
laxes "  the  strain"  somewhat,  but  continues  it. 

Ohs.  2.  others,  again,  in  the  way  of  eulogizing  John  as  a  preacher  of 
the  coming  Kingdom,  exalt  him  beyond  what  the  language  and  facts  will 
bear.  Thus  e.g.  Judge  Jones  {Notes)  correctly  rejecting  the  interpretation 
of  Barnes,  etc.,  adds:  ''None  greater  than  he  will  ever  appear  till  all 
things  shall  be  restored,  and  the  Kingdom  of  God  shall  come."  The 
language  of  Jesus,  however,  only  says  that  none  greater  had  arisen  to  that 
time,  and  we  have  no  authority  to  continue  the  comparison  down  to  the 
Sec.  Advent.  The  apostles  were  also  preachers  of  this  Kingdom,  also 
specially  called,  specially  inspired,  etc.,  and  are  specially  honored  as  the 
founders  of  the  Ch.  Church.  So  also  Oosterzee  {Theol.  N.  Test.,  p.  37) 
informs  us  that  in  John  '' prophetism  attains  its  point  of  culmination." 
But  this  is  opposed  to  fact  :  others  prophesied  after  John,  as  e.g.  Paul  in 
Thess.,  Jesus  in  lengthy  and  remarkable  predictions,  and  John  the  Rev- 
elator  giving  us  the  words  of  Jesus  in  the  Apocalypse.  John  predicted 
but  little  in  comparison  with  those  who  followed  him. 

Ohs.  3.  John  preached  *'  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom,'*^  just  as  Jesus,  the 
twelve,  and  the  seventy  afterward  preached  it.  Attention  is  simply  directed 
to  this,  because  some  assert  that  there  is  no  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
unless  a  crucified  Eedeemer  is  proclaimed.  But  we  have  here  and  previous 
to  the  death  of  Jesus  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom  proclaimed  to  the  nation. 

Ols.  4.  Some  able  writers  (as  e.g.  Bernard,  BamjHon  Lectures,  '^  The 
Progress  of  Doctrine,"  Lee.  2)  take  the  position  that  "  The  Gospel,  con- 
sidered as  fact,  was  begun  at  the  Incarnation  and  completed  at  the  Resur- 
rection ;  but  the  Gospel,  considered  as  Doctrine,  began  from  the  first 
preaching  of  Jesus,  and  was  completed  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit." 
This  is,  however,  too  circumscriptive  ;  for  the  Gospel  was  announced  pre- 
viously to  the  preaching  of  Jesus  by  John,  and  was  contained  in  the  Old 
Test.  The  facts  pertaining  to  the  Gospel  extend  beyond  the  resurrection, 
even  to  Christ's  present  exaltation,  through  this  intermediate  period  down 
to  the  Second  Advent.  To  make  the  Gospel  perfect,  faith  must  accept  as 
facts  (owing  to  certainty  and  assurance  of  fulfilment)  things  that  are 
future.     The  Gospel  could  be  no  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles  until  their  calling 


Prop.  38.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  255 

and  adoption  was  divinely  assumed  and  demonstrated,  i.e.  in  an  official 
manner.  The  Gospel,  when  employed  as  a  general  term  to  embrace  all 
that  relates  to  Salvation,  cannot  be  thus  circumscribed  ;  m  particulars  (as 
e.g.  relating  to  call  of  Gentiles,  to  the  Person  or  Life  of  Jesus,  etc.)  it 
may  be  limited. 


256  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  39. 


Peoposition  39.   John    the  JBaptist  was  not   ignorant  of  the 
Kingdom  that  he  preached. 

The  prevailing  view,  indorsed  by  a  multitude  of  eminent  theolo- 
gians, is  that  John  was  ignorant  of^  i.e.,  did  not  understand  the 
nature  of,  the  Kingdom  he  proclaimed.  Numerous  works  proceed 
to  tell  us  how  ^'low''^  and  ''carnal^''  John's  ideas  were,  without 
perceiving  the  fatal  flaw  introduced  ;  without  realizing  that  they 
are  actually  sapping  the  very  foundations  of  inspiration,  and  giving 
to  infidelity  its  strongest  weapons  against  the  divine  origin  of 
Christianity. 

The  ablest  writers,  under  the  preconceived  view  that  a  subsequent  change  was  sub- 
stituted in  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  do  gross  injustice  to  John  the  Baj^tist.  Thus  e.g. 
Ebrard  {Gospel  History,  p.  283)  makes  John  totally  ignorant  of  the  Kingdom  and  of  "  the 
formation  of  a  compact  '  Kingdom  of  Christ'  " — and  "  he  received  no  revelation  from 
God  on  this  matter,  but  was  left  to  his  own  conclusions," — also  making  John  less  "  in  in- 
sight" than  any  member  of  the  present  church.  A  multitude  of  quotations,  expressing 
the  same  idea,  could  readily  be  gathered. 

Oi^.  1.  Any  theory  of  the  Kingdom  which  makes  the  first  great 
preacher  of  the  Kingdom — a  preacher  specially  prepared,  sent,  and 
inspired — ignorant  of  the  leading  subject  that  he  was  delegated,  specifi- 
cally commissioned  to  announce,  is  not  only  open  to  the  gravest  suspicion, 
but  ought  to  he  rejected  as  unworthy  of  God. 

Ols.  2.  What  was  John's  conception  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom  ?  Let 
those  who  consider  John  to  be  mistaken  inform  us,  and  let  the  reader 
judge  for  himself  whether  it  is  not  tJie  very  idea  of  the  Kingdom  embraced 
in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  prophets  (Prop.  21),  and  in  a  restored 
Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom.  Thus  e.g.  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  ch.  2, 
s.  40)  truthfully  admits  that  ''  he  expects  this  Kingdom  to  be  visible," 
"  existing  in  communion  with  the  divine  life,  witli  the  Messiah  as  its 
visible  King  ;  so  that,  what  had  not  been  the  case  before,  the  idea  of  the 
Theocracy  and  its  manifestation  should  precisely  correspond  to  each  other, ^^ 
and  "  his  expectations  of  a  visible  realization  of  the  Theocracy  shoios  him 
as  yet  iipon  Old  Test,  ground.''''  That  is,  John  expected  the  restoration  of 
the  Theocracy  in  an  exalted  manner  under  the  Messiah,  pist  as  the 
prophets  plainly  predicted.  Was  he  mistaken  in  this  conception  ?  Many 
say  that  he  was,  simply  because  such  a  conception  was  not  realized  at  the 
First  Advent,  and  down  to  the  present  day  no  such  Kingdom  has  existed, 
and,  therefore,  take  it  for  grajited,  that  he  misapprehended  the  nature  of 
the  Kingdom  ;  that  the  church  must  be  the  Kingdom  intended  ;  that  the 
prophecies  pertaining  to  the  restored  Theocracy  must  be  spiritualized  to 
suit  the  present  church,  etc.,  thus  overlooTcing  the  fact,  clearly  given, 
that  for  certain  reasons  (which  will  hereafter  be  given  in  detail)  the  very 


Prop.  39.]  the  theoceatic  kiis-gdom.  257 

Kingdom  preached  and  anticipated  by  John  was  'postponed.  Instead  of 
allowing  God's  Word  to  speak,  and  having  faith  in  it  that  it  will  yet  be 
fulfilled  as  written,  this  lack  of  faith,  based  on  a  supposed  never  to  be 
realized  fulfilment,  is  made  the  measure  of  John's  preaching  and  of  God's 
Divine  Purpose.     Is  it  ivise  or  prude7it  ? 

So  weak  and  insignificant  is  John's  preaching,  so  Jewish  in  its  nature  and  intent,  in 
the  estimation  of  many,  that  it  is  passed  by  without  comment,  or  even  notice,  in  books 
where  we  naturally,  from  the  subject  discussed,  seek  to  find  it,  as  illustrated,  e.g.  in 
Pres.  Edwards's  His.  of  Redemption.  Books  giving  a  history  of  Christ,  and  including  that 
of  John  the  Baptist,  are  very  careful  not  to  touch  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  or  to 
inform  us  what  Kingdom  he  proclaimed,  but  waive  the  whole  matter  by  telling  us,  in 
general  phrases,  that  John  endeavored  to  prepare  the  people  for  the  coming  Messiah,  as 
exemplified,  e.g.  in  Fleetwood's  Life  of  Christ.  Commentators,  with  lack  of  fairness  and 
candor,  pass  by  the  real  facts  (as  they  will  be  shown  in  following  Propositions)  of  John's 
preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  and  present  such  a  modernized  version  of  the  language,  as  if 
that  accurately  represented  John's  belief,  that  they  impose  upon  the  ignorant  and  un- 
wary reader,  as  shown,  e.g.  in  Barnes's  Notes  on  Matt.  3  :  2.  Thus  the  Baptist  suffers  from 
neglect,  from  the  slights  of  believers,  and  from  the  inserting  a  meaning  into  his  language 
that  he  never  for  a  moment  entertained. 

Obs.  3.  If  John  is  specially  called  to  preach  this  Kingdom,  and  yet 
labors  under  delusion,  gross  error  respecting  its  nature,  we  ask,  Whom,  then, 
can  we  trust  ?  Let  the  reader  ponder  these  facts  :  that  this  John  was 
consecrated  to  the  ministerial  office  from  the  womb  (Luke  1  :  15)  ;  that  for 
this  purpose  he  was  brought  forth  beyond  the  ordinary  course  of  nature 
(Luke  1  :  18)  ;  that  he  was  under  such  Divine  guidance  as  (Luke  1  :  15, 
etc.)  to  be  '' filled  witli  the  Holy  Gliosf  ;  constituted  "  the  prophet  of  the 
Highest''';  ''to  give  hnoivledge  of  salvation'';  and  (John.  1  :  7)  to  be  "« 
witness  of  the  light' ^  ;— and  then  is  it  credible,  even  supposable,  that  such 
a  Prophet  and  Witness,  thus  filled  with  the  Spirit,  should  grossly  llunder 
in  declaring  the  leading  subject  of  his  preaching,  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  .^ 
Yet  such  is  the  opinion  of  multitudes,  learned  and  unlearned,  while  in- 
fidels laugh  and  sneer  at  this  practically  acknowledged  lowering  of  a 
divinely  co^nmissioned  preacher  of  the  Kingdom.  Surely,  if  this  is  so,  viz., 
that  he  misapprehended  the  Kingdom,  then  upon  ivhat  does  his  credibility 
as  a  prophet  depend  ?  If  mistaken  in  tlie  most  vital  part  of  his  mission, 
why  was  he  not  in  error  concerning  the  rest  ?  Now,  against  all  such  dis- 
honoring theories,  we  take  the  ground,  sustained  both  by  Scripture  and 
the  Primitive  Church  view,  that  he  was  not  mistalcen  in  his  preaching  ; 
that  he  hnew  full  tvell  what  Kingdom  he  was  to  tender  to  the  Jewish 
nation,  far  better  than  the  multitude  which  denies  its  correctness  ;  and 
that  if  such  a  Kingdom,  as  he  believed  in  and  proclaimed,  was  not  realized, 
we  must  alloio  the  Scriptures  themselves  to  assign  the  reasons  for  such  a 
delay.  This,  indeed,  requires  faith,  but  it  is  a  faith  abundantly  sustained 
by  facts. 

Ohs.  4.  There  is  something  inconsistent  in  Xeander  and  others  opposing 
the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  embraced  in  the  preaching  of  John  and  the 
disciples,  as  being  an  imperfect  conception  of  its  nature,  etc.,  and  yet  in 
their  development  tlieory,  when  the  world  is  renewed,  they  have,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  virtually  the  same  notion  expressed.  Thus  e.g. 
Neander  :  "  In  fine,  the  end  of  this  development  appears  to  be  (though  not, 
indeed,  simply  as  its  natural  result)  a  complete  realization  of  the  Divine 
Kingdom  which    Christ  established  in  its  outward  manifestation,   fully 


258  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  39. 

answering  to  its  idea  ;  a  perfect  ^uo7'J(l  dominion  of  Christ  and  of  His 
organs,  a  world  purified  and  transformed,  to  become  the  seat  of  His 
universal  Empire.''^  Why,  then,  so  strenuously  reject  and  oppose  John's 
idea  of  the  Kingdom,  an  outward  visible  Kingdom,  resulting  in  a  world 
dominion,  etc.,  if  their  own  attached  notion,  in  place  of  it,  is  ultimately 
at  its  consummation  to  bring  this  to  j^ass  ? 

Ohs.  5.  The  reader  will  find,  in  looking  over  authors,  interpreters,  etc., 
that  many  of  them,  whilst  having  much  to  say  about  John's  preaching 
repentance,  omit,  as  a  tender  subject  beset  with  difficulties,  all  allusions  to 
his  preaching  the  Kingdom,  although  repentance  is  only  described  as  a 
means  for  attaining  to  the  Kingdom.  The  greater  is  sacrificed  to  the 
lesser,  or  else,  with  their  church-kingdom  theory  prejudging  the  case,  and 
not  knowing  how  to  reconcile  John's  preaching  with  his  special  call,  etc., 
they  simply  let  it  alone.  But  other  expositors  and  writers  approach  the 
subject  frankly,  and  candidly  tell  us  what  were  the  views  of  John,  con- 
firming Neander's  opinion  (Obs.  2).  Thus  e.g.  Meyer  {Com.  Matt.  3  :  2) 
acknowledges  that  he  did,  in  his  idea  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  embrace 
'^  the  political  element.^''  The  author  of  Ecce  Homo  admits  that  he 
''meant  that  the  Theocracy  was  to  be  restored.''  Reuss  (His.  Ch.  Theol, 
p.  124)  says,  "  After  all,  John  the  Baptist  was  still  a  Jeiv ;  he  looked  for 
the  brilliant  and  august  inauguration  of  the  Kingdom  which  he  had  pro- 
claimed with  so  much  fervor  and  devotedness,"  etc.,  i.e.  a  Jewish  King- 
dom, such  as  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  prophecies  conveyed.  Such 
testimonies  could  be  multiplied,  but  these  are  sufficient.  Others  refer  to 
this  matter  in  a  half-apologetic  tone,  a  lamely  explanatory  manner,  that 
only  makes  the  defect  the  more  glaring.  Thus  e.g.  Olshausen  {Com.  Matt. 
2  :  3)  says  :  "  If  now  we  ask  in  what  sense  John  the  Baptist  may  have 
understood  the  Kingdom,  it  is  most  probable  that  in  his  relation  to  the 
law,  he  conceived  of  it  with  the  generality  and  indeterminateness  of  the 
Old  Test.,  but  without  incorporating  with  the  idea  anything  false.  We 
may  concede  a  certain  affinity  between  John's  notions  of  the  Messiah's 
Kingdom  and  those  that  prevailed  among  the  people."  This  extract 
speaks  for  itself  and  needs  no  comment,  seeing  that  the  "  indeterminate- 
ness" is  with  Olshausen  and  not  with  John  or  the  Old  Test.  Van  Oosterzee, 
{Theol.  N.  Test.,  s.  7),  while  apparently  avoiding  the  main  point  (i.e.  the 
Kingdom  preached  by  John),  refers  to  his  preaching  in  this  way  :  '*  Never- 
theless, compared  with  the  teaching  of  the  Lord  and  His  apostles,  is  the 
testimony  of  John  the  Baptist  relatively  poor,  and  not  essentially  raised 
above  the  standpoint  of  the  Old  Test."  We  gratefully  and  heartily  accept 
of  the  standpoint  assigned  to  Jolm,  and  ivill  prove  from  Scripture  (not 
assertion  or  assumption)  that  John's  testimony  and  conception  was  the 
truth,  confirmed  by  covenant  and  the  oath  of  the  Almighty,  and  therefore 
relatively  and  inexpressibly  rich. 

Obs.  6.  Those,  of  course,  who  assume  that  the  weakest  believer  who  now 
attempts  to  preach  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  far  greater  than  John  (Prop. 
38,  Obs.  1)  have  no  hesitancy  in  rejecting  John's  views  of  the  Kingdom. 
John,  being  less  than  the  least  in  this  dispensation  (e.g.  Fairbairn,  On 
Proph.,  p.  163),  it  follows  that  every  believer  can  tell  us  far  better  what 
the  KingdoRi  is  than  John  was  able,  although  specially  called  to  preach  it. 
If  this  is  so,  how  comes  it  that  the  great  and  learned  theologians  of  this 


Prop.  39.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  259 

dispensation  present  us  so  many  definitions  and  meanings,  several  kinds  of 
kingdoms,  etc.,  and  that  there  is  such  a  lack  of  uniformity  qI  belief  among 
them  ?  If  all  are  greater  preachers  than  John,  if  they  have  more  knowledge 
and  clearer  conceptions,  why,  then,  do  we  not  find  them  expressed  ?  (comp. 
Prop.  3).  Fairness  to  John  requires  that  we  should  accept  of  his  preaching 
until  it  is  proven  to  be  erroneous  ;  simple  assertion,  however  repeated  by 
the  learned,  does  not  condemn  him. 

As  an  illustration  how  recent  Roman  Catholic  writers  treat  the  subject,  ignoring  its 
difficulties  pertaining  to  their  Church-Kingdom  view,  we  present  the  two  following  :  Dr. 
Alzog  {Univ.  Ch.  i/ts.,  vol.  1,  p.  147j,  speaking  of  John,  says  :  "He,  unlike  them  (i.e. 
other  f»rophets),  did  not  put  off  to  an  indefinite  future  the  amelioration  which  be  prom- 
ised, but  proclaimed  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  was  already  among  men,  and  that  the 
least  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  (i.e.  the  Church)  was  greater  than  he."  Dr.  Rutter  (Life 
of  Jesus,  p.  99),  after  telling  us  that  John  said,  "  Do  penance,  for  the  Kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand,"  pronounces  the  Kingdom  to  be  "  that  inward  and  spiritual  reign  which  be- 
gins here  on  earth  by  faith  showing  its  charitj^  and  good  works,  and  which  will  attain  its 
utmost  completion  in  heaven  by  the  perfection  of  charity  ;  a  reign  which  consists  in 
this,  that  Almighty  God,  having,  through  Jesus  Christ,  destroyed  the  empire  of  the  devil 
over  the  hearts  of  men,  sovereignly  reigns  there  in  this  life  by  knowledge  and  love,  and 
in  the  next  life  by  the  sights  and  enjoyment  of  the  divine  essence,  which  constitutes 
our  external  happiness."  Comp.  Props.  19,  20,  21,  22,  37,  41,  etc.,  and  also  90  to  109. 
The  same  view  is  held  by  a  multitude  of  Protestants,  although  such  a  Kingdom  has  no 
resemblance  whatever  to  the  covenanted  and  oath-bound  one. 


260  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  40. 


Proposition  40.  The  liearers  of  John  believed  that  he  jyreached  to 
them  the  Kingdom  predicted  by  the  Prophets^  and  in  the  sense 
held  by  themselves. 

Tills  follows  from  the  preceding  Propositions,  and  is  also  admit- 
ted by  many  eminent  writers. 

Obs.  1.  The  Jewish  belief  in  a  restored  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom 
has  been  noticed  (Prop.  20),  as  supported  by  the  grammatical  sense  of  the 
prophecies  (Prop.  21),  and  the  election  of  the  nation  (Prop.  24),  etc.  The 
preaching  of  John,  giving  no  explanation  of  the  Kingdom,  indicative  that 
the  Kingdom  is  something  well  known  (Prop.  19),  and  the  employment  of 
current  phraseology  without  change  of  meaning  (Props.  22  and  23),  etc. — 
all  proves  tlie  correctness  of  our  position. 

Obs.  2.  The  grammatical  sense  was  the  only  one  then  used  in  relation  to 
the  Kingdom,  producing  unity  of  belief  in  a  restored  Davidic  Kingdom. 

Even  the  Rabbins,  who  had  already  largely  perverted  Scripture  by  allegorical  and 
mystical  interpretations,  still  clung  with  unswerving  faith  to  the  plain  grammatical 
sense  when  it  related  to  the  Kingdom.  The  testimony  on  this  point  is  overwhelming  ; 
as  much  of  it  is  presented  under  various  Propositions,  it  need  not  be  repeated. 

Obs.  3.  The  unity  of  belief  in  the  same  restored  Kingdom  is  evidenced 
by  John's  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  raising  up  no  disputation  concerning 
it.  Had  he  preached  the  modern  view,  it  would  inevitably  have  excited 
disputes  and  appeals  to  the  prophets. 

Obs.  4.  The  exclusiveness  (Prop.  29)  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  prophecies 
describing  but  one  Kingdom  (Prop.  35),  etc.,  forbid  the  idea  that  there 
was  an  antagonism  of  belief  between  the  preacher  and  the  hearer.  There 
might  be  a  difference  of  opinion  respecting  the  imposed  condition  of 
repentance,  but  there  could  be  none  concerning  the  Kingdom  so  far  as 
related  to  its  essential  nature. 

Obs.  5.  This  fact  of  a  nnison  of  vieiu  respecting  the  Kingdom  alone 
satisfactorily  accounts  for  the  exceeding  brevity  with  which  it  is  men- 
tioned.    It  is  taken  for  granted  that  no  difference  of  opinion  existed. 

Obs.  6.  The  unity  of  agreement  also  accounts  for  so  little  descriptive  of 
the  Kingdom  being  given  in  detail  in  the  Mew  Test.  It  was  fully  known 
and  described  in  the  prophets  ;  now  to  have  entered  into  a  detailed  state- 
ment and  particularized  the  restored  Davidic  Kingdom^  would  unnecessarily 
have  excited  the  open  hostility  of  the  jealous  and  persecuting  Eoman 
Empire. 


Prop.  40.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  261 

Cimarus  and  others  have  made  this  feature  an  objection  to  John  the  Baptist  and 
Jesus,  viz.  :  that  devoted  to  the  Jewish  ideal  of  a  Kingdom,  the  restored  Davidic,  they 
virtually  became  consjDirators  against  the  authority  of  the  Caesars.  This  is  nothing  newt 
for  it  was  this  accusation  that  influenced  Pilate  to  give  uj)  Jesus  to  crucifixion,  and  led 
to  the  just  superscription  of  the  cross.  The  whole  matter  rests  upon  the  priority  of 
claims,  the  justness  of  conquest,  the  authority  of  God,  the  manner  of  introducing  the 
Kingdom,  etc.  Foreseeing,  as  we  shall  show,  the  result,  the  greatest  prudence  was  exercised 
in  this  matter  to  avoid  unnecessary  persecution,  and  when  it  was  finally  known  that  the 
Kingdom  was  postponed  to  the  Second  Advent,  to  be  introduced  by  the  power  of  Jesus 
Christ,  then,  in  view  of  the  i^rophecies  which  foretold  their  continued  existence  down  to 
the  Advent,  believers  were  taught  that  the  existing  governments  were  ordained  or  ap- 
pointed of  God— not  that  they  were  sacred  (as  claimed),  but  allowed  as  a  necessary  re- 
quirement, etc, 

Obs.  7.  This  unity  of  agreement  is  also  seen  in  John  doing  his  preaching 
in  the  wilderness — that  is,  east  from  Jerusalem  in  the  open  country,  away 
from  the  large  cities.  He  and  his  hearers,  both  believing  in  a  restored 
Davidic  Kingdom,  and  he  endeavoring  by  repentance  to  prepare  the  nation 
for  its  coming,  those  large  gatherings  of  Jews  and  the  preaching  of  such  a 
Kingdom  would  necessarily  have  excited  inquiry  and  the  pressure  of 
Roman  power.  Hence  (especially  in  view  of  the  foreseen  rejection)  the 
vtmod  caution,  consistent  with  John's  mission,  is  observed. 

If  the  modern  prevailing  view  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  correct  one,  no  reason  can  be 
assigned  for  John's  avoidance  of  the  centres  of  influence,  as  e.g.  Jerusalem. 

Obs.  8.  The  agreement  of  opinion  is  seen  in  the  disciples  of  John,  who, 
as  far  as  known,  held  to  the  coming  of  the  restored  Davidic  Kingdom 
under  the  Messiah. 

Obs.  9.  John  and  his  hearers  certainly  had  no  other  views  than  those 
entertained  by  following  preachers  of  the  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  the  apostles  ; 
see  Acts  1  :  6. 

Obs.  10.  The  agreement  of  opinion  is  frankly  admitted  by  many  of  our 
opponents,  whom  we  have  quoted,  and  whom  we  shall  hereafter  quote,  as 
e.g.  Knapp  {Ch.  Tlieol.),  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  etc.),  and  others. 

Obs.  11.  It  is  in  view  of  such  agreement  of  opinion  that  Ecce  Homo 
declares  (p.  13,  etc.)  that  John  tried  to  renew  the  old  Covenant  by  promis- 
ing "  the  restoration  of  the  ancient  Theocracy,"  adding,  "  he  had  renewed 
the  old  Theocratic  Covenant  with  the  nation.  But  not  all  the  nation  was 
fit  to  remain  in  such  a  covenant,"  etc. 


262  THE  THEOCRATIC    KIJ^GDOM.  [PrOP.  41. 


Proposition  41.  The  Kingdom  was  not  estahllsJied  under  Johi's 
ministry. 

It  could  not  be,  because  no  restored  Theocracy^  such  as  the 
prophets  predicted,  the  covenant  demanded,  and  he  preached,  fol- 
lowed. This  is  seen  by  the  failure  of  John's  mission,  which  was 
designed  to  prepare,  if  x)ossible,  consistently  with  moral  freedom, 
the  nation  for  the  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  1.  John  was  not  conscious  of  a  Kingdom  being  established,  as  is 
noticeable  in  tlie  message  that  be  sent,  shortly  before  his  death,  from 
prison  to  Jesus. 

Consider  the  position  of  John  in  jDrison,  and  imagine  the  thoughts  that  mnst  have 
arisen  in  his  mind  while  confined  for  several  months  in  the  fortress.  He  had  preached 
the  coming  of  the  Kingdom  conditioned  on  repentance  ;  he  had  seen  and  announced  the 
Messiah,  through  whom,  as  he  fondly  anticii^ated,  the  Kingdom  was  to  be  established. 
Just  before  his  imprisonment  he  had  expressed  the  hope  that  the  Messiah  would  be 
received,  and  hence  looked  for  a  speedy  visible  Messianic  Kingdom.  I*^ow  it  is  supposed 
(e.g.  Neander's  L'ija  of  Christ,  S.  IBS')  that  doubts  arose  in  John's  mind  respecting  the 
Messiah  on  account  of  the  delay.  But  this  could  not  2)ossihly  he,  owing  to  John's  specific 
mission,  his  testimony  to  Jesus,  his  having  seen  the  attesting  divine  manifestation,  and 
his  having  heard  the  confirming  voice  from  heaven.  John  had  no  doubts  concerning  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus.  How,  then,  interpret  the  action  of  sending  his  disciples  to  Jesus  V 
The  explanation  follows  naturally  from  the  hopes  entertained  by  him,  and  the  condition 
in  which  he  was  placed.  Being  imprisoned,  the  hope  of  a  speedy  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom  (for  had  he  not  seen  the  Messiah  ?)  implanted  the  hope  of  a  speedy  release 
from  his  prison  ;  for  then,  under  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  as  predicted  by  the  prophets, 
he  would  necessarily  experience  deliverance  from  his  enemies  (as  Zacharias  believed, 
Luke  1  :  74).  Such  thoughts  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  his  belief,  hope,  and  situa- 
•  tion,  have  passed  through  his  mind.  To  satisfy  his  mind  respecting  release",  whether 
the  Kingdom  would  be  soon  established,  he  sends  two  of  his  disciples  (Matt.  11  :  2,  3), 
with,  in  his  estimation,  a  /e.s^  question  :  "  art  Thou  He  that  should  come,  or  do  we  look 
for  another  ?' '  Now  if  we  but  reflect  that  (As  Olshausen,  Com.  loci  has  well  remarked, 
comp.  Whitby  loci.) ''the  Coming  One  "  or  " '  He  that  Cameth,' has  a  fixed  doctrinal 
signification,  viz.  :  the  Messiah"  (denoting  the  One  who  should  restore  the  Davidic  King- 
dom)— this  was  a  most  delicate  way  of  asking  iohy  the  Kingdom  was  not  established,  why 
there  was  a  delay  in  its  restoration.  John  proclaimed  Him  as  "  the  Coming  One,"  and 
thus  reminds  Jesus  of  the  fact  by  the  question  ;  but,  in  view  of  the  non-appearance  of 
the  Kingdom  and  of  his  confinement  in  consequence,  also  in  the  latter  clause  indirectly 
urges  Jesus  to  make  no  delay,  invites  Him  to  hasten  and  manifest  His  Messianic  mission. 
There  is  no  necessity  to  draw  from  the  narrative  the  idea  of  John's  wavering  in  his  Mes- 
sianic faith  (as  unbelief  has  it),  or  of  his  being  momentarily  grievously  tempted  (as 
Olshausen),  or  that  he  misapprehended  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  (as  Ebrard,  note  to 
Olshausen),  (comp.  Whitby  and  Scott  loci.)  etc.,  but  rather  as  Kendrick  (note  to  Olshau- 
sen, loci)  "  that  John  stumbled  rather  at  our  Saviour  s  sloicness  in  assuming  to  Himself 
that  temporal  dominion  which  doubtless  formed  a  part  of  his  view  of  the  function  of  the 
Messiah,"  or  as  Lange  (Com.  loci),  that  he  desired  "  himself  to  witness  the  manifestation 
of  that  Kingdom  of  heaven  which  he  had  announced,"  and  which,  as  a  resultant,  would 
bring  deliverance.  John  thus  expresses  his  hope  in  the  Kingdom,  virtually  saying  :  If, 
as  I  believe.  Thou  art  the  Messiah,  why  not  establish  the  Kingdom  and  impart  freedom  ; 
it  was  an  apxDeal.     Now  notice  Chirst's  admirable  reply  :  Well  knowing  that  the  King- 


Prop.  41.]  the  theocratic  kiis^gdom.  263 

dom  icould  he  postponed  on  account  of  the  nation's  unworthiness,  He  does  not  reject  John's 
Messianic  hopes,  but  simply  confirms  His  Messianic  character  by  an  appeal  to  His 
works— thus  confirming  John's  faith  in  Himself  as  the  Messiah  without  intimating  when 
the  Messianic  expectations  would  be  realized.  Renan  {Life  of  Christ,  p.  189)  says,  that 
when  John's  disciples  returned  to  him  from  Jesus,  "  we  are  led  to  believe  that,  in  spite 
of  his  consideration  for  Jesus,  John  did  not  consider  that  he  was  to  realize  the  divine 
promises."  This  is  an  utterly  unfair  and  unjust  influence.  We  have  seen  why  Jesus 
could  not  be  more  specific  in  answering  John— the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  the 
reason— but  this  did  not  forbid  Him  from  confirming  John's  faith  in  Himself  as  the 
Messiah,  and,  by  consequence,  that  John  should  himself  realize  (at  some  time)  the  Mes- 
sianic promises.     The  language  indicates  it. 

Obs.  2.  That  no  Kingdom  was  established  is  evident  from  the  continued 
style  of  preaching  the  Kingdom  after  John's  imprisonment  and  death,  for 
Jesus,  the  disciples,  and  the  seventy  announced  it,  not  as  actually  present, 
but  as  still  future. 

Obs.  3.  The  imprisonment  and  death  of  John  itself  is  indicative  of  our 
position,  for  it  shows  that,  instead  of  a  Kingdom,  suffering  is  allotted  ;  the 
Forerunner  is  rejected,  and  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  obtained  without  blood 
shed  in  its  behalf.  A  martyred  Forerunner  is  an  appropriate  foreground 
to  a  crucified  King,  and  reminds  us  how  dearly  this  very  Kingdom  is 
purchased. 

Leathes  {The  Religion  of  Christ,  Bampton  Lectures  for  1874),  while  misapprehending 
and  spiritualizing  the  Kingdom  that  John  preached,  yet  fully  admits  :  "  He  certainly 
died  without  seeing  the  Advent  of  that  Kingdom  which  he  had  proclaimed  as  near. 
We  cannot  see  how  any  one  who  holds  the  Ch.  Church  that  was  established  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  to  be  this  Kingdom,  can  logically  hold  any  other  view.  Hence  many 
writers  occupy  Leathes'  position,  and  concede  our  Proposition.  Our  opponents  involve 
themselves  in  the  most  glaring  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  by  .not  adhering  m 
strictness  to  their  own  Church-Kingdom  theory.  Thus  e.g.  Barnes  and  others  (even  in- 
cluding such  as  Nast,  etc.)  make  the  Ch.  Church  to  be  the  Kingdom  established  on  the 
day  of'Pentecost  after  the  death  of  Jesus,  but  then  again  and  again  they  tell  us  that  the 
Gospel  with  its  resultant  spiritual  reign  is  this  Kingdom,  and  that  this  Gospel  was 
preached  and  result  gained  in  John^s  time  (thus  making  this  Kingdom  not  to  exist  and 
then  again  to  exist) ;  and  then,  without  seeing  the  absurdity  of  the  proceeding,  when 
commenting  on  Matt.  11  :  11,  they  make  out  that  John  is  not  m  the  Kingdom  of  heaven, 
but  that  the  least  one  in  it  (i.e.  the  Church)  is  superior  to  John,  owing  to  privilege,  etc., 
after  having  declared  in  other  places  that  John  was  in  it  and  caused  his  hearers  to  press 
into  it.  Alas  !  what  confusion  arises,  when  men  forsake  the  plain  sense  of  covenant  and 
prophecy. 

Obs.  4.  This  satisfactorily  answers  the  question,  tvhy  John  continued 
his  ministry  after  the  public  appearance  of  Christ.  The  solution  is  found 
m  John  baptizing  not  only  in  view  of  a  Messiah  to  come,  but  of  a  Kingdom 
to  come.  The  Kingdom,  and  meetness  for  it,  was  the  burden  ot  his 
preaching,  and  the  foundation  motive  for  urging  repentance.  Kow  if  the 
Kingdom  had  appeared,  as  some  writers  contend,  as  soon  as  Jesus  was 
baptized  by  John  or  even  earlier,  then  John's  mission  would  have  ended  ; 
but  as  the  Kingdom  was  not  manifested,  John  could  continue  hi^s  own 
ministry  without  change.  Jesus  only  commenced  (Matt.  4  :  17)  His 
preaching  when  John  was  imprisoned. 

The  testimony  of  Killen  {The  Ancient  CVmrch,  p.  11).  that  the  Jews  -anxiously  awaited 
the  appearance  of  a  Messiah,"  is  that  of  every  historian.  But  with  this  and  as  a  result^ 
ant,  inseparably  united,  was  the  idea  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  Hence  the  preaching 
was  continued  as  preparatory  to  the  Kingdom.  This,  also,  throws  light  on  the  baptism 
of  Jesus,  a  difficult  subject,  because  Jesus  needed  not  repentance.    Some  (Farrar)  make 


264  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  41. 

it  to  "  prefigure  the  laver  of  regeneration  ;"  others  (Shenkel),  a  vicarious  or  representa- 
tive act  ;  others  (Bernard),  an  act  of  humility,  or  (Barnes)  an  example  sanctioning  divine 
institutions,  or  (Lange)  to  remove  ceremonial  uncleanness,  etc.  This  baptism  was  de- 
signed to  indicate  that  the  person  receiving  it  was  jjrepared  or  qualified  for  the  King- 
dom, yielding  himself  to  the  supreme  will  of  God,  hence  David's  Son  could  properly  re- 
ceive it. 

Obs.  5.  The  non -establishment  of  the  Kingdom  is  shown  in  the  fact 
that  the  disciples  of  John,  instructed  by  himself,  and  their  adherents  after 
John's  death,  even  after  the  death  of  Jesus,  formed  a  sect  who  still  waited 
for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  (Gieseler,  Ch.  His.  1:  69,  Lange's  Com.^  p. 
69,  etc.).  This  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that,  not  seeing 
the  Kingdom  established  as  preached  by  John,  and  unacquainted  with 
or  failing  to  appreciate  its  postponement  to  the  Sec.  Advent  of  the  crucified 
Jesus,  they  still  looked  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom,  and,  of 
course,  then  for  the  Messiah  to  restore  it. 

Obs.  6.  The  brevity  of  John's  ministry  is  readily  accounted  for  ;  brief 
as  it  was,  it  was  sufficiently  long  to  indicate  the  imfityiess  of  the  nation  for 
the  Kingdom  (comp.  Lange,  Com.,  Matt.  3  :  1-12,  p.  68,  2d  col.).  Differ- 
ent writers  inform  us  that  it  was  very  successful  and  give  us  glowing 
accounts  how  the  multitude  "  pressed  into"  the  Kingdom  ;  but  we  have  the 
decided  testimony  of  the  Lord  Himself  that,  whatever  degree  of  success 
attended  John's  efforts  in  the  beginning,  his  mission  to  the  nation  was 
acceptable  only  to  the  feiu  ;  the  representative  men  of  the  nation  were  not 
gained,  they  did  not  repent  (Matt.  11  :  18). 

As  this  is  an  important  point,  and  misconception  here  will  lead  to  misinterpretation, 
a  few  words  may  be  added.  The  passage  adduced  to  prove  the  success  of  John's  minis- 
try is  Matt.  11  :  12,  and  Luke  16  :  16,  We  refer,  by  way  of  illustration,  to  Barnes'  Com. 
loci,  to  show  how  comments  are  made.  On  this  verse,  he  tells  us  of  the  multitudes  who 
"rush"  and  "  press"  for  the  Kingdom,  and  this  state  of  things  "  has  continued,"  etc., 
and  yet,  when  commenting  on  verse  18  of  the  same  chapter,  forgetting  what  he  had  just 
penned,  he  then  informs  us  that  "  this  generation"  "  were  not  pleased  with  him,"  etc. 
The  reader  is  referred  to  the  admirable  comment  of  Judge  Jones  {Notes  on  the  Scriptures, 
loci)  on  this  passage,  in  which  he  consistently  proves  (take  Luke  16  :  16  in  connection 
as  interpreter)  that  it  teaches  that  men  pressed  against,  resisted  the  Kingdom,  treated  it 
with  violent  opposition,  although  urged  upon  them.  His  criticism  of  the  text  corresponds 
with  the  context,  and  makes  it  to  harmonize  with  the  farts  as  they  truly  existed  (so  also 
Lightfoot,  Schneckenburger,  and  others).  Those,  however,  who  retain  a  different  render- 
ing, to  make  it  consistent  with  fact,  interpret  it  (as  H.  Dana  Ward,  Proph.  Times,  Ap. 
1874,  p.  36),  "  every  (wise)  man  presseth  toward  it, "  or  (as  J.  G.  W.,  Proph.  Times,  vol.  11, 
No.  5,  p.  72),  "  From  the  days  of  John  the  Baptizer  until  now,  the  Kingdom  of  heaven 
suffereth  violence"  (permits  a  violation  of  ritualism),  "  and  the  violent"  (the  earnest  pen- 
itents) "  take  it  by  force"  (striving  to  enter  into  the  strait  gate,  etc.).  These,  and 
others  (comp.  Lange's  Com.  loci,  Scott,  etc.)  are  more  or  less  forced,  while  Jones's  inter- 
pretation is  natural  and  accordant  loith  fact.  That  no  national  or  wide  extended  re- 
pentance was  produced  is  evident  from  the  deputation  (John  1  :  19-27)  and  subsequent 
events.  The  extravagant  eulogies  of  "  a  holy  violence,"  and  the  making  by  some 
(Lange,  etc.),  John  and  Jesus  to  be  "  the  violent,"  are  simply  glosses  ;  the  violent — by 
conspiring  to  put  the  Messiah  to  death — took,  as  we  shall  show  in  detail,  the  Kingdom 
away  from  the  nation, 

Obs.  7.  Some  writers,  in  their  eagerness  to  make  out  a  preparation  for 
the  First  Advent  (which  existed,  and  is  temperately  (e.g.  Schaff,  His.  Apos. 
Church)  described  by  others),  tell  us  much  of  the  preparation  of  the  Jewish 
nation  for  the  same.  But  this  is  shown  to  be  utterly  unworthy  of  credence, 
in  view  of  the  failure  of  John's  mission,  the  rejectio7i  and  death  of  the 


Prop.  41.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  265 

Messiah,  and  the  resultant  judgme7its  of  God.   (Comp.  character  of  Jews  as 
given  by  Jesus,  Josephus,  Harwood,  Mosheim,  Home,  etc.). 

Often  have  we  been  pained  and  surprised  to  find  careful  and  able  writers  fall  into 
extravagances  in  this  direction.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  'Lui'b.Qxd.i  {Bremen  Lectures,  Lee.  8,  p.  128) 
says  :  "  John  the  Baptist's  mission  was  to  be  bridesman.  He  led  the  bride  to  the  bride- 
groom, to  be  united  with  Him  in  marriage,  to  be  made  one  with  Him.  This  is  the  end 
of  the  history  of  Israel,"  etc.  All  that  we  have  to  say  of  this  perversion  of  the  marriage 
figure,  as  used  in  Scripture,  is  this  :  John  found  a  very  unwilling  bride,  and  in  his 
efforts  came  to  his  death,  and  Jesus  also  died  ;  instead  of  a  marriage  there  was  gloom  and 
death ;  the  marriage  was  postponed.  Men  may — this  is  their  apology—  think  to  honor 
Christ  by  showing  a  successful  mission  in  John,  but  they  do  it  at  the  expense  of  truth  ;  and 
Jesus  needs  no  fictitious  praise.  Many  illustrations  of  this  could  be  given,  but  this 
will  sufiice.  However,  in  this  connection  it  may  be  well  to  mention  another  mistake  that 
is  prevalent.  Farrar  {Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  115)  speaks  of  John's  baptism  "  as  an  initi- 
ation into  the  Kingdom."  This  is  nowhere  asserted  ;  and  it  is  opposed  by  all  the  facts 
that  we  have  already  presented,  and  by  others  that  will  follow.  It  was  a  baptism  of  re- 
pentance to  qualify  for  the  Kingdom,  and  not  to  admit,  or  initiate  into  the  Kingdom,  as 
is  seen  e.g.  by  the  force  of  Acts  1  :  6,  (the  apostles  even  not  being  cognizant  of  such  a 
Kingdom). 


266  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS'GDOM.  [PrOP.  42. 


Proposition  42.  Jesus  Christy  in  His  early  ministry^  preached 
that  tlie  Kingdovi  of  God  was  nigh  at  hand. 

When  John's  ministry  ended  by  his  imprisonment,  it  is  said 
(Matt.  4 :  17) :  '^From  that  time  Jesus  began  to  preach,  and  to 
say,  Repent,  for  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hanciy  (Comp. 
Mark  1  :  14,  15,  Luke  4  :  23,  and  8:1.) 

The  design  of  this  Proposition  is  simply  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fact 
that  Jesus  preached  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  same  manner  that  John  the  Baptist  did, 
for  there  would  be  an  inconsistency  in  the  Forerunner  preaching  one  Kingdom  and  the 
Principal  quite  another.  Therefore,  the  meaning  and  intent  of  the  nighness— also  pro- 
claimed by  John,  Jesus,  the  twelve,  and  the  seventy — will  be  left  for  full  consideration 
under  Propositions  55  to  G8  inclusive,  when  we  shall  be  better  prepared,  by  the  prelim- 
inaries passed  over,  to  appreciate  its  deep  and  intensely  interesting  signification. 

Obs.  1.  Jesus  adopts  the  same  style  that  John  did,  urges  the  same 
condition  of  repentance,  uses  the  phraseology  common  with  the  Jews,  and 
introduces  the  subject  of  the  Kingdom,  without  any  explanation,  as  one 
well  known  and  understood.  The  efforts  made  by  well-intentioned  men  to 
give  this  preaching  of  Jesus  a  ''  modern''^  aspect  and  coloring  is  not  only 
a  failure,  being  opposed  by  stubborn  facts  and  the  immediate  results  in  His 
liearers,  but  it  actually  places  the  Messiah  in  a  position  irreconcilaMe  with 
that  of  a  perfect  Divine  Teacher.  We  therefore  hold,  with  the  Primitive 
Church,  until  decided  scriptural  proof  is  offered  to  the  contrary,  that 
Jesus  offered  to  the  Jews  tlie  Tlieocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  in  its  Civil  and 
Religious  combination,  y?^cS^^  as  predicted  by  the  prophets. 

Ohs.  2.  How  Jesus  was  understood  by  His  hearers,  we  leave  one  of  our 
opponents — to  whose  interest  it  would  be  to  conceal  or  cover  it — to  describe. 
Thus  Knapp  {Cli.  Tlieoh,  p.  323)  :  "  At  the  time  of  Christ,  and  previously, 
the  current  opinion  of  the  people  in  Palestine,  and  indeed  of  most  of  the 
Pharisees  and  lawyers,  was,  that  He  (the  Messiah)  would  be  a  ternporcd 
Deliverer  and  a  King  of  the  Jews,  and,  indeed,  a  Universal  Monarch,  who 
would  reign  over  all  nations.  Thus  they  interpreted  the  passages,  Ps. 
2  :  2,  G,  8,  Jer.  23  :  5,  6,  Zech.  9  :  4,  seq.  Hence  those  who,  during  the 
life-time  of  Jesus,  acknowledged  Him  to  be  the  Messiah,  wished  to  pro- 
claim Him  King,  John  6  :  15,  coll.  ;.  Matt.  21  :  8,  9.  The  apostles  themselves 
held  this  opinion  until  after  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  Matt.  20  :  20,  21, 
Luke  24  :  21,  Acts  1  :  6.  And  Jesus  Himself,  during  His  life  upon  earth, 
l^roceeded  very  guardedly,  in  order  to  lead  them  gradually  from  this 
deep-rooted  prejudice,  and  not  to  take  it  away  at  once."  Who  can  justly 
be  regarded  as  the  author  of  this  "  deep-rooted  prejudice"  ?  Certainly  lie 
who  placed  it  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  the  Old  Test.,  who  left  the 
Jewish  nation  with  it  for  many  long  centuries  as  their  faith  and  their  hope, 
and  who,  while  having  twelve  men  in  training  to  be  preachers  of  this 


Prop.  42.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  267 

Kingdom  for  over  three  years,  did  not  remove  it,  as  Knapp  confesses. 
The  question  is,  Was  it  a  ^^ prcjudicG'^  or  the  truth? 

Knapp  himself  falls  into  the  accommodation  theory,  which  (Sec.  90,  2)  he  justly  con- 
demns, and  thus  violates  the  very  principle  of  interpretation  (literal)  adopted  by  Christ 
and  the  apostles  in  quoting  from  the  Old  Test.,  and  which  (S.  90,  3)  he  approves  ;  illus- 
trating, that  it  is  much  more  easy  to  lay  down  canons  for  interpretation  than  to  follow 
them.  We  have  merely  the  assertion  of  Knapp  and  others,  that  the  hope  of  a  Theocratic 
restoration — which  they  frankly  acknowledge  (not  seeing  how  necessarily  fatal  it  is  to 
their  own  theory)  was  not  removed  by  the  public  preaching  and  private  instructions  of 
Jesus — is  a  "  deep-rooted  prejudice,"  It  seems  passing  strange  that  without  positive 
proof,  eminent  theologians,  following  the  lead  of  the  Alexandrian  and  monkish  opinion 
afterward  developed,  should  hastily,  rashly  rush  to  such  a  conclusion-  a  conclusion  that 
violates  covenant,  oath,  plain  promises,  the  purity  of  John's  and  Christ's  teaching.  True, 
such  lack  of  faith  is  predicted,  but  still  it  is  strange  that  it  should  be  found  even  in  men 
who,  in  many  other  respects,  are  able  defenders  of  God's  Word.  Alas  !  that  there 
should  be  an  unwillingness  to  candidly  examine  whether,  after  all,  such  a  "  prejudice" 
is  not  clearly  taught  in  the  Old  Test.,  and  as  distinctively  perpetuated  under  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Messiah  Himself,  and  whether  there  may  not  be  valid  reasons,  found  in  the 
conduct  of  the  nation  itself,  why  this  "  prejudice"  remained  unrealized.  When  Fuller 
(Strictures  on  Bobinson's  Sentiments,  Let.  2)  says  of  the  disciples,  "  Their  foolish  minds 
were  so  dazzled  with  the  false  ideas  of  a  temporal  Kingdom  that  they  were  blinded  to  the 
true  end  of  Christ's  coming  and  to  all  that  the  prophets  declared  concerning  it,"  we,  on 
the  other  hand,  think  that  it  is  Fuller's  mind  that  is  "so  dazzled  with  the  false  ideas  of 
a"  sioiritual  "  kingdom"  that  it  is  "blinded,"  etc, 

Obs.  3.  Pressense  has  (in  Tlie  Redeemer)  a  chapter  entitled  "  The  Plan 
of  Jesus  Christ,"  which  contains  an  inconsistent  and  misleading  Plan, 
telling  us,  e.g.  that  it  was  part  of  the  plan  of  Jesus  to  abolish  the  Tlicocracy 
(just  as  if  it  then  existed,  comp.  Props.  32,  33),  because  a  Theocracy  is 
useless  (!?),  etc.,  and  the  proof  alleged  for  such  fundamentally  sweeping 
assertions  is  the  phrase  "  my  Kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  "  (Just  as  if  the 
Theocracy  was  not  a  Divine  but  a  world  appointment,  comp.  Prop.  25, 
Obs.  6).  As  we  shall  examine  this  proof  (comp.  Props.  109  and  110)  in 
another  connection,  it  is  sufficient  to  ask  now.  Why  were  the  preachers  of 
the  Kingdom  down  to  the  ascension  (Acts  1  :  6)  entirely  unacquainted  with 
Pressense's  plan  ?  Why  does  Jesus  then  express  regret  at  leaving  "  the 
house  (Davidic)  desolate,"  and  point  to  His  future  coming,  when  the 
desolation  should  be  removed?  Why  does  the  entire  tenor  of  His  preaching 
evince  that  He  never,  for  a  moment,  hesitated  in  identifying  His  Kingdom 
that  He  proclaimed  with  that  of  the  Prophets,  understood  by  the  Jews  in 
the  Theocratic  sense,  as  e.g.  Matt.  16  :  27  and 25  :  34,  comp  with  Dan. 
7  :  18,  27  ;  Luke  13  :  28,  29,  Matt.  8  :  11,  comp.  with  Mic.  7  :  20  ;  Luke 
22  :  29,  30,  Matt.  19  :  28,  comp.  with  Mic.  4  :  6-8,  Ezek.  37  :  21,  22,  etc.  ? 
When  such  talented  writers  misapprehend  the  precious  nature  of  the 
Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  and  disjjarage  its  Divine  appointment,  what 
idea  can  the  multitude  form  of  the  same  ? 

Obs.  4.  Dr.  Auberlen  {Div.  Rev.)  has  boldly  and  truthfully  declared  that 
Jesus,  the  Prophets,  and  the  apostles  were  express  ChiUasts.  They  all, 
receiving  the  grammatical  sense  and  expressing  themselves  in  it,  taught 
and  looked  for  a  restoration  of  the  fallen  down  Davidic  Kingdom  under  the 
Messiah.  (The  proof  on  this  point  is  cumulative  and  irresistible,  as  will  be 
shown  in  the  course  of  our  argument — the  design  at  present  being  merely 
to  introduce  some  preparatory  matter  before  considering  the  covenants 
upon  which  all  rests.)     Hence  Kenan  [Life  of  Christ)  frequently  refers  (so 


268  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  42. 

Strauss,  Baur,  etc.)  to  this    Chiliastic  feature,  saying,  e.g.   (p.   140)  that 
'*  Millenarianism  gave  the  impulsion." 

Eenan,  too,  like  many  of  the  orthodox,  overlooking  the  postponement  of  the  King- 
dom so  plainly  taught,  ignoring  the  existence  of  the  Scriptures  that  refer  to  it,  and  conse- 
quently  not  realizing  the  close  relationship  existing  between  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by 
the  representative  men  of  the  Jewish  nation  and  His  corresj^onding  change  in  addressing 
the  Jews,  makes  sad  work  with  the  Kingdom  preached.  He  makes  it  just  as  varied  as 
the  belief  does  which  he  is  attacking,  telling  us  that  Jesus  understood  it  "  in  different 
senses."  At  one  time  it  is  "  simply  the  reign  of  the  poor  and  disinterested;"  at  an- 
other ic  is  "  the  literal  accomplishment  of  the  apocalyptic  visions  of  Daniel  and 
Enoch  ;"  sometimes  it  is  "  the  Kingdom  of  souls,"  etc.  After  saying,  "  the  fundamen- 
tal idea  of  Jesus  w^as,  from  the  first  day,  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  we 
have  from  Eenan's  pen  about  as  many  definitions  of  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  "  as,  on  the 
other  side,  Barnes  gives  (Prop.  3)  in  his  Notes.  This  is  derogatory  to  Christ,  and  will  be 
found,  by  a  candid  comparison  of  Scripture,  to  be  utterly  unfounded. 

Ohs.  5.  Because  the  Kingdom  (Theocratic)  has  not  yet  appeared  as 
preached,  we  are  not  authorized  to  conclude  (as  Renan,  etc.)  that  Christ 
clianged  His  plan  ;  because  the  Jews  rejected  Him,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to 
infer  that  their  Davidic  house  will  remain  forever  desolate.  In  this  matter 
we  must  confine  ourselves  (Prop.  9)  to  the  Record,  and  see  ivliy  the  King- 
dom did  not  come,  what  influence  this  rejection  had  upon  the  Kingdom, 
and  what  Jesus  Himself  declared  concerning  it,  and  then,  only  then,  frame 
our  conclusions  accordingly.  The  simple,  unvarnished  narrative,  as  firmly 
held  by  the  Primitive  churches,  tells  us  that  the  Kingdom  preached  as 
nigh  was  idodjponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent. 

But  this  excites  the  scorn  of  Unbelievers,  who,  in  virtue  of  this  allusion  to  his  Sec. 
Advent,  charge  Jesus  with  preaching  "dreams."  Those  extravagant  upholders  of 
Christ  as  a  preacher  of  "  the  Eeligion  of  Humanity"  still  make  (as  Renan)  Him  proclaim 
(Xife  of  Jesus,  p.  248)  "  the  expectation  of  an  empty  apocalypse,"  "  a  false,  cold,  impos- 
sible idea  of  a  pompous  advent,"  etc.  The  case  is  prejudged  ;  the  impossible  steps  in, 
and  nothing  is  left  to  faith.  This  is  precisely  in  the  line  of  Bible  prediction,  that  such 
"  scoffers"  shall  be  educated  to  such  a  standard  of  unbelief  and  irreverence  for  Christ's 
preaching  and  Christ's  claims  to  the  one  Kingdom  linked  with,  and  postponed  to,  his 
Sec.  Appearing  (2  Tim.  4  :  1,  etc.),  and  that  they  shall,  by  the  sj)read  of  their  unbeliev- 
ing sentiments,  influence  the  multitude,  so  that  at  the  Second  Advent,  kings,  nobles, 
great  and  mighty  men,  a  vast  concourse  of  people  shall  be  arrayed  against  Him  (Apoc. 
19,  Zech.  14,  Joel  3,  etc.).  But  it  is  not  merely  the  infidel  who  sjjeaks  disparagingly  of 
Christ's  preaching  ;  many  a  believer,  who  loves  Christ  and  would  shrink  from  being 
classed  with  unbelievers,  so  far  coincides  with  infidelity  in  the  fundamental  part  of 
jjreaching  the  Kingdom,  that  he  lamely  apologizes  in  behalf  of  Christ  (when  He  needs 
none),  and  endeavors  to  conceal  the  alleged  defects  under  a  weak  accommodation  theory, 
saying  that  Christ  accommodated  Himself  to  the  ignorance  and  prejudices  of  the  Jews. 
A  system  that  must  resort  to  such  an  abject  line  of  reasoning,  making  Jesus  to  say  one 
thing  while  really  meaning  another,  keeping  others  (as  e.g.  apostles  down  to  the  ascen- 
sion. Acts  1  :  6)  in  "  error  and  i^rejudice,"  while  all  the  time  intending  the  reverse,  is 
certainly — no  matter  who  advocates  it— sorely  defective  and  entirely  untrustworthy.  It  lacks 
the  truth,  or  it  would  not  place  the  blessed  Messiah  in  such  an  unenviable  attitude.  How 
much  more  logical  and  consistent  the  Primitive  Church. 

Obs.  6.  Neander  and  others  misapprehend  the  intent  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  when  they  make  it  designed  to  contradict  the  Messianic 
expectations  of  the  Jews  in  a  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  For 
(1)  it  contains  not  a  word  or  thought  against  such  a  hope  ;  (2)  it  confir7ns 
the  Jews  in  such  expectations  by  using  their  phraseology  without  intimat- 
ing the  least  change  of  meaning  ;  (3)  those  very  persons  admit  that  it  did 
not  change  the  oj^inions  of  the  disciples  and  apostles  ;  (4)  they  mistake  the 


Prop.  42.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  269 

preparatives  of  the  Kingdom  for  the  Kingdom  itself  ;  (5)  the  exact  reverse 
is  the  truth,  as  seen  in  the  allusions  concerning  the  promise  of  inheriting 
the  earth,  of  securing  the  Kingdom,  of  fulfilling  the  prophets,  of  Jerusalem 
being  "  the  city  of  the  great  King,"  of  praying  for  the  Kingdom  to  come, 
etc.,  all  of  which  had  the  decided  tendency — as  shown  by  the  result — of 
confirrning  the  hearers  in  Jewish  expectations.  The  foundation  thought  of 
the  Kingdom  is  the  keynote  to  its  interpretation,  and  if  this  is  miscon- 
ceived the  entire  discourse  suffers. 

Ohs,  7.  Jesus  preached  "  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom'^  (Matt.  4  :  23  and 
9  :  35,  etc.),  and  for  this.  He  tells  us.  He  was  sent  (Luke  4  :  43).  There- 
fore we  cannot  receive  as  well  grounded  a  principle  enunciated  by 
Hagenbach  {His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  45),  that  "  The  office  of  the  Saviour 
was  not  to  propound  doctrines,  or  to  set  forth  doctrinal  formulas,  but  to 
manifest  Himself,  and  to  reveal  His  unity  with  the  Father.  His  person 
was  a  fact,  and  not  an  idea,"  etc.  Cheerfully  admitting  that  Jesus  was 
thus  to  manifest  Himself  as  an  essential  part  of  His  mission.  He  at  the 
same  time  was  commissioned  to  propound  doctrine,  and,  above  all,  the 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom.  Without  such  doctrine  it  would  have  been 
impossible  to  exhibit  Himself  as  the  Messiah,  for  doctrine  and  the  Messiah- 
ship  are  insejmrably  connected. 

It  is  painful  to  notice  how  many  works,  which  ought  to  contain  it,  omit  this  distinctive 
preaching,  as  e.g.  Luther's  Smaller  Catechism  (Pub.  for  Gen.  Synod,  1840)  asks  (p.  54)  the 
question,  "  What  were  the  chief  subjects  ol  Christ's  preaching  to  the  people?"  and  answers 
by  giving  six  things,  but  fails  to  mention  the  principal  subject  of  all,  the  preaching  of 
the  Kingdom.     The  reader  can  readily  find  hundreds  of  similar  illustrations. 

Obs.  8.  Even  some  who  fully  admit  the  re-establishment  of  the  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  in  the  future  under  the  Messiah,  have 
Christ  to  preach,  for  the  time  being,  another,  viz.  :  a  spiritual  Kingdom. 
Thus  e.g.  J.  L.  Lord  {IsraeVs  Judicial  Blindness)  informs  us,  ''  That 
Christ  first  offered  to  the  Jewish  nation,  not  the  Davidic  and  temporal 
Kingdom  which  they  had  expected,  but  His  spiritual  Kingdom  only,  upon 
conditions  which  were  as  repugnant  to  their  ceremonial  self-righteousness  as 
it  was  to  their  infatuated  worldly  hopes  and  expectations."  Strange  that 
men  cannot,  at  once,  see  the  illogical  and  inconsistent  position  in  Avhich 
this  places  Jesus.  As  our  argument  will  meet  this  view  in  detail  under 
various  following  Propositions,  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  say,  Wliy  does 
Jesus  then  employ  the  Jewish  phraseology,  and  confirm  the  Jews  and  even 
His  own  disciples  in  their  Jewish  expectations  ?  Why  are  the  Jews  con- 
demned for  not  seeing  and  acknowledging  a  Kingdom,  which  is  not,  in  any 
shape  or  form,  contained  in  the  Davidic  Covenant  ?  Why,  if  such  a 
spiritual  Kingdom  was  "  first  offered,"  did  not  John  the  Baptist,  the 
disciples,  and  the  seventy,  tender  it  to  the  people  ?  Why,  if  this  spiritual 
Kingdom  is  the  superior  and  more  exalted  idea,  make  the  consummation 
bring  forth  the  realization  of  Jewish  hopes  in  the  final  glorious  restora- 
tion of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  ?  Why,  if  the  spiritual  Kingdom 
is  "  the  professing  church,"  preach  that  it  was  something  to  come,  when 
the  church  has  always  existed  ?  These,  and  similar  questions  that  must 
be  answered,  indicate  the  untenableness  of  such  a  position. 

Leathes  (77ie  Relig.  of  the  Christ,  Bampton  Lee.  for  1874)  spiritualizes  the  title  Christ  (comp. 
Prop.  205),  and,  therefore,  also  the  Kingdom  (thus  vitiating  much  that  is  most  admirable 


270  THE  THEOCKATIC   KIIS'GDOM.  [PrOP.  42. 

in  his  work),  and  (p.  192)  says  :  "John  had  not  ventured  to  define  what  he  meant  by 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven  "  (simply  because  it  needed  no  definition,  Props.  19-22)  ;  "  but 
no  sooner  does  Jesns  oj^en  His  mouth  than  He  says,  '  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for 
theirs  is  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.'  "  And  this,  he  claims,  is  a  defining  of  the  Kingdom 
different  from  what  was  previously  understood,  i.e.  it  spiritualizes  and  renders  invisible 
what  before  was  deemed  temporal  and  visible  here  on  the  earth.  But  ponder  the  lan- 
guage of  Jesus,  and  you  will  find  no  definition  of  the  Kingdom  in  it,  but  simply  a  decla- 
ration and  encouragement  of  worthiness — how  attained-/or  the  Kingdom.  It  only  tells 
us  who  are  fit  for  it,  and  who  will  ultimatelj^  receive  it.  The  disciples,  who  were  oi: 
these  "  poor  in  spirit,"  had  not  the  faintest  idea  (Acts  1  :  6)  that  such  a  definition  was  in- 
tended ;  and  we  certainly  deem  them,  in  view  of  sj^ecial  instruction  and  lorivileges, 
better  qiialified  to- know  this  than  moderns  are  who  interpret  all  Scripture  by  a  Church- 
Kingdom  theory. 

0^-s\  9.  The  indulgence  of  the  reader  is  desired  while,  in  this  con- 
nection, a  few  points  are  forestalled.  Three  things  must  evidently  have 
weighed  upon  the  mmd  of  Jesus,  and  thus  shaped  His  style  of  preaching  the 
Kingdom. 

1.  The  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  Eoman  Government  over  the  Jewish 
nation,  and  its  jealousy  of  power.  His  mission  was  to  the  Jews,  and  He 
was  commissioned  to  tender  the  Kingdom  to  the  nation  (e.g.  Props.  55,  57, 
etc.),  and  the  Kingdom,  according  to  the  Davidic  covenant  required  a  Son 
of  David  to  restore  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David.  This  was  taught  by 
the  Prophets,  and  believed  by  the  Jews,  "it  was  the  general,  universal 
belief  that  Avhen  the  Messiah  came  to  establish  the  Kingdom,  He  would 
overthrow  Gentile  domination  (as  He  will  do  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  Props. 
163  and  164),  and  thus  deliver  the  Jewish  nation  from  its  enemies.  In 
addressing  the  Jews,  it  was  unnecessary  to  proclaim  this  Kingdom  boldly 
and  freely  in  the  emphatic  words  of  the  Prophets,  because  (1)  the  King- 
dom denoted  was  already  well  hnown,  as  the  subject-matter  of  covenant 
and  promise,  to  every  Jew  ;  and  (2)  because,  foreseeing  His  rejection  by 
'the  Jews,  advantage  would  inevitably  be  taken  (com p.  Prop.  40,  Obs.  6, 
note  1)  of  it  to  accuse  Him  as  a  conspirator  against  the  Roman  Power. 
With  all  the  wisdom  and  prudence  exercised  by  Him,  this,  nevertheless, 
was  done,  and  He  was  crucified  under  the  charge  of  being  "  the  King  of  the 
Jeivsf^  thus  implying  opposition  to  Caesar.^ 

2.  Knowing,  as  Jesus  did,  that  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom  must  be  made 
(Prop.  55,  etc.),  that  the  tender  would  be  rejected  (Prop.  57,  etc.),  and 
that- the  Kingdom  itself  would  be  postponed  (Props.  58-68),  it  would,  in 
view  of  these  foreknown  circumstances,  have  been  unwise  and  impolitic  to 
have  presented  the  subject  of  the  Kingdom  in  any  other  way  than  that  in 
which  it  was  done.  Siifficiently  clear  to  test  the  repentance  and  faith  of 
the  nation,  sufficiently  distinct  for  those  who  receive  the  Word  of  God 
without  human  additions,  and  sufficiently  precise  to  encourage  the  hope 
of  His  people  in  His  Messiahship — more  would  have  been  inexpedient.  What 
was  needed  in  addition  He  gave  to  us  through  John  (in  Apoc),  and  this 
also  in  a  form  that  it  might  not  unnecessarily  excite  opposition.  Christ's 
preaching  is  influenced  hj  foreJcnoivn  results. 

3.  Foreknowing  how  the  Kingdom  would  eventually,  at  His  Sec.  Advent 
(Props.  QQ,  74,  83,  87,  etc.),  be  established.  He  could  accordingly  shape 
and  adapt  His  language,  introducing  other  matter  that  necessarily  pre- 
ceded the  same.  While  a  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom 
(and  as  a  result  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  eminence  and 
power)  is  contemplated,  yet,  because  of  the  defection  of  the  nation  and  its 


PPwOP.  42.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  271 

long  continued  punishment,  p^irposes  of  mercy  toward  tlie  Gentiles  were 
entertained  and  mentioned,  promises  to  be  realized  ultimately  in  the  King- 
dom were  given,  encouragements  and  cautions  were  presented,  etc.  This 
introduced  new  details,  which  can  only  be  properly  apprehended  when 
taken  in  tlieir  connection  ivith  the  tcliole. 

1  This  is  a  sufficient  reply  to  those  who  ask  why  the  New  Test,  is  not  more  specific  in 
mentioning  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  (although  in  several  places  pointedly  re- 
ferred to),  for  all  knew  the  Kingdom  intended.  This,  too,  may  be  a  reason  why  Jesus 
wrote  nothing,  lest  His  writings  should  be  employed,  as  His  rej^orted  words  were,  against 
Him.  The  peculiar  surroundings  required,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  great  caution  in 
proclaiming  the  Kingdom  ;  and  hence  language  was  adopted  toward  the  Jewish  nation 
suffieiently  precise  and  determinate  for  it,  having  the  prophets  to  understand.  And  this 
prudence  was  continued  by  the  apostles  afterward  (as  e.g.  in  linking  the  Kingdom  with 
the  Second  Advent,  with  Supernatural  power,  etc.),  to  prevent  the  Romans  from  taking 
unnecessary  alarm  and  persecuting  believers.  For  history  informs  us  how  readily  the 
Roman  emperors  could  thus  be  aroused.  Eusebius  {Eccl.  His.,  B.  3,  ch.  19,  20  ;  comp. 
Gibbon's  Home,  ch.  16,  vol-  2,  p.  21)  states  that  the  descendants  of  David  were  ordered 
to  be  slain,  and  the  alleged  relatives  of  the  Lord  were  aj^prehended  and  brought  before 
Domitian,  v/howas  alarmed  or  suspicious,  but  as  they  professed  not  to  believe  in  a  i^res- 
ent  temporal  kingdom,  but  in  a  divine  one  to  come  at  "  the  end  of  the  world,"  i.e.  at 
the  Sec.  Advent,  they  were  dismissed.  (In  this  account,  several  things  are  noticeable, 
making  allowance  for  additions  :  (1)  Why  should  Domitian  desire  the  death  of  the  rela- 
tives of  Jesus  or  fear  Christ  (as  we  are  told),  if  it  was  not  tor  the  Primitive  belief  that 
Christ  would  come  and  re-establish  the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom?  (2)  that  the  only 
Kingdom  these  relatives  were  conscious  of  was  not  the  church  as  one,  but  the  Kingdom 
at  the  end  of  the  age,  raised  up  by  the  coming  Son  of  David  ;  (3)  tliat,  truthfully  they 
made  it  Divine,  not  such  a  temporal  kingdom  as  the  Roman,  but  one  established  by 
Sui^ernatural  power  and  under  its  control.  Eusebius  may  have  colored  it  a  little,  but 
as  it  does  not  favor  his  Church-Kingdom  theory,  and  has  much  of  the  Primitive  cast  in 
it,  w^e  may  in  the  main  receive  it.)  The  Primitive  Church  writers  (as  we  shall  show 
hereafter)  constantly  appealed  to  the  proj^hecies  of  a  restored  Davidic  throne  and  King- 
dom, and  expressed  their  faith  in  the  same,  but  as  they  carefully  showed  that  this  was  to 
be  affected  by  Jesus,  who  had  been  crucified  and  buried,  it  seemed  to  be  foolishness  in 
the  sight  of  worldly  rulers — something  that  should  cause  them  no  uneasiness,  esjDecially 
as  all  believers  disclaimed  the  least  idea  of  raising  up  siich  a  Kingdom,  but  iraited  for 
Christ's  appearing.  How  advantage  was  taken  of  this  very  belief  in  a  few  cases,  history 
also  records.  Another  feature,  too,  which  is  not  generally  noticed,  crops  out  in  this 
direction,  viz.  :  that  this  very  belief  is  a  cause  of  the  brevity  of  ancient  remarks  on  the 
subject.  The  Jews  were  not  desirous  to  give  it  great  prominence  and  publicitj',  because 
it  would  naturally  excite  the  suspicions  of  the  emperors.  The  believers,  for  the  same 
reason,  are  guarded.  The  Gentiles,  opjoonents  to  both,  were  not  inclined  to  publish 
and  dilate  upon  it,  because,  by  so  doing,  they  might  be  called  on  hy  the  government  to 
substantiate  the  charge,  and  in  view  of  its  being  based  as  it  was,  expose  themselves  to 
harm.  Intimations,  indeed,  exist,  which  show  that  sneers  and  ridicule  were  cast  upon 
the  idea  of  a  crucified  Son  of  David  coming  back  to  establish  a  Kingdom.  Boyle,  Whate- 
ly,  Rogers,  and  others  have  noticed  the  j^eculiarity  of  the  Bible  in  presenting  an  unsys- 
tematic distribution  of  its  contents,  thus  calling  for  comparison,  study,  etc.  In  the 
reasons  assigned  for  this,  they  altogether  overlook  the  fact  that  if  a  strictly  logical 
arrangement  had  been  made,  so  distinctively  would  this  idea  of  the  Kingdom  have  be- 
come that  the  Roman  Power  and  other  nations  would  have  been  extremely  hostile  to  it. 

Another  feature  may  be  briefly  adverted  to  :  the  meanest  part  taken  by  the  represen- 
tative men  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  condemnation  of  Jesus  was  the  taking  advantage 
of  Jesus  having  proclaimed  Himself  the  Messiah,  i.e.  the  Jewish  King,  and  basing  upon 
it  the  charge  of  conspiring  against  Cffisar.  The  meanness  consists  in  this  :  that  their 
own  views  of  the  prophecies,  if  they  were  fulfilled  as  written,  demanded  of  the  Messiah 
to  oijpose  the  then  existing  Gentile  power  in  order  to  restore  the  Kingdom,  so  that  to 
compass  the  death  of  Jesiis  they  override  their  own  deliberate  convictions  of  the  Mes- 
sianic display  of  power,  and  stamp  their  conduct  as  outrageously  hypocritical.  On  the 
other  hand,  our  faith  and  hope  is  confirmed  in  the  Kingdom  preached  by  Jesus,  in  the 
assumption  of  Messianic  Royalty,  which,  not  discarding,  was  the  ground  of  His  execu- 
tion. Faith  and  hope  rejoices  over  the  inscription  :  "  Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  If 
there  was  nothing  substantial  in  this  Royalty,  the  very  Royalty  to  which  He  was  entitled 


272  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  42. 

as  David's  Son  and  Lord,  why  retain  it  down  to  the  very  last,  and  leave  it  still  speaking, 
silently  but  impressively,  over  His  dead  body  on  the  cross  ? 

Obs.  10.  This  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  by  Jesus  was,  then,  an  appeal 
to  faith  ;  it  is  the  same  to-day.  It  then  called  for  an  acquaintance  with 
the  covenants  and  prophets  ;  it  demands  the  same  at  present.  But  in  the 
preaching  of  Jesus  and  of  His  apostles  some  things  pertaining  to  the 
Kingdom  are  brought  out  more  distinctively  and  with  stronger  appeals  to 
faith.  The  necessity  of  moral  purity  is  impressed  ;  the  superiority  of  the 
coming  Kingdom  over  all  earthly  Kingdoms  is  declared  ;  its  restoration, 
not  by  human  but  divine  power,  is  carefully  asserted  ;  its  postponement 
to  the  Sec.  Advent  is  taught ;  its  exaltation  and  extension,  its  power  and 
blessings  are  portrayed  ;  the  wonderful  things  related  to  it,  such  as  the 
resurrection  of  the  saints,  Kingship  and  priesthood,  glorification,  renewal 
of  the  earth  and  Theocratic  glory,  are  presented — and  all  this,  a  reitera- 
tion and  extension  of  Old  Test,  predictions,  calls  for  continued  faith.  The 
whole  matter  is  purposely  so  arranged  and  ordered  that  faith  alone— 
sustained  by  the  fulfilments  and  a  comparison  of  the  Record — can  discern 
the  surpassingly  strange  but  pre-eminently  wise  Purpose  of  God. 

Another  reason  why  Jesus  Himself  did  not  write  (as  the  founders  of  other  religious 
systems)  is  found  in  the  preaching  of  this  Kingdom.  The  subject-matter  of  His  preach- 
ing is  found  in  the  Old  Test.,  its  foundation  is  in  the  covenant,  and  His  mission  is  not 
to  found  a  new  Kingdom,  but  to  offer  that  which  is  already  proposed,  and  of  which  He  is 
the  rightful  Heir.  He  is  not  come  to  write,  but  to  fulfil  that  which  is  written  ;  hence  a 
sj^stematic  arrangement  of  Divinity,  a  Theological  system  or  summary  of  Doctrine,  would 
have  been  out  of  place.  While  He  necessarily  taught  doctrine  as  pertaining  to  Himself 
and  the  Kingdom,  His  specific  mission  has  its  dignity  enhanced  by  the  position  that  He 
occupied.  It  is  true  that,  after  the  postponement  was  fully  decided  by  His  death,  etc., 
then  special  provision  had  to  be  made  for  this  period,  but  this  we  find  in  the  instruc- 
tions afterward  imparted  through  the  apostles  in  the  establishment  of  the  Christian 
Church,  Christ  honors  the  prophetic  record,  honors  the  oath-confirmed  covenant,  and, 
by  the  fulfilment  of  His  own  birth,  life,  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  words  respecting 
the  Jewish  nation.  Gentiles,  Church  etc.,  reconfirms  in  the  most  powerful  manner — infi- 
nitely superior  to  mere  writing— the  testimony  concerning  Himself  and  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  11.  The  fundamental  idea,  forming  a  bond  of  union  between  Jesus 
and  the  preceding  Revealers  of  the  Purpose  of  God,  is  the  Kingdom  of 
heaven.  This  He  preached  ^r-'?^f ;  this  He  revealed  last  through  John  the 
Revelator  ;  this  was  the  special  subject  (Acts  1  :  3)  between  Him  and  the 
apostles  after  His  resurrection  ;  and  hence  by  it  He  places  Himself  in 
contact  with  the  Prophets,  in  unison  with  John  the  Baptist,  in  sympathy 
with  His  disciples,  and  stamps  Himself  as  the  great  Preacher  of  tlie  King- 
dom. This  suggests  that  perfect  unity  of  Teaching  must  exist  between 
all  these  ;  that  no  accommodation  theory  can  interpose  between  His  teach- 
ing and  that  of  John's  or  the  Prophets  ;  and  that  the  subject  of  the 
Kingdom,  being  so  prominently  set  forth,  must  be  (Props.  1  and  2)  a  most 
interesting  topic  to  every  intelligent  believer  and  student. 

Obs.  12.  What  Kingdom  Jesus  preached  can  readily  be  ascertained  by 
noticing  what  Kingdom  His  disciples  preached.  For,  as  an  honest 
Teacher,  He  ivould  not,  He  could  not,  send  out  men  to  preach  a  Kingdom 
different  from  the  one  proclaimed  by  Himself. 

Obs.  13.  Men  profess  to  be  amazed  that  the  Jews  and  disciples  should 
be  so  ignorant  as  to  expect  in  the  Messiah  "^  temj^oral  deliverer,'^  and 


Prop.  42.]       the  theocratic  kingdom.  273 

regard  those  who  retain  this  Jewish  idea  as  "fanatical,"  "  nnspiritual," 
etc.  But  hotu,  if  we  receive  God's  express  i^romises,  the  plain  grammatical 
sense,  can  we  believe  otherwise  ?  Temporal  deliverance,  in  addition  to 
great  spiritual  blessings,  are  linked  together  (e.g.  Zech.  14)  in  numerous 
prophecies,  and  it  would  indicate  lack  of  faith  in  God's  honor  and  faith- 
fuhiess  to  reject  or  ignore  the  same.  We  know  that  by  the  spiritualizing 
process  Zechariah's  declarations  (Luke  1  :  71,  74),  "  saved  from  our  en- 
emies, and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us,"  "  delivered  out  of  the  hand 
of  our  enemies,"  are  made  to  denote  exclusively  spiritual  enemies."^  But 
this  is  not  sustained  by  the  predictions  of  the  Word,  seeing  (as  will  be 
consecutively  shown  hereafter,  e.g.  Props.  111-115)  that  temporal  deliver- 
ance is  assigned  to  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  is  to  be  in  a 
special  manner  the  work  of  the  Messiah  at  His  Second  Coming.  The 
prophets  all  uniformly  predict  the  temporal  depressed  condition  of  the 
nation,  and  in  the  same  connection  a  glorious  temporal  deliverance.  Leaving 
the  proof  to  come  in  its  proper  place,  it  is  sufficient  now  to  say  that  if  the 
Theocracy  is  to  be  restored  at  all  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  such  a 
restoration  must  necessarily  include  temporal  deliverance  (how  else  can  the 
throne  and  Kingdom  be  re-established),  and  hence  the  Messiah,  in  addition 
to  other  perfections,  is  also  a  temporal  Deliverer.  The  sinfulness  of  the 
nation,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  only  throws  the  time  of 
its  manifestation  to  the  period  of  the  Second  Advent. 


*  Able  writers,  however,  preserve  this  temporal  aspect,  as  e.g.  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's 
Com,  on  Luke,  p.  28)  declares  that  the  songs  of  Elizabeth,  Mary,  and  Zechariah  make  the 
Messiah  "  the  source  of  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  prosperity  to  Israel,"  their  senti- 
ments being  "  purely  theocratic." 


274  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  43. 


Propositiois'  43.  The  disciples  sent  forth  hy  Jesus  to  preach  this 
Kingdom  were  not  ignorant  of  the  meaning  to  he  attached  to 
the  Kingdom, 

To  say  that  they  were  ignorant  of  that  which  they  were  specially 
to  preach  is  an  evident  absurdity  ;  and  if  true  (which  it  is  not) 
would  severely  reflect  upon  the  Divine  Teacher  and  Commissioner. 
Their  mission  necessarily  imj)lying  a  correct  knowledge  of  the 
Kingdom,  is  confirmatory  of  Christ's  own  preaching,  for  the 
preaching,  of  the  Master  and  of  those  who  are  sent  to  preach 
must  correspond. 

Obs.  1.  What  Kingdom  they  all  preached  is  so  evident  (e.g.  from  Acts 
1  :  6,  etc.),  that  our  opponents  save  us  the  trouble  of  stating  it  by  frankly 
admitting  it  (e.g.  Prop.  42,  Obs.  2).  Jesus  instructed  them,  Jesus  sent 
them,  Jesus  never  contradicted  their  views  of  the  Kingdom,'  Jesus  approved 
of  their  preaching  and  rejoiced  over  it.  This  is  amply  sufficient,  seeing 
that  the  Kingdom  accurately  corresponded  with  the  one  contained  in  tlie 
grammatical  sense  of  the  covenant  and  prophecies. 

^  It  is  only  necessarj^  to  say  that  our  opponents  themselves  produce  Matt.  20  :  20,  21, 
Luke  24  :  2i,  and  Acts  1  :  6  as  evidence  of  the  Jev/ish  views  of  the  apostles.  Take  these 
three  illastrations,  and,  over  against  the  unwarranted  deductions  of  numerous  writers, 
Jesus  says  not  a  word  against  their  conception  of  the  Kingdom  ;  in  fact.  He  fully  admits 
the  correctness  of  the  same  by  alleging  nothing  against  it.  The  request  of  the  sons  of 
Zebedee,  based  on  the  Jewish  conception  (Art.  "Kingdom  of  God,"  Ency.  Rellg.  Knowl.) 
of  the  Kingdom  (Matt.  20  :  20,  21),  is  refused,  not  on  the  ground  of  their  misconceiving 
the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  or  even  that  such  stations  are  to  be  allotted  in  it,  but  because 
such  positions  as  they  asked  for  are  to  be  given  to  those  by  the  Father,  who  have  evi- 
denced their  fitness  by  humility  and  service.  So  simple  is  this  that  a  child  cannot  mis- 
take it.  Hence,  how  gratuitous  and  unjust  are  the  disparaging  remarks  heaped  by  some 
commentators  and  writers  upon  these  disciples.  Some  (Olshausen  loci)  express  sur- 
prise that  Jesus  did  not  correct  their  view  of  the  Kingdom,  but  actually  employs  the 
very  language  to  confirm  them  in  it.  Preciselj^  so  ;  He  could  not  do  so,  because  they 
entertained  a  more  Scriptural  idea  of  the  Kingdom  than  those  who  exhibit  such  amaze- 
ment. Luke  24  :  21  teaches  how  these  preachers  understood  their  own  message  ;  so 
also  Acts  1:6;  and  Jesus,  instead  of  telling  them  that  they  were  mistaken,  merely,  leav- 
ing the  notion  of  the  Kingdom  untouched,  points  to  the  future,  the  times  of  fulfilment 
being  in  the  Father's  hands. 

Obs.  2.  If  Jesus  did  not  tell  the  Jews  and  His  disciples  that  they  were  in 
error  respecting  the  Kingdom,  and  this  already  is  presumptive  evidence 
that  they  were  correct  in  anticipating  the  Kingdom  to  be  a  restoration  of 
the  Davidic  Kingdom,  much  more  is  this  true,  when  He  sends  men, 
whom  He  knows  to  hold  such  a  view,  to  preach  it.  The  ablest  writers  (we 
have  given  some,  others  will  be  quoted  as  the  argument  advances),  of  all 
shades  of  opinion,  fully  admit  that  the  disciples  preached  the  Jewish 
Kingdom,  and  candidly  inform  us  that  such  was  their  belief  down  to  the 


PkOP.  43.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  275 

period  of  the  Ascension,  Acts  1  :  6.  (Those  few,  therefore,  who  try  to 
ignore  it,  and  pretend  that  a  spiritual  conception  of  the  Kingdom,  some- 
thing lilce  their  own  modernized  notions  of  it,  are  dislionest  to  the  Record, 
and  the  general  testimony  on  the  subject).  We  therefore  contend  that, 
after  Jesus  Himself  preached  this  Kingdoni,  taught  His  disciples  pullidy 
aiidjjrivately,  considered  them  qualified  to  proclaim  the  Kingdom,  and  se7'it 
them  forth  also  to  preach  it — after  all  this,  it  is  sheer  jjresumptiou  to 
question  their  knowledge  of  it.  It  is  folly  to  suppose  that  we  know  the 
nature  of  that  Kingdom  better  than  they  did,  wlto  ivere  expressly  com- 
missioned to  hold  it  forth  as  an  inducement  to  repentance.  If  they  were  in 
error  on  so  important  and  fundamental  a  point,  it  is  unreasonable  to 
suppose  that  Jesus  would  leave  them  in  error,  send  them  forth  to  dis- 
seminate  error,  and  thus  allow  them,  commissioned  by  Himself,  to  deceive 
the  people.  It  is  incredible,  and  yet  if  we  are  to  believe  eminent  and 
good  men,  Jesus  actually  sent  forth  His  disciples  to  preach  erroneous 
doctrine  !  No  gloss,  however  artful,  no  apology  however  skilful,  can  cover 
up  this  ugly  feature  in  this  supposed  case  ;  there  it  stands,  boldly  and 
defiantly  presented  by  infidels,  and  prominently  held  forth  even  by  many 
believers.  Any  theory,  however  plausible,  esteemed,  fortified  by  great 
names,  which  makes  the  first  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  proclaim  what 
they  did  not  understand,  preach  what  was  an  untruth — such  a  theory  is 
radically  wrong,  and  virtually,  with  all  its  profuse  apologies,  malces  Jesus 
Miinself  the  sender  forth  of  false  preachers.  If  the  Kingdom  is  not  that 
which  they  taught,  what  must  we  think  of  the  instruction  of  Him  who 
commissioned  them  ?  Thank  God,  the  Word  itself  is  consistent,  and  it  repels 
a  charge  which  human  wisdom  has  foisted  upon  it  in  its  blindness,  in  order 
to  make  out  of  the  church  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  God.  Here  is  the 
difiiculty  :  men  judge  these  preachers  under  a  misconceived  theory,  and 
consequently  with  prejudice. 

Some  keenly  feel  this  difficulty  in  their  Church-Kingdom  theory,  and  thus — over 
against  overwhelming  proof— try  to  remove  it.  Gregory  {Four  (J-ospels,  p.  120)  declares 
that  Jesus  "  corrected  their  (the  twelve)  false  Jewish  views  of  His  priestly  character,  and 
of  His  Kingdom,"  and  appeals  for  evidence  to  Matt.  16  :  13-20,  and  20  :  28  !  The  pas- 
sages being  largely  incorporated  by  us,  need  no  comment.  Ebrard  {Gospel  Bis.)  con- 
stantly takes  it  for  granted  that  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Kingdom  is  spiritual,  and 
that  the  disciples  comprehended  it.  Thus  e.g.  p.  267,  referring  to  the  Ser.  on  the  Mount 
(comp.  Prop.  42,  Obs.  6  and  8,  note),  he  says  :  "  Jesus  availed  Himself  of  this  oppor- 
tixnity,  after  the  selection  of  His  disciples,  to  explain, /»//_(/  and  dist'indly,  to  them  and  to 
the  people,  what  was  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom."  He  calls  it  "  the  inaugural  discourse  of  the 
new  Kingdom"  (p.  273),  in  wliich  Jesus  says  :  "  Such  and  such  is  the  nature  of  my 
Kingdom  ;  such  its  form  ;  such  the  proper  state  of  mind  ;  and  such  are  my  demands,"  in 
order  "  to  afford  the  means  of  certainty"  to  the  hearers.  This  is  solely  Ebrard' s  imagin- 
ing, for  he  utterly  fails  to  show  where  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  is  defined,  and  mistakes 
tfte  means  and  accessories  for  obtaining  the  Kingdom  for  the  Kingdom  itself.  It  is  painful 
and  saddening  when  such  men  so  seriously  miss  "  the  means  of  certainty."  The  pre- 
conceived Church-Kingdom  theory  explains  it  all.  Some  writers  even  make  the  ap- 
pointment of  the  twelve  to  be  equivalent  to  the  founding  of  a  new  Kingdom,  although 
they  preached  it  as  future.  On  the  other  hand,  that  the  disciples  knew  the  nature  of  the 
Kingdom  and  located  its  future,  is  well  stated  by  Dr.  Imbrie  in  "  The  Regeneration" 
{Pre-Mill.  Essays,  p.  153,  etc.). 

Obs.  3.  It  is  freely  admitted  that  there  were  many  things  that  these 
disciples,  when  preaching  the  Kingdom,  did  not  then  know,  but  it  was  7iot 
requisite  to  know  them  for  the  simple  reason  that,  before  the  decided 
postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  it  was  no  part  of  their  mission  to  preach 


276  THE  tiieoc'ratic  kit^gdom.  [Prop.  43. 

them.  Thus  e.g.  they  did  not  know  that  the  Jewish  nation  would  refuse  to 
repent,  that  the  representative  men  would  conspire  to  put  Jesus  to  death, 
that  the  Messiah  would  be  crucified,  that  the  Kingdom  would  be  postponed 
to  the  Sec.  Advent,  that  the  Gentiles  would  be  called,  etc.,  and,  more,  all 
these  things  had  nothing  to  do  luitli  their  commission.  They  were  not  to 
preach  the  death  of  Jesus,  or  things  then  unknown  to  them  ;  they  were 
commissioned  to  preach  the  Kingdom  conditioned  by  repentance — to  offer 
it  to  the  Jewish  nation — and  thus  far  they  were  instructed  and  had  knowl- 
edge of  the  truth.  This  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  was  (Props.  54  and  55) 
necessary  at  that  time,  while  a  knowledge  of  the  other  things  was  not  only 
unnecessary,  but  would  have,  if  imparted,  actually  disqualified  them  for  their 
important  mission.  This  exquisite  arrangement  of  truth  in  the  mission  of 
the  first  preachers  is,  to  our  mind,  most  forcible  evidence  of  inspiration. 

Ohs.  4.  Miracles  (Matt.  10  :  1,  8,  Luke  10  :  17,  etc.)  attend  their  preach- 
ing of  the  Kingdom,  which  is  a  most  convincing  attestation  of  both  the 
truthfulness  of  their  proclamation,  freed  from  error,  and  the  intimate 
relationship  that  the  Kingdom  sustained  to  the  Supernatural.  Would 
Christ  give  the  power  of  working  miracles  to  persons  who  confiimed  them- 
selves and  others  in  erroneous  doctrine  ?  Even  Judas,  at  that  time,  how- 
ever much  he  fell  afterward,  must  have,  in  virtue  of  the  mission  bestowed 
upon  him,  known  and  proclaimed  the  truth  concerning  the  Kingdom. 
Designed  as  the  miracles  (wrought  by  some,  perhaps  all)  were  to  fore- 
shadow (Prop.  7)  the  power  to  be  experienced  in  the  Kingdom  itself,  they 
were  also,  at  the  same  time,  a  witness  to  the  veracity  of  the  preachers  them- 
selves. Such  an  attestation,  Origen,  Jerome,  and  all  others,  who  desire 
us  to  believe  that  they  were  in  error,  have  never  yet  been  able  to  give  us. 

Obs.  5.  What  little  satisfaction  many  commentaries  give  us  when  com- 
menting on  the  preaching  of  John  and  the  disciples.  Work  after  work 
will  not  make  the  slightest  mention  of  difficulty  in  the  matter,  and  art- 
fully speak  of  it  as  «  gradual  developing  from  darkness  into  light,  just  as 
if  the  style  of  their  preaching  was  but  a  little  removed  from  that  of  '^  the 
moderns."  A  host  literally  jump  at  the  conclusion — proven  to  be  false 
by  the  continued  belief  of  these  preachers  to  the  ascension  of  Jesus — that 
they  preached  (without  knowing  it)  the  establishment  of  the  church- 
kingdom.  The  large  majority,  without  perceiving  how  fatally  they  sap 
the  very  foundations  of  confidence  in  the  Truth,  and  invite  unbelief  to 
hold  itself  in  merriment  over  the  defect,  pass  the  whole  thing  by  with  the 
comment — as  if  it  amounted  to  nothing,  or  was  scarcely  worth  noticing, 
or  the  most  reasonable  thing  to  expect — that  these  men  were  yet  filled 
with  ^' Jewish  prejudices"  and  '' Jewish  forms,"  and  the  time  had  not 
yet  arrived  for  the  notion  of  a  pure,  spiritual  Kingdom.  Indeed,  if  this 
is  so,  as  learned  men  tell  us,  then  the  first  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  were 
very  imreliable  guides,  being  "  the  blind  leading  the  blind,^^  and,  what  is 
worse,  divinely  commissioned  to  do  this  !  Infidelity  exults  in  such  teach- 
ing, which  eifectually  cripples  the  first  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  and 
introduces  a  discordance  and  antagonism  fatal  to  the  unity  and  integrity 
of  the  Word. 

Obs.  6.  How  unfairly  this  subject  is  treated  may  be  found  illustrated 
in  various  Lives  of  Christ.     Some  of  these  (e.g.   Fleetwood's)  make  the 


Prop.  43.]  the  TiiEOCRAfic  kingdom.  277 

preaching  of  the  twelve  and  the  seventy  exactly  correspondent  with 
their  own  modern  ideas  of  the  Kingdom.  The  same  unfairness  is  true  of 
Histories  of  the  BiUe.  Thus  e.g.  Gleig  {His.  of  the  Bible,  vol.  2,  p.  223), 
after  stating  the  views  of  the  Jews  in  a  restored  Davidic  Kingdom  under 
the  personal  reign  of  the  Messiah,  tells  us  that  it  should  not  surprise  us 
that  the  disciples  continued  in  such  a  belief  because  "  prejudices  are 
usually  deeply  seated  in  proportion  to  the  absence  of  ciiUure,^'  thus  actually 
degrading  the  disciples  to  ignorance  and  uncouthness  to  make  out  a  case,  for- 
getting that  by  so  doing  he  degrades  the  mission  and  instruction  imparted  by 
Jesus.  If  they  were  lacking  "  culture,"  if  they  were  under  "  deeply  seated 
prejudices,"  if  they  were  under  a  "  delusion"  (as  Gleig  well-meaningly 
says),  how  was  it  possible  for  Jesus,  honestlij  and  consistently,  to  send  them 
forth  to  proclaim  their  want  of  ''culture,"  their  "prejudices,"  and  their 
"  delusion"  to  others,  and  confirm  the  same  by  miraculous  signs  !  The 
same  lack  of  candor  is  found  in  Theologies.  Thus  e.g.  Knapp  (Ch.  Theol., 
s.  89,  99,  154,  etc.)  frankly  tells  us  the  Jewish  view,  and  that  the  disciples 
entertained  it,  but  then  endeavors  to  break  its  force  by  insinuating, 
without  adducing  tlie  slightest  historical  or  scriytural  i^iroof,  that  the 
Kingdom  was  also  understood  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  that  a  purer  and 
higher  meaning  was  gradually  X)laced  upon  the  phraseology  pertaining  to 
the  Kingdom.  But  this  does  not  clear  the  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  ;  it 
does  not  vindicate  their  official  position,  for,  according  to  his  statement, 
others — who  were  not  specially  appointed  as  preachers  of  the  Kingdom — 
had  better,  purer  ideas,  which,  we  are  to  infer,  came  down  to  us. 
This  mode  of  reasoning  only  makes  the  matter  worse,  for  in  one  place  all 
the  concessions  needed  are  made  ;  and  in  another,  they  are  virtually 
recalled  under  the  iinyroved  statement  that  in  connection  with  this  idea  of 
the  restoration  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom  they  also  must  have  held  {implied) 
the  notion  of  a  moral  or  spiritual  Kingdom.  Such  an  important  point  as 
this,  must  have  more  than  mere  inference  and  unsupported  supposition  ; 
and  Knapp  forgets,  that  the  very  men  who,  above  all  others,  should  have 
this  pure,  spiritual  conception  of  the  Kingdom  (if  it  is  the  one  intended) 
are  the  disciples,  the  preachers,  whom  he  confesses  to  be  in  ignorance  of  it 
down  to  the  ascension.  These  illustrations  will  suffice  ;  the  reader  can 
readily  find  a  multitude. 

Neancler  {Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  37)  makes  Zechariali's  faith  to  express  itself  in  a 
*'  worldly  sense,  or  worldly  turn,  or  shape,"  because  he  expected  deliverance  from 
enemies,  etc.  But  let  the  reader  notice  that  Zechariah  was  under  the  direct  influence  of 
the  SiDirit,  and  it  follows  that  his  utterances  are  to  be  received  in  preference  to  Nean- 
der's,  especially  seeing  that  they  correspond  with  that  of  the  prophets  (who  link  with  \ 
the  Messianic  Kingdom  a  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation  from  its  enemies,  as  shown 
Props.  111-114).  He  delineates  the  disciples'  ignorance,  etc.,  very  much  as  Knapp,  and 
seeks  refuge  in  his  germ  or  development  theory. 

Obs.  7.  Misled  by  some  favorite  theory,  the  plain  facts  of  the  disciples' 
preaching  are  unintentionally  misstated,  and,  of  coarse,  others  are  im- 
properly influenced.  Thus  e.g.  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  sec.  174)  has  taken 
the  unwarranted  liberty  of  saying,  when  referring  to  the  mission  of  the 
disciples  into  Galilee,  that  they  were  to  spread  "  the  announcement  that 
the  Kingdom  had  appeared,^''  that  "  they  were  only  to  proclaim  everywhere 
that  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  object  of  all  men's  desire,  had  come.''^  Now 
if  we  turn  to  the  Record,  it  is  impossible  to  find  any  such  commission  given 
to  the  disciples;  for  instead  of  preaching  that  the  Kingdom  ^^  had  ap- 


278  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  43. 

peared,  and  '^  had  come,  ^^  they  were  ej;:»res5Zi/ charged  to  say  (Matt.  10  :  7)  : 
"  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,''  and  (Luke  10  :  9)  :  "the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  come  nigh  to  you."  It  language  has  any  force,  this  phraseology 
cannot,  by  any  means,  be  made  to  be  the  equivalent  of  Dr.  Neander's.  So 
Olshausen  even  {Com.  Matt.  3  :  2),  hampered  by  his  Church-Kingdom 
theory,  makes  the  announcement  "  is  at  hand  "  to  be  an  equivalent  of  "  is 
already  present."  Others,  influenced  in  the  same  way,  interpret  the 
language  in  like  manner.  The  difference  to  some  may  appear  trivial,  but 
as  we  proceed  will  be  found  exceedingly  iveighty  and  essential  (Props. 
55-61).  How,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  could  the  first  preachers  of  the 
Kingdom  proclaim  that  a  Kingdom  "  had  come,"  was  "  already  lyresent," 
when  they  themselves  (as  both  Neander  and  Olshausen  admit  in  other 
places)  were  not  conscious  of  it  down  to  the  ascension  (Acts  1:6)? 
Forsaking  the  primitive  view,  the  aUest  men  involve  themselves  in 
difficulties,  and  excite  antagonism  where  none  exists. 

Ols.  8.  It  is  a  fact  to  be  lamented,  that  while  infidelity  has  made  itself 
merry  over  the  preaching  of  the  disciples,  calling  it  "  mistaken," 
"deceived,"  "delusion,"  etc.,  the  Apologists,  unable  themselves  to  receive 
this  preaching,  or  to  satisfactorily  account  for  it,  have  done  nothing  to 
remove  this  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way.  Some  unbelievers  in  a  kind 
of  ironical  manner  (Dean  Mansell  On  Freethinhing)  suggest,  as  the  result, 
that  as  the  whole  proof  of  Christianity  rests  on  the  Prophecies,  it  is  neces- 
sary in  order  to  make  out  such  a  proof  to  avoid  the  literal  and  proper 
meaning,  and  introduce  a  mystical  or  allegorical  interpretation  ;  for  the 
past  has  proven  that  the  apostles  themselves  misinterpreted  the  prophecies 
too  literally  or  in  a  Jewish  manner.  This,  of  course,  opens  the  flood  gates 
to  every  conceivable  fancy,  and  strikes  a  deep  blow  at  the  vital  part  of 
Christianity.  Hence  it  is,  that  an  oily  class,  smooth-tongued  and  eloquent 
over  the  virtues  of  Jesus  and  His  devoted  band,  profess,  all  the  time 
stabbing  the  reputation  and  character  of  these  teachers,  that  they  only 
desire  to  remove  that  blundering  literal  interpretation  and  plant  religion 
more  securely  on  a  spiritual  one,  which  will  not  recognize  "  the  fables"  of 
the  early  preaching.  The  grossest  attacks  and  the  most  artful,  centring 
on  the  early  preaching,  come  from  all  sides,  and  a  careful  reader  will  sadly 
notice  that"  in  the  re])lies  of  the  defenders  of  Christianity,  with  but  rare 
exceptions,  there  is  found  a  Avillingness  to  receive  these  suggestions  of 
unbelief,  viz.  :  to  discard  the  literal,  grammatical  sense  of  the  prophecies, 
which  it  is  wrongfully  siipj^osed  led  these  disciples  into  their  errors,  and, 
therefore,  to  receive  as  an  offset  a  spiritual  one,  which  can  transmute 
David's  throne  into  the  Father's  throne,  and  change  every  other  phrase  to 
suit  the  situation.  Alas  !  the  influence  of  such  a  method  upon  the  minds 
of  men  without  sufficient  independence  to  think  for  themselves  ! 

Obs.  9.  Those,  too,  who  so  candidly  concede  "  the  Jewish  east"  of  the 
disciples'  preaching  are  undecided  as  to  the  time  when  an  entire  change 
in  their  views  of  the  Kingdom  (as  alleged)  was  wrought.  While  some  place 
it  even  later  (others  asserting  no  change,  but  leaving  it  to  development  in 
the  church)  than  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  majority  of  our  opponents 
seem  inclined  to  date  it  from  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  For  the  credit 
of  the  Church-Kingdom  theory,  an  effort  must  be  made,  in  some  way,  to 
trace  it  back  to  iiisjnred  men.     Xow  at  this  stage  of  the  argument  we  only 


Prop.  43.]  the  theocratic  ki^^gdom.  279 

say  this  :  if  the  change  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  took  place,  as 
multitudes  hold,  and  as  e.g.  Bernard  {Bampion  Lectures,  "  The  Progress 
of  Doctrine")  infers,  how  comes  it  then  that  the  early  "  consciousness"  of 
the  church  does  not  'portray  tJiis  cliange  in  the  writings  of  that  period'^ 
Why  does  the  church,  founded  by  these  disciples,  assume  the  position  that 
Jesus,  the  crucified  one,  is  the  Messiah  (with  a  full  understanding  of  the 
Jewish  meaning  of  the  name),  so  declared  by  His  resurrection  and  exalta- 
tion, who  remains  in  heaven  during  this  intermediate  period  until  the  elect 
are  gathered  out  and  the  time  arrives,  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  for  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom?  Why  is  it  that  no7ie 
of  the  Primitive  churches  indicate  such  a  change  of  doctrine,  and  directly 
trace  it  to  the  apostles  ?  Surely  if  the  current  notion  on  the  subject  is  the 
correct  one,  this  feature  ought  to  be  observed.  Bernard  and  others  do 
not  meet  the  real  objections  against  their  view,  for  fully  admitting  that  a 
change  was  introduced,  this  change  was  not  one  in  the  helief  of  the  King- 
dom, but  only  in  the  manner  and  time  of  its  introduction,  in  the  reception 
of  'preliminary  measures,  made  now  necessary  by  the  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom  and  the  organization  of  the  Christian  Church.  This  change 
does  not  affect  covenant  'promise,  confirmed  by  oath,  while  Bernard's  violates 
covenant  and  explicit  promise. 

The  student  is  reminded  that  persons  cannot  be  too  cautious  in  such  wholesale  deduc- 
tions, made  because  of  the  introduction  of  certain  changes  which  do  not  affect  the 
nature  of  the  Kingdom.  Thus  e.g.  many  stumble  at  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  and  can- 
not see  how  this  is  to  be  reconciled  with  the  expectations  of  the  restoration  of  the  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic Kingdom  ;  but  they  overlook  the  predicted  fact  (God  foreseeing  all,  and 
thus  ordering)  that  this  is  implied  in  an  immortal  Son  of  David  thus  restoring  and  reign- 
ing, and  that  this  resurrection  was  expressly  foretold  as  a  requisite  to  fulfil  the  j^romises 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  This  disregard  to  the  Kingdom  preached,  etc.,  leads  to 
many  strange  and  unscriptural  statements.  Thus  e.g.  Bernard  (in  the  excellent  Lectures 
referred  to)  says  :  "Peter  presents  the  Gospel  as  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  com- 
pletion of  the  covenant  made  with  the  fathers."  The  truth  is,  that  Peter  only  presents 
the  Gospel  to  show  how  prophecy  will  be  fulfilled  (saving  in  the  call  of  the  Gentiles),  and 
how  the  covenant  loas  confirmed  in  Christ  and  shall  yet  he  amply  realized  in  the  future. 
Again  :  "  The  Gospel  has  fought  itself  free,  and  severed  itself  from  Judaism,  not  merely 
in  its  form  hut  in  its  essence,  proclaiming  Salvation  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law."  Admitting  freely  the  grace  brought  through  Jesus, 
through  whom  alone  we  expect  to  inherit,  the  sentence  as  it  stands  is  misleading.  The 
Gospel  did  not  cut  itself  free,  etc.,  until  the  influence  of  the  Alexandrian  school  prevailed, 
as  seen  in  the  first  and  second  centuries.  True  Judaism  looked  forward,  having  the  cov- 
enants and  promises,  even  to  the  sacrificial  death  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  death  of  Jesus 
is  no  separation  from  but  a  confirmation  of  the  Judaic  essence,  for  the  Salvation  prom- 
ised through  this  Messiah  is  identical  with  that  proclaimed  by  Judaism.  This  will  he 
shown  hereafter. 


280  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  44. 


Proposition  44.  The  preacliing  of  the  Kingdom^  heing  in  ac- 
cordance with  that  of  the  j[>redicted  Kingdom^  raised  no 
controversy  between  the  Jews  and  Jesus^  or  between  the  Jeivs 
and  His  disciples  and  apostles. 

We  find  no  hint,  not  the  slightest,  that  there  was  the  least  dis- 
agreement between  the  preachers  of  the  kingdom  and  their  hearers 
on  the  subject  of  the  kingdom  itself.  We  know  what  the  views  of 
the  Jews  were,  and  if  there  had  been  any  essential  difference  in 
the  presentation  of  a  subject  so  dear  and  vital  to  Jewish  faith — 
fundamental  to  Messianic  faith — most  certainly  there  would  he 
proof  to  show  it.  The  absence  of  it,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  sub- 
stantiates our  position. 

Ois.  1.  Let  the  reader  place  himself  in  that  period  of  early  preaching. 
The  converts  were  nearly  all  Jews,  embracing  hundreds,  and  finally 
thousands,  including  even  a  large  number  of  priests,  Acts  6  :  7.  Consider 
how  tenaciously  all  these  held  to  the  predicted  restoration  of  the  Davidic 
Kingdom,  and  that  during  the  entire  period  of  preaching,  from  John  down 
to  apostolic  days,  no  question,  no  difficulty  arose  concerning  the  great 
subject  of  the  Kingdom,  i.e.  concerning  its  nature,  its  lack  of  identity 
with  the  anticipated  one.  Why  this?  Simply  because  l)oth  imrties  under- 
stood the  Kingdom  as  covenanted  and  prophesied  ;  because  the  Kingdom 
preached  corresponded  with  the  views  entertained  by  these  Jews  ;  other- 
wise it  would  have  awakened  discussion,  led  to  explanations  and  opposition. 
There  being  agreement,  discussion  and  controversy  could  not  follow,  and 
hence  we  do  not  find  them. 

Ol)S.  2.  A  mutual  understanding  existed  between  the  parties,  and  this 
was  not  interrupted  so  long  as  these  preachers  lived,  for  after  the  ascension 
of  Jesus,  instead  of  a  retractation  of  previous  preaching  and  opinions, 
instead  of  telling  the  Jews  that  they  had  misapprehended  the  nature  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  that  only  a  spiritual  one  was  the  one  intended  by  the 
Messiah  (which,  if  our  opponents  are  correct,  honesty  ought  to  have  done), 
there  continued  a  perfect  agreement  between  preachers  and  converts,  the 
basis  of  which  was,  looking  for  this  same  Kingdom  to  he  revealed  at  the 
Sec.  Adve7it  of  the  Messiali  (comp.  Props.  70-76). 

Ois.  3.  Therefore,  it  is  an  unjust  reflection  upon  these  Jews  and  Jewish 
preachers  to  accuse  them  of  ignorance,  carnality,  etc.  To  assert  as  Storrs' 
(Diss,  on  the  Ktngd.  of  Heaven),  that  these  Jews  "  were  shamefully 
ignorant"  of  the  Messiah's  reign,  recoils  iiponthe  preachers  who  made  and 
left  them  thus  "  ignorant."  Yet  this  is  the  belief  of  many  eminent  men, 
forgetting  that  perhaps  the  "  ignorance"  may  be  in  the'  gradually  sub- 


Prop.  44.]  the  theocratic  kin^gdom.  281 

stituted  change  introduced  after  the  death  of  these  preachers.  Even  as 
late  as  TertuUian,  when  the  proposed  change  had  not  as  yet  overwhelmed 
the  Apostolic  Theology,  he  pointedly  says  in  his  A2:)ology  (Sec.  21),  in 
reference  to  this  point  :  "  Even  now  His  Advent  is  expected  by  them  (the 
Jews  generally)  ;  nor  is  there  any  other  contentio7i  hettvee7i  them  and  -us, 
than  that  they  believe  the  Advent  has  not  yet  occurred."  The  Kingdom 
was  not  disputed,  but  the  manner  and  time  of  occurrence  under  Jesus  as 
the  Messiah. 

Ohs.  4.  The  Jews  did  not  find  fault  with  the  Kingdom,  but  in  tlie  King 
as  believed  in  by  believing  Jews  and  Gentiles.  In  their  blindness,  they 
refused  to  acknowledge  the  purity  and  holiness  essential  to  entrance  into 
the  Kingdom  ;  they  rejected  the  repentance  requisite  for  its  establish- 
ment ;  they  were  angered  at  the  well-merited  rebukes  aimed  at  their 
hypocrisy  and  sinfulness  ;  they  were  fearful  of  losing  their  own  authority 
and  power,  and  therefore  they  rejected  the  King,  and  urged  his  crucifixion. 
After  His  death,  it  was  too  humbling  to  their  pride  to  confess  a  crucified 
Jesus  as  their  Messiah  ;  it  was  too  mortifying  and  condemnatory  to  their 
past  action  to  acknowledge  a  once  dead  and  huried  Jesus  to  he  their 
King ;  the  difficulty  was  not  in  the  Kingdom,  hut  in  the  King,  and  in 
the  confession  and  obedience  that  was  required.  This  influenced  the 
nation,  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  but  nevertheless  many  Jews,  seeing 
the  Scriptures  fulfilled  in  this  Messiah,  and  the  Messianic  evidences  in  His 
birth,  life,  miracles,  words,  death,  etc.,  still  clung  to  Him  as  the  promised 
Messiah,  the  Restorer  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom  as  predicted  ;  and  this  was 
done  under  the  assurance  (as  we  shall  show  in  its  place)  that  He  would 
com.e  the  Second  Time  for  this  very  purpose.  Such  is  the  plain  teaching 
of  the  Record,  and  its  testimony  on  this  point  is  decided  and  overwhelming , 
as  the  reader  will  see  for  himself  as  we  proceed. 

It  will  not  answer  to  cover  this  over  under  the  plea  of  accommodation  ;  for  it  only 
amounts  to  making  numbers  of  persons  preaching,  in  the  most  serioiis  manner,  to  induce 
others  to  repentance  and  faith,  a  Kingdom  of  God  in  accordance  with  their  own  preju- 
dices and  that  of  their  hearers,  because  Jesus  saw  that  thej^  were  not  prepared  for  the 
truth.  And  this /arce  (for  it  can  be  called  nothing  less)  was  designed  and  fostered  by 
the  pure  Son  of  God  !  The  statement  needs  no  refutation  ;  it  contradicts  itself.  There- 
fore to  plead  that  such  an  accommodation  prevented  a  controversy  arising,  is  simply  to 
say  that  Christ  sacrificed  truth  and  kejA  men  in  error  for  the  sake  of  a  slight  temporary 
gain,  or  that  He  sacrificed  His  own  honor  and  dignity  for  the  sake  of  conciliating  erring 
men.  No  wonder  that  the  Baur  school  and  others  are  jubilant  over  the  fatal  concessions 
contained  in  the  works  of  pious  men,  hailing  and  parading  them  as  the  self-evident  in- 
dications of  a  shaky  foundation.  But,  viewing  the  matter  in  its  totality,  the  relation  of 
this  i^reaching  to  covenant,  prophecy,  the  Jewish  nation,  God's  Purpose  of  Salvation, 
etc.,  we  cordially  accept  of  this  preaching  and  agreement— these  alleged  evidences  of 
weakness — as  necessary  and  indispensable  features  in  the  structure.  The  reasons  will 
appear  more  fully. 

Obs.  5.  It  may  be  well  to  say  here,  that  as  long  as  this  happy  correspond- 
ence continued  numerous  Jews  were  converted  to  Christianity  (as  history 
attests),  but  jtcst  so  soon  as  this  disagreement  arose  respecting  the  King- 
dom, and  the  Jewish  faith  in  their  Kingdom  was  derided  and  scorned, 
conversions  became  less  and  less  until  they  almost  ceased.* 

*  And  as  a  return  was  made  to  the  Primitive  Church  doctrine,  conversions  increased 
until  they  form  now  again  a  very  fair  number. 


282  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  44. 

Ohs.  6.  This  agreement  indicates,  what  has  already  been  intimated,  that 
no  necessity  existed  to  hold  up  the  hope  of  a  restored  Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom  more  prominently,  because,  as  it  all  depended  upon  the  coming 
again  of  Jesus  the  Christ,  it  was  sufficient  to  direct  attention  to  that 
Advent,  linking  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  with  them,  thus  avoiding 
the  jealousy,  etc.,  of  the  Roman  Power. 

Ohs.  7.  This  agreement  has  been  noticed  by  numerous  writers,  and  has 
called  forth  corresponding  remarks,  nearly  always  in  disparaging  expres- 
sions, so  intended,  but  more  or  less  connected  with  the  truth.  This  will 
be  seen  by  taking  at  random  two  writers.  Thus  e.g.  Reuss  {His.  Ch. 
Theol.y  p.  246)  tells  us  that  the  early  churches  formed  under  this  preach- 
ing "  might  be  regarded  as,  and  virtually  were,  a  Jeiuish  jMrty.'^  Slorgan 
(in  Moral  Philosophy)  charges  early  Christianity  with  a  leaning  toward. 
Judaism,  that  the  disciples  corrupted  the  New  Test,  to  effect  this,  that  we 
have  a  Jewish  Gospel,  and  the  first  Christians  were  "  nothing  else  but  a 
political  faction  among  the  Jews,  some  of  them  receiving  Jesus  as  the 
Messiah  or  the  Restorer  of  the  Kingdom,  and  others  rejecting  him  under 
that  character."  Now,  aside  from  the  effort  made  to  use  this  connection 
with  Jewish  views  against  Christianity,  to  make  out  a  case  of  corruption, 
ignorance,  etc.,  it  is  true  that,  while  the  ceremonial  law  of  Judaism  was 
rejected  by  many  as  non-essential,  etc.,  there  was  a  strong  point  of  contact 
and  continued  agreement  between  Judaism  and  Christians  m  Messianic 
expectations  respecting  the  Kingdom. — the  difference  being  that  the  former 
located  the  fulfilment  of  their  hopes  at  the  First  Advent  of  the  Messiah 
(thus  rejecting  Jesus  as  the  Messiah),  and  the  latter,  theirs  «^  the  Second 
Advent  of  this  Jesus  who  had  been  crucified.  To  deny  this,  or  to  conceal 
it,  is  simply  exhibiting  gross  ignorance  of  facts,  or  dishonesty  in  suppressing 
truth  (comp.  Prop.  69). 


Prop.  45.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  283 


Proposition  45.  Tlie  i:ilirase8  "  Kingdom  of  heaven,'''  "  Kingdom 
of  God,^^  "  Kingdom  of  Christ,^''  etc.^  denote  the  same  Kingdom. 

It  has  already  been  shown  (Props.  20-23,  etc.)  how  the  Jews 
understood  and  employed  these  phrases,  and  how  the  first  preach- 
ers adopted  them. 

Ohs.  1.  Xow  attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that  they  are  used  as 
synonymous  in  the  New  Test.  What  Matt,  pronounces  "  the  Kingdom  of 
heaven,"  is  said  by  Mark,  Luke,  and  John  to  be  "  the  Kingdom  of  God," 
as  e.g.  comp.  Matt.  5  :  3,  with  Luke  6  :  20,  and  Matt.  13  :  11  with  Mark 
4  :  11.  So  also  "  the  Kingdom  of  God"  is  designated  Christ's  Kingdom, 
as  e.g.  comp.  Matt.  16  :  28  with  Luke  9  :  27,  Mark  9  :  1,  etc. 

So  also  "the  Father's  Kingdom"  and  Christ's  are  represented  as  identical.  Comp. 
e.g.  Matt.  13  :  41-43  with  Eph.  5  :  5,  and  Matt.  26  :  29  with  2  Pet.  1  :  11,  etc.,  and  Prop. 
83.  In  reference  to  the  usage  of  those  phrases,  comp.  Props.  22  and  23,  and  the  note 
by  Dr.  Craven  m  Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  93. 

Ods.  2.  These  phrases  thus  interchangeably  employed  to  denote  the  one 
Kingdom  (Prop.  35)  were  understood  to  mean  the  Davidic  Kingdom 
restored,  as  e.g.  Acts  1  :  6,  Matt.  20  :  21,  Acts  15  :  16,  Luke  1  :  32,  etc. 
(comp.  Props.  19-23). 

This  has  been  so  frankly  admitted  by  our  opponents  (as  e.g.  Dr.  Campbell,  Knapp, 
Neander,  etc.)  that  more  need  not  be  added,  leaving  our  argument  to  bring  in  the  ad- 
ditional proof.  On  every  side  do  we  find  this  testimony,  given,  too,  withoiit  any  thought 
of  its  bearing  on  the  subject.  Thus  e.g.  Farrar  {Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p. 22)  informs  us 
that  "  waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel  "  is  equivalent  to  Mark  15  :  43,  "  waiting  for 
the  Kingdom  of  God,"  and  that  among  the  Jews  a  prayer  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah 
v/as,  "  may  I  see  the  Consolation  of  Israel."  The  Messiah  and  the  Kingdom  were  united. 
We  merely  suggest  that  in  addition  to  the  meanings  and  derivation  iisually  given  to  the 
phrase  used  by  Matthew,  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven"  (viz.  :  that  the  God  of  heaven  gives 
it  to  the  Christ,  that  through  it  the  Father's  will  is  manifested,  that  heavenly  principles, 
etc.,  are  exhibited,  etc.),  may  there  not,  in  the  employment  of  the  plural  form,  "  heaven- 
lies,"  be  an  allusion  to  the  peculiar  form  of  government  (Theocratical)  under  chosen 
heavenly  rulers  (comp.  Prop.  154).  Dr.  Meyer  {Com.  on  Matt.  3  :  2)  says  :  "  It  is  called 
the  Messianic  Kingdom,  not  because  the  words  '  of  the  heavens  '  express  God,  but  be- 
cause this  Kingdom  is  conceived  as  descending  from  heaven  and  entering  the  world, 
Gal.  4  :  26."  This  idea  may  (comp.  Eev.  19  :  11-16  and  21  :  2,  etc.)  indeed  be  included, 
but  it  does  not  exclude  the  old  Jewish  notion  derived  from  Daniel,  or  the  one  just 
stated.     It  may  include  them  all,  making  it  the  more  expressive. 

Obs.  3.  In  addition  to  the  abundant  testimony  already  adduced,  that 
they  were  regarded  as  denoting  the  same  Kingdom,  and  that  the  restored 
Theocracy,  as  existing  under  David,  we  add  a  few  more.  Nast  {Com.  on 
Matt.  11  :  1-6),  allowing  the  Church-Kingdom  theory  as  correct,  frankly 
says  :  ''  Though  John  the  Baptist,  Zecharias,  and  those  other  Israelites 
who  waited  for  *  the   Consolation  of  Israel,'   expected  the  Messiah  to 


284  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  45. 

establish  a  spiritual  Kingdom,  a  reign  of  righteousness,  they  connected, 
nevertheless,  with  it,  the  idea  of  a  visible,  terrestrial  Kingdom,  that  he 
would  literally  sit  on  David's  throne,  and  extend  His  reign  from  the  river 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth. "  Doddrige  (Com.  Matt.  3  :  2),  cordially  adopting 
the  Church-Kingdom  idea  as  intended  by  the  phrase,  says  :  "  It  is  plain 
that  the  Jews  understood  it  of  a  temporal  monarchy,  which  God  would 
erect  ;  the  seat  of  which,  they  supposed,  would  be  Jerusalem,  which 
would  become,  instead  of  Rome,  the  capital  of  the  world.  And  the  ex- 
pected Sovereign  of  this  Kingdom  they  learned  from  Daniel  to  call  '  the 
Son  of  Man'  "  ( Were  the  Jews  mistaken  ?  Comp.  Props.  19-23  and  31-35). 
Fairbairn  (Ilerm.  Jlajiual,  p.  41-13)  tells  us  that  the  phrase,  "  points 
back  to  those  prophecies  of  the  Old  Test.,  in  which  promise  was  made  of  a 
King  and  Kingdom,  that  should  unite  heaven  and  earth  in  another  way 
than  could  be  done  by  a  merely  human  administration,"  etc.,  which  we 
cordially  receive  as  true,  remarking,  however,  that  the  plain  Theocratical 
meaning  contained  in  the  grammatical  sense  (which  he  carefully  avoids), 
as  held  by  the  Jews,  by  the  disciples  and  apostles,  introduces  just  such  a 
union  of  heaven  and  earth  (as  e.g.  God  in  Jesus  condescending  to  reign  as 
earthly  Ruler,  etc.)  as  he  advocates.  Our  entire  argument  thus  far  con- 
clusively proves  that  all  these  phrases  do  not  denote  separate  things  (as  e.g. 
intimated  by  Lange,  Com.  Matt.,  p.  73),  or  are  given  (so  Fleck,  quoted  by 
Lange)  "  in  order  to  distinguish  the  Christian  Kingdom  of  God  more  fully 
from  the  Jewish  Theocracy,"  but  the  restored  Theocracy,  as  covenanted 
and  predicted  under  the  Messiah.  They  were  applied  to  a  definite,  well- 
known  Kingdom,  viz.  :  the  Theocratic- Davidic. 

But  able  writers,  wedded  to  the  spiritual  Churcli -Kingdom  theory,  can  see  nothing  in 
the  phrase  but  another  and  differing  Kingdom,  viz.  :  the  Church  regarded  as  militant 
and  triumphant.  Thus,  to  illustrate  how  confidently  they  appeal  to  its  simplicity  in 
their  teaching,  we  refer  to  Gregory  {Four  Gospels,  p.  146),  who,  speaking  of  "  the  King- 
dom of  heaven, "  and  that  Matthew  by  its  use  intended  to  correct  false  Jewish  views 
(when  Acts  1  :  6,  he  still  held  them),  confidently  asserts  :  "  The  phrase  clearly  expresses 
the  idea  that  it  is  a  Kingdom  distinct  from  all  these  kingdoms  of  this  world  after  which 
the  Jew  had  fashioned  his  idea  of  the  Messiah's  dominion.  Its  origin  is  in  the  heavens, 
where  God  dwells  ;  its  throne,  the  seat  of  the  King,  is  there  ;  its  highest  present  and 
prospective  glories  are  there.  This  simple  phrase  taught  that  the  Kingdom  of  the  Mes- 
siah was  to  be  a  spiritual  and  heavenly  Kingdom,  unlike  the  old  Theocracy  with  its  tem- 
ple and  throne  in  Jerusalem  ;  unlike  the  magnificent  empire  patterned  after  Rome, 
which  the  worldly  Jew  was  dreaming  of  ;  wholly  unlike  the  temporal  empire  of  the  Papa- 
cy long  after  established."  Here  is  a  tissue  of  assumptions  :  (1)  It  ignores  the  fact  that 
it  was  a  Jewish  phrase,  adopted  without  explanation  by  Matthew,  and  that  it  could  not 
possibly  convey  the  idea  assumed,  being  definitely  used  to  designate  the  restored  David- 
ic Kingdom  and  its  extent,  etc.,  as  given  by  Daniel  ;  (2)  it  engrafts  upon  it  a  modern 
notion,  which  the  Jews  never  entertained,  being  bound  by  the  plain  covenant  and  pro- 
jDhetical  language  which  locates  the  Kingdom,  not  in  heaven  but  on  the  earth  ;  (3)  he  as- 
sumes that  the  phrase  is  so  clearly  full  of  his  doctrine  that  it  ought  to  have  taught  the 
Jew  such  a  view,  when  the  facts  are  just  the  reverse,  viz.  :  that  its  usage  fortified  them 
and  the  disciples  (including  Matthew)  in  believing  that  it  unmistakablj^  taught  the  res- 
toration of  the  downfallen  Theocracy,  which  was — as  we  have  shown — a  Kingdom  of 
God  and  of  heaven  ;  (4)  its  simplicity  of  teaching  established  and  confirmed  the  almost 
universal  Pre-Millenarianism  of  the  early  Church  and  its  connected  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom— a  position  just  directly  opposite  to  that  which  Gregory  finds  in  the  "  simple 
phrase,"  and  which  Shedd  {His.  of  Doc,  p.  291)  calls  a  peculiarity  of  the  Jewish-Chris- 
tian." 


Prop.  46.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  285 


Proposition  46.  Tlie  Kingdom  anticipated  by  the  Jews  at  the 
First  Advent  is  based  on  the  Abrahamio  and  Davidic  Cove- 
ants. 

This  might  be  shown  by  numerous  references,  but  it  will  be  suffi- 
ciently conspicuous  by  adverting  to  the  declarations  found  in  only 
one  chapter  of  the  New  Testament.  Thus,  e.g.,  Luke  1  :  32,  33,  55, 
72,  73,  where  we  have  undoubted  allusions  to  previously  obtained 
covenants,  in  "  the  mercy  ^rom/^ecZ  to  the  fathers,"  in  "  the  holy 
covenant ''^  confirmed  by  oath  "to  our  father  Abraham,"  and  in 
'"  the  throne  of  his  father  David." 

Ohs.  1.  In  turning  back  to  the  fountain  head  from  whence  this  doc- 
trine, this  faith  in  a  Messianic  Kingdom  proceeds,  we  only  reiterate  what 
others  have  most  aptly  stated  when  we  invite  for  tlie  covenants  an 
absorbing  interest  in  view  of  their  living,  fundamental  connection  with  final 
Salvation  in  Christ's  Kingdom.  Kurtz"  {His.  Old  Cov.,  p.  175)  has  well 
expressed  this  "  a  foundation  on  which  the  great  Salvation  is  ultimately  to 
appear.'^'  Thorp  {Tlie  D est.  of  the  Brit.  .Evipire,  Fref.,\).  8)  justly  ob- 
serves :  ''  The  Abraham ic  Covenant  is  the  foundation  of  all  tlie  dispiensations 
of  heaven,  both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.''^ 

This  has  been  noticed  by  Brooks  {El.  of  Proph.  Inter.,  ch.  2),  Bickersteth  (Guide  io 
Proph.),  Judge  Jones  {Notes  to  the  Scriptures),  besides  a  host  of  others,  as  Auberlen,  De- 
litzsch,  Lord,  the  Bonars,  etc.  Indeed,  it  is  universally  admitted,  however  explained  after- 
ward, that  the  covenants  are  the  proper  basis  of  future  Kevelation,  and  that  they  con- 
tain in  an  epitomized  form  the  substance  of  God's  Purpose  in  reference  to  man's  Salva- 
tion, the  Messiah's  Kingdom  and  glory,  and  the  perfected  Redemption  from  the  curse. 
Hence,  men  of  all  shades  of  opinion  agreeing  in  this  matter,  it  is  essential  for  any  one 
who  desires  to  become  a  real  student  of  God's  Word  to  make  himself  familiar  with  these 
covenants,  seeing,  that,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  all  things  following  must  correspond 
fully  with  these  previously  given  pledges  and  guides.  While  the  covenants  are  neces- 
sarily primary  in  a  proper  conception  of  the  Divine  Plan  relating  to  Eedemption,  present- 
ing a  central  idea,  the  reader  will  observe  that  they  are  scripturally  based  and  grammati- 
ally  founded  on  direct  oath-bound  promises,  and  hence  are  to  be  distinguished  from  that 
vague,  scholastic,  mystical  effort  to  make  the  covenants  a  central  idea  as  given  e.g.  by 
JoW  Cocceius  (Ilagenbach's  His.  Doc,  vol.  2,  sec.  222  and  223),  Pres.  Edwards's  {His. 
Bedempt. ),  and  others.  This  grasping  after  the  covenants  as  a  foundation  thought  relat- 
ing to  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  is  characteristic  of  the  German  Eeformed  Theology  (see 
Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  sec.  223,  Amer.  Ed.  added,  and  Heppe  on  Ger.  Reform.^  Church 
in  Mercersburg  Review  for  1853),  and  is  found  in  theologians  of  ability  in  various  de- 
nominations. Unfortunatelj^  however,  many  have  viuch  to  say  about  a  covenant  made 
between  the  Father  and  Son  in  eternity — of  which  we  have  no  record,  and  which  opens  a 
door  for  conjecture  and  unproven  inferences — while  they  ignore,  more  gr  less,  those  on 
record. 

Obs.  2.  Let  it  be  observed  that  in  approaching  the  covenants  we  are 
not  at  liberty  to  receive  one  and  reject  another,  nor  are  we  authorized  to 
take  just  as  much  as  may  suit  our  Theological  views  out  of  one  and  refuse 


286  THE  THEOCRATIC  KiisraDOM.  [Prop.  46. 

to  believe  in  the  rest.  Here  is  where  many  Theological  writings  make  the 
fatal  mistake:  they  are  willing  to  receive  the  Abrahamic  covenant  as  a 
perpetual  one,  but  not  the  Davidic,  when  the  same  perpetniti/  is  asserted  of 
both  ;  they  are  agreed  to  receive  pa7i  of  the  Abrahamic,  or  part  of  the 
Davidic  covenant,  but  not  all  that  is  written.  No  wonder  that  a  diversity 
is  thus  produced,  and  an  antagonism  to  the  Old  Test.  The  Jews  and  the 
Primitive  Church  were  far  more  logical  and  scriptural  when  they  cordially 
received  those  covenants  and  believed  in  God's  statements  concerning 
them.  The  trouble  at  present  is,  that  the  church,  with  all  her  prof essions, 
has  too  little  faith. 

Obs.  3.  Approaching  the  covenants  and  seeing  how  they  form  great 
central  points  around  which  successive  revelations  cluster — yea,  the 
foundation  stones  upon  which  the  Christological  structure  is  erected — we 
are  not  surprised  at  the  efforts  made  to  undermine  their  force,  either  by 
separating  the  Old  from  the  New  Test,  as  antiquated,  or  by  elevating  the 
New  far  above  the  Old  as  only  worthy  of  reception,  or  by  a  rejection  of 
the  Old  as  not  authentic,  etc.  De  Wette  and  others  may  apply  their 
mythical  interpretation  to  Abraham,  etc.;  Ammon  and  others  may 
reject  the  Old  Test,  as  having  no  special  divine  worth  ;  Colenso  and 
others  may  endeavor  to  set  aside  reliance  upon  the  writings  of  Moses  ; 
Schleiermacher  and  others  may  place  the  Old  in  a  position  far  inferior  to 
the  New  in  dignity,  value,  etc. — all  this,  and  more,  may  be  done,  and  yet 
in  the  simple  covenant  words,  in  their  gradually  unfolded  purpose,  in  their 
continuous  progress  in  and  toward  fulfilment,  in  their  fundamental 
relationship  to  Messianic  hopes,  etc.,  we  have  the  most  triumphaMt 
vindication  (comp.  Prop.  16  and  198)  of  the  equality  and  truthfulness  of 
all  Divine  Revelation,  and  of  the  significance  and  fundamental  importance 
of  the  covenants,  and  also  a  rebuke  given  to  the  foolishness  of  a  learned 
disjjlay  of  unbelief. 

If  the  reader  follows  the  development  of  the  covenant,  he  will  be  enabled  to  appre- 
ciate the  value  of  the  author's  allegation  in  the  History  of  ihe  Hebrew  Monarchy,  that 
Moses  forged  God's  covenant  with  Abraham  for  political  purposes.  The  wish  is  father 
to  the  thought,  for  the  very  tenor  of  the  covenants  forbid  such  an  idea,  seeing  that  for 
fulfilment  it  implies  a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  etc.  ;  in  brief,  such  an  intervention  of 
the  Supernatural,  as  is  evidenced  already  by  the  past,  that  no  man  could  incorporate  for 
such  a  j)urpose.  Hengstenberg,  Marsh,  Kurtz,  Fritzsche,  Havernick,  Jahn,  and  others, 
in  vindicating  the  credibility  of  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures,  etc,  have  performed  an  excel- 
lent preparatory  work. 

Obs.  4.  The  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants  were  very  prominently 
held  by  the  early  church,  as  can  be  readily  seen  by  the  general  use  made 
of  them,  illustrated,  e.g.  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  the  writings  of 
Irenaeus,  Justin,  TertuUian,  etc.  So  that  Renan  {Jpostles,  p.  116)  remarks 
in  reference  to  the  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church  :"  The  perusal  of  the 
Old  Test.,  above  all  of  the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets,  was  a  constant  habit 
of  the  sect" — a  testimony  most  honorable  to  the  church. 

At  the  present  day  they  are  largely  ignored,  just  as  if  we  had  no  personal  interest  in 
them,  and  so  imperfect  is  the  comprehension  of  Scripture,  that  we  have  plenty  of  works 
which  present  us,  as  the  two  great  covenants,  "  the  Law  and  the  Gospel." 


Prop.  47.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  287 


Proposition  47.  The  Jeivs  had  the  strongest  possible  assurance 
given  to  them  that  the  Kingdom  based  on  these  covenants  would 
be  realized. 

Attention  lias  already  been  directed  (Prop.  18)  to  tlie  fact  that 
the  prophecies  pertaining  to  this  Kingdom  shall  not,  in  their  ulti- 
mate fulfilment,  fail,  i.e.,  they  are  unconditional.  The  reason  for 
this  is  that  they  are  evolved  from  covenants  confirmed  by  oath; 
and  hence,  in  view  of  their  absolute  certainty  (no  matter  hov^  post- 
poned), God  has  given  expression  to  language  which  affirms  beyond 
cdl  doubt  that  this  Kingdom,  sustaining  a  covenanted  relationship, 
would  at  some  time  in  the  future  be  established  ;  and  this,  too,  as 
covenanted  in  connection  with  the  national  salvation  of  the  Jewish 
nation.  Thus,  e.g.,  read  Jer.  31 :  35-37,  and  33  :  19-26  ;  Isa.  54  :  9, 
10,  etc. 

It  has  been  remarked  by  various  writers,  that  the  covenant  name  of  Jehovah  or  Jahveh, 
by  which  the  unchangeableness  of  God  is  expressed,  indicates  the  absolute  certainty  of 
ultimate  fulfilment. 

Ohs.  1.  Hence  it  follows  :  that  the  Jews  were  not  so  grossly  ignorant  as 
many  Gentiles  now  think  ;  that  they  were  correct  in  their  apprehensions 
concerning  the  Messiah's  Kingdom  being  identified  with  the  restored 
Davidic.  Language  could  not  possibly  make  it  any  lilainer  or  stronger. 
The  sun  may  refuse  to  shine,  the  moon  and  the  stars  may  depart,  the  sea 
may  no  longer  war  with  its  waves,  day  and  night  may  not  alternate  in 
their  season,  the  ordinances  of  heaven  and  earth  may  be  repealed  (comp. 
e.g.  Jer.  33  :  17-26,  Isa.  54  :  9,  Jer.  31  :  35,  36,  Ps.  89  :  36,  37,  etc.),  but 
tlie  promises  of  God  shall  not  fail  in  restoring  the  overthrown  Davidic  King- 
dom ;  God  will  perform  the  promises  made  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob, 
David,  and  the  Prophets,  respecting  the  Jewish  nation.  Men  may  foolishly 
ridicule  and  sneer  at  these  things  because  still  unrealized,  calling  them 
"  Jewish  notions,  fables,  and  prejudices,"  but  God's  word  stands  pledged, 
as  solemnly  and  sacredly  as  word  can  be  substantiated,  for  their  fulfilment. 
It  is  idle,  it  is  folly — yea  more,  it  is  sinful  to  censure  the  Jews  for  a  belief 
so  clearly  founded  and  so  unmistakably  encouraged. 

Obs.  2.  Let  the  reader  place  himself  in  the  period  before  the  First 
Advent,  with  the  Old  Test,  in  his  hands.  Now  w/^ff^  would  be  his  belief  in 
the  Kingdom,  with  those  covenants  and  prophecies,  confirmed  by  oath  and 
most  expressive  assurances?  Surely  it  would  be  identical  with  that  of  the 
Jews  themselves  ;  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  if  there  was  faith  in  God's 
Word  and  God's  oath.  Can  we  believe  that  the  First  Advent  of  the 
Messiah  obliterated  this  belief,  destroyed  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  erased 
the  grammatical  sense  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  and  cancelled  the  oath  of 


288  THE   TIIEOCllATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  47. 

the  Uncliangeable  ?  Multitudes  do  this,  but  we  cannot,  dare  not  follow 
the  multitude  in  this  matter.  God's  assurances  are  too  weighty,  His 
Word  is  too  pure,  to  allow  of  such,  a  destructive  ^irocess, 

Ohs.  3.  The  attitude  of  a  portion  of  the  modern  Jews  is  to  be  regretted. 
Leavened  with  infidelity,  they  have  lost  all  faith  in  the  most  precise  and 
determinate  utterances  that  can  indicate  the  determination  of  God  to 
verify  His  promises  to  the  nation,  and  yet  they  profess  to  believe  in  this 
same  God,  in  His  veracity,  etc.  This  is  utterly  inconsistent,  and  simply 
faithless,  when  their  own  scattered  condition  and  continued  preservation 
among  the  nations  (as  predicted)  confirms  the  assurances  of  this  God.  If 
the  covenants,  and  the  prophecies  based  upon  them,  are  not  icortliy  of 
credence  to  a  Jew,  what  is  there  then  in  the  Old  Test,  worthy  of  heticf? 
Their  unbelief  may  reject  the  proffered  blessings,  but  it  cannot  change 
the  Purpose  of  God,  for  (Ps.  33  :  11)  "  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standetli 
forever.'"  Although  the  Jews  are  dispersed,  under  punishment  for  un- 
belief, yet  there  is  something  so  distinguishing  in  their  national  relation- 
ship to  the  Divine  Purpose  that  God,  foreseeing  all  that  has  occurred  in 
the  past,  still  most  graciously  declares  (Lev.  26  :  4i),  ''  Yet  for  all  that,  when 
thev  be  in  the  land  of  their  enemies,  I  will  not  cast  them  away,  neither 
wili  I  abhor  them,  to  destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  my  covenant  with 
them:  for  I  am  the  Lord  their  God.""  Whether  they  believe  it  or  not, 
mercy  follows  them  for  the  sake  of  the  covenant,  and  mercy  will  yet  verify 
that  covenant  in  the  history  of  the  nation,  for  "  their  God''  has  sworn  it. 

Obs.  4.  A  class  of  writers  has  arisen,  who,  professing  to  be  very  critical, 
tell  us  that  Abraham's  life,  and  indeed  the  whole  Bible,  must  be  subjected 
to  "Historical  Criticism."  To  this  there  could  be  no  objection,  if 
honestly  conducted  ;  but  in  the  hands  of  this  class,  this  phrase,  stripped 
of  its  applied  generalities  and  pretentious  adjuncts,  simply  means  to  receive 
fust  as  much  as  any  one  pleases  to  accept.  By  this  process,  Clarke  {Ten 
'Religions,  p.  403)  informs  us  that  "  not  a  little  will  be  gained  for  the 
Jewish  Scriptures  by  this  position.  If  they  lose  the  authority  which, 
attaches  to  the  Word  of  God,  they  will  gain  the  interest  which  belongs  to 
the  utterance  of  Man."  These  men,  while  professing  admiration  for 
Moses,  the  Prophets,  etc.,  virtually  convict  them  of  false  pretences,  decep- 
tion, etc.  Judas-like,  they  kiss  while  in  the  act  of  betraying  ;  Joab-like, 
they  pretend  friendship  while  stabbing.'  To  this  class,  the  solemnly 
covenanted  promises  of  God  and  the  assurances  respecting  the  Kingdom 
are  all  idle  dreams  ;  men  who  believe  and  trust  in  them  are  self-deceived 
and  fanatical  ;  history  that  corroborates  prophetic  announcements  is 
merely  a  coincidence  ;  the  faith  of  ages,  sustained  by  personal  experience 
and  Providence,  is  nothing  but  a  mistaken  belief. 

1  Let  not  the  reader  think  that  otir  expressions  are  too  strong.  We  acknowledge  to  a  de- 
gree of  respect  for  Voltaire,  Bolingbroke,  Hume,  Volney,  etc.,  who,  making  Moses' 
claims  pretentious  and  the  Jewish  religion  a  natural  development,  carried  out  their 
principles  at  least  honestly  in  not  professing  a  regard  that  they  did  not  feel.  But  we 
have  not  much  for  that  class  of  authors  who,  %inder  the  garb  of  friendship,  esteem,  and 
reverence,  stab,  lo'dh  deadly  intent,  in  the  most  courteous  manner  the  truthfulness  of  the 
divine  writers.  What  care  we  for  the  eulogies,  e.g.  of  a  Kenan  and  others,  when  the 
sum  total  of  all  is  to  destroy  the  divine  teaching  of  the  prophets,  Jesus,  and  the  apostles,  and 
bring  everything  down  to  a  mere  human  level,  and  natural  inspiration  ?  And  this  is  called 
"historical  criticism" — a  criticism  which  at  the  very  outset  stands  prejudged  against  the 


PkOP.  47.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM. 

Supernatural,  and  will  not  allow  that  wliicli  is  part  of  history  itself  to  testifj'  in  its  own 
favor  by  reference  to  a  continuous  Divine  Purpose,  a  Unity  of  Design,  a  general  Analogy, 
etc.  The  fact  is,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter,  its  position  is  most  uncritical,  m  that  it 
permits  not  the  higher  testimony  of  the  Word  to  speak  in  its  own  behalf,  but  stands, 
sneeringly,  picking  daws  here  and  there,  and  from  such  presents  the  most  sweeping  de- 
ductions. Upright  criticism,  real  honesty  of  heart  and  design,  calls  for  a  far  different 
attitude.  (Comp.  Prop.  198.)  Against  such  men  might  be  placed,  Bacon,  Newton,  Max 
Miiller,  etc.  (who  declare  that  the  faith  of  Abraham,  etc.,  was  given  by  special  revela- 
tion) ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  the  Word  of  God  does  not  need  the  testimony  ot  learned  and 
scientific  men,  for  its  best  evidence  it  carries  within  itself  corroborated  by  personal  ex- 
perience and  history.  This  allusion  to  a  prevailing  sceptical  tendency  is  made,  to  indi- 
cate how  the  promises  of  God  are  shorn  of  their  strength  by  constituting  them  mere 
human  assurances.  Alas  !  if  it  were  only  confined  to  unbelievers  '  Many  believers  of  the 
Word,  savingly  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  who  would  shudder  to  adopt  such  a  hopeless 
platform  of  unbelief,  who  actually  receive  these  promises  as  divine,  still  by  a  fatal  proc- 
ess so  fritter  them  away  or  deny  their  intention  or  validity  that  they,  too,  with  infidels, 
disbelieve  in  their  ultimate  fulfilment  as  written. 


290  THE   THEOCRATIC    KII^GDOjVI.  [PeOP.  48. 


Peoposition  48.  Tlie  Kingdom  heing  hased  on  the  covenanU^  tlie 
covenants  must  he  carefully  examined^  and  (^Prop.  4)  ilie  literal 
language  of  tlie  same  mmt  be  inaintained. 

The  appointment,  arrangement,  disposition,  or  institution  of  a 
covenant  relation,  in  whatever  (as  voluntary,  a  contract,  etc.)  light 
it  may  be  regarded,  presupposes  two  parties ;  the  one  who 
promises  or  imparts,  and  the  other  who  will  receive  or  attains.  In 
all  earthly  transactions,  when  a  promise,  agreement,  or  contract  is 
entered  into  by  which  one  party  gives  a  promise  of  value  to 
another,  it  is  universally  the  custom  to  exj^lain  such  a  relationship 
and  its  promises  by  the  'well-knoion  laws  of  language  contained  in 
our  grammars  or  in  common  usage.  It  would  be  regarded  absurd 
and  trifling  to  view  them  in  any  other  light.     (Comp.  Prop.  4. ) 

Obs.  1.  Why,  then,  should  this  universal  rule  belaid  aside  when  coming 
to  the  covenants  of  the  Bible  ?  If  it  is  important  in  any  mere  earthly 
relationship  for  the  parties  to  understand  each  other,  and  such  a  com- 
prehension is  based  on  the  jjlain  grammatical  sense  of  the  language  used,  is 
it  not  equally,  yea  more,  essential  in  soiueiglity  acaseas  this  ;  and  to  insure 
comprehension  of  the  same  is  it  not  most  reasonable  to  expect  the  same 
literal  language  ?  Indeed,  when  the  covenants  embrace  the  vital  interest^ 
of  a  nation  and  the  destiny  of  the  race  and  the  world,  is  it  not  requisite 
that  tiiey  should  be  presented  in  such  a  form  that  the  parties  to  whom  they 
are  given  can  readily  perceive  their  meaning,  without  searching  around  for 
another  and  very  ditferent  one  to  be  efigrafted  upon  them,  or,  without 
waiting  for  an  Origen  or  Svvedenborg  to  arise  and  spiritualize  them  into  a 
proper  conception  ? 

It  is  saddeuing  (it  would  be  crushing  to  tlie  few  believing  ones,  if  this  lack  of  faith  — 
its  universality — had  not  been  also  predicted)  to  see  how  extensively  the  latter  is  done 
by  good  and  great  men,  thereby  darkening  knowledge  and  obscuring  the  revealed  piar- 
poses  of  God.  On  the  other  hand,  let  us  firmly  hold  that  the  very  nature  of  a  covenant 
demands,  that  it  should  be  so  worded,  so  plainly  expressed,  that  it  conveys  a  decisive 
meaning,  and  not  a  hidden  or  mystical  one  that  requires  many  centuries  to  revolve  in 
order  to  develop.  Otherwise  it  becomes  decej)tive  and  misleading,  fostering  a  faith  that 
can  never  be  attained,  and  leading  to  hopes  that  can  never  be  realized — which,  if  un- 
worthy in  an  earthly  transaction  between  man  and  man,  is  more  discreditable  when  the 
Divine  Being  becomes  a  party.  No  !  God  never  gave  the  covenants  to  deceive  in  their 
plain,  grammatical  sense  !  Men,  indeed,  say  so  ;  learned  men  declare  it  so  ;  but  this 
does  not  make  it  so— leaving  the  Word  to  speak  for  itself. 

Obs.  2.  This,  however,  does  not  imply,  especially  if  the  covenant  is  a 
voluntary  one  on  the  part  of  God  and  contains  His  merciful  purposes  of 
Salvation,  that  it  may  not  be  briefly  expressed  or  concisely  stated,  and  be 
afterward  enlarged  by  way  of  additions,   by  explaining  how  it  will  be 


Prop.  48.]  the  tiieockatic  kingdom.  291 

performed,  etc.  All  this  may,  indeed,  be  attached  to  it  for  prudential  and 
wise  reasons,  and  yet,  a.^^  far  cls-  given,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  reject  the 
plain  meaning  presented.  And  the  less  so  if  the  additions  afterward 
appended  accurately  coincide  with  the  express  language  of  the  covenants. 

Obs.  3.  Our  Proposition  is  confirmed  by  the  indisputable  fact  that  God 
has  stamped  the  grammatical  sense  as  the  correct  one  by  lifer  ally  fidfiUing 
a  portion  of  the  covenants.  Take  e.g.  the  promised  "  seed."  He  has  come 
from  Abraham,  through  the  line  of  David,  in  a  manner  recognizable 
(implied  by  the  terms)  and  indicative  of  His  power  to  redeem  and  bless. 
A  sufficiency  is  found  in  the  history  of  the  past  to  show  that  these  cove- 
nants GOTitam  areal,  suhi<tantial,  verified  grammatical  meaning.  Hence  we 
are  not  allowed  to  change  it  for  something  else. 

If  all  the  rest  contained  in  these  covenants  has  not  yet  been  thus  literally  confirmed 
by  fulfilment,  we  should  not  hastily  limit  the  Almighty  in  His  disjDensational  proceed- 
ings by  rejecting  the  remainder,  or  by  attaching  another  meaning  to  it  to  suit  present 
circumstances.  No  !  w'lih  Abrahamic  faith  clinging  to  His  revealed  intention,  at  some 
time,  to  fulfil  them  as  He  has  done  a  part,  let  us  calmly  ask,  Why  has  it  not  all  been  thus 
fulfilled  y  When  this  question  is  scripiurally  answered,  and  the  reasons  assigned,  which 
God  Himself  gives,  then,  then  we  shall  not  only  be  satisfied  to  let  its  plain  meaning  stand, 
but  rejoice  in  its  precious  significance. 

Obs.  4.  The  promises  in  the  covenants  are  not  typical,  as  many  argue 
(impelled  to  it  by  not  seeing  a  present  fulfilment,  and  by  a  disbelief  in  a 
future  fulfilment),  for  a  typical  character  is  op2)osed  to  the  very  nature  of 
a  covenant.  It  would  in  a  great  measure  make  the  real  truth  unrecog- 
nizable until  the  appearance  of  the  antitype,  and  the  result  would  be  to 
enshroud  the  covenants  themselves  in  conjecture  and  mystery,  which  is 
opposed  to  the  simple  fact  that  God  appeals  to  the  covenants  as  to  promises 
well  coinpreliended.  The  j^artial  fulfihnent  of  them  clearly  shows  that  they 
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  typical. 

As  this  is  a  point  of  great  importance,  having  a  marked  influence  upon  the  interpre- 
tation of  much  Scripture,  a  few  remarks  ought  to  be  appended.  Many  excellent  writers, 
as  Fairbairn  and  others,  make  e.g.  the  inheritance  promised  to  the  Patriarchs  a  typical 
one,  and  the  proof  texts  assigned  for  .this  are  the  passages  which  sj^eak  of  the  saints  in- 
heriting the  earth,  of  Abraham  being  "  heir  of  the  world,"  etc.  But  this  is  a  begging  of 
the  question,  for  these  passages  in  no  shape  or  form  intimate  a  typical  nature  of  the  in- 
heritance but,  on  the  contrary,  the  reality  oi  the  promise  ;  for,  as  we  shall  show  hereafter 
(Props.  142,  131,  137,  141,  etc.)  this  Scripture  teaches  «?i  ea'«d/i<//z/»jf«/ of  covenant  prom- 
ise, unless  they  themselves  are  also  made  typical  (as  e.g.  inheriting  the  earth  to  mean 
inheriting  third  heaven,  etc.).  That  no  type  is  intended  may  be  briefly  stated  thus  : 
Jesus  Christ,  according  to  the  Prophets,  as  David's  Son  and  Theocratic  King  inherits 
not  only  David's  throne  and  kingdom  but  also  the  territory,  but  in  connection  with  this, 
in  virtue  of  His  Divine-Human  character  and  the  original  design  contemplated.  His  do- 
minion, based  on  His  rightful  inheritance,  is  to  extend  over  the  whole  earth.  To  show 
the  contrary,  Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  266)  introduces  a  very  inajjt  and  unfortunate  in- 
ferential proof.  For  he  tells  us  that  the  inheritance  can  only  be  explained  "  with  what 
it  typically  represented,  in  the  same  way  that  Christ  is  called  Abraham's  seed,"  viz.  :  as 
*'  the  ultimate  child  of  promise."  Here  comes  in  the  fatal  mistake  that  he  and  others 
make  in  supposing  that  covenant  promises  are  typical,  impelling  them,  as  an  illustration 
of  the  same,  to  infer  the  typical  nature  of^''  the  seed.''  We  may  well  ask,  in  reply.  Was  not 
Christ  Abraham's  natural  seed,  and  if  so,  did  "  seed  "  stand  for  a  type  ?  Certainly  not, 
for  there  is  a  literal  fulfilment  of  promise.  Precisely  so,  with  the  inheritance  ;  it  is  better 
to  wait  and  see  what  God  yet  intends  to  do,  before  we  explain  away  His  own  words  by  a 
typical  process.  For  if  we  adopt  this  modernized  principle,  so  prevailing,  where  is  then 
a  promise  in  the  covenants  to  which  can  be  ascribed  certainty  of  meaning  ?  Kejecting 
the  plain  one  that  the  letter  contains,  or  more  conveniently  converting  it  into  a  type,  the 


292  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  48. 

promise  may  then  represent  what  the  ingenuity  of  man  ascribes  to  it,  and  conjecture  fol- 
lows. Men  may  derisively  call  our  view,  an  adhering  to  the  "  husk,"  "  shell, "  or  "  rind  " 
and  congratulate  themselves  in  having  "  the  developed  germ  "  or  "  matured  fruit,"  but 
amid  the  unproven  varieties  of  "fruit,"  from  Origen  to  Swedenborg,  we  are  content  to 
abide  by  the  former,  as  certainly  God-given.  The  truth  is,  that  these  writers  all  come 
to  the  Word  with  an  unproven  hypothesis,  viz.  :  that  the  church,  as  now  constituted,  is 
the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom,  and  hence  all  Scripture,  including  the  precise  and 
determinate  language  of  the  covenants,  must  be  interpreted  to  correspond  with  a  pre- 
judged case.     Learning  and  ability  must  champion  a  fundamental  misconception. 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  293 


Proposition  49.  The  covenants  heing  in  Revelation^  tlie  founda- 
tion of  the  Kingdom^  must  first  he  received  and  appreciated. 

Let  ns  then  l)riefly  pass  them  under  review,  and  notice  their  con- 
tents ;  this  will  clearly  indicate  their  fundamental  nature. 

God  promised  salvation  to  Adam  and  Eve.  The  Bible  gives  us  the  sad  history,  that, 
while  some  through  faith  sought  for  deliverance,  gradually  unbelief  and  sin  enveloped 
and  enshrouded  the  race.  One  man  and  his  family  were  selected  by  the  Almighty  to 
escape  the  general  destruction,  that  through  him  the  race  might  be  propagated,  the  prom- 
ise might  be  extended  and  ultimately  fulfilled.  Again,  corruption  prevailed  (Joshua 
24  :  2,  14  etc.)  to  such  an  extent  that  a  new  development  was  necessary  to  prepare  and 
perpetuate  the  way  of  salvation.  A  descendant  of  Shem  and  Noah,  possessing  peculiar 
characteristics,  was  selected  as  the  preeminently  chosen  one  to  whom  in  a  more  special 
and  particular  manner  was  committed  the  assurances  of  a  preparatory  development  and 
final  attainment  of  Salvation.  In  him  the  Divine  Purpose  becomes  more  si)ecific,  de- 
tailed, contracted,  definite,  and  certain.  Specific,  in  distinguishing  and  separating  him 
from  others  of  the  race  ;  detailed,  in  indicating  more  of  the  particulars  connected  with 
the  purpose  of  salvation  ;  contracted,  in  making  the  Messiah  to  come  directly  in  his  line, 
to  be  his  "  seed  ;"  definite,  in  entering  into  covenant  relation  with  him,  as  his  God  ;  and 
certain,  in  confirming  this  covenant  relationship  by  an  oath.  This,  then,  is  the  period, 
beyond  all  others,  which,  descending  from  the  general  to  the  particular,  lays,  as  Kurtz 
{His.  Old  Gov.,  p.  175,  comp.  Prop.  46,  Obs.  1)  aptly  remarks  :  "  a  foundaiion  on  which 
the  great  Salvation  is  ultimately  to  appear  ;"  or,  as  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  471) 
observes  :  "  We  have  learned  to  recognize  the  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham  as  the  foun- 
dation ot  the  entire  revelation  of  Salvation."  Abraham  is  this  chosen  instrument,  and 
through  his  promised  seed  complete  redemption  is  to  be  obtained.  Certainly  then  the 
Abrahamic  history  becomes  one  of  ahsorbing  interest,  in  view  of  its  fundamental  and  liv- 
ing connection  with  final  Salvation.  It  deserves  and  demands  our  most  earnest  and 
closest  attention,  for  to  it  all  other  things,  in  the  development,  must  sustain  a  close  and 
abiding  relation.  We  cannot  overestimate  the  importance  of  this,  as  Isa.  51  :  1,  2 
teaches.  Even  the  incarnation,  life,  etc.,  of  Christ  grow  out  of  the  deep  significancy,  and 
in  behalf  of  the  fulfilment,  of  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham. 

I.  THE  ABRAHAMIC  COVENANT. 

Ols.  1.  The  covenant  (see  good  remarks  on  the  meaning  of  the  word 
*' covenant"  by  Barnes,  Notes  on  Heb.  8:8,  and  9:16)  made  with 
Abraham  is  found  in  Gen.  12  :  1-3,  7  ;  13  :  14-17  ;  15  :  4-21  ;  17  :  4-16  ; 
22  :  15-18.  The  things  promised  by  God  are  the  followmg  :  1.  That 
Abraham's  name  shall  be  great.  2.  That  a  great  nation  should  come  from 
him.  3.  He  should  be  a  blessing  so  great  that  in  him  shall  all  famihes  of 
the  earth  be  blessed.  4.  To  him  personally  ("  to  thee")  and  to  his  seed 
should  be  given  Palestine  forever  to  inherit.  5.  The  multitude  of  his  seed 
should  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth.  6.  That  whoever  blessed  him  should 
be  blessed,  and  whosoever  cursed  him  should  be  cursed.  7.  He  should  be 
the  father  of  many  nations.  8.  Kings  should  proceed  from  him.  9.  The 
covenant  shall  be  perpetual,  "  an  everlasling  covenant."  10.  The  land  of 
Canaan  shall  be  **an  everlasting  possession."     11.  God  will  be  a  God  to 


294  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

him  and  to  his  seed.     12.  His  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies. 
13.  In  his  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed. 

God  added,  in  order  to  bring  about  these  promises,  predictions,  dispensational  and 
providential  ari-angements,  and  while  in  the  course  of  time  there  has  been  a  partial, 
inchoate  fulfilment,  suflQcient  to  authenticate  their  divine  origin  and  ultimate  realization, 
yet  a  mere  cursory  glance  at  them,  and  then  at  history,  shows  that  they  have  not,  to  this 
time,  been  verified  as  given.  This  partial  and  limited  fulfilment  has  afforded  a  fund  of 
amusement  to  unbelief,  and  it  sneeringly  points  to  it  as  evidence  of  failure,  of  Oriental 
exaggeration,  etc.  In  view,  however,  of  the  dispositions  already  made,  the  continued 
progress  of  the  Divine  Purpose  toward  its  realization,  the  constant  preservation  of  Abra- 
ham's  descendants,  to  whom  nationally  the  covenants  were  given,  the  raising  up  of  a 
seed  unto  Abraham,  etc.,  it  would  be  foolishness  to  say  that  they,  as  recorded,  never  will 
be  accomplished.  To  answer  unbelief,  by  endeavoring  to  make  out  a  fulfilment  by 
spiritualizing  the  promises,  by  substituting  something  else  in  their  place,  is  only  another 
form  of  unbelief  in  the  precise  words  of  the  covenants. 

Obs.  2.  Out  of  the  blessings  enumerated,  several  are  selected,  as  illus- 
trative, which  have  not  yet  been  experienced.  Thus  e.g.  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob'  have  Palestine  ^'from  the  river  of  Egypt  to  the  great  river 
Euphrates"  promised  to  them  p&rsonalli/,  and  alw  to  their  seed.  The 
repetition  of  the  precise  language  admits  of  no  other  construction.  "  To 
thee  and  to  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  ;"  *'  To  thee  will  I  give  it  ;"  "to 
give  thee  this  land  to  inherit  ;"  ''I  will  give  it  unto  thee^  and  to  thy  seed 
after  thee,  the  land  wherein  tliou  art  a  stranger,  all  the  land  of  Canaan, 
for  an  everlasting  possession  ;"  "  nnto  tliee  and  to  thy  seed  will  I  give  all 
these  countries  ;"  "  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it  and 
to  thy  seed  f^  "  the  land  Avhich  I  gave  to  Abraham  and  Isaac,  to  thee  will 
I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land."  How  the 
Patriarchs  nnderstood  this  is  evident  by  referring  to  what  Isaac  said  to 
Jacob  when  he  sent  him  away  to  Laban  (Gen.  28  :  1-4)  :  "  God  Almighty 
bless  thee,  and  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be 
a  multitude  of  people  ;  and  give  thee  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  to  thee  and 
to  thy  seed  witli  thee,  that  thou  mayest  inherit  the  land,  wherein  thou  art  a 
stranger,  which  God  gave  unto  Abraham."  Can  language  be  more 
definite  ?  Does  God  so  carefully  reiterate  the  personal  inheriting  (and  as 
carefully  discriminate  from  such  inheriting  a  present  temporary  sojourn  in 
the  land),  of  the  land  by  the  Patriarchs,  and  yet  mean  something  very 
different  from  what  the  words  properly  denote  ?  Many,  alas,  tell  us  yes  ! 
but  we  respond.  No  !  Never  ! " 

1  The  reason  why  the  covenant  was  repeated  to  Isaac  and  Jacob  was  owing  to  the 
fact  that  they  formed  the  chosen  posterity  to  the  exclusion  of  others  in  the  Abrahamic 
line,  and  witli  Jacob  that  exclusion  ceased,  for  as  Dr.  Kurtz  {His.  Old  Cow,  vol.  2,  p.  33) 
aptly  expresses  it  :  "  Now  at  length  the  way  of  grace  entirely  coincided  with  that  of 
nature."  In  other  words,  all  the  seed  of  Jacob  were  called,  and  the  blessing  offered  to 
each  one  of  them. 

2  Those  who  deny  that  the  Patriarchs  shall  personally  inherit  the  land,  base  their  objec- 
tion on  two  points  ;  viz.  :  (1)  that  it  was  fulfilled  either  in  themselves  sojourning  there, 
or  else  in  their  posterity  inhabiting  the  land  ;  and  (2)  that  such  an  inheriting,  as  we  con- 
tend for,  demands  a  resurrection  of  them.  Let  us  now  carefully  consider  these,  in  the 
light  of  Scripture. 

(1)  Whatever  may  be  said  respecting  ihe  temporary  possession  of  Canaan  (either  as  pre- 
paratory or  initiatory  or  inchoate,)  or  whatever  may  be  asserted  respecting  the  descend- 
ants being  meant  "as  yet  in  his  loins,"  etc.,  one  thing  is  most  positively  stated  in  the 
Bible,  viz.  :  that  this  promise  was  not  fulfilled  in  the  Patriarchs,  in  any  of  the  forms 
alleged  by  unbelief.  The  Spirit,  foreseeing  this  very  objection,  provided  against  it,  lest 
our  faith  should  stumble.     Thus  Stephen,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  tells  us  (Acts  7  :  5) 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kixgdoim.  295 

that  "  He  (God)  gave  liim  (Abraham)  none  inheritance  in  it,  no,  7w{  so  much  as  to  set  his 
foot  on,  yet  He  premised  that  He  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession  and  to  his  seed  after 
him.'"  This  (also  because  accordant  with  the  well-known  Jewish  views)  should  be  deci- 
sive, especially  when  contirined  by  Paul  (Heb.  9  :  8,  9,  and  11  :  13-40),  who  expressl}^  in- 
forms us  that  the  Patriarchs  sojourned  in  "  the  land  of  promise,"  which  they  were  to 
receive  as  "  an  inheritance,"  "  pilgrims  and  strangers,' '  and  that  "  they  died  in  faith,  not 
having  received  the p)romlses,  but  having  seen  them  afar  off,  and  were  persuaded  of  them, 
and  embraced  them,  and  confessed  that  the}'  were  pillgrlms  and  strangers  on  the  earth." 
How,  with  such  evidence  before  us,  can  we  attribute  to  only  their  posterity  what  is 
directly  asserted  of  themselves  jwrsonally  ?  Those  modernized  views  were  not  known  to 
Stejihen  and  Paul  (and  others,  as  e.g.  Luke  1  :  G8-73  ;  Mic.  7  :  20,  etc.).  Hence  it  fol- 
lows that  in  God's  own  time  this  will  be  abundantly  brought  to  pass,  so  that  it  only  be- 
comes us  to  observe  how  and  when,  as  revealed  in  the  Word.  God  will  perform  this  for 
them,  as  the  Jews  held,  as  the  Primitive  Church  believed,  and  as  taught  by  every  Mille- 
narian  writer  down  to  the  present  day.*  The  deep  reasons  which  underlie  this  promise 
and  its  relationship  to  the  Kingdom  will  appear  in  succeeding  pages. 

Evidently  that  which  misleads  the  multitude  in  this  matter  is  the  statement  of  the 
apostle  (Heb.  11  :  16),  that"  they  desire  a  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly."  Com- 
mentators, as  Barnes,  Bloomfield,  etc.,  overlooking  entirely  the  Theocratic  relationship 
that  this  country  (i.e.  Palestine)  is  to  occupy  m  the  Kingdom  of  God,  at  once  conclude 
that  this  "  heavenly"  country  is  the  third  heaven.  They  forget  that  this  phraseology 
would  not  mislead  a  Hebrew,  who  was  accustomed  to  designate  the  restored  Davidic 
Kingdom  a  heavenly  Kingdom,  and  the  country  enjoying  its  restoration  and  Theocratic 
blessings,  a  heavenly  country.  The  expression  does  not  mean  "  the  third  heaven"' 
(Prop.  103),  but  something  that  pertains  to,  or  partakes  of ,  the  heavenly,  as  heavenly  vis- 
ion, body,  calling,  etc.     (To  avoid  repetition,  comj).  Proj^s.  142-151.  "> 

If  no  other  means  avail  to  destroy  the  exj^ress  language  of  the  Covenant,  recourse  is 
had  to  the  typical  theory  (Prop.  48,  Obs.  4).  Thus,  Pressense  {The  Eedeemer,  p.  74) 
says,  resf)ecting  Gen.  17  :  8,  "  Without  doubt  it  was  designed  to  have  an  earthly  fulhl- 
ment  ;  in  fact  this  it  received"  (against  the  testimony  of  Stephen  and  Paul),  ''  but  the 
earthly  fulfilment  was  secondary."  That  is,  it  was  only  "  a  symbol,"  symbolizing  heav- 
enly tbings  ;  and  then  he  asks  :  "  What  interest  attaches,  speaking  in  a  religious  sense, 
to  the  fact  that  one  family  or  one  people  should  have  in  i:)rospect  a  fair  earthly  heri- 
tage ?"  Alas  !  when  good  men  can  speak  so  disparagingly  of  covenant  j^romise.  Has  it 
not  a  deep  religious  signification  in  the  light  of  man's  being  deprived  by  sin  of  "  a  fair 
earthly  heritage  ?"  The  answer  to  Pressense  is  found  in  such  Proj^ositions  as  120,  140, 
142,  145,  etc.  Irving  {Life  of  Ed.  Irving,  by  Mrs.  Oliphant,  p.  338),  in  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Chalmers,  more  comprehensively  remarks  :  "  I  trust  the  Lord  will  give  you  time  and 
leisure  to  consider  the  great  hope  of  the  church  first  given  to  Abraham  ;  that  she  shall 
be  'heir  of  the  world.  '     Certainly,  it  is  the  very  substance  of  Theology." 

(2)  Next  we  are  informed  that  such  a  procedure  must  necessitate  the  resurrection  of 
the  Patriarchs.     Precisely  so  ;  and  we  feel  assured  from  the  faith  manifested  by  Abraham 


*  When  Abraham  asked  (Gen.  15  :  8)  :  "  Lord  God,  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall 
inherit  it?"  God  condescended  to  a  covenant  sacrifice  ;  and  his  faith  is  tested  (as  in 
the  case  of  Isaac,  whom  he  was  to  offer,  although  the  child  of  promise),  by  selecting  and 
bringing  the  material  for  the  sacrifice,  by  the  length  of  time  elapsing  before  the  sacrifice 
is  accepted,  by  the  horror  and  darkness  coming  upon  him,  and  by  the  notification  of  his 
own  death  tjefore  he  should  realize  it.  But  his  faith  is  sustained  by  the  acceptance  of  the 
sacrifice,  by  the  statement  made  respecting  his  descendants,  and  by  the  assurance  thus 
given  that  God  sustained  a  covenant  relationship  to  him.  There  is  something  remark- 
able in  all  this,  and  now,  in  view  of  the  past,  we  can  readily  see  why  the  matter  is  so 
briefly  related.  This  explains  what  Luther  {Table  Talk,  s.  152)  refers  to  :  "No  man, 
since  the  apostles'  time,  has  rightly  understood  the  legend  of  Abraham.  The  apostles 
themselves  did  not  sufficiently  extol  or  explain  Abraham's  faith,  according  to  its  worth 
and  greatness.  I  much  marvel  that  Moses  so  slightly  remembers  him."  The  fact  is, 
that  Moses  says  much,  but  we  appreciate  it  too  little.  The  writer  has  no  doubt  but  that 
much  could  be  added  to  our  knowledge  by  receiving  the  suggestions  of  the  record.  Even 
names  are,  perhaps,  suggestive.  Without  asserting  its  ai^plication,  e.g.  "  Machpelah" 
has  the  meaning  "  double"  (Stanley,  Ills.  Jew.  Church,  1  Ser.  Ap.  2),  and  may  have,  for 
aught  we  know,  an  allusion  to  the  fact  that  Abraham  had  a  double  interest  in  the  tract, 
first  by  gift  from  God  and  secondly  by  purchase. 


296  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

in  Isaac's  resurrection  from  the  dead  (Heb.  11  :  17-19),  had  he  sacrificed  him,  and  in 
his  looking  forward  to  the  day  of  Christ  (John  8  :  56  ;  Heb.  11  :  10,  11),  for  the  fulfilment 
of  these  promises,  that  his  hope  was  based  on  a  resurrection  from  the*  dead.  A  resurrec- 
tion is  implied  ;  it  is  taken  for  granted,  for  the  Patriarchs  die,  the  promise  is  unrealized, 
and  yet  God  is  faithful  in  His  promises.  Now  to  indicate  this,  and  the  power  of  the  res- 
urrection, God  gives  us  His  '"Memorial,"*  which  was  to  be  "unto  all  generations" 
(Ex.  3  :  15),  "  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel  :  7he  Lord  God  of  your 
Fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  the  God  of  Jacob  hath  sent  me  unto  you  ;  this 
is  my  name  forever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto  all  generations."  What  meaning  was 
couched  in  this  most  sublime  Memorial  V  This  :  I  am  the  God  who  will  remember  and 
be  faithful  to  my  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  to  fulfil  it  I  loill  raise  them 
from  the  dead.  Now  let  the  reader  notice  that  this  is  not  my  interpretation  of  it,  but 
that  which  is  given  by  the  greatest  Teacher,  Jesus  Christ.  Por,  when  the  Sadducees 
came  to  Him  denying  the  resurrection,  Jesus,  well  knowing  how  the  Jews  held  that  the  Pa- 
triarchs would  be  raised  from  the  dead  to  inherit  the  land,  told  them  that  Moses  taught  a 
resurrection  when  "  he  called  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the 
God  of  Jacob."  This  Memorial  was  then  given  as  proof  (Luke  20  :  37)  "  that  the  dead  are 
raised,''  and  not,  as  many  would  teach  us,  of  the  immortality  of  the  Patriarchs  and  their 
condition  in  the  intermediate  state.  Neither  immortality,  nor  the  intermediate  state, 
was  the  subject  of  dispute  ;  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  was  denied,  and  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead  was  defended. f  Whatever  might  be  induced  inferentially,  the  direct  subject- 
matter  between  Christ  and  the  Sadducees  was  that  of  the  resurrection,  and  the  memorial 
itself  is  adduced  as  proof,  decisive,  that  such  a  resurrection  will  occur.  Why  thus  ad- 
duced ?  SimjDly  because  the  covenant  necessitates  a  resurrection  ;  without  it  the  covenant 
cannot  be  fulfilled  ;  and  God,  in  thus  calling  Himself  their  God  and  that  He  ever  shall 
remain  their  God,  pledges  Himself  to  a  strict  performance  of  His  promise,  that  they  them- 
selves, personally,  shall  inherit  the  land.  And  in  His  glorious  Majesty,  to  whom  all  time 
is  present,  in  His  omnipotence  and  wisdom,  to  indicate  the  fixity  and  certainty  of  His 
divine  pur^Dose,  He  speaks  of  them— foreseeing  their  position  and  regarding  it  settled  as 
a  fact— not  as  dead  men  but  living.  In  other  words,  He  speaks  only  as  a  God  can 
speak,  making  things  that  are  not  yet  fulfilled,  owing  to  their  certainty,  present  and 
real.  God  looks  at  the  time  when  Abraham's  body  will  arise  from  the  "  marble  covered 
with  carpets  embroidered  in  gold"  (Stanley,  His.  Jew.  Church,  Ap.  2,  1  Ser.),  when 
Isaac's  dust  shall  spring  to  life,  when  Jacob's  embalmed  body,  throwing  aside  its  wrap- 
pings, shall  be  reanimated,  and  His  faithful  promise  shall  be  realized,  and  with  this  be- 
fore Him,  as  Omniscience  alone  can  comprehend,  He  speaks.  Let  us  reverently  hear, 
and  understand. 

*  A  writer  in  an  interesting  art.  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  2,  p.  17)  renders  the  word  trans- 
lated "  memoral  "  into  that  of  "  manchild,"  as  having  a  reference  to  the  Messiah,  the  in- 
carnation of  Deity,  and  the  retention  of  humanity  forever.  However  ingenious,  we  pre- 
fer the  rendering  given  in  our  versions,  as  our  argument  does  not  require  its  special  con- 
sideration. 

f  It  is  painful  to  notice  the  lack  of  candor  in  many  writers,  and  in  some  commenta- 
ries. Seeing  that  if  they  admit  our  position,  it  will  tend  to  overthrow  their  spiritualistic 
views  of  covenant  promise,  they  insist  that  immortality  is  alone  taught.  This  they  do 
(1)  against  the  express  Jewish  usage  of  the  words  as  inclicative  of  a  resurrection  (comp. 
Mede's  Works,  Lightfoot's  Works,  Harmer's  Mis.  Works,  etc.)  ;  (2)  Jesus  employing  the 
memorial  according  to  such  usage  ;  (3)  the  Evangelists  expressly  asserting  that  it  efer- 
red,  not  to  immortality,  but  to  the  resurrection,  as  Matt.  22  :  31  "  as  touching  the  resi-rec- 
iion  of  the  dead,"  Mark  12  :  26  "  as  touching  the  dead,  that  they  rise,"  Luke  20  :  37,  "  that 
the  dead  are  raised  "  (4)  the  fact  that  the  Sadducees  were  silenced  by  the  argument.  It 
is  strange,  when  the  matter  is  so  plainly  stated,  that  prejudice  can  influence  men  to  re- 
ject such  testimony.  One  of  the  best  Expositions  of  this  interview  is  to  be  found  in 
Judge  Jones's  iVofes  on  >S'mp^rf re,  with  which  comp.  Olshausen,  Lange,  Nast,  etc.  Dr. 
Schaff,  in  Lange's  Com.  Matt.  22  :  23-33,  most  aptly  remarks  :  "  The  argument  of  Christ 
avails  only  for  those  who  stand  in  personal  covenant  relations  with  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham," etc.  We  acknowledge  the  force  of  this,  and  hence  infer  from  it,  as  is  elsewhere 
taught  (comp.  Prop.  119,  etc.),  that  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous  is  something  dis- 
tinctive, pre-eminent,  etc.  Smith's  Bib.  Die,  and  many  others,  admit  that  Ex.  3  :  6 
fully  implies  and  teaches  a  resurrection,  but  neglect  to  place  it  properly  on  the  cove- 
nanted basis.  More  satisfactory  is  Auberlen  {Div.  Bev.,  p.  141),  and  others  like  Seiss, 
Bickersteth,  Bonar,  etc. 


PkOP.  49.]  THE   TIIEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  297 

Ohs.  3.  The  reader,  having  carefully  perused  the  preceding  evidence,  will 
understand  the  significance  of  Paul,  before  Agrippa  (Acts  26  :  G-8), 
uniting  "  the  pronu'se  to  the  Fathers''  with  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
The  promise  and  the  memorial  were  thus  understood,  as  we  explain,  by 
the  Jews,  and  it  would  be  simply  an  outrage  for  Paul  and  others  to  use 
language — if  another  meaning  was  intended — which  would  confirm  the 
Jews  in  their  belief.  A  brief  glance  at  Jewish  belief  may,  in  this  connec- 
tion, be  serviceable.  Mede  ( Works,  B.  4,  Ep.  43),  Brooks  {FI.  Froph. 
Interp.,  p.  33),  and  other  tell  us  how  Rabbi  Gamaliel,  the  Preceptor  of 
Paul,  silenced  the  Sadducees  by  bringing  against  them  Deut.  11  :  21, 
"  which  land  the  Lord  sware  that  lie  would  give  to  your  fathers,"  arguing 
''that  as  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  had  it  not,  and  God  cannot  lie, 
therefore  they  must  he  raised  from  the  dead  to  inherit  it.''  Wetstein  (on 
T\ratt.  22  :  32)  cites  a  Rabbinical  writer,  who  thus  argues  the  resurrection 
from  the  memorial.  So  Mede  adduces  Rabbi  Simai  (some  later),  urging 
the  same  from  Ex.  6  :  4,  that  "  the  law  asserts  in  this  place  the  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead— to  wit,  when  it  said.  And  also  I  have  established  my 
covenant  v^ith  them,  to  give  them  Canaan,"  etc.,  because  the  fathers  were 
mentioned  by  name  and  the  Jews  then  existing  were  not  specified.  _  The 
same  is  quoted  by  Fairbairn  {Typology  of  Scrip)ture),  as  contained  in  the 
Talmud  in  Gemara,  who  also  gives  Manasseh  Ben  Israel  (referred  to  by 
Warburton,  B.  6,  S.  3)  as  arguing  the  resurrection  from  the  covenant 
promise.^  Thus  the  Jewish  view,  entertained  and  continued,  indicates  to 
us  unmistakably  how  theXew  Test,  writers  are  to  be  understood,  unless  we 
condescend  to  adopt  the  miserable  and  degrading  accommodation  theory. 

1  For  the  views  of  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ  see  e.g.  Knapp,  Ch.  TheoL,  sec.  151,  2 
(2)  p.  530,  or  Jones,  Xotes  on  the  Scriptures,  p.  281,  note.  While  there  was  some  differ- 
ence of  opinion  as  to  who  shouki  be  raised  (some  holding  only  to  the  righteous  of  the 
nation,  others  to  all  of  the  race,  and  others  including  some  Gentiles  with  these),  there 
was  none  respecting  the  Patriarchs.  The  hope  was  indulged  of  enjoying  resurrection 
life  with  them  in  their  covenanted  inheritance.  This  is  so  clear,  and  admitted  by  a  host 
of  writers,  Millenarian,  Anti-Millenarian,  etc.,  that  it  admits  of  no  doubt.  Allusions  to 
this  resurrection  are  made  in  The  Twelve  Patriarchs  and  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  are 
specially  mentioned  ;  also  in  some  of  the  other  Apocryphal  books.  Comp.  an  "  Excur- 
sus" in  Prof.  Stuart's  Com.  on  Apoc.  The  Sainaritans  only  receive  the  Pentateuch,  and 
yet  they  firmly  hold  to  a  resurrection,  even  quoting  Deut.  32  :  39  "  1  kill,  and  1  make 
alive,"  '  as  affirming  the  same.  The  fact  that  Jesus  passes  by  the  later  utterances  of  the 
Old  Test.,  and  selects  one  from  the  Pentateuch,  shows  that  if  the  resurrection  is  not 
clearly  enforced  by  it,  He  could  not  reprove  the  Sadducees  on  account  of  their  igno- 
rance, thus  evidencing  not  only  its  force  (as  we  affirm),  but  that  the  same  was  recognized 
fully  by  the  Jews.  If  this  were  not  so.  His  reasoning  would  be  inconclusive  and  irrele- 
vant, but  being  so,  it  is  conclusive  and  irresistible.  The  student  will  observe  that,  in 
view  of  the  fundamental  need  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  in  order  to  fulfil  the  covenant 
promises,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  it  is  necessarily  implied  by  Moses,  hence  e.g.  the 
puzzling  (to  many  commentators)  reference  of  Paul  to  Moses  (Acts  26  :  22,  23)  as  teach- 
ing the  resurrection  of  Jesus— Paul  making  such  a  direct  resultant  to  bring  about  the 
fulfilment. 

Ois,  4.  To  say  that  all  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  occupation  of  Palestine 
by  the  preparatory  or  initiatory  possession  of  it  by  the  descendants  of 
Abraham,  is  not  only  contradicted  by  Scripture,  but  is  a  virtual  limiting  of 
the  promise.  Kurtz  {His.  of  Old  Cov.,  vol.  1,  p.  131)  observes,_  what 
history  attests,  that  the  desceiidants  never  possessed  the  land  promised  to 
Abraham  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates  (comp.  geographical  boundary 
given  by  Hengstenberg,  from  Gen.  15  :  18,  Ex.  23  ;  31,  and  Deut.  11  :  22- 


298  THE  THEOCRATIC  KmciDOM.  [Prop.  49. 

24).  It  is  only  by  a  jierversion  of  fads  that  a,  fulfilment  can  be  made  out, 
although  it  is  attempted  under  tlie  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon.  In  yiew 
of  this  non-fulfilment,  and  the  land  being  assigned  ''  for  an  everlasting  or 
eternal  possession,"  some  writers  (e.g.  Kurtz,  Bis.  Old  Gov.,  yoI.  1,  p. 
214)  base  an  argument  upon  it  in  favor  of  a  future  restoration  of  the 
Jews,  but  the  same  reasoning  precisely,  with  the  addition  of  a  promise  to 
the  Patriarchs  personally,  demands  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  by  a 
restoration  of  the  Patriarchs  to  the  land  thus  geographically  bounded. 

Warner  (In  the  Levant,  p.  82)  says  :  "  The  country  the  Hebrews  occupied  was  small  , 
they  never  conquered  or  occupied  the  whole  of  the  Promised  Land,  which  extended  from 
the  Mediterranean  Sea  to  the  Arabian  plain,  from  Hamath  to  Sinai.  Their  territory  in 
actual  possession  reached  only  from  Dan  to  Beersheba.  The  coast  they  never  subdued," 
etc.  He  refers  to  the  brief  period  in  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  when  Damascus 
and  the  cities  of  the  Philistines  paid  tribute,  "  but  the  Kingdom  of  Tyre,  still  in  the 
jiossession  of  Hiram,  marked  the  limit  of  Jewish  sway  in  that  direction.' '  A  large  num- 
ber of  similar  testimonies  might  be  quoted  (comp.  e.g.  Wines'  Com.  on  Laws,  B.  1,  ch.  9, 
etc.),  but  the  student  does  not  require  them  in  such  a  matter  of  fact.  The  past  non-ful- 
filment insures  the  future  fulfilment,  as  God  is  faithful  in  all  His  promises.  God,  foresee- 
ing how  the  Jewish  nation  would  relapse  in  idolatry,  superstition,  and  extreme  bigotry, 
permitted  other  nations,  as  the  Phcenicians,  etc.,  within  the  bounds  of  the  promised  land 
to  survive  and  retain  possession.  In  the  recent  Art.  on  "  Palestine'  in  M'Olintock  and 
Strong's  Cyclop.,  the  decided  ground  is  taken  that  the  land  as  promised  to  Abraham  was 
never  occupied,  extending  as  it  does  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates,  and  this  non-occu- 
pation is  accounted  for  in  view  of  the  imfaithfulness  of  the  nation.  This  is  true  as  to 
the  past,  but  the  student  must  not  be  misled  by  this  to  a  denial  that  it  ever  will  be  real- 
ized, because  the  promise  to  the  Patriarchs  is  unconditional,  and  confirmed  by  oath  and 
abundant  reiterated  promises  ;  and  the  fulfilment  is  explained  to  take  place  under  the 
promised  "  seed,"  who  is  David's  Son,  and  will  come  again  to  bring  in  its  realization. 
The  unfaithfulness  of  some  does  not  rob  the  faithful  of  their  promised  inheritance. 

Obs.  5.  In  view  of  the  Scriptural  statements,  eminent  men,  who  are 
inclined  to  the  prevailing  modern  doctrines,  find  themselves  forced  to  make 
admissions  corroborative  of  the  correctness  of  our  position.  We  append 
a  few  illustrations.  Thus  Thompson  ( Z'/zeo/.  of  Christ,  \i.  18G-7)  justly 
takes  the  ground  that  (Matt.  22  :  30,  etc.)  the  Sadducees  denied  a  literal 
resurrection,  that  Jesus  in  llis  reply  holds  fast  to  the  Jewish  view  of  a 
literal  resurrection,  and  that  every  utterance  given  is  to  confirm  such  a 
faith,  but  then  leaves  a  loophole  for  escape  in  this  sentence  :  "lie  went  on 
to  assert  the  Resurrection  as  set  forth  by  Moses,  in  the  fact  that  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  would  ever  have  a  recognized  identity  in  the  Kingdom 
of  God."  Fairbairn  {Typol.  of  Scripture)  says  much  that  is  highly  in- 
teresting and  valuable — entire  pages  might  be  transcribed — but  he 
vitiates  the  whole  by  making  the  promise  of  Canaan,  etc.,  typical  of 
something  else.  Barnes,  Hody,  Campbell,  etc.,  that  can  only  see  the 
doctrine  of  a  separate  existence  of  the  soul  in  the  memorial,  still  assert  that 
soniehoio  it  infers  the  resiirrection,  i.e.  because  the  spirits  are  alive,  the 
bodies  will  also  be  hereafter.  Acknowledging  the  admission  forced  from 
them,  we  fail  to  see  how  the  existence  of  spirit  in  any  proves  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  ;  and  they  have  failed  to  show  the  connection. 

Even  McKnight,  in  that  spiritualizing  Essay  (No.  5,  p.  256,  "  On  the  Epistles"),  which 
endeavors  to  make  almost  everything  typical  of  something  else,  fully  admits  that  "  ac- 
cordingly our  Lord  in  reasoning  with  tlie  Sadducees,  affirmed,  that  the  promise  to  give 
to  Abraham  and  to  his  immediate  descendants  the  everlasting  possession  of  Canaan,  was 
mxiuaWy  a  promise  to  raise  tltem  from  the  dead.''  This  reference  to  an  implied  resurrec- 
tion he  sustains  by  other  Scripture,  and  by  quoting  the  opinions  of  Jews,  as  e.g.  2  Mac. 


PPwOP.  49.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  299 

7  :  9,  36.  But  the  concessions  are  weakened  by  making  Canaan  a  type  of  another  world, 
thus  vitiating  the  promises  (making  them  to  denote  something  not  contained  in  the  lan- 
guage), rejecting  Christ's  own  inheritance,  the  faith  of  the  Jews,  etc.  The  points  in  the 
essay  are  fully  met  under  various  Propositions.  It  is  now  sufficient  to  say,  that  ihe  ex- 
press  language,  as  e.g.  "  ihe  land  whereon  thou  liest,  io  ihee  icill  I  give  it  and  to  thy  seed,"  pre- 
cludes the  typical  theory.  This  itself  answers  Pressense  {The  Redeemer,  p.  74),  and 
others.  We  must  refer  again  to  the  remarkable  performance  of  Fairbairn  ( Typology,  vol. 
1,  p.  293,  etc.),  who  justly  discriminates  between  the  jiromise  to  the  Patriarchs  person- 
all}^  and  the  promise  to  their  seed  ;  shows  by  an  appeal  to  the  language,  to  Stephen,  etc., 
that  they  had  a  personal  interest  in  the  land,  which  would  be  verified,  although  they 
died,  by  a  resurrection  ;  quotes  Jewish  authorities  to  indicate  how  they  associated  a  res- 
urrection with  its  fulfilment  ;  goes  even  so  far  as  to  advance  the  coming  of  the  seed,  as 
fulfilled  in  "the  most  exact  and  literal  sense,"  thus  indicating  that  the  promise  "  thou 
shalt  inherit  the  land  "  will  likewise  be  thus  realized  ;  in  brief,  he  is  forced  to  the  same 
conclusions  precisely  that  we  arrived  at,  viz.  :  that  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  will  be 
raised  from  the  dead  and  inherit  the  renewed  earth  (which  "  renovated  earth  being  the 
ultimate  inheritance  of  the  heirs  of  promise,"  he,  at  length  and  forcibly',  defends).  But 
he  vitiates  it  (in  order  to  avoid  our  Pre-Millenarian  position,  and  to  save  his  spiritualiz- 
ing  of  other  particulars)  by  making  Canaan  a  type  of  this  renewed  earth.  But  it  is  the 
literal  (ktnaan  which  they  saw,  walked  and  reclined  on,  that  is  promised  ;  renewed  indeed, 
but  the  same  Canaan  ;  delivered  from  the  curse,  and  beautified  and  adorned.  The 
Theocratic  Kingdom,  that  is  to  be  restored  under  the  Messiah,  as  numerous  predictions 
(as  we  shall  show)  declare,  has  its  central  location  in  Palestine  ;  and  the  restoration  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  identified  with  it,  is  inseparably  associated  with  "  the  land,"  "  the  city," 
etc.,  although  at  that  time  (Isa.  C5  and  66)  enjoying  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth." 
The  land  promised  specially  to  the  Patriarchs  has  set  geograi:)liical  bounds,  and  we  keep 
to  these  as  announced  ;  for,  as  Fairbairn  himself  asserts  (which  is  all-suSicient  to  sus- 
tain our  position),  this  inheritance  is  to  be  "  recovered,  not  made,"  being  "  the  posses- 
sion of  this  very  earth,  which  we  now  inhabit,  after  it  shall  have  been  redeemed  and 
glorified.' ' 

Obs.  G.  We  turn  with  a  sense  of  relief  from  the  class  of  writers  who 
constantly  change  the  promises  of  God  into  something  that  the  language 
does  not  convey  (i.e.  make  it  typical,  symbolical,  spiritual,  mystical),  to 
another  class  who,  with  faith,  accept  of  them  as  they  are  ivritten,  in  their 
plain  grammatical  sense,  just  as  the  Jews  and  Primitive  believers.  As 
many  of  these  will  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  other  topics,  we  select 
but  a  single  illustration.  Dr.  Candlish  (Lectures  on  Genesis,  Lee.  1)3)  takes 
the  position  "  that  the  hope  of  an  inheritance  for  himself,  individually, 
did  actually  form  a  part  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  ;"  that  "  nowhere  does 
Abraham  receive  any  promise  whatever  of  future  good,  or  of  a  future 
inheritance,  /'or  //iuiself,  if  it  be  not  in  the  announcement,  '  /  will  give  thee 
this  land  f  ^'  that  Paul  m  Hebrews  makes  no  reference  to  Abraham's 
posterity,  but  to  himself  as  an  individual,  so  far  as  inheriting  the  promise 
is  concerned  ;  that  x\braham  "sojourned  m  the  land  of  promise,"  and 
although  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  in  it,  yet  '' it  ivas  the  land  of  j)rom\se 
still  f  that  "the  place  to  Avhich  he  was  called  to  go  ont,  was  the  very 
place  which  he  shovld  afterward  receive  for  an  inheritance  f'  that  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  is  postponed  until  after  his  resurrection  ;  that  God 
is  his  God  in  respect  to  both  soul  and  body  as  when  living,  and  as  the  cove- 
nant relation  entered  into  was  when  Abraham  was  living,  it  must  always 
be  regarded  in  the  light  of  Abraham  again  living  in  the  body  ;  that  the 
inheritance  is  not  typical  but  real,  evidenced  by  the  renewed  earth,  the 
inheriting  of  the  earth,  etc.  ;  that  this  renovated  earth  with  its  blessings 
brings  heaven  down  with  its  holy  influences.  This  epitome  sufficiently 
indicates  the  line  of  reasoning,  identical  with  that  of  the  Primitive  Church 
(as  Irena?us,  Justin,  etc.). 


300  THE  THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

Ohs.  7.  Multitudes  allow  themselves  to  be  influenced  in  spiritualizing 
these  promises  because  "  a  city"  is  promised  to  Abraham,  which  is  taken 
for  granted  to  be  the  third  heaven,  etc.  But  the  churches  established  by 
the  apostles  had  no  such  idea,  for  they  clearly  apprehended  that  this 
promise  of  the  city,  of  God  being  their  God,  and  of  not  being  ashamed  to 
be  such,  etc.,  had  reference  to  the  glorifms  Theocratic  ordering  in  the  future. 
For  they  saw  that  this  city  of  the  great  King,  in  which  Abraham  shall 
rejoice,  is  plainly  promised  to  be  here  on  the  earth  and  not  in  the  third 
heaven,  etc.  As  this  will  come  up  hereafter  in  detail  (e.g.  Props.  142, 
146,  152,  etc.),  it  may  be  passed  by  with  the  remark  that  it  certainly  is 
strange,  if  the  modernized  notions  of  eminent  men  respecting  this  city  are 
correct,  that  we  do  not  find  them  existing  in  the  earliest  writings  of  the 
Chr.  Church. 

If  the  reader  who  (like  Barnes,  etc.)  applies  this  "  city"  to  heaven,  insists,  at  this 
stage  of  our  argument,  upon  a  reply,  it  is  amply  sufficient  to  point  out  the  simple  fact 
that  the  future  city  of  God  is  rej^resented  (Rev.  21  :  2,  10)  as  coming  out  of  heaven  upon 
this  earth  and  remaining  here.  This,  of  course,  fully  harmonizes  with  our  view,  and 
with  Abraham's  promised  inheritance.  But  we  leave  this  for  the  present,  asking  the 
reader  to  compare  Props.  169,  168,  148,  151,  etc.,  for  full  particulars. 

Obs.  8.  God  gave  an  oath  for  the  faithful  (Micah  7  :  20)  performance 
of  Covenant  promises  (Gen.  22  :  16,  and  26  :  3),  thus  condescending  to 
present  the  strongest  possible  assurance.  Now  God  would  not  swear  to  an 
equivocal  covenant,  to  a  covenant  which  in  its  plain  grammatical  ^ense 
conveys  the  promises  we  have  referred  to,  and  yet  means  something  very 
different.  No  one  can  deny  this  grammatical  meaning,  seeing  that  for 
many  centuries  it  was  the  only  one  maintained,  and  that  for  several  cen- 
turies in  the  Christian  Church  it  was  the  one  presented  by  the  Fathers 
(Props.  76-78). 

Even  the  very  name  of  God  assures  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant.  The  reader  will 
find  an  interesting  "Excursus"  on  this  name  in  Bengel  s  Gnomon,  Apoc.  1  :  8,  in  which 
it  is  contrasted  with  the  names  given  in  the  Apoc.  The  name  "  He  who  is"  was  familiar 
to  the  Patriarchs,  and  this  name,  in  view  of  the  covenanted  relationship,  was  changed 
into  "  I  will  be  what  I  will  be,"  upon  which  Bengel  remarks  :  "  That  is,  '  1  will  he '  to 
the  Israelites  the  character  which,  by  the  very  fact,  '  I  will  be  '  in  regard  to  their  fathers, 
both  what  I  said  to  them  I  would  be,  and  what  it  behooves  Me  to  be  to  them  ;  namely, 
by  now  at  length  fulfilling  the  promise  which  I  formerly  gave."  There  seems,  too,  aside 
from  the  reference  to  the  coming  one  (comp.  Prop.  127),  an  ascending  scale  in  the  name 
of  God  in  reference  to  the  Covenant,  which  writers  have  variously  explained,  but  all  have 
noticed.  Thus,  e.g.  He  is  known  as  "  the  strong  One,"  inspiring  confidence  ;  then  as 
"  God  Almighty,"  confirming  faith  ;  then  as  "Jehovah,"  indicating  that  being  Eternal, 
all  things  were  dependent  upon  Him  and  He  could  fulfil  all  promises  ;  thea  Jehovah- 
{Sabaoth,  the  Eternal  leader  of  the  armies  of  heaven  and  earth,  dependent  upon  His  will 
and  self-existence.  "Jehovah"  is  the  personal,  self -revealing  name  (McCaul,  Essay  5,  p. 
226,  Aids  to  Faith)  ;  it  is  the  name  indicative  of  His  relationship  to  Israel,  of  revealing 
Himself  in  history,  and  as  He  acts  in  it  (Kurtz,  ISac.  His.,  p.  26).  Comp.  Dr.  Etheredge's 
Targums,  Stuart's  Apoc,  Kurtz's  Old  Gov. 

Obs.  9.  Some  few  writers,  as  Silliman  in  The  World's  Jubilee,  "  declare 
that  the  Abrahamic  covenant  and  the  institution  at  Mt.  Sinai  made  pro- 
vision, had  the  Hebrews  rendered  to  them  a  perfect  obedience,  for  their 
exemption  from  death."  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  only  provision  made 
for  a  future  resurrection  ;  and  in  this  we  are  confirmed  by  the  announce- 
ment of  Abraham's  death  at  the  covenant  sacrifice,  by  the  general  analogy 
of  the  Word,  and  by  the  fact  that  the  covenant  itself  contemplated  that  it 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  301 

would  only  be  through  the  seed  Christ,  at  some  future  unannounced  period, 
that  it  would  be  realized — that  saints  would  be  honored  by  a  translation. 
The  covenants,  in  their  tenor,  look  to  the  future  and  not  the  present  for 
realization  ;  the  latter  being  dependent  upon  the  coining  of  the  2)ronnsed 
seed  and  a  Theocratic  ordering. 

Let  it  be  observed,  that  not  only  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  acknowledged  them- 
selves "  pilgrims  and  strangers"  while  in  Canaan,  but  the  same  is  true  of  their  descend- 
ants in  the  land,  even  while  under  the  Theocratic  arrangement.  This  feature  is  mislead- 
ing to  some,  who  draw  conclusions  of  a  spiritual  and  third  heaven  nature  not  warranted 
by  the  fact.  Let  it  be  noticed,  that  if  we  take  Heb.  11,  13,  Ps.  39  :  12,  and  119  :  19, 
1  Chron.  29  :  15,  it  will  be  found  that,  owing  to  the  intervention  of  death,  the  temporary  so- 
30urn  in  the  land  is  7iot  recognized  as  the  one  that  the  covenant  contemplates,  for  the 
latter  presents  it  as  "  an  everlasting  possession."  Hence,  as  we  have  already  shown 
(e.g.  Prop.  25),  the  Theocracy  even  was  only  an  earnest  of  the  Theocracy  reestablished 
in  power  and  glory,  with  its  promised  perpetuity,  etc. 

Obs.  10.  Infidelity  has  triumphantly  asserted  that  in  the  Mosaic  Record 
there  is  no  reference  to  the  resurrection  and  a  future  life,  and  this  has  been 
corroborated  by  the  premature  statements  of  some  believers.  But  this  is  a 
grave  mistake,  and  one  umnistakaMi/  refuted  by  the  Record  itself.  The 
central  point  in  it — the  foundation  upon  which  the  Mosaic  superstruct- 
ure rests — necessitates  a  belief  in  the  resurrection  and  a  future  life.  This 
we  have  shoAvn,  and  this  will  more  fully  appear  from  what  follows. 

Simple  candor  requires  that  we  allow  Scripture  to  interpret  itself,  and  if  this  is  done 
there  can  be  no  question  in  this  matter.  Clarke  {Ten  Religions,  p.  250)  only  repeats  what 
hundreds  before  him  had  asserted  : "  But  it  is  perhaps  more  strange  not  to  find  any  trace 
of  the  doctrine  of  a  future  life  in  Mosaism  when  this  was  so  prominent  among  the 
Egyptians, "  and  adds,  "That  in  Moses  there  is  '  nothing  of  the  future  life  and  judgment 
to  come.'  "  Kant  and  others  hence  infer  a  lack  of  divinity.  This  can  only  be  said  by 
Ignoring  the  covenants  and  the  special  promises  based  on  them,  which,  in  the  nature  of 
the  case,  positively  demand  a  future  life,  seeing  that  death  itself  is  announced  to  precede 
the  fulfilment  of  these  promises.  It  is  simply  folly  to  say  that  God  promises  certain 
things  to  the  Patriarchs  personally,  and  then  tells  them  that  they  must  experience  death 
before  they  are  realized,  and  leave  the  matter  in  this  condition.  God  expects  reason  to 
assert  itself,  and  faith  in  Himself  as  God  to  vindicate  His  truthfulness.  Hence  we  are 
sorry  to  read  such  utterances  as  these  :  Stanley  {His.  Jew.  Ch.,  1  ser.  Lee.  7)  says  :  "  The 
future  life  was  not  denied  or  contradicted,  but  it  was  overlooked,  set  aside,  overshadowed 
by  the  consciousness  of  the  living,  actual  presence  of  God  Himself."  The  truth  is,  that 
the  consciousness  of  this  presence  of  God  inspired  faith  in  the  future  life  (John  8  :  56, 
Heb.  11  :  8-16).  This  is  seen  in  the  promises  given  being  of  such  a  nature,  that,  if  ever 
fulfilled,  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  is  indispensable  ;  they  are  purposely  given  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  test  faith  (i.e.  by  not  explaining  how  they  are  to  be  accomplished,  leaving 
that  to  the  Promiser  to  perform)  ;  and  now  the  presence  of  God,  His  covenant  relation- 
ship, the  attributes  claimed  by  Him,  His  oath,  are  calculated  to  inspire,  bring  forth  im- 
plicit confidence  in  their  fulfilment,  notwithstanding  the  intervention  of  death  (as 
illustrated  in  the  case  of  Isaac).  The  careful  student  will  see  that  the  Mosaic  attitude 
vindicates,  and  presents  to  us,  in  a  most  striking  manner,  the  Majesty  of  a  God  (requir- 
ing simple  confidence  in  Himself),  and  the  reason  and  faith  of  the  Patriarchs.  It  is  a 
matter  of  surprise  that  believers  in  making  concessions  to  unbelievers  overlook  three 
facts:  (1)  That  many  things  illustrative  of  personal  faith  and  doctrine  are  omitted  in 
the  rapid  outline  given  in  the  Old  Test.,  and  that,  in  view  of  this  omission,  to  conclude 
ignorance  in  them,  is  to  judge  both  harshly  and  unjustly  ;  (2)  that  no  passage  is  to  be 
found  which  either  directly  teaches,  or  from  which  it  can  be  legitimately  inferred,  e.g. 
that  these  ancient  worthies  had  no  hope  of  a  future  resurrection  and  life,  i.e.  the  cry  of 
despair,  as  found  in  books  of  unbelief,  is  not  recognized  in  the  Pentateuch  ;  (3)  that 
such  omissions  occur,  is  amply  sustained  by  the  statements  of  Jesus  and  the  apostles 
concerning  the  personal  faith  and  hope  of  ancient  worthies  ;  and  the  union  of  the  Old 
and  New  Tests.,  given  by  the  same  Spirit,  ought  to  prevent  our  degrading  the  knowledge 
of  those  who  sustained  an  intimate  relationship  to  God.     Even  incidental  narrative  ap- 


302  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

pears  to  imply  this  hope,  as  e.g.  the  anxiety  of  Jacob  and  Joseph  to  have  their  bones 
carried  to  Canaan.  AVhile  this  may  be  explained  by  the  desire,  common  to  human 
nature,  to  be  buried  with  our  relatives,  yet  in  view  of  the  great  distance  between  Egypt 
and  Canaan,  and  especially  of  the  covenanted  relationship  of  these  persons  to  Canaan, 
it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  they  were  deeply  impressed  with  the  idea— derived 
from  covenant  promise— that  they  personallj'  had  an  interest  in  that  land,  and  that,  some 
day,  they  would  be  raised  from  the  dead  to  enjoy  its  possession  ;  and  that  by  such  a 
removal  they  expressed  both  their  interest  in  the  land  and  faith  and  hope  in  an  ulti- 
mate acquisition  of  it  according  to  promise.  It  was  virtually  a  silent  but  thrilling  appeal 
to  God,  when  dead,  for  Him  to  remember  and  verify  His  promise.  A  number  of  intel- 
ligent writers  take  the  same  view  of  this  matter,  and  they  certainly  have  strong  rea- 
sons for  thus  concluding.  Thus,  e.g.  over  against  the  Ch.  Union  {Sep .  26th.,  1877),  which 
asserts  that  the  doctrine  of  a  future  life  is  not  in  the  Pentateuch,  and  that  this  "  is  ab- 
solutely indisputable"  (against  the  direct  testimony  of  Jesus,  John,  and  Paul  to  the  con- 
trary), \ve  refer  the  reader  to  Fairbairn's  Typology  (vol.  1,  Ap.  C,  pp.  369-390  on  "  The 
Doctrine  of  a  Future  State"),  who  gives  the  proof  that  such  knowledge  existed.  The 
reader,  of  course,  must  allow  that  by  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  His  teaching  and  sacrifice,  a 
clear  light  was  thrown  on  subjects  of  this  kind,  because  He,  in  whom  their  realization 
depends,  was  revealed.  But  this  does  not  imply  that  a  total  ignorance  existed  before 
His  coming  ;  for  when  the  Union  says,  "It  is  Christ,  not  Moses,  or  David,  or  Isaiah, 
who  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  ;  and  if  He  brought  it  to  light,  it  was  in 
darkness  before,"  this  is  one-sided  :  (1)  ignoring  the  Old  Test,  statements  and  express- 
ed faith  (far  more  than  alleged  "  dreams  ");  and  (2)  that  the  light  brought  by  Jesus  re- 
fers to  the  undoubted  assurance  that  we  have  in  Him  of  its  fulfilment  through  His  power, 
etc. 

Obs.  11.  But  let  ITS  return  to  another  promise.  It  is  said  that  "  the 
Seed"  shall  inherit  the  land  ;  and  we  are  told  by  many  that  this  was 
fulfilled  in  the  history  of  the  Jews  under  Joshua,  the  Judges,  and  the 
Kings  (comp.  Obs.  4).  What,  however,  are  the  facts  as  given  by  tlie  Holy 
Spirit  ?  Certainly,  in  the  interpretation  of  covenant  promise.  Holy  Writ 
should  be  allowed  to  be  Hs  own  interpreter^  that  we  may  ascertain  the 
meaning  intended  by  Grod.  Let  God,  then,  and  not  man,  explain  :  "  Now 
(Gal.  3  :  16)  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made.  He  saith 
not,  '  And  to  seeds  '  as  of  many,  but  as  of  one,  '  And  to  thy  seed,''  which  is 
Christ.''^  If  language  lias  any  definite  meaning,  then,  without  doubt  we 
have  here  the  simple  declaration  that  when  God  promised  "  Unto  thy  seed 
will  1  give  this  land,^^  He  meant  that  the  land  of  Canaan  should  be 
inherited  by  a  single  Person— pre-eminently  the  Seed — descended  from 
Abraham,  even  Jestis  the  Christ.  How  this  will  be  verified  in  David's  Son, 
inheriting  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  will  aj^pear  as  we  proceed. 

This  explanation  of  Paul's  is  discarded  by  multitudes,  on  the  ground  that  it  has  not 
been  fulfilled,  and  infidels,  and  even  some  professed  believers,  make  themselves  merry 
over  the  foolishness  and  blind  faith  that  can  accept  of  the  same.  We  know  full  well 
that  it  has  not  yet  been  verified,  but  we  know,  too,  that  it  took  a  long,  long  time  before 
"  the  seed  "  came,  and  we  know,  from  Scripture,  why  it  did  not  take  place  at  His  First 
Advent,  and  we  also  know,  from  exceedingly  precious  promises  given,  that  it  will  ocrAir 
when  He  comes  the  Second  time  unto  Salvation.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways  ;  and, 
therefore,  instead  of  denying  His  faithfulness  in  performing,  or  His  explanations  of 
given  promises,  let  us  trust — Abraham-like — in  a  covenant-keeping  God,  who  will  yet  com- 
l^letely  fulfil  them.  In  this  connection  :  As  the  Seed,  which  is  Christ,  is  to  inherit  the 
land,  we  only  now  point  to  the  significancy  with  which  this  land  is  mentioned,  and  the 
relationship  that  it  sustains  to  Christ.  Thus  e.g.  proprietorship  in  the  land  of  Canaan  is 
expressly  reserved  to  God  Himself  (Lev.  25  :  23)  :  "  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  forever  ; 
for  the  land  is  mine  ;  ye  are  strangers  and  sojourners  with  Me" — i.e.  mere  occupants,  not 
real  owners.  Hence  when  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  "  came"  (John  1  :  11 — and  is  not  His 
Divinity  implied,  in  view  of  Lev.  25  :  23?)  "  to  His  own"  (land,  so  Barnes,  etc.,  loci,  or 
country,  so  Bloomfield,  etc.,  or  Judea,  so  Alford,  Campbell,  etc.,  or  inheritance,  so  Lange 
and  others),  "  and  His  own  (xaeople  or  nation)  received  Him  not."     This  land  is  called 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  303 

"His  Land"  (Joel  2  :  18),  "  My  land"  (Ezek.  38  :  16),  "  IinmamieVs  land"  (Isa.  8  :  8); 
and  being  a  covenanted  inheritance  of  Abraham's  and  David's  Seed,  it  is  called  "  Thine  in- 
heritance." Christ  is  designated  "  a>i  inheritoj-  of  my  mountains,"  and  rejiresented  as 
desiring  it  for  a  habitation,  a  rest,  to  dwell  in  (Ps.  132  :  13,  14  ;  Ps.  G8  :  IG,  etc.). 
Surely,  in  the  light  of  these,  and  numerous  other  references,  we  ought  to  be  guarded  lest, 
in  our  eagerness  to  vindicate  God's  purposes,  we  interpose  our  own  views  and  opinions 
inplace  of  God's.  How  often  is  the  heart  pained  at  the  exceeding  rashness  of  many, 
who  either  reject  the  language  as  *'  grossly  carnal,"  or  make  it  tyi^ical  of  something 
else,  or  spiritualize  it  into  another  meaning  to  suit  a  theory. 

We  add  :  In  connection  with  the  individual  seed,  reference  is  also  made  to  the  pos- 
terity of  the  Patriarchs,  as  in  Gen.  17  :  7,  8  ;  "  in  their  generations,"  in  the  multiplica- 
tion of  the  seed,  Gen.  15  :  5,  etc.  But  Christ  is  by  way  of  pre-eminence  "  the  Seed  " 
through  whom  the  remaining  Seed  obtain  the  promises,  for  "  all  the  promises  of  God  are  in 
Him,  yea,  and  in  Him,  Amen."  Why  this  is  so  will  appear  as  we  proceed.  The  joromise 
specifically  is  to  the  one  Seed,  and  through  Him  to  others  (comp.  e.g.  Fausset's  (Jam.  on 
Gal.  3  :  16). 

Fairbairn  {Typol.  of  Scripture^  justly  discards  the  views  of  Ainsworth  and  Bush  (who 
make  the  promise  read  "  to  thee  even  to  thy  seed  ')  as  makirg  Abraham  and  his  offspring 
one,  when  they  are  separated  (mentioned  even  as  "  after  thee")  into  two  j)arties.  So 
also  he  rejects  Gill's  opinion  (who  made  Abraham  receive  the  title  and  his  posterity  the 
possession  ;  Abraham  to  sojourn  in  it  and  his  posterity  to  dwell  in  it)  as  making  the  title 
no  j)ersonal  boon  and  his  sojourning  no  inheritance.  Again,  he  refutes  W^arburton's 
theory  (who  makes  "  Abraham  and  his  posterity",  put  collectively,  to  signifj^  the  race  of 
Abraham")  as  swallowing  up  the  specific  promises  to  the  Patriarchs,  by  a  generalitj%  in 
the  race,  as  a  violation  of  the  language  which  distinguishes  the  Seed  from  the  Patriarchs, 
as  opposed  to  Stephen's  reference  to  Abraham,  etc.  He  correctly  argues  for  a  "  promise 
personally  given  to  the  Patriarchs,''  and  for  distinguishing  the  Seed  from  them.  What- 
ever views  may  be  engrafted  by  him  afterward  upon  these  admissions,  or  however  any 
one  may  seek  to  explain  them,  these  are  plain  facts  that  must,  in  consistency,  underlie  a 
scriptural  statement,  and  we  feel  under  obligations  to  him  for  presenting  them  so 
clearly  and  forcibly.  He  (p.  357,  vol.  1),  referring  to  Hengstenberg  and  others,  makes  the 
singular  "  seed  "  expressive  of  a  distinct  line  of  offspring,  and  His  view  is  embraced  by 
numerous  Millenarian  writers,  who,  making  Jesus  by  way  of  pre-eminence  "  the  Seed," 
include  in  it  all  believers,  being  one  with  Him  and  inheriting  with  Him. 

Obs.  12.  The  reader  has  seen  where  the  line  of  argument  is  leading  us, 
viz.  :  to  (mr  inJieritinxj  the  land  with  Abrahani  and  the  Christ,  being 
co-heirs,  co- inheritors  of  the  same  promises.  Indeed,  let  a  concordance  be 
taken,  and  let  the  passages  be  sought  out  which  promise  to  the  saints  an 
inheriting  of  the  land  and  the  earth,  and  the  student  will  be  surprised  at 
their  number,  unity  and  richness  of  expression,  forming  a  necessary 
sequence  to  this  very  covenant  relationship  (comp.  Props.  142,  146-152). 

Obs.  13.  The  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  multitudes  against  receiving 
such  promises  is,  that  Christ  came  and  there  was  no  fulfilment,  and  Jience 
only  spiritual  blessings  are  to  be  anticipated,  etc.  Our  argument  Avill  fully 
meet  this  objection  as  we  advance  ;  at  present,  attention  is  called  to  a 
singular  prediction,  deserving  marked  notice  on  account  of  the  connection 
in  which  it  stands.  In  Ps.  69,  we  have  (1)  the  humiliation  and  affliction 
of  Christ  (for  the  Messianic  character  of  the  Ps.  is  indisputably  settled  by 
the  New  Test,  writers)  ;  (2)  direct  reference  to  His  betrayal  and  cruci- 
fixion ;  (3)  His  deliverance  and  that  of  the  prisoners  (an  allusion  to  those 
held  by  death  or  the  grave.  Prop.  126)  ;  and  then  after  this  (for  the 
prophetic  spirit  does  not  see  failure  in  Christ's  death,  but  a  means  for 
accomplishment  through  the  power  of  the  resurrection)  the  result,  not  yet 
attained  but  covenanted  and  predicted,  for  which  we  should  praise  God, 
viz.  :  *'  For  God  will  save  Zioii,  and  will  build  the  cities  of  Judah,  that 
they  may  dwell  there  and  have  it  in  i^ossession.     The  seed  also  of  His 


304  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PPwOP.  49. 

servants  shall  inherit  it ;  and  they  that  love  His  name  shall  chuell  therein"*^ 
(comp.  Ps.  22,  Ps.  72,  and  the  Mess.  Psls.  in  general).  Well  may  it  be 
asked,  Has  this  folio-wed  the  Messiah's  death  ?  If  not,  since  God  is  faithful 
to  His  promises,  and  the  affliction,  reproach,  gall,  yinegar,  etc.,  mentioned 
was  all  literally  fulfilled,  we  may  confidently  rest  assured  tliat  in  God's  02vn 
time  the  rest  will  likewise  be  accomplished.  What  little  faith,  after  great 
professions  of  the  same,  men  exercise  in  God's  Word  !  Let  not  man,  with 
his  limited  ideas  of  fitness,  judge  God's  proceedings  ;  we  see  how  he  failed 
at  the  First  Advent,  deeming  it  incredible  that  God  sliould  thus  humble 
Himself  and  literally  fulfil  His  Word,  for  already  multitudes  are  pre- 
judging, as  imivorthy  of  credence,  that  which  is  to  take  place  at  the  Sec, 
Adveni. 

Obs.  14.  Our  faith  in  this  matter  is  the  faith  of  the  Primitive  Church, 
so  that  we  reverently  and  cordially  say  with  Justin  Martyr  {Dial  Trypho., 
ch.  119),  "  along  with  Abraham  we  shall  inherit  the  holy  land,  when  we  shall 
receive  the  inheritance  for  an  endless  eternity,  being  the  cliildren  of  Abraham 
through  the  like  faith.''  *  Indeed,  with  Irenseus  {Ag.  Her.,  ch.  32),  we  may 
add  :  ''  It  is  fitting  that  the  just,  rising  at  the  appearing  of  God,  should  in 
the  renewed  state  receive  tlie  jiromise  of  inheritance  wliich  God  covenanted 
to  the  Fathers,  and  should  reign  in  it  f  then  following  the  argument 
respecting  the  covenant  promises  made  to  Abraham  and  arguing,  as  we 
have  done,  that  Abraham  received  them  not,  he  continues  :  "  Thus,  there- 
fore, as  God  promised  to  him  the  inheritance  of  the  earth,  and  he  received 
it  not  during  the  whole  time  he  lived  in  it,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should 
receive  it,  together  with  his  seed,  that  is,  with  such  of  them  as  fear  God 
and  believe  in  Him — in  the  resurrection  of  the  just" — and  then  showing 
that  Christ  and  the  Church  are  of  the  true  seed  and  partakers  of  the  same 
promises,  he  concludes  :  "  Thus,  therefore,  those  wlio  are  of  faith  are 
blessed  with  faithful  Abraham  ;  and  the  same  are  the  children  of  Abraham. 
For  God  repeatedly  promised  the  inheritance  of  the  land  to  Abraham  and 
his  seed ;  and  as  neither  Abraham  nor  his  seed,  that  is,  those  who  are 
justified  by  faith,  have  enjoyed  any  inheritance  in  it,  they  will  undoubtedly 
receive  it  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just.  For  true  and  unchangeable  is 
God  J  wherefore  also  He  said  :  '  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit 
the  earth. ^  "  Thus  the  early  Church  spoke  in  strict  accordance  with  un- 
bounded faith  in  covenant  promise.  The  prevailing  modern  notions,  which 
make  the  covenants  mean  something  else,  were  then  unknown  ;  for  all  the 
churches  established  East  and  West,  North  and  South,  both  Jewish  and 
Gentile,  held  to  this  inheritance  as  we  now  receive  it. 

Contrast  the  belief  of  the  modern  Church  with  the  expressed  faith  of  the  early  Church, 
and  what  a  sad  departure  from  covenanted  promises  is  witnessed.  Direct  attention  to 
this  difference,  and  you  meet  with  the  most  strenuous  and  bitter  opposition.  Advocate 
a  return  to  the  "  old  paths,"  the  primitive  belief,  so  plainly  pointed  out  in  the  grammati- 
cal sense,  and  multitudes  are  ready  to  deem  you  guilty  of  gross  heresy.  Present  the 
scriptural  reasons  for  the  early  faith,  and  many,  many  will  absolutely  refuse  even  to 

*  And  in  ch.  139  he  says  :  "  There  shall  be  a  future  possession  of  the  saints  in  this 
same  land.  And  hence  all  men  everywhere,  whether  bond  or  free,  who  believe  in  Christ, 
and  recognize  the  tridh  in  His  own  words  and  those  of  his  j^rophets,  know  that  they 
shall  be  with  Him  in  that  land,  and  inherit  incorruptible  and  everlasting  good,"  He  makes 
a  number  of  such  references  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  making  Jesus 
the  promised  Seed,  with  whom  believers  are  co-heirs  in  the  covenanted  inheritance. 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  305 

consider  them.  Nothing  but  the  terrible  persecution  of  the  future  following  the  transla- 
tion of  the  first-fruits,  awakening  the  Church  from  its  false  exegesis  and  application  and 
dreams  of  prosperit}^  will  cause  a  revulsion  and  a  return  to  the  scriptural  ground,  be- 
cause the  modern  idea  is  too  extensively  advocated  b}'  eloquent,  talented,  pious  men  to 
be  rooted  out  by  other  means. 

Obs.  15.  Having  given  an  illustration  of  the  Primitive  faith,  it  may  be 
interesting  to  the  reader  to  contrast  with  it  a  specimen  of  the  mode  of 
interpretation  by  which  these  covenanted  promises  lost  their  literal  aspect 
and  had  another  sense  engrafted  upon  them.  We  select  one  of  the  earliest. 
Origen,  who  opened  the  floodgates  for  fanciful  interpretation,  in  his  work 
against  CeJsus  (B.  7,  chs.  28,  29,  30),  contends  that  the  land  promised  to 
the  I'ighteous  does  not  refer  to  Judea  or  any  portion  of  the  earth,  lecatise 
the  earth  is  cursed,  quoting  Gen.  3  :  17,  and,  therefore,  not  fit  for  an 
inheritance.  He  argues  as  if.  the  redemption  of  the  land  did  not  embrace  tlie 
removal  of  the  curse  (Props.  1-12-148).  He  forgets  the  admissions  found 
in  other  portions  of  his  writings  respecting  the  taking  away  of  the  curse  ; 
and  he  admits  that  Ps.  70  :  2,  Ps.  48  :  12,  andPs.  37  :  9, 11,  22,  29,  34,  refer 
to  the  saints'  inheritance,  and  this  admission  (in  view  of  tlie  statement  and 
connection  of  these  passages)  is  all  that  is  necessary  to  overwhelm  his 
entire  theory.  But  the  beauty  and  propriety  of  his  hypothesis  prominently 
appears,  when  he  draws  a  concurrent  and  sympathetic  argument  from  his 
intidel  opponent  Celsus.  For  the  latter  (B.  7,  ch.  28),  quoting  from  Plato, 
describing  the  land  of  the  blessed,  says  of  it  :  "  That  land  which  is  pure 
lies  in  the  pure  region  of  heaven."  Origen,  not  to  be  outdouo,  heartily  in- 
dorses Celsus.  Eeader,  reflect ;  what  a  contrast  this  later  and  heathen  derived 
interpretation,  now,  alas,  so  popular,  sustains  to  the  earlier  and  apostolic. 

Origen  may  be  called  the  father  of  the  typical  application,  now  such  a  general  favorite 
with  Protestant  and  Romish  writers.  Some,  however,  have  api^lied  it  to  this  earth,  and 
even  to  Palestine,  but  confined  it  to  a  j^ossession  by  the  present  existing  Church.  We 
append  an  illustration  of  the  latter.  Thus  (Mosheim's  iJcdes.  His  ,  vol.  2,  p.  144,  note 
19,  Murdock's  Transl.),  when  the  Cathari  and  Waldenses  opposed  the  Crusades,  under- 
taken to  deliver  Palestine  from  the  Saracens,  a  Dominican,  Fr.  Moneta,  employed  this 
argument  to  refute  them  :  "  We  read,  Gen.  12  :  7,  that  God  said  to  Abraham:  To  thy 
seed  imll  I  give  this  UukL  But  toe  (the  Christians  of  Europe)  are  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  as 
says  the  apostle  to  the  Galat.  3  :  29  :  To  us,  therefore,  has  that  land  been  given  for  a  pos- 
session. Hence,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  civil  power  to  make  efforts  to  put  us  in  posses- 
sion of  that  land  ;  and  it  is  the  dut}"  of  the  Church  to  exhort  civil  rulers  to  fulfil  their 
duty." 

Ol)s.  ICj.  Fairhairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  197),  however  he  fails  himself  in 
logically  carrying  out  the  principle  in  several  particulars  (viz.  :  by  con- 
verting them  into  types),  is  certainly  correct  in  opposing  Sherlock  and 
Davison,  who,  both,  divide  the  covenanted  promises  and  prophecies  based 
on  them  into  two  classes,  one  referring  to  temporal  matters  which  do  not 
concern  us,  and  the  other  to  spiritual  things  in  which  alone  we  are 
interested.  Fairbairn  justly  remarks  :  "We  take  this  to  be  a  superficial 
view  of  the  matter.  The  outward  and  the  temporal  did  not  exist  by  itself, 
but  for  the  higher  spiritual  things  connected  with  it,  and  as  the  necessary 
means  for  securing  their  attainment.  I'o  separate  such  things  which  God 
has  bound  so  closely  together,  and  draw  a  broad  line  of  demarcation 
between  them,  is  false  in  'principle,  and  sure  to  lead  to. erroneous  results." 
Well  may  it  be  asked,  why  separate  them  finally  in  "the  age  to  come," 
wdiere  covenant  and  Theocratic  ordering  place  them?     Why  not  continue 


306  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

to  leave  them  together  as  the  Spirit  lias  bound  them,  and  not,  nnder  a 
mistaken  apprehension  of  exalting  them,  typify  and  spiritualize  them 
away  ?  This  is  the  rock  upon  which  many  a  well-meaning  system  of 
interpretation  has  beaten  itself  into  worthlessness. 

Obs.  17.  Some  writers  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  phrase  "  everlasting 
2)Ossesdo}i,^^  as  if  it  denoted  temporary  possession.  Thus  e.g.  Augustine 
{City  of  God,  B.  16,  s.  26)  endeavors  to  cast  a  shade  of  suspicion  on  the 
word  "  everlasting,"  which  may  denote  "  either  no  end,  or  to  the  very  end 
of  the  world."  Suppose  we  even  take  the  latter  meaning  (or  that  it 
denotes  "  possession  in,  or  for,  the  ages"),  it  does  not  help  the  matter,  for 
history  shows  that  it  has  not  been  fulfilled  either  in  the  Patriarchs  or  in 
their  descendants.  Instead  of  such  a  possession,  the  Patriarchs  and  Jews 
had  but  a  brief  sojourn  in  it,  the  nation  has  long  ago  been  driven  away  and 
the  land  has  been  in  the  possession  (as  predicted)  of  strangers  for  many 
centuries.  It  is  the  lament  of  the  prophet  (Isa.  63  :  18)  that  the  nation 
'" 2)0sscssed  it  hut  a  little  tvhile.''^  It  is  folly  ^t?  circumscribe  the  promise  to 
the  past  ;  for  then  it  compresses  it  into  the  feeblest  of  proportions,  or 
makes  it  an  Oriental  exaggeration.  If  it  be  alleged  that  the  promise 
was  conditional,  we  grant  it  (comp.  Prop.  18),  so  far  as  the  individuals 
composing  the  nation,  and  even  for  a  time  the  nation  itself,  is  concerned, 
but  not  so  far  as  the  Purjoose  of  God  is  concerned,  which  positivelg,  and 
ivithout  any  condition  annexed,  promises  this  land  to  the  Patriarchs 
personally  (although  death  shall  intervene),  and  to  a  Seed  by  way  of  j^re- 
eminence,  and  then  to  a  seed  identified  with  Abraham  by  descent  or  adoption 
(as  explained  and  enlarged  m  succeeding  revelations),  and  then  to  the 
nation  itself  (when  fully  prepared  by  its  course  of  discipline  and  the  ad- 
ditions made  through  the  resurrecting  Messiah) — all  of  ivhich  is  yet  to  he 
accomplished  as  the  Bible  plainly  asserts.  Otherwise,  what  will  we  do  with 
Abraham  himself  and  a  multitude  of  his  descendants,  who  were  obedient, 
who  performed  the  conditions  annexed  to  individuality,  and  never  thus 
possessed  it?  What  shall  we  do  with  the  projihetic  announcements,  that 
they  shall  yet  obtain  it  ?  Has  God  failed  in  His  foreknowledge,  wisdom, 
and  power  ?  To  evade  this,  by  making  the  land  typical  of  heaven,  is  sheer 
faithlessness,  seeing  that  the  very  land  "  laid  loaste''  and  "  made  desolate''^ 
(which  the  third  heaven  never  was),  is  the  land  spoken  of — the  same  land 
whereon  Jacob  reclined  and  which  Abraham  was  requested  to  survey. 

Compare  Kurtz's  remarks  on  "  the  everlasting  Covenant"  in  the  His.  of  the  Old  Cov., 
p.  128.  In  reference  to  the  unconditionality  of  the  covenant  promise— its  positive 
future  fulfilment — the  epitome  of  Moses  in  Deut.  32  is  amply  sufficient  evidence  in  its 
favor,  even  so  far  as  the  nation  is  concerned. 

Obs.  18.  This  lack  of  faith  in  the  exact  fulfilment  of  God's  covenanted 
promises  may  well  be  left  to  infidels.  Voltaire  and  others  (recently 
reiterated)  raise  an  objection  to  the  inspiration  of  God's  Word,  because 
the  promise  of  inheriting  the  land,  given  to  Abraham  personally,  was  not 
realized.  They  fail,  just  like  many  believers,  to  see  that  the  fact  of  his 
not  inheriting  is  plainly  stated  i?i  the  Scriptures,  and  that  we  are  directed 
to  the  future,  to  the  resurrection  period,  for  its  fulfilment.  This  feature  is 
nnjustly  left  out  of  the  question,  and  the  discussion  carried  on  without 
reference  to  the  time  designated,  the  ability  and  faithfulness  of  God  to 
perform  His  jjromises.     It  is  ever  thus  with  the  Divine  purposes  ;  they 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kiis^gdom.  307 

must  be  received  hy  faith,  otherwise  God's  designs  will  be  enshrouded  in 
darkness,  and  the  crafty  will  be  taken  in  a  net.  It  is  true  to-day,  that 
(Ps.  '^D  :  14)  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Rini,  and  He 
will  show  them  Bis  covenanf^ — now  to  faith — then  m  happy  realization. 

Recent  writers,  like  Clarke,  etc.,  treat  the  faith  and  hopes  of  Abraham  most  un- 
justly, being  utterly  unable  to  look  at  the  Bible  as  a  whole,  and  observe  the  connection 
that  one  part  sustains  to  the  whole.  Abraham's  history  is  regarded  isolated  and  torn 
from  its  relations,  and  upon  this  detachment,  assumptions  are  readily  founded  to  mis- 
lead others.  One  of  the  most  unfair  chajjters  of  the  Duke  of  Somerset's  work  {Ch. 
Theol.  and  Mod.  Skeptic.,  ch.  20)  is  the  one  entitled  "  Stephen,"  in  which  Stephen's 
speech  is  characterized  (a  rehash  from  Paulus,  Baur,  etc.)  as  "  rambling  over  the  mi- 
gration of  Abraham,"  as  "  lamentably  feeble,"  as  an  ignoring  of  the  proof  relied  on  to 
vindicate  Christianity  ;  and  yet  this  was  an  "  able  disputant,"  who  had  not  received  the 
aid  promised  to  be  given  before  tribunals,  etc.  The  speech  of  Stejjhen  certainly  "  is 
full  of  incomprehensible  anomalies"  to  a  person  possessing  the  Duke's  love  of  ridiculing 
sacred  things.  Stej^hen's  speech  was  pre-emmently  logical,  and  the  very  thing  demanded 
(showing  that  he  was  aided)  under  the  circumstances.,  His  hearers  believed  in  the  cov- 
enants, as  the  ^foundation  of  their  religious  and  national  hopes,  and  hence  Stephen  begins 
with  the  covenant,  traces  it,  and  endeavors  to  show  its  connection  with  Jesus  as  the 
Messiah.  We  have  only  the  opening,  for  when  he  came  to  Jesus  he  was  interrupted, 
and  the  address  remained  unfinished.  The  Jews,  posted  as  they  were  in  the  Old  Test., 
powerfully  felt  its  force  ;  if  the  Duke  does  not,  it  is  simply  because  he  fails  to  notice  the 
self-evident  connection  running  through  the  whole,  and  that  Stephen's  aim  was  to  show 
that  this  covenant  in  which  the  Jews  trusted  could  only  be  fulfilled  through  this  Jesus, 
whom  they  had  crucified.  The  Duke  might  well  have  spared  his  sneers  and  attempted 
sarcasm,  at  the  expense  cf  a  martyr! 

Obs.  19.  Unbelievers  have  exjiended  their  wit  over  the  explanation  of  Paul 
(Gal.  3  :  16)  respecting  the  use  of  the  word  "  seed"  m  the  singular  number, 
joronouncing  it  a  mere  "  quibble,"  or  "  Rabbinical  interpretation."  Those, 
too,  who  believe  in  the  Word,  but  fail  to  recognize  the  distinctiveness  of 
the  promises,  join,  more  or  less,  in  the  same.  Jerome  (Chandler,  quoted 
by  Barnes,  loci)  affirmed  "  that  the  apostle  made  use  of  a  false  argument, 
which,  although  it  might  appear  well  enough  to  the  stupid  Galatians, 
would  not  be  approved  by  wise  and  learned  men."  Le  Clerc  supposes  it 
to  be  a  trick  of  argumentation.  Borger  (Bloomfield,  loci)  pronounces  it 
an  accommodation  to  Jewish  Rabbis.  Doddridge  even  calls  it  "  bad 
Greek."  Rosenmliller  and  others,  against  Paul's  express  language,  think 
that  the  body  of  the  believers,  and  not  the  Messiah,  is  meant.  Paul  needs 
no  ajjolog?/  from  men,  for  the  soundness  of  his  interpretation  is  apparent 
from  the  general  tenor  of  the  Word,  which  indicates  that  the  Divine 
Purpose  contemplates  07ie  distinguished  Personage,  in  the  specified  Abra- 
hamic  line,  through  whom  the  promises  should  be  realized,  and  that  the 
apostle  properly  directs  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  very  language  of  the 
covenant,  using  the  singular  number  (let  it  be  customary  or  not),  is  in 
accordance  with,  and  significant  of,  God's  j^redetermined  design.  Hence, 
ridicule  falls  harmless,  and  apologetic  explanations  are  of  no  force,  coming 
from  persons  who  would  undertake  to  decide  hoio  God  ought  even  to  word 
His  covenant  language.  We  are  ready  to  receive  the  language  as  given, 
finding  it  precise,  significant  of  an  important  fact,  and  in  full  accord  with 
the  analogy  of  Scripture. 

Luther  (whom  many  follow),  Com.  on  Gal.  3  :  16,  remarks  :  "Now,  the  promises  are 
made  unto  Him,  not  in  all  the  Jews,  or  in  many  seeds,  but  in  one  seed,  which  is  Christ. 
The  Jews  will  not  receive  this  interpretation  of  Paul  ;  for  they  say  that  the  singular 
number  is  here  put  for  the  plural,  one  for  many.  But  we  gladly  receive  this  meaning 
and  intei-pretation  of  Paul,  who  oftentimes  repeateth  this  word  'seed,'  and  expoundeth 


308  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

this  seed  to  be  Christ  ;  and  this  he  doth  with  an  apostolic  spirit.  Let  the  Jews  deny  it  as 
much  as  they  will  ;  we,  notwithstanding,  have  arguments  strong  enough,  which  Paul  hath 
before  rehearsed,  which  also  confirm  this  thing,  and  they  cannot  deny  them."  (The 
student  will  observe  that  Luther's  reference  to  the  Jews  denotes  those  who  endeavor  to 
break  the  reasoning  which  would  apply  it  to  Jesus,  as  the  Messiah  ;  various  commentators 
and  writers  oppose  Paul's  statement  because,  as  they  allege,  "  the  interpretation  is 
found  in  Rabbinical  writers,  and  the  mode  of  interpretation  here  adopted  is  quite  Jew- 
ish.") Fausset  {Com.  loci)  makes  this  seed  to  be  "  the  Christ,"  "  and  that  which  is  in- 
separable from  Him,  the  literal  Israel,  and  the  spiritual.  His  body,  the  Church,"  because 
the  covenant  promises  can  onlj'-  be  fulfilled  to  both  through  Him.  This  is  correct,  as  a 
little  reflection  and  comparison  will  show,  for  e.g.  it  is  only  through  the  power  of  the 
resurrection  obtained  through  this  Seed  that  His  co-heirs  obtain  the  inheritance  with 
Him  ;  and  it  is  only  at  His  Sec.  Advent,  and  through  His  powerful  interference  in  behalf 
of  the  Jewish  nation,  that  it  enters  upon  its  glorious  national  existence.  Hence,  in  view 
of  the  Divine  Purpose  through  this  Seed,  there  is  eminent  fitness  and  deep  significancy  in 
thus  singling  Him  out  and  expressing  it  in  the  form  given  by  Paul. 

Obs.  20.  The  reader  is  reminded  to  keep  in  view  how  such  promises, 
thus  given  and  thus  explained  by  the  apostles,  would  strike  the  Jewish 
mind.  The  aim  of  the  apostles  was  to  show  that  "  the  Seed"  was  Jesus 
the  Christ,  and  that  through  this  Jesus  the  covenant  promises  given  to 
Abraham  would,  in  due  time,  lie  realized.  There  was  no  difference  of 
opinion  concerning  the  covenants,  as  to  their  actual  meaning,  but  only  in 
reference  to  Jesus  being  the  Messiah,  to  the  postponement  of  fulfilment  to 
the  Sec.  Advent,  etc.  Hence,  so  long  as  the  early  Church  received  the 
covenants  as  the  Jews  themselves  believed  and  taught  (Obs.  3),  they  could 
the  more  easily  find  access  to  Jewish  minds  and  hearts,  but  just  so  soon  as 
the  Church  departed  from  this  view  of  tho  covenants  (making  the  land 
heaven,  etc.),  then  the  Je\Y  was  the  more  dillicult  to  reach,  seeing  that  the 
Old  Test,  language  and  promise,  upon  which  he  relied  as  plain  and  indis- 
putable, was  changed  and  transformed  into  something  else.  This  sub- 
stitution made  it  more  troublesome  to  prove  the  Mossiahship  of  Jesus,  for 
he  naturally  and  inevitably  became  more  distrustful  of  a  Messiah  who  was 
not  to  fulfil  the  covenant  promises  as  they  were  icritten.  The  Origenistio 
interpretation,  forced  upon  the  covenants,  made  the  Jew  and  his  fathers 
virtually  believers  m  "carnality  and  error,"  "gross  misconceptions," 
which  charges  are  apjjlaiidingly  repeated  by  eminent  men  down  to  the 
present  day.  And  then,  these  lament  the  unbelief  and  incredulity  of  the 
Jew,  without  seeing  that,  saving  m  the  acknowledgment  of  Jesus  as 
Messiah,  tlieij  are  inore  in  darkness  than  the  Jew  whom  they  pity  or 
despise. 

Obs.  21.  It  must  not  be  overlooked  that  inexpressibly  precious  spiritual 
blessings  are  inseparably  connected  with  those  pertaining  to  this  inheri- 
tance of  the  land,  the  earth.  This  will  fully  appear  when  we  come  to  these 
same  promises  enlarged  and  explained  by  additional  revelation.  Already 
they  are  contained  in  the  expressions  indicative  of  God  in  a  special  manner 
(Theocratic)  becoming  their  God,  becoming  an  "  exceeding  great  reward," 
and  becoming  a  source  of  enjoyment,  honor,  and  glory.  (Oomp.  e.g.  Props. 
197,  154-157,  etc.) 

Obs.  22.  The  remaining  promises  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  and  the 
deep  meaning  conveyed  in  the  few  but  precise  words,  will  come  up,  more 
appropriately,  under  following  Propositions.     Briefly,  let  it  be  said,  that 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  309 

the  witticisms  offered  at  our  faith  are  premature,  for  the  time  allotted  for 
fulfilment  has,  as  Scripture  itself  testifies,  not  yet  arrived.     When  so  much 
that  is  preliminary  and  provisionary  has,  as  predicted,  taken  place  and  is 
now  transpiring,  it  would  he  foolishness  in  us  to  yield  up  oar  faith.     Let 
men  review  these  promises  and  ridicule  them.  ;  we  ^jatientli/ wait  for  their 
fulfilment.     Thus  e.g.  when  it  is  said  that  Abraham's  name  shall  be  great, 
men  of  intelligence  and  learnmg  may  exercise  their  wit  in  comparing  him 
with  an  Arab  sheik  and  extol  in  contrast  the  name  of  a  Csesar  and  Plato  ; 
we,  acknowledging  the  greatness  of  Abraham's  name  already  to  the  faith- 
ful, wait  for  the  time  when  he  shall  arise  from  the  tomb  and  inherit  the 
promise — then,    indeed,   luill    it  he   great    in  honor,   dignity,   and  power. 
When  men   ridicule  the  promise  that  a  great  nation  shall  proceed  from 
him  by  contrasting  the  feebleness  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  past  with 
the  powerful  Gentile  nations  that  have  existed,  we,  with  faith  and  hope, 
point  to  the  time,  still  declared  to  be  in  the  future,  when  this  nation  slicdl 
truly  he  great  (comp.  Props.  111-114).     AVhen  the  promise  is  that  kings 
should  proceed  from  him,  unbelief  laughs  at  the  J^ings  of  Judah  and  Israel 
compared  with  the  conquerors  of  the  earth  ;  we  wait  patiently  and  hope- 
fully for  the  Kings,  the   manifestation  yet  to  come  (comp.  e.g.  Prop.  154). 
Thus,  with  other  promises  that  men  deride,'  just  as  if  the  past  was  intended 
for  their  fulfilment  ;  just   as  if  the  Word  itself  declared  not  that  their 
realization  was  still  in  the  future  ;  just  as  if  the  Scriptures  did  not  firmly 
unite  their  accomplishment  with  the  Sec.  Advent  of  the  covenanted  Seed  ; 
just  as  if  God  were  not  now  performing  a  preparatory  work  to  insure  its 
ultimate,  triumphant  fulfilment. 

1  Thus  e.g.,  "  And  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies"  is  declared  a  mere 
boast.  For  if  referred  to  the  Jewish  nation,  instead  of  being  able  to  drive  out  their 
enemies  from  Canaan,  they  themselves  were  ultimately  overcome  and  finally  banished  ; 
if  applied  to  Christ  as  the  seed  intended,  it  is  said  that  the  mighty  existing  confedera- 
tions, counting  their  adherents  by  the  million,  and  still  forming  a  vast  numerical  ma- 
jority, disprove  the  assertion.  But  we  wait  for  its  ultimate  realization,  both  for  the 
nation  and  the  Christ,  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  Avhere  inspired  Scripture  locates  it.  So  "  the 
multitude  of  seed,"  "  In  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed,"  and  others  are 
compared  with  the  history  of  the  i:)ast  and  the  present,  and  conclusions  drawn  indica- 
tive of  ''  Oriental  exaggeration,"  "  strong  figure,"  etc.  But,  leaving  the  testimony  of 
the  "Word  to  specify  the  time  and  order  of  fulfilment,  we  wait  in  unfaltering  expectation 
for  its  complete  accomplishment,  which  we  show  under  various  Propositions.  Why  do 
men  tear  these  precious  promises  from  their  connection  with  a  determined,  and  fully 
revealed.  Divine  Plan  of  procedure,  and,  considering  them  thus  isolated  and  fragmen- 
tary, refuse  the  statements  of  Scripture  concerning  the  manner  and  time  of  performance  ? 
Why  not  permit  the  very  Book  that  contains  them  to  present  its  own  explanation  of 
them? 

Obs.  23.  If  the  question  be  asked  whether  Abraham  had  a  knowledge  of 
the  manner  through  which  he  would  inherit  the  land,  the  answer  is 
decisively — leaving  the  entire  Record  to  testify — in  the  afiirmative.  A 
believer  must  feel  convinced  from  what  Jesus  declared,  John.  8  :  56  (comp. 
Heb.  11  :8-16),  that  Abraham  had  far  greater  knowledge  of  the  future  than 
the  Bible  records.  Without  receiving  the  view  (so  Tholuck,  etc.)  that 
Abraham  saw  Jesus  in  His  heavenly  existence  ;  without  indorsing  the 
notion  (Olshausen,  etc.)  that  Jesus  was  specially  manifested  to  Abraham  by 
a  vision  unrecorded  ;  without  confining  ourselves  to  the  idea  (Barnes,  etc.) 
of  simple  faith  anticipating  and  thus  beholding  the  day  of  Christ,  we 
might  perhaps  adopt  the  view  (of  Bloomfield,  etc.)  of  part  faith  and  part 


310  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

added  revelation  giving  liim  this  knowledge.  For  certainly  it  is  most 
reasonable  to  think  and  believe  that  Abraham,  the  faithful,  would  not  be 
less  favored  by  special  inspiration  to  behold  the  future  day  of  Christ  than 
Balaam  (Numb.  24  :  17),  especially  when  Paul  teaches  us  in  Hebrews  that 
Abraham  had  views  of  the  future  which  are  not  stated  in  his  history. 
Being  the  one  to  whom  the  covenant  is  first  given,  there  is  propriety  in 
imparting  such  added  instruction,  that  he  may  foresee  its  final  result  and 
be  thus  confirmed  in  its  meaning. 

That  Abraham  believed  that  God,  who  gave  life,  could  after  death  restore  life,  is  evident 
in  the  case  of  Isaac  (Heb.  11  :  19)  ;  that  the  Patriarchs  held  the  promises  resi^ecting  the 
land  to  relate  to  the  future  after  death  is  seen  in  their  regarding  themselves  merely  as 
"  sojourners  and  strangers,'  and  not  as  inheritors  and  possessors  ;  that  even  their  pos- 
terity entertained  similar  views  is  abundantly  evident  from  the  manner  in  which  they 
regarded  the  promises,  and  themselves  as  still  "  sojourners  and  strangers"  (e.g.  1 
Chron.  29  :  15  ;  Ps.  39  :  12  etc.),  i.e.,  expectants  and  heirs  of  something  permanent  and 
enduring  in  the  future,  Moses  clearly  foresaw  the  future,  as  we  show  in  a  number  of 
places,  and  men,  having  a  third  heaven  inheritance  in  mind,  greatly  prejudge  many  ex- 
pressions which,  m  their  estimation,  have  too  earthly  a  cast,  forgetting  that  this  very 
feature  (so  objectionable  and  regarded  as  temporary  in  nature)  is  an  essential  element  in 
the  scheme  of  Redemption,  which  includes  the  sin-cursed  earth.  It  is  true,  that  while 
these  promises  relating  to  the  future  are  sufficiently  precise  and  clear  to  reason  and  to 
faith  in  God,  yet  they  are  purposely  kept  somewhat  in  the  background,  owing  to  the 
Theocratic  ordering  (for  being  already  in  the  land  and  having  God  for  their  earthly 
Ruler,  they  could  well  trust  to  Him  the  manner  of  fulfilment,  which  the  mode  of  revela- 
tion was  calculated  to  develop),  until  the  Theocracy  was  overthrown.  Then  the  utter- 
ances, already  given  by  Moses,  David,  etc.,  became  more  and  more  distinct  under  Daniel 
and  tlie  Prophets. 

Obs.  24.  Men  under  the  influence  of  the  Origenistic  interpretation,  or  of 
the  Platonic  or  heathen  notion  of  the  future,  and  thus  rejecting  the  plainly 
covenanted  promises  of  an  earthly  inheritance,  unnecessarily  make  an 
enigma  where  none  exists,  and  find  fault  with  Moses  when  the  fault  really 
is  in  themselves.  Tlius  e.g.  Clarke  {Ten  Religiotis,  p.  417)  says  :  ''  Con- 
cerning the  future  life,  upon  which  the  Egyptians  had  so  much  to  say, 
Moses  taught  nothing.  His  rewards  and  punishments  were  inflicted  in 
this  world.  Retribution,  individual  and  national,  took  place  here.  As 
this  coiild  not  have  been  from  ignorance  or  accident,  it  must  have  had  a 
pirrpose,  it  must  have  been  intentional."  Certainly  it  was  "  intentional,^^ 
because  in  the  direct  line  of  the  truth  and  of  God's  purpose  in  Salvation. 
Of  course,  with  a  third  heaven,  an  outside  world,  theory  prejudging  Moses, 
it  is  impossible  to  find  a  reference  to  the  future  life,  for  the  simple  reason 
that  Moses  connects  the  future  life  with  an  inheriting  of  the  land  and  earth, 
thus  making  his  writings  to  correspond  fully  and  accurately  with  the  entire 
tenor  of  Scripture  on  the  subject  (as  seen  e.g.  Props.  142,  131,  137, 
141,  148-152,  etc.).  The  fact  is,  that  a  dispassionate  comparison  of  Moses 
with  the  general  analogy  of  Scripture,  and  noticing  that  Moses  carefully 
rejects  the  Egyptian  theories  and  confines  himself  to  a  specific  Plan,  after- 
ward carefully  and  consistently  developed,  is  strong  corroborative  evidence 
of  an  inspiration,  which,  over  against  existing  and  prevailing  notions 
entertained,  could  lay  down  a  foundation  in  relation  to  this  earth  that 
(if  accomplished)  is  adapted  to  secure  the  blessedness  of  man  and  creation  in 
deliverance  from  an  imposed  curse. 

Hence  we  see  why  Warburton  failed  in  his  "  Legation  of  Moses."  He  undertook  a 
labor  which  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  him  to  accomplish,  and  he  sank  under  it,  be- 
cause he  misconceived  the  plain  covenant  promises.     No  man,  unless  he  apprehends  the 


PeOP.  49.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIIS^GDOM.  311 

inheritance  that  Moses  says  God  promised  to  the  Patriarchs  and  the  relation  thf.t  believ- 
ers sustain  to  it  through  coming  resurrection  power,  can  do  justice  to  Mos^s  or  properly 
vindicate  his  unity  with  the  after  statements  of  prophets  and  apostles.  Accept  of  the 
inheriting  of  the  earth  as  believing  Jew  and  Primitive  Christian  held,  and  then  Moses 
stands  forth  a  distinctive  teacher  in  the  same  contemplated  and  carried  on  Divine  Pur- 
pose of  Redemption.  We  only  add  :  The  fulfilment  of  the  covenants  as  given,  at  once 
sets  aside  a  vast  mass  of  mystical,  spiritualistic,  antagonistic  theories  of  the  inheritance, 
etc.,  as  presented  in  thousands  of  works,  and  the  result  of  fancy,  vain  imaginings,  and 
adherence  to  wrong  princijiles  of  interpretation.  For,  let  it  be  noticed,  the  Theocracy 
jDertains  to  this  earth — it  is  God's  Kingdom  here  on  the  earth,  He  ruling  in  it  as  the 
earthly  Ruler— and  hence  the  objection  that  Warburton  and  others  urge  (viz.  :  that 
Moses  — and  during  the  Theocratic  period  down  to  the  captivity— presented  only  motives, 
rewards,  etc.,  relating  to  a  life  on  earth),  has  no  force,  because,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case,  if  the  Kingdom  inaugurated  is  indeed  a  Theocracy,  it  must  necessarily  present  this 
very  feature  ;  for  with  the  Theocracy  the  interests  the  rewards,  of  every  believer  are 
identified,  and  it  pertains  to  the  earth.  The  rewards  and  punishments  relate  to  its  gov- 
ernment as  established  even  in  its  initiatory  or  earnest  form  ;  and  the  future  enjoy- 
ment of  or  banishment  from  the  same,  in  its  higher  restored  form  under  the  Messiah,  is 
sustained  (1)  by  present  obedience  or  disobedience  ;  (2)  by  j:)romising  and  threatening 
things  which  God  alone  can  perform  ;(3)  by  basing  the  future  on  covenants  that  necessi- 
tate a  resurrection  for  their  fulfilment  ;  (4)  by  asserting  that  if  obedient  the  Kingdom 
will  be  perpetuated,  but  if  disobedient  it  shall,  as  a  punishment,  be  withdrawn,  and  when 
ultimately  restored  it  shall  be  for  the  righteous  ;  (5)  by  making  the  hopes  of  the  individ- 
ual and  of  the  nation  to  centre  in  the  Theocracy,  which  in  its  ultimate  outcome  embraces 
the  future  ;  (6)  by  exhibiting  trust  in  their  Ruler,  in  His  attributes  and  ability  to  verify 
promise  which  embraced  "  an  everlasting  possession"  personally  here  on  earth.  As  we 
proceed  in  our  argument,  step  by  step,  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  the  very  idea  of  a  real, 
actual  Theocracy,  with  which  the  interests  of  the  individual  and  the  nation  are  identi- 
fied, now  and  hereafter,  requires  just  such  language  and  limitations  as  Moses  and 
others  give  ;  for  the  reign,  rewards,  etc.,  eternal  in  their  nature  (which  are  now  under 
spiritualistic  manii^ulations,  applied  to  the  third  heaven),  pertain  to  this  very  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic  Kingdom  re-established  by  "  the  Seed"  here  on  the  earth.  When  our 
opponents,  however,  assert  in  connection  that  a  future  life  was  unknown,  they— as  we 
have  shown — go  beyond  the  Divine  Record.  (Comp.  Wines'  Com.  on  Ileb.  Laws.)  As  we 
proceed  in  the  argument,  these  will  be  brought  out  under  various  Propositions, 

II.  THE   SINAITIO    COVENANT,  MADE  WITH  ISRAEL  AT 

MOUNT   SINAI. 

Ods.  1.  The  Sinai  tic  Covenant  is  an  outgrototli  of  the  Abrahamic 
covenant,  and  embraces  an  offer  to  the  Jews  nationally  of  a  complete  verifi- 
cation of  the  blessings  tendered  under  the  original  promises.  This  pro- 
cedure of  erecting  a  Theocracy  indicates  that  it  was  contemplated  in  the 
covenant  with  Abraham,  as  preparatory  to  the  future  realization  of  the 
promises.  Its  provisionary  and  initiatory  character  has  already  (Prop.  25) 
been  noticed,  while  its  conditional  nature  (Prop.  26)  is  evident  from  the 
blessings  and  curses  pronounced  by  Moses  in  Lev.  and  Deut. ,  and  also  by 
the  language  of  Paul  in  Hebrews,  who,  among  other  things  illustrative  of 
this,  refers  to  God  as  saying  :  ''  Because  they  continued  not  in  my  covenant 
and  I  regarded  them  not,  saitli  the  Lord."  This  covenant,  as  the  result 
shows,  was  designed  both  to  test  the  nation  and  to  separate  a  seed  to 
whom,  at  some  future  time,  the  Kingdom  could  be  safely  intrusted.  It 
was  the  inauguration  of  means  by  which  a  suitable  preparation  could  be 
made /or  the  iilti  mate  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  While  it  was 
the  bond- under  which  the  Kingdom  of  God,  as  an  earnest,  was  bestowed, 
it  embraced  many  things  which  were  only  temporary  and  provisionary, 
looking  forward  to  a  period  when  the  contained  and  contemplated  blessings 
in  the  former  covenant  could  be  realized  in  the  spirit  and  manner  indicated. 


312  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

So  that,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  the  Mosaic  covenant  being  also  a 
legitimate,  but  yet  inferior,  resultant  of  the  previous  covenant,  it  must 
itself,  when  the  original  coyeBHiit  is  to  be  fully  ful^Wed,  give  place  to  its 
superior.     How  it  does  this  will  appear,  e.g.  in  oar  next  Proposition. 

To  indicate  how  able  writers  enforce  the  outgrowth  of  this  covenant  from  the  Abra- 
hamic,  we  select  as  illustrations  the  following.  Fairbairn  ( Typology,  vol.  2,  p.  146)  cor- 
rectly asserts  :  "  Its  (i.e.  Sinaitic)  object  was  not  to  disannul  the  covenant  of  promise, 
or  to  found  a  new  title  to  gifts  and  blessings  conferred.  It  was  given  rather  as  a  hand- 
maid to  the  covenant,  to  minister  in  an  inferior  but  still  necessary  j^lace,  to  the  higher 
ends  and  i^urposes  which  the  covenant  itself  has  in  view."  So  Sack  (quoted  by  him,  p. 
145)  says  :  "  The  matter  of  the  law  is  altogether  grounded  upon  the  covenant  of  joromise 
made  with  Abraham.  .  .  .  The  law  neither  could  nor  would  withdraw  the  exercise 
of  faith  from  the  covenant  of  i^romise,  or  render  that  superfluous,  but  merely  formed  an 
intermediate  jDrovision,  until  the  fulfilment  came." 

Ol)S.  2.  It  is  a  gratification  to  find  that  Theologians,  urged  to  it  by 
Eationalistic  attacks,  are  falling  back  on  the  old  ground  that  the  Mosaic 
covenant  is  a  result  of  the  previous  Abrahamic  one,  thus  preserving  the 
unity  of  the  Divine  Purpose.  The  view,  adopted  by  some,  that  it  is  a 
separate  and  distinct  covenant,  simply  provisionary  without  a  direct  and 
vital  union  existing  between  it  and  others,  is  justly  held  by  many  able 
writers  to  be  erroneous  and  misleading — a  violation  of  Scripture  state- 
ments. A  recent  author,  Kurtz  [His.  Old.  Cov.,  vol.  3,  p.  109),  has  some 
pertinent  remarks  on  this  point,  saying  that  "  the  covenant  at  Sinai  was 
precisely  the  same  as  that  vv^hich  had  formerly  been  concluded  at  Mamre," 
that  "  the  one  was  merely  the  renewal  of  the  other,"  etc.  Admiring  the 
spirit  which  so  accurately  keeps  in  view  the  connection  existing  between  the 
two  covenants,  we  would  more  correctly  say,  that  they  are  not  the  same 
(the  proof  is,  that  tlie  promises  contained  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant  were 
not  realized  under  the  Slosaic  covenant,  thus  e.g.  Abraham  did  not  inherit 
the  land,  etc.),  but  the  Mosaic  is  a  legitimate  outgrowth  from  the  former 
and  designed  to  be  lyreparatorij  to  a  realization  of  the  Abrahamic.  An 
important  caution  is  necessary  to  be  observed  by  the  careful  student  ;  that 
IS,  constantly  to  keep  in  mind  that  God's  Purpose  to  establish  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom  'will  not  fail  because  of  its  being  conditionally  setup  at  Mt.  Sinai  ; 
that  if  the  Jews  rebel  against  their  King  and  He  gives  them  up  to  punish- 
ment, yet  His  promise  to  Abraham — which  we  see  here  already  takes  the 
form  of  an  outward,  external,  real  TJieocratic  Kingdom — will  ultimately  be 
carried  into  successfnl  accomplishment.  How  this  will  be  done,  is  the 
subject  matter  of  several  of  the  following  Propositions. 

Henderson,  art.  ^'Dispensation"  in  Ency.  Eelig.  Knowl.,  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the 
students  of  prophecy,  who  hold  to  a  future  Messianic  Kingdom,  make  "  the  Mosaic  cov- 
enant" "  the  root  of  many  of  the  mistaken  views  of  the  future  state  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Christ,"  and  argues  that  its  j)ro visionary  sacrifices,  etc.,  show  that  it  was  to  be  superseded 
by  the  Christian  Church,  or  the  present  dispensation,  which  is  "  si^iritual,  universal,  per- 
petual." As  our  argument  fully  meets,  in  detail,  his  reasoning,  we  only  now  say  :  (1) 
That  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants  are  "  the  roots  ;"  (2)  that  we  hold,  that  much 
was  provisionary  under  the  Mosaic  economy;  (3)  that  the  form  of  government  itself. 
Theocratic,  was  only  an  earnest  of  that  which  should  arise  under  David's  Son  and  re- 
lated rulers  ;  (4)  that  the  Church  does  not  in  any  particular  meet  covenant  promises, 
and  is  itself  preparative,  etc.  The  student  can  already  see  that  Waldegrave  and  others 
are  mistaken,  that  our  doctrine  originates  in  and  is  founded  on  (some  say,  "one  pas- 
sage") the  Apocalypse,  or  that  (as  Prof.  Sanborn)  "  the  key-stone  of  the  whole  system" 
is  in  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent.  It  requires  but  a  little  knowledge  of  our  views  to  see  how 
deeply  and  solidly  they  are  founded  (  n  the  covenants  and  prophecies. 


PPwOP.  49.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  313 

III.  THE   DAVIDIO    COVENANT. 

Ols.  1.  Having  already  shown  and  proven  (Props.  28,  31,  32)  how  the 
Theocratic  element  was  incorporated  with  the  Davidic  line,  which  God  (as 
the  chief  Eiilerand  so  acknowledged)  chose,  attention  is  now  called  to  the 
distinguishing  covenant  with  David  by  which  this  union  is  made  forever 
inseparable  ;  and  by  which  this  union  is  to  be  specially  rnanifested  in  the 
sight  of,  and  for  the  blessings  of,  the  world  tliroiKjh  a  descendant  of 
David's.  The  covenant  is  found  in  2  Sam.  7  :  10-16  (1  Chron.  17  :  11-14), 
"  The  Lord  telleth  thee  that  He  luillmalce  tliee  a  house.  And  when  thy  days  he 
fulfilled,  and  thou  shall  sleep  tuith  thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after 
thee  which  shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels,  and  1 2vill  establish  His  Kingdom. 
He  shall  build  a  house  for  my  name,  and  I  will  stablish  the  throne  of  His 
Kingdom  forever.  I  will  be  His  Father  and  He  shall  be  my  Son.  If  he 
comjnit  iniquity  I  will  chasten  Him  with  the  rod  of  7nen  and  witli  tlie  stripes 
of  tlie  children  of  men."^  But  my  mercy  shall  not  depart  away  from  Hi^n , 
as  I  took  it  from  Saul  ivhom  1  put  aivaij  before  thee.  And  thine  house  and  thy 
Kingdom  shall  be  establislied  forever  before  thee;  thy  throne  shall  be 
established  forever. "  '^ 

1  Dr.  Clarke  ( Com.  loci),  who  cannot  be  accused  of  special  syropathy  with  our  views, 
renders  this  sentence  :  "  In  suffering.for  iniquity  I  will  chasten  Him  (the  Messiah)  with 
the  rod  of  men,  and  with  the  stripes  due  to  the  children  of  men."  A  multitude  of  our 
opponents  make  it  to  refer,  in  some  way,  to  the  Messiah,  and  sometimes  give  fanciful  in- 
terpretations to  this  effect.  Thus  e.g.  Augustine  (see  below,  next  Obs.)  explains  "  the 
iniquity  of  Him"  and  the  sin  of  the  children  Ps.  89  :  30-33,  as  referring  to  Christ's 
body,  the  Church,  and  quotes  as  proof  Acts  9  :  4,  that  when  Saul  persecuted  His  believing 
people,  Christ  said,  "  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me?"  (It  may  be  said  that  Ps.  89  :  30, 
31  is  not  exactly  parallel,  because  it  refers  not  to  the  special  seed  but  to  the  descendants 
of  David  in  general  (ovving  to  the  fact  that  the  Kingdom  is  offered  continuously  (Prop. 
26)  to  his  descendants),  and  this  is  evidenced  by  the  "  nevertheless,"  etc.,  where  God  re- 
turns to  the  idea  of  the  special  seed,  previously  mentioned,  through  whom  His  promise 
would  be  verified).  Those  who  refer  it  to  Christ  directly  (as  Tertullian,  Lactantius, 
Beza,  Calov,  Pfeiffer,  Buddeus,  Patrick,  etc.)  or  indirectly  (as  Hengstenberg  and  others), 
or  in  part  to  Him  and  in  -part  to  Solomon  (as  Breuz,  Sack,  etc.),  or  literally  to  Solomon 
and  mystically  to  Christ  (as  Glass,  etc.)— all  find  that  in  Jesus  we  must  find  the  pre- 
eminent fulfilment. 

■•^  When  we  come  to  this  Davidic  covenant,  this  perpetuation  of  the  Theocratic  relation- 
ship with  the  house  of  David,  how  much  we  regret  the  lost  books  of  Samuel,  Gad,  and 
Nathan  on  the  life  of  David, 

Obs.  2.  Learned  and  able  men,  forsaking  the  Primitive  view  and  over- 
looking the  perpetuity  of  this  covenant,  gravely  tell  us  that  Solomon  and 
other  descendants  were  here  denoted  ;  but  we  vastly  prefer  to  let  God 
explain  His  own  language  and  the  meaning  intended.  Thus,  e.g.  Acts 
2  :  30,  "  David  being  a  prophet,  and  hnoiving  that  God  had  sivorn  with  an 
oath  to  him,  that  of  tlie  fruit  of  his  loins,  according  to  the  flesh,  He  would 
raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne  f  and  Paul,  directly  quoting  this 
covenant  (Heb.  1  :  5),  applies  it  to  Christ  Jesus,  asking,  "  Unto  which  of 
the  angels  said  He  at  any  time.''^  .  .  .  '^  I  will  be  to  Him  a  Father  and 
He  shall  be  to  me  a  Son."  The  announcing  angel  (Luke  1  :  30-33)  gives 
the  same  testimony  that  the  covenant  truly  refers  to  Christ. 

The  concessions  of  our  opponents  are  all  that  can  be  desired.  We  select,  out  of  the 
mass,  those  of  an  ancient  and  a  modern  writer.  Augustine  ("  City  of  God,"  B.  17,  s.  8), 
unable  to  rid  himself  of  the  Primitive  interpretation,  applies  tlie  covenant  of  2  Sam. 
7  :  8-16  to  Jesus,  the  Christ.     It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  man  to  whom  the  mod- 


314  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

erns  are  so  largely  indebted  for  spiritualizing  views,  argues  that  this  covenant  is  fulfilled 
in  Christ,  saying  :  "  He  who  thinks  that  this  grand  promise  was  fulfilled  in  Solomon 
greatly  errs,"  and  adduces  as  proof  that  Solomon's  house  was  not '■  faithful,"  being 
"  full  of  strange  women  worshij^ping  false  gods,  and  tlie  King  himself,  aforetime  wise, 
seduced  by  them  and  cast  down  into  the  same  idolatry  ;  and  let  him  (the  reader)  not 
dare  to  think  that  God  either  promised  this  falsely,  or  was  unable  to  foreknow  that  Solo- 
mon and  his  house  would  become  what  they  did."  He  then  adds,  that  the  Jews  do  not 
understand  this  to  be  fulfilled  in  Solomon,  but  look  for  another  ;  that  Solomon  began  to 
reign  while  David  still  lived,  before  he  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  hence  is  not  the  one 
designated  in  the  promise  :  "When  thy  da3^s  be  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy 
fathers, "  etc.  Augustine  is  undoubtedly  correct  in  making  Jesus  the  covenanted  Son 
promised,  but  incorrect  when  he  attemj)ts  to  make  out  a  present  fulfilment  of  the  prom- 
ise. Again,  Barnes  {Com.  Acts  2  :  30)  makes  2  Sam.  7  ;  11-16  the  basis  of  such  prom- 
ise, and  however  inclined  to  drag  in  Solomon,  is  forced  to  say  :  "  It  is  clear  that  the 
New  Test,  writers  understood  them  as  referring  to  the  Messiah."  He  then  says  that  the 
Jews  thus  believed,  and  that  such  was  the  belief  of  David,  giving  Ps.  2,  22,  69,  17  as 
l)roof,  and  that  such  a  reference  must  be  received  as  scriptural.  So  in  his  Notes  on  Heb. 
1  :  5,  he  makes  the  reference  taken  from  the  covenant  Messianic,  that  they  were  so  ap- 
plied in  the  time  of  Paul,  and  that  Paul  employs  them  according  to  prevailing  usage. 
Indeed,  if  we  admit  that  the  aj^ostles  are  inspired,  no  other  possible  interpretation  can  be 
given. 

Obs.  3.  How  did  David  himself  understand  this  covenant  ?  This  is  best 
stated  in  his  own  hmgiiage.  Read  e.g.  Ps.  72,  which  describes  a  Son 
infinitely  superior  to  Solomon  ;  reflect  over  Ps.  132,  and  after  noticing 
that  "  the  Lord  hath  S2vorn  in  truth  unto  David,  He  tuill  not  turn  from 
it ;  of  the  fruit  of  thy  body  luill  I  set  upon  thy  throne''"'  (which  Peter, 
Acts  2  :  30,  31,  expressly  refers  to  Jesus)  ;  consider  the  numerous  Messianic 
allusions  in  this  and  other  Psalms  (89th,  110th,  72d,  48th,  45th,  21st,  2d, 
etc.),  so  regarded  and  exp)licitly  quoted  in  the  New  Test,  by  inspired  men  ; 
ponder  the  fact  that  David  calls  Him  "  my  Lord,''  "  higher  than  the  kings 
of  the  earth,''''  and  gives  Him  a  position,  power,  dominion,  immortality,  and 
perpetuity,  that  no  mortal  King  can  possibly  attain  to,  and  most  certainly 
we  are  not  wrong  in  believing  that  David  himself,  according  to  the  tenor 
of  the  covenant  "  thy  Kingdom  shall  be  established  forever  before  thee,''"' 
expected  to  be  in  this  Kingdom  of  his  Son  and  Lord  both  to  witness  and 
experience  its  blessedness  (so  Storrs,  Diss,  on  Kingdom,  and  many  others). 

There  is  something  wonderful  in  all  this  :  while  seeing  and  acknowledging  that  his 
throne  and  Kingdom  are  fully  and  distinctively  incorporated  as  part  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  that  it  shall  belong  to  a  Son  of  his  own  both  by  divine  right  and  inheritance,  he 
also  perceives  and  describes  that  his  throne  and  Kingdom  thus  occupied,  is  only,  in  vir- 
tue of  its  Theocratic  relationship,  the  groundwork  of  a  universality  of  dominion,  it  under- 
going some  peculiar  changes  to  make  it  harmonize  with  the  evident  rulership  of  immor- 
tals. He  notices  also  the  connection  that  this  j^romised  Seed  of  his  has  with  the  older 
promises.  For,  we  have  first  simply  the  seed  of  the  woman  ;  next  that  He  shall  be 
Abraham's  seed  ;  next  that  He  shall  inherit  the  land  and  bless  all  nations  ;  next,  that 
He  shall  be  a  mighty  King  ;  and  next  that  He  shall  be  David's  Son  and  Lord,  sitting 
on  David's  throne  and  from  thence  exerting  a  world-wide  dominion.  Many  a  reference 
is  made  to  this  connecting  series,  and  it  wotild  be  highly  interesting  to  trace  them,  but  we 
have  only  space  for  one,  which  immediatel}''  follows  tlie  giving  of  the  covenant.  David 
(2  Sam.  7  :  19,  comp.  1  Chron,  17  :  17)  goes  to  God  and  expresses  his  amazement, 
gratitude,  and  praise  ;  and,  among  other  things,  declares  :  * '  And  is  this  the  manner 
(marg.  read.,  law)  of  the  Man,  O  God,"  which  Dr.  Kennicott  renders  :  "  And  this  is  (or 
must  be)  the  law  of  the  Man  or  of  the  Adam."  Bh.  Horsley  translates  it  :  "And  this 
is  the  arrangement  about  the  Man,  O  Lord  Jehovah,"  thus  making  an  exact  parallel  with 
1  Chron.  17  :  17,  which  he  renders  :  "  And  thou  hast  regarded  me  in  the  arrangement 
about  the  Man,  that  is  to  be  from  above,  O  Lord  Jehovah."  (Comp.  Jones's  Notes  on 
Scripjture,  p.  95,  Lange's  Com.  2  Sam.  loci,  Poole's  Synopsis,  etc.).  In  comparing  the 
different  renderings,  keeping  in  view  what  preceded  and  followed  in  the  Divine  Purpose 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic   kingdom.  315 

(and  noticing  Paul  in  1  Cor.  15  :  45-47;,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  but  that 
David  regarded  this  Man,  this  promised  Son.  as  the  covenanted  Seed  of  the  woman,  the 
Seed  of  Abraham,  the  Man  above  all  others,  in  whom,  as  the  Second  Adam,  the  Redemp- 
tive process  would  exhibit  a  complete  restitution.  This  is  confirmed  b}-  his  Psalms,  and 
the  use  made  of  them  by  the  apostles.  David  anticipated,  by  inspiration.  His  own  Sal- 
vation, and  the  perpetuity  of  His  throne  and  Kingdom,  in  the  Divine  arrangement  con- 
cerning the  Man. 

The  reader's  attention  is  called  to  a  feature,  which  gives  us  one  of  these  indirect  but 
most  forcible  (because  undesigned)  proofs  of  divine  inspiration.  Here  is  David  receiv- 
ing a  covenant  from  the  Almighty  which  explicitly  affirms  the  perpetuity,  etc.,  of  his 
throne  and  Kingdom,  and  yet  David  himself  now  proceeds  to  predict  the  (onq  continued 
overthrow  and  desolation  (e.g.  Ps.  89)  of  his  throne  and  kingdom,  and  that  this  very  cove- 
nant, confirmed  by  oath,  should  for  a  long,  indefinite  time  be  held  in  abeyance.  Now  it  is 
not  in  the  nature  of  man  to  do  this  himself,  for  professing  this  covenant  relationship,  the 
most  unlikely  thing  would  be  the  prediction  of  such  an  overthrow.  In  fact  it  is  unnat- 
ural, because  the  natural  man  would  inevitably  eulogize  the  future  prosperity  of  his 
throne  and  Kingdom  under  the  auspices  of  the  Almighty.  IIovo  then  do  we  account  for 
this  mental  phenomenon,  and  that  David  described  the  exact  condition  of  his  throne  and 
kingdom  as  it  has  existed  during  many  centuries  ?  The  only  reasonable  way  to  explain 
it  is  to  receive  the  Biblical  account,  viz.  :  that  David  was  inspired  by  God's  Spirit  to 
foresee  and  describe  the  future — accurately — against  what  the  natural  man,  influenced  by 
desire  and  such  expressed  covenanted  relationshiiJ,  would  have  done. 

Obs.  4.  The  Prophets  following,  had  a  similar  understanding  of  this 
divine-human  disposition  or  ordering,  by  which  David's  Son  would  perso7i- 
aUi/,  through  DavifVs  Kingdom,  bestow  the  blessings  of  perfected  Redemp- 
tion. Thus  e.g.  Isa.  9  :  7,  Jer.  23  :  5,  6,  and  30  :  9,  aiid  33  :  15-2G,  etc. 
(comp.  Props.  21,  31,  33,  GS,  122,  etc.). 

Obs.  5.  Before  censuring  the  Jews,  as  many  do,  for  believing  that  Jesus 
would  literally  restore  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  we  must  consider, 
in  fairness,  that  they  luere  justified \\\  so  doing  by  the  very  language  (Props. 
4,  21,  and  48)  of  tlie  covenant.  It  is  incredible  that  God  should  in  the  most 
important  matters,  affecting  the  interests  and  the  happiness  of  man  and  near- 
ly touching  His  own  veracity,  clothe  them  m  words,  which,  if  not  true  m 
their  obvious  and  common  sense,  tvould  deceive  the  pious  and  God-fearing 
of  many  ages.  We  cannot,  dare  not  (however  upheld  by  many  eminent 
names)  entertain  an  opinion  so  dishonoring  both  to  God  and  His  ancient 
believing  children.  The  Jews  are  abundantly  defended  m  their  faith  by 
the  covenant  itself  ;  the  correctness  and  justness  of  their  fondly  enter- 
tained hopes  appear  from  the  particulars  incorporated  with  it. 

(1)  The  words  and  sentences  in  their  plain  grammatical  acceptation,  do 
exjiressly  teach  their  belief.  This  is  denied  by  no  one,  not  even  by  those 
who  then  proceed  to  spiritualize  the  language.  Therefore  already  the 
Jews  are  excusable  in  believing  what  God  so  definitely  declares  (comp. 
Prop.  48). 

(2)  The  covenant  is  distinctively  associated  with  the  Jewish  nation  and 
none  other.  Passing  by  the  numerous  proof  texts  which  will  be  presented 
hereafter,  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  understanding  of  this  relationship 
by  David  at  the  giving  of  the  covenant.  In  2  Sam.  7  :  23,  24  (1  Chron. 
17  :  21,  22)  he  expresses  before  God  his  consciousness  of  the  magnitude  of 
the  blessing  ;  that  this  covenant,  in  virtue  of  his  throne  and  Kingdom 
being  thus  distinguished,  embraces  '^  one  nation'^ \com.-^.  Props.  24,  59,  60, 
etc.),  and  this  the  sayne  nation  that  was  brought  out  of  Egypt  (i.e. _ 
Abraham's  descendants),  who  should  be  established  in  ''  thy  (God's)  land." 


316  THE  THEOCRATIC   KUN-QDOM.  [PrOP.  49. 

And  then  ascending  to  the  promise  previously  given  that  this  nation  is 
specially  chosen,  i.e.  the  elect  nation,  and  that  this  very  covenant  made 
with  himself  is  a  marvellous  confirmation  of  this  truth,  he  adds  :  "  Thou 
hast  confirmed  to  Thyself  thy  people  IsraeV^  (the  same  nation  brought  out  of 
Egypt,  as  the  connection  shows)  " /o  be  a  people  unto  Thee  forever  ;  and 
Thou^  Lord,  art  become  their  Qod.'^  With  such  testimony  before  them, 
hoio  could  the  faithful  Jews  hesitate  m  believing  as  they  did  respecting 
their  nation,  its  elect  position,  its  supremacy  owing  to  this  Theocratic 
exaltation  in  and  throiigti  the  Messiah. 

(3)  It  IS  called  a  perpetual  covenajit,  i.e.  one  that  shall  endure  forever. 
It  may,  indeed,  require  time  before  its  fulfilment  ;  it  may  even  for  a  time 
be  held,  so  far  as  the  nation  is  concerned,  in  the  background,  but  it  must 
be  ultimately  realized.  David  himself,  in  his  last  words  (2  Sam.  23  :  5), 
emphatically  says  :  "'He  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered 
in  all  tilings  and  sure ;  for  this  is  all  my  scdvation  and  all  7ny  desire,^'  ' 
The  prophet  Isaiah  reii:erates  (55  :  3),  pronouncing  it  "  an  everlastiyig 
covenant,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David.''^  Surely  no  one  can  fail  to  see 
that  this  denotes,  as  Barnes  (Com.  loci),  "  an  unchanging  and  unwavering 
covenant, — a  covenant  which  was  not  to  be  revoJced,^^ — "  one-ivhich  ivas  not 
to  be  abrogated,  but  which  was  to  be  perpetual,''^ — and  that  ""God  would 
ratify  this  covenant.''^  Assuredly  so  ; — why  then  accuse  the  Jeius  of  folly  in 
trusting  m  it  V^ 

(4)  It  ^N2i^  confirmed  by  oath  (Ps.  132  :  11,  and  89  i  3,  4,  33),  thus  giving 
the  strongest  possible  assurance  of  its  ample  fulfilment.  Could  the  Jews 
do  less  than  trust  m  language  thus  confirmed  ?  (comp.  Props.  47  and  48). 

(5)  To  leave  no  doubt  whatever,  and  to  render  unbelief  utterly  in- 
excusable, God  concisely  and  most  forcibly  presents  His  determination 
(Psl.  89  :  34)  :  "  My  covenant  will  I  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is 
gone  out  of  my  lips.^'  It  would  have  been  sheer  presumption  and  blindness 
in  the  Jews  to  have  «//ere<:/ (under  the  plea— modern — of  spirituality)  the 
covenant,  and  to  have  refused  to  accept  of  the  obvious  sense  conveyed  by 
the  words  ;  and  there  is  a  heavy  responsibility  resting  upon  those,  who, 
even  under  the  most  pious  intentions,  deliberately  alter  the  covenant  Avords 
and  attach  to  them  a  foreign  meaning.^ 

^  In  the  context  he  clearly  intimates  that  his  house  will  not  continuously  advance  in 
prosperity  that  of  itself  it  will  fall,  but  that  it  will  rise  again  under  the  Messiah  to  the 
highest  attainable  prosperity.  Now  after  so  much  of  fulfilment  we  can  appreciate  the 
sudden  transitions  from  predicted  triumph  and  glory  to  sad  reverses  and  downfall  of 
throne  and  kingdom,  followed  by  expressed  hopes  of  a  glorious  restitution.  The  reason 
for  such  abruptness  and  a  certain  degree  of  obscurity  in  the  allusions  to  the  overthrow, 
etc.,  ot  the  Kingdom,  will  be  found  in  the  predetermined  offer  of  this  Kingdom  to  the 
Jewi.sh  nation  at  the  First  Advent  (Props.  54-66).  While  foreseeing  and  foretelling  (in 
order  to  vindicate  His  knowledge)  this  downfall,  yet  God,  in  consistency  with  the  moral 
freedom  ot  the  people,  offers  to  perpetuate  this  throne  and  kingdom,  that  not  a  son  shall 
fail  to  David  to  sit  on  his  throne  if  obedient,  etc.  He  could  not  do  less,  and  therefore, 
in  testing  the  nation — which  Moses  even  foretold  would  fail  to  endure  the  test  and  would 
meet  with  a  long,  prolonged  punishment— these  things  are  carefully,  jDrudently  revealed 
so  as  not  to  interfere  with  God's  tender  of  the  Kingdom. 

2  Barnes  and  a  host  besides  do,  however,  change  this  identical  covenant  ;  seeing  its 
perpetuity  so  clearly  asserted,  they  receive  it  as  perpetual,  but  only  after  changing  Us  mean- 
ing. The  plain  grammatical  sense — the  one  the  Jews  and  Primitive  Chiirch  received — is 
rejected  as  "  carnal,"  and  another  substituted  by  which  David's  throne  and  kingdom  is 
transmuted  into  God's  throne  in  the  third  heaven  and  God's  Kingdom  in  heaven  or  in 
the  church.  Alas  !  when  pious  and  excellent  men  can  thus  tamper  with  the  foundations 
of  our  hope.     (Comp.  Prop.  122.) 

2  Such  altering  is  only  building  with  "  wood,  hay,  and  stubble."     The  motives  may, 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  317 

like  Paul's  in  Stephen's  case,  result  from  a  zeal  for  the  truth's  sake,  but,  in  the  light  of 
the  unchangeable  covenant,  it  is  evidently  misdirected  zeal.  Learning,  philosophy,  piety, 
cannot,  ought  not  to  assume  the  liberty  of  altering  what  God  has  so  solemnly  spoken  ;  but[ 
alas,  it  is  so  prevailingly  done  that  the  Church,  with  here  and  there  some  exceptions' 
has  lost  sight  of  this  covenant.  Theologies  that  profess  to  give  a  systematic  statement 
of  the  truth  either  ignore  it,  or  very  briefly  mention  it  as  somethmgm  which  we  are  not 
interested.  Those  who  cling  to  this  oath-bound,  perpetual  covenant  are  regarded  as 
very  "  carnal ' '  and  "  Jewish,"  etc.  The  simple  reason  for  all  this  is,  that  because  there 
has  been  no  fulfilment  of  this  covenant  promise  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  either  there 
will  be  none,  or  else  the  language  must  be  sijiritualized  to  suit  existing  circumstances. 
From  what  has  taken  place  in  the  past,  we  rest  assured  that  God  means  just  what  the 
words  in  their  plain  grammatical  sense  convey,  and  that  as  such  they  will,  in  God's  own 
time,  be  realized.  God  has  hitherto  rejected  substitutions  of  His  Word.  Abraham 
tried  it,  when,  after  waiting  for  some  years,  he  contemplated  adopting  a  son,  thinking 
that  God  probably  meant  an  adopted  son,  and  then  alter  another  waiting  he  went  m  to 
Hagar  supposing  that  the  seed  would  be  his  and  not  Sarah  s,  but  God  fulfilled  His  Word 
just  as  loritten.  Others  attempted  this  with  the  same  result;  no  substitution,  however 
learnedly  or  eloquently  presented,  is  to  be  received  over  against  the  eA-p7-ess  u:ords  of 
God.  Wo,  indeed,  may  not  be  able  to  tell  hoic  they  can  be  fulfilled,  but  if  unable,  the 
matter  may  safely  be  trusted  to  God  without  putting  forward  our  weak,  accommodating 
mterjDretations.  We,  therefore,  must  earnestly  protest  against  the  manifest  injustice 
that  IS  done  to  this  covenant.  Books  specially  devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  Covenants 
have  much  to  say  respecting  an  eternal  covenant  entered  into  between  Father  and  Son, 
at  some  jjeriod  in  eternity,  of  which  nothing  is  said,  but  all  is  inferred,  and  a  covenant 
plainly  given,  confirmed  by  oath,  declared  to  be  perpetual,  is  coolly  set  aside.  Theolo- 
gies, Bib.  Dictionaries,  etc.,  totally  ignore  it.  Indeed,  it  has  become  fashionable  to  ridi- 
cule the  Jewish  and  Primitive  belief  based  on  this  covenant,  as  e.g.  Gregory  (Four 
Gospels),  who  declares,  with  intended  sarcasm,  that  their  "  Messiah  was  to  be  the  Jewish 
Caesar  of  the  world,"  because  they  "  had  cast  away  that  grander  idea  of  a  spiritual,  uni- 
versal, and  everlasiing  Kingdom  (i.e.  the  Church)  which  fills  the  books  of  the  prophets." 
It  is  no  matter  of  surprise  to  find  such  writers  to  have  no  manner  of  use  for  the 
(Davidic  covenants,  either  in  '•  the  preparation  for  the  Messiah"  or  in  "the  mission  of 
the  Jews,"  or  m  the  present  and  future.  Instead  of  being  fundamental,  it  only,  in  their 
estimation,  is  indicative  of  the  Messiah  being  of  David's  line,  and  can  be  emiDloyed,  if  at 
all,  in  a  mystical  or  spiritual  sense.  We  hold,  against  all  such,  that,  no  matter  who  was 
on  the  throne  (David,  Solomon,  Hezekiah,  etc.),  and  no  matter  how  flourishing  the  King- 
dom, the  pious  and  believing  held  that  the  covenant  looked  for  that  special  "  Anointed 
One,"  David's  Son,  who  should  exalt  the  identical  Theocratic  throne  and  Kingdom  to  a 
grandeur  immeasurably  great. 

Obs.  G.  The  language  of  the  apostles  is  eminently  calculated  to  confirm 
the  Jewish  belief  in  the  literal  fulfilment  of  the  Davidic  covenant.  Thus 
e.g.  let  any  nnprejudiced  reader  take  the  first  sermons  that  were  delivered 
after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  addressed  to  Jews,  and  he  cannot  fail  to  see 
this  feature.  Peter  (Acts  2  :  14-36),  referring  to  the  covenant  promise  that 
Jesuit  Christ  would  sit  on  David^s  throne,  correctly  argues  that  the  j^er- 
formance  of  this  requires  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  which  David  also 
foretold  as  a  prerequisite.  He  then  informs  the  Jews  that  He  did  thus 
arise,  that  He  ascended  to  heaven  where  He  is  exalted  as  Lord  and  Christ, 
waiting  for  the  time  when  His  foes  shall  be  made  His  footstool,  "  wiiom 
(Acts  3  :  12-26)  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitntion  of  all 
things''  (keeping  in  mind  the  Jewish  idea  of  restitution  as  always  associated 
^ith  the  restored  Davidic  Kingdom)  shall  come,  and  then  "  He  (God)  shall 
send  Jesus  Christ"  through  wJiom  this  is  effected.  He  exhorts  them  on 
the  ground  that  they  ^' are  children  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with 
our  fathers'''  to  repent  that  they  may  become  worthy  participants  in  "  the 
times  of  refreshinff  (Jewish  expression),  which  "  shall  come  from  the  pres- 
ence of  the' Lord."  Let  any  one  read  the  covenant  and  prophecies  directly 
bearing  on  it,  and  then  place  himself  inthe  j)osition  (Prop.  20)  of  a  «J"ewisli 


318  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PkOP.  49. 

hearer  of  Peter,  with  Jewish  faith,  expectations,  and  covenant  relationship, 
and  the  decided  impression  will  be  made  that  the  covenant  is  not  altered 
but  remains  unchanged,  that  the  death  of  Jesus  combined  with  resurrection 
and  exaltation  only  qualities  Him  the  better  to  meet  the  condition's  Of  the 
covenant,  and  that  through  this  resurrected  Jesus,  when  the  time  'appointed 
by  the  Father  arrives,  this  covenant  will  be  verified. 

Obs.  7.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fully  admitted  early  church  view  on 
the  subject.  Let  tlie  reader  pause  and  reflect,  ho^u  it  coines,  if  the  prevalent 
modern  notion  of  the  covenant  is  correct,  that  the  early  Christians  (who 
had  the  advantages  of  apostolic,  inspired  teaching,  or  were  close  to  it)  held 
to  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  covenant  and  fully  believed  with  the  Jews 
that  the  Messiah  ivould  come  (again,  as  to  Jesus)  to- restore  the  Davidic 
throne  and  Kingdom  ?  Upon  what  supposition  can  ,lt  be  satisfactorily 
explained,  excepting  the  one  that  they  were  correct?   /.I 

Acknowledging  Neander's  manly  concessions  to  the  prevalence  of  Chiliasm  in  the 
early  church,  and  his  favorable  estimate  of  Millenarians,  he,  to  make  room  for  his  own 
modern  theory,  does  these  ancient  worthies  injustice,  when  [His.  Church,  vol.  1,  p.  78) 
he  informs  us  that  it  was  "  a  distinguishing  character"  of  Christianity  "  to  lower  itself 
down  to  the  comprehension"  of  these  men.  His  standard  of  comparison,  derived,  from  an 
anti-Chiliastic  bias,  is  not  a  true  one  ;  and  this  appears  evident  from  the  covenant  itself. 
These  men,  b^Jievers  in  whom  the  truth  is  perpetuated,  embraced  a  pure,  fundamental 
truth,  a  high  and  noble  faith,  indorsed  and  su^jported  by  Divine  authority,  and  needed 
not  the  Origenistic,  or  the  elevating  Hegelian,  Philosophy  to  discern  it.  We  leave  this 
able,  but  in  this  respect  mistaken,  writer  give  the  following  testimony  to  the  early  church 
doctrine.  "  Christianity  (//ts.  Plant.  Chr.  Church,  vol.  1,  p.  500)  allied  itself  to  the  expec- 
tation of  a  restoration  and  glorification  of  the  Theocracy,  which  was  preceded  by  an  increas- 
ing sense  of  its  fallen  state  among  the  Jews.  Those  who  clung  to  a  national  and  exter- 
nal Theocracy  looked  forward  to  this  glorification  as  something  external,  sensuous  (?), 
and  national.  The  Messiah,  they  imagined,  would  exalt  by  a  divine  miraculous  power  the 
dejDressed  Theocracy  of  the  Jews  to  a  visible  glory  such  as  it  had  never  before  possessed, 
and  establish  a  new,  and  exalted,  unchangeable:^order  of  tilings,  in  place  of  the  transitory'- 
earthly  institutions  which  had  hitherto  existed.  Thus  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah 
would  appear  as  the  perfected  form  of  the  Theocracy,  as  the  final  stage  in  the  terrestrial  de- 
velopment of  mankind,  exceeding  in  glory  everything  that  a  rude  fancy  could  dejjict  under 
sensible  imagss,  a  Kingdom  in  which  the  Messiah  would  reign  sensibly  present  as  God's 
Vicegerent  and  order  all  circumstances  according  to  His  will.  From  i:his  point  of  view, 
therefore,  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  would  ap>pear  as  belonging  entirely  to  the  future ;  the  present 
condition  of  the  world,  with  all  its  evils  and  defects,  would  be  set  in  opposition  to  that 
future  golden  age,  from  which  all  wickedness  and  evil  would  be  banished."  He  then 
proceeds  to  tell  us  how  a  change  of  belief  was  gradually  brought  about  in  the  Church 
doctrine,  and  the  substance,  compressed,  is,  that  man  unauthorized  made  this  change 
under  the  plea  that  a  deeper  insight,  greater  knowledge,  indicated  the  early  belief  to  be 
erroneous.  Such  a  change  may  commend  itself  to  human  wisdom,  but  it  is  not  reasona- 
ble according  to  the  covenants  and  the  assurances  surrounding  them,  or  to  the  prophe- 
cies and  the  teaching  of  the  first  three  centuries.  No  !  let  us,  in  all  lowliness  of  mind, 
seek  no  change,  but  content  ourselves,  even  if  it  gives  rise  to  invidious  comparisons,  with 
the  faith  held  by  the  early  confessors  and  martyrs.     (Comp.  Props,  75-78.) 

It  is  exceedingly  gratifying  to  find  this  Jewish  faith,  thus  founded  on  the  covenants, 
recognized  and  continued  in  the  early  history  of  the  Chr.  Church  ;  for,  if  true,  this  very 
feature— now  regarded  by  many  as  a  stain  or  blot— ought,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case, 
to  characterize  the  churches  established  by  the  apostles  and  their  immediate  successors. 
There  is  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  some  writers  to  treat  this  matter  unfairly  (as  in 
Corrodi's  His.  of  Chiliasm,  Shedd's  His.  of  Ch.  Doctrine,  etc.),  and  to  ignore,  as  much  "as 
possible,  the  early  Jewish  belief  as  something  of  no  value  to  us  (as  in  various  Quarterlies, 
Pteviews,  Theologies,  etc.). 

Obs.   8.   Having  called  attention  to  the  covenant  and  its  literal  fulfil- 
ment, it  may  be  suitable  to  present   the  order  of  fulfilment  as  given  by 


Prop.  49.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  319 

David  himself.  Necessarily  brief  and  abrupt,  so  as  not  to  conflict  witli  the 
free  agency  of  man,  it  is  a  sublime  vindication  of  David's  insjjiration,  the 
peiyetuity  of  the  covenant,  and  its  idtiitiate  literal  realization. 

Consider  Ps.  89,  and  observe  these  particulars  as  stated  :  (1)  David  acknowledges  the 
bestowal  of  the  covenant  by  God,  and  its  confirmation  by  oath,  "  I  have  made  a  cove- 
nant with  My  chosen,  I  have  sworn  unto  David  My  servant.  Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for- 
ever, and  build  up  th^^  throne  to  all  generations"  (v.  1-4),  (2)  He  expresses  praise  that 
God's  wonders  and  faithfulness  will  be  shown  "  in  the  congregation  (gathering)  of  the 
saints,"  and  that  He  has  the  authorit3%  power,  and  mercy  to  perform  His  promises 
(v.  5  to  18).  (3)  He  again  refers  to  the  covenant,  shows  that  One  shall  be  specially  ex- 
alted, and  that  God  says  :  "  I  will  make  Him  My  First-born,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the 
earth.  My  mercy  will!  keep  for  Him  forevermore,  and  My  covenant  shall  stand  fast  in 
Him.  His  (David's)  seed  also  will  I  make  to  endure  forever,  and  His  throne  as  the  days 
of  heaven"  (v.  19-29).  (4)  Then  as  this  Kingdom  is  offered  to  the  regular  descendants 
of  David,  and  it  is  foreseen  that  ihey  will  become  unworthy  of  it,  God  foretells  the  same, 
with  the  additional  assurance  to  David  that,  notwithsiandinq  such  rebellion  and  His  with- 
drawal for  a  time,  the  covenant  will  still  be  fulfilled,  in  these  pregnant  words  :  "  If  his 
(David's)  children  forsake  My  law  and  walk  not  in  My  judgments,  if  they  break  My 
statutes  and  keep  not  My  commandments,  then  will  I  visit  their  transgression  with  the 
rod,  and  their  iniquity  with  stripes.  Nevertheless,  My  lovingkindness  will  I  not  utterly 
take  from  him,  nor  suffer  My  faithfulness  to  fail.  My  covenant  will  I  not  break  nor  al- 
ter the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  My  lips.  Once  have  I  sworn  by  My  Holiness,  that  I 
will  not  lie  unto  David.  His  seed  shall  endure  forever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun  before 
Me.  It  shall  be  established  forever  as  the  moon,  and  as  a  faithful  witness  in  heaven" 
(V.  30-37).  Here  it  is  positively  asserted  that  the  relapse  of  the  nation  and  a  resultant 
infliction  of  j^unishment  (justas  centuries  have  witnessed)  shall  not  change  God's  prom- 
ise] to  David  respecting  that  seed  of  his  that  shall  reign  on  his  throne.  (5)  Now  comes 
a  remarkable  transition,  which  should  shame  the  unbelief  of  doubting  ones,  seeing  that 
it  is  descriptive  of  the  precise  condition  of  things  as  they  exist  to-day.  David  having 
foretold  the  conditional  overthrow  of  his  kingdom,  and  yet  that  God  will  be  faithful  in  its 
final  restoration,  now  plainly  predicts  the  downfall  itself :  "  But  Thou  hast  cast  ofl:  and 
abhorred  ;  Thou  hast  been  wroth  with  Thine  anointed"  (i.e.  the  Theocratic  kings  that 
followed  David).  "  Thou  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  Thy  servant  ;  Thou  hast  pro- 
faned his  crown  by  casting  it  to  the  ground, "  etc.  "  Thou  hast  made  his  glory  to  cease, 
and  cast  his  throne  down  to  the  ground,"  etc.  The  covenant  is  unrealized  ;  the  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom  is  fallen  ;  the  very  throne  and  Kingdom,  the  subject  of  such  special  prom- 
ise, is  now  overthrown.  Then, "however,  resting  upon  the  assurances  given,  he  asks  : 
"How  long,  Lord?  Wilt  Thou  hide  Thyself  forever?  Shall  Thy  wrath  burn  as  fire  ?" 
"  Lord,  where  are  Thy  former  lovingkindnesses,  which  Thou  swarest  unto  David  in  Thy 
truth?"  David's  faii:h  in  God  that  He  would  remember  His  covenant  and  restore  his 
cast-down  crown  and  throne,  is  briefly  butfinelj^  expressed  :  "  Remember,  Lord,  the  re- 
proach of  Thy  servants."  "Blessed  be  the  Lord  forevermore.  Amen  and  Amen." 
Who,  that  is  an  humble  believer  in  the  Word  as  written,  can,  in  the  face  of  such  predic- 
tions, deride  the  early  church  faith  evolved  by  them  ?  Who,  when  observing  how  care- 
fully every  objection  is  answered  lest  faith  should  stumble  and  fall,  can  resist  the  con- 
viction that  there  is  a  force  in  these  words,  which  are  yet — when  realized — destined  to 
form  one  of  the  grandest  displays  of  God's  faithfulness  and  mercy  in  the  Redemptive 
scheme  ? 


320  THE  THEOCEATIC    KIN-QDOM.  [PeOP.  50. 


Propositiois"  50.  Tlie  Kingdom  loill  he  the  otdgroioth  of  the 
renewed  AhrahaniiG  covenant^  nnder  ivhich  renewal  we  now 
live. 

Leaving  the  first  part  of  the  proposition  to  be  brought  out  by  our 
general  argument  and  the  considerations  under  various  proposi- 
tions hereafter,  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  other  fact  stated,  viz.  : 
that  the  Abrahamic  covenant  is  reneioed  or  re-conflrmed  in  this 
dispensation,  under  which  re -confirmation  we  now  live. 

Obs.  1.  This,  indeed,  might  already  be  inferred  by  the  reflection,  that 
the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  being  overthrown,  and  the  Mosaic  in- 
stitutions abrogated,  and  the  covenant  made  with  David  being  held  in 
abeyance  (or,  as  David  expressed  its  "  made  void,"  i.e.  not  fultilled)  the 
original  Abrahamic  covenant,  from  which  the  others  spring,  in  consequence 
alone  remains  in  complete  force.  The  covenant  of  this  dispensation, 
called  the  New  Testament,  or  the  New  Covenant,  is  none  other  than  the 
xlbrahamic  reneived  or  confirmed  by  Jesus  the  Christ.  We  are  not  left  to 
conjecture  or  inference  on  so  important  a  point  ;  it  is  one  i^lainly  taught 
in  Holy  Writ. 

The  reader  will  carefully  regard  this  matter,  as  it  is  essential  to  a  correct  understand- 
ing of  much  Scripture.  It  is  a  sad  fact,  that  more  ignorance  and  misunderstanding  ex- 
ist in  relation  to  the  covenants  than  perhaps  of  any  other  portion  of  the  Bible.  This 
originates  from  the  manner  in  which  the  subject  has  been  handled  by  tlKologians  of 
talent  and  eminence.  Instead  of  confining  themselves  to  the  covenants  in  which  man  is 
directly  interested  and  which  have  been  directly  given  to  him  by  God,  they  have  much 
to  say  concerning  "  a  covenant  of  Eedemption"  entered  into  by  the  Father  and  Son  from 
eternity  (and  undertake  to  give  the  particulars  of  what  is  not  on  record),  and  "  a  Cove- 
nant of  Grace"  (which  embraces  the  particulars  of  salvation,  etc.),  but  the  distinctive 
Abrahamic  covenant  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  confirmed  is  left  without  due  consid- 
eration. This  introduces  a  series  of  wild  and  fanciful  interpretations,  such  as  that  all 
nations  are  now  in  the  position  once  occupied  by  the  Jewish  nation  ;  that  God  does  not 
regard  the  Jewish  nation  with  more  favor  than  other  nations  ;  that  the  promises  to  the 
Jewish  nation  are  typical,  temporary,  conditional,  etc.  Believing  that  we  are  under  an 
entire  New  Covenant  (which  they  cannot  point  out  in  the  Scriptures,  but  which  they 
afiirm  is  this  or  that,  viz.  :  this  dispensation,  or  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  or  the  tender  of 
salvation  to  all  believers,  etc.),  they,  of  course,  ignore  the  necessity  of  our  besoming  "the 
seed  of  Abraham,  of  our  being  engrafted,  etc.  The  relationship  that  believers  sustain  to 
the  Jewish  nation  is  utterly  misapj)rehended,  and  inevitable  confusion  and  antagonism 
arise.  (Comp.  e.g.  Pres.  Edwards's  Rls.  Redemp.,  Eussell,  Witsius,  Boston,  Strong,  etc., 
on  the  Covenants,  and  our  various  systems  of  Theology).  It  is  painful  to  notice  the 
discrepancies,  amid  a  show  of  profound  learning  and  speculation. 

Obs.  2.  Tarn  to  Galatians  (the  more  significant,  because  addressed  to 
Gentile  believers),  ch.  3,  and  the  apostle  argues  that  Gentiles  come  in 
under  the  Abrahamic  covena7it,  which,  consecpiently,  must  be  the  one 
under  which  believers  live  and  inherit.  Notice  :  (1)  v.  16,  "  To  Abraham 
and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made ^'^ — the  promises  of  salvation  pertain 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  321 

then  to  this  covenant.  (2)  By  this  seed)  v.  16)  is  denoted  "  Christ" — so 
that  Christ  Himself  as  Abraham's  seed  has  the  promises  pertaining  to 
Himself  m  the  same  covenant.  (3)  Hence  (v.  17)  this  "  covenant  tvas 
confir7ned  before  of  God  in  Christ'^ — i.e.  the  Divine  Purpose  embraced  this 
as  a  fact  to  be  accomplished,  and  therefore  the  Messiah  came.  (4)  In  view 
of  the  relationship  of  this  Abrahamic  covenant  to  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  added 
(v.  17)  that  the  law  or  Mosaic  institution,  which  was  afterward  given, 
"  cannot  disanmiV  this  previously  given  one.  (5)  For,  if  it  did  disannul 
it,  then  it  would  "  7nake  the  promise  of  none  effect,''  i.e.  it  could  not  be 
realized,  but  because  the  covenant  continues  unimpaired,  the  promise  also 
is  sure.  (6)  The  inheritance  of  the  saints  is  originally  given  (v.  18)  by 
God  ''  to  Abraham  by  promise,''  and  hence  is  not  affected  by  the  abrogation 
of  the  law.  (7)  For  the  law  "  was  (v.  19)  added  because  of  trans-gressions, 
till  the  seed  should  come  to  luhom  the  pro?nise  was  7nade."  (8)  By  the  death 
of  the  Seed  provision  is  made  so  "  that  (v.  13,  14)  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ ;  that  we  might  receive  the 
promise  of  the  ^Spirit  through  faith," — i.e.  the  promise  contained  in  the 
Abrahamic  covenant.  (9)  Now  "  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's 
seed  and  heirs  according  to  tlie  promise ;" — we  become  inheritors  with 
Abraham  and  Christ  of  promises  contained  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant. 
(10)  Hence  we  ''receive  (cb.  4  :  5,  7)  the  adoption  of  sons,''  "  and  if  a  son, 
then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ ;"  i.e.^we  inherit  in  God's  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  (ll)  "  Then  (ch.  5  :  5)  lue  through  the  Spirit  imit  for  the  hopie 
of  righteousness  by  faith"  contained  in  the  covenant  promise,  and  (v.  21) 
can  '^  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God"  (Rom.  4  :  11,  18).  Thus  then  accord- 
ing to  the  apostle  we  are  living  under  the  precious  Abrahamic  covenant, 
which  is  renewed  or  confirmed  in  Christ ;  and  if  we  desire  to  inherit  with 
Abraham  and  Christ,  we  must,  by  faith,  become  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and. 
thus  come  into  proper  covenant  relationship.  Well  may  we  say,  in  view  of 
this,  with  Paul  (Gal.  3  :  15),  "  Brethren,  I  speak  after  the  manner  of 
men  ;  though  it  l^e  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet  if  it  be  confirmed,  no  man 
disannulleth  or  addeth  thereto." 

Obs.  3.  This  is  corroborated  and  strengthened  by  what  the  apostle  says  in 
other  places  respecting  the  Abrahamic  coveyiant  containing  the  yromises, 
which  we  hope  to  inherit  through  and  with  Christ.  The  entire  analogy 
of  the  Word  sustains  our  position. 

Having  given  Paul's  views  addressed  to  Gentiles,  let  us  turn  to  the  same  as  given  to 
Jews,  who  were  well  acquainted  with  the  covenant.  Notice  the  train  of  thought  as 
given  in  Hebrews.  (1)  Paul  informs  us  (ch.  1  :  16),  as  a  preliminary,  that  Jesus  "  took 
on  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;"  covenant  relationship  demanded  it.  (2)  Then  after 
referring  to  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  (and  mind,  speaking  of  it  as 
something  well  understood  by  his  hearers,  comp.  Prop.  143),  exhorting  to  steadfastness, 
upholding  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  fiilfilling  His  promises,  he  approaches  the  siibject 
of  the  covenant  by  informing  us  (ch.  7  :  18)  of  the  "  disannulling"  of  the  Mosaic  law, 
and  (v.  22)  that  "  Jesus  was  made  surety  of  a  better  covenant;''  that  (ch.  8:6)  "  He  is 
the  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant,  which  was  established  upon  better  promises.  For  if  the 
first  covenant' '  (Mosaic,  as  all  admit,  being  the  first  in  actual  course  of  realization) 
"had  been  faultless,  then  should  no  place  have  been  found  for  the  second  ;"  i.e.  the 
Mosaic  had  many  things  attached  which  w^ere  merely  provisionary.  Let  the  reader 
pause  and  consider  what  is  "  the  better  covenant  "  here  designated.  According  to  Gal.  3 
it  is  the  one  established  on  better  promises  ;  the  one  which  gives  the  promises  of  bless- 
ing and  inheritance  to  Abraham  and  his  Seed,  the  Christ— in  brief,  the  Abrahamic,  and 
which,  therefore,  not  being  annulled  or  set  aside,  remains  in  force,  for  otherwise  "  the 


322  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDO^M.  [PrOP.  50. 

promise  would  be  of  none  effect."  Jesus  becomes,  by  virtue  of  His  being  the  Seed  of 
Abraham  and  because  of  His  death  (which  provides  the  way  of  ultimate  fulfilment 
through  resurrection  power,  etc.),  "  the  surety"  of  its  final  realization.  But  we  will  leave 
the  apostle  to  state  this  in  his  own  language.  (3)  Then  he  adds  (v.  8  :  13),  "  For  finding 
fault  with  them"  (viz.  :  Mosaic},  "  He  saith,  Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord, 
when  I  will  make  a  new''  (comp.  Obs.  4,  following)  "  covenant  with  the  house  of  Israel 
and  with  the  house  of  Judah  ;  not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their 
fathers,  in  the  day  when  I  took  them  out  of  Egypt,"  etc.  "  In  that  He  saith  a  new  cov- 
enant. He  hath  made  the  first  old."  While  the  Sinaitic  covenant  is  an  outgrowth  of  the 
Abrahamic,  and  yet,  owing  to  the  foreseen  defection  of  the  nation  and  to  the  necessity 
of  securing  a  satisfactory  remission  of  sin,  it  was  in  many  of  its  provisions  merely  pre- 
paratory, and  hence,  when  removed,  must  give  place  to  that  which  introduced  it.  Here 
the  Mosaic  is  called  the  first  because  under  it  the  Theocratic  government  was  first  estab- 
lished, and  the  Abrahamic  is  designated  the  second  or  new  because  under  it,  when  ful- 
filled, that  government  will  be  re-established  and  existing.  Paul,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, wrote  to  Jews,  and  used  this  quotation  as  they  employed  it.  Now  that  the  Abra- 
hamic covenant  is  alluded  to  in  this  quotation  from  Jer.  31  :  31,  etc.,  is  evident  :  (a) 
from  the  context  in  which  the  passage  stands  in  Jeremiah — jjreceded,  followed,  and 
connected  with  a  literal  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  identified  with  (for  the 
prophet  does  not  contradict  himself)  the  Davidic  covenant  (which  is  an  amplification  of 
the  Abraliamic,  showing  how  it  will  be  fulfilled)  in  its  renewal.  (6)  The  prophet  calls 
this  "  a  new''  covenant,  not  because  it  is  entirely  new,  but,  as  is  said  b}'  the  apostle, 
because  the  other  is  superseded  by  it,  i.e.  it  is  renewed,  as  e.g.  in  the  coming  of  the 
seed,  etc.  (c)  It  is  given  to  "  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah,''  which,  as  all 
commentators  admit  (however  thej^  may  afterward  spiritualize),  in  its  literal  aspect  de- 
notes the  Jewish  people.  It  is  the  same  people,  too,  that  were  "  scattered,  "  "  plucked  up, " 
"  destroyed,"  and  "  afilicted, "  who  shall  be  restored  to  their  "land"  and  "  cities." 
Although  not  yet  verified,  the  apostle  aptly  quotes  it  to  prove  that  God  predicts  such  a 
superseding  of  the  Mosaic.  Addressing  Jews  and  admitting  their  hopes  of  a  restoration 
under  the  Messiah,  they  would  feel  the  force  of  such  an  argument,  which  indicated  the 
setting  aside  of  the  law.  (d)  Unity  of  prediction  requires  this,  for  we  have  decided  ref- 
erences to  this  renewed  Abrahamic  covenant,  conjoined  with  the  Davidic,  being  a  dis- 
tinguishing characteristic  of,  and  fundamental  to,  the  Messianic  period,  as  e.g.  Mic. 
7  :  9,  Ezek.  16  :  60-63,  Isa.  55  :  3,  etc.  Indeed,  tiiany  are  the  i^rophecies  which  assume 
that  under  the  Messiah  both  the  Abraliamic  and  the  explanatory  Davidic,  shall  he  real- 
ized. As  we  shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to  quote  these  largely,  it  is  sufficient  here  to 
say  that  they  not  only  specifically  refer  to  it,  but  denominate  it  (hence  it  cannot  be  su- 
perseded) "  an  everlasting  covenant  "  (which  it  must  be,  since  its  promises  bring  Salvation). 
This  does  not  interfere,  as  the  predictions  themselves  intimate,  in  allowing  other  and 
new  arrangements  under  the  reign  of  the  Messiah,  as  e.g.  a  new  disj^ensation,  the  ruler- 
ship  of  immortals,  the  renewal  of  the  earth,  etc.  But  the  Bible  still  insists  that  these 
covenants  are  fundamental  to  all  those  things  ;  that  the  dispensation,  honor,  i3rivileges, 
glor}',  etc.,  enjoyed,  are  all  the  resultants  of  an  existing  and  then  realized  Abrahamic- 
Davidic  covenant — the  Abrahamic  being  the  foundation  of  the  others. 

But  to  return  to  Paul  :  (e)  In  the  next  chapter  he  shows  how  the  Mosaic  introduced 
rites,  sacrifices,  etc.,  which  were  typical,  and  that  to  obtain  the  promise  of  the  inheri- 
tance (for  we  have  already  shown,  ProjD.  49,  how  it  necessitates,  e.g.  a  resurrection)  the 
death  of  Jesus  is  requisite.  Hence  (ch.  9  :  15),  "  For  this  cause  He  is  the  Mediator  of 
the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions 
that  were  under  the  first  Testament,  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of 
eternal  inheritance."  This  promise,  let  the  reader  notice,  of  inheriting  the  land  forever,  is 
found  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  Now  the  Mosaic  economy  made  no  provision  for  the 
Patriarch's  or  Christ's  inheriting  (and  through  them  of  the  righteous  dead),  because  it 
provided  for  no  resurrecting  power  through  which  it  could  be  accomplished,  but  pointed 
onward,  by  its  types  and  sacrifices,  to  Him  who  should  have  power  to  perform  it.  In  this 
Plan,  the  death  of  Jesus  is  an  important  factor.  Therefore,  he  adds  (v.  16,  17),  "For 
where  a  testament  is,  there  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the  testator.  For  a 
testament  is  of  force  after  men  are  dead  ;  otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the 
testator  liveth."  While  the  original  word,  constantly  and  carefully  selected,  does  not 
mean  either  a  will  or  testament,*  but  an  arrangement,  disposition,  disposal  of  matters, 

*  That  we  are  not  forcing  a  meaning,  is  apparent  from  what  our  opponents  themselves 
say,  as  e.g.  the  excellent  remarks  of  Barnes,   Com.  loci,  and  Stuart,   Com.  loci.     We  are 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  323 

or  ordering  of  things,  yet  Paul  illustrates  the  fact  that  the  Abrahamic  covenant  required, 
before  its  realization,  the  death  of  Christ,  by  what  occurs  with  the  disposition  men  usu- 
ally make  of  their  affairs,  which  disposition  is  effective  after  their  death  as  far  as  inher- 
iting IS  concerned.  (This  is  also  additional  proof  of  the  correctness  of  our  position  that 
the  promises  of  the  covenant  are  not  yet  fulfilled.)  Without  keeping  in  view  this  man- 
ifest allusion  to  the  jjromise  of  inheriting,  the  illustration  would  be  unnatural  and  out 
of  place.  Or,  if  it  be  preferred,  as  some  do,  that  the  illustration  be  drawn  from  the 
ratification  of  a  covenant  or  arrangement  over  dead  sacrifices,  the  same  truth  is  still  pre- 
sented, that  without  the  death  of  Christ  the  promise  of  inheritance  cannot  be  obtained. 
(7)  The  matter  is  summed  up  (v.  28),  and  attention  directed  to  ihe  time  of  inheriting  : 
"  So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  ;  and  wito  them  that  look  for  Him 
shall  He  appear  the  second  time  wiihord  sin  unto  salvation.'"  To  a  Jew,  with  his  belief  in 
the  covenanted  mercies  of  Abraham  and  David,  the  only  possible  conclusion,  from  the 
language  of  the  apostle,  was,  that  at  the  second  coming,  thus  specified,  the  covenant  icould 
he  realized.  This  Jewish  opinion  would  be  strengthened  by  the  direct  quotations  from 
the  covenants  ;  by  speaking  of  "  the  world  to  come"  (a  favorite  Jewish  phrase,  emjDloyed 
to  designate  the  period  when  these  covenants  would  be  fulfilled)  ;  t)y  declaring  that 
"  this  man"  "  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  from  henceforth  expecting  till  His 
enemies  be  made  His  footstool  ;"  bj^  foretelling  "  the  day  approaching,"  "  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ, "  in  which  salvation  (as  covenanted)  was  to  be  experienced;  by  saying: 
"  For  yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry  ;''  by  point- 
ing to  Abraham  and  all  the  ancient  worthies  that  they  had  7wt  received  the  promise  in 
fulfilment,  but  would  with  us  at  the  appearing  of  this  Jesus  ;and  by  adopting,  in  conclu- 
sion, the  prophetical  and  Jewish  denomination  of  ''  everlasting  covenant"  in  the  ithrase 
"  tJte  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant/'  thus  showing  that  the  Abrahamic,  known  as  "  the 
everlasting,"  was  ratified  i3y  the  blood  or  death  of  Jesus.  Thus  a  perfect  unity  of  doctrine 
is  i3reserved  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  both  uniting  in  the  same  declara- 
tion, that  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the  reign  of  David's 
Son,  is  a  resultant  of  an  existing,  confirmed  covenant  relationship,  a  divine  arrangement, 
which  finds  its  basis,  so  far  as  humanity  is  related,  in  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the 
Jewish  nation,  and,  above  all,  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 

Obs.  4.  Persons  are  apt  to  be  misled  by  the  nse  of  the  word  "  neii%^^ 
thinking  that  it  necessarily  means  something  entirely  new,  different  from 
what  preceded.  They  forget  that  in  Bible  usage  it  frequently  means 
renewed,  restored  again,  newly  confirmed,  etc.,  as  in  new  heart,  new  moon, 
new  creature,  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  new  commandment,  drink  new 
(Matt.  26  :  29),  etc.  It  is  important  then  to  discriminate  whenever  the 
word  is  employed,  especially  in  so  weighty  a  matter  as  this,  seeing  the  high 
interests  that  are  involved.  As  the  phrase  "  new  covenant"  only  appears 
once  in  the  Old  Test,  and  but  a  few  times  in  the  Xew,  the  general  analogy 
of  Scripture  must  be  allowed  to  determine  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used. 

Ohs.  5.  The  corroborating  proof,  drawn  from  the  fact  that  Gentiles  to 
inherit  the  promises  must  become  tlie  seed  of  Abraham,  has  already  been 

not  specially  concerned,  so  far  as  our  argument  is  related,  to  advocate  any  of  the  views 
entertained  respecting  these  two  verses  (16th  and  17th),  for  whatever  opinion  is  enter- 
tained, all  admit  that,  in  some  way,  the  death  of  Christ  is  made  necessary  to  ratify  or 
secure  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  and  this  is  all  that  is  required  in  our  line  of  argu- 
ment. We  only  suggest  that  these  verses,  which  give  so  much  trouble  to  Expositors,  are 
easily  reconciled.  Eor  although  the  word  does  not  denote  strictly  a  will  or  testament, 
yet  the  apostle  can,  and  does,  correctly  compare  it  with  such,  on  account  of  the  resem- 
hlance  that  exists  between  the  Abrahamic  covenant  and  an  earthly  will  or  testament. 
Both,  in  order  to  be  realized,  call  for  the  death  of  the  testator  (and  here  indirectly  we 
have  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  asserted,  inasmuch  as  God  in  Christ  gave  this  covenant,  etc.)  ; 
both  are  only  valid  in  their  appropriations  or  fulfilment  of  contained  promises  of  in- 
terest through  the  death  of  the  parties  bestowing  them.  Keeping  this  resemblance  in 
view,  all  difficulty  vanishes.  (Comp.  Home's  Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  39  and  note,  Fairbairn's 
Berm.  Manual,  P.  2,  Sec.  7,  Judge  Jones's  Isotes,  Nast,  Com.  Matt.  26  :  28,  etc.) 


824  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  50. 

briefly  given  in  Props.  24,  29,  30  (united),  bnt  will  be  presented  in  detail 
nnder  Props.  59,  60,  Gl,  62,  63,  etc.  To  avoid  repeating,  let  it  only  be 
said  that  the  very  engrafting  or  adojition  of  Gentile  believers  into  the 
covenanted,  elect  nation^  is  itself  evidence  that  we  live  under  the  recon- 
firmed Abrahamic  covenant. 

As  a  correct  knowledge  of  covenant  relationship  is  essential  to  a  ijroper 
understanding  of  the  truth  in  Redemption,  and  to  inspire  within  us 
correct  hopes  of  the  future,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  those 
believers  who  lived  the  nearest  to  apostolic  times  and  enjoyed  the  advan- 
tages of  apostolic  explanations  upon  so  interesting  and  fundamental  a  sub- 
ject, ought  to  know  iinder  lohat  covenant  we  are  living,  what  covenant 
Jesus  confirmed  by  His  death,  and  under  what  covenant  saints  inherit. 
Now  down  to  Origen  not  a  single  Father  has  the  least  idea  of  an  entire  neiv 
covenant  instituted  by  Jesus,  but  every  one,  either  directly  or  indirectly  as 
far  as  we  can  gather,  confirms  our  vieiu  of  it.  If  moderns  are  correct  with 
their  notions  respecting  a  new  covenant  as  taught  in  Hebrews,  is  it  not 
remarkable  that  they  cannot  point  to  a  single  church,  Jewish  or  Gentile, 
that  received  and  taught  their  views  in  the  first  and  second  centuries.  If 
the  modern  notion  is  so  plain  and  distinct,  as  is  claimed,  why  not  then 
proclaimed  by  some,  at  least,  of  the  earliest  Fathers  ? 

This  is  seen  by  their  Chiliastic  attitude  and  looking  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic- 
Davidic  covenant  at  the  speedy  Advent  of  Jesus.  They  all  held  that  Christ  is  become 
the  surety  or  pledge  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  ;  that  He  will  fulfil  it  in  connection 
with  the  Davidic,  with  which  it  is  incorporated  ;  and  that  they  would,  through  Christ, 
inherit  the  promises  under  that  covenant.  A  large  array  of  quotations  might  be  pre- 
sented to  indicate  the  general  sentiment  on  this  point  but  having  already  given  (Prop. 
49,  etc.)  some  testimony,  and  having  occasion  hereafter  in  connection  with  other  points 
to  quote  others,  it  is  unnecessary  (the  more  so,  in  view  of  the  admissions  already  quoted 
from  Neander  and  others  respecting  the  prevailing  belief)  to  do  more  than  simply  refer 
to  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  who  (Sec.  14  and  15)  positively  argues  that  God  has  not  yet 
fulfilled  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  excepting  in  sending  the  Seed,  Christ,  who  is  the  cov- 
enanted pledge  that  the  remainder  will  be  realized  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  at  ''the  day  of 
restitution, "  at  "the  renewal  of  all  things."  The  decided  and  impressive  testimony  of  these 
early  Fathers,  given  amidst  weakness  and  imperfection,  and  the  strong  and  unwavering 
faith  they  manifested,  held  amidst  derision  and  persecution, —that  they  were  living  under 
this  renewed  Abrahamic  covenant  as  the  seed  of  Abraham,  which  the  death  and  exaltation 
of  Jesus  ensured  to  them  of  finally  realizing  in  the  inheriting  of  the  land  with  Abraham, 
—this  cannot  be  set  aside  as  a  departure  from  the  truth,  or  as  "  carnal,"  without  under- 
mining the  foundations  of  Christianity  itself.  If  these  men,  who  appealed  to  the  apostles 
and  elders,  are  not  to  be  trusted  in  giving  an  exhibit  of  the  covenanted  foundation  of 
their  Christian  faith,  —if  they  were  in  error  and  deceived,  —then  who  in  the  Church  can  be 
trusted  in  presenting  one  ?  Shall  we  select  Origen,  or  Augustine,  or  Jerome,  or  some 
later  one  ?  We  prefer  to  take  that  which  harmonizes  with  Scriptural  authorities  and 
keeps  the  closest  to  covenant  promise  as  written,  and,  therefore,  in  making  our  selection, 
we  find  Barnabas,  Papias,  Justin  Martyr,  Irena3us,  and  their  fellows  in  like  faith,  con- 
sistent both  with  covenant  language  and  explanation  as  given  in  Holy  Writ.  In  their 
simplicity,  and  with  all  their  imperfection,  they  have  far  more  of  the  truth,  fundamental, 
than  multitudes,  learned  and  eminent,  who  deride  them.     (Comp.  Props.  73-78.) 

Obs.  6.  This  view  of  the  covenant  was  overshadowed  and*crushed  by  the 
Alexandrian,  monkish,  and  Popish  theories  introduced  (comp.  Props.  77 
and  78).  It  was  entertained  in  some  of  its  leading  aspects  by  a  few  (as  e.g. 
Waldenses,  Albigenses)  down  to  the  Reformation,  when  it  was  partially 
(not  m  its  primitive  purity)  revived  by  the  Reformers.  The  influence  of 
the  late  Fathers  (as  Augustine,  etc.)  and  of  the  schoolmen,  prevented  that 
clear,  consistent,  and  simple  statement  that  once  pervaded  the  Primitive 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  325 

Church.  But  notwithstanding  this,  every  Reformer  saw  and  recognized  the 
fundamental  character  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  that  we  lived  under  its 
promises,  that  Christ  made  provision  for  their  fulfilment,  and  thus  con- 
lirmed  the  covenant.  Thus  e.g.  Luther  repeatedly  asserts  the  present 
existing  force  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  his  Com.  on  Galatians  ;  Calvin 
in  his  Institutes  (B.  2,  ch.  10)  rightly  makes  the  promises  of  this  covenant 
to  extend  over  into  the  future. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  Luther's  views.  Thus  e.g.  in  Com.  on  Gal.  ch.  3,  taking 
"  the  testament"  in  the  sense  of  a  will  (instead  of  disposition,  etc.),  he  expressly  says 
(V.  15)  :  "  Now,  if  a  man's  will  be  kept  with  so  great  fidelity,  that  nothing  is  added  to  it 
or  taken  from  it  after  his  death,  how  much  more  ought  the  last  will  of  God  to  be  faith- 
fully kept,  which  He  promised  and  gave  unto  Abraham  and  his  seed  after  him  ?  For  when 
Christ  died,  then  was  it  confirmed  in  Him,  and  after  His  death,  the  writing  of  His  last  tes- 
tament was  opened  ;  that  is  to  say  :  '  the  promised  blessing  cf  Abraham  was  preached 
among  all  nations  dispersed  throughout  the  world.'  This  was  the  last  will  and  testament 
of  God,  the  great  Testator,  confirmed  by  the  death  of  Christ  ;  therefore  no  man  ought  to 
change  it,  or  add  anything  to  it,  as  they  that  teach  the  law  and  man's  traditions  do." 
He  tells  under  V.  16,  that  "  the  promises  of  God  made  unto  Abraham"  being  called  "  a 
testament  "  makes  them  "  a  donation  or  free  gift,"  and  that  the  "  heirs  look  not  for  laws, 
exactions,  or  any  burdens  to  be  laid  upon  them  by  a  testament,  but  they  look  for  the 
i»/i6"/';7a?u;e  confirmed  thereby". "  In  commenting  on  v.  17,  he  a.dyoG{ites  the  perjjetuity  ol  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  (hence  is  not  superseded, — God  forbid  !),  and  beautifully  illustrates 
the  relation  that  the  Sinaitic  covenant  sustained  to  it  :  "  the  j^romise  was  not  abolished 
either  by  the  law,  or  by  the  ceremonies  of  the  law  ;  but  rather  by  the  same,  as  by  certain 
seals,  it  was  for  a  time  confirmed,  until  the  letters  themselves,  or  the  writing  of  the  tes- 
tament (to  wit,  the  promise),  might  be  opened  and  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  be 
spread  abroad  among  all  nations."  He  frequently  expresses  his  faith  in  this  promise, 
that  he  rests  in  it,  that  he  hopes  to  obtain  the  inheritance  (in  which,  mingling  the  means 
for  obtaining  the  inheritance  icitJi  the  inheritance  itself,  and  thus  introducing  confusion 
of  ideas,  he  includes,  v.  18,  "  remission  of  sins,  righteous,  salvation,  and  everlasting 
life  ;  that  we  should  be  sons  and  heirs  of  God  and  fellow-heirs  with  Christ' ' )  througli 
it,  and  that  to  receive  the  promise  we  must,  v.  29,  become  '^-the  children  of  Abraham  by 
adoption,"  and  ''  the  heirs  of  Abraham  after  the  promise.''  Thus  Luther  makes  much  of  an 
existing  Abrahamic  covenant,  confirmed  to  us  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  under  which  we 
already  enjoy  an  earnest  or  prelude  to  the  final  inheritance. 

Ois.  7.  Many  writers  might  be  presented  who  acknowledged  the  essen- 
tials, viz.  :  that  the  Abrahamic  covenant  is  an  existing  one,  made  sure  by 
the  death  of  Christ,  under  which  we  have  the  hope  of  inheritance,  and 
which  shall  finally  be  realized.  But  under  a  strange  misapprehension, 
they  either  deny,  or  else  omit  to  state,  that  all  the  promises  of  the  covenant 
will  be  fulfilled  ;  some  they  make  literal,  others  are  typical  or  spiritual, 
and  others  are  ignored.  Whatever  view  may  be  entertained,  they  are 
forced  by  the  tenor  of  Scripture  representation  to  confess  its  continued 
fundamental  relationship  to  Christianity. 

We  append  a  few  illustrations  :  Schmucker  {Pop.  Theol,  p.  247-8)  says  that  the  cov- 
enant made  with  Abraham  "  was  not  a  temporary  one,  soon  to  be  abolished,  but  that  it 
was  to  remain  in  its  essential  features  through  all  future  generations,  for  an  everlasting 
covenant."  Hodge  (Sys.  Div.)  asserts  the  identity  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  succeed- 
ing dispensations  and  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  common  doctrine  of  the  church.' '  When  Hodge 
says  of  Christ,  "  He  guarantees  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises  and  conditions  of  the 
covenant  ;  His  blood  was  the  blood  of  the  covenant"  it  may  well  be  asked,  were  not 
those  promises  contained  in  the  Abrahamic,  and  is  not,  therefore,  the  Abrahamic  cove- 
nant the  one  sealed  by  His  blood  ?  Any  amount  of  such  testimony,  which  flatly  con- 
tradicts other  statements  of  the  same  writers,  might  be  adduced,  but  these  are  sufficient 
to  show  how  fundamental  the  covenant  is  regarded  even  by  those  who  are  largely  ad- 
dicted to  spiritualizing.  When  drawing  up  the  first  draft  of  this  Proposition,  the  writer 
(March  27th,  1873),  being  in  company  with  his  former  theological  instructor,  Rev.  Dr. 


326  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIIS-GDOM.  [PrOP.  50. 

Sprecher,  directly  asked  liim  the  question  :  Under  what  covenant  do  we  now  live  ?  The 
Dr.  quickly  and  unhesitatingly  replied  :  that  the  church  now  lived  under  the  Abrahamic 
covenant  and  that  it  would  ultimately  reap  the  promises  of  that  covenant  ;  and  that  the 
new  covenant  was  the  Abrahamic  renewed  or  contirmed  by  the  death  of  Christ,  so  that 
we  had  the  strongest  possible  assurance  in  its  realization.  It  was  a  gratification  to  find 
my  honored  friend  thus  cordially  receive  the  Primitive  doctrine,  which  is  the  only  Scrip- 
tural and  logical  view. 

Ois.  8.  There  are  writers  who  clearly  apprehend  the  truth  and  fairly 
state  it.  These,  of  course,  are  Millenarians  ;  for  it  is  a  distinguislmig 
feature  of  their  system,  from  the  Primitive  Church  down,  that  it  is  directly 
founded  on  tlie  Abrahaniic  and  Davidic  covenants.  Holding  to  those 
covenants  as  luritten,  clinging  to  those  promises  witliout  changing  .them, 
believing  that  they  will  all,  as  recorded,  be  finally  realized  through  Jesus 
Christ, — leads  necessarily  to  CMliasm.  The  history  of  the  Church  con- 
clusively shows,  that  just  as  Chiliasm  in  its  purity  prevailed,  in  that 
proportion  were  the  covenants  tt2)held  and  exalted  as  signal  landmarks  ;  and 
just  as  the  Origenistic,  Popish,  and  Mystical  interpretation  extended  so 
were  these  covenants  ignored  as  non-essential,  or  else  spiritualized  so  as  to 
make  them  scarcely  recognizable. 

Outside  of  the  Scriptures,  we  are  alone  indebted  to  Chiliasts  for  a  distinct  statement 
of  the  relationship  that  the  covenants  sustain  to  the  Plan  of  Salvation  or  to  the  King- 
dom of  God.  But  even  some  Millenarians,  influenced  by  the  neglect  that  the  covenants 
have  sustained,  or,  not  realizing  sufiiciently  their  vital  and  fundamental  relationship  to  the 
Kingdom,  either  omit  an  extended  reference  to  them  when  such  an  one  would  be  in 
place,  or  intimate  the  same  with  the  briefest  mention.  It  is,  indeed,  a  very  simple  doc- 
trine when  contrasted  with  many  of  the  elaborate  antagonistic  systems  of  divinity  orig- 
inated by  the  assumptions  of  Popish  doctors,  the  Schoolmen,  Philosophers,  etc.,  but  its 
simplicity,  to  a  scholar  posted  in  the  history  of  doctrine,  and  to  a  believer  who  knows 
that  "  the  just  live  by  faith,"  only  recommends  it  the  more  to  our  notice.  Nearly  every 
Millenarian  work  refers  to  the  covenant  as  we  have  done,  more  or  less,  extended.  Ad- 
mirable things  are  found  in  the  writings  of  M'Neile,  Noel,  Bonars,  Shimeall,  Bicker- 
steth,  Jones,  etc.,  etc.  An  illustration  is  given  :  Brooks  (El.  Proph.  Inter.,  p.  19)  says  : 
"The  covenant  made  with  Abraham  is  what  is  called  the  '  New  Covenant'  and  the 
'  Covenant  of  Promise '  ;  for  unless  he  (the  reader)  be  clear  in  this  matter,  he  will  be  un- 
able to  understand  '  the  hope  of  his  calling  '  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  set  forth  in  the  word  of 
prophec5\  It  is  the  more  needful  to  premise  thus  much,  seeing  that  many,  even 
pious  Christians,  have  but  a  vague  notion  of  the  nature  of  the  covenant  of  grace." 
Brethren,  who  may  differ  from  the  author,  must  not  become  offended  at  the  plainness  of 
speech,  seeing  that  faith  is  involved.  Luther  once  said  :  "  Charity  beareth  all  things, 
faith  nothing."  Charity  will  be  gentle,  embracing  those  from  whom  we  are  compelled 
to  differ  ;  faith  makes  no  compromise  in  doctrine  and  states  its  i)osition  plainly,  and 
frankly,  and  boldly. 

Ohs.  9.  Those  who  advocate  that  an  entire  7ievj  covenant  was  given  and 
confirmed  by  the  death  of  Jesus  differ  very  much  as  to  the  nature  and 
meaning  of  this  alleged  covenant.  A  variety  of  explanations  are  tendered, 
but  all  these,  so  far  as  noticed,  with  but  few  exceptions,  attempt  no 
Scriptural  proof.  We  are  simply  to  receive  assertion,  without  having  the 
neiv  covenant  itself  pointed  out  and  its  language  quoted.  If  Jesus  gave  such 
a  covenant,  as  alleged,  it  ought,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  (like  preceding 
ones)  to  be  plainly  stated  ;  for  a  covenant  is  of  so  special  a  character  that 
it  cannot  be  taken  for  granted,  or  be  simply  inferred.  Now  not  a  single 
writer  of  this  class  has  attempted  to  produce  the  covenant  itself. 

To  indicate  this  variety  and  the  loose  method  of  procedure,  several  illustrations  are 
annexed.  Augustine  (City  of  God,  B.  17,  S.  3),  makes  Heb.  8  :  8-10,  the  new  covenant, 
to  refer  to  King  Solomon  building  the  temple  (against  the  context  of  Jeremiah),  and  thus 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  327 

to  the  earthly  Jerusalem  historically,  and  then  spiritualized  :  "  without  doubt  this  is 
prophesied  to  the  Jerusalem  above,"  i.e.  as  elsewhere  explained  "  the  true  Jerusalem 
eternal  in  the  heavens. "  And  such  nonsense — if  not  worse — is  to  be  received  as  worthy 
of  reception.  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  TheoL,  p.  301)  calls  it  "  a  new  dispensation,  a  new  econ- 
omy, that  which  Jesus  had  called  a  new  covenant."  Barnes  {Com.  Matt.  26  :  28)  terms 
it,  "  the  Gospel  economy,"  a  new  compact  with  men,  etc.  The  Encycl.  Relig.  Knowl., 
Art.  "  Covenant,"  makes  the  new  covenant  "  a  new  dispensation,"  or  "the  Christian 
Economy."  Knapp  {Ch.  Theol,  p.  499)  says  :  "  On  the  day  of  Christ's  death  the  ancient 
Mosaic  dispensation  ceased,  and  the  new  covenant  or  the  new  dispensation,  instituted 
by  God  through  Christ  for  the  Salvation  of  men,  commenced."  "  It  is  therefore  the  uni- 
form doctrine  of  the  apostles  that  the  new  dispensation  of  God  began  with  the  death  of 
Christ,  and  was  thereby  solemnly  consecrated."  The  texts  cited  to  prove  such  an  im- 
portant deduction  are  all  of  a  nature,  fiist,  to  show  that  the  Mosaic  economy  is  abolished 
(which  we  do  not  deny),  and  secondly,  to  indicate  the  efficacy,  etc.,  of  Christ's  death 
(which  we  as  cordially  accept),  but  in  none  is  the  slightest  hint  given  that  this  dispen- 
sation is  the  New  Covenant,  which  is  inferred  from  Matt.  26  :  28.  Certainly  this  process 
of  reasoning,  which  makes  a  disjiensation  equivalent  to  the  bestowal  of  a  covenant,  is 
utterly  wrong  and  derogatory  to  the  Word  itself,  whose  explanation  of  the  covenant  is 
passed  by  for  an  unlawful  inference.  Those  who  favor  the  dispensational  theory  in- 
volve themselves  at  once  in  a  gross  absurdity  and  contradiction.  Thus  e.g.  Hodge,  a 
writer  in  Encycl.  Relig.  Know].,  Schmucker,  etc.,  call  this  covenant"  an  everlasting,'"  '■'an 
eternal"  one,  and  yet  they  make  it  identical  v^ith.  a  dispensation  or  economy  which  (hey 
tell  us  is  7iot  eternal,  but  will  come  to  an  end.  The  trouble  with  this  class  of  dispensa- 
tional theorists  is,  that  making  this  the  final  dispensation,  everything,  whether  it  tits  or 
not,  must  be  crowded  into  it  to  fulfil  the  Scriptures.  Lange  {Com.  Genl.  Introd.,  p.  20), 
makes  "  the  New  Testament  the  covenant  itself,"  which  is  totally  irrelevant.  Some- 
thing of  the  kind  must  have  influenced  the  mind  of  Origen,  for  we  are  indebted  to  him 
(Home's  Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  38)  for  first  api^lying  the  phrase  "New  Testament"  to  the 
writings  of  the  Apostles.  (This  is  a  title,  which,  while  merely  of  human  origin  and  in- 
correct, if  understood  as  pertaining  to  the  New  Covenant,  may  Tdc  retained.)  Some,  there- 
fore, are  misled  in  making  the  Scriptures  as  contained  in  the  Gos^jels,  Acts,  Epistles, 
and  Apocalypse,  the  New  Covenant.  This  embraces  too  much,  and  defeats  itself. 
Lange,  however,  only  applies  this  in  a  general  way,  for  on  the  same  page  he  particular- 
izes :  "  the  Lord  designates  the  Eucharist  the  New  Covenant  in  His  blood,  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  term."  But  Lange  is  again  mistaken,  for  Christ  did  not  call  the  Eucharist  or 
Supper  the  covenant,  because  "  the  cup"  is  significant  of  the  Eucharist,  and  hence  "  the 
cup  of  the  New  Testament"  shows  that  the  Supper  or  that  expressed  by  it  is  separate 
from  the  covenant.  It  simply  denotes  what  we  have  already  shown,  that  by  the  death 
represented  in  this  cup  the  covenant  itself  is  renewed  or  confirmed.  Otherwise  if  the 
covenant  is  the  Eucharist,  the  propriety  even  of  language  is  violated,  for  we  have  "  the 
Eucharist  (the  cup;  of  the  Eucharist."  Pressense  {The  Bedeemer,  p.  95)  has  the  old  cov- 
enant spiritualized  to  form  the  New,  for  he  informs  us  :  "  He  (Christ)  cannot  develop 
it  (the  old  covenant)  except  by  rendering  it  spiritual  ;  and  the  ancient  covenant  when 
made  spiritual  6eco?nes  the  New  Covenant."  This  is  simply  a  repetition  of  Augustine 
{City  of  God,  B.  16,  S.  26),  who  says  :  "  The  New  Covenant  is  shadowed  forth  in  the  old. 
For  what  does  the  old  covenant  imply,  but  the  concealing  of  the  New  ?  And  what  does 
the  term  New  Covenant  imply,  but  the  revealing  of  the  Old  ?"  All  this  proceeds  on  the 
assumption  that  the  old  covenant  was  not  also  of  a  spiritual  nature,  which  is  refuted  by 
the  spiritual  blessings  that  it  also  promises.  And  if  temporal  blessings,  blessings  relat- 
ing to  this  earth,  are  connected  with  it,  how  can  these  in  an  everlasting  covenant  be 
changed,  modified,  altered,  spiritualized  without  invalidating  God's  truthfulness  ?  And, 
if  it  is  so  exclusively  spiritual,  how  comes  it  that  Jesus  came  literally  in  the  flesh  as  the 
promised  Seed  ?  And  if  spiritual,  who,  of  all  those  who  spiritualize  it,  have  spiritualized 
it  correctly  ?  For  Jesus,  the  Christ,  certainly  never,  never  sjm'itualized  away  Hi3  own  in- 
heritance (comp.  Prop.  122).  Schmid  {Bib.  Theol,  p.  213)  defines  the  New  Covenant  to 
be  "  a  covenant  of  more  complete  alliance  and  forgiveness,  concluded  and  consecrated 
by  the  death  of  Christ,"  etc.  Cheerfully  admitting  the  necessity  and  efficacy  of  Christ's 
death,  yet  the  Abrahamic  covenant  itself  requires  in  those  who  shall  inherit  its  pro- 
mises the  remission  of  sins,  and  as  the  shedding  of  blood  is  required  according  to  the 
Scriptures,  provision  is  made  for  fulfilment  in  and  through  the  death  of  Jesus,  so  that 
the  resurrection  power  implied  (Prop.  49)  in  the  covenant  may  be  exerted.  Hence,  it 
will  not  answer  to  exalt  the  provision  made  by  Christ /or  the  fulfilment  of  covenant 
promise,  however  indispensable  and  precious,  into  the  position  of  the  covenant  itself. 
Where  is  the  express  covenant,  consecrated  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  found,  if  not  in  the 


328  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  50. 

Abrahamic  ?  If  any  other  exists,  as  Sclimid  and  others  state,  ivhy  is  it  not  formally  ex- 
pressed somewhere  in  the  Scrij^tures.  Others,  however,  refer  ns  to  Isa.  49  :  8  and 
42  :  6,  where  it  is  predicted  of  Christ,  "  1  will  give  Thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,''  and 
assert  that  this  means  that  Christ  Himself  is  the  New  Covenant,  or  that  He  will  make 
such  an  one.  As  to  the  first,  that  Christ  is  the  covenant,  commentators  admit  (even 
Barnes,  loci)  that  the  phrase  does  not  mean  that  Christ  himself  is  the  covenant  but  the 
One  through  whom  it  is  to  be  effected  or  established,  appealing  to  Mic.  5  :  5,  "and  this 
man  shall  be  the  peace,"  i.e.  the  establisher  of  j^eace,  etc.  Aside  from  some  Germans 
(Hitzig,  Ewald,  etc.),  rendering  the  word  "  covenant  "  "  a  mediatorial  people"  or  "cov- 
enant people,"  which  Alexander  (Com.  loci)  says  "  yields  a  good  sense,"  we  accept  of 
Alexander's  explanation  :  "  this  use  of  '  covenant '  although  unusual  is  in  itself  not  more 
unnatural  or  forced  than  that  of  '  light '  in  the  next  j^hrase.  As  light  of  the  nations  must 
mean  a  source  or  dispenser  of  light  to  them,  so  '  covenant  of  the  people '  in  the  very 
same  sentence  may  naturally  mean  the  disf)enser  or  mediator  of  a  covenant  with  them." 
Christ,  because  He  confirms  the  Abrahamic  covenant  and  eventually  fulfils  it,  bears  this 
significant  title.  As  to  the  second  idea,  that  Christ  makes  an  entire  new  covenant,  it  is 
pure  inference  and  remains  unproven.  The  reader  has  only  to  read  the  context  of  these 
phrases  in  Isaiah,  and  he  will  find  our  position  fully  sustained  by  its  intimate  relation- 
ship to  the  restoration  of  the  covenanted  Jewish  nation,  and  hence  these  references  to  Christ 
denote  that  He  caiises  the  covenant  to  be  realized.  These  examples  are  amply  sufficient 
to  illustrate  the  opposite  views  and  to  indicate  their  variety  and  strength.  Hence,  we 
cannot  receive  the  current  phraseology  on  the  subject,  as  e.g.  Pressense  (TAe  Early  Days 
of  Christianity,  -p-  240),  Who  says  of  Paul's  teaching  :  "  The  new  covenant  is  to  him  essen- 
tially a  new  fact,  the  proclamation  of  pardon,  the  sovereign  manifestation  of  grace — in 
one  word,  the  Gospel " — for  this  is  simply  to  mistake  the  means  intended  to  secure  cov- 
enant blessings /or  the  covenant  itself.  Much  that  is  said  of  a  "  covenant  of  grace"  (as 
distinguished  from  a  "  covenant  of  works"),  while  correct  in  principle  and  showing  the 
contrast  between  the  dispensations,  may  be  retained,  but  just  so  soon  as  it  is  made  to 
occupy  the  position  of  ' '  the  everlasting  covenant "  which  contains  the  promises  and 
under  which  we  inherit  by  grace  extended,  then  we  reject  it  as  unscriptural  and  mislead- 
ing. 

Ohs.  10.  It  follows,  then,  that  it  is  a  grave  misapprehension  of  Scripture 
teaching  to  say,  as  some  do,  that  all  the  older  covenants  ended  in  Christ. 
Able  writers  take  the  position  (Kurtz,  His.  of  Old  Oov.,  Vol.  1,  p.  1)  that 
the  old  covenant  ended  in  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  (Knapp,  Gh.  TheoL, 
p.  499,  prefers  to  end  it  at  the  death  of  Jesus),  giving  place  to  an  entire 
new  one.  Kurtz  tells  us  that  "  the  ultimate  aim  and  the  highest  point  of 
the  Divine  covenant  activity  in  all  its  manifestations  is  the  incarnation  of 
God  in  Christ,"  and  (p.  221)  that  Clirist  is  "  the  highest  and  last  repre- 
sentative of  the  Abrahamic  covenant."  No!  never  I  for  the  covenant 
compreliends  immensely  more  than  the  incarnation  of  the  Messiah  ;  it 
embraces  His  inheritance  and  future  glory  ;  it  is  world-embracing,  for,  as 
will  be  shown  hereafter,  in  its  brief  but  pregnant  sentences,  it  includes  the 
resurrection,  restoration,  and  inheriting  of  the  Patriarchs  and  of  their 
believing  descendants  and  of  the  adopted  seed, — the  Kingdom  under  the 
reign  of  that  pre-eminent  Seed,  the  ultimate  salvation  of  the  race  as  a  race, 
the  final  removal  of  the  curse,  and  the  perfected  Redemption  of  man  and 
the  creation.  The  Incarnation,  mexj^ressihly  precious  and  indispensably 
necessary,  is  an  important — the  first  in  magnitude — 7neans  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  covenajit  promises,  but  it  too  is  only  'preparatory.  Hence  it  is 
wrong  to  narrow  down  the  covenant  to  the  First  Advent,  just  as  if  the 
Seed  was  not  in  His  glorified  humanity  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  82,  83,  199-203) 
yet  to  exhibit  a  glorious  part  in  the  fulfilment  of  covenanted  promises  at 
His  Second  Advent. 

Seeing  the  weighty  consequences  resulting  to  interpretation  from  this  source,  we  leave 
Dr.  Kurtz  (p.  207)  present  his  view  as  follows  :  After  justly  speaking  of  the  fuln  ess  of  the 
name  of  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,"  calling  it  "  the  inscription  on  the  por- 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  329 

tal  of  the  historical  development  of  the  covenant,"  and  "  the  seal  of  that  covenant,"  he 
then  adds,  that  it  continued  such  until  the  appearance  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  until  the  time 
arrived  in  which  Abraham  ceased  to  be  the  rock  whence  the  people  of  the  covenant  were 
hewn  and  Sarah  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  they  were  digged  (Isa.  51  :  1,  2),  and  the  new 
Israel  found  in  Christ  the  author  and  finisher  of  faith,  and  in  the  Spirit 'of  God  the  foun- 
tain of  life."  This  is  a  serious  misstatement  of  "  the  hope  of  our  calling,"  and  ?/ true, 
^/ioi  our  promised  inheritance  is  withheld  from  tis  and  God's  promises  covenanted  to 
Abraham  will  not  be  faithfully  performed.  Let  us  briefly  point  out  the  fallacy  of  such 
language  (selecting  Kurtz  as  the  ablest  advocate  of  this  view),  because  of  its  bearing  upon 
the  highest  interests  of  man.  (1)  The  reference  to  Abraham  and  Sarah  (Isa.  51  :  1,  2)  is 
an  utter  reversal  of  what  the  inspired  prophet  declares.  Kurtz  informs  us  that  in  the 
Messianic  times  we  shall  not  look  to  Abraham,  because  the  people  of  the  covenant  are  not 
derived  from  him  ;  the  Prophet  says  exactly  the  reverse,  viz.  :  that  we  shall  look  to  him. 
and  the  reason  is  assigned  because  of  his  election  ("  for  I  called  him  alone").  It  stands 
connected  loith  a  glorious  Millennial  portrayal.  In  some  way  (as  we  shall  explain,  Props. 
Gl-65)  Abraham  is  still  our  Father,  i.e.  of  the  elect,  them  that  believe,  and  because  of  his 
being  chosen  and  his  seed  in  him  "  the  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion,  He  will  comfort  all  her  icaste 
places,''  etc.  (2)  When  the  Jews  were  rejected  nationally  during  the  allotted  "  times  of 
the  Gentiles"  still  a  seed  must  be  raised  xqy  unto  Abraham,  to  be  recognized  as  his  chil- 
dren. Why  ?  Because  to  him  and  to  his  seed  was  given  the  covenant,  and  hence  we 
miist  herela'ted  to  him.  (3)  Believers  inherit  icith  Abraham,  and  this  because  they  come  into 
covenant  relationship  with  him.  (4)  All  who  are  received  as  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  received 
on  the  same  principle  of  faith  that  Abraham  was,  i.e.  by  faith,  and  in  view  of  the  same 
are  adopted  as  his  " children,"— thwH  are  connecied  with  him.  (5)  Hence  Abraham  is  ex- 
pressly called  the  Father  of  all  the  faith  fid,  because  of  a  sustained  relationship.  (G)  The 
chosen  are  never  called  the  children  of  Christ,  but  His  brethren,  co-heirs,  etc.,  because 
they  inherit  with  Him  covenanted  promises  given  to  Abraham.  (7)  Being  the  author  and 
finisher  of  our  faith  does  not  by  any  means  place  Christ  in  the  position  of  Abraham,  it 
only  shows  how  through  Christ  we  can  attain  and  retain  Abrahamic  faith.  (8)  Christ 
Himself  is  the  subject  of  covenanted  promise  not  yet  fulfilled,  and  therefore  the  covenant 
is  not  superseded  in  Christ,  for  that  would  destroy  promises  pertaining  to  Him.  (9)  The 
"  Spirit  of  God  "  was  just  as  much  "  the  fountain  of  life"  to  Abraham  and  believing  Jews 
as  to  us  now,  for  the  Bible  abundantly  testifies  (comp.  Prop.  171)  how  that  Spirit  attended, 
enlightened,  confirmed,  and  strengthened  them.  In  the  light  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant, 
we  dare  not  depart  from  the  plain  statements  of  the  Word  and  reverse  one  of  the  most 
impressive  utterances  of  Isaiah,  and  destroy  oi(r  own  covenanted  hopes  of  a  blessed  in- 
heritance. Men  may  honestly  and  sincerely  think  that  they  are  exalting  Christ  by  this 
method,  but  the  real  truth  is,  that  they  are  lowering  Christ  as  a  faithful  Rdfiller  of  the 
X^romises  made  to  the  Fathers. 

Ohs.  11.  We  read  and  hear,  at  present,  what  are  supposed  to  be  axio- 
matic truths  respecting  the  New  Covenant,  which  are  eminently  calcuhited 
to  mislead  the  inquirer.  An  immense  array  of  alleged  self-evident  truth 
will  not  stand  the  test  of  Scriptural  examination  ;  and  yet  men,  blinded 
and  biased  by  the  authority  of  great  names  who  promulgate  them,  persist 
in  retaining  them  because  of  their  plausible  appearance.  It  is  singular 
how  a  rut  made  by  the  ornamental  carriage  of  an  Augustine  or  of  a 
Cyprian,  or  even  by  the  ruder  cart  of  some  monk,  has  b^en  followed  for 
centuries,  unquestioned,  as  if  it  alone,  and  none  other,  was  the  proper  road 
to  an  intended  goal.  The  time  has  arrived  when  those  well  worn  ruts  are 
carefully,  through  their  entire  length,  examined  both  by  the  enemies  and 
friends  of  the  truth  ;  and  we  may  rest  assured,  from  the  nature  of 
truth  itself,  that  if  honestly  made  the  Divine  Directory  will  never  suffer. 

If  men  have  erred,  if  even  the  multitude  have  gone  astray,  it  is  only  what  the  Bible 
has  predicted,  has  threatened,  has  warned  us  against,  and  has  pointed  out  as  the  natural 
result  of  human  wisdom,  weal^ness,  and  depravity.  Hence,  as  in  the  present  case,  when 
but  few  really  entertain  the  truth  on  a  given  subject,  instead  of  feeling  that  this  is  an- 
tagonistic to  the  truth,  we  ought  rather  to  say  that  it  precisely  corresponds  with  what 
God  Himself  asserts  respecting  it.  A  lack  of  great  faith  is  predicted,  and  as  Gentiles  we 
are  warned  not  to  be  "  high-minded  "  in  our  privileges.     Indeed,  we  ought  only  the  more 


330  THE  THEOCRATIC  Ki:N^GDO]vr.  [Prop.  50. 

narrowly  examine  even  tlie  things  that  may  be  deemed  well  established.  Surely  in  such 
a  procedure  is  there  safety  and  well-grounded  hoi^e.  For,  as  practical  Christianity  is 
fostered  and  strengthened  by  a  constant  renewal  and  self-examination,  so  theoretical  or 
doctrinal  Christianity  is  confirmed  and  improved  by  reflection,  study,  and  testing. 
When  a  student  has  advanced  so  far  that  he  is  unwilling  to  have  his  most  cherished 
views  subject  to  a  candid  but  searching  criticism,  then  advancement  in  knowledge,  and 
improvement  in  understanding,  also  ceases  ; — he  no  longer  occupies  a  student's  attitude. 
By  the  axiomatic  truths  alluded  to  in  the  Obs.,  we  mean  the  exalting  of  means  to  accom- 
plish the  covenant  into  the  covenant  itself  ;  the  elevation  of  this  dispensation,  which  is 
only  preparatory,  into  the  covenant  ;  the  making  the  Gospel,  which  gives  the  glad  tidings 
how  the  covenant  is  to  be  realized  and  that  we  are  invited  to  participate  in  its  realiza- 
tion, the  covenant,  etc.     The  student  can  readily  find  them  in  ten  thousand  works. 

Obs.  12.  Some  readers  may  desire  to  have  the  mistakes,  into  which  a 
misconception  of  the  covenant  necessarily  leads,  pointed  out.  In  the  an- 
nexed note  several  of  the  more  prominent  are  given,  in  addition  to  those 
already  specified. 

(1)  Making  an  entire  New  Covenant  and  the  Old  Covenants  abrogated,  necessarily  dis- 
connects this  disj)ensation  from  the  preceding,  and  erects  an  independency  which  is 
destructive  to  the  unity  of  Divine  Purpose  as  exhibited  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  The 
reverse  of  this  follows  our  argument. 

(2)  Professing  to  live  under  an  entire  New  Covenant,  and  that  the  Old  is  no  longer  ex- 
isting, leads  to  a  denial  of  the  Jewish  elect  and  covenanted  position,  and  that  the  Jewish 
nation  has  certain  indisputable  privileges  pertaining  to  it  which  it  is  jolainly  predicted 
to  realize  in  the  future.  The  reverse  of  this  follows  the  reception  of  the  Abrahamic  and 
Davidic  covenants. 

(3)  The  annulling  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  Christ  and  the  bestowal  of  another 
covenant,  while  unjust  to  the  faith  of  centuries  in  that  covenant,  while  hostile  to  the 
grammatical  sense  of  the  covenant,  evinces  the  grossest  injustice  in  that  it  denies  that 
Gentiles,  to  participate  in  the  blessings  of  the  covenant,  must  also,  in  some  way,  he  iden- 
tijied  with  the  believing  portion  of  the  Jewish  nation  that  received  the  covenant. 

(4)  The  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  Christ,  and  a  consequent  New  one 
entered  into,  flatly  denies  the  inheritance  of  the  land  j^romised  to  Abraham's  Seed,  the 
resurrection  and  subsequent  inheriting  of  the  land  by  the  Patriarchs,  etc.,  and  thus  en- 
tirely misapprehends  the  ndtiire  of  Christ's  inheritance  and  that  of  the  Patriarchs. 

(5)  Having  such  a  New  Covenant  and  ignoring  the  Old,  causes  its  advocates  to  insist 
upon  a  present  fulfilment  of  promises  which  are  located  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  To  make 
such  an  application,  the  grammatical  meaning  must  give  place  to  engrafted  sjjiritual 
ones.  Preparatory  measures,  means  of  grace,  the  earnests  of  faith  and  hope,  are  ele- 
Tated  into  an  ample  fulfilment. 

(6)  Those  who  admit  the  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  the  distant  future, 
but  deny  that  we  live  under  it  now  (making  a  new  covenant  existing),  thus  ignore  its 
not  having  been  annulled,  that  our  adoption  as  children  of  Abraham  hinges  on  it,  that 
Christ's  death  confirms  its  validity  to  us,  and  that  all  our  blessings  flow  from  it.  The 
dislocation  offered  by  them  is  unnatural  and  destroys  the  unity. 

(7)  Those  who  make  the  covenants  exclusively  pertaining  to  the  Jews,  the  natural  de- 
scendants of  Abraham,  and  hence  something  not  pertaining  to  the  Gentiles,  the  latter 
being  under  another  and  new  covenant— forget  that  it  is  the  blessing  of  Abraham  that 
is  to  be  extended  to  the  Gentile  believers,  l)ut  only  on  the  ground  of  their  becoming 
the  seed  of  Abraham  through  faith,  so  that  they  may  inherit  the  promises  with  Abraham. 
The  Bible  makes  no  distinction  between  the  believing  natural  descendants  or  the  be- 
lieving adopted.  It  is,  however,  not  as  Gentiles  that  we  can  inherit,  but  Gentiles  who, 
on  account  of  faith,  are  adopted,  engrafted. 

(8)  Those  who  make  a  New  Covenant  existing,  because  the  Old  was  conditional,  over- 
look the  fact  that  its  unconditionality  is  expressly  asserted  in  that  all  believers  inherit 
under  it.  It  is  an  everlasting  covenant  unto  all  generations,  and  ctinnot,  will  not  fail  to 
be  realized  in  the  Patriarchs  and  their  seed— those  natural  and  adopted  who  are  of  faith. 

(9)  To  create  a  New  Covenant  on  the  ground  that  the  Abrahamic  will  not  be  realized 
because  the  Jewish  nation  has  rejected  Christ,  is  to  raise  up  a  false  issue,  and 
make  it  the  basis  of  an  important  doctrine.  For  if  there  is  a  truth  distinctly  taught  in 
the  Bible,  it  is,  that  the  Jewish  nation  will  some  time  in  the  future  recognize  Him  whom 


PPwOP.  50.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  331 

they  have  pierced  as  the  Messiah,  the  one  who  is  to  fulfil  the  Abrahamie  covenant.  This 
will  be  shown  at  length  as  our  argument  proceeds. 

(10)  Advocating  a  New  Covenant  and  ignoring  the  renewed  Abrahamie,  leads  to  an  entire 
change  of  Biblical  terms.  Thus  e.g.  Israel  and  Judah  are  made  to  mean  simply  believers 
in  Christ  without  the  slightest  reference  to  their  adoption  as  the  children  of  Abraham  bj^ 
which  they  become  entitled  to  the  name.  The  true  Israel  are  a  covenanted  peoj)le. 
which  they  obtain  by  their  relationship  to  Abraham  as  the  covenanted  head.  Gen- 
tiles only  can  become  such  by  adoption. 

Such  are  some  of  the  mistakes  made  on  this  subject  ;  and  let  not  the  reader  con- 
sider them  unimportant,  for  they  largely  affect  the  interpretation  of  the  Word,  a  cor- 
rect faith  and  hope  in  the  things  of  God.  By  adopting  them,  no  proper  discrimina- 
tion can  be  maintained  in  the  fulfilment  of  promises,  no  existing  and  vital  connection 
between  the  dispensations  under  covenant  is  observed,  no  satisfactory  and  unvarying 
fundamental  covenant  forms  the  theological  basis  of  doctrine,  no  undeviating  usage  of 
the  sense  contained  in  language  is  constantly  preserved,  in  brief,  no  correct  and  consis- 
tent Plan  of  Salvation,  preserving  the  promises  to  Abraham,  to  David,  and  to  Christ,  can  be 
successfully  advocated.  In  this  again,  the  Primitive  Church  shows  its  wisdom  and  logi- 
cal consistency. 

Obs.  13.  The  very  coming  of  tlie  Seed  covenanted  to  Abraham,  insures 
the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  as  'written.  It  is  in  view  of  this  that  He 
Himself  is  designated  "  the  covenant/^  for  He  is  the  Fulfiller  of  it,  and 
without  Him  it  could  not  possibly  be  realized.  Justin  Martyr  {Dial,  with 
Trypho,  cli.  51)  and  others  of  the  Fathers,  who  viewed  the  covenant  in  the 
light  that  we  do,  called  Christ  "  the  New  Testament,"  meaning  that  in 
Him  the  covenant  was  confirmed  and  fully  assured  of  ultimate  fulfilment. 
The  Advent  of  Abraham's  Seed,  then,  is  evidence  already  that  the  purposes 
of  God  expressed  in  that  covenant  are  sure.  Literally  He  came,  vindicating 
the  truthfulness  of  the  covenant  given  many  centuries  before,  and  teaching 
us,  if  we  will  but  receive  it,  that  every  promise  will  be  literally  verified. 

Hence  Paul  in  1  Cor.  11  :  26,  having  directed  attention  to  this  covenant  renewed  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  immediately  in  connection  points  to  the  Sec,  Advent  as  certain,  and 
the  means  of  fulfilment,  thus  :  ' '  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye 
do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come." 

Obs.  14.  In  the  promises  of  the  covenant  are  involved  blessings,  such  as 
a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  a  perpetual  inheritance,  a  constant  presence 
and  blessing  of  God,  a  Theocratic  ordering  intimated,  etc.,  which  to  be 
secured  in  all  their  fulness,  as  the  Divine  Plan  in  its  unfolding  shows, 
demands  a  Mediator,  a  Sacrifice  for  sin,  in  order  that  those  who  believe 
nnto  obedience  may  be  thus  blessed.  The  death  of  Jesus  becomes  a  pre- 
requisite to  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  for  through  this  death,  as  Paul 
says  in  Heb.  9  :  15,  all  (in  the  past,  present,  and  future)  "  which  are  called 
7night  receive  the  pro^nise  of  eternal  inheritance.^^  By  that  death  not  only 
the  power  and  majesty  of  moral  law  is  vindicated,  not  only  a  never-failing 
proof  of  God's  love  and  mercy  is  manifested,  etc.,  but  it  constitutes  Him  ct 
worthy  Messiah,  a  worthy  Theocratic  King,  tested  and  tried,  acknowledged 
and  accepted  by  the  Father,  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost,  able  to  save 
from  sin  and  death,  able  to  verify  the  j^romises,  able  to  secure  the  inheritors 
of  the  Kingdom,  able  to  carry  out  the  Divine  Will  in  Redemption  in 
ransoming  from  the  grave  and  restoring,  once  forfeited  but  now  cov- 
enanted, the  blessings  of  an  Edenic  state.  By  His  birth,  death,  and 
resurrection  He  is  become  the  promised  immortal  David's  Son  ;  by  the 
same  He  has  given  assurance  to  all  men  that  He  is  "  the  surety''  of  the 
Abrahamie  covenant,  so  that  its  words  cannot  fail  ;  by  the  same  He  has 


332  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PrOP.  50. 

confirmed  and  ratified  it,  showing  in  tlie  most  impressive  manner  how  it 
can  be  realized  (embracing  as  it  does  an  endless  life  and  unchangeable 
happiness)  in  the  justification,  purification,  and  immortality  that  He 
graciously  provides. 

Ois.  15.  How  can  we  refuse  to  believe  in  the  promises  of  a  covenant, 
sealed  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  estaJjlished  by  His  resurrection,  and  confirmed 
by  His  present  exaltation  ?  Yea,  in  (dl  the  promises  ;  not  merely  in  the 
Seed,  it  being  said  "  to  thy  Seed,"  but  in  what  is  promised  to  this  Seed. 
AVhat  faith  does  it  require  to  receiYe  part  of  the  sentence  and  explain  away 
the  remainder,  ]\x.si  as  if  God  never  intended  that  the  remainder  "  i^o  ^^/^^ 
Seed  IV ill  I  give  this  land  to  inheriV  should  likewise  be  fulfilled  ?  What 
faith  is  this,  to  accept  of  a  portion  literally  and  deny  the  remainder  ^vlien 
joined  together  hy  God  Himself.  Because  not  yet  realized,  is  that  a  reason 
that  it  never  will  be  accomplished  ?  Do  men  forget  how  long  (humanly 
speaking)  it  takes  for  covenanted  blessings  to  be  realized,  owing  to  the 
necessary  preliminary  measures?  Let  the  Scriptures  testify  on  these 
points,  and  with  reverent,  believing  hearts  let  tis  receive  the  same,  especially 
when  a-crucified  and  resurrected  Abraham's  Seed  is  given  to  us  as  a  pledge 
of  its  ultimate  and  most  happy  realization.  That  Seed,  as  we  shall  show, 
is  yet  to  exhibit  a  most  triumjohant  Redemptive  work  in  connection  with 
His  earthly  inheritance. 

Ohs.  16.  This  enables  us  better  to  comprehend  the  passage  in  2  Cor. 
3  :  6  (already  referred  to  at  length,  under  Prop.  4,  Obs.  3)  :  "  Who  has 
made  us  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament ;  not  of  the  letter,  but  of 
the  spirit  :  for  the  letter  killeth,  Mt  the  Spirit  giveth  life.^''  Let  the  reader 
notice  how  the  word  "  giveth  life,"  "  quickeneth,"  is  directly  applied  to 
the  resurrection  in  1  Pet.  3  :  18  (comp.  Barnes'  admirable  comment.  Com. 
/O6'0,-and  in  other  places  ;  then  let  him  remember  how  the  covenant  for  its 
fulfilment  necessitates  a  resurrection,  and  how  Jesus  has  amply  provided 
for  the  resurrection  of  His  believers,  and  in  the  light  of  this  renewed 
covenant  the  passage  is  easily  understood. 

Paul  says  that  they  are  made  sufficient,  competent  ministers  or  expounders  of  a  re- 
newed covenant  (which  remained  after  the  Mosaic  came  to  an  end),  not  of  the  letter  as 
Abraham  received  it  and  trusted  in  it,  but  of  the  Spirit,  as  it  has  been  unfolded  and 
ratified  by  the  appearance  of  the  Seed,  His  death  and  resurrection,  etc.  ;  for  the  mere 
letter,  without  this  attestation  and  provision,  killeth,  i.e.  it  cannot  give  life  because 
although  Abraham  and  all  the  ancient  worthies  believed  in  it  yet  they  all  died  without 
receiving  the  promise.  Something  more  than  the  letter  is  required,  and  this  is  furnished 
in  Christ  whom  Paul  in  the  context  calls  "  the  Spirit."  The  Spirit  giveth  life,  i.e.  it 
insures  the  fulfilment  of  this  cov^enant  by  the  power  of  the  resurrection  (ch.  4  :  14),  see- 
ing that  the  dead  can  and  will  now  be  quickened.  That  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  apos- 
tle is  evident  from  the  use  of  the  word  "  quickeneth,"  and  by  a  comparison  of  chs,  1  :  9, 
14,  20,  22,  and  2  :  17  and  4  :  14  and  5  :  5,  in  the  same  epistle.  It  is  wrong  to  decry,  un- 
der the  cloak  of  this  passage,  as  worthless  the  literal  meaning  of  the  Word,  and  we  can 
see  how  through  a  false  interpretation  of  it  (comp.  Prop.  4,  Obs.  3,  etc.),  the  floodgates 
of  professed  spiritual  interpretation  have  been  opened,  and  the  valuable  treasures  of 
God's  promises  so  covered  over  with  man's  additions  that  they  are  unrecognizable.  No  ! 
the  apostle  means  that  we  now.  in  a  covenant  renewed  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  and  by  His 
resurrection  from  among  the  dead,  have  hnmensely  more  than  the  mere  letter  originally 
given  and  which  in  itself  cannot  save  from  death  ;  for  now  we  have  the  Spirit,  which  in 
the  same  chapter  is  said  to  be  Christ,  who  "giveth  life,"  i.e.  fully  ensuring  to  all  who 
receive  the  promises  that  they  by  being  also  "  quickened  "  shall  inherit  the  covenanted 
promises.     Christ  is  the  root  of  the  whole  matter  ;  without  Him  and  His  solemn  ratifying 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  333 

acts,  the  Abrahamic  covenant  would  forever  remain  a  dead  letter.     It  is  in  Him,  through 
Him,  by  Him,  and  for  Him,  that  it  is  given,  and  jDroceeds  to  its  final  accomplishment. 

01)8.  17.  The  blood  of  the  covenant,  i.e.  the  blood  or  sacrifice  pertaining 
to  or  sealing  the  covenant,  brings  us,  if  received  by  faith,  into  covenant 
reJationsliip.  This  is  clearly  announced  in  Eph.  2  :  13,  "  But  noio  in 
Clirid  Jesus,  ye  wlw  sometimes  were  afar  off,  are  made  nigh  hy  the  Uood  of 
Christ.''^  Notice  the  train  of  the  apostle's  reasoning  :  (1)  The  Jews  were 
nigh  (v.  IT),  being  already  in  covenanted  relationship  ;  (2)  the  Gentiles 
who  "  were  far  off,"  i.e.  not  in  such  a  covenanted  position,  are  now, 
whe)i  helieving  (otherwise  not),  brought  also  "  nigh,"  i.e.  they  too  obtain 
an  interest  in  the  covenanted  blessings  ;  (3)  this  covenanted  attitude 
brings  them  into  union  and  fellowship  with  the  covenanted  people  of  God, 
"  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  ;"  (4)  and  this,  enjoying  now  the  same 
privileges  and  hopes  of  the  covenanted  people,  makes  them  co-heirs  with 
the  inheritors  of  covenanted  promises  ;  (5)  but  to  become  this  believing 
covenanted  people,  faith  (leading  to  obedience)  must  be  exercised  in  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ,  through  which  provision  is  made  for  fulfilment  of 
promises. 

01)8.  18.  The  covenant  being  thus  confirmed  in  Christ,  we  are  not  at 
liberty  (as  multitudes  do)  to  select  portions  of  it  for  belief,  and  reject  others 
as  unworthy  of  credence  ;  or,  to  accept  of  one  part  as  literally  fulfilled, 
and  refuse  such  a  literalness  to  the  remaining  ;  or  to  receive  the  Seed  and 
then  disdainfully  refuse,  as  "  carnal,  sensual,  lowering,"  etc.,  the  inherit- 
ing of  the  land.  It  is  not  to  be  set  aside  in  any  of  its  features  ;  it  is  not 
to  be  limited  in  any  of  its  promises  ;  but  it  is  to  be  received  in  all  its 
statements,  as  luritten,  without  substitution,  change,  or  addition.  It  is 
God  that  2Jromises,  not  man. 

Obs.  19.  We  Gentiles  should  be  careful  lest  we  fall  int6  an  error  the 
reverse  of  the  Jewish.  The  Jews  at  the  First  Advent  believed  in  the 
covenant,  but  refusing  to  credit  the  fact  that  the  covenant  must  be  sealed 
with  the  blood  of  the  Messiah,  they  rejected  the  Seed  through  whom  alone 
the  covenant  can  be  realized.  The  error  of  many  Gentiles  now  is,  that 
while  receiving  the  crucified  One,  they  reject  the  covenant  promises  and  do 
not  look  for  their  fulfilment,  as  recorded,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be 
"  too  Jewish"  (comp.  Prop.  68).  The  latter  error,  while  not  so  fatal  as 
the  former,  obscures  the  truth,  and  destroys  the  wonderful  unity  of  the 
Bible. 

Obs.  20.  As  we  proceed  in  our  argument,  this  covenant  will  pour  a  flood 
of  light  on  many  precious  promises  linked  with  it.  Language,  otherwise 
dark,  becomes  easy  of  comprehension  :  dispensational  procedures,  other- 
wise dim  and  unaccountable,  become  precise  ^nd  significant^  in  their 
meaning  ;  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  disciples,  and  apostles,  instead  of 
being  contradictory  or  accommodating  to  error,  is  found  consistent.  ^  It 
explains  much  that  enables  us  the  more  clearly  to  perceive  and  appreciate 
a  regular  Divine  Plan  in  preparing  for  and  ultimately  establishing  the 
Theocratic  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah.  It  tells  us,  as  nothing  else  can, 
why  the  Gentiles  must  be  grafted  in,  why  "  blindness  in  part  is  happened 
to  Israel  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  come  in.     And  so  all  Israel 


334  THE  THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  50. 

shall  be  saved,  as  it  is  written  :  There  shall  come  out  of  Zioji  a  Deliverer, 
and  shall  turn  aiuay  ungocllincss  from  Jacob,  for  this  is  my  covenant  tvitli 
them.^''  It,  and  it  alone,  as  the  outgrowths  from  it  are  developed,  gives  ns 
a  strict  liistorical,  providential,  doctrinal,  and  Divine  Unity  of  ■  Pmyose 
in  the  Word  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  182,  184,  186,  187,  194,  and  196). 

Ohs.  21.  Persons  under  the  influence  of  an  entire  New  Covenant  theory 
make  the  Gospel  to  begin  with  the  Incarnation,  or  the  death  of  Jesus,  or 
the  call  of  the  Gentiles.  But  this  is  a  mistake;  for  "the  GospeP'  is 
already  contained  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  so  that  (Gal.  3  :  8)  God 
''preached  the  Gospel  before  unto  Abraham,"  and  (Ileb.  4  :  2)  ''unto  us 
was  the  Gospel  preached,  as  well  as  unto  them,'^  i.e.  the  Fathers,  only  that 
with  a  covenant  reconfirmed,  "  the  Gospel"  is  clearer  in  sound,  and  far 
more  faith-inspiring.  Now,  instead  of  having  the  eye  of  faith  solely 
directed  to  the  future  for  the  Seed  as  it  once  was,  it  is  directed  to  the  Seed 
as  He  came  at  the  First  Advent,  and,  hopeful  at  what  it  sees  thus  far,  it 
looks  onward  to  the  Seed,  glorified,  as  He  shall  come  again. 

Obs.  22.  It  seems  almost  unnecessary  to  add,  and  yet  its  importance  will 
justify  it,  that  this  Abrahamic  covenant  was  always  received  by  faith, 
simple  faith.  Thus  the  Patriarchs,  the  ancient  worthies,  the  Apostolic 
Fathers,  and  many  others,  have  received  it.  It  demands  to-day  the  same 
simple,  confiding  faith  exercised  by  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  only  that, 
in  view  of  what  God  has  done  to  verify  it  through  Christ,  we  are  less 
excusable  if  we  do  not  entertain  such  faith. 

Alas  !  how  little  of  such  faith  is  prevalent.  Reason  and  Philosophy  linked  with  unbe- 
lief, cannot  possibly  comprehend  the  covenant,  for  it  is  united  with  the  miraculous,  the 
Supernatural.  Hence  its  promises  are  idle  dreams.  But  even  professed  believers  are 
unwilling  to  believe  and  cooll}^  ask,  how  this  and  that  is  to  be  accomplished,  just  as  if  no 
Omnipotent  God  had  given  the  promises.  Unbelief  even,  not  seeing  the  connection  of 
these  promises  with  the  Second  Advent  (therefore  called  "  the  blessed  hope"),  deliber- 
ately proposes  to  reject  the  doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent  itself  as  an  addition  made  by 
enthusiastic  followers.  Now  the  clamor  is,  to  have  everything  demonstrated  and  leave 
nothing  to  faith.  But  this  is  fundamentally  opposed  to  a  Scriptural  attitude  and  a 
Christian  character.  Science  and  unbelief  joined  may  in  fancied  triumph  and  scorn 
ask,  how  this  and  that  can  be  accomi^lished,  and  we  maj'-,  like  the  Patriarchs,  be  utterly 
unable  to  explain,  yet  this  should  not  prevent  us  from  clinging  to  a  covenant  rendered 
the  more  credible  and  estimable,  the  more  worthy  of  faith  and  hope,  by  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus,  and  the  earnest  of  blessing  that  we  receive.  Brethren,  fellow- 
Gentiles,  it  is  as  true  to-day  as  it  ever  was,  that  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews  ,•"  and  if,  owing 
to  their  fall,  we  have  been  brought  in  by  faith,  let  us  exercise  such  faith  in  humble  ac- 
knowledgment of  our  dependence  on  a  covenanted  people,  lest  we  be  "  high-minded"  (as 
Paul  warns  us  Rom.  11  :  20),  and  also  be  cut  off  on  account  of  our  unbelief  and  being 
"wise  in  our  own  conceits."  It  is  saddening  to  think  how  many  ministers  and  churches 
there  are,  professed^  believing  and  even  pious  and  devoted  to  miich  truth,  of  whom  it 
can  be  truthfully  said,  that  they  have  no  faith  in  "  the  everlasting  covenant,"  saving  per- 
haps that  in  some  spiritual  way  all  the  blessings  are  to  be  heaped  on  the  Gentiles,  or  that 
all  has  been  perfected  at  the  First  Advent  so  that  it  concerns  us  little. 

0^-5?.  23.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  presupposes  the  covenants. 
Hence  the  New  Test.  Scriptures  begin  with  taking  the  Abrahamic  and 
Davidic  covenants  for  granted,  as  something  ivell  knoivn  and  correctly 
apprehended.  These  fundamentals  of  knowledge  were  so  deeply  rooted  in 
the  national  faith,  were  so  constantly  the  subjects  suggestive  of  hopeful 
anticipations  of  future  glory,  that  no  necessity  existed  for  their  recapitula- 


Prop.  50.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  335 

tion.  Allusions  to  them,  confirmatory  teaching,  a  consistent  harmony  with 
their  promises,  is  all  that  is  required,  and  this  is  abundantly  found  in 
every  writer. 

Obs.  24.  Let  a  peculiarity,  attached  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  covenant, 
be  deeply  pondered,  viz.  :  that  in  the  history  of  a  partial  fulfilment  in  the 
past,  it  has  never  yet  been  so  realized  as  to  meet  the  natural  wisdom  of 
man,  or  to  answer  to  the  general  anticipations  of  the  period  when  thus 
fulfilled.  Observe  this  procedure  in  the  very  beginning,'  when  Abraham, 
contrary  to  all  human  expectations,  raised  up  Seed  in  the  covenanted  line 
against  the  course  of  nature.  And  down  to  the  miraculous  birth  of 
Abraham's  pre-eminent  Seed,  all  things  were  so  ordered  that  they  did  not 
meet  the  expectations  of  the  mass  of  the  nation.  The  Advent  itself, 
a  strictly  literal  fulfilment,  did  not  meet  the  hopes  enit3rtained  by  the 
Jews.  The  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  to  raise  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham,  was 
a  thing  unanticipated.  Judging  from  the  writings  of  the  Church,  its 
expectations  have  been  repeatedly  disappointed,  so  much  so  that  now  men 
deliberately  and  unhesitatingly  deny  some  of  the  most  precious  promises  of 
the  covenants,  both  relating  to  the  Christ  and  His  co-heirs,  as  e.g.  the 
restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  and  the  inheriting  of  the 
land.  Analogy  teaches  us  what  prophecy  distinctly  announces,  that  at  the 
period  when  this  covenant  is  to  be  most  amply  fulfilled  by  the  Christ  who 
confirmed  it,  the  multitude  including  the  kings  and  nations  of  the  earth, 
will  be  arrayed  against  it,  will  have  no  faith  in  its  realization.  This,  alone, 
should  make  us  thouglitfid  and  careful. 

Now,  as  illustrative  of  our  position  in  general,  we  may  give  the  views  of  two  writers. 
Take  e.g.  Dr.  Brown  {Com.  Rom.  11  :  29,  to  which  special  attention  is  invited  because  of 
his  being  Post-Millenarian  and  a  writer  against  us),  and  he  allows  the  connection  of  the 
covenant  with  the  future  conversion  and  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation.  He  refers  to 
the  irrevocable  nature  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant  in  view  of  the  unchangeableness  of 
God,  as  it  aj^plies  to  "  the  final  destiny  of  the  Israelitish  nation,"  saying  :  "It  is  clear 
that  the  perpetuity  through  all  time  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  is  the  thing  here  affirmed. 
And  lest  any  should  say  that  though  Israel,  as  a  nation  has  '  no  destiny  at  all  under  the 
Gospel,  but  as  a  people  disappeared  from  the  stage  when  the  middle  wall  of  partition 
was  broken  down,  yet  the  Abrahamic  covenant  still  endures  in  the  sjDiritual  seed  of  Abra- 
ham, made  up  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  one  undistinguished  mass  of  redeemed  men  under 
the  Gospel,  the  apostle,  as  if  to  preclude  that  supposition,  expressly  states  that  the  verj^ 
Israel  who,  as  conceriUng  the  Gospel,  are  regarded  as  '  enemies  for  the  Gentiles'  sakes,' 
are  '  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sake  ; '  and  it  is  in  proof  of  this  that  he  adds,  '  For  the  gifts  and 
calling  of  God  are  without  repentance.'  But  in  what  sense  are  the  now  unbelieving  an<l 
excluded  children  of  Israel  '  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes  ?  '  Not  merely  from  ances- 
tral recollections,  as  one  looks  with  fond  interest  on  the  child  of  a  dear  friend  for  that 
friend's  sake  (Dr.  Arnold) — a  beautiful  thought,  and  not  foreign  to  Scripture  in  this  very 
matter  (see  2  Chron.  20  :  7  ;  Isa.  41  :  8) — but  it  is  from  ancestral  connections  and  obliga- 
tions, or  their  lineal  descent  from,  and  oneness  in,  covenant  with  the  fathers  with  whom 
God  originally  established  it.  In  other  words,  the  natural  Israel — not  '  the  remnant  of 
them  according  to  the  election  of  grace, '  but  the  nation,  sprung  from  Abraham  according 
to  the  flesh — are  still  an  elect  people,  and  as  such  'beloved.'  The  very  same  love  which 
chose  the  fathers  and  rested  on  the  fathers  as  a  parent  stem  of  the  nation,  still  rests  on 
their  descendants  at  large,  and  will  yet  recover  them  from  unbelief,  and  reinstate  them  in 
the  family  of  God."  In  a  note  (6),  he  adds  :  "  God's  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his 
natural  seed,  is  a  perpetual  covenant,  in  equal  force  under  the  Gospel  as  before  it.  Therefore 
it  is  that  the  Jews  as  a  nation  still  survive,  in  spite  of  all  the  laws  which,  in  similar  cir- 
cumstances, have  either  extinguished  or  destroyed  the  identity  of  other  nations.  And 
therefore  it  is  that  the  Jews  as  a  nation  will  yet  be  restored  to  the  family  of  God,  through 
the  subjection  of  their  proud  hearts  to  Him  whom  they  have  pierced."  Then  take  a 
Pre-Milienarian  :  Fausset  {Com.  Jer.  31  :  31)  says  of  this  passage,  which  so  many  apply 


336  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  50. 

to  a  present  fulfilment  :  "  The  new  covenant  is  made  with  literal  Israel  and  Judah,  not 
with  the  spiritual  Israel,  i.e.  believers,  except  secondarily,  and  as  grafted  on  the  stock  of 
Israel  (Rom.  11  :  16-27).  For  the  whole  subject  of  chs.  30  and  31,,  is  the  restoration  of  the 
Hebrews  (ch.  30  :  4,  7,  10,  18,  and  ch.  31  :  7,  10,  11,  23,  24,  27,  36).  With  '  the  remnant 
according  to  the  election  of  grace '  in  Israel,  the  new  covenant  has  already  taken  effect. 
But  with  regard  to  the  lohole  nation,  its  realization  is  reserved  for  the  last  days,  to  which 
Paul  refers  this  prophecy  in  an  abridged  form  (Rom.  11  :  27)."  Comp.  e.g.  Ezek.  36  :  26, 
27,  and  context. 


Prop.  51.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  337 


Proposition  51.  The  relation  that  the  Kingdom  sustains  to  ^Hhe 
covenants  of  'promise'^''  enables  us  to  appreciate  the  prophecies 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom. 

All  predictions,  all  promises,  all  preparative  measures,  relating 
to  the  Kingdom,  are  based  on,  and  restdt  from,  these  covenants. 
The  prophecies  constantly  keep  in  view  what  God  has  covenanted 
and  confirmed  by  oath,  and  enlarge  and  expand  the  same  by  amplifi- 
cation, explanation,  etc.  Therefore,  to  appreciate  the  utterances  of 
the  prophete,  notice  must  continually  be  taken  of  the  foundation 
upon  which  they  are  erected.  To  isolate  them  is  to  defeat  one  in- 
tent of  prophecy,  viz.  :  to  instruct  us  in  the  manner  by  which  God 
will  ultimately  fulfil  His  covenants  and  establish  His  Theocratic  rule 
over  the  nations. 

Obs.  1.  The  one  covenant  singles  out  Abraham  and  his  seed,  and,  in  the 
words  of  another  (Fairbairn,  On  Propli.,  p.  189),  "  linked  indissohihly  with 
it  the  better  destinies  of  the  world.^^  The  other  covenant  promises  the  same 
Seed,  narrowed  down  in  the  Davidic  line,  a  specific  tlirone  and  Kingdom 
from  which  "  the  better  destinies  of  the  world  "  are  secured.  This  con- 
nection is  observed  by  the  prophets,  and  is  held  up  so  pi^omiyiently  that 
many  writers  (however  they  explain  it)  have  designated  it  as  ''  the 
Abrahamic  type,"  or  "  the  Davidic  type."  Whatever  additions  are  made 
to  these  two  (really  one,  as  the  latter  is  only  an  amplification  of  the  other 
in  one  of  its  aspects,  or  rather,  perhaps,  an  outgrowth  preparatory  to  a 
realization  of  the  other)  covenants,  they  spring  from  them  as  from  a  root, 
and  give  ample  evidence  of  the  vitality  of  the  covenants  sending  them 
forth,  and  consequently  afford  additional  assurances  of  a  continued  de- 
velopment toward  completeness. 

Hence,  in  interpreting  prophecy,  it  should  be  observed  how  it  is  founded  on,  and 
united  with,  the  covenants  ;  and  any  interpretation,  however  plausible,  which  militates 
against  them,  which  contradicts  or  changes  their  promises,  should  at  once  he  discarded  as 
of  foreign  origin.  For  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  God  will  invalidate  the  most 
solemnly  given  of  all  His  revelations,  or  that  the  Spirit  will  deliberately  contradict  Him- 
self in  His  utterances.  Therefore,  e.g.,  all  applications  of  prophecy  which  do  not  incor- 
porate as  fundamental  the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  is  radically  defective,  simply  because 
it  makes  the  fulfilment  of  the  Davidic  covenant  an  utter  impossibility.  To  rid  ourselves 
of  the  covenant,  and  the  prophecies  relating  thereto,  by  spiritualizing,  etc,  is  unworthy 
of  faith  in  God's  promises. 

Obs.  2.  God  is  jealous  of  His  covenanted  Word,  and  after  having  con- 
firmed it  by  oath,  by  the  sending  of  His  Son,  etc.,  He  presents  it  in  a 
form,  through  additional  revelation,  admirably  adapted  to  test  the  faith  of 
His  people.  Much  of  it,  the  most  precious  portion  of  it,  the  distinctive 
features  of  it,  still  belong  to  the  future  and  are  dependent  upon  the  Sec. 


338  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  51. 

Advent  of  Jesns,  the  Messiah.  Hence  the  predictions  of  the  Old  and  New 
Test.,  unless  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  covenant,  cannot  be  duly  appre- 
hended. They  only  form  additional  links  to  a  previously  forged  chain, 
and  the  places  in  which  they  fit  must  be  found  and  matched.  God  having 
supplied  the  material,  and  given  the  key  for  placing  them  in  the  covenant, 
is  pleased  with  the  faith  that  honors  His  oath-bound  Word. 

Ohs.  3.  We  see  tlie  fatal  mistake  of  those  systems  of  Biblical  and 
Systematic  Theology,  which  entirely  ignore  the  Davidic  covenant.  The 
Abrahamic  covenant,  probably,  obtains  the  merest  mention  ;  the  Davidic 
is  not  noticed,  although  confirmed  as  strongly  as  language  can  make  it ; 
and  both  are  practically  discarded  for  the  most  elaborate  theories  concern- 
ing covenants  of  grace  (just  as  if  there  were  not  such) — covenants  made 
some  time  in  the  ages  of  eternity,  etc.  The  result  follows,  that  these 
covenants,  being  more  or  less  (especially  the  Davidic)  deemed  unessential  to 
the  development  of  doctrine,  a  one-sided,  defective  system,  arises,  lacking 
unity  ;  and,  in  addition,  a  large  portion  of  Scripture  relating  to  these 
covenants,  particularly  prophecy,  is  either  passed  by  without  incorporation, 
or  else  so  spiritualized  tliat  it  may  somehow  fit  into  the  hypothesis. 

To  whom  are  we  indebted  for  a  departure  so  wide  from  the  Scriptural  standard  ? 
Need  we  wonder,  when  the  Bible  testimony  is  so  much  ignored,  that  men  to-day  are 
afraid  to  adopt  its  covenanted  language  ;  that  the  early  Patristic  Theology  is  cast  aside  as 
too  "  carnal  ;"  and  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  covered  with  a  heap  of  rubbish, 
the  accumulated  work  of  Alexandrian  philosoj)hers,  monks,  Popish  schoolmen,  mystics, 
etc.,  who  could  not  make  these  covenants  blend  with  their  sj'stems.  Is  it  not  true,  that 
if  a  man  were  to  present  the  Davidic  covenant  and  the  Scriptures  relating  to  it,  and  the 
hoj)e  to  the  world  contained  in  it,  to  almost  any  congregation  throughout  the  land,  he 
would  be  regarded,  such  is  the  ignorance  on  the  subject,  as  foolish  in  his  belief  and  as 
weak  in  his  intellect?  What  has  caused  this  change,  and  who  are  responsible  for  it? 
Let  us  repeat  :  it  is  a  fundamental  defect  in  any  professed  system  of  Biblical  truth,  when 
it  endeavors  to  give  an  exhibit  of  doctrines  of  God  and  of  Christ  without  incorporating 
as  living  roots  those  blessed,  precious  ''  covenants  of  jjromise."  Instead  of  erecting  new 
foundations  and  building  on  them,  we  have  them  already  laid  and  built  upon  in  the 
Word. 

Ohs.  4.  The  Church  is  "  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner  stone"  (Eph. 
2  :  20).  This  includes,  of  course,  their  teaching  and  the  doctrines  per- 
taining to  Christ.  Nothing  is  fundamental  in  the  Christian  system  which 
cannot  be  found  in  their  writings,  and  this  embraces  a  knowledge  of  the 
Old  Test,  as  well  as  of  the  New,  and  particularly  the  things  relating  to 
Jesus  Christ.*  Now,  the  great  theme  of  both  the  prophets  and  the  apostles, 
and  which  appertains  so  largely  to  Jesus,  is  that  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom, 
and  this  is  specially  contained  in  the  Davidic  covenant  and  the  prophecies 
resulting  from  the  same  found  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

Ohs.  5.  The  rejection  of  these  covenants  in  their  totality,  and  a  re- 
sultant   spiritualistic    conception    of    the   Kingdom,   with   a    consequent 

*  To  indicate  that  we  do  not  force  a  meaning,  we  leave  one  of  our  opponents  give  its 
the  intent  or  spirit  of  the  passage.  Thus  Barnes,  Com.  loci,  says  :  '"  That  is,  the  doc- 
trines of  Divine  revelation,  whether  communicated  hy  prophets  or  apostles,  were  laid  at 
the  foundation  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was  not  founded  on  philosophy,  or  tradition, 
or  on  human  laws,  or  on  a  venerable  antiquity,  but  on  the  great  truths  which  God  had 
revealed." 


Prop.  51.]  the  theocratic   kingdom.  389 

mystical  treatment   of    the   prophcies,   lead  some   of   onr   most   eminent 
writers  to  present  utterly  unwarranted  doctrinal  constructions. 

We  append  several  additional  (comp.  e.g.  Prop.  50,  III.,  Obs.  10,  12,  etc.)  illustra- 
tions. Dr.  Mej-er  {Com.  Matt.  3:2)  says  :  "  With  Christ  and  the  apostles  the  idea  of  a 
Messianic  Kingdom  is  not  national  but  universal,  i.e.  so  that  the  participation  in  it  is 
not  conceived  as  depending  on  a  connection  with  Abraham,  but  on  faith  in  Christ." 
Here  is  a  mixture  of  things  which,  as  joined  together,  are  misleading.  ^Vhy  did  Christ 
and  the  apostles  at  first  confine  themselves  to  the  Jewish  nation,  if  the  Kingdom  was  not 
national?  (Comp.  Props.  54  to  69.)  If  there  is  no  connection  with  Abraham,  ichy  ac- 
counted as  his  seed,  inherit  with  him,  etc.  ?  (Comp.  note  to  Obs.  10,  under  third  di- 
vision of  Prop.  50.)  The  Kingdom,  the  Theocracy,  is  first  national  as  covenanted,  but 
this  forms  the  basis,  as  the  proj^hets  predict,  from  which  it  will  be  extended  into  a  iiniver- 
sal  dominion.  The  inheritance  of  David's  Son  forms  the  groundwork  of  the  universal 
Theocratic  reign.  While  it  is  true  that  Gentiles,  all  believers,  inherit  the  Kingdom  be- 
cause of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  yet  it  is  also  true  that  the  promises  remain  covemnded  to 
Abraham  and  his  seed,  and  that  it  is  by  this  very  faith  they  become  (are  adoi)ted  as)  his 
seed  and  thus  inheritors.  It  is  a  sad  mistaking  ot  "  the  hope  of  our  calling"  to  deny 
"  a  connection  with  Abraham."  However  done  by  various  theologians,  it  is,  in  fact, 
allowing  one  important  truth  to  overshadow  and  obliterate  another  of  great  value. 
Again  :  Neander  {Life  of  C/irisf,  p.  20),  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  Davidic  covenant,  with 
the  prophecies  pertaining  thereto,  informs  us  that  David  being  a  type  of  Christ,  is  a  rea- 
son why  Christ  is  sprung  from  the  line  of  David.  It  is  no  reason  whatever  ;  the  valid 
reason  lies  in  the  covenanted  Tlieocratic promise,  that  a  Son  of  David  should,  at  some  future 
time,  receive  David's  throne  and  Kingdom,  etc.  But  the  same  author  proceeds  {His. 
Plant.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  1,  p.  506,  footnote)  to  tell  lis  :  "Paul  himself,  to  the  common 
Jewish  idea  of  a  Messiah  belonging,  as  a  descendant  of  David,  peculiarly  to  the  Jewish 
nation,  who  would  never  break  through  the  forms  of  their  Theocracy',  in  Eom.  1  :  3,  4, 
describes  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  who  by  natural  descent  belonged  to  thep  osterity  of 
David,  but  evinced  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God  in  a  powerful  manner  by  His  resurrec- 
tion through  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  that  is,  after  His  resurrection  He  divested  Himself  ot  all 
those  peculiar,  earthly  national  relations  in  which  He  appeared  to  stand  as  a  native  Jew 
of  the  family  of  David."  One  stands  amazed  at  such  hold  interpretation  (comp.  e.g. 
Props.  81,  82,  84,  200,  203,  204,  122,  etc.).  What,  then,  becomes  of  the  promises  given  to 
David,  that  his  Son,  "  according  to  the  flesh"  (in  His  humanity.  Acts  2  :  30,  comp.  with 
Eom.  1  :  3,  etc.),  should  reign  as  David's  Son  on  his  throne?  Besides,  the  Kingdom  is 
never  promised  to  the  Son  of  God,  but  invariably  to  the  Son  of  Man  (Proi^.  81),  because  it 
is  not  the  Divinity  but  the  Humanity  that  is  brought  into  covenanted  relationship  with 
God.  No  !  the  resurrection  and  the  subsequent  glorification  has  not  stripped  Him  of 
His  Humanity  or  of  His  earthly  relations.  They  only  qualify  Him  the  better  to  carry 
out  the  promises  relating  to  that  Humanity.  He  is  to-day  David's  Son,  the  covenanted 
Seed,  who  shall  fulfil  the  i:»romises.  To-day  He  glories  in  the  message  that  He  sends  us 
(Rev.  22  :  16),  "  I  am  (continues  to  be)  the  root  and  offspring  of  David.''  Paul  makes  no 
such  erroneous  deductions,  as  Neander  supposes  ;  far  from  it,  as  he  unmistakably  shows 
in  the  same  epistle  in  the  fulfilment  of  covenanted  blessings.  Such  illustrations  could 
be  multiplied,  but  these  sufficiently  serve  to  show  that  if  men  once  cast  aside  the  cov- 
enants, then,  their  views  of  the  Kingdom  being  antagonistic  to  those  covenants,  all  Script- 
ure, and  even  the  person  of  Jesus,  must  bend  to  their  preconceived  theories. 

Oh^.  G.  By  observing  this  relationship  of  the  covenants  and  of  prophecy  to 
the  Kingdom,  those  erroneous  deductions  are  at  once  removed,  which 
writers  of  ability  have  drawn  from  alleged  differences  in  the  teaching  of  the 
apostles.  One  party,  it  is  asserted,  derive  their  Christianity  from  a 
Jewish  covenanted  standpoint  ;  and  another,  theirs  from  a  form  distinctive 
from  the  Old  Jewish  covenanted  relation.  This  has  led  to  a  false  distinc- 
tion or  classification,  called  the  Petrine,  Pauline,  and  Johannine  Theol- 
ogies. The  simple  truth  is,  that  they  all  unite  in  this  renewed  covenant 
as  a  central  iioint ;  all  insist  upon  our  becoming  engrafted  among  the 
covenanted  people  (the  children  of  Abraham)  through  faith  in  Christ, 
and  that  all  express  their  faith  in,   and  hope  for,   a  realization  of  the 


340  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  51. 

covenanted  promises  through  Jesus  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  While  there  is 
some  diversity  in  their  manner  of  expressing  truth,  resulting  from  tempera- 
ment, style,  etc.,  instead  of  being  in  conflict  with  "  the  sure  mercies  of 
David,"  they  are  unanimous  in  holding  up  the  original  "  everlasting 
covenant"  confirmed  by  the  death  of  Jesus  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  187-191). 

Ohs.  7.  One  reason  why  so  many  Messianic  predictions  in  the  Old  Test., 
especially  m  the  Psalms,  are  explained  away  as  relating  to  David,  Solomon, 
Hezekiah,  etc.,  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  prophecies  do  not  agree  with 
the  writers'  preconceived  notions  of  the  covenants  and  of  a  spiritual 
Kingdom.  The  covenanted  foundatio?i  of  the  predictions  is  overlooked  or 
perverted,  and,  of  course,  the  superstructure  is  correspondingly  untenable. 
Thus  valuable  Scripture  is  given  up  to  unbelief.  Even  pious  and  able 
writers,  who  recognize  such  passages  as  Messianic,  under  the  influence  of 
the  idea  formed  of  the  covenants  and  Kingdom,  will  call  the  very  words 
given  (as  they  admit)  by  God  "  very  one-sided  "  (as  e.g.  Kurtz,  His.  Old 
Cov.y  vol.  3,  p.  438,  on  Balaam's  prophecy),  because  they  seem  to  them 
too  earthly  or  too  Jewish,  forgetting  that  the  Theocracy  proclaimed 
pertains  both  to  this  earth  and  to  the  Jewish  nation. 

Ois.  8.  The  covenants  outline  the  Plan  of  the  Divine  Purpose  ;  prophecy 
partially ///s  up  and  deepens  the  lines  thus  drawn.  Agreeing  with  Hengs- 
tenberg,  Fairbairn,  and  others,  that  the  prophets  are  not  mere  soothsayers 
to  predict  future  events,  and  that  their  predictions  are  based  on  something 
higher  than  mere  foretelling,  yet  we  dare  not  go  so  far  as  they  do  in  saying 
that  "  a  mere  knowledge  of  the  future  is  itself  a  matter  of  indifi'erence." 
The  knowledge  of  the  future  is  an  important  and  essential  element  to  a 
correct  appreliension  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation. 

The  prediction  being  a  foreshadowing  of  God's  purposes,  must  necessarily  relate  to 
the  future  ;  and  as  we  value  truth,  all  such  information  imparted,  even  the  slightest, 
possesses  great  weight.  They  add  to  our  knowledge  of  the  covenants  and  Kingdom, 
and  God  Himself  regards  all  such  testimony,  derived  from  a  foreknowledge  of  the  future, 
as  evidence  of  inspiration,  credibility,  etc.  Besides  this,  as  our  hopes  all  lay  in  the 
luture,  and  the  covenants  upon  which  these  hopes  are  based  give  the  merest  outlines, 
we  need  these'  extended  and  enlarged  in  order  the  better  to  appreciate  them.  A  neglect 
of  prediction,  therefore,  is  a  weakening  of  tendered  strength  and  a  diminishing  of 
offered  hopes.  The  covenants  themselves,  in  their  most  precious  aspects,  relate  to  the 
future,  and  now  for  any  additional  information  respecting  them,  we  are  dependent  on 
that  class  of  men  to  whom  God  by  His  Spirit  vouchsafed  a  knowledge  of  the  future. 
Prophecy  thus  becomes  more  than  "  a  prediction  of  some  contingent  circumstance  or 
event  in  the  future,  received  by  immediate  and  direct  revelation  ;"  for  it  is  a  communi- 
cation or  message  from  God,  a  pre  historic  record  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  and  if  properly 
linked  together  forms  a  continuous  chain  of  evidence,  evincing  the  unity  of  the  Divine 
Plan  in  establishing  the  Kingdom.  To  perceive  this  unity,  so  confirmatory  to  faith,  a 
knowledge  of  the  future  is  indispensably  necessary  ;  hence  it  is  graciously  given,  that 
we  may,  beholding  the  future  as  present,  see  the  unfolding  of  covenanted  grace,  realize 
the  evidences  of  a  prevailing  Sovereignty  of  the  Most  High,  and  have  excited  within  us 
faith,  childlike  trust,  hope,  and  love. 

Ois.  9.  History  does  not  become,  as  some  make  it,  a  measure  of 
prophecy  concerning  the  Kingdom  ;  and  hence,  to  make  history  accord 
with  a  notion  entertained  respecting  the  Kingdom,  prophecy  must  be  so 
spiritualized  and  explained  as  to  correspond  with  the  standard  adopted. 
No  !  History  is  only  a  toitness  to  the  fact  that  the  history  of  the  Chnrch 
and  world,  as  it  progresses,  is  foreknown  to  God,  and  that  He  orders  all 


Prop.  51.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  341 

tilings  in  sucli  a  manner  that  what  He  purposes  to  perform  shall  be 
ultimately  accomplished.  History,  instead  of  being  a  measurer  of  that 
which  so  largely  pertains  to  the  future,  only  gives  us  the  assurmice,  from 
the  testimony  of  the  past  and  present,  that  all  God's  predictions  will  be 
verified  m  actual  accomplishment. 

Thus  e.g.  it  is  predicted  that  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation  the  nations  of  the  earth 
shall  be  arrayed  against  the  truth,  the  church  shall  be  persecuted,  etc.  ;  now  those  who 
live  during  or  at  that  period  will  see  history  (i.e.  fulfilment)  hearing  witness  to  the  truth- 
fulness of  God  ;  and  more,  they,  if  believing  and  receptive  of  the  testimony,  will  know, 
in  the  faith  of  additional  predictions,  that  this  arrogant  union  of  the  enemy  is  doomed 
to  a  terrible  overthrow,  and  that,  however  victorious  for  a  time,  it  cannot  retard  the 
Divine  Purpose  concerning  the  Kingdom.  History  may  reliantly  testify  to  fulfilment, 
but  it  cannot  measure  j^rophecy  by  the  fulfilment,  simply  because  the  pro^Dhecy  includes 
the  foreknowledge  of  God,  a  divinely  inspired  Plan,  covenants  as  its  foundation  to 
which  it  stands  related,  and  Christ  in  His  Theocratic  ordering  as  its  goal.  Besides 
this,  prophecy  contains,  indeed,  that  which  becomes  historical  reality,  not  because  God 
jn-edicts  and  then  causes  or  allows  the  fulfilment,  but  because  He  foreknows  what  will 
arise  through  the  free  agency  of  man  and  permits  it,  and  yet,  in  view  of  such  knowledge, 
provides  means  and  agencies  to  counteract  the  evil  and  carry  out  His  own  purposes. 
Thus  e.g.  He  foretells  the  successive  beasts  in  Daniel,  the  beasts  in  Revelation,  etc.,  and 
as  the  time  arrives  they  respectively  appear,  but  affirmative  as  they  are  and  ever  will  be 
to  the  truth  of  prophecy,  their  naked  history  by  no  means  exhausts  the  meaning  of  the 
predictions,  which  stand  related  to  a  progressive  and  ever-maturing  Divine  Purpose. 


342  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIJJ^GDOM.  [PkOP.  52. 


Proposition  52.    Tlie  promises  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom^  as 
given  in  the  covenaMs^  will  be  strictly  fulfilled. 

This  already  follows  from  Props.  4,  21,  22,  23,  31,  32,  33,  35,  39, 
40,  42,  43,  44,  47,  48,  49,  50,  and  51.  A  covenant  must,  in  the 
nature  of  the  case,  be  understood  by  the  parties  to  whom  it  is 
given  ;  the  language  employed  is  that  ordinarily  used,  so  that  the 
ideas  intended  may  be  accurately  expressed.  This  has  been  shown 
under  Prop.  48.  In  connection  with  the  same,  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  a  partial  literal  fulfilment  in  the  coming  of  the  Seed, 
should  inlluence  us  to  believe  that  the  remainder  will  likewise  be 
thus  verified. 

Obs.  1.  Among  the  promises  that  remain  uiifalfilled,  but  which  we 
claim  shall  be  fully  realized  in  their  pi  a  i?i  grammatical  sense,  one  is  selected 
that  is  either  generally  denied  or  totally  explained  away.  We  refer  to  the 
express,  most  explicit  promise  in  the  Davidic  covenant  (com p.  Prop.  49, 
III.),  that  David's  Son  (viz.  :  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Scriptures  testify)  should 
personaUy  occupy  and  reign  on  David's  tlirone  and  in  David's  Kingdom, 
i.e.  He  should  appear  as  tlie  Theocratic  King  over  the  restored  Theocratic 
Kingdom.  This  possession  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  is  cor- 
roborated by  the  equally  precise  phraseology  of  the  prophets  and  the  angel, 
as  e.g.  Isa.  9  :  6-7,  Jer.  ^^3  :  14-16,  Luke  1  :  30-33.  That  David  himself 
expected  a  literal  fuljihnent  of  the  promise  is  evident  from  his  language 
which  follows  the  giving  of  the  covenant  ;  and  in  this  literal  anticipation 
of  the  promise  he  returns  thanks  to  God  and  ]) raises  Him  for  thus  selecting 
his  house  for  honor  and  in  thus  establishing  it  for  the  ages,  even  forever 
(2  Sam.  7  :  8,  etc.,  1  Chron.  17  :  16,  etc.).  It  "is  presumption  to  suppose 
that  David  returned  thanks,  and  thus  prayed  under  a  mistaken  idea  of  the 
nature  of  the  covenant.  The  reasons  for  a  literal  fulfilment  follow  in  the 
next  observation. 

Luther  on  the  Second  Psalm  (quoted  by  Dr.  Seiss,  Last  Times,  p.  254)  uses  language 
indicative  of  faith  in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  covenant,  in  a  literal  personal  reign- 
ing of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  throne  of  David,  that  we  reproduce  it.  "  Christ  was  ap- 
pointed King  upon  the  holy  Mount  Zlon.  This  is  particularly  to  be  remarked  ;  for  the 
Holy  Ghost  mentions  the  corporeal  Zion,  that  we  may  be  assured  that  this  King  is  divinely 
appointed,  and  is  a  real  Man.  .  .  .  The  Person  and  the  place  are  appointed  and 
made  known.  The  Person  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  He  is  King  in  Zion  ;  that  is,  the  Son 
of  David,  and  the  heirot  David  ;  and  He  who  was  promised  to  David  to  be  the  King  over 
the  circumcised  people  over  whom  David  reigned.  We  are,  therefore,  to  expect  this  man 
to  teach  in  Zion,  and  to  reveal  Himself  in  Zion,  because  He  is  appointed  of  God  to  be 
King  in  Zion.  .  .  .  The  eternal  Father  Himself  crowned  Him  to  be  King  of  Zion, 
on  Mount  Zion,  in  the  City  of  Jerusalem.  .  .  .  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  yet  born  a 
man  corporeally,  that  He  might  receive  the  throne  of  His  Father  David,  and  rule  in  Zion." 
Even  extravagance  and  fanaticism  has  attempted  to  cloak  its  enormities  by  using  the  cov- 
enanted language,  as  e.g.  John  of  Leyden  (with  the  Anabaptists  at  Munster,  Michelet's 
Life  of  Luther,  p.  234)  was  ordained  to  reign  over  the  whole  earth,  ijrofessing  (according 


Prop.  52.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  343 

to  a  prophet  who,  1534  announced  it)  "  to  occupy  the  throne  of  David" — the  absi^rdity 
of  which  api^ears  that  no  throne  of  David  was  ever  at  Munster  (hence  he  spiritualized  it 
to  make  it  applicable),  and  the  enormity  is  aggravated  by  assuming  that  which  only  be- 
longs to  Jesus  the  Christ, 

Obs.  2.  If  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  is  to  be  understood  literallij, 
then  all  other  promises  necessarily  follow  ;  and  as  the  reception  of  this 
literal  fulfilment  forms  the  main  difficulty  in  the  minds  of  many,  a  brief 
statement  of  reasons  why  it  must  be  receiv^ed,  is  in  place.  1.  It  is  solemnly 
covenanted,  confirmed  hy  oath,  and  hence  cannot  be  altered  or  broken.  2. 
The  grammatical  sense  alone  is  becoming  a  covenant.  3.  The  impression 
made  on  David,  if  erroneous,  is  disparaging  to  his  prophetical  office.  4. 
The  conviction  of  Solomon  (2  Chron.  6  :  14-16)  was  that  it  referred  to  the 
literal  throne  and  Kingdom.  5.  Solomon  claims  that  the  covenant  was 
fulfilled  in  himself,  but  only  m  so  far  that  he  too  as  David's  son  sat  on 
David's  throne.  Some  from  this  wrongfully  infer  that  the  entire  promise 
is  conditional  over  against  the  most  express  declarations  to  the  contrary  as 
to  the  distinguished  One,  the  pre-eminent  Seed.  It  was,  indeed,  con- 
ditional as  to  the  ordinary  seed  of  David  (comp.  Ps.  89  :  30-34,  and  see 
force  of  "  nevertheless,"  etc.),  and  if  his  seed  would  have  yielded 
obedience,  David's  throne  whould  never  have  been  vacated  until  the  Seed, 
par  excellence,  came  ;  but  being  disobedient,  the  throne  was  overthrown, 
and  will  remain  thus  ''a  tabernacle  fallen  doivny  "ft  house  desolate,'^ 
until  rebuilt  and  restored  by  the  Seed. '  The  reader  will  not  fail  to  observe 
that  if  fulfilled  in  Solomon,  and  not  having  respect  unto  the  Seed,  how 
incongruous  and  irrelevant  would  be  the  prophecies  giveyi  afterivard,  as 
e.g.  Jer.  33  :  17-26,  etc.  6.  The  language  is  that  ordinarily  used  to 
denote  the  literal  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David,  as  illustrated  in  Jer. 
17  :  25  and  22  :  4.  7.  The  prophets  adopt  the  same  language,  and  its 
constant  reiteration  under  Divine  guidance  is  evidence  that  the  plain  gram- 
matical sense  is  the  one  intended.  8.  The  prevailing  belief  of  centuries,  a 
national  faith,  engendered  by  the  language,  under  the  teaching  of  inspired 
men,  indicates  liow  the  language  is  to  be  understood.  9.  This  throne  and 
Kingdom  is  one  of  promise  and  inheritance  (Prop.  122),  and  hence  refers 
not  to  the  Divinity  but  to  the  Humanity  of  Jesus  (comp.  Props.  82-85). 
10.  The  same  is  distinctively  promised  to  David's  Son  ''  according  to  the 
flesh''  to  be  actually  realized,  and,  therefore.  He  must  appear  the 
Theocratic  King  as  promised.  11.  We  have  not  the  slightest  hint  given 
that  it  is  to  be  interpreted  in  any  other  way  than  a  literal  one  ;  any  other 
is  the  result  of  pure  inference  (as  will  be  shown).  12.  Any  other  view 
than  that  of  a  literal  interpretation  involves  the  grossest  self -contradict  io7i 
(as  seen  in  Obs.  3).  13.  The  denial  of  a  literal  reception  of  the  covenant 
robs  the  heir  of  His  covenanted  inheritance  (comp.  e.g.  Prop.  122).  14. 
No  grammatical  rule  can  be  laid  down  which  will  make  David's  throne  to 
bo  the  Father's  throne  in  the  third  heaven.  15.  That  if  the  latter  is 
attempted  under  tile^ -notion  of  "symbolical"  or  "  typical,"  then  the 
credibility  and  meaning  of  the  covenants  are  left  to  the  interpretations  of 
men,  and  David  himself  becomes  "  the  symbol"  or  "  type"  (creature  as  he 
is)  of  the  Creator.  16.  That  if  David's  throne  is  the  Father's  throne  in 
heaven  (the  usual  interpretation),  then  it  must  have  existed  forever.  17. 
If  such  covenanted  promises  are  to  be  received  figuratively,  it  is  incon- 
ceivable that  they  should  be  given  in  their  present  form  without  some 


344  THE   THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PrOP.  52. 

direct  affirmation,  in  some  place,  of  their  figurative  nature,  God  foreseeing 
(if  not  literal)  that  for  centuries  they  would  be  pre-eminently  calculated  to 
excite  and  foster  false  expectations,  e.g.  even  from  David  to  Christ.  18. 
God  is  faithful  in  His  promises,  and  deceives  no  o?ie  in  the  language  of  His 
covenants.  19.  No  necessity  existed  why,  if  this  throne  promised  to  David's 
Son  meant  something  else,  the  throne  sliould  be  so  definitely  promised  in 
the  form  given.  20.  The  identical  throne  and  Kingdom  overthrown  are 
the  ones  restored.  21.  But  the  main,  direct  reasons  for  receiving  the  literal 
covenanted  language  will  he  given  under  Props.  81,  122,  111,  112,  114, 
117,  201,  203,  204,  etc.  These,  in  connection  with  the  covenants  them- 
selves, make  David's  throne  and  Kingdom  a  requisite  for  the  display  of 
that  Theocratic  ordering  which  God  has  already  instituted  (but  now  holds 
in  abeyance  until  the  preparations  are  completed)  for  the  restoration  and 
exaltation  of  the  Jewish  nation  (which  is  preserved  for  this  purpose),  for 
the  salvation  of  the  human  race  (which  comes  under  the  Theocratic 
blessing),  and  for  the  dominion  of  a  renewed,  curse-delivered  world  (the 
Theocratic  arrangement  making  this  possible  and  a  reali-zation).  Such  a 
throne  and  Kingdom  are  necessary  to  2)reserve  the  Divine  Unity  of  Purpose 
in  the  already  proposed  Theocratic  line.  Thus  early  in  our  argument 
reference  is  made  to  this  j^oint,  not  so  much  to  prove  it  as  to  direct  the 
reader's  attention  to  it,  because  it  is  <x  goal  to  which  the  path  of  Scripture 
directly  leads  us,  as  it  led  the  Primitive  Church. 

Obs.  3.  The  reasons  urged  for  a  non-literal  fulfilment  must  also  be  fairly 
presented,  so  that  the  reader  may  compare  them  with  those  given  on  the 
other  side.  Storr  {Diss,  on  the  Meaning  of  tlie  Kingdom  of  Heaven)  in- 
forms us  that  Christ's  sitting  on  David's  throne,  etc.,  was  verified  by  His 
descent  from  David,  by  His  being  born  in  David's  land,  by  His  claiming 
to  be  King  of  the  Jews,  and  by  His  exhibiting,  after  His  exaltation,  the 
first  fruits  of  His  reign  "  within  the  ancient  empire  of  David."  But  still 
feeling  a  deficiency— /o?*  none  of  these  things  meet  the  covenanted  conditions — 
he  goes  on  to  say  :  "  The  throne  of  Christ  cannot  be  called  the  throne  of 
David  except  figuratively,  inasmuch  as  that  divine  government  over  the 
Israelites  which  was  transferred  to  David  and  his  posterity  as  to 
the  Sons  of  God,  the  King  of  the  Israelites,  was  a  sliadoiv  and  image  of 
the  divine  government  over  the  universe,  conferred  upon  that  man  who 
sprang  from  the  stock  of  David,  and  who  was  much  more  truly  the  Son 
of  God.  Which  being  established,  it  follows  that  Christ  sits  7iot  on  the 
throne  of  David  itself,  but  on  tlie  antetype.^^  And  this  showing  tliat  He 
"  sits  not  on  the  throne  of  David,"  he  calls  "  a  real  succession  to  David's 
place.^^  This  is  grounded  on  the  assumption  that  some  fulfilment  of  the 
covenanted  promise  is  required,  and  this  was  the  best  that  offered,  viz.  :  to 
show  that  Jesus  is  not  on  David's  throne,  and  that  it  is  not  really  de- 
manded, refuge  being  sought  under  another  sense,  i.e.  a  typical.  But  this 
is  abundantly  refuted,  {a)  by  covenant  promises  containing,  in  the  nature 
of  the  case,  no  typical  promises  (Prop.  48)  ;  (Jb)  by  tlie  personal  antetypical 
language  of  the  covenant  itself,  promising  a  lineal  descendant  of  David's 
to  sit  on  his  throne  and  establish  his  Kingdom  forever  (Prop.  49)  ;  (c)  by 
the  direct  connection  it  sustains  to  the  Jewish  nation  (Props.  47,  111-114, 
etc.)  ;  {d)  by  the  time,  as  predicted,  when  it  shall  be  realized  (Props.  66, 
68,  120,  121,  etc.)  ;  {e)  by  overlooking  tlie  postponement  of  the  covenanted 
Kingdom    (Props.    51-76)  ;  (/)    by  misapprehending   the   nature   of    the 


Prop.  52.]  the  theocratic  ki:n^gdom.  345 

Davidic  Kingdom  as  a  real  Theocratic  Kingdom  (Prop.  31)  ;  (g)  by 
forgetting  that  it  is  "  the  fallen  doivn'^  throne  and  Kingdom  (which  shows 
that  it  is  no  type)  that  is  to  be  restored  (Prop.  32)  ;  (li)  by  mistahing  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  for  the  covenanted  Kingdom  (Props.  79,  80)  ;  (i)  by 
■ignoring  Christ's  inheritance  (Prop.  122),  and  the  distinctive  feature's 
allied  with  its  restoration,  as  e.g.  place  of  manifested  royalty  (Prop.  1G8), 
a  visibly  manifested  Theocracy  (Prop.  117),  pre-millennial  Advent  (Prop. 
121),  the  visible  reign  of  Jesus  (Props.  131,  132,  133),  etc.  The  fact  is, 
that  the  language  of  the  covenant  does  not  fulfil  the  conditions  of  typical 
language,  for  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  were  already  incorporated 
(Props.  28,  49)  as  ilie  real,  undoubted  Kingdom  of  God — a  Tlieocracy.  There 
is  no  Scriptural  authority  for  constituting  it  a  type  ;  it  is  mere  human  in- 
ference, because  its  language  cannot  otherwise  be  made  to  fit  into  a  system 
or  theory.  It  is  unreasonable  to  make  it  a  type,  because  it  makes  a  throne 
cast  doivn  the  type  of  an  eternal  one  in  heaven,  and  David  a  type  of  the 
Father,  which  is  an  unfit  application,  there  being  no  pro2Jer  analogy 
between  them.  Such  a  view  entirely  overlooks  the  important  and  essen- 
tial fact,  that  this  throne  and  Kingdom  was  covenanted,  not  to  the  Son  of 
God  (for  it,  in  virtue  of  His  Theocratic  relationship,  already  belongs  to 
Him  as  God,  and  no  covenant  is  necessary),  hut  to  the  Son  of  Man  (comp. 
Props.  81,  82,  83).  It  is  sadly  defective  in  making  the  promises  of  such  a 
nature,  that  pious  Israelites,  John  the  Baptist,  and  the  disciples,  were 
deceived  by  them,  resting  their  faith  and  hope  not  in  a  reality,  but  in  mis- 
conceived figures  of  speech,  thus  placing  the  Church  before  and  at  the 
First  Advent  in  an  exceeding  low  state  of  intelligence. 

Home's  {Introd.  vol.  1,  p.  386)  declaration  concerning  types  is  commended  to  the 
consideration  of  those  who  adopt  this  typical  view  :  "  But  if  we  assert,  that  a  person  or 
thing  was  designed  to  prefigure  another  person  or  thing  when  no  such  prefiguration  has 
been  declared  by  divine  authority,  we  make  an  assertion  for  which  we  neither  have,  nor 
can  have,  the  slightest  foundation.' '  To  this  it  is  alleged  that  Christ  is  called  David,  and 
hence  David  must  be  a  type  (others  claim  that  it  is  mystical  to  make  David  mean 
Christ)  ;  but  this  does  not  follow,  it  being  a  common  figure  of  speech  indicative  of 
Christ's  occupying  the  station,  etc.,  of  David,  being  his  legal  royal  descendant,  as  is  seen 
m  the  line  of  emperors,  occupying  the  throne  of  Caesar,  calling  themselves  Caesars.  The 
name  itself  is  evidence  of  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom,  being  appro- 
priately, significantly,  and  forcibly  applied  to  the  Messiah.  (Killen,  in  The  Old  Caih. 
Church,  quotes  from  Bin.  Council,  3,  P.  1,  184,  how  even  the  "  most  religious"  emperor, 
Constantine  Pogonatus,  was  complimented  as  "  a  new  David''  whom  "  God  raised  up," 
etc.  What  men  employ  by  way  of  flattery,  God  uses  to  designate  the  certain  restored 
Davidic  royalty. ) 

In  view  of  the  importance  of  this  promise,  and  the  persistent  attacks  againfet  its  lit- 
eral fulfilment,  we  present  additional  remarks  urged  by  others  in  opposition  to  our  be- 
lief. Thus  e.g.  the  strictures  contained  in  The  Kingdom  of  Grace  embrace  the  following  : 
(1.)  That  Christ  "  was  King  of  the  Jews,  and,  of  course,  the  rightful  heir  of  David's  throne, 
but  never  once  did  He  set  up  any  claim  to  the  literal  and  material  throne  on  which 
David  sat."  Prom  this  we  are  to  infer  that  Jesus  waived  His  right,  and  does  yet.  It  is 
taken  for  granted,  that  since  there  has  been  no  such  a  literal  fulfilment,  there  never  will  he 
one,  and  tliat,  therefore,  the  whole  matter  must  be  understood  spiritually^  That  is,  we 
are  to  do  just  as  the  unbelieving  Jews  did  :  because  siich  a  Kingdom  has  not  appeared, 
we  are  to  deny  that  He,  "  the  rightful  Heir,"  will  ever  establish  it.  Would  it  not  be  more 
prudent  and  wise  to  ponder  over  the  reasons  assigned  for  its  postponement.  Props.  66-68  V 
(2)  That  David's  throne  was  "  in  dust,"  and  to  raise  it  up  would  be  "  absurd."  The  ab- 
surdity is  not  in  the  promise  of  restoring  a  fallen  throne,  but  in  the  supposition  that  the 
throne  of  a  Kingdom  is  necessarily  confined  to  a  certain  chair  or  seat.  (3)  Referring  to 
Winthrop's  Lectures,  where  it  is  stated  (as  all  Millenarians  hold),  that  risen,  changed, 
glorifiecl  saints  are  rulers  and  princes  in  this  Kingdom  (comp.  Prop.  154),  and  that  it  is 
of  heavenly  (being  Theocratic)  origin,  established  under  heavenly  power,  it  is  replied, 


346  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  52. 

that  this  involves  a  contradiction,  because  David's  throne  was  not  of  heavenly  origin,  and 
risen  saints  were  not  its  princes.  This  objection  (more  fully  answered  in  succeeding 
Propositions)  is  set  aside  by  the  simple  fact  that  the  Theocratic-Davidic  rule  was  of 
heavenly  origin  (Proi)S.  28,  31),  for  God  chose  David,  adopted  his  throne  and  Kingdom, 
calling  it  "  Jlis  throne,"  and  gives  it  as  an  inheritance  to  the  Seed  selected  by  Himself, 
to  which  Seed  He  unites  Himself  in  the  strictest  Theocratic  relationship  ;  and  the  re-estab- 
lishment at  the  Sec.  Advent  is  not  by  earthly  hid  heavenly  power,  being  done  by  Christ 
and  His  saints.  The  predictions  of  David,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  impl}^  an  im- 
mortal Euler.  Change  in  the  officials  and  government  of  a  Kingdom  does  not  destroy 
its  identity,  provided  the  regular  succession  (a  descendant  of  David's),  the  nationality 
(restored  Jewish  nation),  and  locality  (Palestine)  are  preserved.  (4)  Jesus  refused  to  be 
made  King  of  the  Jews  ;  now  if  the  rightful  heir  and  the  covenant  required  it,  He  would 
have  acceded  to  the  wishes  of  the  Jews.  This  objection  overlooks  the  reasons  assigned 
under  Props.  57,  58,  G5,  66,  67,  and  68,  that  the  nation,  in  its  representative  men,  re- 
jected  Him  and  that  the  Kingdom  was  postponed.  But  a  small  and  feeble  proportion  of 
the  nation  desired  to  make  Him  King  ;  the  leading,  ruling  class  were  persistent  m  refus- 
ing Him  as  the  Messiah.  (5)  At  His  death  Christ  said  "  It  is  finished,"  and  as  many 
centuries  have  passed  since  that  declaration  and  David's  throne  has  remained  vacant,  it 
is  evident  that  it  will  never  be  claimed  in  a  literal  sense.  Here  certainly  is  faith  '  If 
such  argumentation  (does  it  deserve  to  be  called  such?)  can  be  admitted,  then,  as  infidels 
do,  we  may  deny  all  that  is  future,  under  the  plea  that  "  it  is  finished."  The  writer 
overlooks  the  plainly  stated  fact,  that  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  (Prop.  66,  etc.)  must  in- 
tervene before  the  claim  is  again  made  and  realized. 

Fairbairn  ( On  Prophecy)  reiterates  some  of  the  previous  statements,  insists  upon  the 
covenant  being  "  figurative  and  symbolical,"  saying  :  "  that  He  was  destined  to  occupy 
the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David,  meant  simjDly,  that  He  was,  like  David,  to  hold  the 
place  of  King  over  God's  heritage,  and  to  do  to  the  full  what  David  could  do  onl^^'in  the 
most  i^artial  and  imperfect  manner — bring  deliverance,  safety,  and  blessing  to  the  people 
of  God."  If  this  was  all  that  is  meant,  why  conceal  it  then  under  a  form  of  expression 
which  deceived  the  Jewish  nation  and  the  Primitive  Church  ?  WJiy  identify  it  with  a  re- 
stored fallen  throne  and  a  restored  punished  Jewish  nation?  Why  so  concisely  link  to- 
gether David's  throne.  Kingdom,  people,  land,  and  explain  that  it  is  only  to  be  realized 
when  the  same  shall  be  restored  from  a  downfallen,  ruined,  and  desolate  condition  con- 
tinued on  through  the  allotted  "  times  of  the  Gentiles  ?"  The  idea  of  Fairbairn 's  is  far 
from  exhausting  its  meaning,  and  the  identification  of  the  i)romise  with  other  things  (as 
e.g.  the  rebuilding  of  ruined,  desolate  cities,  etc.)  forbids  such  a  transformation.  The 
reasons  that  urge  Fairbairn  to  the  conclusion  presented,  are  mainly  two  :  first,  that  no 
other  fulfilment  than  this  can  be  found  to  have  taken  place,  and,  therefore,  this  one  must 
be  accepted  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case  ;  and  secondly,  that  for  Christ  to  descend 
from  heaven  and  occupy  David's  throne  as  literally  predicted  would  be  a  lowering  or  de- 
grading of  His  dignity,  position,  etc.  As  to  the  first  supposition  :  it  is  sufficient  now  to 
say  that  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  literal  sense  does  not  prove  it  to  be  false.  Wisdom  sug- 
gests that  we  first  ascertain,  before  condemning  it,  whether  it  is  not  part  of  the  Divine 
Purpose  to  postpone  its  fulfilment,  just  as  He  has  postponed  the  restoration  of  the  Jews. 
It  took  a  long  time  before  the  Seed  promised  came  and  before  His  coming  the  non-fulfil- 
ment of  what  afterward  literally  occurred,  was  no  reason  to  spiritualize  the  promise 
away  ;  and  so  again,  it  may  require  a  long  period  before  the  remainder  is  fulfilled.  The 
truth  is,  that  in  considering  this  subject  the  Scriptures  which  teach  the  delay,  the  post- 
ponement, are  not  allowed  to  testify.  (Comp.  e.g.  Props.  54-68).  These  essential  wit- 
nesses, showing  that  delay,  or  postponement,  is  reconcilable  with  God's  promises,  are 
not  admitted,  and,  of  course,  the  view  entertained  must  be  one-sided.  As  to  the  second 
supposition :  We  are  willing  to  accept  covenanted  promises  and  predictions  as  written, 
without  setting  ourselves  up  as  a  judge  to  decide  whether  they  agree  with  our  sense  of 
proprieties,  or  our  notion  of  the  fitness  of  things.  (Comp.  Prop.  203,  where  this  objec- 
tion is  considered. )  The  Jews  did  this  at  the  First  Advent,  and  they  made  a  fearful  mis- 
take. Those  who,  honestly  but  mistakenly,  speak  so  degradingly  of  this  throne  and 
Kingdom  forget  that  it  is  a  Theocratic  throne  and  Kingdom  (Prop.  31),  and  they  might 
just  as  well  write  of  God  lowering  His  majesty,  etc.,  lohen  Be  condescended  to  act  in  the 
capacity  of  earthly  Ruler  over  the  Jewish  nation.  Even  if  we  had  no  Scripture  to  show 
that  such  a  reign  was  an  exalting  of  the  Humanity  of  Jesus,  that  it  stood  intimatel}^  re- 
lated to  the  perfection  of  His  work  as  Redeemer,  that  the  Redemption  of  the  saints,  the 
Jewish  nation,  the  Gentiles,  the  race  as  a  race,  and  the  groaning,  sin-cursed  world,  is 
embraced  in  it  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  196,  197,  200,  202,  etc.) — even  if  these  glorious  and 
ennobling  things  were  not  recorded,  we  would  not  permit  our  faith  in  such  promises  to 


Prop.  52.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  347 

waver,  but  with  these  added  it  would  be  foll}^  for  us  to  deny  them.  The  misapprehen- 
sion here  probably  arises  from  thinking  that  Jesus  must  lower  Himself  to  be  "a  King 
on  the  earthly  model  of  David."  He  was  a  Son  of  David's,  but  yet  far  more  than  a  Son, 
even  David's  Lord  (being  God-man — i.e.  having  in  His  own  Person  the  real  Theocratic 
Rulership  united),  and  hence  the  j^romises  (while  including  as  a  central  point  the  re- 
stored Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom)  in  view  of  His  immortality,  His  attendant  Ptulers, 
the  greatness  and  power  of  His  administration,  the  extension  into  universal  dominion, 
the  splendor  and  majesty  of  His  person  and  surroundings,  the  Supernatural  exerted  and 
manifested,  the  wonderful  works  performed,  have  the  same  Theocratic-Davidic  throne 
immeasurably  augmented  and  glorified— to  subserve  certain  purposes — when  once  occupied 
by  this  august  'Theocratic  Personage.  Prophecy  unites  in  asserting  the  greatness  of  this 
reign  in  exulting  strains.  It  is  not  in  our  place  to  say  that  these  things  cannot  take  place 
without  Christ's  descending  to  the  level  of  an  earthly  monarch,  or  without  a  diminution 
of  His  majesty,  lest,  peradventure,  we  be  found  underrating,  disparaging,  despising,  and 
even  sneering  at  His  glory.     God's  work  is  "  a  strange  loork.'" 

Then  there  are  others  (as  e.g.  Westminster  Review,  Oct.  1861,  Art.  5)  who  acknowledge 
that  such  a  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  is  promised,  was  entertained  by  the 
Jews,  etc.,  but  utterl}'  reject  it  on  the  ground  of  its  being  Jetois^  imagination,  partialism, 
and  national  pride.  The  prophetic  descriptions  are  indeed  sometimes  grand,  but 
merely  poetic  ;  sometimes  sublime,  but  altogether  human.  (Every  writer  of  this  kind  is 
very  careful  not  to  inform  us/ioio  "Jewish  partialism  and  pride"  could  conjoin  with  this 
so  much  that  is  humiliating  and  degrading  to  the  nation — as  e.g.  the  long  fall  of  the 
nation,  remaining  under  Gentile  domination,  etc. — preliminary  to  the  Kingdom.)  We 
give  one  extract,  taken  from  the  review  mentioned,  as  illustrative  of  the  spirit  of  those  who 
speak  of  this  matter  as  "  a  Messianic  fiction,"  or  as  "  a  Christianized  Messianic  expecta- 
tion." Thus,  the  writer  declares  the  Apocalypse  "proclaims  to  all  ages  the  intense 
reality,  the  frenzied  fanaticism,  the  splendid  superstition,  and  Berserker  transport,  of 
one  great  dreamer  of  this  glorious  vision,  the  St.  John  of  Patmos,  the  author  of  the 
Christian  Apocalypse."  From  persons  who  treat  the  reign  of  Christ  and  of  His  saints  in 
this  condemnatory  strain,  no  favor  need  to  be  anticipated  in  behalf  of  covenanted  prom- 
ise.    To  them  it  is  simply  an  idle  dream  or  Jewish  enthusiasm. 

Eminent  men  (as  e.g.  Lange,  Bremen  Lectures,  Lect.  8,  i3.  242)  make  the  Theocracy  a 
figure  or  type  of  a  concealed.,  invisible  Kingdom  in  the  church.  But  the  reader  can 
readily  see  that  this  is  disproven  by  the  predictions  that  the  same  kingdom  overthrown  shall 
be  re-established  ;  by  its  covenanted  relationship  which  forbids  any  such  transmutation  ; 
and  even  hy  the  tact  that  no  correct  antetype  exists  if  such  an  invisible  Messianic  King- 
dom is  admitted,  for  the  one  was  a  real  outward  Theocratic  Kingdom,  and  this  one  is  in- 
visible and  hence  unrecognizable  ;  the  one  had  God  an  accessible  Ruler  to  consult  in 
cases  of  difficulty,  this  one  has  a  God  not  thus  accessible,  etc.  But  we  need  not  repeat 
what  has  been  said  previously. 

Ois.  4.  No  sophistry  in  spiritualizing,  symbolizing,  or  typicalizing  can 
transmute  the  promise  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  into  something 
else,  as  e.g.  into  the  Father's  throne,  the  Divine  Sovereignty,  the  Kingdom 
of  Grace,  Gospel  Dispensation,  etc.,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  identical 
throne  and  Kingdom,  no2V  overturned,  is  the  one  that  2S  promised  to  the 
Messiah  to  be  re-established  by  Himself,  as  e.g.  Amos  9  :  11,  Acts  15  :  16, 
Zech.  2  :  12,  Zech.  1  :  16,  1*7,  etc.  (with  which  compare  Props.  33,  122, 
etc.).  The  Theocratic  crown  cast  dotun,  the  Theocratic  throne  overiurned, 
the  Theocratic  Kingdom  overthroivn,  is  the  crown,  throne,  and  Kingdom 
that  the  Christ  is  to  restore.  These  belong  to  Christ  by  '^  righf  (Ezek. 
31  :  25-27),  and  will  be  ''given  to  Him''  (Prop.  83).  '  These,  too,  are 
linked  with  a  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  Jer.  33  :  14,  Micah  4  :  6,  8, 
etc.  (Props.  111-114).  These  facts — the  existence  of  the  throne  at  one 
time,  its  non-existence  for  a  period,  its  restoration  again,  its  connection  at 
the  restoration  with  the  ancient  people  and  land  that  formed  the  original 
Kingdom — these  facts,  as  well  as  many  others  that  will  be  brought  forward, 
indicate,  as  fully  as  language  can  possibly  express  it,  that  the  ancient  faith 
in  covenanted,  language  must    not   be  discarded  through  Gentile  "high- 


348  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  52. 

mindedness. "  The  entire  tenor  and  analogy  of  prediction  unmistaJcaUy 
2Jroves  this;  and,  therefore,  without  an  express  declaration  to  the  con- 
trary, we  ought  not,  dare  not,  change  the  sense  that  is  given.  Let  men 
ridicule  and  sneer  at  our  intirmity  ;  it  is  the  sense  contained  \xv  the 
language,  and  we  can  wait  for  God's  own  time  of  vindication  and  verifica- 
tion. 

Ols.  5.  The  Divine  nature  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom  is  admitted  by 
Storr,  Fairbairn,  and  others.  So  that  our  opponents  confess,  what  has 
already  been  proven  (Props.  28,  31,  etc.),  that  David  sat  upon  "  the  tlirone 
of  the  Kingdom  of  Jehovah.''^  It  was  truly  a  Theocratic  Kingdom  ;  and 
this  Theocratic  basis  is  the  reason  why  God  takes  such  an  interest  in  its 
re-establishment.  It  is  Christ's  "inheritance,"  because  it  is  Theocratic; 
and  it  is  this  Divine  aspect  which  makes  it,  as  represented,  worthy  of  the 
Son  of  Man. 

Obs.  6.  Adhering  to  the  Primitive  faith  we  can  consistently  explain, 
what  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  Apos.  Age,  p.  32)  finds,  from  his  standpoint,  a 
difficult  matter,  viz.  :  "  that  the  predictions  and  hopes  of  the  prophets 
are  invariaUy  associated  with  the  earthly  and  political  existence  of  the 
nation,  and  that  they  never,  in  their  most  ideal  representation  of  the 
future,  break  through  the  circle  of  conditions  belonging  to  that  existence." 
These  are  honest,  frank  words,  and  we  firmly  hold  to  them,  asking,  Wliy  seeh 
to  break  through  that  circle  of  conditions  now  9  Do  they  not  still  exist  in 
the  Theocratic  ordering?  Does  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  alter  or  in- 
validate them  ?  We  shall  presently  see,  in  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom, 
etc.,  that  the  covenanted  relationship  of  the  Jewish  nation  im2)eratively 
demands  it. 

Obs.  7.  This  feature  again  reminds  us  that  ''the  keystone  of  the  whole 
system"  (i.e.  Millenarian)  is  not  to  be  found,  as  Prof.  Sanborn  (Essay  on 
Mill.),  in  the  pre-Millennial  Advent  (however  indispensable),  but  in  the 
covenants.  The  promises  are  not  in  the  Sec.  Advent,  but  in  the  covenants 
and  prophecies  based  on  them  ;  the  Advent  being  only  the  necessary  means 
toward  their  accomplishment. 

Obs.  8.  Many  persons,  aside  from  infidels  who  ridicule  this  Davidic 
throne  and  Kingdom,  and  the  precious  promises  linked  with  them, 
through  mistaken  zeal,  or  a  conscientious  desire  to  vindicate  the  Word 
spiritualized,  or  mere  passion  engendered  by  controversy,  employ  the  most 
slighting  language  respecting  this  throne  and  Kingdom.  They  insist  that 
\f  must  be'-  spiritually  comprehended,  or  else  it  is  utterly  unworthy  of 
belief,  being  "  carnal,''  ''fleshly,''  etc.  They  gravely  tell  us— overlooking 
its  Theocratic  basis  founded  by  God  Himself—that  it  is  impossible  that 
such  a  Kingdom  should  be  manifested,  because  of  Christ's  relationship  to 
the  Almighty. 

If  it  "  must  he,"  lohy  does  not  the  grammatical  sense  sustain  them,  and  whi/  are  tliey 
left  to  mfer  it  ?  Why  do  they  practically  ignore  the  Humanity  of  Jesus  and  lay  all  stress 
upon  the  Divinity,  not  noticing  that  this  Kingdom  is  given  to  David's  Son,  the  Son  of 
Man  by  covenant,  and  that  the  Divine  is  superadded  to  the  Human,  thus  rendering  His 
reign  more  exalted,  glorious,  and  necessarily  Theocratic  ?  Why  do  they  not  observe, 
what  all  the  prophets  declare,  that  the  Davidic  is  used  as  the  leverage  or  foundation  of 
Christ's  world-wide  dominion  ?   Why  not  see  that  this  Kingdom  is  one  exclusively  of  prmn- 


PkOP.  52.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  349 

ise,  and  is  given  to  the  Man  Jesus,  and  has  no  reference,  as  covenanted,  whatever  to  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  lodged  in  the  Godhead  ?  Why  not  notice  that  this  Kingdom  is  Divine 
as  well  as  Civil — a  perfect,  complete  Theocracy  ?  If  these,  and  kindred  jDoints,  were  ob- 
served, it  seems  to  ns  "  impossible"  for  a  student  of  the  Word,  who  reverently  ap- 
proaches it  and  earnestly  desires  its  teachings,  to  speak  and  write  so  disrespec(/'M%  of  the 
restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  or  to  denounce  as  "  impossible"  the 
Theocratic  arrangement  that  God  has  mercifully  acknowledged.  Even  if  influenced  to 
dissent,  the  same  ought  to  be  expressed  in  guarded  language,  not  denunciatory  of  that 
which  Holy  Writ  contains  in  its  grammatical  sense.  Prudence,  to  say  nothing  of  higher 
motives,  dictates  this  course. 

Obs.  9.  The  extremely  guarded  language  of  Scripture  on  this  point,  so 
as  not  to  conflict  with  the  covenanted  promise,  should  lead  the  student  to 
reflection.  Thus  e.g.  in  Eev.  3  :  21  two  thrones  are  mentioned,  the 
Father's  throne  and  Christ's  throne,  and  these  are  distinguished  the  one 
from  the  other  (Prop.  117).  In  Christ's  typical  triumphal  entry  into 
Jerusalem,  when  the  people  exclaimed  (Mark  11  :  10),  ''  Blessed  "^be  the 
Kingdom  of  our  father  David,  tliat  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ; 
Hosanna  in  the  highest,^^  Jesus,  instead  of  rebuking  tlie  identification  of 
His  Kingdom  with  the  restored  Davidic,  virtually  allows  it  by  defending 
the  disciples  against  (Luke  19  :  39,  Matt.  21  :  15,  16)  the  displeasure  of 
the  Pharisees.  In  John  18  :  33,  Jesus,  in  virtue  of  His  Theocratic  posi- 
tion, does  not  deny  the  affirmative  of  Pilate's  question,  "  Art  Thou  King 
of  the  JewsT'  although  the  circumstances  might  involve  tlie  charge  of 
treason  against  the  Roman  power.  In  Matt.  19  :  28  the  time  of  setting 
up  the  Kingdom  is  specified,  etc.  And  thus  through  all  the  Scriptures,  as 
will  be  shown  hereafter,  there  is  a  carefully  drawn  distinction  between 
what  belongs  to  Jesus  Christ  because  of  His  relationship  as  God,  and  what 
pertains  to  Him  by  promise,  by  right,  by  inheritance,  by  the  redemptive 
work  that  He  is  accomplishing  because  of  His  Messiahship  as  David's  Son, 
the  promised  Theocratic  King. 

01)s.  10.  Having  all  along  the  literal,  plain  grammatical  sense  in  our  favor 
— a  sense  that  excited  faith  and  hope  in  multitudes  of  Jewish  and  Christian 
hearts — the  reader  ought  reasonably  to  expect  that  we  should  constantlv  lav 
stress  upon  this  admitted  fact.  There  is  no  difference  of  opinion  as  to 
what  meaning  the  words  in  their  common  usage  convey  ;  this  is  conceded, 
but  the  question  is  sprung,  whether  this  sense  is  to  be  received  or  another 
is  to  be.  entailed.  Considering  the  matter  settled  against  a  literal  sense 
from  its  non-fulfilment,  is  umvorthy  of  a  believer,  for  God's  sayings  (as 
even  unbelieving  Jews  have  asserted,  e.g.  in  professing  to  receive  the  Old 
Test,  on  the  ground  of  its  being  God's  Word)  are  to  be  received  simply  on  the 
ground  of  their  having  been  given  by  the  Almighty.  This  matter  of  inter- 
pretation must  be  decided  from  a  higher  position,  viz.  :  by  direct  reference 
to  the  Word  itself  (Props.  4  and  9),  and  just  so  soon  as  God  declares  that 
the  grammatical  sense  is  the  one  not  intended,  then,  and  only  then,  other 
engrafted  senses  may  be  tolerated. 

Obs.  11.  Regarding  the  intensely  warning  predictions  that  at  the  very 
time  this  Kingdom  is  to  be  re-established  at  the  Sec.  Advent  (Props.  Q>Q, 
74,  121,  etc.),  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  have  so  little  faith  (Props. 
177-180,  etc.)  that  they  shall  stand  arrayed  against  the  King — disbelieving 
the  promises  pertaining  to  Him — it  is  prudent  and  wise  to  avoid  that 


350  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  52. 

2)revalent  spirit  of  nnbelief  taking  this  predicted  direction  in  avoiding  the 
literal  and  substituting  another  sense.  We  feel  disinclined  to  foster  such 
an  antagonistic  spirit,  lest  we  too  should  receive  the  censure  (Luke 
24  :  25),  "  0  fools  ami  sloio  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  iwoi:)hets  have 
spokeyi  f^  and  lest  we  become  of  those  who,  by  insidious  interpretation, 
2)ave  the  ivay  for  an  utter  denial  of  Christ's  claims  as  David's  Son  and 
Theocratic  Heir.  Let  the  motive  of  denial  be  ])rompted  by  the  best  inten- 
tions, its  fruit,  if  in  oi)position  to  the  Divine  Will,  will  result  m  evil. 

It  is  sad  to  see  the  frailty  and  perversity  of  human  wisdom  in  the  things  of  God.  The 
Jews  believed  in  this  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  but  overlooked  the  foretold 
sufferings,  death,  etc.  of  the  Messiah  ;  the  Gentiles  acknowledge  the  sufferings  and 
death,  but  ignore  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  the  promises  literally  understood. 
The  Theocratic-Davidic  inheritance  of  Jesus  is  but  rarely  mentioned  ;  it  is  scarcely  ever 
heard  in  preaching  or  praying  ;  it  is  deemed  of  so  little  importance  that  Christian  teach- 
ing hardly  refers  to  it  ;  and  when  reference  to  it  is  made,  it  sounds  a  note  of  discord  in 
prevailing  systems  of  theology.  Let  us  ponder  ;  ought  jDromises  so  solemnly  given,  so 
constantly  presented,  so  literally  reiterated,  so  preciously  confirmed,  to  be  passed  by  in 
neglect,  and  even  in  silence  ?  Ought  they  to  become  the  objects  of  ridicule  and  reproach? 
No  !  to  ignore  them,  or  to  mock  them,  is  indicative  of  serious  doctrinal  defect. 

Ohs.  12.  The  assumption  that  David's  throne  and  Kingdom  must 
denote  some  other  throne  and  Kingdom  in  the  third  heaven  never  meets 
the  contradictions  that  it  involves,  viz.  :  that  David's  throne,  etc.  was 
never  in  heaven,  never  extended  over  another  world,  and  is  not  fitted  from 
its  alleged  "  fleeting  earthly"  condition  to  designate  an  eternally  existing 
throne,  and  that  if  logically  carried  out  (from  which,  however,  our  op- 
ponents recoil),  then  David's  throne  being  "  the  Father's  throne, '^  where 
Christ  is,  David  himself  (for  the  throne  is  expressly  identified  with  him) 
must  also  represent  the  Father  !  Who  would  be  so  rash  as  to  adopt  such 
an  interpretation?  and  yet  simple  consistency  demands  it. 

If  the  throne  and  Kingdom  is  typical,  why  not  David  also,  with  whom  the  same  is 
constantly  cojoined  ?  But  more  than  tliis  :  if  only  an  enthronement  in  heaven  is  meant, 
why  not  say  so  at  once,  without  leading  multitudes  into  self-deception  ?  Can  any  reason 
be  assigned  why  such  a  matter,  if  contemplated,  should  be  disguised  under  language  em- 
inently calculated  to  mislead  ?  Would  such  a  procedure  be  consistent  with  the  profes- 
sions and  honor  of  the  God  of  mercy  and  love?  Why,  if  only  this  enthronement  is  de- 
noted, express  it  in  words,  which  fairly  includes  the  idea  of  a  perpetuation  of  the  throne 
and  Kingdom  of  David  here  on  the  earth  ?  That  this  idea  is  contained  in  it  no  one 
denies,  and  so  prominently  too  that  David  and  his  descendants,  the  Jews  down  to  the 
First  Advent,  the  disciples  of  Christ,  the  apostles  (as  e.g.  admitted  by  Knapp,  Fairbairn, 
etc.,  "up  to  the  very  eve,  Acts  1  :  6,  of  Christ's  dejjarture" ),  and  the  early  church,  all 
entertained  it.  This  assumption  passes  over  this  general,  universal  belief  as  if  it  were 
of  no  moment,  and  carefully  avoids,  as  a  tender  point,  all  allusion  to  it  ;  but  we  insist 
that  it  must  be  honestly  met  and  candidly  explained.  This,  we  apprehend,  will  be  a 
difficult  task,  seeing  that  the  true  church,  the  pious  of  centuries,  and  even  the  inspired 
of  God,  and  men  sent  out  to  preach,  are  included  in  such  a  faith;  and  if  held  to  be  in 
error,  then  He  who  sent  those  messages  must,  in  a  great  measure  (owing  to  the  gram- 
matical sense  containing  it),  become  responsible  for  the  introd^^ction  and  perpetuation 
(for  where  is  the  reproof  or  denial?)  of  such  alleged  error.  There  is  no  escape  from 
this  dilemma  ;  and  alas,  this  is  seen  and  felt  by  the  infidel  schools  now  in  existence,  who, 
fortified  by  the  prevailing  authority  of  believers,  reject  everything  "  Jewish''  as  untena- 
ble, pointing  with  delight  to  the  doctrinal  attitude  (now  so  antagonistic  to  the  church's 
present  position)  of  the  Primitive  Church  on  the  subject  of  the  Kingdom  (trusting  in  the 
literal  sense  of  the  promises^  as  an  indication  of  gross  error.  Thus  professed  believers 
of  the  Word  from  assumptions  plunge  into  strange  inconsistencies,  charging  the  entire 
ancient  church  with  erroneous  doctrine  in  fundamevtal  things,  and  furnish  the  weapons, 
manufactured  to  hand,  for  Strauss,  Baur,  Kenan,  Parker,  and  others.  The  expectations 
and  hopes  of  the  ancient  worthies  are  given  up  to  derision  and  scorn,  and  the  result  is 


Prop.  52.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  351 

that  it  recoils  back  upon  the  Bible  itself,  which  in  its  language  expresses  and  favors  the 
same.  The  apologies  tendered,  which  invariably  reflect  upon  and  lower  the  intelli- 
gence, etc.,  of  the  faithful,  only  make  the  inconsistency  and  antagonism  more  glaring. 
It  is  high  time  for  reverent,  intelligent  piety  to  see  this  abuse  of  the  Word,  and  aid  in 
restoring  its  proper  and  faith-inspiring  use. 

Ois.  13.  In  the  objections  made  to  the  Apocalypse  by  Schott  and  others, 
one  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  royal  dignity  and  honor  is  assigned  to 
Christ  as  the  Son  of  David.  In  addition  to  the  arguments  produced  by 
Prof.  Stuart  (6'o?>z.)  and  others  against  the  validity  of  such  an  objection, 
the  strongest  of  all  is  found  in  this  :  that  the  covenant  relationship  of 
Jesus  requires,  as  confirmatory  and  essential,  just  such  references  (Rev. 
3  :  7,  and  5  :  5,  and  22  :  16),  because  as  the  predicted  Seed  of  David  He 
inherits  David's  throne  and  Kingdom,  and  hence  his  personality,  as 
covenanted,  must  be  distinctively  observed.  It  is,  therefore,  both  reason- 
able and  requisite  to  find  them  in  such  a  book. 

The  outgrowths  of  spiritualizing  these  promises  run  into  the  most  painful  evidences 
of  complete  ignorance  of  covenanted  promises.  The  most  extravagant  and  foolish  vagary 
is  found  in  Davis  {Seven  Thimders,  p.  151  and  153),  who  makes  Christ,  at  His  Second 
appearing,  "an  American,"  This  is  equalled  by  several  writers,  who,  also  ignoring 
Christ's  Davidic  relationship  and  inheritance,  make  the  Fifth  Monarchy  or  Kingdom  of 
Daniel  the  United  States,  (as  e.g.  Berg,  etc).  Such  outrageous  interpretation,  violating 
the  covenants  and  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word,  are  not  worthy  of  a  serious  re- 
joinder. 

Obs.  14.  The  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  promises  implies,  in  view  of 
this  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  that  the  Messianic  Kingdom  is 
a  visible,  external  Kingdom,  not  merely  spiritual,  although  embracing 
spiritual  and  divine  things.  Its  visibility,  and  a  corresponding  acknowl- 
edgment of  the  same,  is  a  feature  i7iseparable  from  the  language  of 
promise  (comp.  Props.  117,  112,  122,  etc.). 

Obs.  15.  The  covenanted  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  allied  as  it  is 
with  the  Jewish  nation  (particularly  with  Judah  and  Benjamin),  necessarily 
reqr.Ires,  in  order  to  a  future  restoration,  a  preservation  of  the  nation. 
This  has  been  done  ;  and  to-day  we  see  that  nation  wonderfully  continued 
down  to  the  present,  although  enemies,  including  the  strongest  nations 
and  most  powerful  empires,  have  perished.  This  is  not  chance  work  ; 
for,  if  our  position  is  correct,  this  is  demanded,  seeing  that  without  a 
restoration  of  the  nation  it  is  impossible  to  restore  the  Davidic  Kingdom. 
The  covenant  language,  the  oath  of  God,  the  confirmation  of  promise  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  the  prophetic  utterances — all,  notwithstanding  the 
nation's  nnbelief,  requires  its  perpetiiatioii,  that  through  it  finally  God's 
promises  and  faithfulness  may  be  vindicated.  God  so  provides  that  His 
Word  may  be  fulfilled.  Every  Jew,  if  we  will  but  ponder  the  matter,  that 
we  meet  on  our  streets  is  a  living  evidence  that  the  Messiah  will  3'et  some 
day  reign  gloriously  on  David's  throne  and  over  his  Kingdom,  from  which 
to  extend  a  world-wide  dominion. 


352  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  53. 


Pjropositioit  53.   The  genealogies   of  our   Lord  form   an    im- 
portant link  in  the  comprehension  of  tliis  Kingdom, 

Tills  is  seen  already  from  what  preceded.  A  tlirone  and  a  king- 
dom is  to  be  given  to  a  promised  son  of  David,  a  regular  descendant 
of  Abraham' s.  It  is  his  by  right  of  inheritance.  He  is  the  royal 
Theocratic  heir.  Hence  without  such  a  genealogy  something  essen- 
tial would  be  lacking  in  the  chain  of  evidence. 

Ols.  1.  This  link  is  purposely  supplied,  and  with  special  reference  to 
these  covenants.  This  is  observable  in  Matthew  commencing  his  table  by 
a3serting  that  Jesus  was  "  the  Son  of  David,  the  Son  of  Abraham,^ ^  i.e. 
both  covenants,  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic,  were  thus  realized  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Also  m  designating  ^'' David  the  King,^^  and 
omitting  it  in  the  descendants  ;  the  same  expression  is  significant  only 
when  the  royal  covenant  which  made  David's  throne  and  Kingdom  sure  is 
taken  into  consideration  (comp.  Judge  Jones's  "Notes"  on  Matt.,  ch.  1, 
for  some  excellent  suggestions).  The  Kingdom  is  covenanted  to  a  legal 
descendant,  and  this  legal  descent  is  clearly  traced,  showing  the  legal, 
divine  right  of  Jesus  to  the  Theocratic  throne  and  Kingdom. 

Ebrard  {Gospel  His.,  Div.  2,  ch.  1)  says  of  Matthew's  genealogy  :  "  In  v.  16  it  is  de- 
scribed as  that  of  Joseph.  From  this  circumstance,  as  well  as  from  the  fact  that  it  com- 
mences with  Abraham  ;  from  the  stress  laid  u^on  King  David  ;  from  the  frequent  ref- 
erence made  to  persons  or  events  of  theocratic  importance  ;  and  lastly,  from  the  division 
in  three  periods,  the  central  one  being  that  of  the  theocratic  line  of  kings — we  may  clearly 
discern  the  intention  of  the  author  :  not  to  give  the  natural  jyedigree  of  Jesus,  but  to  prove 
that  He  had  a  right  to  claim  the  theocratic  crown — an  intention  in  pejfect  harmony  with  the 
general  character  of  the  Gospel.  We  have  here  also  the  true  key  to  all  the  supposed  difficul- 
ties." (It  will  repay  the  student  to  see  how  Ebrard  applies  this  "  key  "  in  the  solving 
of  difficulties.  He  makes  the  genealogy  of  Luke  to  be  that  of  Mary,  giving  the  natural 
progenitors.)  Lord  Hervey  {The  Genealogies  of  our  Lord)  and  Mill  {The  Mythical  Inlerp. 
of  the  Gospels,  ch.  2)  hold  that  both  genealogies  are  those  of  Joseph  ;  the  one  (Matthew's) 
exhibiting  the  legal  descent  of  the  Christ  from  David  ;  the  other  (Luke's),  His  natural  de- 
scent through  Nathan.  Ernest  von  Bunsen  ( The  Angel  Messiah)  takes  the  ground  "  that 
Jesus  was  not  really  a  Jew  by  extraction.  The  descent  of  David  from  Caleb,  the  Kene- 
zite,  and  thus  from  non-Hebrews,  points  to  a  connection  with  '  the  strangers  in  Lsrael,' 
and  this  is  confirmed  by  four  female  ancestors  being  non-Hebrews"  (so  also  M.  D.  Con- 
way in  Cin.  Commercial,  May  31st,  1879).  But  suppose  all  this  were  admitted,  it  does  not 
effect  His  descent  whatever,  provided  there  is  a  continuoup,  intermingling  of  Jewish 
blood.  Besides,  these  objections  overlook  the  fact  that  such  engrafted  ones  were  by  the 
Hebrew  laws  fully  incorporated,  and  recognized  as  legal  members  of  the  nation. 

Obs.  2.  If  the  Saviour  was  merely  to  descend  from  David,  to  take 
human  nature  in  that  line  for  the  purpose  of  redemptive  work  at  the  First 
Advent,  and  then  that  was  to  be  the  finale  of  the  matter,  why  lay  so  much 
stress  on  descent  from  the  royal  li^ie  9  Does  the  mere  notion  of  identifica- 
tion meet  the  point  why  one  table  should  be  exclusively  given  to  designate 


Prop.  53.]  the  theocratic  kiis^gdom.  353 

His  legal  right  to  tlie  throne  ?  This  certainly  must  have  some  very 
significant  meaning,  for  God  does  not  put  His  descent  in  such  a  form 
without  some  weighty  reason  underlying  it.  If  we  accept  of  the  covenant 
just  as  it  reads,  without  alteration  or  substitution  of  sense,  then  a  forcible 
reason  appears  for  being  so  minute.  On  the  other  hand,  if  David's  throne 
is  God's  throne  in  heaven,  no  satisfactory  reason  can  be  assigned  for  so 
strange  a  peculiarity.  What  difference,  on  the  latter  supposition,  was  it 
then,  whether  Jesus  was,  or  was  not,  tlie  legitimate  Heir  to  l)avid's  throne, 
if  He  was  never  to  occupy  it?  Why  should  special  stress  be  laid  on 
that  which,  if  we  are  to  credit  the  multitude,  God  never  intended  to 
fulfil  .^  We,  therefore,  hold  that  there  is  a  solid,  sublime  reason  why  those 
tables,  so  uninteresting  to  many,  are  given,  viz.  :  not  merely  to  identify 
Jesus  as  the  Saviour,  but  to  identify  Him  as  the  One,  the  Messiali,  Avho 
has  the  laivful  rigid  to  David's  Theocratic  throne.  The  throne  is  not 
typical,  not  representative,  not  symbolical,  but  actually  and  really  cov- 
enanted to  this  Heir,  and  hence  the  tables  truthfully  and  actually  show  how 
by  course  of  descent  He  is  the  rightful  Heir  (comp.  Prop.  122). 

Clelland  (5i6.  Sacra,  Ap.  1861)  denies  that  the  promise  to  David  concerning  his  seed 
(2  Sam.  7  :  12  ;  Acts  2  :  30  and  13  :  23  ;  Rom.  1:3)  demands  for  our  Lord  a  natural 
descent  from  David  through  His  mother  Mary.  His  reasoning,  highly  siDeculative,  is  satis- 
fied with  a  simj^le  humanity,  supernaturally  attained,  and  the  relationship  to  David 
established  through  Joseph  as  a  legal  son.  Thus,  being  the  seed  of  David  according  to 
the  flesh,  means  only,  according  to  this  writer  and  others,  to  be  legally  regarded  as 
David's  !Son,  but  not  virtually  or  naturally.  This  is  an  error  specifically  contradicted  by 
the  8crii3tures,  which  expressly  declare  that  this  seed  shall  spring  out  of  his  loins,  etc. 
Our  position  is  sustained  by  the  Word,  which  requires  a  natural  and  legal  descendant  ac- 
cording to  the  covenant  and  promises.  Men  may  think,  honestly,  to  exalt  Jesus  by  such 
theories,  but  they  virtually  degrade  Him  as  the  covenanted,  predicted  Christ.  "We  turn 
from  such  writers  to  others,  who  refresh  us  by  maintaining  a  Scriptural  attitiide.  Thus 
Kurtz  {Sac.  His.,  p.  279)  remarks  :  "  The  difference  between  the  two  genealogies  is  most 
easily  explained  by  referring  to  the  j^articular  object  which  each  evangelist  had  in  view 
in  commencing  to  write.  It  was  the  main  object  of  Matthew,  when  he  comiDosed  his 
Gospel,  to  demonstrate  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  promised  in  the  Old  Test.  ;  it  was, 
accordingly,  incumbent  on  him  to  furnish  the  evidence  that  Jesus  was  the  lawful  heir  and 
successor  to  whom  the  royalty  of  David  belonged,  and  that  the  fundamental  proj^hecy  in 
2  Sam.  7  was  thus  fulfilled.  In  accordance  with  his  leading  design,  he  necessarily 
showed  the  legal  connection  (derived  from  the  laws  of  inheritance)  of  Christ  with  the 
house  of  David  in  the  line  of  Solomon.  If  this  descent,  although  fixed  bj'  the  laws,  did 
not  coincide  with  Christ's  descent  after  the  flesh,  the  latter  was  passed  over,  and  the 
former  was  set  forth  as  entitled  to  recognition.  As  Luke  wrote  for  Christians  who  j^ro- 
ceeded  from  the  Gentile  world,  no  necessity  existed  for  giving  prominence  to  that  line 
of  succession  which  was  valid  in  law  in  a  theocratical  point  of  view  ;  it  was,  on  the  con- 
trary, far  more  important,  in  accordance  with  his  main  object,  to  set  forth  Christ's  true 
descent  according  to  the  flesh."  We  affirm,  in  the  light  of  covenant  and  i^rophec}-,  that 
both  tables  are  a  necessity — hence  given — in  order  that  both  the  natural  and  the  legal  de- 
scent be  presented,  for  both  are  claimed  as  pertaining  to  the  Messiah.  We  reproduce  an- 
other :  "  Greybeard"  (Graff),  in  his  "  Lay  Sermons,"  No.  94,  says  :  "  Matthew,  writing  of 
Christ  as  the  rightful  heir  to  Abraham's  land  and  David's  throne,  very  proj^erly  reproduced 
the  lineage  of  Joseph,  the  lawful  husband  of  Mary,  while  Luke,  in  portraying  His  his- 
tory as  the  seed  of  the  woman,  traces  the  genealogy  of  His  mother  not  merely  to 
Abraham,  but  to  the  first  human  pair.  Lest  the  captious  take  exception  to  this  construc- 
tion as  involving  a  fraud  on  the  part  of  Matthew  in  order  to  establish  His  Lord's  right- 
ful heirship  as  a  descendant  of  David,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  genealogies  of  both 
Joseph  and  Mary  unite  in  David."  In  a  footnote  he  adds,  respecting  Luke's:  "In 
reading  this  passage  it  will  be  observed  that  the  words  '  the  Son  '  (being  in  italics)  are 
merely  supplied,  and  do  not  appear  in  the  original  text.  Joseph  was  the  son-in-law  of 
Heli,  not '  the  son.'  In  that  sense  he  was  of  Heli.  So  (in  the  38th  verse)  Adam  was  of  God, 
but  not  '  the  son '  of  God.  No  human  being  ever  was  the  the  son  of  God  until  after 
Christ's  resurrection,  Luke  3  :  23-28."     So  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's   Com.   Luke,  p.   63) 


354  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  53. 

saj's  :  "  The  often-contested  descent  of  Mary  from  David  is  raised  above  all  possibility 
of  refutation  by  the  genealogy  of  Luke.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  therefore  naturally,  as  well 
as  legallv,  descended  from  David  ;  and  this  descent  is  with  perfect  justice  made  promi- 
nent by  both  Peter  and  Paul  (Acts  2  :  30  ;  12  :  23  ;  Eom.  1  :  3  ;  2  Tim.  2:8);  while 
Jesus  designates  Himself  the  Son  of  David,  Mark  12  :  35-37." 

Ohs.  3.  Without  entering  into  a  discussion  of  the  genealogies,  which  is 
ably  performed  by  others,*  it  is  sufficient  to  confiue  ourselves  to  the  fact, 
fully  admitted,  that  Jesus,  according  to  Matthew,  is  a  legal  successor  to 
the  throne  of  David.  Lord  Hervey  and  others  show  this  ;  for  His  descent 
is  traced  through  a  line  of  kings  or  their  legal  descendants,  whilst  Luke's 
table  proceeds  more  on  the  principle  of  tracing  His  descent  through  pro- 
genitors who  were  the  paternal  stem  of  Him  who  was  the  heir.  By  this, 
and  other  considerations,  the  anomalies  of  the  two  pedigrees  are  fully 
explained.  Now,  seeing  that  the  promise  has  been  so  literally  fulfilled  in 
Christ's  descent,  in  His  being  the  legal  Heir  to  the  throne  and  Kingdom, 
we  hold  that  such  a  fulfilment  gives  us  the  strongest  assurance  that  tJie  re- 
mainder of  the  promise  will  likewise,  in  God's  ordering  and  time,  be 
realized. 

This  descent  from  David  was  not  called  into  question  during  the  life  of  Christ,  and  for 
some  time  after  His  death  it  passed  unchallenged,  although  most  conspicuously  affirmed. 
It  was  long  after  that  it  was  questioned  by  unbelievers  ;  it  has  been  attacked  by  the 
English,  French,  and  German  infidels  ;  and  more  recently  it  has  been  repeated  by 
Eenan  and  others,  that  Jesus  is  not  descended  from  David,  but  that  He  endeavored,  in 
order  to  carry  out  His  purposes,  to  make  the  impression  that  such  was  His  descent.  Eenan 
(Life  of  Jesas,  p.  217),  as  usual,  sets  himself  up  as  infallible  judge,  and  elevates  mere 
conjectures  into  facts.  To  make  out  that  the  family  of  David  was  extinct  because 
Asmonean  princes  ruled  ;  to  attempt  to  prove  the  same  because  Herod  and  the  Eomans 
did  not  dream  of  such  a  representative  of  the  ancient  dynasty  living  ;  to  speak  of  "  in- 
nocent frauds,"  of  his  birth  at  Nazareth,  etc.,  is  simply  indicative  of  a  preconceived 
prejudice  and  a  desire  to  prejudge  the  case.  But  when  he  tells  us  that  Jesus  "  never 
designated  Himself  with  His  own  lips  as  the  Son  of  David  "  (over  against  His  quotations 
and  accepting  of  the  name,  as  e.g.  Matt.  9  :  27  ;  12  :  23  ;  15  :  22  ;  20  :  30-31  ;  Mark 
10  :  47,  52,  and  12  :  35-37  ;  Luke  18  :  38),  we  instinctively  feel  a  spirit  of  dislike  and 
hatred  to  the  truth  underlying  such  statements.  To  all  those  objections  it  will  suffice 
to  say  :  (1)  That  a  pedigree  regularly  presented  at  a  time  when  genealogical  tables  were 
carefully  kept,  and  passing  by  unchallenged  and  unprotested  even  by  the  bitter  enemies 
of  Jesus,  must  be  taken  as  better  evidence  of  truthfulness  than  the  mere  conjectures  of 
later  ages  ;  (2)  That  if  there  was  a  discrepancy  or  untruth,  as  alleged,  the  Jews  would 
only  have  been  too  glad  to  avail  themselves  of  the  same  ;  (3)  that  the  apparent  disagree- 
ment between  the  two  pedigrees  has  been  reasonably  and  satisfactorily  explained  by 
those  (note  1)  who  have  given  the  subject  special  attention  ;  (4)  the  claim  set  up  by 
Jesus  is  confirmed  by  His  words,  life,  works,  death,  resurrection  and  exaltation  ;  (5)  if 
the  first  link  in  the  chain  were  missing,  the  rest  could  n  t  be  attached  to  it,  but  seeing 
a  necessary  connection,  promise  and  prediction  verified,  the  matter  of  descent  assumes 
its  due  importance  in  a  completed  chain  of  evidence  to  the  Messiahship.  It  may  be 
well  to  observe  here  that  Eeuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol,  p.  392),  correctly  noticing  that  the 
genealogy  of  Jesus  was  given  "  to  prove  the  right  of  Christ  to  the  title  of  Messiah"  as 
the  promised  Son  of  David,  and  that  great  stress  was  laid  upon  His  humanity,  then  adds, 


*  See  Lord  Hervey' s  Genealoqies  of  our  Lord,  the  commentaries  of  Olshausen,  Lange, 
Meyer,  etc..  Smith's  Bib.  Die.  and  N.  Test.  Ills.,  Kitto's  Journal  of  Sac.  Lit.,  M'Clintock 
and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  Evang.  Review,  \o].  4,  p.  168,  Bib.  Sacra,  yo\.  18,  p.  410,  Meth. 
Quart.  Review,  vol.  11,  p.  593,  and  the  writings  of  Beeston,  Cochrane,  Green,  Home's 
Introd.,  Gresswell's  Diss.  Morris,  Sympson,  Birks,  Watson,  etc.  Numerous^  writers 
have  more  briefly  but  satisfactorily  referred  to  the  same,  as  Judge  Jones  (Notes),  Dr. 
McCosh  {Christi.  and  Posiiiv.),  Farrar  {Life  of  Christ),  Kurtz  {Sac.  His.). 


Prop.  53.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  355 

that  it  must  have  had  little  value  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  made  Him  divine. 
This  is  not  correct  so  far  as  the  Primitive  Church  is  concerned,  for  they  clearly  and  dis- 
tinctly announced  their  faith  and  hope  in  the  promises  made  to  the  Son  of  Man,  and 
hence  in  David's  Son  as  the  promised  Theocratic  King.  (Comp.  Props.  81-83,  and 
74-78).  It  was  later,  under  Alexandrian  and  Popish  influence,  that  the  Humanity  was 
ignored  in  a  great  measure  for  the  Divine. 


356  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  54. 


Propositions'  54.  The  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  hy  John^  Jesus, 
and  the  disciples,  was  confined  to  the  Jeioish  nation. 

This  necessarily  follows  as  a  sequence  from  preceding  Proposi- 
tions (as  e.g.  Props.  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  29,  31,  33,  35,  38,  39,  40, 
42,  43,  44,  45,  46,  47,  48,  49).  It  is  plainly  stated  in  Matt.  10  :  5,  6 
and  15  :  24,  etc.,  "6^o  not  into  the  loay  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into 
any  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not ;  hut  go  ye  rather  to  the 
lost  siieep  of  the  liouse  of  Israel,  as  ye  go  preach,  saying :  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand^  ''I am  not  sent  Ijut  nnto  the  lost 
sheep  of  tlie  house  of  Israel.''^  These,  and  other  intimations,  are 
sufficiently  distinctive  of  the  fact. 

Ohs.  1.  The  special  covenant  to  Abraham  and  renewed  in  David,  the 
election  of  the  nation,  the  very  nature  of  the  Kingdom  —  Theocratic- 
Davidic — ahied  with  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  and  hence  the  con- 
finement of  the  Kingdom  in  its  re-establisliment  to  the  descendants  of 
Abraham  in  their  national  capacity,  demanded  sii-cli  a  restriction  of  the 
distinctive  offer  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jews.  It  could  not  possibly  be 
otherwise,  unless  God  violates  His  solemnly  pledged  Word.  So  carefully 
does  the  Sacred  Record  guard  this  restrictive  feature — necessary  in  the 
very  nature  of  the  case — that  the  only  time  Jesus  left  the  Jews  for  Samaria, 
John  apologizes  for  the  same  by  urging  its  necessity  (John  4  :  4),  informing 
us,  "  He  must  needs  go  through  Samaria,"  i.e.  His  direct  route  lay  through 
it. 

Ohs.  2.  For  some  reason,  a  decided  and  exclusive  preference  is  given  to 
the  Jewish  nation.  WJig  is  this  f  If,  as  persons  now  so  confidently  assert, 
there  is  nothing  in  being  a  Jew,  a  real  descendant  of  Abraham's,  how 
comes  it  at  this  crisis,  that,  when  the  Kingdom  is  preached,  express 
charges  and  admonitions  are  given  to  avoid  the  Gentiles  ?  Simply  and 
solely  because  by  the  promise  made  to  Abraham,  by  their  previous  Theo- 
cratic relationship,  and  by  their  national  adoption  in  the  Davidic  covenant, 
the  Kingdom  that  was  preached,  viz.  :  the  restoration  of  the  Theocratic- 
Davidic,  helonged,  as  per  covenant,  exclnsively  to  them.  It  would  have 
been  a  violation  of  God's  oath  to  have  passed  by  these  covenanted  people 
and  to  have  turned  to  Gentiles,  with  whom  720  special  covenant  was  thus 
made.  This  procedure  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples,  in  accordance 
with  sacred  covenanted  relationship  (but  the  subject  of  ignorant  and  un- 
believing ridicule),  teaches  a  fixed,  fundamental  truth,  which  must  by  no 
means  be  overlooked,  viz.  :  that  the  regular  lineal  believing  descendants 
of  Abraham — the  nationality  of  David — with  those  adopted  (Prop.  29)  by 
them,  were  entitled,  hy  covenant,  to  this  Kingdom.  Hence  the  Kingdom 
was  preached  to  them— tendered  to  them  individually  and  nationally,  and 


Prop.  54.]  TfiE  theocratic  kingdom.  357 

it  was  left  to  their  choice  to  accept  of  it  or  to  refuse  it,  because  it  was  also 
in  the  Divine  Purpose  to  bestow  it  upon  "a  tviUi?ig  people/'  to  the 
descendants  of  x\braham  and  those  adopted,  who  made  themselves  luorthy 
of  a  Theocratic  Kingdom  by  faith,  obedience,  and  holiness.  The  offer  of 
the  Kingdom  is  not  in  violation  of  but  in  unison  with  free  moral  agency. 

Ohs.  3.  Even  after  the  call  to  the  Gentiles  was  made  out,  the  apostles 
still  affirmed  this  covenanted  position  of  the  Jews,  so  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas  (Acts  13  :  46)  said  to  the  unbelieving  Hebrews  :  ''it  ivas  neces- 
sary tliat  the  Word  of  God  should  first  have  Ijeen  spoken  to  yoti.'" 

The  explanation  tisnally  given  does  not  cover  this  necessity,  viz.  :  that  the  necessity 
arose  because  Jesus  commanded  His  disciples  to  preach,  "  beginning  at  Jerusalem,"  and 
it  was  solely  to  fullil  the  command  that  this  was  done.  Now,  aside  from  Paul  (Acts 
9  :  20,  21),  not  having  fulfilled  the  command,  let  the  reader  consider  why  the  command 
itself  was  given  ;  in  that  lay  the  necessity,  the  injunction  of  Jesus  only  manifesting  it  as 
existing.  This  can  be  none  other  than  the  one  already  asigned  by  us  in  Obs.  1  and  2. 
It  is  given  by  Peter  (Acts  3  :  25,  26),  and  by  Paul  (Eom.  9  :  4),  and  because  of  it  an 
express  revelation  in  reference  to  the  Gentiles  was  needed  and  bestowed. 

Ohs.  4.  Even  the  instructions  imparted  in  a  more  private  way,  and  the 
mercy  extended  to  Gentiles  by  Jesus,  teach  and  enforce  our  Proposition. 
Keeping  in  view,  as  will  be  presently  explained,  the  peculiar  position  of 
Christ,  that  He  forelcneiu  the  rejection  of  this  Kingdom  by  the  Jews  and 
the  suijsequent  call  of  the  Gentiles,  it  seemed  eminently  suitahle  i7i  Him  to 
exhibit  His  foreknoivledge  of  the  fact,  and  also  His  interest  in  and  sym- 
pathy for  the  Gentiles.  But  He  does  not  do  this  ly  sacrificing  the 
covenanted  relationship  of  the  nation  ;  He  only  confirms  it  in  a  striking 
manner. 

Let  us  take  the  examples  recorded,  and  illustrate  this  feature.  Take  the  Sj-rophe- 
nician  woman  (Matt.  15  :  21-28  ;  Mark  7  :  25-30),  and  when  she  first  addressed  Him  for 
mere}',  "  He  answered  her  not  a  word,"  and  when  besought  to  send  her  away  by  the  dis- 
ciples, answered,  "  lam  not  sent  hut  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel ;"  and  then 
added,  when  the  woman  in  her  faith  worshipped  Him,  "it  is  not  meet  to  take  the 
children's  bread  and  cast  it  to  the  dogs."  Thus  far  He  kept  this  covenanted  relation- 
ship in  view,  and  expressed  it  fully  ;  but  also  foreseeing  that  this,  the  children's  bread, 
would  be  freely  given  to  others  in  response  to  their  faith,  so  noio  in  the  plenitude  of  His 
mercy  and  power  He  also,  as  an  earyiest,  responds  to  the  faith  of  the  woman.  If  we  refer 
to  the  centurion  (Matt.  8  :  5-13),  the  mercy  extended  to  him  had  direct  reference  in  the 
mind  of  Jesus  to  the  foreknown  rejection  of  the  Kingdom  by  the  Jews  and  the  introduc- 
tion of  others  ;  for  keeping  in  view  His  exclusive  mission.  He  remarks,  as  exjjianatoi'y  of 
His  course,  "  that  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west,  and  shall  sit  down  with  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  but  the  children  of  the  Kingdom  shall  be 
cast  out  into  outer  darkness."  Thus  predicting  the  rejection  of  His  ofi:er,  and  the  sub- 
sequent call  of  the  Gentiles.  So  with  other  cases  briefly  mentioned,  intimations  of  the 
same  kind  are  given,  and  when  they  are  lacking  (as  e.g.  comp.  Luke  7  :  1,  etc.,  who  does 
not  state  the  language  that  Matthew  does),  we  may  rest  assured,  from  the  examples  ad- 
duced, that  brevity  alone  has  excluded  them.  The  peculiar  case  of  Zaccheus  shows  that 
by  his  faith,  charity,  and  joyful  recognition  of  Jesus  (Luke  19  :  1,  etc.),  he  was  adopted 
into  the  covenanted  relationship,  for  the  precise  language  is  :  "  this  day  is  salvation  come 
to  this  house,  for  so  much  as  he  (dso  is  a  son  of  Abraham,"  thus  wonderfully  foreshadowing, 
after  He  had  foretold  His  own  death,  the  future  adoption  of  Gentile  believers  ;  and  to  make 
tins  the  more  striking,  indicative  of  Divine  inspiration,  appends  the  parable  of  the 
nobleman  and  Kingdom  (comp.  Props.  108-110).  Even  in  the  memorable  interview 
with  the  Samaritan  woman — closer  related  to  the  Jews  than  others — and  which,  as  we 
proceed  in  the  argument,  will  be  found  to  be  based  on  the  then  unrevealed  but  still  pre- 
dicted purpose  of  God  respecting  Gentile  worship,  etc.,  He  forgets  not  His  restricted 
mission.     For  while  partly  unfolding  to  the  woman  and  Samaritans  this  important  feat- 


358  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOST.  [PkOP.  54. 

ure  coming,  dependent  on  the  foreknown  fall  of  the  elect  nation,  He  iDresents  that 
remarkable  declaration  (which  some  critics  denounce  as  so  excessively  "  Jewish"  that  it 
becomes  "  the  dead  fly  in  the  ointment,"  but  which,  as  we  see,  is  pre-eminently  suitable 
to  fall  from  Christ's  lips) — "  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews." 

Ohs.  5.  Origen  {De  PriMcip.,  ch.  1,  s.  22)  first  (and  he  has  been  largely 
copied)  endeavors  to  break  the  force  of  our  Proposition  by  saying  that  the 
Saviour  came  ?iot  specially  to  the  "  caimaV^  Israelites,  "  for  they  who  are 
the  children  of  the  flesh  are  not  the  children  of  God."  Thus  by  a  de- 
liberate perversion  of  Rom.  9  :  8  he  endeavors  to  make  out  a  sense  which 
the  passage  cannot  possibly  bear.  Isolated,  torn  from  its  connection,  the 
Scripture  may  be  employed  in  a  dishonest  way,  while  in  its  orderly 
relation  it  strongly  affirms  our  position.  What  children  of  the  flesh  are 
alluded  to?  All  the  children  of  Abraham,  or  some  of  them,  or  none  of 
them  ?  The  answer  is,  that  some  of  the  children  of  Abraham  were  not 
identified  with  the  covenanted  relationship,  viz.  :  Esau  and  his  descend- 
ants ;  these  are  the  children  of  the  flesh  purely,  but  some  of  the  children 
were  thus  under  covenant,  viz. :  Jacob  and  his  descendants,  and  these  of 
the  flesh  ivere  not  of  the  flesh  only,  hut  the  children  of  promise.  But  they 
could  not  be  the  latter  unless  they  were  also  of  the  former,  and  it  is  this 
union  of  the  tivo  that  makes  them  to  differ  from  the  mere  children  of  the 
flesh  to  whom  the  promise  was  not  given. 

This  important  point  needs  some  additional  remarks.  The  apostle's  argument  does 
not  proceed  on  the  ground  that  because  they  are  the  natural  descendants  of  Abraham 
they  are  rejected  (for  that  would  prove  too  much),  but  that  even  out  of  those  horn  to  Abra- 
ham some  are  chosen  and  others  not ;  and  that,  in  view  of  this  distinction  made  by  God 
Himself,  He  can  in  His  sovereignty  even  yet,  and  does,  reject  those  who  reject  Him. 
The  apostle's  reasoning  sustains  the  doctrine  of  election  in  Abraham's  line  in  a  certain 
direction  and  within  marked  limits.  Origen  here  laid  the  foundation  upon  which  a 
multitude — ignoring  the  express  declarations  to  the  contrary — have  thoughtlessly  built, 
deeming  it  trustworthy,  and  being  deceived  by  the  mere  sound  of  words.  Origen,  how- 
ever, can  be  recommended  for  his  candor  and  consistency,  by  which,  from  such  a  position, 
he  continues  to  spiritualize  until  he  finds  spiritual  counterparts  for  the  Egyptians,  Tyrians, 
Sidonians,  etc.,  paving  the  way  for  Swedenborg  and  others. 

Obs.  6.  This  exclusive  mission  to  the  Jewish  nation,  viz. :  the  direct 
offer  of  the  Kingdom  to  them  and  to  no  other  nation,  removes  at  once  the 
arbitrary  constructions  put  upon  this  so-called  "  Jewish  Partialism"  by 
commentators  and  others. 

Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Alexander  {Com.  Isa.  Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  8)  tells  us  that  "  their  national 
pre-eminence  was  representative,  not  original  ;"  "  symbolical,  not  real  ;"  "  provisional, 
not  perpetual."  Such  language  is  based,  in  view  of  their  rejection  for  a  time  and  the 
call  of  the  Gentiles,  on  an  entire  misapprehension  of  the  covenanted  relation  and  election 
this  nation  sustained  to  God.  This  nation  was  singled  out  and  chosen  from  all  others 
(Prop.  24,  etc.),  and  certain  blessings  were  covenanted  to  it  (Prop.  49),  and  in  such  a 
form  that  while  individuals  of  the  nation  and  even  the  nation  itself  might  reject  them, 
yet  ultimately  by  a  wise  ordering  and  provision,  in  gathering  out  a  selected  people  and 
in  the  manifested  judgments  of  the  Messiah,  these  blessings  shall  be  manifested  through 
the  basis  of  that  nationality  because  of  its  relationship  to  the  contemplated  restored  The- 
ocracy. Hence  this  national  pre-eminence,  thus  even  observed  by  Jesus  and  His  disci- 
ples, was  original  and  real,  being  founded  on  the  covenants,  and  although  now  for  a 
time  (during  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles")  nationally  rejected,  yet  the  perpetuity  of  this 
covenant  relationship  is  manifested  by  the  oath  of  God,  the  assurances  given  of  its  ful- 
filment, the  continued  preservation  of  the  nation,  the  predictions  of  its  future  restora- 
tion and  pre-eminence,  and  the  necessity  of  Gentiles  being  engrafted  into '*  the  com- 
monwealth of  Israel "  and  becoming  the  adopted  "  children  of  Al^raham"  in  order  to  re- 
ceive the  promises  under  the  covenants. 


Prop.  54.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  359 

There  seems  to  be  in  some  writers  a  confounding  of  tlie  provisional  in  the  Levitical 
economy  with  the  things  established  by  the  covenants  ;  and,  what  is  still  more  mis- 
guiding, having  in  their  own  minds  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  already  existing  with- 
out a  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  they,  with  this  veil  over  their  eyes,  must,  of 
course,  discard  the  most  solemnly  covenanted  arrangements  of  God,  and  place,  with  Gen- 
tile "  high-mindedness,"  the  Jewish  nation,  to  which  pertains  the  covenants,  in  an  at- 
titude of  inferiority.  Ignoring  the  express  covenant  language,  and  mistaking  the  King- 
dom itself — two  fatal  doctrinal  mistakes — this  prohibition  of  Christ's  not  to  go  to  other 
nations  is  to  such  writers  either  a  very  tender  or  a  very  difficult  subject  to  explain,  so 
that  they  pass  it  by  or  gloss  it  over  in  the  fewest  possible  words,  or  else  totally  refuse  to 
allude  to  it  as  something  to  them  utterly  inexplicable.  Strauss  and  other  unbelievers 
object  to  Jesus  sending  His  disciples  only  to  Palestine,  and  not  to  Phoenicia,  Egypt, 
Greece,  Italy,  etc.,  but  such  an  objection  has  no  force  when  viewed  from  the  covenanted 
standpoint.  It  has  only  propriety  and  pertinence  when  it  is  assumed  that  the  modern 
notion  of  the  Kingdom  was  the  one  preached.  Therefore  the  usual  replies  given  to 
Strauss  do  not  meet  the  objection  fairly,  as  e.g.  Ebrard  {Gosp.  His.,  p.  333),  which  is 
insufficient,  limiting  this  exclusive  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  to  a  "  ground  of  prudence," 
and  then  in  order  "  to  form  in  Judea  a  centre  and  starting  point  for  the  new  Kingdom." 

Obs.  7.  If  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  really  what  the  multitude  affirm  it  to 
be,  viz.  :  the  Church,  or  the  reign  of  God  in  the  heart,  etc.,  what  con- 
sistent and  valid  reasons  can  possibly  be  assigned  for  its  being  thus  re- 
stricted nationally  to  one  people  ?  It  seems  strange  that  intelligent 
theologians  fail  to  see  that  none,  on  their  hypothesis,  can  be  given. 

Even  Millenarians,  who  adopt  the  prevailing  Church-Kingdom  theory  (as  preparatory 
to  the  final  Messianic  Kingdom),  involve  themselves  in  difficulties.  Thus  Olshausen  in- 
forms us  :  "  We  cannot  suppose  that  in  this  (restriction)  Christ  was  accommodating 
Himself  merely  to  the  weakness  of  the  discij^les,  but  rather  to  the  demands  of  the  times, 
and  the  immediate  destination  of  the  twelve"  {Com.  Matt.  10  :  5).  And  this,  in  jjlace  of 
the  "  everlasting  covenant,''  is  offered  as  a  reason  to  infidelity.  No  wonder  that  unbeliev- 
ers revel  in  this  accommodation  theory  to  "  the  demands  of  the  times."  Olshausen  adds 
another  conjecture  :  "  It  was  necessary,  first  of  all,  to  prepare  in  the  nation  of  Israel  a 
hearth  to  receive  the  sacred  fire,  and  to  keep  its  heat  in  a  state  of  concentration."  These 
surmises  show  an  evident  seeking  for,  and  manufacturing  of,  a  reason,  which  by  no 
means  covers  the  question  ;  for,  even  admitting  these  doubtful  suppositions,  why  alone 
select  the  Jewish  nation  (that  rejected  Christ,  etc.),  and  not  others'?  Why  should  the 
times  demand  this  exclusiveness,  if  a  mere  spiritual  apprehension  was  concerned  ?  The 
response,  alone  affording  a  solid  reason,  always  follows  :  the  covenant  and  covenant  reJaiion- 
ship  made  it  necessary.  Barnes  {Com.  Matt.  10  :  5,  6)  has  much  to  say  about  the  Samari- 
tans, but  waives  the  plain  (but  to  him,  with  his  Church-Kingdom  view,  knotty)  ques- 
tion, by  saying  :  "  The  full  time  for  preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles  was  not  come. 
It  loas  proper  that  it  should  be  first  preached  to  the  Jews,  the  ancient  covenant  people 
of  God,  and  the  people  among  whom  the  Messiah  was  born.  He  afterward  gave  them  'a 
charge  to  go  into  all  the  world."  "  They  (the  Jews)  had  been  the  chosen  people  of  God  ; 
they  had  long  looked  for  the  Messiah  ;  and  it  was  proper  that  the  Gospel  should  be  first 
offered  to  them."  This  is  all  that  he  has  to  say,  basing  the  restriction  upon  propr/efies, 
and  not,  where  the  Bible  places  it,  upon  the  covenanted  promises  and  their  national  iden- 
tity with  the  Davidic  people  over  whom  and  in  whom  the  Kingdom  was  to  be  estab- 
lished. 

Obs.  8.  The  difficulty  that  theologians,  who  endorse  the  prevailing 
Church-Kingdom  theory,  are  under  to  reconcile  this  preaching  of  the 
Kingdom  exclusively  to  the  Jewish  nation  with  their  own  system  of  belief, 
is  indicative  of  a  serious  flaw,  a  fundamental  doctrinal  defect,  in  the  same. 

The  difficulty  is  found  in  a  multitude  of  writers.  It  may  be  both  interesting  and 
profitable  to  give  additional  illustrations.  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  TTieo/.,  p.  154)  thinks  :  "The 
difficulty  can  be  solved  by  supposing,  first,  that  Jesus  was  often  obliged  to  use  the 
language  c^f  His  hearers  in  order  to  be  more  easily  understood  ;  next,  by  remembering 


360  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  54.. 

that  the  blame  cast  upon  the  heathen  was  well  deserved,  and  that  it  does  not  imply 
praise  of  the  Jews  ;  and  lastly,  by  admitting  that  in  His  wisdom  Christ  designedly 
drew  a  narrow  circle  for  His  disciples  in  their  first  mission  of  evangelization." 
The  reader  may  well  ponder  such  a  circuitous  and  accommodating  way  of  giving  no 
reason  why  Jesus  "  in  His  wisdom"  "  drew  a  narrow  circle  for  His  disciples."  Fuirbairn 
and  others  tr}'  to  evade  this  restrictive  mission,  this  confinement  of  the  preaching  to 
one  nation,  by  saying  that  Christ  before  His  ascension  said  that  they  were  to  be  His  wit- 
nesses at  Jerusalem,  and  then  preach  the  Gospel  in  all  the  world  ^Obs.  3,  note  1).  This 
does  not  remove  the  obstacle  to  their  view  ;  it  is  in  fact  no  answer  to  the  question,  be- 
cause, as  we  shall  show,  the  reasons  for  the  removal  of  this  restriction  are  also  given  and 
recorded.  Christ  gave  His  command  to  go  to  other  nations  after  the  postponement  of 
the  Kingdom  and  calling  of  the  Gentiles  was  fully  determined  ;•  and  even  when  the  com- 
mand to  j)reach  to  all  the  world  was  given,  such  was  the  decided  influence  of  this  re- 
striction upon  the  minds  of  Jewish  believers  that  it  was  only  made  manifest  after  the  day 
of  Pentecost  and  after  special  revelation  and  council  held,  how  it  could  be  removed. 
Such  writers  fail  to  answer  why  the  exclusive  mission  was  first  given,  and  shielding 
themselves  under  what  afterward,  for  well  assigned  reasons,  took  place,  do  not  see  that 
the  final  removal,  instead  of  explaining,  only  makes  the  restriction  the  more  conspicuous. 
Dr.  Neander  {Life  of  Christ),  not  satisfied  with  the  common  view  entertained,  tells  us 
that  Christ's  ministry  was  confined  to  the  Jews,  and  that  before  the  truth  could  be 
offered  to  the  heathen  it  must  be  "  fully  developed  in  the  disciples,"  etc.  It  follows 
then  that  the  truth  partially  develojjed  (contained  in  "  the  husk")  was  good  enough  for 
the  Jews,  but  not  for  the  Gentiles.  Besides  this,  Neander  flatly  contradicts  himself  ;  for 
what  must  we  say  to  such  an  announced  full  development  in  the  disciples,  taken  for 
granted  to  meet  a  contigency,  and  his  repeated  assertions  in  other  places  (some  of  which 
we  have  already  quoted)  that  the  disciples  and  apostles  had  only  "  the  germ"  which  was 
afterward  to  be  developed  in  the  church — that  they  could  never  entirely  divest  themselves 
of  "Jewish  forms"  and  "  Jewish  prejudices."  Explanations  like  these  amount  to  noth- 
ing ;  they  are  simply  conjectures  worked  out  by  a  preconceived  theory.  Neander  endeav- 
ors to  guard  his  explanation  by  stating,  what  is  emphatically  contradicted  by  the  Rec- 
ord, viz.  :  that  the  disciples  could  not  infer  from  this  restriction  that  the  Samaritans 
and  heathen  were  to  be  excluded  from  the  Kingdom  of  God.  It  is  surjsrising  that  such 
an  assertion  can  be  made  in  the  light  of  the  most  positive  prohibitions  to  go  to  the  Gen- 
tiles. That  such  was  their  oj)inion  or  inference,  derived  from  a  specific  covenanted 
relationship  and  confirmed  by  the  language  of  Jesus,  is  evident  from  the  special  vision 
vouchsafed  to  Peter  to  indicate  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  and  from  the  apostolic  meeting 
when  the  question  of  the  call  was  discussed.  Thus  able  men  pervert  Scripture,  in 
endeavoring  to  bend  it,  honestly  meant,  to  a  favorite  theor}'. 

Schmid  {Bib.  Theol.,  p.  54)  misses  the  historical  connection,  and  entirely  overlooks  the 
covenants,  when  he  affirms  :  "  His  only  reason  for  limiting  His  own  operations,  and  at 
first  those  of  His  disciples,  to  the  Jewish  nation,  was  to  gain  a  firm  foothold  and  start- 
ing point  for  His  entire  scheme."  He  assigns  the  cases  of  the  centurion  and  of  the 
Samaritan  woman  (Obs.  4,  note  1)  as  proof.  These  exceptional  cases  only  prove  that 
the  foreknowledge  of  Jesus  anticipated  the  final  result  of  His  mission,  and  gave  a  fore- 
taste of  hope  to  the  Gentiles.  In  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  see  our  next  Propo- 
sition for  a  reply  to  Schmid.  Eenan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  213)  thinks  :  "  If,  in  other  cases, 
He  seems  to  forbid  His  disciples  to  go  and  preach  to  them  (Gentiles),  reserving  His  Gos- 
pel for  the  pure  Israelites,  this  also  is  undoubtedly  a  precept  dictated  by  circumstances, 
to  which  the  apostles  may  have  given  too  absolute  a  meaning."  The  Record  as  it  stands 
is  sufficiently  satisfactory  and  consistent  with  both  what  precedes  and  follows  ;  there  is 
not  anything  "  seeming"  about  it.  For,  "  the  absolute  meaning"  is  a  necessity  grounded 
in  the  preceding  covenants  :  the  circumstances  dictating  such  "  a  one-sided  "  mission, 
are  found  in  the  election  of  the  nation  ;  the  disciples,  instructed  by  Jesus  and  conver- 
sant with  the  covenants,  are  better  qualified  to  express  the  idea  fairly  thanRenan,  who 
cares  very  little  for  both.  Indeed,  if  the  mission  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples  had 
been  made  indiscriminately  to  Gentiles  and  Jews,  what  woiild  have  become  of  God's  cov- 
enants made  with  Abraham  and  David  ?  What  would  God's  solemn  affirmation  then  be 
worth  ?  Let  the  analogy  of  Scripture  answer,  why  such  a  restriction  w^as  laid  in  the 
preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  reply  comes  clear  and  distinct,  that  it  was  conditioned 
hy  covenant  promises  which  belonged  exclusively  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  and  the  people  of 
David.  If  this  prohibition  were  lacking,  this  exclusive  turning  to  the  one  elect  nation 
were  not  exhibited  and  recorded,  then  an  important  and  essential  link  in  the  golden  chain 
of  Divine  Purpose  were  also  missing. 


PPwOP.  54.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KII^GDOM.  361 

Ohs.  9,  The  reader  will  bear  in  mind  that  the  message  of  the  disciples— 
a  peculiar  and  distinctive  one — to  say  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand"  was  not  addressed  hy  them  to  amj  Gentile,  The  same  is  true  of 
John,  and  also  of  Jesus,  who  carefully  avoided  it  in  His  address  to  Gentiles 
(Obs.  4,  note  1).  The  reason  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  Kingdom 
belonged  to  the  Jews,  and  until  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  was  entered  into  on 
account  of  Jewish  unbelief,  the  message  pertained,  to  the  Jeivs  and  those 
adopted  as  Jews. 

Ohs.  10.  The  Kingdom  was  ultimately  to  be  extended  from  the  Jews  so 
that  it  would  embrace  the  Gentiles  also,  as  indicated  plainly  by  the 
prophecies  (Prop.  30).  This  opinion  was  held  by  the  Jews,  as  the  titles 
given  to  the  Messiah  showed  (e.g.  Mac.  2  :  7,  14,  "  the  King  of  the 
World  ").  But  this  ordering  did  not  interfere  with  the  Davidic  cov- 
enanted basis,  or  with  the  predicted  (on  this  account)  supremacy  of  the 
nation  (Prop.  114). 

Ohs.  11.  Some  writers,  anxious  to  find  some  basis  for  their  idea  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  consequently  that  it  also  was  preached  to  the  Gentiles, 
assume  that  the  mission  of  the  twelve  was  exclusive,  but  that  of  the 
seventy  was  general,  including  the  Gentiles.  But  this,  as  we  see  from  the 
covenanted  position  of  the  nation,  would  he  contradictory  and  fated  to  the 
truth. 

Advantage  is  taken  of  the  omission  in  Luke  10  :  1,  etc.,  of  the  exclusive  injunctions 
elsewhere  recorded,  and  a  hasty,  desired  deduction  is  made.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Killen  {Old 
Cath.  Church,  p.  5)  remarks  that  "  the  seventy  symbolized  His  regard  to  the  whole 
human  race,"  an  opinion  derived  from  some  tradition  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
were  divided  into  seventy  nations,  speaking  seventy  languages,  etc.  It  is  surprising  that 
so  careful  a  writer  as  Olshausen  {Com.  Matt.  10  :  5  and  Gen.  Introd.  to  Paul's  Epistles) 
makes  the  ministry  of  the  seventy  "  also  directed  to  the  Gentile  world,"  and  "these 
seventy  appear  as  the  representative  of  the  whole  Gentile  world."  Now  there  is  positively 
nothing  in  the  Eecord  to  lead  to  such  an  inference  ;  more  than  this,  the  statement  of 
Luke,  carefully  considered,  teaches  the  exact  reverse.  For  these  seventy  were  only  to 
go  to  the  places  "  ichlther  He  Himself  would  come,"  and  therefore  not  outside  of  Christ's  own 
mission  ;  the  message  was  the  same  that  the  twelve  delivered,  and  Jesus  would  not  con- 
tradict Himself  in  the  injunctions  covering  the  same  ;  the  nighness  of  the  Kingdom  to 
the  people  preached  to  (as  we  shall  show,  Props.  57-59,  etc.)  indicates  the  Jews  ;  the  de- 
nunciations against  Jewish  places  only  and  the  lack  of  any  mention  of  Gentiles  visited, 
shows  the  resti'ictive  character  of  the  mission  ;  the  fact  that  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  had 
to  be  made  the  subject  of  special  revelation,  that  the  seventy  were  Jews  with  Jewish  ideas 
of  covenanted  relationship,  looked  for  the  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  etc. — 
these  things  afford  ample  evidence  of  the  restrictive  nature  of  their  mission  corresjjonding 
with  that  of  the  twelve.  If  there  was  anything  symbolical  in  the  number  chosen,  then 
it  would  be  better,  as  many  do,  to  make  the  twelve  representative  of  the  twelve  tribes 
and  the  seventy  of  the  nation,  either  through  the  number  of  the  Sanhedrim,  the  Elders 
of  Moses,  or  the  family  of  Jacob. 


362  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  55. 


Proposition"  55.  It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  and  His  disciples 
should  at  first  preach  the  Kingdom  as  nigh  to  the  Jeivish 
nation. 

That  the  Kingdom  was  nigh  to  the  nation  is  distinctly  stated, 
Matt.  4  :  17,  Marl^  1  :  14,  15,  Lnke  11 :  20,  Matt.  12  :  28.  The  cove- 
nanted Theocratic  Kingdom  was  overthrown  ;  at  the  appearance  of 
the  promised  Davidic  son,  who  should  inherit  the  Kingdom,  it  was 
absolutely  requisite^  in  view  of  the  covenanted  relationship  of  the 
nation  to  this  Kingdom,  to  offer  it  to  the  Jews  for  their  acceptance. 
This  was  done  by  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples. 

Ols.  1.  Jesiis  Himself  tells  us  (Luke  4  :  34)  that  He  "  mud  preach  the 
gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  for  therefore  am  I  seyit ;"  aud  He  must  preach  it  as 
nigh — within  reach — to  the  elect  nation,  for  to  it  the  promises  are  given. 
The  reason  why  Christ  did  this,  is  assigned  by  Paul  in  Rom.  15  :  8,  viz.  : 
because  He  was  "«  mi7iister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God  to 
confirm  the  promises  made  to  the  Fathers.^^  Xow  the  Kingdom  is  specifi- 
cally promised  to  the  nation,  and  to  meet  the  conditions  of  the  promise  and 
to  confirm  them,  it  was  necessary  (Paul  and  Barnabas  keep  up  the  spirit  of 
this  feature  even  later,  Acts  13  :  46)  to  tender  the  Kingdom  to  its  ac- 
ceptance. 

Ohs.  2.  If  Jesus  came  to  fulfil  the  law  and  the  prophets,  if  He  came  as 
the  messenger  of  the  covenant,  the  One  through  whom  the  covenants  were 
to  be  realized,  tlien  it  follows  as  a  natural  sequence  that  He  could  not  other- 
wise but  offer  this  Kingdom  to  the  nation,  for  that  nation  was  composed 
of  the  covenanted  people,  only  conditioned — as  found  stated  in  the 
prophets,  in  the  preaching  of  repentance,  and  in  the  future  predicted 
repentance  of  the  nation — by  its  national  repentance  and  acceptance  of  the 
tender  made. 

Ohs.  3.  Hence  the  Kingdom  was  offered  as  nigh,  on  the  condition  of  re- 
pentance annexed  to  the  tender.  The  proclamation  of  nighness  was 
involved  in  the  fact  (to  be  made  plain  hereafter)  that,  as  a  certain  number 
of  elect  are  contemplated  as  requisite  to  the  establishment  of  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom  (former  experience  teaching  that  otherwise  it  could  not  be 
sustained),  that  number,  in  case  of  national  repentance,  would  have  been 
speedily  obtained.  But  owing  to  the  rejection  of  Christ,  the  number  of 
inheritors  must  now  be  obtained  in  a  different  and  more  gradual  way  ;  and 
consequently  the  nighness  of  the  Kingdom  is  conditiojied  by  the  national 
action.  Coming  to  such  a  people  so  peculiarly  related  by  covenant 
promises  ;  coming  in  behalf  of  the  covenant  itself,  any  other  style  of 
preaching  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  out  of  place  ;  inconsistent  with 


PROr.  b^.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  363 

Ilis  own  Mission,  witli  the  relationship  of  the  people,  and  with  the  pre- 
determined number  of  ''  ivilling  /jco^^/e"  to  be  obtained  previous  to  its 
re-establishment.  In  the  very  nature  of  the  case  and  of  past  experience, 
the  covenant  required  the  offer  of  the  Davidic-Theocratic  Kingdom,  while 
a  moral  fitness  for  the  same  demanded  a  previous  repentance. 

Barbour  {Tfiree  Worlds,  p.  121),  influenced  by  his  invisible  spiritual  Kingdom  theory, 
says  that  the  Kingdom  was  offered  to  the  Jews  in  a  "  shadowy  sense.'"  Never  !  the  cov- 
enants, preaching,  etc.  all  forbid  it.  It  is  strange  that  Schenkel's  accommodation 
theory  is  so  largely  prevailing  among  believers,  when  so  derogatory  to  fundamentals. 

Obs.  4.  It  was  left,  we  find,  to  the  moral  freedom  of  the  representative 
men  of  the  nation  to  receive  or  refuse  it.  The  phrase  "  7iig7i  at  licnuV^  is 
indicative  of  a  tender,  which,  if  necessary,  can  be  withdrawn.  The  phrase 
is  purposely  chosen,  pregnant  with  meaning,  and,  in  view  of  the  power  of 
choosing,  leaves  a  degree  of  indefiniteness  about  it,  which  is  materially 
heightened  by  its  dependence  on  the  preceding  "  repent.''  For  ii^liat  then 
if  they  do  not  rejjent  ?  In  that  case  will  they  notwithstanding  receive  the 
Kingdom,  or  will  it  still  be  nigh  to  them  ?  Leaving  following  Propositions 
to  answer  these  questions,  let  it  now  be  suggested  (what  so  many  entirely 
overlook)  that  the  exact  reversal  of  this  formula  would  be.  If  you  do  no"t 
repent,  the  Kingdom  will  be  far  from  you  ;  now  it  is  nigh,  within  reach  ; 
then  it  will  be  distant,  removed,  postponed.  Alas  !  how  fearfully  true  this 
became  :  oiationally  nigh,  then  nationally  distant. 

The  conditionality  of  this  matter  is  apparent  from  the  call  to  repentance  and  the  un- 
fortunate result.  God  never  violates  moral  freedom  in  His  purposes  relating  to  the 
nation.  Jesus,  with  full  purpose  of  fulfilling,  and  yet  foreknowing  the  sad  result,  em- 
ploys the  only  language  adapted  to  their  free  agency.  Such  expressions  as  "  Ye  will  not 
come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life,"  "would  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us," 
"  ye  would  not,"  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not,"  and  kindred 
ones  unmistakably  indicate  the  power  of  choice.  If  not,  where  is  human  responsibility  ? 
The  Saviour,  therefore,  in  offering  this  Kingdom  as  nigh  to  them,  addresses  this  power  of 
choice,  this  capacity  (we  are  not  concerned  with  the  question  of  natiaral  or  acquired,  but 
onl}^  with  the  fact  of  actual  possession),  of  making  a  suitable  selection  ;  and  in  view  of 
the  possibility  of  making  a  proper  choice,  exhibited  in  repentance,  preaches,  "  Bepent, 
for"  (if  you  do  so)  "  the  Kingdom  is  nigh  at  hand,"  i.e.  the  Kingdom  already  covenanted 
to  you,  and  nigh  to  you  in  view  of  such  a  relation,  will  be  given  to  you.  But  if  you  make 
no  such  a  choice,  if  you  refuse  to  repent,  then,  of  course,  this  Kingdom  is  not  nigh  to 
you.  Strange  that  so  many  theologians  overlook  the  conditionality  on  which  all  hinges, 
and  affirm  (as  Neander,  etc.)  that  the  Kingdom  was  established.  The  Primitive 
Church,  taught  by  inspired  men  and  their  immediate  successors,  held  to  no  such  absurd- 
ity, but  maintained  in  this  matter  a  logical  consistency. 

In  view  of  this  conditionality,  -Tesus  comes  in  a  state  of  poverty,  in  order  that  the 
moral  appeal  to  repentance  may  be  fairly  tested.  Had  He  come  rich,  loaded  with 
honor,  etc.,  the  Jews  would  have  been  influenced  by  selfish,  improj^er  motives.  Hence 
the  Theocratic  King,  to  test  the  nation,  comes  in  humble  circumstances. 

Ods.  5.  It  has  already  been  shown  (Props.  19,  20,  21,  22,  38,  39,  40,  43, 
etc.)  what  Kingdom  was  preached,  koto  the  Jews  and  disciples  understood 
it,  and  hence  tliat  the  people  were  aware  of  the  Kingdom  that  was  offered 
to  them.  If  we  are  to  credit  the  multitude,  Jesus  tendered  a  motive,  held 
out  an  inducement,  for  repentance,  which  the  nation  vu'sapprehendcd  and 
could  not  understand.  Those  few,  then,  that  did  repent  were  influenced 
by  mere  "Jewish  prejudice"  and  "Jewish  partialism."  Thus  the  pre- 
vailing Church-Kingdom  theory  degrades  the  early  preaching  of  the  King- 
dom from  every  point  of  view  (comp.  Props.  42-44). 


364  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PllOP.  55. 

Let  it  again  be  noticed  that  Jesus  employs  the  very  j)hraseology  in  vogne  among  the 
Jews  indicative  of  this  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  Thus,  to  point  out  a  sin- 
gle example  which  Neander  (see  Prop.  42,  Obs.  G)  and  others  attempt  to  maice  contra- 
dictory to  Jewish  expectations,  viz.  :  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Now,  keeping  in  view 
the  Jewish  ideas  of  the  Kingdom  and  the  phrases  in  common  usage  expressive  of  the 
same,  the  promises  pertaining  to  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,"  "  the  meek  shall  inherit 
the  earth,"  "  fulfilling  the  law  and  the  prophets,"  "  the  least  and  great  in  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven,"  "  Jerusalem  the  city  of  the  great  King,"  ''  thy  Kingdom  come,"  "  the  King- 
dom of  God" — these  are  all  of  a  nature  to  impress  the  Jewish  mind  (as  the  result 
proves),  that  our  Saviour  alluded  to  the  Theocratlc-Bavidic  Kingdom  as  covenanted  to  the 
nation.  It  was,  under  the  circumstances,  simply  impossible  for  the  Jews  to  entertain 
any  other  view.  The  naked  fact  that  they  thus  understood  Him  and  were  not  corrected 
in  their  comprehension  of  the  Kingdom,  is  evidence  that  our  position  is  the  only  tenable 
one  ;  for  otherwise,  knowing  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  covenants  and  how  the  same 
was  held,  Jesus  would  not  be  performing  His  mission  worthily  if  it  led  to  the  indorsement 
of  error,  confirmed  by  His  own  language.  Let  the  reader  reflect  :  Uoio  could  He  ask 
them  to  repent,  and  on  condition  of  such  repentance  offer  them  a  Kingdom  contrary  to 
the  universal  expected  covenanted  one,  icithont  a  suitable  explanation?  Common  honesty 
required  it.  i/oio  could  He  urge  repentance  on  the  ground  of  something  which  they 
utterly  misapprehended  ?  Common  charity  forbids  such  a  notion.  Questions  like  these, 
involving  the  gravest  of  charges  and  reflecting  upon  the  character  of  Teacher  and  hearer, 
must  first  be  satisfactorily  answered  before  we  can  give  up  the  precious  covenanted  King- 
dom. 

Obs.  6.  It  is  wrongly  stated  by  Reiiss  (His.  Oh.  Thcol.,  p.  147)  that  the  ex- 
pression "  Kingdom  of  heaven"  in  the  formuhi  "  restricts  the  idea  to  a  com- 
ing period  or  place,  to  a  state  of  things  different  from  that  in  which  human- 
ity at  present  exists,"  and  objects  to  it  therefore  (through  his  modernized 
Ohurcli -Kingdom  view)  as  "a  less  comprehensive  form"  than  that  of 
"Kingdom  of  God,"  and  attribntes  it  as  belonging  "originally  to  the 
Jewish  Theology,  which  assigned  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  absolutely 
to  the  sphere  of  final  or  future  things."  This  is  a  misappreliension  of  the 
phrases  ;  for  we  have  shown  (Prop.  45)  that  they  are  convertible,  that  all  of 
them  were  used  by  the  Jews  to  denote  the  restored  Davidic  rule  under  the 
glorious  Messiah,  David's  Son,  and  that  they  were  employed  Ly  the  first 
preachers  luitJiout  explanation  according  to  common  usage.  This  makes  the 
phraseology  "  Repent,  for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  at  hand,^'  the  more 
significant  to  a  f^QW,  and  the  motive  for  a  speedy  repentance  the  stronger  ; 
for  then,  if  penitent,  the  long-cherished  hopes  excited  by  covenant  and 
prophecy  might  at  last  be  realized. 

The  time  selected  for  this  preaching  of  national  repentance  was,  humanly  speaking,  fa- 
vorable, and  the  refusal  to  repent,  under  the  circumstances,  increases  the  guilt  of  the 
nation  and  evinces  the  power  of  depravity.  While  with  Eeuss  {His.  Ch.  TheoL,  p.  39) 
we  object  to  the  theory  advanced  by  some,  ''  that  the  Jews  during  the  exile,  through  the 
influence  of  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  civilization,  underwent  a  complete  metamor- 
phosis" in  religious  matters,  yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  captivity  and  partial  res- 
toration produced  changes — changes,  however,  which,  instead  of  destroying,  only  devel- 
ojjed  the  distinctive  and  characteristic  traits  of  Judaism.  Among  the  latter,  a  more  steady 
and  persistent  attachment  to  and  expectation  of  a  coming  King  in  the  restored  King- 
dom by  which  they  should  be  nationally  exalted,  according  to  the  prophets.  This  pro- 
duced an  intense  (and  in  many  a  selfish)  exclusiveness,  as  evidenced  by  history.  The 
sorrows  and  trials  of  the  nation,  the  long-continued  submission  to  Gentile  domination, 
had  ^more  and  more  directed  faith  and  hope  to  the  covenants,  so  that,  as  far  as  the 
national  situation  was  concerned,  the  time  was  favorable  for  such  preaching,  but  the  repent- 
ance urged,  the  moral  preparation  required,  was  too  much  for  its  representative,  leading  men. 

Obs.  7.  The  reader  is  reminded  that  this  preaching  of  the  nighness  of 
the  Kingdom,  this  offer  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jews  at  the  First  Advent  on 


PkOP.  55.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  365 

condition  of  repentance,  is  the  'key  to  the  commingling  of  the  Advents  of 
Christ  (Prop.  34).  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  It  being  predetermined  as 
eminently  suitable  to  tender  this  Kingdom  at  the  First  Advent  of  Jesus, 
the  Messiah,  and  it  being  also  foreknown  that  it  would  be  rejected,  the 
matter  is  so  guardedly  presented  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  free  moral 
agency  of  the  nation,  and  as  not  to  be  opposed  to  foreknown  fact.  Yet 
both  the  rejection  of  the  Kingdom  at  the  First  Advent,  and  the  subsequent 
obtaining  of  it  at  the,  now  understood.  Second  Advent  of  Christ,  are 
unmistakaUy  ])redided.  Hence,  too,  in  view  of  this  offer  and  rejection, 
the  prophets  pass  on  and  describe  more  repeatedly  and  vividly  the  scenes 
connected  with  the  Second  Advent. 

Ohs.  8.  The  reader,  from  what  has  been  said,  cannot  fail  to  observe  that 
this  Kingdom,  thus  brought  nigh  by  the  offer  made  by  Jesus  and  His 
coadjutors,  is  the  same  Kingdom  predicted  by  the  jorophets  (Prop.  35). 
There  is  only  one  Kingdom  covenanted,  the  prophets  describe  but  one,  the 
Jews  believed  only  in  one,  the  disciples  knew  and  preached  only  one,  viz.: 
the  covenanted  TJieocratic-Davidic.  Jesus,  coming  to  fulfil  what  the 
prophets  predicted,  the  covenant  demanded,  could  not  preach  any  other 
Kingdom  than  tlie  one  described.  Hence  in  His  teaching  He  appeals  to 
the  prophets  and  appropriates  their  predictions  to  Himself  (but  only  in  so 
far  as  not  to  make  the  false  impression  that  under  Him  the  Kingdom  was 
already  establislied),  as  e.g.  in  Mark  12  :  10  He  refers  to  the  stone  of  Ps. 
117,  and  applies  it  to  Himself.  This  would  naturally  suggest  the  Stone  of 
Han.  2  :  34,  45,  and  the  inference  follows  that,  although  rejected.  He  is 
the  Head  of  the  coming  Kingdom,  and  through  Him  the  God  of  heaven 
will  yet  set  it  up.  So  also  Matt.  22  :  24,  Luke  4  :  18,  19,  etc. ;  and  He  does 
this  to  make  the  rejection  of  Himself  the  more  inexcusable  in  them. 

01) s.  9.  Writers  in  abundance  censure  Millenarians  (as  e.g.  the  Prim- 
itive Church)  for  believing  in  the  restoration  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic 
Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  on  the  ground  of  its  "  earthly  relations," 
"  carnality,"  etc.  They  do  not  pause  to  reflect  that,  owing  to  its  Theo- 
cratic nature,  it  cannot  le  set  up  without  a  suitable  moral,  spiritual  prep- 
aration in  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  to  experience  its  blessings.  The 
proof  is  found  in  this  first  preaching,  in  its  being  brought  nigh  on 
condition  of  repentance,  in  its  being  offered  solely  in  view  of  a  proposed 
change  of  character.  Those  who  inherit  it  as  kings  and  priests  must  be 
among  the  penitent  (Prop.  91)  ;  the  nation  itself  before  it  can  enjoy  its 
restoration  must  be  converted  (Prop.  113).  Therefore,  seeing  ho2u  it  was 
proposed  at  the  First  Advent  to  the  nation,  and  hoiu  it  is  offered  to  us  now 
conditionally  on  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ  as  a  future  inheritance, 
it  becomes  thoughtful,  reverent  men  to  be  extremely  cautious  hoio  they 
write  concerning  it. 


366  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  56. 


Proposition  56.  Tlie  Kingdom  was  not  estahlished  during  tlie 
ministry  of  Christ. 

This  necessarily  follows  from  the  preceding  ;  for  no  sucli  a  cove- 
nanted Kingdom  as  promised,  qio  such  a  restored  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom  as  predicted  appeared.  He  (Lnke  19  :  11-27)  had  to 
leave  before  he  would  receive  (Prop.  83)  the  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  1.  The  men  who  were  the  preachers  of  this  very  Kingdom,  and  who, 
above  all  others  (especially  modern  theologians),  ought  to  have  known 
whether  it  was  instituted  or  not,  had  no  knoivleclge  whatever  of  its  being 
thus  erected.  These  persons,  preachers,  and  singled  out  to  be  loitnesses  to 
the  truth,  are  more  reUahle,  vastly  more,  in  their  belief  and  testimony, 
than  theologians  with  their  spiritualistic  and  philosophical  conceits  con- 
cerning the  Kingdom  and  its  "  husk"  envelope.  Is  it  conceivable,  can  it 
be  credited,  that  such  special  chosen  ones,  upon  whose  testimony  the  faith 
of  others  was  to  be  founded,  should,  after  their  own  preaching,  after  all 
their  private  and  public  instruction  for  several  years,  and  cfter  the 
particular  ^  "forty  clays''  (Acts  1  :  3),  "  speaMng  of  the  things  j)ertaining  to 
the  Kingdom  of  God,''  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  (if  it  be  as  alleged)  that  a 
promised  Kingdom  was  (as  eminent  theologians  now  gravely  inform  us) 
actually  in  existence?  No  !  such  a  supposition  is  damaging,  fatally  so,  to 
preachers  and  Teacher,  and  cannot  possibly  be  entertained. 

Theologians,  to  carry  out  their  Church-Kingdom  theory,  assert  that  Jesus  established  the 
Kingdom  during  His  life.  Thus  e.g.  Ebrard  {Gosp.  His.,  p.  135)  says  :  ''Jesus  mani- 
fests Himself  in  Galilee  as  Rabbi,  announces  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  has  come,  and 
seeks  to  make  men  disciples,  or  members  of  that  Kingdom. ' '  The  formal  organization 
of  the  same  he  places  in  the  selection  of  the  twelve,  the  very  persons  (see  next  Obs.)  who 
knew  positively  nothing  oi  Ebrard's  Kingdom.  Jesus  nowhere  declared  "  that  the  King- 
dom of  God  has  come'' — this  is  added  to  the  record  to  sustain  a  j)reconceived  notion. 
The  utter  inconsistency  of  Ebrard  will  appear  more  distinctively  if  we  quote  him  (p.  243) 
respecting  the  use  of  the  Parables  :  "  He  (Jesus)  explained  to  them  (the  twelve)  that  the 
whole  nation  was  not  yet  in  a  condition  to  understand  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  and  that  He  selected  the  form  of  parables,  that  His  preaching  might  be  unintelli- 
gible to  those  who  were  not  yet  mature,  and  so  act  as  a  stimulus  and  provocative  to  future 
inquiry  ;  while  to  the  disciples,  to  whom  he  explained  the  parables,  it  was  a  revelation  of  saving 
truth."  See  next  Obs.  and  continued  argument  ;  we  may  well  ask,  How,  then,  if  thus  ex- 
plained, could  they  misapprehend  the  Kingdom,  especially  when  formally  established,  as 
he  says,  by  their  call  ? 

Obs.  2.  The  apostles,  the  best  judges  in  the  matter,  hnetv  nothing  about 
a  Kingdom  set  up  ;  and  therefore,  consistejitly  with  covenant  and  proph- 
ecy, with  former  preaching  and  instruction,  with  desire  and  hope  ask. 
Acts  1:6,  "  Lord,  wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  Kingdom  to 
Israel?"  The  reply  of  J  esns  co?ifr7}is  their  view  of  existing  facts;  for 
instead  of  telling  them  that  they  were  mistaken  in  their  idea  of  the  King- 
dom, that  the  Kingdom  already  existed,  etc.  (according  to  the  Alexandrian 


Prop.  56.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  367 

formulas),  the  answer,  referring  to  the  "  times  and  seasons, ^^  implies  on 
its  very  face  that  tliey  did  not  misapiyreliend  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom 
(comp.  Prop.  43).  They,  like  Joseph  of  Arimathea  (Mark  15  :  43),  "  also 
waited  for  the  Kingdom  of  God.^' 

Commentators  frankly  admit  the  views  of  the  ajDostles.  Thus  e.g.  Bloomfield  loci 
says  that  the  word  rendered  "  restore"  "  signifies  properly  to  restore  anything,  which 
has  suffered  change,  to  its  former  state  ;  and  it  is  not  unfrequently  used  (as  here  and  in 
Matt.  17  :  11  and  Mark  9  :  12)  of  restoring  a  ruined  kingdom  or  government  to  its 
ancient  form,  and  there  is  usually  implied  some  improvement  upon  that. "  He  admits 
that  the  ajDostles  "  thought  that  Christ  would  then  restore  the  Kingdom  of  Judea  to  its 
former  consequence, "  etc.  Thus  Barnes  Zoci,  Olshausen,  and  other  commentators.  To 
make  this,  as  Lightfoot  (so  Barnes,  but  footnote  to  Olshausen,  p.  176,  A.  E.),  a  question 
asked  in  indignation  against  the  Jews,  as  if  it  meant  "  Wilt  Thou  confer  dominion  on  a 
nation  which  has  just  put  Thee  to  death  ?"  is  so  far-fetched  and  unworthy  of  serious 
consideration  that  our  opponents — even  Barnes,  who  quotes  him — reject  it,  saying  : 
"  The  answer  of  the  Saviour  shows  that  this  was  not  the  design  of  the  qiiestion."  Dr. 
Increase  Mather  {The  Mystery  of  Israel' s  Salvation,  p.  130)  gives  the  general  Millenarian 
interpretation  :  "  Christ  did  not  say  to  them  that  there  should  never  be  any  such  restora- 
tion of  the  Kingdom  to  Israel  as  their  thoughts  were  running  upon  ;  only  He  telleth 
them  that  the  times  and  seasons  were  not  for  them  to  know;  thereby  acknowledging 
that  such  a  Kingdom  should  Indeed  he,  as  they  did  from  the  holy  prophets  expect.  Herein 
was  their  error,  not  in  expecting  a  glorious  appearing  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  but  in 
that  they  made  account  that  this  would  be  immediately."  SoLechler,  Lange's  Com.  Acts, 
loci,  remarks  :  "  The  Kingdom,  which  is  the  object  of  their  hope,  is  a  Kingdom  of 
Israel,  a  theocratic  Kingdom,  deriving  its  existence  and  realitj'  from  the  Messiah,  and 
intended  to  give  liberty,  greatness,  and  dominion  to  the  people  of  Israel,  who  were  at 
the  time  oppressed  by  a  heavy  yoke.  The  apostles  believe  that  they  are  almost  author- 
ized by  the  words  now  pronounced  by  the  Lord,  to  hope  for  an  early  restoration  of  this 
Kingdom."  After  rejecting  Lightfoot's  interjjretation  as  not  needing  a  "  special  refu- 
tion,"  and  stating  that  the  answer  of  Jesus,  so  "  frequently  "  and  even  "  grossly  misin- 
teriDreted,"  refers  to  the  time,  he  adds  :  "  As  to  the  fact  itself,  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  as  to  Israel's  privilege  with  respect  to  the  latter,  they  entertained  no  doubt  ;  and 
the  Lord  was  so  far  from  disapproving  of  such  an  expectation  that  He  rather  confirmed  it 
by  declaring  that  the  Father  had  fixed  the  times.  Now  we  know  that  neither  a  period 
nor  an  epoch  can  be  affirmed  concerning  an  event  which  is  only  imaginary.  Those  in- 
terpreters have  altogether  mistaken  the  sense,  who  maintain  that  Jesus  here  entirely  re- 
jects the  conceptions  entertained  by  His  apostles  respecting  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  for 
this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  He  did  not  deny  that  either  their  expectation  of  the  ap- 
jiearance  on  earth  of  His  glorious  Kingdom  in  its  reality,  or  their  hope  of  the  glorious 
future  which  that  Kingdom  ojDened  to  the  people  of  Israel,  was  well  founded  ;  He  sim- 
ply subdued  their  eager  curiosity  respecting  the  time,  and  directed  their  attention  to  the 
j)ractical  duties  which  they  were  to  perform  at  the  present  period.  Numerous  testimo- 
nies of  a  similar  nature  could  be  given.  Comp.  e.g.  Judge  Jones's  Notes,  Alford's  Com., 
Bengel's  Gnomon  of  N.  Test. ,  Olshausen  Com.  etc. 

Ods.  3.  Jesns,  befor3  His  death,  declared  the  Kingdom  to  be  still  future 
(comp.  Props.  58,  66,  67,  68,  70,  71,  73,  74,  etc.).  Take  e.g.  one  of  His 
last  utterances  (Matt.  26  :  64)  to  Caiaphas,  the  High  Priest  :  "  Hereafter 
shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power  and  coming 
i7i  the  clouds  of  heaven,''  This  was  taken  from  the  prediction  of  Daniel, 
applied  to  Himself  to  occur  "  hereafter,'''  and  was  well  understood  by  all 
Jews  to  refer  to  the  Messiah  and 'the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  The 
charge  of  blasphemy  corroborates  this  view.  This  is  so  clear  that  even 
Renan  [Life  of  Jesus,  p.  331)  says  :  "  The  high  priest  adjured  him  to  say 
whether  He  was  the  Messiah.  Jesus  confessed  it,  and  'proclaimed  lefore 
the  assembly  tJie  speedy  co7ning  of  His  heavenly  Kingdom.'"  So  also  a  little 
later  before  Pilate,  He  reiterates  this  direct  reference  to  His  Kingdom  as 
future,  when  He  says  (John  18  :  36)  :  "  But  now''  (i.e.  at  present,  during 


868  THE  THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  56. 

this  order  of  things)  "  my  Kingdom  is  not  from  hence"  (comp.  Jones's 
admirable  Notes  on  this  verse,  and  see  Prop.  109). 

Obs.  4.  The  significant  fact  that  our  opponents  cannot  tell  tvlien  this 
promised  Kingdom  was  set  up,  although  professing  that  it  was  established, 
is  corroborative  evidence  in  our  favor.  They  cannot  agree  in  the  time, 
giving  various  periods  (Prop.  3),  although  it  is  a  Kingdom  that  prophets 
describe  as  so  manifest,  when  re-established,  that  men  shall  see  and  rejoice 
in  it.  This  Proposition  is  the  more  necessary,  in  order  that  these  conflict- 
ing opinions  may  .be  presented  to  the  reader — opinions,  too,  that  never 
would  have  been  entertained  if  the  grammatical  sense  had  not  been  yielded 
nnder  the  pressure  of  a  spiritualistic  Church-Kingdom  theory.  Some  tell 
ns  that  the  Kingdom  already  appeared  under  John  the  Baptist,  but  this  is 
disproven  in  Prop.  41,  etc.  Others  locate  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdom 
at  the  birth  of  Jesus  ;  some  place  it  at  the  commencement  of  His  ministry  ; 
others,  when  He  commissioned  His  disciples  ;  some,  at  the  confession  of 
Peter  ;  others,  at  His  deatb  ;  some,  at  His  resurrection  and  ascension  ; 
others,  at  the  day  of  Pentecost  ;  and  still  others,  at  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  Here  certainly  is  diversity,  and  this  alone  should,  to  a  reflect- 
ing mind,  suggest  something  radically  lorong  in  a  theory  which  is  utterly 
unable,  with  any  degree. of  unity,  to  show  lolien  so  important  a  thing  as  a 
Kingdom  is  founded.  Alas  !  how  blind  is  man,  when  wilfully  blind,  or 
when  allowing  the  blind  to  lead  him. 

Obs.  5.  That  no  Kingdom,  as  covenanted,  was  set  up,  is  corroborated  by 
the  entire  tenor  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  and  forbids,  if  sheer  inference 
is  laid  aside,  the  notion  to  be  entertained.  As  evidence  that  those 
opinions  have  no  weight,  we  point  to  the  twofold  work  of  Christ.  The 
first  work  was  to  offer  this  Kingdom,  on  the  condition  of  repentance,  to 
the  nation.  This  He  faithfully  performed,  and  in  the  act,  at  least, 
eliminated  the  elect,  chosen  ones  from  the  mass.  But  as  the  result  of 
this  part  of  the  mission  was  foreknown,  there  was,  in  consequence,  con- 
nected with  it  (as  a  sequence)  His  second  work  to  accomplish  the  Redemp- 
tion (by  the  shedding  of  His  blood),  even  of  those  who  had  been  previously 
chosen,  and  of  those  who  would  be  among  the  elect  in  the  future,  and  this 
was  performed  through  tlie  sacrifice  of  Himself,  thus  making  provision  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  covenants  in  '^the  age  to  come."  This  mission 
positively  forbids  the  idea  of  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom. 

Provision  was  to  be  made  in  vindication  of  the  majesty  of  moral  law,  by  which  not 
only  sins  could  be  remitted,  but  that  those  who  obeyed  the  truth  could  be  ultimately 
delivered  from  all  the  effects  of  the  curse  and  become  co-heirs  with  Jesus  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  forfeited  dominion  of  Adam.  This  provision  was  accomplished  by  the  life 
and  death  of  Jesus,  confirmed  by  His  resurrection,  established  by  His  ascension  and  ex- 
altation, thus  sealing  and  makiiag  sure  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants,  through 
the  fulfilment  of  which  such  a  dominion  shall  be  exercised.  During  this  period  of  His 
mission,  having  those  definite  objects  in  view,  intending  the  performance  of  a  great  and 
precious  preparatory  work,  designing  to  make  us  inheritors  with  Himself  of  a  coming  King- 
dom through  the  efficacy  and  resultant  power  of  His  sacrifice—  during  such  a  period 
there  is  7io  room  for  the  Kingdom.  No  !  instead  of  a  Kingdom  His  work  required  humili- 
ation, suffering,  and  death  ;  instead  of  exaltation  to  power  and  Kingship,  it  was  a  veiling 
of  power  and  kingly  authority,  an  emptying  of  Himself,  of  honor  and  glory  in  our  be- 
half. The  two  states  are  in  antagonism  and  cannot  coexist  in  the  First  Advent  of  the 
blessed  Kedeemer.  This  Lord  and  Son  of  David  came  to  "  suffer  many  things"  instead 
of  reigning  ;  "  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer,"  so  that  the  Father,  instead  of  giving  Him  the 


Prop.  r)(j.']  the  theocratic  kingdom.  369 

Kingdom  predicted  by  Daniel,  described  by  the  prophets  and  covenanted  in  the  sure 
mercies  of  David,  gave  Him  the  exceedingly  bitter,  sorrowful  "  cup"  to  drink  for  us. 
Instead  of  a  Kingdom,  He  "  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;"  "  He  came  to  His  own 
and  His  own  received  Him  not,"  for  "they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  Instead  of 
reigning,  He  was  betrayed,  reproached,  spit  on,  crowned  with  thorns,  mocked  as 
King,  and  crucified.  Tell  us  not  that  David's  Son  reigned,  as  covenanted,  during  such 
trials.  Any  effort  to  unite  the  two  is  a  violation  of  what  the  prophets  have  written  and 
the  Gospels  have  recorded,  and  opposed  to  express  passages  which  teach  us,  among  other 
reasons,  xfhy  Christ  endured  all  this,  Phil.  2  :  6-11  ;  Heb.   12  :  2  ;  Rom.  14  :  9,  etc. 

And  (which  is  a  remarkable  and  decided  proof  that  ScrijJture  embraces  a  Divine,  not 
human,  Plan)  that  this  humiliation,  suffering,  etc.,  of  David's  Son  is,  according  to 
David's  own  predictions  concerning  his  Heir,  a  necessary  prelude  to  reigning  as  an 
immortal  Son  of  Man  on  David's  throne,  and  a  requisite  preparation  to  qualify  Him  pre- 
eminently for  the  lofty  position  of  a  universal  Theocratic  King.  We  are,  therefore,  abun- 
dantly sustained  in  our  position  by  converging  evidence  taken  from  different  points, 
while  a  mass  of  confirmatory  proof  remains  still  to  be  presented  as  we  advance  in  the 
argument. 

Obs.  6.  This  nighness  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  nation  was  evidenced  not 
merely  by  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom,  but  by  the  tender  of  it  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ.  He  was  the  predicted  King,  the  Son  of  David  who  should 
reign,  and  in  virtue  of  this  the  Kingdom,  in  a  manner,  has  come  nigh  in 
His  Person,  He  being  a  representative  of  the  Kingdom,  or,  rather,  in  Him 
it  is  lodged  as  in  Divine  royal  right.  So  that,  as  the  King  of  Babylon  is 
called  the  Kingdom  in  Dan.  2  :  38,  39,  so  also  the  Kingdom  was  vested  in 
Christ,  but  with  this  material  difference  (which  many  overlook),  that  whilst 
in  Him  as  of  divine  and  legal  right  it  was  ?iot  then  manifested,  the  right, 
for  certain  reasons  and  purposes,  was  not  then  entertained  and  pressed  to 
an  actual  realization.  The  Kingship  was  held  in  abeyance  because  of  the 
foreseen  result. 

The  Kingdom  thus  connected  with  the  person  of  Jesus  may  serve  to  illustrate  and  ex- 
plain some  peculiar  phraseology,  such  as  is  contained  in  the  Kingdom  coming  nigh, 
upon,  or  among  them.  But  as  these  passages  will  deserve  a  separate  notice,  we  j)ass 
them  for  the  present  with  the  simple  caution,  that  such  language  must  not  be  pressed 
(as  many  do)  beyond  its  legitimate  meaning  and  application.  While  it  is  true  that  Jesus 
never  denied,  even  in  the  face  of  death.  His  royalty,  His  Kingship,  His  divine  and  legal 
right  to  reign  as  covenanted,  yet  it  is  likewise  true,  that,  foreseeing  His  rejection  by  the 
nation,  and  ai^preciating  the  work  before  Him  to  be  performed,  instead  of  urging  His 
claim  He  veiled  it,  giving  us  only  an  occasional  glimjDse  of  it,  and  that  when  solicited  by 
some  (not  the  representative  men  of  the  nation).  He  refused  to  be  made  King. 

Obs.  7.  The  reader  will  observe  that  there  is  not  a  single  declaration  of 
Christ's  which  asserts  that  the  Kingdom  was  theii  in  actual  existence.  It 
is  simply  inferred  by  others  against  covenant  promise  and  prediction.  One 
of  the  stronofest  passages  from  which  such  an  inference  is  drawn  is  that 
of  Matt.  12  :''28,  "  But  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  then  the 
Kingdom  is  come  unto  you.^^  Leaving  a  full  answer  to  follow  in  succeed- 
ing Propositions,  we  now  only  remark  that  in  the  establishment  of  this 
Kingdom  (as  predicted)  the  miraculous  and  supernatural  (Props.  6  and  T) 
is  required,  and  the  miracles  of  Christ  are  a  foreshadoiving  and  evidence  of 
the  future  fulfilment  of  the  promises.  To  this  evidence  Jesus  simply 
appeals,  as  confirmatory  of  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  made  to  them,  of 
its  sincerity  and  surety  ;  for  His  miraculous  power  exerted,  evinced  that 
the  Kingdom  was  nigh  unto  them,  both  in  the  person  of  the  King,  although 
in  humiliation,  and  in  His  possessing  the  adecjuate  poiver  to  re-establish  it, 
if  they  made  the  necessary  choice. 


370  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  56. 

Observe,  also,  that  this  language  was  addressed  to  unbelievers,  to  captious  persons 
who  rejected  Jesus.  Hence,  the  Kingdom  is  come  unto  or  upon  you,  certainly  does  not 
allude  in  their  case  to  an  actual  jDossession,  but  merely  to  its  being  offered  to  them. 
Again,  as  critics  have  often  noticed,  the  phrase  "  is  come"  is  frequently  used  to  denote  a 
drawing  nigh,  a  divine  purpose  not  then  actually  accomplished,  etc.,  as  e.g.  Gen.  6  :  13  ; 
Isa.  60  :  1  ;  Heb.  12  :  22,  etc. 

Ods.S.  Kenan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  249),  after  telling  us  that  Christ  had  an 
"  apocalyptic  theory"  of  the  Kingdom  (which,  in  another  place,  he  defines 
to  be  a  literal  fulfilment  of  Daniel),  adopts  very  much  the  prevailing  view  of 
the  Messianic  Kingdom  by  saying  :  "  lie  often  declared  that  the  Kingdom 
of  God  has  already  commenced  (?),  that  every  man  carries  it  in  himself  (?), 
and  may,  if  he  be  worthy  of  it,  enjoy  it  ;  that  each  creates  this  Kingdom 
(?)  quietly  by  the  true  conversion  of  the  heart,"  and  then  interprets 
the  Kingdom  to  mean  ''  the  good,"  "  the  reign  of  justice,"  or,  "  the 
liberty  of  the  soul."  He  gives  as  proof.  Matt.  6  :  10,  33,  Mark  12  :  34, 
Luke  11  :  2  ;  12  :  31  ;  17  :  20,  21.  Such  a  total  misaiypreliension  of  the 
Kingdom,  (which  ignores  ex2:)ress  covenant  and  jirediction)  is  fortified  bj 
the  usage  of  eminent  theologians.  For  the  present,  we  only  reiterate  our 
conviction,  that  the  disciples  on  the  ground  loere  far  letter  aUe  to  judge 
concerning  the  Kingdom  and  what  Christ  declared  respecting  it,  than 
Kenan  is  prepared  to  do  at  this  late  day. 

Ohs.  9.  Olshausen,  Neander,  Lange,  and  many  others  are  com2:)elled, 
in  order  to  preserve  consistency  in  their  theory  of  a  spiritual  Kingdom, 
to  make  this  Kingdom  commence  somelioiu  with  the  First  Advent.  Now, 
while  it  is  true  that  the  Kingdom  in  a  certain  sense  (Obs.  G)  was  in  Christ, 
and  brought  nigh  by  Him  to  the  nation,  yet  it  is  wrong  and  misleading  to 
infer  from  this  that  it  luas  established.  Tlie  contrary,  as  held  by  the  early 
Church,  is  the  truth.  It  is  in  view  of  this  uniuarranted  inference  that 
such  writers  take  the  great  and  unauthorized  liberty  of  changing  the 
phrase  "  nigh  at  hand  "  into  "  now  established,"  "  now  founded,"  "  now 
already  present,"  etc.  Overlooking  the  Kingdom  that  is  covenanted  even 
under  oath,  and  spiritualizing  the  promises,  it  is  an  easy  matter  to  draw 
from  Christ's  language  erroneous  inferences.^  Forsaking  the  expressly 
covenanted  Kingdom  for  something  else,  introduces  widely  antagonistic 
contrasts.  The  most  divergent  theories  are  a  natural  result.  Some  of 
these  have  already  been  mentioned  ;  others  are  2:)resented  in  the  following 
note.^ 

'  We  will  allow  some  to  speak  for  themselves,  leaving  the  reader  to  ponder  a  certain  un- 
decisive tone.  Storr  {Diss.  On  the  Kingdom)  says,  respecting  this  nearness,  that  the 
Kingdom  was  present  and  actually  realized,  because  "  Jesus  being  born  (Matt.  3  :  2),  the 
Kingdom  in  a  certain  sense  (Luke  11  :  20,  and  17  :  21  ;  Matt.  12  :  28)  was  come,"  being 
promised  to  "  the  offspring  of  David  ;"  and  it  could  not  commence  until  He  was  born, 
and  then  "  the  Kingdom  had  so  far  come  that  the  King  by  whom  it  was  to  be  adminis- 
tered was  certainly  present."  From  this  he  takes  it  for  granted  that  it  was  thus  "  ad- 
ministered," never  attempting  to  prove  the  main  fact,  never  considering  that  the  pres- 
ence of  one  entitled  to  reign  and  the  reign  itself  are  not  necessarily  cojoined,  and  never 
noticing  that  a  part  of  the  covenant  promise  (i.e.  the  descent)  he  takes  literally  and  the 
rest  (i.e.  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom)  he  discards.  Is  it  possible  to  base  so  important  a 
matter  as  the  founding  of  a  Messianic  Kingdom,  upon  so  slight  and  inferential  a  founda- 
tion ? 

Schmid  (B'lh.  Theol,  p.  244)  remarks  :  "  He  describes  the  Kingdom  of  God  as  already 
begun  at  the  then  present  time  (Matt.  12  :  28  ;  Luke  11  :  20,  21).  The  starting  point  of 
this  Kingdom  is  the  appearance  of  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  11  :  12  ;  Luke  16  :  16)  ;  up  to 
this  time  the  Old  Test,  dispensation  lasted.     By  Jesus  in  Matt.  11  :  11,  contrasting  the 


Prop.  SG.']  the  theocratic  kik-gdom.  371 

Baptist  with  the  members  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  it  may  be  perceived  that  the  real  com- 
mencement of  this  Kingdom  is  connected  with  Hisj^erson."  This  needs  no  comment, 
its  points  Ijaving  ah-eady  been  anticipated  (as  to  the  Baptist,  see  Props.  38-41)  ;  biit  may 
we  not  ask,  Wliy  this  shifting  of  commencement  from  John  to  Christ,  and  then,  as  Lango 
(Com.)  does,  from  the  birth  to  the  baptism,  and  from  the  baptism  to  the  confession  of 
Peter,  or  to  the  death,  or  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesiis,  or  to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  etc.  ? 
Is  this  not  a  sign  of  weakness?  Von  Gerhach  (Lange's  Com.  Matt.,  p.  309)  begins  it  at 
the  baptism  of  Jesus  :  "  At  His  baptism  Jesus  had,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  entered  that  new 
Kingdom  of  God  upon  earth  which  He  Himself  had  founded."  Strange  procedure  :  the 
Son  of  Man  founds  a  Kingdom  and  then  afterward  enters  into  it  Himself  !  This  theory 
is  only  a  following  of  Augustine,  who  {City  of  God,  B.  17,  S.  8)  speaking  of  His"  do- 
minion from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  remarks  :  "  He 
took  the  beginning  of  His  reigning  from  the  river  where  John  bai)tized,"  etc.  The  ab- 
surdity is  so  apparent  that  it  needs  no  rei)]y. 

Van  Gosterzee  {TJieol.  X.  Test.,  p.  70),  so  also  Thompson  (TJie  Theol.  of  Christ),  tells  us 
that  the  Kingdom  is  "  something  essentially  present.  "When  He  comes,  it  appears  with 
Him  ;  it  is  already  in  the  midst  of  those  who  are  asking  when  it  shall  appear,  Luke 
17  :  20,  21."  From  this  it  is  inferred,  without  noticing  that  if  his  argument  is  correct  it 
will  also  hold  true  that  when  He  leaves  the  Kingdom  leaves  with  Him.  A  full  reply  to 
this  favorite  passage  for  inferential  proof,  taken  from  Luke,  will  appear  under  Prop. 
110.  It  is  only  by  confounding  (Props.  79  and  80)  the  Divine  Sovereignty  with  the 
specially  covenanted  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  that  such  inferences  are  unjustly 
made.  So  Eeuss  (His.  Ch.  Theol.,  p.  154)  argues  :  "  The  Kingdom  of  God,  which  Jesus 
desired  to  make  a  reality,  commences  with  his  personal  aj^pearance  on  the  theatre  of  the 
world.  His  Advent  and  the  setting  up  of  the  Kingdom  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  be- 
cause He  is  the  Head  and  the  cause  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  cause  cannot  exist  without 
its  effect."  Then  (p.  157)  he  asserts  that  for  "  a  precise  date  for  the  commencement  of 
the  Kingdom,"  "  that  date  is  no  other  than  the  moment  in  which  John  the  Baptist,  the 
last  and  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  opened  its  doors,  so  to  speak,  bj'  iDroclaiming  to  the 
world  Him  who  was  to  realize  its  most  cherished  hopes,"  and  apjDeals  as  confirmatory  to 
Luke  16  :  16  and  Matt.  11  :  11-14.  Thus,  when  men  forsake  the  covenants  and  the  pre- 
dictions which  determine  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  intended,  do  they  blunder  and  per- 
vert the  simple  truth — men,  too,  who  are  able  instructors  in  many  other  things.  Alas  'l 
it  demands  just  such  men  to  cause  the  church  itself  to  drift  into  its  predicted  course  of 
unbelief  (Prop.  177)  ;  weak  men,  or  persons  of  no  ability  and  power,  could  not  exert  such 
an  influence. 

-  Thus  e.g.  Storr  (Diss,  on  the  Kingdom),  not  satisfied  with  his  own  declarations  (Obs.  9, 
note  1),  adds  :  "  After  the  death  of  Jesus,  from  the  period  of  His  resurrection  and  ascen- 
sion into  heaven,  that  heavenly  Kingdom  which  the  ancient  prophets  had  predicted  was 
entered  upon  by  the  offspring  of  David."  "  It  follows,  then,  that  the  commencement  of 
the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  although  in  a  certain  sense  it  may  be  traced  from  His  birth,  j^et 
properly  is  to  be  reckoned  from  His  ascension  into  heaven.  Which  proves  that  a  far 
different  apijearance  was  then  given  to  the  Kingdom  of  David,  which  Jesvs  possessed  after 
His  death  and  return  to  a  new  life  ;  and  that  the  throne  of  David  became  a  far  more 
exalted  sent  of  majesty,  from  the  time  that  it  was  occupied  by  Jesus."  Here  is  simply 
one  asssuinption  built  uj)on  another,  and  the  leading  one  is  that  in  some  sense  Jesus 
really  was  on  David's  throne.  (Comp.  Props.  52  and  122.)  Now  if  the  Davidic  throne 
(taking  their  own  theory)  is  the  Father's  throne  in  the  third  heaven,  how  could  the  Son 
of  man,  during  His  natural  life  and  previous  to  His  exaltation,  reign  in  the  promised 
Kingdom  ?  Does  that  exaltation  in  the  third  heaven  meet  the  conditions  of  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom  covenanted  to  be  here  on  the  earth,  or  the  predictions  of  the  prophets  in 
describing  the  restoration  of  an  overthrown  Theocratic  Kingdom  in  the  kmd  of  Palestine  ? 

Dr.  Bascom  (Hermons,  series  1,  ser.  4),  brings  us  to  a  climax.  He  informs  us  that  the 
Kingdom  (as  delineated  in  the  110  Ps.,  called  "  the  Creed  of  David")  here  described  was 
witnessed  in  the  covenant  of  redemption  in  Paradise,  is  from  eternity  and  extends  to 
eternity,  and  hence  is  not,  as  some  assume,  "  a  mere  parenthesis  in  the  Divine  adminis- 
tration." This  sadly  mixes  the  Divine  Sovereignty  with  the  Kingdom  specially  cove- 
nanted to  David's  Son  ;  it  utterly  ignores  the  Humanity  of  Jesus,  the  Theocratic-Davidic 
ordering,  and  what  is  promised  to  the  Son  of  Man.  But  instead  of  answering  Bascom, 
we  leave  one  of  his  own  class  of  interpreters — but  far  more  able — reply.  Van  Gosterzee 
(TJieol.  X.  Test.,  p.  69)  observes:  "The  Kingdom  is  something  new.  Since  it  drew 
near  only  in  the  fulness  of  time,  it  was  not  before  found  on  earth.  It  is  consequently 
not  merely  the  continuation  of  the  former  thread,  but  the  commencement  of  an  order  of 
things  not  before  seen,  Luke  10  :  23,  24,  comp.  Matt.  26  :  28."     Leaving  others  to  rec- 


372  THE  THEOCRATIC  KiT^-GDOM.  [Pkop.  56. 

oncile,  if  they  can,  such  opposite  statements,  it  may  be  said  that  Oosterzee  is  right  in 
saying  that  it  is  new,"  i.e.  something  to  come,  not  existing  just  previously  to  the  advent 
(Pro23S.  37  and  38),  but  is  certainly  wrong  in  the  assertion  that  it  was  '*  not  before  found 
on  earth,"  as  shown  by  Props.  25,  29,  31,  etc.  For  it  is  to  be  restored ;  it  is  the  restored 
Theocratic  Kingdom  ;  and  it  is  "  new,"  i.e.  renewed  (for  the  word  "  new"  is  often  used, 
ProiD.  50,  in  the  sense  of  renewal),  having  also  many  "  new"  features  added  (as  e.g.  the 
rule  of  a  God- man,  of  glorified  and  immortal  rulers)  that  the  Davidic  Kingdom  never 
possessed.     But  we  will  not  anticpiate  coming  Propositions. 

Ods.  10.  Here,  at  this  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  as  nigh  at  hand,  so 
many  stumble  and  fall  into  serious  error  (comp.  Props.  38,  42,  55).  Let 
us  take  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol),  illustratiye  of  a  large  class,  which  rightly 
affirms  that  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  is  fundamental,  and  then  gives  as  a 
special  means  for  comprehending  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  the  epit- 
omized formulas,  "  the  time  is  fulfilled  ;  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand  ; 
repent  ye  and  believe  the  Gospel."  Thus  far  correct  ;  but  instead  of  look- 
ing at  these  formulas  from  the  covenanted  standpoint  and  from  the 
Primitive  view,  he  regards  them  entirely  from  a  modern  position.  More 
than  this  :  he  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  nation  to  whom  this  was 
preached  refused  to  repent  ;  the  conditions  then  being  altered  and  the 
preaching  of  Jesus  also  (which  he  never  notices)  being  changed,  he  pro- 
ceeds on  the  assum2)tio7i  of  repentance  and  tlie  immediate  setting  up  of  the 
Kingdom  ;  and  then  to  find  this  Kingdom  nothing  offered  itself  but  the 
Church,  or  believers,  as  the  Divine  Sovereignty,  which,  of  course,  under 
such  an  illegitimate  process  of  reasoning  (leaving  out  the  conditions, 
whether  actually  complied  with,  upon  which  the  Kingdom  was  tendered) 
are  elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  11.  The  climax  of  unbelief  in  this  direction  is  reached  by  Deprez 
{John,  or  the  Apoc.  of  the  New  Test.),  a  professed  believer.  Admitting  that 
the  Kingdom  was  believed  and  preached  as  covenanted  ;  confessing  that 
it  was  not  set  up,  as  thus  received,  during  the  First  Advent  and  since  ; 
informing  us  that  the  apostles  and  Primitive  Church  universally  looked 
for  the  coming  of  this  Kingdom,  locating  it  at  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus, 
he  then  proceeds,  in  the  coolest  possible  manner,  to  suggest  that  all  such 
references  to  the  Kingdom  and  Advent  connected  with  it  are  to  he  rejected 
as  spurious,  as  additions  given  under  a  gross  misapprehension  of  the 
truth.  This  interpretation  and  remedy  (indorsed  by  eminent  men)  is 
simply  a  total  perversion  of  covenant  and  Scripture,  a  fatal  bloiv  at  the 
integrity  and  authority  of  the  Word  itself.  It  follows,  as  a  natural  result, 
from  three  things,  all  of  which  are  taken  for  gi^anted :  (1)  that  the  King- 
dom noto  exists,  in  a  form  so  widely  differeiit  from  the  expectations  of  the 
early  Church  and  the  descriptions  of  the  Word,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
reconcile  them  ;  (2)  that  the  most  solemnly  given  Scripture,  viz. :  the  cove- 
nant (given  under  oath  and  the  basis  of  the  Kingdom),  is  to  be  also  ignored 
as  incapahle  of  fulfilment ;  (3)  and  that  Holy  Writ,  descriptive  of  the 
postponement  of  this  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  is  not  to  have  ajiy 
weight  in  the  consideration  of  this  subject.  In  other  words,  Deprez, 
whether  intentional  or  not,  sets  himself  up  as  the  judge  of  Scripture  (what 
to  receive  and  what  to  reject),  luithout  alloioing  Scripture  to  testify  in  its 
oion  hehaJf.  If  no  such  Kingdom  exists  now,  certainly  it  is  no  more  than 
simple  justice  demands  to  permit  Scripture  to  assign  its  reasons  for  the 
same  (comj).  Props.  57-68). 


Prop.  CyQ.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  373 

Obs.  12.  In  the  light  of  Scripture  there  is  710  excuse  ior  the  prevailing 
interpretations  respecting  the  Kingdom,  for,  over  against  the  meanings 
engrafted  by  man,  there  is  a)i  abundance  to  satisfy  the  reverent  student 
that  they  are  utterly  untenable.  Without  attemptiug  to  forestall  the 
proof  that  the  following  Propositions  contain,  it  may  be  well  to  say  that 
numerous  passages  directly  athrm,  or  imply,  our  position.  Take  e.g.  Matt. 
26  :  29,  Mark  14  :  25,  and  Jesus  in  the  expressions  "  until  that  day^^ 
locates  the  Kingdom  in  the  future,  which  is  made  more  emphatic  by  Luke 
(22  :  18)  saying  :  "  Until  the  Kingdom  of  God  shcdl  come.''  If  the  King- 
dom already  existed,  such  phraseology  would  be  entirely  out  of  place,  but 
with  our  view  it  is  consistent  and  significant.  The  general  tenor  of  the 
Word  indicates  the  same  feature.  Thus  e.g.  when  Jesus  speaks  of  entering 
into  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  (Matt.  7  :  21,  22),  its  futurity  is  expressed  by 
the  phrase  ''  in  that  day,'''  i.e.,  it  is  something  not  present  to  be  realized  at 
once.  So  also  in  the  prayer  *'  tliy  Kingdom  come,"  the  futurity  of  which 
was  believed  in  by  the  disciples,  and  which  excited  the  petition  (for  the 
prayer  was  given  in  accordance  with  the  well-known  views  of  the  disciples) 
just  before  the  ascension.  Acts  1  :  6.  Thus  in  Matt.  19  :  28,  Luke  22  :  29, 
by  adopting  the  Jewish  phraseology  linked  with  the  Messianic  Kingdom, 
Jesus  conclusively  teaches  that  the  Kingdom  is  future  and  not  present. 

Obs.  13.  The  distinctive  preaching  of  Jesus,  based  as  it  is  on  the 
covenants,  throws  light  on  the  vexed  question  pertaining  to  the  relation 
that  He  sustained  to  the  law.  He  observed  the  law  Himself  and  enjoined 
it  upon  others,  and  yet  intimated,  in  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  etc., 
the  abrogation  of  the  Mosiac  law.  But  we  must  carefully  distinguish  lohen 
the  latter  was  done,  viz.  after  the  representative  men  of  the  nation  had 
conspired  against  Him,  and  cfter  He  had  revealed  His  rejection  by  the 
nation.  We  hear  much  about  Jesus  being  no  Jew  in  spirit,  etc.  Even 
believers  largely  indorse  the  language  of  Eenan  {Life  of  Jesits,  p.  207), 
"  Jesus,  in  other  words,  is  no  longer  a  Jew."  "  He  proclaims  the  rights 
of  man,  not  the  rights  of  the  Jew  ;  the  religion  of  man,  not  the  religion  of 
the  Jew  ;  the  deliverance  of  man,  and  not  the  deliverance  of  the  Jew" 
(comj).  Prop.  69).  Against  all  such  inferential,  cosmopolitan  reasoning, 
we  need  only  place  one  passage  (Rom.  15  :  8)  oat  of  many  :  ^'JVow  I  say 
that  Jes2is  Christ  was  a  mi7iister  of  the  circimicision  fo7'  the  truth  of  God,  to 
confirm  the  lyromises  made  unto  the  Fathers."  Hence  His  restricted  mis- 
sion. Prop.  54. 

This  deserves  more  attention.  The  preaching  of  Jesus  indicates  that  He  was  a  Jewish 
preacher  to  Jews.  The  covenants,  the  promises,  the  predictions  all  demand  this,  and 
hence  His  exclusive  mission  to  the  Jews.  The  cosmopolitan  results  are  invariably  linked 
with,  first,  a  fall  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and,  secondly,  with  a  recovery  of  the  same  nation. 
The  Gentiles  are  reached  and  blessed  through  the  Jews,  for  it  is  ever  true  that  "  ISalva- 
Hon  is  of  the  Jews."  Paul  affirms,  what  simple  consistency  requires,  that  Jesus  exercised 
His  office  of  Messiah  with  special  reference  to  the  covenanted  people,  the  Jews,  He 
could  not,  with  covenanted  truth  before  Him,  occupy  any  other  position.  Besides  this, 
as  the  law  was  obligatory  upon  the  Jewish  nation,  and  had  formed  part  of  the  Davidic 
institution  or  Theocratic  rule,  it  was  essential  that  the  Heir,  the  promised  Son  of  David, 
should,  as  Son  of  Man,  render  obedience  to  that  law  (until  set  aside)  thus  vindicating 
His  fitness,  sinlessness,  reverence  for  God's  appointments,  and  worthiness  to  be  the 
Kuler  on  David's  throne  (comp.  Props.  83,  84,  etc.).  What  changes  would  have  resulted 
had  the  Jews  received  Him,  we  cannot  tell,  seeing  that  God's  Plan  was  determined  in  view 
of  this  foreseen  rejection.  The  grace  and  mercy  extended  to  Gentiles,  as  will  be  more 
cleanly  stated  hereafter,  through  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  does  not  alter  Christ's  Jewish 


374  THE  THEOCEATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PeOP:  56. 

attitude  or  lessen  His  being  "  a  minister  of  the  circumcision."  "When  the  nation  fell  and 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  continued  on,  the  Mosaic  ritual  was  abrogated  by  the  very  force 
of  circumstances.  And  it  is  a  curious  and  striking  exhibition  of  Christ's  delicate  feeling 
toward  His  own  specific  mission  to  the  Jewish  people,  that,  what  Paul  afterward  so 
boldly  proclaimed  as  no  longer  binding,  Jesus  only  intimated  in  an  indirect  manner. 
He  respected  and  honored  His  mission. 


PeOP.  57.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDOX.  375 


Proposition  57.  This  King doimo as  offered  to  the  Jewish  nation, 
hut  the  nation  rejected  it 

That  it  was  offered  in  good  faith  we  have  seen — the  mission  of 
John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples  being  confined  to  the  nation.  But 
the  nation,  instead  of  repenting  and  receiving  the  Messiah,  con- 
spired through  its  representative  men^  the  chief  i^riests,  scribes, 
and  elders,  to  put  Him  to  death.  The  entire  record  of  the  Gosijels 
shows  how  He  was  persecuted  and  finally  crucified,  as  John  1  :  11. 
Luke  19  :  14,  Matt.  16  :  21,  Matt.  20  :  18,  19,  etc.  By  this  action 
they  said  :  ''We  id  ill  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over\is  f  by  this 
conduct  they  evinced  how  utterly  unprepared^  morally,  they  w^e 
for  a  restored  Theocratic- Davidic  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah. 

If  it  be  asked,  Why  this  imposed  condition  of  rejpentance  ?  the  answer  is  plain.  Such 
a  Theocratic  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  with  the  accompanying  elevation  of  the  Jewish 
nation — as  covenanted  and  predicted  —cannot  possibly  be  established  without  a  suitable 
moral  preparation.  An  exaltation  to  such  siipremacy  and  honor,  unless  previously  pre- 
pared for  it,  would  only  have  excited  the  pride,  the  selfishness,  the  arrogance,  and  am- 
bition of  the  Jewish  nation.  The  purity  of  the  Kingdom  intended,  its  design  for  bless- 
ing, the  character  of  its  rulers,  the  Theocratic  idea  itself— «//  demanded  hearty  repent- 
ance and  true  reformation.  This  feature  will  appear  more  evident  when  we  see  how 
God  is  raising  up  a  repentant  people  for  this  very  jourpose,  viz.  :  to  establish  it  upon  a 
basis  of  moral  ])reparation  in  the  persons  of  those  who  are  associated  with  Him  in  gov- 
ernment. Thus  e.g.  the  account  of  Luke  9  :  60,  which  some  denounce  as  "  cruelty,"  and 
which  others  (Barnes,  etc.)  explain  that  "  sentimentality"  must  give  place  to  "  deci- 
sion" and  *'  eternal  consolations,' '  can  be  more  readily  explained  in  the  light  of  this  con- 
ditioned repentance.  The  man  was  a  disciple  of  Jesas,  as  evidenced  by  his  asking  per- 
mission. Now,  as  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom,  the  greatest  of  all  things,  was  thus  con- 
ditioned, and  the  preaching  of  this  repentance  nationally  being  very  limited  and  urgent 
(in  order  to  make  the  nation  inexcusable),  it  was  of  the  highest  moment  and  importance  to 
bring  this  testimony  before  the  nation  ;  all  other  objects,  for  the  time  being,  must  give 
place  to  this  one,  so  essential,  which  could  not  he  postponed.  Hence,  under  the  circum- 
stances, the  charge  to  preach  the  Kingdom— a  style  of  preaching  which  speedily,  as  we 
shall  show — changed,  the  crisis  having  been  passed. 

Oh.'i.  1.  N'ationally,  through  the  nation's  highest  officials  and  council, 
the  Kingdom  was  rejected  on  account  of  the  ivq^osed  condition,  repentance, 
although  individual  Jews  repenting  were  received  as  believers.  The 
Kingdom  could  not  be  erected,  owing  to  its  affiliation  with  the  nation 
itself,  requiring  not  merely  a  few  who  believed,  but  a  natmicd  wor(d 
regeneration.  The  past  history  of  the  nation  clearly  taught  the  sad  truth 
that,  without  such  a  moral  reformation,  it  was  utterly  nnfifted  to  bear  a 
Theocratic  rule.  This  it  most  painfully  evidenced  at  the  IFirst  Advent  by 
crucifying  its  own  promised  Messiah.  This  was,  when  fully  appreciated, 
a  fearful  crime.  The  great  question  with  the  Jew,  after  the  Messiah  was 
killed,  was  this  :  How  could  he  under  such  aggravating  guilt,  slaying  the 
covenanted  David's  Son,  be  saved  from  his  sin?  This  it  was  that  caused, 
under  Peter's  exhibition  of  this  guilt,  that  anguish  of  heart,  bursting  forth 


376  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  57. 

into  the  significant  inquiry:  '*  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?" 
What  they  were  to  do — this  key  of  knowledge  given  in  mercy — was  com- 
mitted to  Peter,  as  well  as  the  other  key  pertaining  to  the  Gentiles. 

The  modern  Reformed  Jews  deny  that  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  nation  resulted  from 
sinfulness,  deleave  them  to  assign  the  reason  for  their  dispersion,  etc.,  in  the  following 
resolution  at  a  meeting  held  by  Reformed  Rabbins  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  (quoted  in  The 
Israelite  IndeeiJ,  Feb.  No.,  1871)  :  "  Resolved,  That  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  state  had  not  its 
cause  m  the  sinfulness  of  Israel,  but  in  the  Divine  i)urposo,  manifested  more  and  more 
in  history,  to  send  the  members  of  the  Hebrew  race  to  all  parts  of  the  earth,  for  the  ful- 
filment of  their  high  mission,  to  lead  all  nations  to  the  true  concejition  and  worship  of 
God."  Now,  aside  from  the  New  Test,  declarations  (which  they,  of  course,  do  not  re- 
ceive, and  yet  which  are  verified  in  the  literal  fulfilment  of  its  predictions  in  their  actual 
historj'),  this  is  utterly  opposed  by  Moses  in  his  prophecies,  by  all  the  prophets,  by  the 
repeated  confessions  of  the  ancient  Jews,  and  even  by  modern  Orthodox.  Many  prayers 
of  the  Jews  indicate  the  truthfulness  of  the  same  ;  and  it  is  only  a  sj^irit  of  unbelief  in 
the  Divine  Record,  a  virtual  abandonment  of  God's  own  testimony  and  that  of  the  nation 
itself  in  the  past,  that  can  lead  to  such  unscriptural  and  unhistorical  resolutions.  Rev. 
Van  Noorden  (pastor  Holland  Pres.  Ch.,  Chicago)  has  written  some  strictures  on  this  un- 
tenable resolution,  and  among  other  things  shows  "  that  since  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  the 
Jews  as  a  nation  never  have  influenced  the  nations  to  forsake  idolatry,  nor  taken  any 
active  steps  to  lead  the  nations  to  the  true  conception  and  worship  of  God."  History 
substantiates  this,  seeing  that  civilization,  enlightenment,  etc.  came  through  the  labors, 
etc.  of  Christians,  and  not  through  Jews,  however  individuals  of  the  race  may  have 
aided  in  the  same  work.  The  entire  resolution,  therefore,  is  opposed  both  by  Scripture 
and  history,  and  its  framers  were  unable  to  substantiate  it  by  a  single  quotation  from 
or  reference  to  the  Word  of  God, 

Obs.  2.  The  leading  reason  assigned  by  the  priests  and  Pharisees  in 
council  (John  11  :  47,  48)  for  putting  Jesus  to  death  (whom  they  hated 
for  exposing  their  rottenness,  and  insisting  upon  repentance)  was,  that  by 
acknowledging  Him  as  their  King,  they  should  bring  the  Koman  power 
upon  themselves,  which  would  destory  "  both  our  place  and  nation." 
Here  certainly  was  lack  of  faith  in  a  Theocratic  King  and  Kingdom.  And 
on  this  very  charge  was  He  arraigned  before  Pilate  (Luke  23  :  2,  3)  ;  thus 
hatred  causing  them  to  choose  Cmsar,  instead  of  "  Christ,  a  King.''  Let 
the  reader  reflect  :  their  guilt  was  aggravated  by  a  knowledge  of  the 
covenanted  Kingdom,  of  a  covenanted  Messiah  in  David's  line  able  to 
protect  against  all  earthly  power,  and  hence  their  malignity  was  manifested 
in  causing  the  death  of  One  who  gave  all  the  predicted  evidences  of 
Messiahship,  and  i7i  taking  adiumtage  of  the  very  tender  of  this  Kingdom 
to  them  in  procuring  His  condemnation.  Their  knowledge  of  the  cove- 
nants and  prophets,  their  acquaintance  with  the  works  of  Christ,  made  the 
rejection  the  more  deliberate  and  cruel.  Knowing  the  claims  of  the  pre- 
dicted Messiah,  knowing  that  if  He  ever  came  He  should  be  truly  a  King 
on  David's  restored  throne — this  makes  the  charge  produced  by  them  and 
their  conduct  in  the  matter  the  more  dastardly  and  inexcusable.  What 
was  offered  in  mercy  and  love,  they  make  the  basis  of  accusation  and  death. 

This  condition  of  repentance,  as  essential  to  the  bestowment  of  a  Theocracy  im- 
posed, is  the  key  to  the  private  nature  of  Christ's  miracles.  Unbelievers  ask  why  they 
were  not  more  conspicuous,  etc.  The  design  was  to  give  sufiicient  evidence  to  satisfy 
His  claim  to  Messianic  power  and  dignity  ;  hence  the  miracles  performed  in  connection 
with  this  preaching.  If,  however,  on  the  other  hand.  He  had  publicly,  like  Moses,  at 
Jerusalem  performed  miracle  after  miracle  of  an  astounding  nature,  he  would  have  pre- 
cipitated the  nation,  without  being  morally  qualified,  into  an  effort  (as  even  in  His  re- 
serve was  adverted  to,  John  6  :  15)  to  make  Him  King  by  force,  tlius  bringing  on  a  re- 
bellion against  the  Roman  Government.  The  exhibition  of  the  miraculous  was  graduated 
by  this   condition  of  repentance.     The  delicacy  of  Jesus— foreknowing  the  result — in 


Prop.  57.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  377 

avoiding,  by  withdrawal  and  retirement,  to  bring  the  nation  into  revolt  against  and  con- 
flict with  the  Roman  Empire,  is  most  admirable,  and  serves  to  exj)lain  a  number  of 
events  in  His  life. 

Ohs.  3,  Pressense  {The  Redeemer)  has  several  chapters  on  "  The  Prepara- 
tion for  Christianity,"  and  takes  the  position,  as  announced  in  his  Preface  : 
"  In  my  view,  that  preparation  consisted  solely  m  developing  the  desire  of 
salvation.'"  We  apprehend  that  here  is  a  great  mistake,  as  plain  fact 
proves.  Thousands  before  the  Advent  desired  salvation,  but  did  not 
obtain  it  ;  feiu  at  the  Advent  entertained  it  so  strongly  tliat  they  were 
willi)ig  to  acquiesce  in  God's  mode  of  securing  it,  for  the  multitude  re- 
jected and  crucified  Christ,  and  by  their  very  conduct  showed  that  other 
motives,  other  desires,  were  stronger  than  those  alleged  by  Pressense.  The 
facts  disprove  the  theory.  If  tlie  nation  had  repented  and  received  Jesus 
as  the  Messiah,  then,  and  only  then,  wottld  it  be  true,  but  as  it  did  not, 
such  a  preparation  is  imagi^iary. 

See  e.g.  what  Mosheim,  Neander,  Killen,  Kurtz,  and  others  say  of  the  actual  con- 
dition of  the  Jews,  sunken  into  degeneracy,  divided  into  hostile  parties,  eager  for  Roman 
patronage,  etc.  The  simple  Bible  truth  is  this  :  the  Word  predicts  the  unsuccessful  nature 
of  Christ's  tender  of  the  Kingdom,  the  unbelief  of  the  nation,  that  He  shall  be  despised, 
rejected,  etc.  The  nation  itself  is  suffering  continued  punishment  for  its  unbelief.  The 
desire  for  salvation  was  only  such  as  wicked  men  now  joossess,  viz.  :  a  willingness  to  be 
saved  in,  and  not  from,  their  sins.  A  proper  desire,  excepting  in  a  few,  was  not  culti- 
vated. Hence,  many  writers  blunder  when  adverting  to  this  subject,  forgetting  that 
both  Advents,  the  First  and  the  Second,  are  represented  as  finding  the  people  arrayed 
against  the  Christ.  For  even  at  the  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  when  Jesus  comes  again 
"  unto  salvation,"  we  find  that  the  world,  instead  of  desiring  salvation,  will  be  in  open 
hostilit}'  to  the  Messianic  claims.  Both  Advents  fall  under  the  same  Divine  procedure, 
and  we  must  look  deeper  than  this  for  the  real  preparation.  The  secret  of  the  matter 
lies  in  the  Divine  Purpose,  foretold  already  by  Moses,  Deut.  33  :  21,  who,  instead  of  pre- 
dicting a  desire  for  salvation,  prophesied  the  unbelief  and  rebellion  of  God's  chosen  people 
and  their  punishment  until  a  period  of  trial  had  passed,  and  that,  notwithstanding  the 
same,  God  would  gather  out  a  people  who  shall  desire,  and  ultimately  participate  in, 
this  salvation.  The  Divine  Purpose  accommodated  itself  in  the  Plan  of  Redemption  to 
these  foreseen  exhibitions  of  national  depravity.  The  times  of  the  Gentiles  were  intro- 
duced, not  because  of  the  desire  of  salvation  previously  fostered  in  the  Jewish  nation, 
but  because  (as  Paul  in  Rom.  11)  of  unbelief,  the  veil  over  their  eyes,  their  fall.  The 
idea  of  there  having  been  prej^arations  going  on  and  culminating  at  that  period  is  in- 
deed a  correct  one,  as  other  writers  have  noticed  (in  language,  facilities  of  intercourse, 
general  peace,  etc.),  for  prophecy  indicates  this  ;  but  it  possesses  a  different  aspect  and 
must  be  placed  on  other  grounds.  The  error  of  some  writers  consists  in  this  :  having 
no  proper  conception  of  another  and  coming  dispensation  here  on  the  earth,  in  whicli 
salvation  is  to  be  realized,  they  make  the  faith,  hope,  and  earnests  of  salvation  the  salva- 
tion itself,  and  under  the  influence  of  this  misapprehension  indulge  themselves  in  cor- 
responding laudatory  flights,  opposed  alike  to  fact  and  the  Word. 

Ohs.  4.  Til  is  Kingdom  was  offered  to  the  nation  in  good  faith,  i.e.  it 
would  have  been  bestowed  provided  the  nation  had  repented.  The  fore- 
known result  made  no  difference  in  the  tender  of  it,  so  far  as  the  free 
agency  of  the  nation  is  concerned  ;  that  result  flowed  from  a  voluntary 
choice.  The  national  unbelief  did  not  change  God's  faithftilness,  Rom. 
3:3.  It  would  be  derogatory  to  the  mission  of  Christ  to  take  any  other 
view  of  it,  and  the  sincerity  and  desire  of  Jesus  that  the  nation  might 
accept,  is  witnessed  in  His  tears  over  Jerusalem,  in  His  address  to  it,  in 
His  unceasing  labors,  in  sending  out  the  twelve  and  the  seventy,  and  in 
His  works  of  mercy  and  love.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  Jews  had  the 
privilege  accorded  to  them  of  accepting  the  Kingdom,  and  if  the  condition 


378  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  57. 

annexed  to  it  had  been  complied  with,  then  the  Kingdom  of  David  would 
have  been  most  gloriously  re-established  under  the  Messiah. 

The  question,  How,  then,  would  the  atonement  have  been  made  by  the  shedding  of 
blood  ?  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  sincerity  of  this  offer,  for  ' '  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God  "  would  have  been  equal  to  the  emergency,  either  by  antedating  to  some 
other  period,  or  by  providing  for  it  previously  ;  or  in  some  other,  to  us  unknown,  way. 
As  it  was,  God's  purposes,  His  determinate  counsel,  are  shaped  by  what  w^  a  foreseen 
voluntary  choice  of  the  nation.  God's  mercy  was  willing  to  bestow,  but  the  nation's 
depravity  j)revented  the  gift.  That  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  established  had  the 
nation  believed,  is  evident  from  Deut.,  ch.  32,  2  Chron.  7  :  12-22,  Isa.  48  :  18,  Ps.  81  : 8- 
16,  etc.  Dealing  with  facts,  we  are  not  concerned  with  contingencies.  Compare  Ooster- 
zee's  Cli.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  523,  and  Augustine  quoted  by  him,  and  Augustine  and  Gregory 
the  Great  as  quoted  by  Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  j).  351. 

In  the  programme  of  unbelief  we  find  it  asserted  by  the  Duke  of  Somerset  {Ch.  Theol. 
and  Mod.  Sleep.,  p.  139)  that  "  the  disbelief  of  the  Jews  in  Jesus  was  indisiDcnsable  to 
the  scheme  of  the  atonement" — language  even  incautiously  used  by  some  believers. 
This  is  disproven  by  this  tender  of  the  Kingdom,  by  the  prevailing  tenor  of  the  Word, 
and  by  the  guilt  of  the  nation  not  being  compromised  or  lessened  through  such  a  fiction. 
It  is  unauthorized  assumption,  Paul's  argument  in  Romans  proceeds  on  the  supposition 
that  the  nation  had  the  power  of  choice,  that  it  wilfully  chose  the  evil,  and  that  God  in 
mercy  overruled  its  fall  for  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles.  They  stumbled  and  fell,  not 
through  necessity,  and  not  because  God's  Purpose  required  it,  but  solely  through  their 
own  unbelief  ;  and  God's  Plan,  as  the  Omniscient,  embraced  the  same  as  a  foreknown 
result,  and  made  provision  accordingly.  This  feature  also  meets  a  Jewish  objection. 
Thus  e.g.  Levi  (Disserts.,  vol.  1,  p.  120)  says  :  "  They  (Christian  Apologists)  cannot 
produce  one  single,  clear,  unequivocal  prophecy  of  the  Old  Test,  which  foretells  a 
twofold  coming  of  one  and  the  same  person  as  the  Messiah,"  etc.  This  arises  simply 
from  the  fact  that,  as  this  offer  was  to  be  made  at  the  First  Advent,  the  prophecies  are 
guardedly  (see  Proj).  55,  Obs.  7,  and  Prop.  34)  given,  and  at  the  same  time  sufiiciently 
distinctive  to  show  that  at  the  First  Advent,  as  occurred,  the  Messiah  would  be  de- 
spised and  rejected  (Isa.  55,  Dan.  9  :  26). 

Obs.  5.  Able  writers  make  incautious  assertions  relative  to  this  period. 
Thus  e.g.  Oosterzee  {Theol.  Neiu  Test.,  p.  32)  on  this  point  says  :  "  The  cove- 
nant act  of  the  Theocracy  thus  founded  was  the  lawgiving  at  Sinai  ;  its  seat 
tlie  Sanctuary  ;  its  end,  not  the  rising  of  the  Kingdom,  by  which  it  was 
modified,  t)ut  the  destruction  of  tlie  Israelitish  state;  its  highest  benefit, 
finally,  was  the  appearing  of  Him  who  put  an  end  to  the  wall  of  separation 
between  Israel  and  tlie  natio7is.'^  According  to  the  express  promises  an- 
nexed by  Moses  (Prop.  26)  to  Deut.  32,  its  end  was  not  such  as  Oosterzee 
states,  for  it  was  designed  for  blessing  and  not  for  such  a  destruction. 
The  end  alleged  by  him  was  brought  about,  not  by  the  tender  of  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom  (much  less  by  a  Kingdom  not  then  in  existence),  not  by  the 
appearing  of  Christ  in  itself,  but  is  invariably  attributed  to  ttie  nation^s 
u}ibelief.  If  we  do  not  accept  of  the  solution  given  by  revelation,  and  put 
the  fall  of  the  nation  luJiere  God  places  it,  yiz. :  not  in  His  purposing  or 
designing  it,  but  in  tJieir  own  imbeliefy  we  introduce  an  antagonism  into 
the  Divine  Plan,  inconsistent  with  the  universal  ideps  of  justice  and  love, 
and  invite,  unnecessarily,  the  sneers  of  infidelity.  Besides  this,  the  end 
contemplated  has  not  yet  come  ;  let  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  end,  and  let 
this  nation  again  be  restored,  and  then  will  the  Theocracy  be  restored,  and 
refute  such  fallacies. 


PkOP.  58.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  379 


PpwOpositio:n"    58.   Jesus^    toward    the    close    of   His    ministry^ 
preached  that  the  Kingdom  was  not  nigh. 

If,  indeed,  tlie  covenanted  Davidic  Kingdom  is  offered,  and  that 
tender  is  rejected  through  unwillingness  to  repent,  then  it  follows^ 
from  the  foreknowledge  lodged  in  Jesus,  that  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect  some  such  procedure.  The  statement  in  the  Proposition  is 
abundantly  confirmed.  Just  so  soon  as  the  representatives  of  the 
nation  met  in  council  and  conspired  to  put  Jesus  to  death,  then^ 
released  fi'om  the  first  part  of  His  mission.  His  style  of  preaching 
also  changed.  Instead  of  proclaiming  that  the  Kingdom  was  nigh 
to  the  nation,  He  now  du-ectly  intimates  and  declares  that  it  was 
not  nigh.  Matt.  21  :  43,  "The  kingdom  of  God  shall  he  taken  from 
you  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof  ^^^^  is 
ah'eady  conclusive  (as  will  be  shown  hereafter),  confirmed  as  it  is 
by  other  passages. 

Ols.  1.  The  importance  of  this  point,  so  much  overlooked  by  com- 
mentators and  theologians,  will  justify  additional  proof.  Thus  e.g.  take 
the  parable  of  the  marriage  of  the  King's  son,  Matt.  22  :  1-14,  given  just 
after  (Matt.  21  :  43),  He  declared  that  the  Kingdom  should  be  taken 
from  them,  and  we  have  :  (1)  The  Jeiuish  nation  bidden  but  refusing  the 
invitation  (showing  the  sincerity  of  the  offer,  etc.)  ;  (2)  if  the  invitation 
had  been  accepted,  the  marriage  would  have  taken  ])lace  ;  but  the  invited 
guests  refusing,  it  was  j^ostpoyied  until  other  guests  were  furnished  ;  (3)  the 
marriage  (i.e.  the  enthronement  to  the  Kingdom,  comp.  Prop.  169),  the 
wedding  (i.e.  the  inauguration  blessings  and  privileges,  the  Kingdom 
being  likened  to  a  feast.  Prop.  1G9),  were  no  Io?iger  nigh  to  these  invited 
ones  ;  (4)  the  marriage,  the  time  when  the  guests  are  scrutinized,  is  (as 
commentators  inform  us  correctly)  at  the  Sec.  Advent  of  this  King,  he7ice 
j)Ost2J07ied  nnfil  that  period.  Again  :  the  parable  of  the  Great  Supper, 
Luke  14  :  15-24,  has  also  reference  to  this  fact.  It  was  suggested  by  the 
saying,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,'^  i.e.  in 
this  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  for  such  was  the  meaning  attached  to 
the  phrase.  Jesus,  in  reply,  expressively  shows  how  this  Kingdom  was 
received.  The  persons  (Jews)  specially  invited  to  this  "great  supper" 
(i.e.  to  the  blessings  of  this  Kingdom)  rejected  the  invitation,  for  "  they  all 
with  one  consent  began  to  make  excuse,"  and  other  guests  are  to  be 
invited,  urged  to  conie  and  enjoy  it,  whilst  "  none  of  those  men  which 
were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  supper,"  i.e.  it  luas  no  longer  nigh  to  those 
invited.  The  calling  of  other  guests  now  (still  going  on)  takes  the  place 
of  the  first  invitation — a  new  exigency  and  preparation  being  evolved — and 
the  supper,  until  these  guests  are  obtained  (Prop.  65)  is  postponed  to  the 
Sec.  Advent  (Prop.  169). 


380  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  58. 

The  critical  student  may  i^erliaps  ask  what  Gospel  do  we  follow  in  its  chronological 
order.  Our  preference  is  Matthew  (so  Ebrard,  Gosp.  His.,  as  Calvin,  Bengel,  etc.),  where 
Jesus  declares  His  rejection  shortly  after  the  sending  forth  of  the  disciples  to  preach.  But 
we  can  (v/ith  Wieseler  and  others)  take  Luke,  or  even  any  of  the  others  (as  we  shall  show  in 
Prop.  187),  with  the  same  result.  For  this  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  so  constantly 
ignored  by  Christian  AjDologists,  is  a  most  powerful  factor  in  the  criticism,  both  of  the 
Gospel  writings  and  the  Gospel  History.  It  conclusively  proves  that  the  great  object  of 
the  writers,  in  all  of  them,  was  to  show — (1)  That  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  ;  (2)  why  the 
Messianic  Kingdom  was  delayed  ;  when  and  through  whom  it  shall  be  established.  The 
idea  of  a  postponement  (even  contained  in  the  references  to  a  future  coming  of  Himself 
in  glor3%  and  which  caused  the  question  of  the  disciples  in  Matt.  24  : 3  resjiecting  His 
future  coming),  must  have  singularly  impressed  the  disciples,  owing  to  their  utter 
inability  to  reconcile  it  with  His  death.  Without  comment,  they  give  us  a  complete  his- 
tory of  the  facts  as  they  existed,  and  do  not  conceal  the  perplexity  in  which  they  were 
involved,  owing  to  their  having  allied  to  the  First  Advent  promises  which  are  only  to  be 
realized  at  the  Second. 

Obs.  2.  But  we  have  more  explicit  announcements.  Thus,  Luke  19  :  41- 
44,  in  which  is  found  :  (1)  Jesus  weeping  over  the  city  ;  (2)  the  things 
which  belonged  unto  their  peace,  being  rejected,  were  hid  from  them  ;  (3) 
the  evil  results  of  their  unbelief,  in  being  given  over  to  their  enemies  and 
continuing  under  ther  power  ;  (4)  this  great  evil  brought  upon  them 
because  they  appreciated  not  the  offer  made,  because  ''  thou  knewest  not 
the  time  of  thy  visitation."  Here,  instead  of  a  Kingdom,  is  presented  a 
direftil  threatening  of  fearful  incoming  evils.  Again  :  in  Matt.  23  :  37,  38, 
w^e  have  :  (1)  the  rejection  of  His  message,  evinced  by  the  treatment  of 
those  sent  ;  (2)  Christ's  earnest  desire  that  they  might  receive  it  ;  (3)  but 
"  they  would  not,"  indicating  a  voluntary  rejection  ;  (4)  then  "  the  house 
left  desolatef^  no  restoration  being  granted  ;  (5)  and  Christ's  tuithdraiual 
from  them  for  a  time  ;  (6)  so  that,  instead  of  a  Kingdom  coming  then  to 
them,  dispersion  and  the  destruction  of  the  city  is  determined,  owing  to 
their  unrepentant  state. 

It  was  in  view  of  this  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  this  refusal  to  repent,  that  the  sign  of 
Jonah  was  specified  by  Jesus  in  Matt.  12  :  38-41.  Persons  have  sought  for  an  analogy 
between  the  sign  of  Jonah  to  that  generation  and  that  of  the  Son  of  man.  Much  that  is 
unsatisfactory  (by  believers,  who  refer  it  to  death  and  the  resurrection,  forgetting  that 
Jonah  was  alive,  etc.)  and  witless  (by  iinbelievers,  who  ridicule  it  as  a  standing  joke) 
has  been  said  and  written.  Many  confess  their  utter  inability  to  see  where  the  analogy 
is  to  be  found.  Thus  e.g.  a  writer  in  The  Sj^ecfator  (and  LitteWs  Liv.  Age)  for  1872 
(Art.  "  Fred.  Deu.  Maurice"),  after  stating  that  Maurice  "  admitted  that  he  could  not 
understand  the  analogy  between  Jonah's  three  days'  burial  in  the  fish  and  our  Lord's 
three  days'  burial,"  adds  :  "  He  (Maurice)  would  not  admit  that  he  believed  the  Evange- 
list to  have  made  a  mistake,  and  to  have  attributed  a  fanciful  analogy  of  his  own  to  liis 
Master."  Maurice,  professing  himself  unable  to  explain,  was  correct  in  rejecting  the 
notion  of  "  a  fanciful  analogy"  concocted  by  Matthew.  The  preaching  of  this  Kingdom 
on  condition  of  repentance,  and  the  refusal  to  repent,  explains  and  enforces  the  anal- 
ogy. The  simplicity  of  the  analogy  has  caused  it  to  be  overlooked.  To  realize  its  force 
we  must  place  ourselves  on  Jewish  ground  in  the  position  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
who  demanded  a  sign.  The  Kingdom  was  offered  ;  a  sign  was  required,  by  those 
unwilling  to  repent,  against  (v.  41,  42)  all  reasonable  evidence  already  afforded.  Jesus 
virtually  and  emi:>hatically  tells  them  that  the  only  sign  which  they  deserved  is  the  sign  of 
unbelief  Jonah  was  three  days  and  nights  in  the  fish's  belly,  owing  to  unbelief  so  Jesus, 
for  the  same  period,  was  in  the  grave  because  of  Jewish  unbelief  The  one  was  evidence 
of  Unbelief,  the  other  also,  so  that  the  declaration  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  nation 
would  not  repent  but  be  the  means  of  Christ's  death.  This  is  confirmed  by  what  imme- 
diately follows. 

Ods.  3,  The  evidence  on  this  point  is  strong  and  cumulative,  and  there 
are  given  even  clearer  exhibitions  than  the  preceding.     In  Luke  21  :  31  is 


Prop.  58.]  the  theocratic  kit^-gdom.  381 

something  decisive,  when  apprehended  in  the  light  of  the  immediate  con- 
text. After  describing  the  destruction  of  the  temple  {v.  6,  20),  the  days  of 
vengeance  (v.  22,  23),  the  captivity  and  dispersion  of  the  nation  (v.  24), 
the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem  "  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fnl- 
fiUecl "  (v.  24),  the  Advent  of  the  Son  of  Man  (v.  27),  the  approach  of  our 
redemption  (v.  28),  the  signs  of  a  coming  deliverance  (v.  28,  29,  30),  the 
Saviour  adds  :  ''So  likeiuise  ye,  when  ye  see  these  things  come  to  pass,  know 
ye  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand.^^  At  the  beginning  of  His 
ministry,  it  was  relatively  nigh  (as  we  have  shown)  ;  the  offer  was  simply 
conditioned  by  repentance  ;  and  being  left  to  their  choice,  no  long  interval, 
as  here  intimated,  must  take  place  before  it  is  nigh  to  them.  Now,  how- 
ever, since  His  death  was  actually  contemplated  by  the  representatives  of 
the  nation,  the  offer  is  withdrawn,  and  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom, 
its  not  being  nigh  to  them,  is  directly  stated  by  an  enumeration  of  certain 
events  which  are  jjvevioKsly  to  take  place  before  it  is  nigh  again.  Let  the 
reader  examine  these  events,  and  he  will  find  that  not  one  of  them,  occurred 
between  the  delivery  of  the  prediction  and  the  death  of  Christ  ;  hence 
the  Kingdom  was  not  yet  come.  But  more  :  none  of  them  took  place  be- 
tween tlieir  utterance  and  the  day  of  Pentecost  ;  hence  the  Kingdom  Avas 
not  established.  This,  in  which  all  are  agreed  as  to  the  non-occurrence  of 
the  events,  is  all  that  is  needed  thus  far  in  our  argument. 

But  in  this  passage  and  context  we  have  more  than  this  :  two  things  maj^  well  call 
for  consideration.  (1)  Let  the  reader  reflect  upon  the  Jewish  idea  of  "the  Coming 
One"  and  "  the  world  to  come,"  etc.,  and  then  notice  that  the  questions  of  the  disciples 
resi)ecting  His  coming  and  the  end  of  this  age  imply  the  notion  of  the  introduction  of 
the  Messianic  Kingdom.  The  reply  indicates  no  such  introduction,  but  a  continued  series 
of  events,  long  continued  (for  this  passage  and  Matt.  24  and  25  and  Mark  13  contain  an 
epitomized  history  of  this  dispensation  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent),  before  the  Kingdom 
again  comes  nigh.  (2)  Next,  consider  the  events  enumerated,  and  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  which  occiuTed  thirty  or  forty  years  afterward  ;  the  captivity  and  dispersion 
of  the  Jews,  the  domination  of  the  Gentiles  over  the  city  during  the  times  of  the  Gentiles, 
etc.,  are  mentioned,  all  of  which  are  still  in  the  course  of  fulfilment,  and  consequently 
^^as  we  advocate)  the  Kingdom  (which  could  only  again  be  nigh  "  u'hen  these  tilings  come 
to  pass")  is  still  in  the  future.  Comp.  some  excellent  remarks  by  Philo,  Basilicus  (Judge 
Jones,  of  Philadelphia)  in  Essays  on  the  Coming  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  {Literxdisf,  vol.  3, 
p.  32).  Jones  says  :  "  If  it  should  be  said  that  hy  ^  these  things'  we  must  understand 
some  of  these  things,  the  answer  is,  that  would  be  adding  to  Scripture,  not  expounding 
it  ;  besides,  it  would  not  remove  the  difficulty,  because  we  have  no  evidence  that  any  of 
these  things  came  to  pass  before  the  commencement  of  the  present  dispensation.  If  it 
should  be  said  (as  it  sometimes  is)  that  all  these  predictions  relate  to  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  the  difficulty  remains,  for  certainly  the  present  dispensation  commenced  long 
before  that  event.  Not  only  had  the  Gospel  been  promulgated  throughout  the  Eoman 
Emi^ire,  but  almost  the  whole  of  the  New  Test,  was  written  before  that  event,  and 
several  of  the  apostles,  among  whom  were  James,  Peter,  and  Paul,  had  suffered  mart^-r- 
dom.  If  it  be  said  that  (v.  34  jDroves)  these  things  must  have  been  fulfilled  within  the 
life  time  of  the  men  then  living,  the  answer  is, 'that  this  verse  must  be  interpreted  so  as 
to  be  consistent  with  the  facts  of  the  case."  After  mentioning  the  facts,  he  adds  : 
"  Besides,  the  Word  translated  generation  signifies  race  in  this  j)lace,  as  may  be  easily 
proved,  and  it  was  so  understood  by  Jerome,  who  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  competent 
judge  of  the  meaning  of  the  Latin  word  generaiioy 

With  this  opinion  agree  Clarke  and  numerous  other  commentators,  who  read  v.  34  : 
"This  nation  shall  not  pass  (i.e.  be  rooted  out,  etc.)  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled."' 
The  idea  being  that  the  fulfilment  is  linked  with  the  destiny  of  the  nation,  and  that  there- 
fore, notwithstanding  their  scattering  and  dreadful  persecutions,  it  would  be  preserved. 
As  this  verse  is  frequently  employed  against  us,  it  will  be  well,  in  view  of  the  frequent  use 
made  of  the  chapter  containing  it,  to  add  some  particulars  to  those  given  under  another 
heading.  To  indicate  the  varieties  of  meanings  attached  to  the  passage,  making  it  in  full 
agreement  with  our  views,  we  give  the  following  :  Jerome  applies  it  either  to  the  human 


382  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  58. 

race  or  particularly  to  the  Jewish  ;  Calovius,  Mede,  Dorner,  Stier,  Nast,  Alford,  Faber, 
etc.,  to  the  Jewish  nation  ;  Wordsworth,  etc.,  to  the  literal  Israel  (as  a  race)  and  to  the 
Si3iritual  Israel  (as  the  same);  Origen,  Chrysostom,  Paulus,  Lange,  etc.,  to  the  believers 
(as  a  race),  as  indicated  in  v.  33.  Other  interpretations  are  given,  as  e.g.  that  (so  Elliott, 
Barbour,  Lord,  etc.)  it  refers  to  the  future  generation  then  living,  making  it  parallel 
with  Luke  21  :  31,  32,  "  when  ye  shall  see  ;"  Luke  17  :  34,  "  this  night,"  etc.  Some  (as 
Byrant,  etc.)  think  the  key  is  found  in  vs.  33  of  the  preceding  ch.,  in  "  this  generation 
of  vipers, "'  indicative  of  a  continued  unbelief.  The  reverse  of  this  is  given  by  others 
(as  Rutter,  etc.),  who  make  it  "  the  generation  of  the  righteous,"  referring  to  the  perpe- 
tuity ot  the  faithful  or  of  the  church  ;  or  (as  Lange),  "  the  generation  of  Christians,  as  a 
generation  of  those  who  wait  for  Christ  never  pass  away. "  (Lange's  view  is  a  revival 
of  De  Syra's.)  Piscator,  Erasmus,  etc.  render  generation  by  cetas  or  age.  Brookes 
(Maranatha,  p.  68)  refers  to  quotations,  showing  that  the  word  translated  "  fulfilled  "  is 
often  used  to  denote  the  beginning  of  an  event  without  expressing  its  completion,  so  that 
it  would  read,  if  retaining  the  limited  idea  of  generation  :  "  This  generat'on  shall  not  pass 
till  ah  these  ihinr/s  (the  predicted  desolations  of  Israel,  terminating  with  His  Sec. 
Coming)  begin  to  be  fulfilled."  (This  is  the  opinion  of  Luther,  Cunningham,  Bush, 
Van  Oosterzee,  Ebrard,  and  others.)  Bickersteth  and  others  refer  the  verse  simply  as 
including  the  overthrow  of  the  temple  and  Jerusalem.  The  meaning  of  the  words 
"  generation"  and  "  fulfilled,"  as  given  in  Lexicons,  in  Commentaries,  and  in  other 
renderings,  make  such  interpretations  justifiable.  Hodge  {Sys.  Div.,  vol.  3,  p.  799)  says  : 
"  There  is  high  authority  for  making  '  generation  '  refer  to  Israel  as  a  people  or  race  ;" 
the  same  is  true  of  others.  We  cannot  admit  the  limited  notion  of  generation  without 
allowing  (unless  we  adopt  the  idea  of  "  age"  or  "  beginning  to  be  fulfilled  ")  the  claims 
of  Rationalistic  criticism,  which  asserts,  truthfully,  that  these  predictions  were  not  ful- 
filled within  the  bounds  of  an  ordinary  generation.  (Comp.  Alford,  Lange,  Stier,  Nast, 
etc. ;  Brookes's  Maranatha,  p.  67  ;  Cumming's  Great  Tribulation,  pp.  157,  159  ;  Proph. 
Times,  vol.  6,  p.  76  and  p.  205  ;  Seiss's  Last  Times,  Ap,  ;  Literalist,  vol.  3,  p.  160  ;  Lord's 
Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal,  July,  1854,  p.  161,  etc. 

Obs.  4.  Luke  19  :  11-27  forcibly  demonstrates  our  Proposition.  Jesus 
uttered  this  parable  "  because  they  thought  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  should 
immediately  appear.'"  In  His  reply  there  is  no  intimation  (as  is  unjustly 
inferred,  comp.  Prop.  110)  that  the  Jews  were  mistaken  in  their  idea  of 
the  Kingdom,  and  that,  if  modern  notions  are  correct,  the  Kingdom  had 
already  come  and  was  established.  If  this  had  been  so,  then  the  answer  of 
Jesus  would  be  cruelly  irrelevant ;  but  with  the  proper  conception  of  the 
Kingdom  it  is  finely  consistent  and  forcibly  expressed.  For  there  is  (as 
there  could  not  be)  no  declaration  that  they  were  wrong  in  believing  that 
the  Kingdom  which  they  expected,  the  Messianic,  teas  still  in  the  future. 
They  were  only  mistaken  in  the  opinion,  carefully  announced,  "  that  the 
Kingdom,  of  God  should  immediately  appear.''^  ]N'ow  the  parable  is  given  to 
correct  this  belief  in  tJie  immediate  setting  up  of  the  Kingdom,  to  indicate 
that  it  would  not  soon  appear,  but  only  after  an  undefined  period  of  time 
had  elapsed.  For  He  represents  Himself  as  a  nobleman,  who,  having  a 
right  to  the  Kingdom,  goes  "  into  a  far  country  to  receive'^  (to  have  His 
title  confirmed)  "/or  Himself  a  Kingdom^and  to  return.^^  During  His 
absence  His  servants  "  occupy  till  I  come."  Then  after  an  interval  of 
time,  not  definitely  stated,  the  period  having  come  to* enter  upon  His 
reign,  having  received  the  Kingdom,  He  returns,  judgment  follows,  and 
those  who -rejected  Him  (saying,  "we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign 
over  us")  are  destroyed.  Here  we  have  :  (1)  the  Jews  thought  that  the 
Kingdom  would  noiu  appear  ;  (2)  but  it  ivas  not  nigh,  for  {ci)  He  would 
leave,  {b)  they  had  refused  His  proffered  reign,  (c)  those,  however,  who 
were  devoted  to  Him  should  "  occupy"  until  He  returned,  {d)  during  His 
absence  there  was  no  Kingdom,  being  gone  to  receive  the  power  to 
reign  ;  (3)  He  Avould  return  and  then  manifest  His  acquired  power  (Prop. 


Prop.  58.]  the  theocratic  kiistgdox.  383 

83)  in  the  establishment  of  His  Kingdom.     Thus  we  have  the  absence,  and 
then  "  the  apj^earing  and  Kingdom''^  of  Christ. 

This  parable  first  seriously  directed  the  attention  of  Greswell  (  Work  on  Parables,  vol. 
4,  p.  419-514)  to  the  Millenary  dispensation,  and  confirmed  his  faith  in  the  Primitive 
Church  view  of  the  Kingdom  to  be  set  up  at  Christ's  return.  He  justly  remarked  that  it 
was  impossible  to  explain  it  "  satisfactorily  and  consistently  upon  any  other  principle  than 
that  of  a  reference  to  the  Millenary  dispensation,"  etc.  This  is  corroborated  by  the  con- 
tradictory statements  of  commentators  and  others,  who  spiritualize  this  Kingdom,  and 
have  it  existing  either  under  Christ's  ministry  or  at  His  ascension.  Thus  e.g.  Barnes, 
loci,  after  having  repeatedly  told  lis  that  the  Kingdom  had  already  come,  that  multitudes 
pressed  into  it,  etc.,  flatly  contradicts  his  former  bold  inferences  by  saying  that  "  the 
reign  of  the  Messiah  should  immediately  commence,  He  spake  the  parable  to  correct 
that  expectation."  But  how  reconcile  it  with  his  own  statements?  Thus:  "By  the 
nobleman  is  undoubtedly  represented  the  Messiah,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  by  His 
going  into  a  far  country'  is  denoted  His  going  to  heaven,  to  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father,  before  Be  should  fully  set  up  the  Kingdom  and  establish  His  reign  among  men." 
Lisco  {On  the  Parables,  p.  398)  correctly  observes  "  that  this  Kingdom  should  be  imme- 
diately, without  any  further  delay,  set  up,  against  which  the  intimation  in  the  parable  is 
directed,  that  it  should  necessarily  be  a  long  time  before  the  return  of  the  nol)leman," 
but  vitiates  the  force  of  it  by  putting  into  the  parable  what  it  does  not,  even  by  implica- 
tion, teach,  viz  :  "  He  (Jesus)  will  give  full  manifestation  of  it  (the  Kingdom)  from 
heaven.' '  Numerous  illustrations  of  this  character  could  be  given,  but  these  will  suffice 
to  show  how  men,  under  a  false  theory  of  the  Kingdom,  labor  to  reconcile  this  parable 
with  a  spiritualistic  conception  by  introducing  that  which,  on  its  face  and  intent,  it 
utterly  repudiates.  Attention  might  be  called  to  other  passages,  especially  Luke  17  : 
20-37  (see  Prop.  110),  but  as  these  will  be  brought  up  in  connection  with  other  Proposi- 
tions, this  proof  must,  for  the  present,  content  us.  For,  taking  these  together,  and  ob- 
serving their  uniform  testimony,  they  already  suffice  to  establish  our  Proposition. 

Obs,  5.  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  Christ  only  openly  predicted  His 
sufferings  and  death  toward  the  close  of  His  ministry,  Matt.  20  :  17-20, 
John  12  :  32-34,  etc.  This  was  desig7iedh/  done,  and  accords  with  our 
position.  The  Kingdom  was  offered  according  to  the  promise  made  to  the 
Fathers.  Being  a  minister  of  the  circumcision  to  confirm  the  promises, 
this  tender,  embracing  the  most  precious  of  the  promises,  was  necessarily 
included.  When  He  was  rejected,  and  efforts  were  made  to  destroy  Him, 
then  He  was  free  to  unfold  what  God  had  farther  purjoosed  in  view  of,  and 
to  overrule,  this  rejection. 

The  critical  student  will  also  notice  another  peculiarity,  viz. :  that  before  it  was  fully 
determined  by  the  chief  men  of  the  nation  to  kill  Jesus,  He  was  far  more  free  in  com- 
municating in  private  than  in  His  public  discourses.  Judge  Jones  ("  Philo-Basilicus," 
Essays,  Literalist,  vol.  3,  p.  62-64)  has  noticed  this,  and  assigns  some  excellent  reasons 
for  His  observing  such  a  distinction.  The  main  one  has  already  been  given  by  us.  To 
strangers,  as  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  the  Centurion,  Zacchaeus,  He  revealed  from  the 
first  more  concerning  the  future  purposes  of  God  pertaining  to  the  rejection  of  the  Jews 
and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  than  He  did  to  His  own  disciples  before  the  conspiracy 
of  the  Jews,  thus  evincing  both  His  Divine  foreknowledge  and  His  wonderful  tact  in 
keeping  His  disciples  in  the  most  favorable  position  and  mental  condition  to  preach  the 
offer  of  the  Kingdom.  This  entire  procedure,  as  related  in  the  GosjDels,  is  one  of  those 
unintentional  but  most  forcible  evidences  of  divine  inspiration.  A  narration  which  so 
carefully  preserves  the  most  delicate  arrangements,  without  any  violation  of  propriety 
and  character  in  the  actors  of  a  complicated  drama  like  this,  can  only  be  accounted  for 
on  the  basis  already  assumed,  Prop.  5.  The  sincerity  of  Jesus  is  evidenced  (Matt.  23  :  37» 
Luke  19  :  42,  etc.),  the  covenanted  relationship  of  the  nation  is  preserved,  the  fact  of  its 
failure  to  repent  is  so  represented  that  the  foreknowledge  of  God  is  vindicated,  the  con- 
tingency of  the  offer  on  repentance  (Kom.  9  :  31-33,  and  10  :  8,  10,  21,  and  11  :  7,  23,  etc.) 
is  made  manifest,  the  Purpose  of  God  is  made  in  consideration  (Gal.  3  :  8,  Acts  2  :  23, 
etc.)  of  all  the  fores^'sn  circumstances  as  they  actually  arose,  the  faithfulness  of  God 
(Rom.  3  : 3,  4)  is  pr'     rved,  the  necessity  (to  raise  seed  unto  Abraham)  of  calling  and 


384  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  58. 

engrafting  the  Gentiles  is  shown — these  and  various  other  features  involved  are  all  so 
clearly  and  distinctly  given,  without  any  conflict  or  antagonism,  that  they  stamp  the 
book  containing  them  as  the  Word  of  God.  The  principles  and  interests  involved, 
although  pertaining  to  the  highest  and  noblest  known  to  man,  are  carefully  guarded  with 
incomparable  simplicity. 

Ohs.  6.  This  change  of  preaching  in  Jesus  has  been  noticed  by  Renan 
and  others,  and  they  lorongfuUy  attribute  it  to  a  change  of  plan  respecting 
the  Kingdom,  forced  upon  Him  by  attending  circumstances.  That  is, 
seeing  that  He  could  not  secure  the  throne  and  Kingdom  over  the  Jewish 
nation.  He  concluded  to  erect  a  more  spiritual  Kingdom.  Such  an 
opinion  cannot  be  legitimately  inferred,  and  it  overlooks  "the  most  jwsitivc 
joTOof  that  Christ,  instead  of  altering  His  view  of  the  Kingdom,  His 
rightful  claim  to  it,  His  intention  to  restore  the  Theocratic-Davidic 
throne,  only  j^ostj^onecl  its  execution  until  the  lapse  of  a  determined  j^eriod 
of  time.  Kenan  and  his  class  totally  ignore  the  abundance  of  Scripture 
assigning  tlie  reasons  for  joostponement,  just  as  if  they  had  no  existence. 

Such  a  mode  of  procedure,  a  revival  of  Porjohyry's  (Art.  on,  M'Clint.  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.),  unjust  to  the  Word  and  discreditable  to  honest  reasoning,  which  forbids  the 
Scriptures  to  testify  in  its  own  behalf,  is  becoming  very  prevalent.  The  position  of 
Jesus,  in  view  of  the  foreknown  rejection  of  the  Kingdom,  was  peculiar.  To  Him  the 
progress  of  events,  the  history  of  the  future  was  fully  known  ;  hence  down  to  the  very 
moment  of  His  proposed  arrest  by  the  representatives  of  the  Jewish  nation.  His  lan- 
guage, impelled  hy  regard  due  to  His  mission,  respecting  the  Kingdom  is  guarded,  and  if  we 
desire  to  appreciate  it,  to  attain  to  a  correct  apprehension  of  it,  we  must  keep  in  mind  the 
nature  of  that  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  its  offer  to  the  nation,  its  rejection 
by  those  who  had  the  controlling  influence,  its  postponement  until  a  Seed — the  elect, 
chosen  ones — of  Abraham  is  gathered  out,  and  its  final  re-establishment  at  the  Sec. 
Advent.  Then  the  attitude  and  words  of  Jesus  stand  out  with  new  propriety  and  force. 
This,  and  this  alone,  will  render  radiant  with  hope  many  a  passage  which  otherwise 
would  remain  dark. 

Obs.  7.  The  notion  entertained  by  some,  that  only  temporal  blessings 
and  rewards  were  offered  to  the  Jews  under  the  Levitical  economy,  is  also 
shown  (as  before  noticed),  by  the  tender  of  this  Kingdom  and  its  postpone- 
ment, to  be  erroneous.  In  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  temporal  blessings 
are  largely  annexed  to  it  (for  did  not  the  curse  greatly  deprive  us  of  them, 
and  if  Redemption  is  completed,  will  it  not  restore  them  ?)  ;  but  besides 
these,  there  are  special  and  inexpressible  great  spiritual  ones  connected 
with  them.  This,  as  we  advance,  will  become  more  and  more  appar- 
ent. The  Theocratic  rule  brings  God  Himself  into  national  relation- 
ship as  its  earthly  Ruler,  and  this  relationship  insures  present  and  fut- 
ure blessings,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  If  the  reader  will  but  reflect 
upon  the  Kingdom  offered  to  them — the  same  still  held  in  abeyance — upon 
the  events  requisite  for  its  re-establishment  (as  e.g.  the  resurrection,  the 
presence  of  God,  etc.),  upon  the  imagery  used  to  represent  its  blessings 
(as  e.g.  a  feast,  marriage,  etc.),  that  were  included  in  the  covenants  to  be 
ultimately  realized  by  the  elect,  he  will  at  once  perceive  that  the  The- 
ocratic ordering  necessarily  embraces  lotli  the  liigliest  temporal  and  spiritual 
Nessings  to  which  Redemption,  in  its  fullest,  ividest  reach,  extends.  The 
earnests  indicate  it ;  the  fruition,  under  the  coming  Messianic  reign, 
realizes  it. 

Ohs.  8.  In  view  of  this  foreknown  change  in  the  i.c.-^'^nhing  of  Jesus 
resulting  from  a  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  Chr.irt^^    ^  not  publicly 


Prop.  58.]  the  theocratic  ki^^gdom.  385 

assume  in  His  personal  ministry  the  title  of  "  the  ClirisV^  until  after  His 
betrayal,  Mark  14  :  62.  After  the  death  of  John  the  Baptist,  which 
already  foreshadowed  His  own  rejection  and  the  nation's  refusal  of  the 
tender,  of  the  Kingdom,  He  strictly  charged  His  disciples  to  tell  no  man 
that  He  was  "  tlie  Christ.''^  The  intimations  publicly  given  were  inferen- 
tial, and  might,  as  He  Himself  asserted,  be  adduced  from  His  works. 
Xew  this,  to  many  an  unaccountable  feature  (owing  to  their  making  the 
phrase  "the  Christ"  a  doctrinal  one  instead  of  regarding  it,  as  it  is,  His 
Kingly  title,  comp.  Prop.  205),  is  in  accord  with  our  position  ;  for  knowing 
His  rejection  as  "  the  Christ,'^  in  that  the  nation  refused  to  obey  the  con- 
dition annexed  to  the  obtaining  of  the  Kingdom,  it  would  only  have  af- 
forded the  greater  facilities  to  His  enemies  to  accuse  Him  as  a  rebel, 
etc.,  to  the  Roman  power. 

One  of  the  best  writers  on  this  point  is  Judge  Jones,  in  his  Notes  on  Scripture  (as  e.g. 
on  Matt.  16  :  20  and  23  : 8,  etc.),  and  in  his  Essays  (Philo-Basiliciis)  attached  to  vol.  3 
of  the  Literalist.  The  Judge,  with  his  fine  scholarship,  theological  learning,  and  eminent 
legal  abilities,  was  well  calculated  to  see  and  bring  out  points  unnoticed  by  the  large 
class  of  expositors.  Among  other  things  he  notices  the  remarkable  change  in  tlie 
phraseology  as  seen  in  Acts  and  the  Epistles  when  compared  with  the  GosjDels,  and 
justly  argues  that,  as  the  name  of  Jesus,  the  title  of  Son  of  man,  was  designedly  given  at 
one  period,  and  the  titles  of  Christ  and  Messiah  were  kejjt  in  the  background,  so  also 
after  the  death  and  ascension  of  Jesus  the  title  of  Christ  is  purposely  more  prominently 
exhibited.  The  former  procedure  is  based  on  the  fact  of  the  offer  and  rejection  of  the 
Kingdom  ;  the  latter  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  this  same  Jesus,  dead,  buried,  and  cru- 
cified, is  nevertheless  "  the  Christ,"  and  that  the  covenanted  promises  lolll  yet  be  realized 
through  Him.     The  very  title  implies  faith  and  hope  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenants. 

OI)S.  9.  Lee  (An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Prophecy),  Platfield  {Ayner. 
Preslty.  (2uart.  Review,  Nos.  April  and  July,  1864),  and  others  have  asserted 
that  the  prophets  predicted  only  one  Advent  (the  First),  and  that  a  second 
personal  Advent  was  unknown  to  them,  or  that  they  had  "no  distinct 
perception  of  a  Sec.  Advent,  or  any  thought  of  such  an  event,  is  by  no 
means  certain,"  etc.  (comp.  Shimeall's  1  Will  Come  Again,  Ap.  Note  D, 
p.  132).  This  falling  back  to  the  Jewish  objection  (Prop.  57,  Obs.  4, 
note  1)  is  owing  to  an  overlooking  of  the  conditions  that,  in  view  of  the 
foreknown  future,  were  imposed  upon  prophecy. 

This  attitude  of  the  prophets,  in  not  more  accurately  discriminating  (Prop.  34)  in 
respect  to  the  mission  of  Jesus  at  His  First  Advent  in  offering  the  Kingdom  to  the 
nation,  is  the  very  one  required  by  the  sincerity  of  the  tender,  the  free  agencj'  of  the 
nation,  the  rejection  of  the  Kingdom,  and  its  postponement.  To  have  distinctivel.y  an- 
nounced  the  two  Advents,  with  the  interval  between,  and  with  the  results  of  each,  would 
have  materially  interfered  with  the  course  of  events.  Yet  now  both  the  wonderful  fore- 
knowledge of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  the  Almighty,  in  the  prophetic  announcements, 
are  strikingly  exhibited.  Now  it  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  discriminate  ;  the 
fulfilments  at  the  First  Advent  teach  us  what  to  appl}'-  to  it  and  what  to  refer  to  the 
Second.  Both  Advents  are  plainly  delineated — one  of  humiliation,  suffering  and  death, 
and  exaltation  ;  the  other,  one  of  triumph,  vengeance,  dominion,  and  glory.  The  Primi- 
tive Church  view  gives  us  the  key  to  this  peculiar  prophetic  style,  and  this  very  delinea- 
tion, now  so  perplexing  to  Jewish  Kabbis  and  to  unbelievers,  is  evidence,  if  we  will 
receive  it,  of  Divine  insj)iration. 


386  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  59. 


Proposition  59.  This  Kingdom  of  God^  offered  to  the  JewisJf 
nation^  lest  the  pwpose  of  God  fail^  is  to  he  given  to  others 
who  are  adopted. 

This  Kingdom  is  incorporated  by  covenant  promise  with  the  seed 
of  Abraham  ;  that  seed  is  chosen,  but  refusing  the  Kingdom  on  the 
condition  annexed  to  it,  now,  that  the  Divine  Purpose  revealed  in 
the  covenants  may  not  fail  in  its  accomplishment  through  the  un- 
belief and  depravity  of  the  nation,  another  seed  must  be  raised  up 
unto  Abraham,  to  whom  the  Kingdom,  in  a  peculiar  sense  (as  will 
be  explained  hereafter),  is  to  be  given. 

Ohs.  1.  In  Matt.  21,  after  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  and  elders 
manifested  their  opposition  to  Him,  and  after  He  had  told  (v.  31)  them, 
^'  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the 
Kingdom  of  God  before  you"  (i.e.  in  view  of  their  repentance  and  faith, 
they  became  lieirs  of  the  Kingdom),  then  He  gives  the  parable  of  the 
wicked  husbandmen,  who  not  only  rejected  and  killed  the  servants,  but 
finally  even  the  heir  (v.  33-46).  When  the  Jews  answered  Christ's  question 
concerning  what  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  would  do  in  such  a  case,  He 
accepts  of  their  reply  {condemnatory  of  themselves),  and  shows  that  He 
(the  Stone)  has  been  rejected,  and  adds  :  ''  therefore  (i.e.  on  account  of 
their  refusing  to  receive  Him),  /  say  unto  you,  the  Kingdom  of  God  shall  be 
tahen  from  you  and  given  to  a  nation  hringing  forth  tlie  fruits  thereof.''' 
Kow  let  the  reader  carefully  consider  :  (1)  The  Kingdom  of  God  tahen  from. 
them.  This  Kingdom  belonged  exclusively  to  them  (comp.  Props.  24,  29, 
31,  49,  54,  55).  It  was  theirs  by  covenant  relationship  ;  but,  having  made 
themselves  unworthy  of  it,  the  tender  was  withdrawn,  and  it  was  to  be 
given  to  others.  (2)*  The  Kingdom  was  to  be  given  to  a  nation,  a  people, 
who,  by  the  fruits  resulting  from  obedience  through  faith,  should  show 
themselves  ivorthy  of  it. 

Ohs.  2.  Additionally,  in  this  declaration  of  Jesus,  we  have— (I)  the 
Kingdom  which  is  taken  from  them  is  one,  which,  it  is  taken  for  granted, 
that  the  Jews  comprehended,^  viz.  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  the  only  King- 
dom that  they  were  acquainted  with,  thus  corroborating  our  position. 
They  well  understood  its  force  and  propriety,  and  appreciated  its  applica- 
tion to  themselves,  saying,  "  God  forbid.''  (2)  They  expected  to  receive 
this  Kingdom  solely  in  virtue  of  their  national  relationship  withovt 
observing  the  condition  of  repentance  annexed  to  the  offer.  (3)  They  were 
not  to  receive  the  Kingdom  within  their  reach,  appertaining  to  them, 
owing  to  their  great  wickedness  in  rejecting  and  even  killing,  as  a 
culmination  of  rebellion,  the  Heir  Himself.  (4)  Another  people  was  to 
receive  it.     This  at  once  opens  some  interesting  questions,  which,  if  we 


Prop.  59.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  387 

desire  to  appreciate  the  Divine  Purpose  and  to  prevent  its  assuming  the 
changeable  aspect  of  human  plans  diverted  and  altered  by  contingencies, 
demand  on  our  part  due  consider  at  io7i.  We  now  merely  suggest  them, 
leaving  following  Propositions  to  bring  them  out  in  detail.  The  Kingdom 
of  God  is  expressly  covenanted  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  (but  to  the  faithful, 
obedient  seed)  ;  now  how  can  the  covenanted  promises  respecting  the 
Kingdom  in  this  line  be  carried  out  into  realization  when  the  nation 
embracing  that  seed  is  rejected?  Is  this  rejection  final  and  perpetual,  or 
is  it  removable  and  temporary?  Can  the  nation  or  people  who  are  to 
specially  receive  what  the  Jewish  nation  then  lost  by  its  non-repent- 
ance, obtain  it  without  any  reference  to  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic 
covenants,  i.e.  without,  in  some  way,  becoming,  l)y  adoption,  or  engrafting, 
or  incorporation,  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  Remember  that  God  confirmed  his 
promises  d^  oath,  and  that  He  is  faithful — not  given  to  variableness  or 
change — and,  therefore,  unless  these  questions  can  be  satisfactorily  and 
consistently  answered,  so  that  the  jjroniise  still  runs  i7i  the  covenanted 
Abrahamic  line,  there  would  be  a  sad  and  unwarranted  deficiency  somewhere. 

Ohs.  3.  This  already  teaches  us  that  to  preserve  the  sole7nnly  -pledged 
faithfulness  of  God,  this  people,  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  given, 
must,  in  the  very  nature  of  tlie  case,  stand  closely  related  to  the  Jewish 
race.  They  cannot  be  gathered  out  or  selected,  as  multitudes  now  vainly 
imagine  and  foolishly  boast,  without  any  regard  whatever  to  the  old 
covenanted  line.  They  must  he,  if  God  is  sincere  and  mindful  of  His  oath, 
adopted  as  Abraham'' s  seed  (comp.  Props.  29,  30,  etc.). 

Obs.  4.  John  the  Baptist  had  already  foreshown  that  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  God  would  be  amply  sufficient  to  carry  out  His  own  covenanted 
Purpose,  even  if  the  nation  would  reject  Christ.  When  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees  also  came  to  his  baptism,  after  denouncing  them  with  his 
prophetical  spirit  as  "  a  generation  of  vipers,"  and  urging  them  to  repent- 
ance, he  (Matt.  3  :  9)  adds  :  "  And  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  we 
have  Abraham  to  our  Father  ;  for  I  say  unto  you,  that  God  is  able  of  these 
stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham.''^  Here  are  several  suggestive 
ideas  that  we  ought,  by  all  means,  to  keep  in  mind  :  (1)  that  standing  in 
the  covenant  relationship  (being  "  children  of  the  Kingdom")  as  the  mere 
natural  offspring  or  descendants  of  Abraham  without  repentance  and 
obedience  is  not  sufficient.  To  insure  the  Kingdom  in  their  case,  both 
are  required  ;  for  the  Theocratic  ordering  calls  for  moral  preparation  (e.g. 
Rom.  2  :  28,  29)  as  well  as  for  union  with  the  Fathers  to  whom  the  cove- 
nant was  given.  (2)  That  God  is  abundajitly  aUe  to  raise  up  children 
unto  Abraham,  so  that,  if  necessity  required  it,  they  could  be  raised  up 
even  from  stones.  (3)  That  God  would  perform  so  miraculous  a  creative 
act  rather  than  leave  His  covenant  promises  unfulfilled.  (4)  But  even 
when  this  would  be  done,  the  covenant  relationship  would  be  sustained  in 
their  being,  by  adopt io7i,  the  childreyi  of  Abraha7n,  (5)  Hence,  the 
promises  are  recognized  as  given  to  Abraham,  and  to  i7iherit  ivith 
Abraha7n  it  is  requisite  to  come  into  cove7iant  relationship  witli  hvm. 

This  evinces  how  carefully  the  covenant  relationship  is  constantlj^  gnarcTed,  and  that 
the  current  views  respecting  it  being  immaterial,  whether  we  are  related  to  Abraham  or 
not,  are  sadly  defective.  It  also  has  become  fashionable  for  recent  commentators,  as  a 
concession  to   rationalistic  criticism,  to  make  "  these  stones"  to  mean  "the  Romans" 


388  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  59. 

or  "  the  hard  hearts  of  the  heathen,"  "  for  a  stone  has  manifestly  no  life  ;"  just  as  if  the 
power  of  God  which  gave  life  to  the  dust  of  the  earth  could  not  bestow  life  to  *'  these 
stones"  present.  This  implies  doubt  concerning  God's  jDOwer,  and  is  unworthy  of  a 
believer. 

Olii.  5.  The  reader  will  observe  that  this  removal  of  the  Kingdom  is  a 
national  one.  (It  necessarily  is  such  becanse  identified  with  the  nation.) 
Various  writers  have  fallen  into  gross  mistakes  on  this  point,  and  quote 
the  passages  relating  to  it  as  if  all  the  Jews  that  ever  li\ed  had  forfeited 
and  lost  their  right  to  the  Kingdom.  The  fact  is,  that  the  believing 
portion  who  had  died  will  yet  receive  it,  the  believing  portion  who  now 
accept  of  it  will  likeivise  obtain  it,  and  the  Gentiles  who  by  faith  are 
engrafted  2uill  also  receive  it.  This  will  be  plainly  proven,  as  we  proceed 
in  the  argument. 

Ohs.  6.  Another  mistake  into  which  many  fall  must  be  corrected,  viz. : 
that  the  Kingdom  being  tahen  from  them,  it  will  never  he  given  to  the 
nation  again.  Now  here  we  must  ask  the  indulgence  of  the  reader,  for  a 
number  of  things  which  serve  to  exjjlain  this  remarkable  language  are 
reserved  for  separate  propositions,  and,  therefore,  no  decided  and  satis- 
factory explauation  can  be  j^resented  before  passing  over  these.  This 
much,  by  way  of  preliminary,  maybe  stated  :  (1)  that  those  then  addressed, 
the  nation  as  existing  down  to  the  present  day,  cannot  (excepting  in- 
dividual believers)  inherit  the  Kingdom  in  the  higher  sense  (intimated  by 
giving)  of  Kingship  and  jiriestliood,  co-heirship  with  Christ  ;  (2)  that 
the  nation,  as  such,  by  its  wickedness,  forfeited  the  high  position  of  rulership 
with  Christ,  which  individual  believers  will  receive  from  Him  at  its 
ultimate  re-establishment  ;  (3)  but  this  does  oiot  prevent  the  final  restora- 
tion of  the  nation  to  its  covenanted  position  in  order  to  secure  {a)  the 
establishment  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  and  (b)  the 
special  bestowal  of  this  Kingdom  to  this  very  nation  gathered  out  ;  (4) 
hence,  Jesus,  whilst  directly  asserting  the  forfeiture  of  a  high  privilege,  does 
not  add,  as  many  suppose,  that  the  nation  itself  shall  never  again  enjoy  the 
blessings  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  but  in  a  subordinated  2)osition  ;  (5) 
for  this  Scripture  must  be  interpreted,  7iot  isolated,  but  in  connection 
with  others  relating  to  the  same  subject. 

Ol)s.  7.  This  removal  of  the  Kingdom  from  the  nation  on  account  of 
sinfulness,  and  its  contemplated  bestowal  upon  individual  believers  (as 
rulers  in  it)  rebuts  the  argument  of  the  Duke  of  Somerset  {Ch.  TJieol.  and 
Mod.  Skep.,  ch.  18),  in  that  he  attempts  to  aflfirm  that  "  the  book  of  Acts 
bears  false  witness  against  a  Christian  apostle,"  owing  to  Paul's  language 
to  the  Jews  at  Rome,  when  some  of  them  refused  to  believe  in  the  King- 
dom under  Jesus  Christ  as  he  expounded  it  to  them  out  of  the  law  and 
prophets.  -But  we  see  (Acts  28  :  17-31)  the  accuracy  of  the  writer  of  Acts 
and  the  exceeding  jjrojrriety  and  delicacy  of  Paul's  representations,  con- 
trasting the  same  with  the  covenanted  relationship  of  the  Jews  to  this 
Kingdom,  to  the  language  of  Jesus,  the  Master,  respecting  their  rejection 
of  it  and  its  bestowal  upon  others,  and  to  the  apostolic  desire  that  His 
brethren  after  the  flesh  might  also  inherit — in  the  higher  sense — this 
Kingdom.  There  is  a  beautiful  and  most  delicate  consistency  in  Paul's 
conduct ;  for,  giving  the  Jews  the  precedence  (for  the  reasons  given  by  us), 
after  an  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  during  a  whole  day,  he  honorably,  as  his 


Prop.  59.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  389 

character  of  apostleship  demanded,  referred  them,  because  of  their 
unbelief,  to  what  had  previously  been  predicted  of  them,  and  then  turned 
to  the  Gentiles.  There  was  no  deception  in  the  case,  but  an  open,  frank 
statement  of  the  real  facts  as  they  existed.  According  to  the  Duke  (who 
totally  misapprehends'the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  preached)  Paul  ought  to 
have  told  the  Jews  that  they  were  mistaken  concerning  the  Kingdom,  that 
Christ  had  established  another  one,  a  spiritual  one,  etc.,  and  not  pretend 
that  he  was  in  unison  ivith  them  in  the  hope  of  the  same  Kingdom  when 
really  he  was  in  opjmsition  to  them.  Paul  could  not  do  this,  simply  because 
it  would  have  made  his  message  discordant,  instead  of  its  being,  as  it  is,  in 
happy  correspondence  with  the  truth  (com p.  Props.  44,  70,  71,  72,  74). 

The  Duke's  reasoning  has  force  only  if  we  adopt  the  prevailing  modern  views  of  the 
Kingdom.  If  Paul  entertained  the  spiritualistic  notion  of  the  Kingdom,  ihen,  as  the 
Duke  observes,  neither  his  conduct  nor  speech  can  be  commended.  But  if  Paul  iDelieved 
in  the  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  indicated  in  our  argument,  then  he  is  not  open  to 
the  Duke's  strictures  and  corrections.  The  objector  in  the  charge  of ''  dishonesty,"  forgets 
that  the  death  of  Jesus  oyily  confirms  the  covenant  promises  (Prop.  50);  that  the  kingdom 
w^as  not  the  disputed  j)oint,  but  whether  Jesus  was  "  the  Christ"  through  whom  the  King- 
dom should  eventually  appear  ;  that  the  giving  of  the  Kingdom  to  others  does  not  change 
the  covenants  respecting  it  or  its  nature  ;  that,  therefore,  Christianity  is  not  a  "  subversion 
of  the  Jewish  religion,"  but  an  elevation  of  it  (the  typical,  non-essential  elements  being 
necessarily  removed),  showing  how  the  covenants,  the  Theocratic  ordering,  the  presence 
of  God,  etc.  can  and  will  he  secured.  The  Duke's  reasoning,  consequently,  has  force  only 
with  such  who  place  Paul  in  a  wrong  position. 

Obs.  8.  The  Kingdom  had  come  nigh  to  the  nation  (in  the  tender  of  it, 
in  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and  in  covenant  relationship  leading  to  the 
restrictive  preaching),  and  the  nation,  therefore,  must  have  sustained  a 
peculiar,  special  relation  to  it,  or  else  it  could  not  have  been  taken  from 
them.  To  be  taken  from  them  is  indicative  of  the  nation's  having  a 
claim  upon  it  (as  we  have  all  along  demonstrated).  Now,  preliminary  to 
following  Propositions  (93-104)  it  may  be  well  for  the  reader  to  notice  in 
this  connection  that  what  was  taken  from  them  could  not  be  "the 
church,"  or  "  the  Christian  dispensation,"  or  "  God's  reign  in  the  heart," 
or  "  the  Gospel,"  or  "  spiritual  reign"  (see  usual  meanings  given  to 
Kingdom,  Prop.  3),  so  prevalently  defined  to  be  the  Kingdom  of  God. 
Por  none  of  these  things  luere  taken  from  the  Jews  as  can  be  abundantly 
shown  ;  for  they,  in  this  respect,  stand  precisely  upon  tlie  same  footing  as 
the  Gentiles.  This  dispensation  was  commenced  at  Jerusalem,  the  Gospel 
was  first  preached  to  the  Jews,  and  for  some  time  the  Church  largely 
embraced  Jews  as  believers.  It  was  by  express  command  that  the  Gospel 
should  first  be  offered  to  the  Jews,  Luke  24  :  47,  Acts  13  :  46,  Acts  3 ':  19, 
21,  etc.  The  gospel  with  its  blessings  is  just  as  freely  offered  to  the  Jews, 
and  the  privileges  of  the  Church  just  as  graciously  extended  to  them  as  to 
the  Gentiles.  Ilence  it  follows  :  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  taken  from 
them  is  not  the  gospel,  or  admission  into  the  Church,  or  enjoyment  of 
Church  blessings,  or  the  privileges  of  this  dispensation,  because  none  of 
these  things  were  taken  from  them.  AV^hat  they  lost  is  the  Kingdom  itself, 
just  as  covenanted,  and  not  the  after  provisionary  appointments  to  still 
secure  the  Kingdom  in  the  future.  Is  it  not  surprising  that  so  plain  a 
feature  is  so  much  ignored  ?  * 

*  Let  the  reader  observe  the  inconclusive  and  inconsistent  interpretations  of  numerous 
commentators  (as  e.g.  Lange,  Barnes,  Scott,  etc.,  loci.\  for  it  was  not  taken  from  the 


390  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIN^GDOM.  [PrOP.   59 

Obs.  9.  This  taking  away  of  the  Kingdom  from  the  nation  to  whom  it 
belonged  as  a  covenanted  right,  and  thus  giving  it  to  others,  serves  to 
explain  the  phraseology  of  Luke  11  :  20,  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  has  come 
tq)07i  you.''^  The  offer  and  the  taking  it  away  shows  that  the  nation  was 
indeed  nigh  to  it,  if  it  had  only  known  the  day  of  its  gracious  visitation. 
So  also  the  phrase,  ''  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  among  {or  luithin)  you,^'  Luke 
17  :  21  indicates  the  same  fact,  for  as  many  critics  have  noticed  the  word 
rendered  "among,''  may  mean  **  within,"  *  and,  therefore,  in  strict  ac- 
cordance with  the  circumstance  that  the  Jewish  nation  is  an  elect  (Prop. 
24)  nation,  and  that  the  Kingdom  is  a  covenanted  (Prop.  49)  one,  and 
that,  in  view  of  this,  was  "  loithin''''  it,  connected  and  identified  Avith  it 
(through  the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  Prop.  31),  and 
hence,  tendered  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  this  nation  alone 
(Props.  54,  55).  The  phrase  "  children  of  the  Kingdom  cast  ouf  likewise 
indicates  this  same  relationship,  implies  that  they  stood  in  close  connection 
with  the  Kingdom,  that  they  rejected  it,  and  that  it  was  withdrawn  from 
them.  For  such  phraseology  cannot  be  used  respecting  the  Gentiles,  all 
the  wicked,  but  only  of  those  who,  in  some  special  manner,  stand  related 
to  the  Kingdom  by  promise  or  otherwise. 

OI)s.  10.  Two  things  additional  are  suggested  by  the  words  of  Jesus. 
(1)  What  unspeakable  honor,  power,  and  glory  would  have  resulted  to  the 
Jewish  nation,  if  it  had  accepted  the  simple  but  necessary  Theocratic 
condition  of  repentance  annexed  to  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom.  Instead  of 
the  fearful  judgments  of  God,  the  overthrow  and  dispersion  of  the  nation, 
the  terrible  persecution  of  centuries,  the  long  and  bitter  Gentile  domina- 
tion treading  down  the  beloved  city,  etc.,  it  would  have  taken  rank  as  the 
first  of  the  nations  of  the  world,  and  it  would  have  been  exalted  as  the 
centre  of  Theocratic  influetice,  poiuer,  and  dominion.  This  is  seen  by  what 
will  occur  when  the  saints  inherit  the  Kingdom,  and  by  what  will  even  yet 
take  place  when  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  ended,  and  the  nation  is 
restored.  (2)  The  mercy  extended  to  the  Gentiles;  the  grace  of  God 
tendering  the  first  jplace  in  this  Kingdom  (i.e.  its  kingship  and  priesthood) 
to  those  who  were  not  in  covenanted  relationship,  but  who  now,  through 
the  unbelief  and  fall  of  the  nation,  are  brought  into  it  through  repentance 
and  faith.     What  a  prize  grace  offers  to  us  Gentiles  I 

Ohs.  11.  There  is  a  remarkable  agreement  between  this  taking  away  of 
the  Kingdom  from  the  nation  and  giving  it  to  others,  and  the  predictions 
relating  to  this  matter.  Thus  e.g.  when  this  Kingdom  was  offered  to  the 
Jews,  its  proclamation  was  heralded  by  *'  the  time  is  fulfilled."  In  this, 
as  numerous  writers  have  noticed,  there  is  an  evident  allusion  to  the 
seventy  weeks  of  Daniel  (ch.  9  :  20-27).     Having  seen  the  result  of  this 


Jews  to  be  believers,  the  peculiar  people  of  God,  true  members  of  the  N.  Test.  Church, 
etc.,  as  evidenced  by  the  facts  presented.  This  only  proves  the  correctness  of  our  posi- 
tion, viz.:  that  that  which  is  taken  from  the  then  existing  nations,  is  a  peculiar,  distinc- 
tive honor  and  privilege — that  of  special  rulership — which  now  will  be  bestowed  upon 
believers  gathered  out  of  all  nations. 

*  Jones  {Essays  by  Philo-Basilicus,  p.  16  and  17,  foot-note),  after  tracing  the  usage  of  the 
word,  says  :  "  The  word  properly  signifies  within,  and  the  question  is,  within  what? 
The  true  answer  is,  within  the  Jewish  nation,  which  was  the  elect."     (Comp.  Prop.  110.) 


Prop.  59.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  391 

offer  we  find  it  also  foresliown  in  this  yery  prediction  ;  for  instead  of  a 
Kingdom  and  great  glory  described  as  pertaining  to  the  nation,  we  have 
the  Messiah  cut  off,  the  destruction  of  the  city,  desolations  determined 
^'eve7i  mitil  the  conswnmation;'  or  for  a  certain  period  ot  time.  Ihus 
do  the  facts,  as  they  exist  to-day,  tally  with  the  previously  given  pre- 
dictions. 


392  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  60. 


Proposition  60.  Tlds  Kingdom  of  God  is  given^  not  to  nations^ 
hut  to  one  nation. 

This  is  distinctly  stated,  ''a  nation,"  Matt.  21  :  43.  It  necessa- 
rily follows  from  our  Scriptural  i)ropositions,  and  corroborates 
tliem.  It  is  a  logical  sequence  from  tlie  premises  laid  down.  For, 
so  long  as  one  nation  is  chosen  from  among  all  others  (Prop.  24), 
and  the  Kingdom  is  covenanted  hy  oath  to  that  nation  (Prop.  49),  it 
is  impossible  for  other  nations,  in  their  national  capacity,  to  be 
thus  elected.  It  would  be  a  violating  of  the  most  solemnly  given 
covenants  and  assurances. 

Ols.  1.  Notice  :  the  Kingdom  is  promised  to  the  natural  believing 
descendants  of  Abraham,  and  as  the  nation,  then  existing  when  the 
Kingdom  was  offered,  refused  to  repent  in  order  to  receive  it,  God  must 
now — to  carry  out  His  purpose — raise  up  a  nation  luito  Abraham,  i.e.  a 
nation  in  some  way  still  related  to  him.  If  a  Gentile  nation  or  nations 
(as  many  suppose)  were  chosen  in  place  of  the  Jewish,  this  would  ignore 
all  the  past  assurances  given,  and  overthroiv  the  multiplied  predictions  of 
the  prophets.  It  would  nullify  God's  covenants,  and  make  it  appear  that 
He  undertook  a  Plan  which,  owing  to  human  depravity,  He  was  unahle  to 
perform.  It  would  loiuer  the  power  of  the  Divine  administration,  and 
make  God  subject  to  change.  Gentile  nations  cannot  as  nations  be  sub- 
stituted for  the  one  elect  Jewish  nation  (as  we  have  already  abundantly 
shown).  The  imi^ortance,  therefore,  of  tracing  His  chosen  nation,  and 
ascertaining  lioio  it  becomes — to  insure  covenanted  relationsliip — incor- 
porated with  the  elect  nation,  the  Abrahaniic  people,  cannot  he  over- 
estimated. Upon  this  largely  depends  our  estimation  of  the  covenants, 
the  faithfulness  of  God,  the  continued  election  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the 
design  of  the  Church,  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  inspiration 
and  unity  of  the  Word. 

Therefore  we  cannot  receive  the  idea  advanced  by  Oosterzee  (see  Prop.  57,  Obs.  5), 
that  Jesus  at  His  First  Advent  "  put  an  end  to  the  wall  of  separation  between  Israel  and 
the  nations. "  Multitudes  assert  the  same,  misapprehending  the  nature  and  intent  of  the 
call  of  the  Gentiles,  as  will  fully  appear  in  the  course  of  our  argument,  satisfactory 
Scriptural  reasons  being  assigned  for  every  step  taken. 

Ohs.  2.  In  the  consideration  of  this  matter  it  is  requisite  for  the  reader 
to  keep  in  mind  what  has  been  proven  (see  Props.  24,  30,  49,  50,  etc.),  that 
the  wall  of  partition  betvi^een  the  Jewish  nation,  as  such,  and  Gentile 
nations,  as  such,  is  not  7'emoved  but  07ily  hetioeen  believers  of  all  nations 
and  the  Jewish  nation.  This  is  essential  to  a  proper  understanding  of  the 
truth,  and  is  a  feature  clearly  taught  as  already  shown,  over  against  the 
inferences  of  De  Oolanges  {Ancient  City),  and  many  others. 


Prop.  60.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  393 

Ols.  3.  The  entire  tenor  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests,  makes  the  Abrahamic 
and  Davidic  covenants  subsisting  and  continuous  (Prop.  51)  ;  and  the 
Divine  Purpose  in  reference  to  salvation  and  the  Kingdom  is  inseparably 
(Prop.  50)  identified  with  them.  It  follows,  then,  as  a  matter  of  moral 
necessity,  that  this  nation  or  people  must  come  in  under  these  covenants. 
If  the  Divine  forbearance  toward  the  Jewish  nation  ceased  for  a  time, 
owing  to  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  God  must  now,  in  a  way  conusient 
with  His  own  promises  and  faithfulness,  raise  up  a  people  for  Abraham. 
Jesus,  in  accordance  with  what  was  predicted  (as  e.g.  Deut.  32  :  21),  simply 
states  the  fact  of  such  a  calling,  without  any  explanation  as  to  the  manner 
in  which  it  would  be  accomplished,  leaving  it  for  the  future  to  interpret 
His  meaning.  We  cannot  be  too  guarded  in  strictly  following  the  plain 
narrative  of  the  Word  and  m  accepting  of  its  teachings  on  this  point, 
seeing  that  the  Plan  is  of  God's,  not  man's,  devising. 

Obs.  4.  God  does  not  change  His  Plan  of  having  one  nation  (comp.  e.g. 
1  Pet.  2  :  9)  identified  with  Abraham,  in  which  is  lodged  tlie  foundatioii  of 
that  Kingdom  destined  to  attain  world-wide  dominion,  and  to  bring  all 
nations  directly  under  its  sway.  To  do  this  would  be  indicative  of  weak- 
ness m  the  formation  of  His  Purpose  (as  announced  and  supported  iy 
oath),  and  in  the  power  of  His  Divine  administration  (to  carry  into  effect 
that  which  is  promised).  Therefore,  let  it  be  repeated  as  something 
specially  worthy  of  attention,  that,  in  view  of  the  Divine  character, 
attributes,  and  pledges  given,  we  may  rest  assured  that  any  change  which 
may  occur  (dispensational  or  otherwise)  will  not  affect  the  original  design 
contemplated  and  covenanted,  relative  to  the  Kingdom,  in  its  ultimate 
fulfilment. 

Ols.  5.  The  original  choice  of  one  nation,  and  the  continued  selection 
of  "a  nation,"  in  some  way  identified  with  Abraham,  enables  us  to 
appreciate  the  reason  why  God  confined  the  acceptance  of  the  Kingdom  to 
one  nation  and  ultimately  gives  it  to  one  people.  It  was  not  merely  (as 
Kurtz,  Xeander  and  others)  to  preserve  the  purity  of  religion,  to  per- 
petuate it,  to  make  known  the  true  God,  etc.,  but  the  selection  of  a  nation 
was  made  to  be  the  nucleus  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  (comp.  what  was 
said  under  the  Davidic  covenant)  ;  {a)  m  the  rulers  or  co-heirs  with  the 
Messiah  selected  out  of  nations  forming  the  believing  elect,  who  compose 
with  Jesus  a  select  body  having  the  supremacy  ;  {h)  that  afterward  the 
nation  itself  might  be  incorporated  (according  to  promise  through  the 
Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom)  in  it,  thus  becoming  the  entering  wedge  or 
the  fulcrum  of  universal  dominion  hecause  of  its  Theocratic  nature ;  (c) 
that  in  this  way  (owing  to  the  foreseen  depravity  of  man  making  such  a 
foretold  provision  necessary),  thehighest  and  noMest  of  all  earthly  relations 
(viz.  :  that  of  nationality)  is  seized,  appropriated,  and  through  it  (exhibited 
nnder  direct  Messianic  rule),  when  all  things  are  ready  for  its  manifesta- 
tion, the  conversion  and  exaltation  of  the  greatest  mimher  will  be  ac- 
complished in  the  briefest  time.  For  under  such  an  ordering,  a  certain 
number  saved  (i.e.  "  a  nation")  is  secured  to  provide  for  the  requisite 
establishment  of  a  stable  Theocratic  government  which  cannot  be  moved 
by  (as  in  the  past)  the  outbreaks  of  depravity.  The  number  of  the  elect 
completed,  then  the  Kingdom  is  manifested,  by  which  and  its  intro- 
ductory judgments  the  conversion  of  the  world  in  a  speedy  manner   is 


394  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  60. 

insured.  From  tliis  we  infer,  that  the  Proposition  contains  a  Plan 
adopted  by  the  wisdom  of  God,  by  which  not  only  the  required  number 
of  the  elect  is  obtained  in  the  soonest  manner,  but  that  it  contains  withm 
itself  the  elements  by  which  '"'the  sui^e  mercies  of  David,''  and  all  the 
covenanted  promises,  will  be  realized  in  the  Iriefest  time  compatiUe  loitli 
the  free  agency  of  man. 

Ohs.  6.  It  IS  extremely  satisfactory  to  find  that  nowhere  in  the  Scriptures 
does  the  now  prevailing  view,  that  the  Gentile  nations,  as  7iations,  are 
called,  find  the  least  support.  This  is  precisely  what  the  covenanted 
Word  requires.  This  one  nation  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  given, 
which  shall  inherit  it,  is  composed  of  individuals  out  of  all  nations.  To 
no  one  Gentile  nation  is  the  Kingdom  oifered  as  it  ivas  to  the  Jewish,  viz.  : 
that  on  their  national  repentance  the  Kingdom  of  God  would  be  estab- 
lished among  or  within  it.  This  could  not  be  done  without  doing  violence 
to  pledged  covenants,  seeing  that  the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom  pertains  nationally  to  the  Jewish  nation.  But  God  can  tender 
this  Kingdom,  on  certain  conditions,  to  individuals  of  all  nations  ;  and 
therefore  all  nations  are  invited  in  their  individual  capacity  to  receive  the 
gospel  and  by  the  obedience  of  faith  secure,  through  believing  ones,  the 
blessings  of  the  Kingdom  ;  i.e.  in  the  persons  thus  believing  "  a  nation" 
will  be  gathered  to  whom  the  Kingdom  will  be  given. 

The  proof  will  be  adduced,  and  the  manner  of  incorporating  this  nation  in  the  Abra- 
hamic  line  will  be  presented,  as  we  progress  in  the  argument.  Attention  ismerelj^  called 
to  the  matter  now,  so  that  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  to  all  nations,  including  the 
Jews,  may  not  be  mistaken  for  the  bestowal  of  the  Kingdom  to  a  people  to  be  chosen 
out  of  all  nations  according  to  the  foreknown  and  declared  will  of  God.  But  compara- 
tively few  families  in  their  entirety  have  accepted  of  the  Gospel,  so  that  we  need  not  ex- 
pect entire  towns,  cities,  and  nations  to  receive  it.  It  will  remain  true  down  to  the  end 
of  this  dispensation,  that  '•'many  are  called  hut  few  chosen;"  these  few,  in  their  grand  ag- 
gregate, forming  this  chosen  "holy  nation."  For  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  God  also 
foreknows,  which  He  has  plainly  predicted,  that  no  Gentile  nation,  as  such,  will  receive 
the  gospel,  which  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  at  the  very  close  of  the  dispensation  the 
nations  of  the  earth  (Rev.  19,  etc.)  will  be  arrayed  against  the  Messiah.  God's  Plan  is 
made  and  carried  on  in  view  of  this  very  foreseen  dej^ravity  of  nations,  and  hence  it  is 
not  His  purpose  to  make  all  nations  this  "  peculiar  people,"  but  to  gather  them  out  of 
the  nations.  We  must  therefore  distinguish  between  "the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom" 
being  given  to  all  nations,  the  result  of  the  Gospel  in  individual  believers,  the  people  to 
whom  the  Kingdom  is  bestowed,  and  the  Kingdom  itself  and  the  giving  of  the  Kingdom 
to  a  nation.     The  former  is  done  that  the  latter  may  be  realized. 

Obs.  7.  It  is  proper  to  remind  the  reader  that  this  bestowal  of  a  King- 
dom to  "a  nation"  that  is  to  be  gathered  does  not  result  from  Gentile 
nations  being  better  than  the  Jewish  nation  ;  this  is  evinced  by  their 
possessing  a  common  depravity,  that  justification  is  accorded  to  both  Jew 
and  Gentile  on  precisely  the  same  grounds,  and  that  the  Gentiles,  like  the 
Jews,  will  ultimately  be  found  arrayed  against  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ. 
It  arises  solely  from  the  mercy  and  favor  of  God,  who,  out  of  the  Jewish 
and  Gentile  nations  alike,  is  ready  and  willing  to  accept  of  believers  in 
Christ  to  form  that  nation  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  given.  This 
gives  us  the  true  standard  by  which  to  judge  of  the  harsh  and  unjust 
opinions  and  proceedings  of  Gentile  nations  toward  the  Jewish  nation, 
just  as  if  they  were  better  than  the  latter,  and  not  entirely  dependent  07i 
grace  for  the  call  to  the  Kingdom. 


Prop.  60.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  395 

Ohs.  8.  It  may  be  added,  that  this  feature  throws  light  upon  the  question 
of  nationalized  churches  as  representative  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Such 
certainly  do  not  enter  into  the  Divine  Plan,  seeing  that  since  the  Jews  as  a 
nation  were  for  a  time  rejected,  it  is  only  part  of  that  Plan  to  gather  out  of 
the  nations  "  a  peculiar  people,"  and  not  to  exalt  any  Gentile  nation  to 
tlie  Theocratic  position  which  the  Jewish  nation  alone  by  covenant  privilege 
possess  ;  and  which  union  of  Church  and  State  shall  he  07ily,  in  the  way 
contemplated  by  God,  exhibited  when  this  "  peculiar  people''  or  "  nation" 
has  been  gathered  out.  In  other  words,  individual  persons,  and  not  nations, 
are  chosen  ;  after  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  then,  as  we  shall  see, 
all  nations  will  also  come  under  its  dominion  and  blessings. 

Hence  we  need  not  wonder  at  the  lamentable  corruptions  and  failures  of  State 
cliiirches,  as  well  as  others,  in  establishing  what  was  wrongfully  thought  to  be  the  King- 
dom of  Grod,  as  e.g.  was  4one  in  the  Constantinian  period  (which  every  historian,  ex- 
cepting Roman  Catholic,  informs  us  resulted  in  injury  to  the  Church,  both  in  doctrine 
and  i^ractice).  We  need  not  be  surprised  that,  at  the  close  of  this  dispensation,  the 
nations  most  highly  favored  witli  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  shall  be  severely  punished 
as  the  enemies  (Rev.  19,  etc.),  either  directly  or  indirectly,  of  the  Christ.  The  secular 
governments  of  the  earth,  of  whatever  form  and  however  they  may  result  from  expedi- 
ency, moral  and  civil  necessit3%  etc.,  are  not  chosen  by  God,  out  of  which  and  in  which  to 
develop  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ;  they  all  lack  the  great  essential,  fundamental  feature, 
viz.  :  the  Theocratic;  they  all,  while  under  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and  control,  have  not 
God  acting  in  their  behalf  as  an  earthly  Ruler  ;  long  ago  that  choice  was  made,  and  it  is 
inseparably  connected  with  the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  The  only  national 
election  is  that  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  with  that  election,  as  we  shall  see,  the  King- 
dom of  God  is  fully  blended.  This  at  once  removes  many  wild  and  untenable  theories 
advanced  concerning  the  union  of  Church  and  State  in  Gentile  nations,  and  also  the  pre- 
dictions of  fallible  men  respecting  the  nationalized  glory  of  Gentile  nations  thus  distin- 
guished by  such  a  union.  God  does  not  recognize,  either  in  Daniel  or  Rev.,  the  alleged 
and  professed  conversion  of  the  Roman  Empire,  for  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent  it  retains 
its  bestial  character.  God  looks  at  nations  from  a  standpoint  very  different  from  that 
assumed  by  their  eulogizers  (comp.  Prop.  164). 


396  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  61. 


Propositiois'  61.  The  Kingdom  ivJdcli  by  promise  exclusively 
helonged  to  the  Jeivish  nation,  the  rightful  seed  of  Abraham, 
was  71010  to  be  given  to  an  engrafted  people. 

It  has  been  shown  that  this  kingdom  belongs  by  promise  and 
covenant  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  (Props.  29,  49)  ;  now,  as  the 
promises  of  God  are  sure  (Prox)s.  47,  52),  this  people,  this  very  na- 
tion, must  he  engrafted  or  incorporated  with  this  elected  seed  of 
Abraham.  This  is  indispensable,  for  othewise  God's  oath-bound 
word  would  fail  in  its  fulfilment.  Rather  than  have  so  precious  a 
word  to  fail,  God  is  able,  as  we  have  seen,  to  raise  up  children  unto 
Abraham  even,  if  necessary,  from  the  stones  (Matt.  3:9);  but  in- 
stead of  resorting  to  miraculous  intervention  to  produce  such  a 
result,  God  raises  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham  out  of  the  Gentiles  by 
engrafting  them  through  faith  in  the  Christ,  and  accounting  them 
as  the  children  of  Abraham  by  virtue  of  their  Abrahamic  justifying 
faith. 

Oh^.  1.  The  plan  of  adoption  is  simple  :  Abraham  was  justified  by  faith, 
the  election  was  bestowed  upon  him  in  virtue  of  that  faith,  and  hence 
those  who  believe  in  the  promised  seed  being  also  justified  by  faith,  are 
brought  into  living  union  with  Christ  ("  the  King  of  the  Jews"),  and 
through  Him  become  the  adopted  children  of  Abraham  who  was  of  like 
faith.  Hence  the  apostle  in  G-al.  3  tells  us  (v.  7)  "  Know  ye  therefore,  that 
they  luhich  are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of  Abrahain.'^  '  But  why 
become  the  children  of  Abraham  ?  Because,  as  he  shows,  verses  14-18, 
the  promises  and  inheritance  are  given  through  him,  and  we  must  be 
related  to  Abraham  in  order  to  receive  and  inherit  the  same.  Therefore  he 
goes  on  and  insists  that  this  very  essential  relationship  is  established  in 
and  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  (v.  28,  29)  adds  :  '\for  ye  are  all  one  in 
Christ  Jesus.  And  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs 
according  to  promise.'"  Thus  then  (ch.  2  :  5)  receiving  "  the  adoption  of 
sons,"  because  united  and  identified  with  Christ,  who  is  the  chief  inheritor 
under  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  we  becorne  co-heirs  with  Him.  This 
marvellously  simple  arrangement,  introducing  mercy  and  grace  to  us 
Gentiles,  preserves  the  covenanted  promises  intact  and  confirms  them. 

Hon.  Vance,  in  a  lecture  (Baltimore,  Md.,  reported  in  The  <^M7i,  March,  1874),  justly 
says  :  "  Every  Christian  to  day  is  a  graft  upon  the  stock  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and  each 
Christian  perpetuates  the  Jew."  On  the  other  hand,  e.g.,  Hodge  {Sys.  Div.,\o\.  3,  p. 
810)  does  not  discriminate,  but  has  the  wall  of  partition  broken  down  between  nations  in- 
stead of,  as  Paul,  between  believers  in  Christ.  If  it  be  objected  that  we  have  the  most 
comprehensive  language,  such  as  the  world  reconciled  in  Christ  and  kindred  expressions, 
the  answer  is  plain  :  such  a  reconciliation  and  the  recej)tion  of  the  Gospel  by  all  men 
has  not  yet  been  witnessed— it  requiring  time  to  be  exemplified  practically— but  will  be 
in  the  future,  through  the  instrumentality  of  this  very  Kingdom  inherited  by  believers 
(comp.  e.g.  Prop.  176). 


Prop.  61.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  397 

Ols.  2.  This  Proposition  and  the  decided  Scriptural  proof  sustaining  it, 
removes  at  once  that  painfully  loose  and  inconsistent  theological  writing, 
so  exceedingly  prevalent  since  the  days  of  the  mystical  schoolmen,  which 
makes  no  account  of  our  virtually  becoming  the  children  of  Abraham. 
Having  lost  the  true  force  of  the  covenants,  consequently  totally  mis- 
apprehending the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  and  of  the  covenant  renewed  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  substituting  another  and  widely  different  Kingdom 
for  the  covenanted  one,  and  utterly  ignoring  the  plainly  revealed  post- 
ponement of  the  Kingdom, — multitudes  (seee.  g.  Prop.  67,  Obs.  3,  Prop.  54, 
Obs.  4,  5,  etc.)  see  no  necessity  for  our  becoming  the  seed  of  Abraham  in 
order  to  inherit.  With  many  it  seems  to  be  the  proper  thing,  to  lie  as  far 
removed  as  possiI)Ie  from  a  Jeiuish  standpoint,  and  to  this  feeling  much  and 
precious  truth  is  sacrificed.  All  passages  bearing  on  the  subject  are  merely 
regarded  and  interpreted  as  representative  or  fignrative  and  not  real.  But 
we  see  a  deep  and  solid  reason  for  this  process  of  becoming  grafted  into 
this  elect,  covenanted  nation.  Paul  (Rom.  chs.  9,  10,  and  11)  argues 
directly  that  the  election  runs  only  iji  a  certain  line  of  Abraham's  seed,  in 
that  of  Isaac  (comp.  Props.  49  and  50)  the  child  of  promise,  and  that  after 
the  manifested  unrighteousness  of  the  nation,  "  except  the  Lord  of  Sabaotli 
had  left  its  a  seed  we  had  been  as  Sodom,"  etc.  ;  that  in  helievers  there  is 
no  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  both  being  equally  heirs  of  the 
promise  ;  that  Gentiles  by  their  faith  are  accounted  as  believing  Jews  and 
also  of  the  election,  because  "  if  some  of  the  branches  be  broken  oft',  and 
thou,  being  a  wild  olive  tree,  wert  graffed  in  among  them,  and  with  them 
partakest  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive  tree  ;  boast  not  against  the 
branches.  But  if  thou  boast,  thou  bearest  not  the  root,  bid  the  root  thee.^^ 
Here  then  it  is  decisively  stated  that  Gentile  believers  are  grafted  in  upon 
the  Jewish  olive  tree,  tlie  root  of  which  remaining  untouched,  owing  to  the 
elective  ^purpose  of  God,  this  also  bears  these  engrafted  ones.  ^Y\iQ  jyevsonal 
interest  in  the  coyenants  is  thus  clearly  specified,  and  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  obtained,  by  adoj)tion,  is  equally  stated  in  precise  language.  This 
language,  too,  is  addressed  to  Gentiles,  reminding  them  of  the  distinctive 
relationship  they  sustained  to  the  Jewish  elect  nation.  While  the  natural 
descendants  of  Abraham  were  included  in  the  covenant  relationship,  as 
evinced  by  the  covenants  only  given  to  them,  by  the  Theocratic  govern- 
ment instituted  only  among  and  over  themi,  yet  only  the  believing  and 
faithful  portion  of  those  natural  descendants  were  to  realize  the  ultimate 
blessing  of  that  Kingdom  of  kings  and  priests  promised  to  faith  and 
obedience.  Now  it  is  with  this  believing  body  of  the  Abraham ic  line  that 
believing  Gentiles  are  incorporated,  thus  coming  under  the  same  covenant 
promises  and  blessings. 

Fausset  {Com.  Dan.  7  :  27)  justly  remarks  :  "  The  saints  are  gathered  out  of  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  but  the  stock  of  the  Church  is  Jewish  (Eom.  9  :  24  and  11  :  24)  ;  God' s  faithfulness 
to  this  election  Church  is  thus  virtually  faithfulness  to  Israel,  and  a  pledge  of  their  future 
national  blessing.  Christ  confirms  this  fact,  while  withholding  the  date  (Acts  1  :  6,  7)." 
Comp.  with  this  Prop.  63,  and  observe  the  numerous  concessions  to  be  found  in  various 
commentaries  on  Kom,  ch.  11  and  Gal.  ch.  3. 

Obs.  3.  We  cannot  too  strongly  insist  upon  Jhis  necessary  engrafting^  of 
Gentile  believers,  so  that  by  virtue  of  a  real  relationship,  they,  being 
regarded  by  God  Himself  as  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  may  inherit.  For, 
it  has  become  a  great  and  radical  defect  in  many,  if  not  nearly  all,  of  our 


398  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIIS-GDOM.  [PrOP.  61. 

systems  of  Theology  to  overlook  the  reason  lohy  a  seed  must  be  raised  up 
unto  Abraham,  and  to  proceed  in  their  elucidations  of  the  subject,  as  if 
Abraham  and  the  Jews  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  matter.  In  treatises 
on  Justification  by  Faith  (by  which  we  become  engrafted)  we  find,  from 
beginning  to  end,  no  allusion  whatever  to  the  Patriarchs  and  the  cove- 
nants, just  as  if  the  present  dispensation  was  separate,  unconnected,  and 
independent  of  all  others.  This  is  a  serious,  fundamental  blunder, 
violating  unity,  and  making  the  election  and  covenants  of  little  value. 
Let  sucli  writers  consider  tlie  exceeding  plani  and  reiterated  language  of 
Scripture  on  this  point.  That  the  Gentile  believer  viust  become  an  adopted 
memher  of  the  elected  nation  is  stated  in  words  (Eph.  chs.  2  and  3)  hke 
these  :  that  the  Gentiles  who  were  in  time  past  '*  aliens  from  the  com- 
momvecdtli  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,'^  ""  ivho 
sometime  were  afar  off  are  now  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ/''  so  that 
in  believing  and  apj^ropriating  that  blood  by  faith,  "  ye  are  no  more 
strangers  and  foreigners,  but  felloiv  citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the 
houseliold  of  God,'^  etc.,  so  ''that  the  Gentiles  sliould  be  fellow  heirs,  and 
of  the  same  body,  and  partakers  of  his  pro^nise  in  Christ  by  the  gosp)eiy 
Why  does  the  apostle  tell  this  to  Gentile  believers,  if  it  was  not  to  show 
them  clearly  into  lohat  they  had  been  grafted,  viz. :  into  that  elected  Jewish 
nation  to  which  was  covenanted  the  promises  ?  Moreover,  such  is  the 
peculiarity  and  distinctiveness  of  this  relationshijo,  or,  as  the  apostle  calls 
it,  "  fellowship,"  that  the  revealment  of  its  adoption  and  manner  of  pro- 
cedure IS  called  "  a  mystery."  For  it  was  a  question  to  be  decided,  how 
this  could  be  done  without  changing  or  lowering  covenants  given  to  this 
Jewish  nation. 

Alas  !  multitudes  of  Gentiles  do  not  regard  it  in  this  light.  They  think  it  was  a  very 
simple  process,  viz.  :  to  ignore  or  set  aside  oath-hound  covenants,  and  give  the  blessings 
spiritualized  to  Gentiles  without  any  reference  to  the  Jews.  When  such  utterances  as 
"  salvation  is  ot  the  Jews"  (John  4  :  22),  "  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold  ; 
them  also  must  2  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice  ;  and  there  shall  be  onefold  and  one 
IShepherd  ' ''  (John  10  :  16),  etc.,  are  given,  they  are  interpreted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  lose 
their  native,  inherent  force.  Learned  men  gravely  inform  us  that  about  all  the  meaning 
that  can  be  attached  to  them  is,  that  as  the  Jews  were  depositories  of  truth  and  religion, 
so  the  same  was  handed  down  to  us  through  them,  and  Gentiles  receive  it  and  become  m 
turn  the  depositories.  Others,  however,  go  so  far  as  to  object  to  the  use  of  such  lan- 
guage. Thus  e.g.  Renan  {Lije  of  Jesus,  p.  215,  footnote),  with  his  usual  destructive  crit- 
icism in  behalf  of  his  lauded  religion  of  humanity,  objects  to  the  phrase  "  salvation  is  of 
the  Jews,'' as  expressing  a  thought  which  "  a^Dpears  to  have  been  interpolated."  Our 
entire  argument  shows  that  it  is  essential  and  just  the  language  that  ought  to  be  em- 
ployed. The  vital  necessity,  owing  to  oath-bound  covenants,  given  to  Abraham  and  David, 
of  every  Gentile,  who  desires  to  secure  the  covenanted  promises  sealed  by  the  blood  of 
C'arist,  in  becoming  a  child  of  Abraham  is  entirely  passed  over  as  if  it  had  never  existed, 
by  such  writers.  They  also  endeavor  to  make  a  difference  between  Paul  and  the  other 
apostles,  extending  even  to  an  antagonism,  because  Paul  lays  more  stress  on  the  doctrine 
of  "  justification  by  faith, "  forgetting  that  this  very  feature  ought  to  be  prominent  in 
Paul's  case,  because  specially  appointed  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  and  faith  was  the  grand 
instrumentality  by  which  the  Gentiles  were  engrafted  and  adopted. 

Obs.  4.  Men  ridicule  as  "  carnal,"  "  fleshly,"  etc.,  that  we  Gentile 
believers,  m  virtue  of  our  union  with  Christ,  are  grafted  in  and  become 
members  of  the  Jewish  elect  nation,  virtually  becoming  believing  Jews, 
Overlooking  the  covenants  exclusively  given  to  the  Jews  (Rom.  9:4), 
forgetting  that  the  Kingdom  with  its  ultimate  blessings  is  only  tendered 
to  the  true  Israel,  i.e.  to  the  believing  and  obedient  natural  descendants 
(and  engrafted  and  adopted  Gentiles,)  of  Abraham,  our  opponents  point  us. 


Prop.  61.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  399 

in  order  to  sustain  their  rejection  of  such  a  Jewish  connection,  to  Rom. 
2  :  28-29  :  ^'Fo7'  he  is  ?iot  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly  ;  neither  is  that 
circumcision  which  is  outivard  in  the  flesh  ;  hut  he  is  a  Jeiv,  lohich  is  one 
inwardly  ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit  and  not  in 
the  letter  ;  ichose iwaise  is  not  of  men  hut  of  God.""  Aside  from  the  expres- 
sion that  we  must  become  "  Jeivs  inwardly,'^  thus  confirming  our  position 
(for  what,  excepting  this  covenanted  relationship,  could  have  induced  Paul 
to  use  this  peculiar  phraseology,  viz.  :  that,  in  some  way,  we  must  become 
Jews  ?),  we  apprehend,  from  the  very  concessions  made  by  many  of  our 
opponents,  that  the  expression  "  for  he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  one  out- 
wardlif  has  no  reference,  as  is  generally  supposed,  to  birth  or  descent  from 
Abraham.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  contrast  or  antithesis  "  but  he  is  « 
Jeiu,  which  is  one  imvnrdly  f*  the  latter  indicating  the  state  of  the  heart, 
VIZ. :  being  faithful  and  obedient, — the  former  "outwardly"  has  also 
reference  to  the  heart,  that  it  was  not  right  because  such  an  one  contented 
himself  with  external  or  outward  conformance  to  the  law. 

It  only  teaches  what  is  elsewhere  taught,  that  not  all  the  natnral  descendants  of 
Abraham  will  receive  the  promises  (]ust  as  now,  not  all  who  are  outwardly  Christians  but 
those  who  are  also  inwardly  such,  shall  inherit  the  Kingdom),  though  covenanted  to 
them  and  incorporated  with  them  as  a  nation,  because  ihey  are  conditioned,  so  far  as  indi- 
vidual members  of  the  nation,  are  concerned,  by  heartfelt  faith  and  obedience.  Indeed, 
to  make  the  passage  refer  to  birth  or  descent  would  make  it  inco7isistent  with,  the  previous 
dealings  of  God  with  the  Jewish  nation,  which  was  so  directly  and  positively  chosen 
because  of  its  line  of  descent.  To  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  this,  as  will  be  seen  more  clearly 
as  we  advance,  natural  descent  is  of  inestimable  value,  for  to  it  belongs  the  Theocratic  or- 
dering ;  to  the  individual  Jew  it  was,  as  Paul  argues  in  Romans,  of  great  advantage,  be- 
cause of  his  personal  contact  with  the  covenants,  but  even  this  advantage  (just  as  noM-,  in 
church  membership)  and  church  privileges)  could,  through  unbelief,  be  rendered  unavailable 
and  condemnatory,  rendering  his  circumcision,  the  outward  sign  of  his  peculiar  relation- 
ship, of  no  profit,  not  being  accompanied  by  a  proper  heart  observance.  Another  pas- 
sage, Rom.  9  :  6,  "  'Fliey  are  not  all  Israel  ivhich  are  of  Israel,''  is  employed  by  some  as  if 
it  discarded  the  natural  descendants.  But  this  is  contradictory  to  tlie  plain  fact  that  for 
many  centuries  the  promises,  etc., were  confined  to  those  natural  descendants  and  to  the 
tew  Gentiles  adopted  ;  and  to  the  additional  fact  that  even  now  they  pertain  to  them, 
making  it  necessary  for  Gentiles  to  be  grafted  in  and  adopted.  The  reader  will  observe 
that  the  name  is  a  national  one,  for  all  have  a  right  to  the  name  who  are  descended  from 
Israel,  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  also  imbibe  the  faith  and  spirit  of  him  who  was  first 
called  Israel,  for  the  apostle  argues  that  some,  through  their  conduct,  inake  void  their 
interest  in  tlie  name.  Those  who  are  loyal  to  the  name  retain  it ;  those  who  are  not  can- 
not be  counted  among  them. 

Obs.  5.  This  necessary  engrafting,  this  vital  connection  through 
Christ  with  the  Jewish  elect  nation  (as  the  seed  of  Abraham  to  wliom  the 
promises  are  given)  gives  the  key  to  the  word  "  Israel,''  applied  even  now 
to  all  true  believers.  This  word 'has  not  two  meanings,  one  applicable  to 
the  Jews  and  the  other  to  the  Gentiles,  such  as  men  in  their  wisdom  attach 
to  it,  but  only  07ie  meaning  which  God  has  given  to  it.  Given  originally 
to  Jacob,  it  was  only  applicable  (e.g.  Rom.  9  :  6)  in  its  original  full  mean- 
ing to  his  believing  descendants  who  had  part  and  lot  in  the  covenanted 
blessings  ;  and,  therefore,  in  view  of  this  connection  the  word  is  in  a 
general  way  (as  e.g.  Rom.  9  :  4,  27,  and  11  :  7,  25,  etc.)  applied  to  these 
descendants  (including  even  all  the  natural  descendants  because  to  them 
were  the  promises  committed,)  to  whom  belonged  the  covenants,  (and  to 
those  who  were  adopted  into  the  nation).  Therefore,  it  is  applicable  only, 
so  far  as  the  Gentiles  are  concerned,  to  such  as  are  grafted  in  and  thus, 
becoming  members  of  the  covenanted  line,  are  reckoned  as  "  the  Israel,*' 


400  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  61. 

can  entertain  ^^  tJie  hope  of  Israel,''  and  will  inherit  with  ^^  the  Israel  of 
God.'''  Being  thus  incorporated  with  "  the  commonwealth  of  IsraeV^ — the 
Israel  to  whom  pertain  the  covenants,  —they  virtually  become  Jews,  and  the 
distinctive  title  by  which  the  beheving  line  of  Jews  was  favored,  rightfully 
also  belongs  to  them.  The  very  name  "  Israel"  is  a  reminder  to  us  of  such 
an  adoption  and  election. 

The  name  "  Israel "  means,  as  critics  have  informed  us,  "  Who  prevails  with  God," 
or  "  A  Prince  of  God,"  and  is  significant  of  much  more  than  being  one  whom  God  favors, 
viz.  :  that  the  one  favored  is  in  the  covenanted  line.  Thus  e.g.  the  name  is  given  to 
Christ  (Isa.  49  :  3),  because  pre-eminently  applicable  to  him  as  one  who  prevails,  as  one 
who  is  a  Prince,  as  the  Seed  in  Israel's  line,  as  the  one  through  whom  Israel  is  saved  ;  it 
is  bestowed  upon  all  believers  because  they  prevail,  are  exalted  in  the  covenanted  line  ; 
and  it  is  given  to  the  natural  descendants  of  Jacob  as  expressive  of  their  covenanted 
position.  Full}'  admitting  that  the  resemblance  of  names  does  not  necessarily  imply 
identity  of  ideas,  yet  if  the  name  continues  to  have  the  same  idea  connected  with  it 
throughout  revelation,  and  if  no  change  is  directly  asserted,  we  may,  consistently, 
maintain  the  identity,  esiDecially  in  so  weighty  a  doctrine  as  the  election,  adoption 
13ertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  The  name  "  Israel  "  ai^plies  to  the  Jewish  nation,  to  the  one 
line  of  Abraham's  descendants,  and  also  to  those  adopted  into  it.  Hence  it  fully  belongs, 
by  right,  to  all  who  are  engrafted,  and  is  thus  employed.  All  who  are  the  sons  of 
Abraham,  whether  Jews  believing  or  believing  Gentiles  grafted  in,  are  Israel  This 
simple  application  should  prevent  the  misapplying  of  the  word,  as  if  the  present  Israel 
was  something  separate  and  distinct  from  the  Jewish  stock.  "We  recommend  to  the 
reader's  notice  the  following  remark  from  the  leading  Post-Millenarian  of  the  day.  Dr. 
Brown  {Com.  Rom.  11,  note 8)  says  :"  Those  who  think  that  in  all  the  evangelical  proph- 
ecies of  the  Old  Test,  the  terms  '  Jacob, '' Israel, '  etc.,  are  to  be  understood  solely  of 
the  Christian  Church,  would  appear  to  read  the  Old  Test,  differently  from  the  apostle,  who, 
from  the  use  of  those  very  terms  in  Old  Test,  proj^hecy,  draws  arguments  to  prove  that 
God  has  mercy  in  store  tor  the  natural  Israel  (v.  26,  27)."  Such  a  rebuke  from  such  a 
source,  to  the  prevailing  spiritualizing  of  the  terms,  and  exclusive  application  to  Gentiles, 
etc.,  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  aids  to  refute  some  of  his  reasoning  in  Ch.  Sec.  Coming. 

Ol)S.  6.  This  necessarily  becoming  "  <^  child  of  Abraham"  in  order  to 
inherit  the  promises,  is  unaccountable  to  those  wlio  overlook  the  covenants 
by  which  it  is  demanded.  Thus  e.g.  Clarke  {Ten  Relujions,  p.  403),  who 
regards  Abraham's  life  and  influence  alone  from  a  historic  point,  remarks  : 
"  the  most  curious  fact  about  this  Jewish  people  is,'that  every  one  of  them 
is  a  child  of  Abraham  "  which  "ancestral  pride"  "has  never  been  the 
case  with  any  other  nation."  The  reason  is  evident  :  the  covenant 
relationship  demanded  such  a  descent,  for  it  is  only  the  children  of 
Abraham,  natural  and  adopted,  that  can  obtain  the  promises.  This  was 
felt  and  acknowledged  from  the  express  terms  of  the  covenant  ;  and  that 
covenant  instead  of  being  rescinded,  annulled,  or  altered  remains  to-day 
in  full  force. 

It  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  surprise  that  Knapp  {Ch.  Theol.,  p.  350)  should  assert  that 
"  far  better  promises  are  given  in  these  prophets  to  the  heathen  than  to  the  Jews,"  when 
the  facts  are  that  they  are  the  same  blessings  covenanted  to  the  Jews  and  obtained  by  the 
Gentiles  only  on  the  condition  of  being  engrafted  and  thus  coming  under  the  blessed 
reign  of  "  the  King  of  the  Jews."  This  will  be  more  clearly  seen  when  we  come  to  prov6 
the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  covenant  given  to 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  observe  the  conspicuous  position  assigned  to  the  Jewish  elect  nation  in 
it.  Knapp's  judgment  is  based  on  his  view  of  the  present  dispensation  as  final,  and  in 
the  fact  that  now  the  Gentiles  believe  and  receive  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  more  freely 
than  the  Jews  ;  but  this  is  only  taking  a  very  limited  and  partial  view  of  God's  Plan  in  the 
incorporation  of  Gentile  believers,  and  in  the  ever-continued,  because  covenanted,  pre- 
eminence of  the  Jewish  nation.  For  we  must  never  forget  the  declaration.  2  Sam. 
7  :  24  :  "  For  Thou  hast  confirmed  to  2'hyself  Thy  people  Israel  to  be  a  people  unto  Thee 
forever:  and  Thou,  Lord,  a7i  become  their  God." 


Prop.  62.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  401 


Proposition  62.  TJiis  people^   to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to   he 
giveri^  gathered  out  of  the  nations,  becomes  the  elect  nation. 

This  cannot  be  otherwise,  owing  to  their  incorporation  with  the 
elect  Jewish  nation  as  the  seed  of  Abraham  by  virtue  of  their  faith 
in,  and  union  with,  Christ.  To  keep  up  this  elect  the  Gentiles  are 
engrafted,  and  hence  are  called,  on  account  of  their  identitication 
with  the  elected  people  of  God,  ^^  the  elect  according  to  the  for e- 
Tcnowledge  of  Gocf^  (1  Pet.  1  : 1,  2),  ''a  chosen  generation'^  (2  :  9, 
10)  ^'  which  in  time  past  were  not  a  people,  hut  are  noio  the  people 
of  God''  (comp.  Eph.  1 ;  1  Thess.  1:4;  Col.  3  :  12  ;  Pom.  9,  etc.). 
If  we  take,  the  language  and  promises  ai)plied  to  this  elect  peoj^le, 
they  are  identical  with  those  originally  given  to  the  line  of  elec- 
tion,, and  summed  up  in  the  expressions  "(X  royal  priesthood,  a 
holy  nation,"  etc.  (comp.  Ex.  19  :  5,  6  ;  Deut.  10  :  15,  etc.). 

The  certainty"  of  being  engrafted,  and  thus  becoming  of  "  the  elect,"  is  not  found  in 
a  process  of  reasoning,  or  in  a  mere  connection  with  the  Church,  or  in  observance  of  re- 
ligious rites,  but  is  alone  found  in  a  Christian  consciousness  of  acceptance,  resulting 
from  justification  by  faith  in  a  personal  Saviour,  an  appropriation  of  the  Messiah  which 
is  evidenced  by  the  accomj^anying  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  To  this  self-consciousness,  sup- 
ported by  a  fruitage,  the  Scriptures  constantly  appeal  ;  to  this  reality,  affording  a  satis- 
factorj'  assurance  of  salvation,  believers  in  successive  generations  have  continuall}'  re- 
ferred ;  and  it  alone  can  afford  a  sonl-satisfying  j^roof,  inspiring  love,  hope,  joy,  and 
peace.  Personal,  individual  experience  on  this  point  is  essential  to  happiness,  for 
then  is  verified  such  declarations  as  "  7  kyiow  in  whom  I  have  believed,"  "  1  am  known  of 
mine,"  etc.  Comp.  Dr.  Sprecher's  Groundwork  of  TJieol,  where  this  is  admirably  pre- 
sented and  urged. 

Obs.  1.  The  term  "  elect  "  is  used  with  reference  to  their  being  "  cliosen'" 
for  this  kingdom.  2  Pet.  1  :  10  exhorts  brethren  "  to  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure,^^  and  adds  that  by  so  doing  they  shall  enter  "  the  ever- 
lasting Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.''*  Hotu  make  it 
sure?  (1)  The  Jews  are  elect  (Prop.  24,  etc.)  ;  (2)  since  their  national  fall 
(as  a  punishment  for  sin)  the  Gentiles  are  invited  to  become,  by  faith,  the 
seed  of  Abraham  that  shall  inherit  the  promises  ;  (3)  by  thus  becoming  the 
seed  of  Abraham  they  enter  into  the  covenanted  line  and  also  become  the 
elect  ;  (4)  it  is  by  faith  in  Christ,  in  whom  as  the  predicted  David's  Son  are 
centered  ^^  exceeding  great  a7id  precious  promises,**  that  they  become  the 
elect ;  (5)  hence,  to  make  our  call  as  Gentiles  to  become  children  of  Abra- 
ham, and  our  election  to  the  promised  Kingdom  sure,  we  miist  live  a  life 
of  faith  in  Clirist.  In  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  the  foreknowledge  of 
God  is  thus  manifested  ^'  having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  chil- 
dren by  Jesus  Christ*^  (Eph.  1  :  5)  in  order  that  the  covenanted  inheritance 
may  be  obtained  by  '*  the  elect  of  God  "  (Col.  3  :  12  ;   James  2  :  5,  etc.)- 

Before  God  took  the  Israelites  to  Canaan  He  first  provided  a  sufficient  number  of  peo- 
ple, even  under  great  trial  and  sorrow,  who  should  be  able  to  occupy  the  land,  drive  out 


402  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  62. 

their  adversaries,  and  enjoy  their  imparted  possession.  So  now  God  has  promised  a  rich 
inheritance,  even  the  whole  earth,  to  the  saints  under  a  Theocratic  ordering,  which  they 
are  to  realize  in  a  peculiar,  exalted  way  ;  but  before  this  inheritance  is  given  God  is  en- 
gaged in  gathering  out  this  people,  even  under  trial,  temptation,  and  tribulation  ;  and 
when  the  chosen,  elected  number  is  complete  (known  only  to  Him),  then  the  possession 
will  be  received,  the  adversaries  will  be  judged  and  overthrown  by  them  as  associated  in 
Eulership  with  the  Lord  Christ. 

This  will  enable  us  to  discriminate  between  Auberlen  and  Fairbairn.  The  latter  {On 
Froph.,  Ap.  K,  p.  510),  takes  Auberlen  to  task  for  making  the  saints  of  Dan.  7  :  18-22 
"  the  people  of  Israel,"  calling  it  "  an  unwarranted  license,"  etc.  Now  that  Auberlen  is 
right  as  to  the  phrase  itself,  there  can  be  iw  doubt,  seeing  that  the  saints,  including  the 
engrafted  Gentiles,  are  truly  the  seed  of  Abraham,  incorporated  among  the  elect,  and  ac- 
counted  "  the  people  of  Israel."  So  also  a  writer  (Proph.  Times,  Oct.,  1870,  Art.  1,  p.  148) 
observes  that  "  the  saints  of  Daniel  are  Jews,  and  not  Gentile  Christians,''  under  the  idea 
that  Daniel's  vision  only  relates  to  the  Jews  when  speaking  of  the  saints.  The  latter  is 
true,  but  it  includes  Gentile  believers  who  are  incorporated  as  Jews,  and  to  whom,  as  we 
shall  hereafter  show,  the  Kingdom  is  in  an  especial  manner  given.  We  know  of  no 
"  Gentile  Christians"  separate  and  distinct  from  the  Jewish  election,  and  hence  Daniel 
is  correct  in  speaking  of  the  saints  relating  to  the  future,  without  the  least  intimation  of 
a  change  from  the  Jewish  to  a  Gentile  standpoint. 

Obs.  2.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  covenanted  aspect  gives  us 
the  key  to  the  doctrine  of  election.  The  language  referring  to  election  is 
based  (1)  on  the  Divine  Purpose  relating  to  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  ; 
(2)  on  the  Plan  embraced  in  that  Purpose,  of  gathering  out  a  people, — whose 
character,  etc.,  is  predetermined — to  whom  it  can  be  entrusted  ;  (3)  on  the 
acceptance  of  the  conditions  by  persons  through  which  they  come  into  the 
line  of  that  purpose.  The  election  then  (a)  is,  so  far  as  God  is  concerned, 
pre-ordained  ;  such  a  people  will  be  gathered  (as  even  Moses  predicted)  for 
such  a  Kingdom  of  kings  and  priests  to  be  established,  and,  as  God  changes 
not,  it  will  most  assuredly  be  carried  into  execution  ;  {b)  on  the  part  of 
man,  he  comes  in  the  line  of  the  predestinated  order,  or  elect,  or  chosen, 
just  so  soon  as  he  accords  or  falls  in  with  the  determined  process  of  engraft- 
ing through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Hence,  in  view  of  the  conflicting  and  mystical  opinions  on  this  point,  Dr.  Auberlen 
{Div.  Rev.,  p.  232)  justly  observes  that  the  doctrine  of  predestination  sprung  out  of  a 
misapprehension  and  erroneous  interpretation  of  the  history  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  on 
earth,  transferring  what  only  belonged  to  such  a  Kingdom  "  to  eternal  religious  relation- 
ships," etc.  The  term  "  elect"  has  then  an  ulterior  reference  to  the  fact  (which  will 
appear  hereafter)  that  after  this  number  is  completed,  who  are  to  be  associated  with 
Christ  in  the  higher  Theocratic  positions,  no  others  can  or  will  be  added.  They  alone  form 
that  chosen  body  counted  worthy  of  co-heirship  with  Christ,  and  hence  even  the  common 
ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  as  given  e.g.  by  Macnight  {Prelim.  Essays,  essay  4,  S.  40,  to 
his  Epistles),  signifying  "  the  most  excellent,  chief,  the  most  precious,"  among  other 
things  of  the  same  kind,  because  excellence  is  the  reason  why  some  things  are  chosen 
l^referably  to  others,  etc.  (illustrated  by  "  the  elect  captains"  Ex.  15  :  3  ;  "  the  elect  an- 
gels" 1  Tim.  5  :  21  the  "  elect  lady"  and  "  elect  sister"  of  2  John  1  :  13,  etc.),  may  be 
aptly  retained.  "  The  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  indeed  preordained,  but  only  in  view 
of  t\\\^  foreordained  number  of  the  elect.  The  foreknowledge  of  God  comprehended  the 
delay  in  gathering  out,  and  determines  the  end  accordingly. 

Obs.  3.  The  believing  Gentile,  becoming  through  his  faith  a  "Jew  in- 
wardly," is  elected  or  chosen  in  the  place  of  "  the  children  of  the  King- 
dom" (Matt.  8  :  11, 12),  who,  through  unbelief,  are  cut  off  from  the  nation- 
ally covenanted  Kingdom.  Therefore,  these  chosen  ones,  becoming  such 
through  adoption,  ''  shall  come  from  the  east  and  luest,  and  shall  sit  down 
with  Abralianij  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  (to  whom  the  covenant  was  given)  m 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven,''^  etc. 


Prop.  62.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  403 

Lincoln  {Leds.  on  Ep'is.  of  St.  John,  p.  80)  rejects  the  idea  of  ''  adoption,"  making  it 
to  mean  "  son-placing"— a  son's  place,  saying,  "He  (God)  has  taken  children,  but  He 
does  not  adopt  them,"  for  He  makes  them  such  by  "  actually  communicating  His  own 
nature  and  life  ;"  "  it  is  not  by  adoption,  but  that  it  is  by  the  actual  impartation  of  God's 
own  life,"  in  resurrection  life,  etc.  While  we  fully  acknowledge  the  impartation  of  the 
divine  in  resurrection  and  glorification,  yet  the  word  "  adoption"  (which  includes  this 
result)  is  used  in  the  Scriptures  as  applicable  to  a  believer  now  being  one  accepted,  and 
destined  for  divine  glory  (Eph.  1  :  4,  5  ;  Rom.  8  :  15  ;  comp.  with  Gal.  3  :  26  ;  John 
1  :  12  ;  1  John  3  :  1,  2).  The  higher  evidence  and  realization  is  in  res.  power  (Rom. 
8  :  23),  and  is  given  to  those  thus  recognized  (Gal.  4  :  5,  6). 


404  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PHOP.  63, 


Proposition  63.  The  ^present  elect ^  to  loliom  the  Kingdom  will  he 
giveri^  is  the  continuation  of  the  pre'Cious  elect  ion  j  chiefly  in 
another  engrafted  jpeo]ple* 

This  follows  from  what  has  preceded,  and  is  thus  thrown  into  a 
Proposition  to  imjDress  it  npon  the  mind.  The  previous,  and  the 
present^  election  is  founded  on  the  promises  and  oath  to  Abraham. 

Ols.  1.  Both  elect  are  the  seed,  the  children  of  Abraham  ;  1)0111  sets  of 
branches  are  on  tlie  same  stock,  on  the  same  root,  on  tlio  same  olive  tree  ; 
hoth  constitute  the  same  Israel  of  God,  the  members  of  the  same  body, 
fellow-citizens  of  the  same  commonwealth  ;  hoth  are  '"'Jews  imvardly^'' 
(Rom.  2  :  29),  and  of  the  true  '^  circumcision^^  (Phil.  3  :  3),  forming  the 
same  "  peculiar  people,"  "  holy  nation,"  and  "  royal  priesthood  ;"  hoth 
are  interested  in  the  same  promises,  covenants,  and  kingdom  ;  loth  inherit 
and  realize  the  same  blessings  at  the  same  time.  From  these  and  other 
considerations,  involving  identity,  we  find  this  election  a  continuous  one, 
by  which  the  faithfulness  of  God  shall  be  exhibited  to  the  Patriarchs,  to 
their  obedient  descendants,  and  to  the  engrafted  believers  taken  from  other 
nations. 

This  meets  the  objection  of  Williamson  {Letters  to  a  Millenarian),  which  rests  upon  an 
entire  misapprehension  of  Millenarian  teaching.  No  Millenarian  makes  the  Jewish 
nation,  as  siich,  an  heir  of  the  Kingdom  ;  all,  without  exception,  make  the  believing  Jew 
in  the  elect  Abrahamic  line  (hence  identified  with,  and  included  in,  the  nation),  and  the 
believing  Gentile  (engrafted  by  faith),  in  their  totality  the  heir.  We  carefully  distinguish 
between  the  heir  and  the  subjects  (Props.  124,  128,  153,  etc.).  Besides  the  nation  itself, 
before  restored  and  securing  its  covenanted  supremacy,  must  be  jDenitent  and  converted 
in  order  to  obtain  its  distinguished  position  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  The  nation, 
as  such,  is  brought  into  nearness  with  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  as  already  exj^lained  ;  as 
a  nation  it  can  abuse,  pervert,  and  reject  it,  as  already  shown  ;but  as  a  nation  it  can  and 
will  (as  we  will  prove  in  its  place)  be  restored,  God  foreseeing  the  same,  as  predicted, 
and  lience  forming  His  determinate  Purpose  in  view  of  it.  But  this  nation,  thus  restored 
to  high  Theocratic  privileges,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  is  only  exalted  because  it 
stands  associated  with  the  immortal  rulers,  e.g.  the  twelve  apostles,  etc.  We  receive 
with  him  the  same  heirs,  only  that  we  insist  upon  their  being  Abraham's  seed,  conse- 
quently engrafted  and  adopted  as  such,  in  view  of  the  elect  covenanted  relationship  of 
the  nation,  in  which  the  Theocracy  is  based  fundamentally. 

Obs.  2.  This  continuous  election  of  the  same  body  is  manifested  not  only 
in  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  in  the  reigning  with  the  twelve  tribes, 
in  participating  with  the  Patriarchs  in  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom,  etc., 
but  it  is  surprisingly  represented  even  in  the  description  of  the  ^ew  Jeru- 
salem, which  has  the  names  of  "  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel  " 
(Rev.  21  :  12),  showing  that  only  those  who  are  the  children  of  Abraham 
have  the  privilege  of  constant  association  therewith.^  It  is  remarkably 
delineated  as  a  filling  up  a  predetermined  number  (Rev.  7  :  4—9)  in  each 
one  of  the  twelve  tribes^  and  after  that  chosen  number  is  taken  out  (as  we 


Prop.  63.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  405 

shall  show  in  the  proper  place),  then  comes  in  the  multittide,  which  cor- 
responds with  God's  Plan.'' 

1  This  may  serve  to  explain  James'  epistle  addressed  "  to  ihe  twelve  tribes  which  are  scat- 
tered abroad,"  or  "  which  are  in,  or  ot,  the  disjDersion. "  Critics  find  it  difficult,  in  view 
of  the  contents  of  the  epistle  and  its  being  addressed  to  believers,  to  reconcile  this  pas- 
sage with  the  literal  twelve  tribes.  Yet  two  opinions  prevail,  viz.  :  that  James  wrote  to 
believing  Jews  (Beza,  Grotius,  etc.),  or  that  he  addressed  all  Jews  (Lardner,  etc).  But 
if  we  keep  in  view  the  engrafting  and  adoption,  the  continuous  election  and  incorpora- 
tion, James  forcibly  emj)loys  this  phraseology  to  designate  believers,  and  their  being  the 
elect  people  of  God,  who  also  were  scattered  or  dispersed  abroad  among  the  nations. 

2  We  may  only  add,  if  somewhat  premature  in  the  argument,  that  the  election  has  not 
merely  reference  to  the  Kingdom  itself,  but  to  a  certain  position — one  of  distinguished, 
pre-eminent  honor  and  dignity,  viz.  :  Kingship  and  priesthood,  in  that  Kingdom, 
Hence  arises  the  exceeding  preciousness  of  this  election,  bringing  to  us  the  glory  of  asso^ 
ciated  Eulership  with  Christ  in  His  Theocratic  dominion.  "  The  Plymouth  Brethren," 
define  (Art.  "  Plymoidh  Brethrenism,"  Brit.  Quarterly,  Oct.  1873)  ''the  Church  of  God,"  ov^ 
as  they  prefer  to  call  it,  "  the  Assembly  of  God:"  "  it  is  the  actual  living  unity  with  Christ,, 
and  with  each  other,  of  those  who,  siyiee  Ch7'isVs  7-esurrectiou,  are  formed  into  this  unity 
by  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  definition  excludes  the  Old  Test,  saints,  which  is  erroneous 
and  derogatory  to  those  saints,  who  also  are  saved  through  Christ.  The  apostles  do  not 
call  the  Church  a  new  thing  or  a  mystery,  but  that  Gentiles  could  be  introduced  and  put 
on  the  same  ground  {"fellow  heirs,"  Eph.  3  :  6)  with  the  Old  Test,  members.  The  same 
glory  awaits  both  ;  botli  inherit  with  Abraham  ;  both  form  the  Church  purchased  by  His 
blood  ;  both  look  for  and  enter  the  same  city,  etc.  This  error  is  found  in  many  of  their 
works. 

Ods.  3.  This  engrafting  and  continued  election  confirms  what  has 
already  been  said  respecting  "  the  wall  qfpartitioji''  being  broken  down,  7iot 
between  the  Jewish  nation  and  Gentile  nations  (Pressense,  Early  Days  of 
Christian  if  I/,  p.  292),  hit,  between  Jewish  and  Gentile  believers  in  Christ 
(comp.  Props.  24,  30,  49,  50,  etc.). 

The  election  is  not  removed  from  the  Jewish  nation,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  for  it  con- 
tinues, as  has  been  proven,  unbroken  (comp.  Rom.  11  :  28,  29,  26,  25,  23).  No  Gentile 
nation  has  been  chosen  in  place  of  the  Jewish,  for  such  a  procedure  would  violate  and 
vitiate  the  solemnly  given  covenants.  Even  the  covenanted  Davidic  throne  and  King- 
dom, the  Messiah's  special  inheritance  as  David's  Son,  indicates  the  continued  necessity 
of  such  election.  That  God's  purposes  may  not  be  defeated  in  erecting  the  contem- 
plated Theocratic  dominion  wdth  the  elect  nation  for  its  basis.  He  continues  the  elec- 
tion in  incorporating  Gentiles.  For  the  accomplishment  of  His  Purpose  He  requires  a 
certain  determined  number  (known  only  to  Him),  and  as  the  chosen  nation  in  its  mem- 
bership made  itself  unworthy  through  the  baseness  of  its  depravity  (in  rejecting  the 
Messiah),  and  but  few  remain  "  Jews  inwardly,"  the  true  Israel  of  God,  it  becomes  nec- 
essary^ to  raise  up  a  seed  identified  with  that  nation  ;  this  is  done  by  calling  all  Gentiles  to 
repentance  and  faith,  and  choosing  individuals  out  of  the  nations,  who,  by  virtue  of  their 
rejDentance  and  faith,  are  adopted  and  become  the  elect.  By  this  adoption,  no  distinc- 
tion exists  between  them  and  the  believing  natural  descendants  of  Abraham,  and  hence 
that  distinction  which  once  arose  between  them  as  a  barrier,  called  "  the  wall  of  par- 
tition," is  removed  between  such  believers.  This  election  is  something  very  different,, 
as  will  be  seen  as  the  argument  progresses,  from  the  reception  of  the  Gospel  and  the  en- 
joyment of  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom  in  the  future  under  the  Messianic  reign  by  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  These  elect  are  then  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  Rulership,  etc. 
The  offer  now  is  indeed  freely  made  to  all,  but  all,  as  yet,  do  not  accept  of  the  same. 
The  Gospel  is  freely  preached  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  by  faith  they  become  one 
in  Christ  Jesus,  the  wall  of  separation  being  broken  down  between  them  because  of 
faith.  Hence  Oosterzee  {Theol.  X.  Test.)  is  wrong  when  he  says,  "  the  wall  of  separa- 
tion between  Israel  and  the  Gentile  world  is  already  fallen,"  which  is  true  only  as  to  the 
call,  but  not  as  to  election,  the  latter  being  the  result  of  faith. 

Obs.  4.  In  various  works,  the  theory  is  advocated  that  the  Christian 
Church  is  so  entirely  new  in  its  institution,  etc.,  that  it  is  no  continuation 


406  THE  THEOCPwATIO   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  63. 

of  the  old  order.  Thus  e.g.  Alex.  Campbell  {Strictures,  Ap.  to  Debate  on 
Baptism,  p.  225),  says  :  "  the  Jews  were  the  typical  congregation  or 
church  of  God,  but  Christians  are  the  real  congregation  or  church  of  God." 
This,  however,  is  hostile  to  the  entire  tenor  of  the  Divine  Plan  as  unfolded, 
and  antagonistic  to  the  covenants  and  election.  The  reply  to  this  has 
already  been  given.  It  would  be  surpassing  strange  indeed  to  require 
engrafting  upon  a  mere  "  typical  "  stock  or  olive-tree,  and  to  promise  us 
an  inheritance  with  previous  "  typical  "  members  of  the  church.  Admit- 
ting that  there  is  a  newness  in  the  arrangement  by  which  Gentiles  are  em- 
braced on  the  principle  of  faith,  thus  causing,  through  the  defection  of  the 
Jews  and  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  a  change  in  ordinances,  etc.,  yet  the 
expressive  language  by  which  it  is  carefully  guarded,  warns  us  to  regard 
the  past  and  the  present  church  of  God  as  one  grand,  continuous  reality  in 
the  progress  of  the  fulfilment  of  covenanted  blessings. 

Obs.  5.  The  quite  early  church  view,  as  seen  m  the  writings  of  the 
Fathers,  made  no  such  unjust  discrimination  between  the  ancient  and 
modern  elect.  Both  were  regarded  in  the  same  light  and  as  belonging  to 
the  same  body,  and  such  persons  as  Barnabas,  Iren^eus,  Justin  Martyr,  and 
others  pointedly  traced  the  election  of  believers  to  their  being  grafted  i7ito 
the  elect  Jewish  nation,  i.e.  that  portion  of  the  natural  seed  of  Abraham 
which  also  believed  and  rendered  obedience,  and  thus  becoming,  through 
adoption,  members  of  the  elect  nation.  We  have  already  quoted  language 
of  theirs,  illustrative  of  this  feature,  under  previous  Propositions.  It  may 
be  added,  that  so  identified,  through  faith  m  Jesus,  did  they  feel  them- 
selves with  the  Patriarchs  to  whom  the  covenants  were  given,  that  (as  e.g. 
Lactantius,  Div.  Insti.,  B.  4,  ch.  10),  they  called  them  "  our  ancestors," 
and  vividly  expressed  the  hope,  in  virtue  of  being  adopted  as  their  seed,  of 
finally  inheriting  with  them. 

Obs.  6.  While  in  relation  to  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  and  their  call- 
ing, this  might  be  named,  as  some  do,  a  "  Gentile  dispensation,"  yet  it  is 
a  phrase  not  strictly  correct,  because  it  implies  that  the  Jews  were  not  also 
called  and  eligible  to  the  Kingdom,  that  the  Gentiles  stood  in  a  position  in- 
dependent of  the  Jews  (i.e.  were  not  grafted  in,  etc.),  and  that  there  is  an 
unjust  (to  the  Jews)  discrimination  m  behalf  of  the  Gentiles.  Hence,  care- 
ful writers  avoid  the  phrase. 

Obs.  7.  This  adoption  and  continued  election,  materially  aids  in  throw- 
ing light  upon  the  difficult  question,  why  it  was  that  the  apostles  and  first 
Christians,  with  their  faith  and  hope  m  Jesus  Christ,  continued  faithful 
Jews,  attending  the  religious  services  in  the  temple  and  synagogue  ;  and 
that  we  have  no  distinctive  utterance  from  the  apostles,  even  when  in  coun- 
cil together  considering  the  admission  and  circumcision  of  the  Gentiles, 
respecting  the  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  law,  etc.,  excepting  by 
Paul  afterward.  The  views  entertained  respecting  virtual  adoption,  incor- 
poration, and  election  caused  them  to  occupy  such  a  posture. 

The  opinions  generally  expressed  concerning  this  are  various,  such  as,  that  it  was  an 
accommodation,  provisional,  temporary  concession,  necessary  transition  state,  lack  of 
knowledge,  and  even  inconsistency.  But  we  see  in  it  a  deeper  reason  :  the  Jewish 
nation  was  the  elect  nation,  and  until  God  showed  clearly,  by  the  destruction  of  the  tem- 
ple and  dispersion  of  the  nation,  that  it  was  for  a  time  rejected  (there  being  no  commen- 


Prop.  63.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  407 

surate  repentance  for  its  contracted  guilt),  it  was  right  and  proper  for  Jews  to  observe 
the  institutions  nationally  connected  with  the  nation.  When  these  were  abrogated  by 
the  manifested  judgments  befalling  the  nation — and  for  which  Paul  forewarned  and  pre- 
pared the  Jews  in  Hebrews — the  same  reason  existed  no  longer.  It  was  then  the  cove- 
nanted relationship  that  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  sustained  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,  that 
influenced  believing  Jews  to  manifest  a  regard  for  everything  nationally  connected.  With 
their  ideas  of  the  covenants,  inseparably  connected,  as  they  yet  are,  with  the  nation  in 
the  Theocratic  relatioDship  instituted,  and  allied  with  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic 
throne  and  Kingdom  inseparably  identified  with  the  nation,  it  would  have  been  prema- 
ture in  them  to  have  turned  away  from  the  nation  thus  favored,  until  they  were  clearly 
taught,  both  by  inspiration  and  the  providence  of  God,  that  the  nation,  as  such,  had  in- 
deed fallen,  and  that  others,  even  Gentiles,  were  engrafted.  This  clinging  so  tenaciously 
and  persistently  to  the  nation  (as  e.g.  see  even  statement  of  Sulpitius  Severus,  Mosheim's 
Ecd.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  138,  footnote  2)  is  evidence — the  highest— of  their  faith  in  this  very 
election,  incorjDoration,  adoption,  and  that  salvation  is  truly  identified  with  the  Jewish 
nation.  This  very  feature  which  multitudes  deem  so  defective  in  early  Christianity,  and 
which  infidels  scoffingly  deride,  is  honorable  to  those  believers.  Distinguishing  between 
those  who  made  circumcision  and  the  observance  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  essential,  and  those 
who,  discarding  the  same  as  superseded  by  faith  in  Jesus,  etc.,  still  held  to  a  union 
made  requisite  by  covenanted  relation,  we  observe  a  logical  consistency.  Even  Gibbon 
(Ded.  and  F'all,  vol.  2,  p.  14)  observes  this  feature  :  "  The  Gentile  converts,  who  by  a 
spiritual  adoption  had  been  associated  to  the  hope  of  Israel,  were  likewise  confounded  under 
the  garb  and  appearance  of  Jews ;"  and  in  a  note  adds  :  "  An  obscure  passage  in  Sueto- 
nius (in  Claud,  c.  25)  may  seem  to  offer  a  proof  how  strangely  the  Jews  and  Christians 
of  Rome  were  confounded  with  each  other."  This  is  explained  by  the  simple  fact  that 
so  long  as  the  Early  Church  clung  to  the  literal  belief  of  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  cov- 
enants, there  was  mudi  that  was  common  to  both  (however  they  disagreed  respecting  the 
Mosaic  ritual  being  still  binding),  but  as  the  Gentile  believers  drifted  from  this  belief,  an 
antagonism  sjirung  up  and  continued. 


408  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  64 


Proposition  64.  The  Kingdom  being  given  to  the  elect  only,  any 
adoption  into  that  elect  portion  must  be  revealed  by  express 
Divine  Revelation. 

No  addition  to,  or  continuation  of,  that  elect  portion  to  whom 
the  Kingdom  is  alone  promised  (by  way  of  inheritance),  can  be 
made  without  direction  from  God  Himself. 

Obs.  1.  It  has  already  been  shown  (Prop.  30),  how  God,  in  order  to  vin- 
dicate His  foreknowledge  and  purpose,  revealed  that  Gentiles  should  par- 
ticipate in  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom.  But  the  vmnner  in  which  they 
should  be  introduced,  was  left  unexplained.  The  indefinite  nature  of  the 
predictions  (as  e.g.  by  Moses  in  Deut.  32)  are  now,  in  the  light  of  fulfil- 
ment, become  definite.  But  it  was  not  so  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and  His  dis- 
ciples ;  something  was  to  be  added  to  show  how  this  incorporation  could  be 
effected,  for  with  the  special  election  of  the  one  nation,  it  would  have  been 
presumptuous  for  any  one  to  have  joined  others  with  it  without  due 
authority  from  God.  Hence  we  find  Jesus  before  His  death  promising  the 
keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  to  Peter,  i.e.  the  authoritative  knowledge 
by  which  that  Kingdom  could  be  gained.  Owing  to  the  excessive  sinful- 
ness of  the  nation  in  rejecting  and  killing  the  Messiah,  the  one  key  con- 
cerning the  Jews  (Acts  2  :  38),  was  given  to  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
while  the  other  key  pertaining  to  tiie  Gentiles  was  given  to  him  later  by 
special  revelation  (Acts  10  :  l-i8). 

Comp.  my  Art.  "The  Keys,"  in  Evang.  Review,  vol.  20,  p.  269  and  341.  Our  line  of 
argument  disproves  the  utterly  unfounded  assertion  of  Lord  Bolingbroke,  that  the  Gospel 
was  only  for  the  Jews,  and  that  Paul  was  the  first  one  who  saw  it  necessary  to  extend  it  to 
the  Gentiles,  which  he  did,  corrupting  it,  etc.  The  Key  of  Knowledge  \Ya,s  first  given  to 
Peter,  and  from  him  extended  to  the  others.  It  is  amazing,  m  the  light  of  the  predic- 
tions of  Jesus  and  the  fulfilment  in  Peter  (next  Obs.),  that  Keuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol.,  p. 
259),  can  say,  after  placing  tlie  call  of  the  Gentiles  prior  to  tiie  conversion  of  the  Centu- 
rion of  Caesarea  by"  a  simple  (?)  chronological  arrangement  :"  "  To  some  obscure  Cyreni- 
cians  and  men  of  Cyprus,  friends  of  the  illustrious  proto-martyr,  justly  belongs  then  the 
honor  of  having  been  the  first  to  break  down  the  barrier  which  limited  the  word  of  God 
within  the  sphere  of  the  Israelitish  nationality."  We,  however,  are  content  to  leave 
this  "  honor"  with  Peter,  to  whom  it  more  "  justly  belongs."  Reuss  unintentionally 
belittles  Peter  (making  him  weak  and  foolish)  and  the  other  apostles,  by  making  these 
unknown  (for  he  cannot  even  name  them)  preachers  persons  of  far  greater  enlightenment 
than  the  apostles  themselves,  adding  :  "  in  their  case,  no  visions,  ecstasies,  or  celestial 
voices  were  needed  to  enable  them  to  receive  the  positive  and  repeated  assurances  of 
the  Saviour.  ' 

Obs.  2.  This  doctrine  of  the  election  of  the  Jewish  nation,  is  one  so 
clearly  taught  that  it  was  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews.  The 
i-esult  was  that  no  addition  could  be  made  to  it  or  allowed  without  rt?^ 
extraordinary  Divine  revelation.  Hence  we  read  (Acts  11)  that  when 
**  the  apostles  and  brethren  that  were  in  Judea  heard  that  the  Gentiles  had 


Prop.  64.]  the  theocratic  kingdo:^!.  409 

also  received  the  word  of  God,"  they  contended  with  Peter  in  consequence 
of  his  thus  encouraging  the  Gentiles.  Peter  rehearsed  the  whole  matter  ; 
what  vision  he  had  seen  ;  what  directions  he  had  received  ;  what  results 
had  followed  ;  how  God  had  acknowledged  the  validity  of  such  an  engraft- 
ing of  Gentile  believers  by  the  bestowal  of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
This  was  satisfactory  ;  for  "  when  they  heard  these  things,  they  held  their 
peace,  and  glorified  God,  saying  :  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles 
granted  repentance  unto  life.''  On  a  later  occasion  when  the  dispute  was 
again  raised  by  a  few  respecting  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  under  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  Peter  interfered,  showing  how  the  Gentiles  through  him 
heard  the  Gospel  and  believed,  the  Holy  Ghost  testifying  to  the  same. 
Then  Paul  and  Barnabas  increased  the  force  of  the  testimony  by  relating 
what  miracles  and  wonders  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  through 
them.  The  result  of  the  discussion  is  announced  by  James  (Acts 
15  :  13-21),  in  which  we  have  distinctively  three  things  presented  :  (1)  The 
election  and  incorporation  of  the  Gentiles,  "  Simeon  hath  declared  ho2v  God 
at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  His 
name  f  (2)  the  identification  of  this  elect  people  with  them  (the  Jews)  in 
the  covenanted  Kingdom,  "  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the ptrophets,  as 
it  is  written,  '  after  this'  (viz.  :  after  this  people  are  gathered  out)  '  /  tvill 
return  and  will  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof  and  I  will  set  it  up,'  '' — both  elect 
enjoying  this  restored  Theocratic-Dav'idic  Kingdom  ;  (3)  the  blessings  that 
would  follow  this  restoration,  "  that  the  residue  of  men,'"  etc. 

The  comments  of  various  commentators  are  exceedingly  unsatisfactory  (as  also  of 
writers,  e.g.  Hengstenberg's  Christ,  B.  3,  p.  233,  etc.),  simply  because  they  forget  to  place 
themselves  in  the  Jewish  position,  ignore  the  necessity  of  adoption  and  incorporation, 
and  misapprehend  the  nature  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  Even  Olshausen,  generally 
good  in  noticing  the  intent  of  passages,  is  here  weak  and  uninstructive,  while  such  com- 
mentators  as  Barnes  (loci)  flatly  contradict  their  own  Church-Kingdom  theory  by  admit- 
ting a  line  of  reasoning  which  is  fatal  to  it.  For  Barnes  admits  (1)  that  this  has  refer- 
ence to  Messianic  time  ;  (2)  that  these  times,  thus  described,  are  identified  with  a  Jewish 
restoration  to  great  prosperity  and  blessings,  etc.  But  the  Messianic  times  and  King- 
dom cannot  be  thus  established,  as  predicted,  because  no  such  prosperity,  no  such  res- 
toration came  upon  the  Jews  at  the  First  Advent  ;  instead  of  such  a  fulfilment  history 
records  the  sad  fate  of  the  nation.  It  is  true  that  Barnes  and  others  endeavor  to  shield 
their  view  under  the  ever-convenient  but  pitiful  subterfuge  of  making  this  prediction 
emblematical  of  the  favor  of  God  and  of  other  blessings  than  those  specified. 

The  entire  history  of  the  election  of  Gentile  believers  indicates,  from  the  jealousy  with 
which  it  was  regarded  and  the  divine  proofs  that  had  to  be  necessarily  attached  to  it, 
that  in  the  minds  of  the  apostles  and  believing  Jews  it  was  connected  and  blended  with 
their  own  national  election  ;  it  was  regarded  as  a  virtual  engrafting  and  adoption  as  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  to  whom  the  covenants  and  promises  belonged.  If  it  be  asked  why 
such  a  rev3lation  was  necessary,  owing  to  a  previous  admission  of  Gentiles  as  proselytes, 
the  answer  is,  that  the  former  system  of  admission  being  abrogated,  and  the  Abrahamic 
covenant  being  renewed  and  pertaining  exclusively  to  the  faithful  portion  of  the  Jews,  it 
was  requisite,  if  the  Gentiles  were  to  be  adopted,  etc.,  to  show  how  this  could  be  ac- 
complished. 

Obs.  3.  Various  authors  of  eminence  have  unjustly  accused  the  apostles, 
and  especially  Peter,  of  being  "  too  Jewish"  in  their  views  respecting  the 
call  of  the  Gentiles.  But  in  the  light  of  the  covenants  and  the  election, 
ho7u,  we  ask,  could  they  be  otherwise  ?  It  will  not  answer,  as  some  defend- 
ers ol  Christianity,  to  assume  that  this  "  Jewish  exclusiveness"  was  merely 
"  a  husk"  enveloping  something  else  ;  for  we  find  this  alleged  "  husk"  a?i 
imjjortant  and  indispensable  element  even  down  to  the  present  day.     Recent 


410  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  64. 

Christian  writers  may,  rather  sarcastically,  remark  that  Peter  thought  that 
*^  the  Gentiles  must  be  brought,  as  it  were,  over  the  bridge  of  Judaism  into 
the  Kingdom  of  God."  But  Peter  had  no  riglit  to  think  otherwise  nntil 
God  revealed  the  matter  to  him  how  Gentiles  could  be  engrafted  and  also 
become  of  the  elect  people  without  observing  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of 
Judaism.  In  this  whole  affair,  the  apostles  sustained  tlie  very  attitude 
required  by  our  Propositions  concerning  the  covenants  and  election. 

The  criticisms  of  some  writers  on  Peter  are  of  such  a  nature  that  it  almost  seems  as 
if  they  thought  th^  keys  were  given  to  themselves  instead  of  being  presented  to  Peter. 
It  wil]  not  answer  to  say,  as  some  do,  that  salvation  is  just  as  necessary  to  the  Gentile 
as  it  is  to  the  Jew,  and  hence  that  no  difference  is  made,  no  engrafting  takes  place,  etc. 
Admitting  that  both  need  salvation,  the  question  to  be  constantly  kept  before  us  is  how 
God  Himself  arranges  and  carries  out  His  Divine  Purpose  of  Salvation.  The  objection, 
if  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  such,  might  with  equal  propriety  be  alleged  against  jDreceding 
dispensations  (as  e.g.  the  choice  of  the  Jewish  nation,  its  Theocratic  relationship,  etc.), 
and  even  against  this  one,  seeing  what  little  provision  has  been  made  for  the  salvation 
of  the  heathen  of  past  centuries,  although  they  also  needed  salvation.  A  Christian  cannot 
thus  object,  because  God,  who  is  all-wise  and  merciful,  undoubtedly  selects  the  best 
methods  by  which  (in  the  briefest  time,  consistent  with  man's  moral  freedom  and  His 
own  Purposes),  to  attain  to  the  ultimate  Redemption  of  the  world  with  the  least  loss  and 
with  the  greatest  honor  to  His  moral  government.  Hence  we,  unable  to  grasp  the  in- 
numerable details  and  principles  underlying  a  Divine  Plan  only  partially  unfolded, 
should  not  set  ourselves  up  as  judges  and  arbiters  of  the  matter,  but  simply  receive  the 
mode  indicated  by  the  Word  itself.  Such  writers  as  Froude  {IShort  Studies,  p.  239), 
when  they  proclaim  "  the  narrow  littleness  of  '  the  peculiar  people,'  "  of  course  do  not 
regard  the  covenanted  Theocratic  relationship,  etc.,  but  seek  after  objections  to  gratify 
their  own  "  high-mindedness." 

Obs.  4.  The  pronouncing,  by  Paul,  of  this  election  of  Gentile  believers 
as  "  a  mystery,^ ^ — something,  which,  in  view  of  the  elected  position  of  the 
Jews,  was  unexplained  and  to  human  reason  inexplicable, — confirms  our 
line  of  reasoning.  That  which  made  ''  the  mystery,"  was  the  sole  and 
exclusive  promise  given  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  the  solving  of  '*  the  mys- 
tery," was  the  making  known  li02v  the  Gentiles  could  be  incorporated  zuith 
the  elect  nation. 

Ohs.  5.  Even  the  intimations  given  by  Jesus,  before  his  death,  could 
not  break  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples  the  force  of  this  exclusive  promise, 
until  it  was  also  shown  how  the  Gentiles  could  become  the  seed  of  Abraham 
without  observing  the  rites,  etc.,  of  a  previously  ordained  proselytism.  In 
the  nature  of  the  case,  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  and  it  increases  our  ad- 
miration of  the  correct  knowledge  and  attitude  assumed  by  the  disciples. 

Let  us  briefly  survey  one  of  those  intimations  as  given  in  Matt.  12  :  14-22.  Here  we 
liave— (1)  the  Pharisees  holding  a  council,  and  consulting  to  destroy  Him  ;  (2)  when  Jesus 
knew  it,  He  withdrew  from  thence,  and  "  charged  them  (the  people  that  followed)  that 
thej'"  should  not  make  Him  known,"  in  order  that  two  things  "  might  be  fulfilled  :  (a) 
His  submissiveness  to  suffering  and  death,  and  (6)  in  view  of  His  rejection  by  the  nation 
and  the  nation's  fall,  the  call  and  election  of  Gentiles.  But  in  this,  as  in  others,  the  man- 
ner of  incorporation  is  passed  by,  it  being  left  for  future  revealment.  Some  writers  (as 
e.g.  Potter,  Freedom,  and  Fellowship  in  Belig.,  p.  207),  assign  to  Paul,  and  not  to  Peter,  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles  ;  but  this  is  opposed  to  the  divine  statements  (Obs,  1  and  2).  It 
is  confounding  Paul's  special  apostleship  to  the  Gentiles  with  the  call,  and  it  is  setting 
up  a  claim  for  Paul  which  he  never  assumed. 

Ohs.  G.  Dr.  Reuss  (His.  Ch.  Tlieol,  p.  151)  adduces  as  proof  that  the 
Kingdom  itself  changed  its  nature  and  became  spiritual,  the  removal  of 


PeOP.  64.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KII^GDOM.  411 

exclusiveness  in  the  call  of  the  Gentiles.  But  this  is  a  strange  and  most 
erroneous  inference.  Paul  tells  us  in  Rom.  ch.  11,  Jesus  declares  in  Matt. 
21  :  4:3,  other  passages  assert,  that  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  resulted,  not 
from  a  change  in  the  Kingdom  {God  forhid),  but,  from  the  posture  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  viz.  :  its  delilierate  rejection  of  the  King  and  tendered  King- 
dom. To  argue  that  the  Kingdom  itself  was  changed  to  accommodate  it  to 
the  Gentiles,  is  to  violate  the  covenants,  to  anmd  God's  oath  to  David,  to 
make  the  Gentiles  anotlier  separate  and  superior  elect  nation,  in  brief,  to 
override  the  important  and  scripturally  sustained  reasons  given  in  preced- 
ing Propositions.  Reuss'  position  (which  only  illustrates  that  of  multi- 
tudes) is  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  the  prophets  (Prop.  35),  who, 
although  announcing  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  never  intimate  the 
slightest  change  in  the  Kingdom,  but  constantly  refer  to  it  as  the  restored 
Theocratic-Davidic.  It  is  hostile  to  the  express  declarations  of  the  apostles, 
who,  when  in  council  to  consider  the  relationship  of  the  Gentiles,  announce 
that  it  is  not  in  conflict  with  the  still  future  restoration  of  the  fallen  taber- 
nacle of  David.  It  is  contradictory  to  the  entire  tenor  of  the  Word,  which 
only  predicts  and  promises  one  Kingdom,  the  restored  Davidic,  for  the 
elect  to  inherit.  The  theories  which  require  for  their  support  a  present 
existing  Davidic  Kingdom,  must,  of  necessity,  not  only  advocate  a  change, 
although  it  is  an  ignoring  of  the  most  precise  covenants,  but  seek  in  its  be- 
half the  lame  apologies  already  so  abundantly  presented. 

This  subject  of  the  election  and  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  with  the  engrafting  on  the 
principle  of  faith,  fully  accounts  why  Paul  enters  so  largely  into  the  matter  of,  and  lays 
so  much  stress  on,  the  doctrine  of  justification  through  faith.  The  contrast  between  his 
writings  and  that  of  the  other  apostles  in  this  particular  is  so  great  that  some  have  con- 
cluded it— erroneously — to  be  "  another  Gospel."  But  ihe,  key  is  to  be  found  in  his 
being  specially  appointed  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  His  very  mission  made  this  a 
very  significant  and  highly  important  topic,  and  consequently,  in  faithfulness  to  his 
calling,  he  enlarges  upon  it. 


412  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  65, 


Proposition  65.  Before  this  Kingdom  can  he  given  to  this  elect 
l^eople^  they  must  first  he  gathered  out. 

The  nature  of  the  Kingdom  as  covenanted,  and  the  rejection  of 
the  Kingdom  by  the  chosen  nation  (making  such  a  gathering  requi- 
site), requires  such  an  arrangement.  The  introduction  of  the  faith 
j)rinciple,  by  which  Abraham  was  justitied  before  circumcision  took 
place,  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham,  merely  produces  ^^  the 
heirs^^^  who  inherit  the  Kingdom.  The  elect  are  "  the  guests," 
who  are  first  all  invited  and  furnished  before  the  marriage  feast 
takes  place.  The  Kingdom  is  not  given — in  the  sense  of  being 
actually  realized — to  them  one  by  one  as  gathered,  but  when  all  are 
gathered. 

Obs.  1.  This  final  gathering  of  all  the  elect  "  from  one  end  of  heaven  to 
the  other,"  at  the  period  of  inheriting  the  Kingdom,  is  mentioned,  e.g. 
Matt.  24  :  31  ;  Mark  13  :  27  ;  2  Thess.  2  :  1,  etc. 

It  is  a  query,  whether  in  such  passages  as  Matt.  24  :  31  there  is  not  a  reference  to 
the  Jewish  nation.  The  elect  nation,  after  a  time  of  punishment,  is  also  to  be  gathered 
out  of  all  nations.  Jesus  was  speaking  to  Jews  who  believed  their  nation  to  be  the 
chosen,  elect  one,  and  His  language  would  necessarily  lead  them  to  apply  it  to  the  gath- 
ering of  the  nation  as  predicted  by  the  prophets.  Tlie  special  point  made  by  the  Sav- 
iour is,  that  such  a  gathering  can  only  take  place  after  the  period  of  tribulation  has  run 
its  allotted  course  (comp.  Props.  111-114),  This  includes,  however,  as  other  passages 
teach,  the  gathering  out  of  those  also  who  are  incorporated — who  are  deemed  worthy  of  a 
Theocratic  position  in  the  Kingdom.  Bonet,  in  his  address,  Christianity  and  the  Gospel, 
before  the  Evang.  Alliance  for  1873,  defines  even  the  word  "saint"  to  mean  "set 
apart," 

Ohs.  2.  This  Kingdom  is  promised  to  the  direct  faithful  seed  of  Abra- 
ham, and  it  is  incorporated  with  the  Jewish  nation  through  the  adopted 
and  amalgamated  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  It  is  likewise 
promised  to  the  engrafted  seed,  but  necessarily  subject  to  the  same  incor- 
poration. Hence,  until  this  seed  is  openly  manifested  in  its  nationally 
engrafted  character  witli  the  Jewish  elect  nation  (a  restoration  of  the  nation 
being  imijeraiive  to  fulfil  covenants),  the  Kingdom  as  promised  and  pre- 
dicted cannot  be  established. 

Therefore,  in  view  of  this,  a  petition  occurring  in  the  Burial  Service  of  the  Church 
of  England  has  often  arrested  the  attention  of  the  writer,  viz.  :  "  That  it  may  please 
Thee,  of  Thy  gracious  goodness,  shortly  to  accomplish  the  number  of  Thine  Elect,  and  to 
hasten  Thy  Kingdom.'"  Not  keeping  in  view  the  design  for  which  the  election  is  made, 
viz.  :  to  qualify  men  for  the  future  divine  administration  of  the  restored  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  Fairbairn  {On  Proph  ,  p.  263)  applies  things  to  the  restored  Jewish  nation  in 
its  un-theocratic  form  (i.e.  without  the  Davidic  covenant  literally  realized  in  a  personal 
reign  of  the  Messiah,  David's  Son),  which  only  refer  to  the  elect  saints,  viz.  :  that  por- 
tion accounted  worthy  to  rule  in  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  when  the  restoration  is 
effected.  The  Jewish  nation  in  the  flesh  is  subordinate  to  these  firstborn  glorified  rulers, 


Prop.  65.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  418 

and  while  the  latter  come  in  the  elect  covenanted  line,  yet  they  are  superior  to  the  for- 
mer in  honor,  station,  and  privileges.  The  reader's  indulgence  is  asked,  for  it  is  yet  too 
early  in  our  argument  to  give  more  than  these  hints.     Compare  Props.  118, 153,  and  154. 

Obs.  3.  In  view  of  the  Kingdom  being  thus  future,  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect  such  futurity  to  be  specified  in  connection  with  the  election.  This 
is  done  in  various  places,  as  e.g.  2  Pet.  1  :  10,  11,  the  election  is  stated  and 
faithfulness  enjoined  that  an  entrance  may  be  secured  hereafter  into  the 
Kingdom.  In  1  Pet.  1  :  2-13,  the  elect  are  mentioned,  and  they  are 
pointed  to  tlie  future,  even  to  the  revelation  of  Christ,  for  their  inheritance. 
So  in  Eph.  1  :  4,  these  chosen  ones  are  directed  to  the  future  gathering  for 
their  inheritance.  Tlie  Word  does  not  contradict  itself.  Therefore  this 
futurity  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  basis  of  the  numerous  exhortations  to  obtain 
it,  to  walk  worthily  of  it,  to  look,  seek,  and  pray  for  it. 

Ohs.  4.  God  for  a  time  leaving  the  nation  first  bidden,  and  treating  the 
Jews  as  individuals  (i.e.  not  in  their  national  relationship),  now  invites 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  become  this  people  of  faith,  and  through  Peter, 
to  whom  this  knowledge  was  imparted,  the  relation  of  these  elect  to  the 
Kingdom,  in  the  age  to  come,  is  fully  and  explicitly  stated.  There  is  a 
fitness  in  this,  that  the  apostle  selected  to  indicate  this  election  should  also 
refer  the  Kingdom  to  the  future  for  manifestation  and  realization.  In 
addition  to  the  passages  quoted  from  him,  the  reader  may  turn  to  his  ser- 
mon. Acts  3  :  19-26,  where  the  eye  of  faith  is  directed  to  tlie  coming  again 
of  Jesus  and  the  accompanying  "  restitution  of  alt  things.^ ^  In  no  place  is 
it  asserted,  that  the  promised  covenanted  Kingdom  was  already  in  posses- 
sion of  the  elect,  for  such  a  statement  would  he  patjjahly  contradictory  to 
the  most  sacred  portions  of  Holy  Writ,  viz.  :  to  tlie  covenants, 

Ohs.  5.  This  Kingdom  is  to  be  given  to  all  of  the  elected  nation,  both 
believing  Jews  of  natural  descent  and  engrafted  Gentiles,  to  all  believers, 
therefore,  that  have  ever  lived  ;  and  it  will  be  bestowed  upon  hoth  at  the 
same  time,  including  the  Patriarchs,  ancient  worthies,  faithful  Jews,  and 
believing  adopted  Gentiles.  One  portion  of  the  elect  cannot  inherit  hefore 
the  other  portion  ;  hoth  stand  precisely  upon  the  same  footing  and  obtain 
through  the  identical  election  and  covenants  the  same  inheritance.  (The 
rejection  by  the  nation  of  the  tender,  does  not  change  the  nature  of  it, 
other  guests  are  invited  and  participate  instead  of  those  previously  urged, 
and  now  under  a  cloud  for  their  refusal.)  In  reference  to  one  portion  of 
these  elect,  Paul  informs  us.  (Heb.  11  :  39,  40),  after  enumerating  a  long 
list  of  worthies,  "  these  all  received  not  the  promise^^  ^^  that  they  without 
lis  should  not  he  made pter feet.' "^  None  of  the  present  saints,  (viz.  :  of  this 
dispensation,)  have  inherited  the  Kingdom,  for  the  inheriting  is  placed  in 
the  future,  as  e.g.  Matt,  25  :  34.  The  Kingdom  is  promised  to  both, 
forming  the  one  elect  hody,  but  those  things  which  belong  to  the  actual 
realization  of  the  Kingdom,  such  as  inheriting,  receiving  the  crown,  reign- 
ing, etc.,  are  all,  as  the  reader  will  find  by  a  comparison  of  passages,  related 
to  the  future.  The  saints,  the  elect  of  this  and  previous  dispensations,  are 
represented  as  waiting  for  the  Kingdom  (comp.  Rev.  6  :  9-11  ;  Luke 
18  :  7,  8  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5-10  ;  Rom.  8  :  23,  etc.). 

Whatever  the  intermediate  state  may  be,  whether  in  Hades  simply  (as  some  assert),  or 
in  Paradise  in  Hades  (as  others  claim),  or  in  the  third  heaven  (as  some  announce), 


414  THE   THEOCEATIG   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  65, 

etc.,  one  thing  is  clearly  demonstrable,  viz.:  that  the  inheriting  of  the  Kingdom,  the 
receiviiig  of  the  crown,  the  obtalniny  of  the  distinctive  reward  as  allied  with  covenanted 
promises,  are  all  still  future,  always  linked  with  the  future  resurrection  of  the  just  or 
allied  with  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Bible  is  explicit  on  this  point,  and  the 
covenants  absolutely  require  this  to  preserve  the  requisite  unity.  Let  the  reader  compare 
what  is  said  on  the  intermediate  state.  Prop.  136. 

Obs.  6.  This  Kingdom  is  to  be  given  at  a  specified  appointed  time  known 
to  God.  Without  now  discussing  the  predictions,  we  only  refer  to  the  fact 
that  before  "  the  Kingdom,  and  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of  the  Kingdom 
tinder  the  lohole  heaven  shall  lie  given  to  the  people  of  the  saitits  of  the  Most 
High^\  Dan.  7),  a  certain  period  of  time  must  first  elapse,  certain  events 
must  first  transpire,  and  then  the  Kingdom  is  bestowed.  It  is  given  to  this 
people  at  a  particular  time  or  era.  The  parable  of  the  talents  ("  after  a 
long  time,''  etc.),  and  of  the  tares  and  wheat,  the  delineation  of  2  Thess.  2, 
and  of  other  passages,  illustrate  this  same  truth. 

Obs.  7.  In  comparing  Scripture,  it  will  be  found  that  this  period  of  time 
is  stated  to  be  at  the  era  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  ivhen  this  Kingdom  will  be 
bestowed  upon  the  elect.  Matt.  25  :  34  ;  Luke  12  :  32  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5-10, 
etc.  Hence  the  elect  are  represented  as  "  called  "  (1  Thess.  2  :  12)  to  this 
Kingdom,  to  '' «  patient  waiting  for  Christ  "  (2  Thess.  3:5),  and  "  His 
appearing  and  Kingdom""  (2  Tim.  4  :  1)  are  united  ; — they  are  ex- 
horted to  endure  trials  that  (2  Thess.  1  :  5)  "  ye  may  be  counted  ivorthij 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God.'^  To  these  might  be  added  numerous  passages, 
which  will  appear  as  we  proceed  ;  in  the  meantime,  the  reader  is  reminded 
that  this  accurately  corresponds  with  what  has  preceded  and  what  follows  in 
our  argument. 

"We  only  remind  the  reader,  as  an  indication  of  a  Divine  Purpose  and  Providence,  that 
as  the  larger  number  of  the  elect,  the  great  mass,  are  taken  out  of  the  Gentiles,  the  time 
chosen  for  this  call  of  the  Gentiles  was  signally  opportune.  Thus  e.g.  the  change  from 
the  Hebrew  to  the  Hellenistic  language  was  one  of  the  providential  movements  prepara- 
tory to  this  calling,  and  facilitated  the  same.  The  time  specified  in  the  Obs.  and  the 
delay  of  the  Kingdom,  until  the  number  of  the  elect  is  completed,  has  been  noticed  by 
many  able  writers.  Thus  e.g.  Olshausen  {Com.  Acts  1  :  6-8),  remarks,  in  connection  with 
referring  "  the  times  of  refreshing  and  restitution"  to  the  personal  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  : 
"  The  conversion  of  men,  therefore,  and  the  diffusion  of  faith  in  Christ,  are  the  con- 
ditions of  the  speedy  approach  of  that  blessed  time — a  thought  which  occurs  again  in  2 
Pet.  3  :  9." 

Obs.  8.  It  may  be  added,  that  this  future  Kingdom  covenanted  to  the 
elect  nation,  and  which  the  elect,  including  the  promised  Seed,  are  to 
inherit,  is  explicitly  called  Christ's  Kingdom.  This  ought  to  be  so,  if  our 
position  is  correct,  and  has  already  been  foreshown  under  Prop.  45,  etc. 
The  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent  is  distinctively  called  "  His  Kingdom,^' 
as  e.g.  2  Tim.  4:1;  Matt.  13  :  41  ;  Luke  22  :  30  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  11,  etc.  We 
are  gravely  told  (comp.  Prop.  159)  by  a  multitude  that  Christ  at  the  end 
of  this  dispensation  at  His  Sec.  Advent,  will  deliver  up  "  His  Kingdom," 
so  that,  if  we  are  to  receive  their  theory,  no  such  distinctive  Kingdom  is  to 
Qxht  after  the  Advent  for  the  elect  to  inherit.  But  this  notion  is  to  be 
rejected  as  titteidy  untenable  and  contradictory  to  the  entire  tenor  of  the 
Word,  wliicli  locates  the  Messianic  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent  (comp. 
Prop.  159). 


Prop.  65.]  the  theo«eatic  kingdom.  415 

Ohs.  9.  In  studying  the  subject  of  tlie  Kingdom,  we  must  not  be  misled 
by  a  striking  peculiarity  of  Scripture,  viz.  :  that  things  still  future,  owing 
to  their  certainty,  are  spoken  of  as  inesent.  The  style  of  prediction  and 
promise,  dealing  largely  of  objects  of  faith  and  hope,  contains  this  feature 
as  has  been  noticed  by  many  writers.  Thus  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the 
great  object  of  faith  and  hope,  being  sure,  founded  on  the  Word  and  oath 
of  the  Almighty,  is  in  view  of  its  certainty  spoken  of  as  present,  being  re- 
ceived, etc.  (comp.  Prop.  109),  as  e.g.  in  Heb.  12  :  22-28  ;  Rom.  8  :  30  ; 
Rev.  1  :  6,  9,  etc.  To  take  such  passages,  given  through  the  intensity  of 
faith  and  hope,  and  make  them  contradictory  and  inconsistent  with  tlie 
general  analogy  of  the  Word,  is  certainly  both  unwise  and  unnecessary. 

The  illustrations  given  by  Macnight  in  his  Prelim.  Essays  on  the  Epistles  (Essay  4, 
s.  12,  from  the  Greek,  Matt.  3  :  10  ;  Mark  9  :  31  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  2,  12  ;  James  5  :  3  ;  2  Pet. 
3  :  11,  12),  prove  that,  as  he  says,  "  the  present  tense  is  often  put  for  the  future,  to  show- 
that  the  thing  spoken  of  shall  as  certainly  happen  as  if  it  were  already  present,"  He 
(as  well  as  many  commentators)  overlooks  this  feature  in  his  exegetical  comments  on 
various  passages.  The  illustrations  can  be  greatly  increased  indicative  of  the  sentiment 
of  Eom.  4  :  17,  He  "  calleth those  things  which  be  not  as  though  they  icere,"  as  in  Rom. 
8  :  30  "  them  He  also  glorified;'  in  1  Pet.  1  :  9  (see  connection),  Luke  1  :  51-53  ;  Isa.  9  :  6, 
many  of  the  Psls.,  etc.  Justin  Martyr,  long  ago,  in  his  First  Apology,  assigns  the  reason 
for  this  mode  of  expression,  "The  things  which  He  absolutely  knows  will  take  place, 
He  predicts  as  if  already  they  had  taken  place."  This  feature  heightens  the  Divine  in 
the  Word,  making  it  to'  speak  in  the  largeness  and  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  as  e.g.  in  that 
Divine  Purpose  portrayed  in  the  declaration  that  Jesus  is  "  tlie  Lamb  slain  from  the  foun- 
dation of  the  loorld''  (Rev.  13  :  8).  So  also  Neander  in  several  places  shows  how  the 
apostles  spoke  of  the  future  as  present,  although  he  forgets  his  own  admissions  in  com- 
menting on  several  passages.  Thus  e.g.  speaking  of  the  author  of  Hebrews  {His.  Plant, 
Ch.  Ch.,  vol.  2,  p.  5),  he  instances  ch.  10  :  22,  ch.  12  :  23,  and  ch.  12  :  28,  as  evidence 
that  "  to  Christians  the  future  is  by  faith  already  become  a  presents  And  (p.  13),  "  by 
means  of  faith  a  vital  connection  is  formed  between  the  Present  and  the  Future.  By 
means  of  faith,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  this  epistle,  the  Future  becomes  in  some 
measure  a  Present  to  the  mind,  although  this  Present  has  a  necessary  bearing  to  a  more 
perfect  development,  a  consummation  in  the  Future." 

Obs.  10.  The  reader  need  scarcely  be  reminded,  that  in  all  the  elect  ones, 
both  ancient  and  modern,  who  are  to  enjoy  the  Kingdom  of  God,  certain 
moral  qualifications  are  necessary  as  a  prerequisite.  The  natural  and 
engrafted  seed  of  Abraliam  must  all  he  of  faith  and  ohedience.  The  decisive 
argument  in  Romans  and  Hebrews  evinces  this  ;  for  while  the  seed  of 
Abraham  is  chosen,  not  every  individual  is  thus  favored  ;  while  the  nation 
is  elected  to  a  Theocratic  position,  not  every  member  of  it  will  be  saved  ; 
it  is  only  the  faithful  f)ortion  of  Abraham's  seed  that  is  commended  and 
that  will  be  exalted.  This  has  been  so  ably  represented  by  various  writers 
(as  Noel,  McNeill,  Bickersteth,  Bonar,  etc.),  that  it  only  requires  brief 
mention. 

It  may  be  added  :  this  requires  more  than  mere  knowledge,  viz.  :  the  practical  recep- 
tion of  the  truth  and  a  heartfelt  obedience  to  the  same,  lest  we  fall  into  the  "  delusion" 
specified  by  Dorner  {His.  Prot.  Theol,  vol.  1,  p.  19),  of  receiving  the  truth  merely  by  the 
mind  and  not  by  the  mind  and  heart— the  latter  alone  leading  to  a  personal  appropriation 
of  Christ,  influencing  heart  and  life  In  the  Obs.  ancient  and  modern  saints  are  pur- 
posely placed  in  the  same  position,  for  there  is  much  written  at  the  present  day  respect- 
ing the  inferiority  of  Old  Test,  saints,  grounded  on  their  being  justified  by  works,  the 
law,  etc.  This  is  certainly  a  misapprehension,  seeing  that  the  apostles  hold  up  the  be- 
lievers of  former  dispensations  as  pre-emineiit patterns  of  faith  {their  works  being  the  result 
of  faith)  and  that  their  lives  evinced,  in  obedience  to  God's  requirements,  the  strongest 
faith.  They  were  justified  by  faith,  and  not  by  the  law,  and  not  by  their  works,  how- 
ever, the  law  might  drive  to  faith,  and  the  works  might  evidence  the  purity  and  strength 


416  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  65. 

of  faith.  Hence,  as  faith  introduces  the  blessing  of  Redemption  through  Abraham,  and 
all  his  seed  are  of  faith,  we  cannot  receive  the  disparaging  remarks  of  eminent  writers  in 
this  direction.  Thus,  to  illustrate,  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  TheoL,  p.  290),  says,  alluding  to  con- 
version and  its  moral  results  :  "  The  new  relation  of  which  we  have  spoken  was  evi- 
dently an  individual  relation  between  the  believing  man  and  his  God.  Now  we  must 
remember  that  such  a  relation  had  no  existence  in  the  religious  sphere  of  Judaism,  which 
was  a  purely  and  essentially  national  institution,  the  members  of  which  had  rights  and 
duties  only  as  belonging  to  the  great  whole."  This  is  simply  overlooking  the  distinctive 
Theocratic  element  connected  with  this  nationality,  which  bound  the  individual  member 
to  his  Sovereign  Ruler.  The  tendency,  indeed,  constantly  was  to  ignore  this  Theocratic 
feature,  but  God  insisted  upon  its  retention  as  alone  honorable  to  Himself  as  the  Theo- 
cratic King. 

Ois.  11.  The  Kingdom  thus  given  to  these  elect  ones  does  Jiot  7'emove  the 
election  of  the  Jewish  nation  as  a  nation.  This,  aside  from  the  covenants 
and  the  Theocratic  ordering  allied  with  the  nation,  is  seen  from  the  fact, 
that  this  seed  gathered  out  is  virtually  regarded  as  jjart  and  parcel  of  the 
nation  (is  a  continuation  of  the  election,  Prop.  63),  and  when  the  nation 
is  nationally  restored  will  be  so  recognized  in  the  inheriting  with  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Again,  let  any  one  compare  Deut.  ch.  32,  Rom.  ch.  11, 
together  with  various  predictions  relating  to  this  elect  Jewish  nation,  and 
he  will  find  the  following  succinctly  stated  :  (1)  The  Jews  an  elect  nation 
(Prop.  24)  ;  (2)  this  nation  can  render  itself  unworthy  of  the  Kingdom  by 
disobedience  ;  (3)  by  its  own  conduct  it  will  bring  upon  itself  terrible  evils 
and  a  temjjorary  rejection  as  a  nation  ;  (4)  the  Theocratic  rulership  will 
be,  for  a  time,  withdrawn  ;  (5)  during  such  a  period  of  rejection,  God  still 
continues  His  work  of  gathering  out  of  it,  and  out  of  the  Gentiles,  the 
elect ;  (6)  but  the  nation  itself,  for  a  time  under  the  most  severe  tribula- 
tions, will,  owing  to  this  very  election  (being  "  deloved  for  the  Fathers 
sakes'^),  again — as  the  covenant  to  be  fulfilled  demands — be  restored  to  the 
favor  of  God.  This  nation,  therefore,  now  under  trial,  is  still  the  chosen 
nation,  and  this  will  Ite  manifested  in  due  time  (see  Props.  Ill  to  114). 
Hence  the  preference  (Luke  24  :  47  ;  Rom.  1  :  16  ;  Acts  3  :  25,  26  ; 
Rom.  2  :  10  ;  Acts  13  :  46,  and  19  :  21),  showed  to  this  nation  even  after 
the  day  of  Pentecost  in  preaching  the  Gospel — a  preference  based  only 
upon  this  election,  the  Jews  being,  by  virtue  of  their  relationship  to  Abra- 
ham, "  the  children  of  the  Kingdom,''''  and  the  descendants  of  those  who 
once  enjoyed  this  Kingdom  in  its  initiatory,  incipient  form.  The  natural 
seed  must  not,  therefore,  be  ignored  ;  and  only  upon  their  refusal  to 
accept  of  the  proffered  gospel  of  the  Kingdom  were  the  apostles,  and  even 
Paul,  authorized  to  seek  after  the  engrafted  ones.  One  of  the  darkest  pages 
in  the  history  of  Christianity  is  that  which  records  the  tendering  of  insult, 
wrong,  and  death  instead  of  the  precious  message  of  hope  and  peace  to 
this  covenant  favored  people. 

This  already  gives  us  the  clue  to  the  literal  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  promises,  con- 
firmed as  they  are  by  the  oath  of  God,  and  therefore  unconditional.  Thus  e.g.  the  prom- 
ise of  making  Abraham's  seed  a  miglity  nation  (which  has  specially  excited  the  ridicule 
of  infidels  in  comparing  the  feeble  Kingdom  of  Israel  with  the  mighty  empires  of  the 
earth)  will  be  realized  when  this  elect  nation  will  all  be  gathered  and  stand  associated 
with  the  restored  Theocratic  Kingdom.  It  does  not  require  much  reason  to  see,  that 
when  God's  Plan  is  carried  out  and  openly  manifested,  it  will  exceed  the  highest  eulo- 
gies that  the  Prophets  have  given,  and  most  amply  vindicate  God's  Word.  Let  all  the 
seed  of  Abraham  be  brought  together  at  the  appointed  time,  and  language  fails  to  ex- 
press the  might  and  grandeur  of  the  nation.  The  world  will  be  astonished  at  the  sublime 
manifestation. 


Prop.  Q5.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  417 

Waldegi'ave  {N'ew  Test  M'dlenarianism,  Lect.  3)  entirely  misapprehends  this  election  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  holding  that  the  continuance  of  the  election  by  the  engrafting  of  the 
Gentiles  forbids  any  future  special  manifestation  of  God's  favor  to  the  Jewish  nation,  as 
e.g.  to  bestow  upon  it  pre-eminence  over  Gentile  nations.  Much  that  "VValdegrave  saj's 
we  can  cordially  adopt,  excepting  his  extreme  in  this  direction,  seeing  that  he  does  not 
discriminate  between  the  pre-eminence  of  those  who  inherit  the  Kingdom  (i.e.  the  saints 
as  rulers)  and  that  of  the  nation  restored  among  and  over  the  nations  by  virtue  of  its  cov- 
enanted position  and  relationship  with  these  glorified  saints,  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
This  engrafting  process,  we  also  hold,  gives  "  a  perfect  equality  between  Jew  and  Gen- 
tile," and  it  is  likewise  correct  to  assert,  as  he  does,  that  "  the  believing  Gentile,  though 
uncircumcised,  is  much  more  really  a  child  of  Abraham  than  the  circumcised  Jew  who 
does  not  believe."  The  reason  for  this  has  been  fully  assigned  in  previous  Props.,  but 
this  does  not,  by  any  means,  necessitate  his  hasty  and  inconclusive  deductions,  which 
make  the  Davidic  covenant  and  numerous  prophecies  inoperative  and  unfulfilled. 

Obs.  12.  These  elect,  now  gathered  out,  are  in  the  various  denominations 
of  Christians.  The  diversity,  even  of  doctrine  and  practice,  does  not  inter- 
fere with  the  possession  of  the  living  engrafting  'principle  of  faith.  The 
former  arises  incidentally  from  the  liberty  allowed  to  humanity,  which, 
through  infirmity,  results  in  doubt  and  even  error  being,  more  or  less,  mixed 
with  apprehensions  of  the  truth  ;  the  latter,  however,  in  the  eyes  of  a  just 
and  merciful  God,  compensates,  if  followed  hy  corresponding  fruit  in  evi- 
dence of  its  sincerity,  for  the  weakness  exhibited  in  the  former.  The  one 
could  not  have  been  obviated  without  largely  infringing  man's  moral 
agency  ;  the  other  cannot  be  negatived  without  interfering  with  the  Divine 
Will  itself. 

The  reader  is  reminded  that  while  many  professors  are  rejected  and  few  are  chosen, 
it  is  also  true  that  out  of  those  saved  some  are  but  barely  saved,  as  by  fire,  and  cannot 
expect  to  enjoy  that  honor  of  position  that  others  realize  in  the  coming  Kingdom  (comp. 
Prop.  135).  Prosperity,  too,  is  no  sign  of  God's  special  favor,  for  Heb.  12  :  5-12  ; 
James  1  :  12  ;  Eev.  3  :  19,  etc.,  clearly  teach  that  trial,  adversity,  etc.,  are  often  but 
tokens  of  God's  love  toward  His  elect.  With  Paul  (Col.  1  :  24),  they  fill  up  the  measure 
of  Christ's  sufferings,  for  being  designed  as  co-heirs,  co-rulers  with  Christ,  it  is  essential 
that  they  become  in  all  things  Christ-like,  imitating  Him  and  cultivating  His  spirit,  which 
can  only  be  done  by  being  tested  and  tried,  as  Jesus  Himself  was  afflicted,  so  that  they 
may  partake  of  His  glory.  Enduring  temptation  and  trial  is  indicative  of  a  projDer  ap- 
prehension of  Christ,  of  the  Spirit  and  truth  abiding  with  us,  of  our  being  truly  the 
children  of  God,  of  our  being  the  elect.  But  while  enduring,  under  trial,  fighting  the 
good  fight  of  faith,  it  is  not  for  us  to  sit  in  judgment  over  others  who  may  be  struggling 
and  tried  as  we  are  ;  it  is  siifficient  to  realize  in  our  own  experience  God's  leadings  and 
to  enjoy  the  sweet  consciousness  of  His  favor  in  the  fulfilment  of  promises  pertaining  to 
the  present  life. 

Obs.  13.  This  elect  people  are  charged  with  folly  by  others,  because 
they  trust  in  covenanted  promises,  and  in  the  Seed  by  whom  they  shall  be 
fulfilled.  This  was  predicted  many  centuries  ago,  Deut.  32  :  21,  and  is 
pointedly  referred  to  in  1  Cor.  1  :  25-28. 

Ohs,  14.  Many  claim,  some  arrogantly,  that  they  alone  are  these  elected 
ones  and  all  others,  outside  of  their  organization  or  doctrinal  position,  are 
excluded.  This  is  simply  presumption  ;  for  it  ever  remains  true  what  is 
stated  in  Matt.  7  :  21-23,  etc.  Profession  is  not  God's  judgment  ;  and 
these  elect  will  be  made  manifest  when  the  Judge  cometh. 

Julius  Miiller  (quoted  by  Dr.  Sprecher  in  The  L%dh.  Evangelist,  1877)  forcibly  ob- 
serves :  "As  an  inalienable  acquisition — derived  by  the  Protestant  Church  out  of  the 
sad  decay  of  its  orthodox  theology,  especially  in  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen- 


418  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  65. 

tury  and  after,  out  of  the  Pietistic  and  Moravian  reactions,  and  out  of  the  revival  of  liv- 
ing faith  in  the  present  century — we  must  regard  the  conviction  that  the  faith  which 
saves  does  not  consist  in  the  adoption  of  a  series  of  articidi  fundamentales  primarii,  but  in  an 
absolute  and  truthful  surrender  of  one's  self  to  the  personal  ISaviour  ;  a  surrender  of  which  the 
simplest  child  is  capable.  Although  this  conviction  may  in  the  next  few  years  have  to 
sustain  violent  attacks  and  be  branded  as  heresy — the  attacks  have,  indeed,  already  be- 
gun—yet it  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  Divine  Word  and  in  the  fundamental  religious 
sentiment  of  the  Reformers,  that  we  cannot  but  have  confidence  in  its  final  triumi)h." 

Obs.  15.  The  Kingdom  with  its  attendant  blessings,  being  the  same  ten- 
dered to  both  Jew  and  Gentile  believer,  at  once  removes  the  objection 
urged  against  the  Bible  in  the  following  extract.  One  of  the  advocates  of 
"  the  Absolute  Religion"  (quoted  by  Birks,  p.  413  in  The  Bible  find  Mod. 
Thought),  speaking  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  says  :  "  One  offers  only  an 
earthly  recompense,  the  other  makes  immortality  a  motive  to  the  Divine 
life."  "  If  Christianity  and  Judaism  be  not  the  same  thing,  there  must 
be  hostility  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  for  the  Jewish  form 
claims  to  be  eternal.  To  an  unprejudiced  man,  this  hostility  is  very 
obvious.  It  may  indeed  be  s^id,  Christianity  came  not  to  destroy  the  Law 
and  the  Prophets  but  to  fulfil  them  ;  and  the  answer  is  plain,  their  fulfil- 
ment  was  their  destruction.'"  Our  line  of  argument  clearly  shows  afu7ida- 
onental  union  and  vital  connection  between  the  two  :  it  also  proves  the  per - 
iMual  election  of  a  seed  and  the  ultimate  fulfilment  in  that  Abrahamic  seed 
of  all  that  has  been  covenanted,  promised,  and  predicted  in  the  Old  and 
New  Tests.  The  prevailing  view,  which  introduces  the  antagonism  and 
hostility  alluded  to  by  its  transmutations  of  covenant  and  promise,  is  alone 
chargeable  with  suggesting  the  objection. 


PeOP.  66.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  419 


Proposition  66.  The  Kingdom  that  ivas  nigh  at  one  time  {viz. : 
at  the  First  Advent)  to  the  Jeivish  nation^  is  noiv  removed  to 
the  dose  of  its  trihulation^  and  of  "'  the  times  of  the  Gentilesr 

This  can  be  distinctly  inferred  from  what  23receded  (as  e.g.  Props. 
58,  59,  6b\  especially  since  that  Kingdom  is  now  linked  in  the  New 
Test,  with  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Christ. 

Obs.  1.  Let  us  again  refer  to  Luke  21  :  31,  in  which  it  is  stated  "  2vJien 
ye  see  these  things  come  to  pass,  knoiv  ye  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  nigh 
at  hand.^'  Now  among  '^  these  things^'  which  are  first  to  happen  are  the 
Jewish  tribulation  and  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles''  (v.  24),  and  when  these 
come  to  pass,  and  Jerusalem  is  no  longer  under  Gentile  dominion,  and  the 
Adv^ent  (v.  27)  of  the  Saviour  is  witnessed,  then  the  Kingdom  will  be 
estabhshed.  So  long  as  "  the  city  of  the  great  King,"  and  so  long  as  His 
land.  His  by  inheritance  (Prop.  IIG),  as  David's  Son,  is  under  Gentile 
dominion,  it  is  simply  impossible  for  tiie  Kingdom  to  exist ;  and  it  is  folly 
to  argue,  with  the  light  of  the  Davidic  covenant  and  prophetic  announce- 
ments relating  to  it,  that  the  Messianic  Kingdom  has  been  set  up.  This 
Jewish  tribulation,  these  times  of  the  Gentiles,  this  gathering  out  of  an 
elect,  the  nonfulfilment  of  "  these  things," — these,  and  a  multitude  (in 
following  Propositions),  of  considerations,  show  that  it  is  thus  postponed. 

Efforts  are  made  to  break  the  force  of  our  reasoning  by  interpreting  Luke  in  a  manner 
inconsistent  both  with  the  context  and  the  facts  of  history.  Thus  e.g.  Barnes  {^Com. 
loci),  while  reluctantly  admitting  an  ulterior  reference  to  the  Sec.  Advent  in  Luke's  dis- 
course, endeavors  to  make  "  the  redemption"  (v.  28),  in  order  to  agree  with  his  Church- 
Kingdom  theory,  to  consist  in  a  deliverance  from  Jewish  persecution,  forgetting  that  the 
Church  was  soon  after  given  over  to  far  more  severe  series  of  persecutions  under  the 
Eoman  emperors.  If  this  was  all  that  the  Saviour  meant,  how  could  they  rejoice  in  such 
a  deliverance  when  greater  trials  were  impending?  It  is  an  utter  perversion  of  the  pas- 
sage. But  they  involve  themselves  in  still  greater  absurdities,  for  they  tell  us  that  the 
Kingdom  of  v.  31  is  the  Church,  although  it  is  spoken  of  as  not  established,  but  only 
"  nigh  at  hand,"  when  they  know  full  well  that  the  Ch.  Church  was  founded  hefore  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  dispersion  of  the  nation,  and  that  the  Gospel  was  pro- 
claimed throughout  the  Roman  Empire.  The  inconsistency  of  many  of  this  class  is  the 
more  glaring,  since,  when  we  turn  to  their  comments  on  Matt.  24  :  33,  on  the  same  para- 
ble, they  allow  that  it  has  a  decided  reference  to  the  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent.  Some 
give  it  a  double  meaning,  making  it  to  refer  to  deliverance  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem and  also  lo  deliverance  at  the  coming  again  of  the  Son  of  man.  This  only  indicates 
weakness.  Again,  Prof.  E.  W.  Hengstenberg  {TJie  Jews  and  the  Ch.  Church,  p.  66),  weak- 
ens the  force  of  Christ's  own  prediction  by  asserting  :  "  The  treading  down  of  Jerusalem 
by  the  heathen  has  already  twice  ceased— once  under  Constantine,  and  once  in  the  time 
of  the  Crusades,  when  a  Christian  (?)  Kingdom  existed  at  Jerusalem."  This  (1)  invali- 
dates the  continuous  treading  down  of  Jerusalem  until  certain  "  times  of  the  Gentiles" 
are  fulfilled  ;  (2)  it  makes  the  "  times  of  the  Gentiles"  to  be  an  exact  equivalent  of  "  the 
times  of  the  heathen,"  which  it  is  not,  for  in  its  broader  meaning  it  denotes  all  nations 
who  are  not  of  the  Jewish  race  or  of  the  observances  of  the  Jewish  religion.  It  has  ref- 
erence to  nations  other  than  the  Jewish  ;  (3)  it  makes  the  phrase  expressive  of  nations 
who  do  not  profess  Chi-istianity,  which  was  not  its  meaning  when  uttered  by  Jesus  ;  (4) 


420  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  66. 

it  does  not  preserve  the  relationship  of  the  Jews  to  the  city,  which  the  overthrow  and 
subsequent  restoration  makes  necessary  ;  (5)  it  substitutes  a  nation,  the  Roman  under 
Constantine,  and  in  its  divided  form  at  the  Crusades,  as  if  it  were  an  exact  equivalent  of 
the  Jewish  nation  ;  (6)  it  forgets  that  under  Constantine  and  the  Crusades  the  Jews  were 
badly  treated,  and  had  no  power  in  and  over  the  city  ;  (7)  it  overlooks  the  fact  that  the 
very  power  which  held  the  cit}--  at  the  times  designated  is  delineated  as  "  a  beast"  even 
down  to  the  end,  as  e.g.  the  fourth  beast  power  in  Dan.  2  and  7  ;  (8)  to  make  out  such  a 
cessation,  linked  as  it  is  with  the  dispersion  and  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  is  to 
pervert  a  standing  proof  of  inspiration. 

Ohs.  2.  The  proof  on  this  point  is  abundant.  Thus  e.g.  the  Kingdom  is 
associated  with  the  period  of  "  restitution"  (Prop.  144),  "  regeneration" 
(Prop.  145),  "  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  "  (Props.  138,  139),  ''  the  Judge- 
ship" of  Jesus  (Props.  132,  133),  "  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth" 
(Props.  148,  151),  the  reign  of  the  saints  (Prop.  154),  the  overthrow  of 
Antichrist  (Prop.  160),  the  Pre-Millennial  personal  Advent  (Prop.  120), 
etc.,  etc. 

Obs.  3.  ^'  The  house  is  left  desolate''  until  He  comes  again,  when  its 
fallen,  desolate  condition  will  be  removed.  One  of  the  most  decided  and 
expressive  passages  is  that  of  Matt.  24  :  29,.  where,  after  delineating  the 
Jewish  tribulation  running  down  through  an  allotted  "  times  of  the  Gen- 
tiles" we  come  to  the  language  *'  immediately  afte?-  the  tribulation"  (not 
before,  but  afte?^  it)  certain  events  such  as  the  open  Advent  of  the  Son  of 
Man  and  the  gathering  of  the  elect,  will  take  place,  which  in  many  places 
(as  e.g.  Matt.  25,  Dan.  7,  2  Thess.  5,  etc.)  are  associated  with  the  setting 
up  of  the  Kingdom.  Such  a  portraiture  of  the  course  of  events  is  in  har- 
mony with  the  general  ami  tiniform  testimony  of  the  Prophets,  who  almost 
invariably  contrast  this  Kingdom  with  a  previously  endured  tribulation  by 
the  Jewish  nation  which  has  finally  ended  through  special  Divine  interpo- 
sition (as  e.g.  Zech.  14,  etc.),  and  the  nation  enjoys  the  blessedness  of 
covenants  folly  and  gloriously  realized.^  With  this  Prop,  must  be  united 
such  Props,  as  58,  88,  etc. 

1  The  student  is  reminded,  in  this  connection,  of  a  suggestion  advanced  by  several 
writers.  Thus  e.g.  Frazer  {Key  to  Proph.,  p.  80),  quoting  Eom.  11  :  30-32,  adds:  "To 
make  the  parallel  exact,  it  is  meet  that  the  Jews  should  remain  in  unbelief  as  long  as  the 
Gentiles  did.  The  Gentiles  remained  excluded  from  the  ordinances  of  the  true  religion 
for  2000  years,  from  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  Jews  must  remain 
in  unbelief  for  the  same  period.'  He  quotes  Hos,  6:  2,  making  "the  day"  as  2  Pet.  3  :8, 
a  thousand  years.  This  would  give  an  approximative  idea  of  the  duration  of  the  Jewish 
tribulation  and  of  the  relative  nighness  of  the  Kingdom.  And  yet,  for  aught  we  know, 
the  time  may  be  shortened  or  lengthened  as  best  suits  the  Divine  pleasure. 


Prop.  67.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  421 


Proposition  67.  Tlie  Kingdom  could  not  therefore  have  leen  set 
up  at  that  time^  viz. :  at  the  First  Advent, 

This  is  apparently  from  Propositions  56,  57,  58,  59,  etc.  The 
Kingdom  being  one  with  the  Davidic  throne  and  kingdom,  it  loas 
impossihle  because  of  the  rejection  and  punishment  of  the  nation 
for  a  certain  time,  to  establish  it.  "The  tabernacle  of  David" 
remains  fallen  down;  the  nation,  invited  nationally,  refused  the 
invitation  because  of  the  imposed  condition  of  repentance,  and  now 
other  "  guests"  must  be  furnished  before  "  the  feast"  is  enjoyed. 
The  "  nation"  is  not  yet  gathered  ;  one  by  one  the  elect  are  received 
and  adopted,  but  the  time  of  manifestation  has  not  yet  anived  ; 
the  "nation"  as  a  nation  is  not  yet  exhibited  in  its  nationalized 
form. 

Ohs.  1.  In  Matt.  12  :  28  (Luke  11  :  20),  when  the  Jews  had  taken  counsel 
to  kill  Jesus,  He  cast  out  a  devil  and  was  accused  by  the  Jews  of  perform- 
ing miracles  through  the  power  of  Satan.  In  self-defence,  showing  that 
this  very  power  was  necessary  to  Him  wlio  wcnild  establish  the  Kingdom, 
He  says  :  "  But  if  I  cast  out  devils  ly  the  Spirit  of  God''  (Luke  :  "  the 
finger  of  God''),  ^' then  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  yon"  (Luke 
"  iqmn  you")  i.e.  it  was  tendered  to  them  on  condition  of  rei^entance  and 
Christ's  miraculous  power  evinced  the  ability  to  verify  the  offer  of  it. 
Then  the  Jews  sought  a  sign  ;  Jesus  in  reply  severely  rebukes  them,  and 
condemns  thcd  existing  generation,  declaring  that  their  last  state  is  worse 
than  the  first,  i.e.  instead  of  repentino^  in  their  already  fallen  condition  and 
rendering  themselves  worthy  of  the  Kingdom  they  became  worse  until  the 
judgments  of  God  (com p.  Barnes  loci)  were  fearfully  poured  out  upon 
them.  How  dreadfullv  was  this  verified.  This  indicates  that,  in  the  con- 
dition of  the  nation  as  it  then  existed  and  increased  in  wickedness,  it  was 
impossiJjle  for  the  Kingdom  to  be  set  up  as  covenanted.  The  nation  is  not 
tnorcdly  2^repared  for  the  blessed  Theocratic  ordering.  The  Kingdom  is 
offered  to  them  in  virtue  of  their  election  ;  it  has  come  "  unto  or  upon 
them"  both  m  the  tender  and  in  the  manifested  power  and  person  of  the 
Messiah  ;  it  pertains  to  them  because  of  their  covenanted  relationship  ;  it 
is  conditioned  only  by  a  repentance  of  the  nation,  and  this  being  rejected 
by  the  representative,  ruling  men  of  the  nation,  Jesus  censures  them  and 
predicts  their  continued  and  increasing  fall  ;  hence,  as  the  Kingdom  was 
to  be  taken  from  them  (i.e.  the  offer  of  its  establishment  at  that  time  was 
withdrawn,  and  the  pre-eminent  position  assigned  to  the  elect  in  that  King- 
dom was  to  be  given  to  others),  and  as  it  was  to  be  given  to  others  who 
were  not  yet  gathered,  it  follows  that  our  Proposition  is  correct. 

Ot)s.  2.  But  this  taking  away  of  the  Kingdom  from  the  nation  (then  un- 
worthy), and  the  giving  of  it  to  others  (in  a  special  sense,  i.e.  as  inheritors 


422  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  67. 

as  will  appear  in  the  course  of  our  argument),  must  not  be  pressed,  as  the 
reader  has  already  been  warned,  to  the  extent  that  the  Kingdom  will  never 
again  be  established  with  this  Jewish  nation  restored  to  God's  favor.  For 
this  would  nullify  GocVs  covenants  and  oath,  and  vitiate  Chrisfs  inheri- 
tance. This  is  directly  predicted  :  (1)  The  continued  Jewish  tribulation 
owing  to  sinfulness,  and  (2)  the  fiual  restoration  of  the  nation,  after  the 
period  of  trial,  to  national  greatness.  Leaving  the  proof  for  another 
Proposition,  we,  in  this  connection,  direct  attention  to  Ezek.  ch.  16,  which 
describes  the  first,  intermediate,  and  final  position  of  this  elect  nation. 
Here  we  have  (1)  the  great  goodness  of  God  toward  Jerusalem  ;  (2)  her 
monstrous  sinfulness  even  exceeding  Sodom's  ;  (3)  her  grievous  punish- 
ment ;  (4)  yet  it  is  added  :  "  nevertlieless  I  will  remember  my  covenant  loith 
thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting 
covenants  Thus,  in  virtue  of  God's  covenant  with  that  nation,  we  are 
cautioned  not  to  draw  the  erroneous  conclusion  that  the  exceeding  and  un- 
paralleled wickedness  of  killing  even  the  Heir,  y^iW  forever  withdraw  God's 
covenanted  blessings  from  the  nation. 

Multitudes,  however,  contend  that  God  does  not  remember  His  covenant  ;  theologians, 
unmindful  of  the  express  covenant  relationship  of  this  people,  write — under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Chuvcli-Kingdom  theory — as  if  the  covenants  were  of  such  a  nature  that  they 
could  be  annulled,  modified,  or  altered.  Illustrative  of  this  election,  remaining  perpet- 
ual notwithstanding  sinfulness  and  subsequent  punishment,  we  have  a  striking  declara- 
tion in  1  Kings  11  :  39.  When  the  Kingdom  of  Israel  was  rent  from  the  house  of  David, 
God  emphatically  says  :  "  And  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed  of  David,  hut  not  forever." 
For  sinfulness  ten  tribes  (with  consequent  evils)  are  taken  away,  but  it  will  not  he  forever ; 
the  twelve  tribes  will  again  as  the  seed  of  Abraham  be  reunited.  Jarchi,  on  this  verse, 
says  :  "  ichen  the  Messiah  comes,  the  Kingdom  shall  be  restored  to  the  house  of  David." 
The  reader  can  readily  recall  prophecies  which  predict  this  very  removal  of  a  former  sejD- 
aration  and  an  abiding  union.  To  the  student  the  writer  only  suggests,  that  those  ten 
tribes  can  be  restored  by  God  either  literally  or  if  necessary  by  a  process  of  engrafting 
somewhat  similar  to  what  is  witnessed  in  the  jiresent  elect  ones.  It  is  foolishness  to  limit 
the  iDower  of  God,  for  either  the  nucleus  of  those  ten  tribes  is  somewhere  j^reserved,  or 
else  such  a  nucleus  can  be  formed  through  the  exertion  of  the  Divine  pleasure.  It  is  yet 
premature  in  our  argument  to  meet  the  objections  of  Second  Adventists  (in  periodicals 
and  books),  and  others  (as  Williamson,  see  Lord's  Journal  for  Oct.  1853,  First  Art.),  who 
contend  that  the  Jews  are  not  in  any  sense  "  the  lawful  heirs  of  the  Abrahamic  cove- 
nant "  and  will  never  again  be  restored  to  their  former  Theocratic  position. 

Obs.  3.  The  Kingdom  could  not  be  set  up,  because  it  required  (accord- 
ing to  the  Theocratic  ordering  and  the  Davidic  covenant  accepting  and  in- 
corporating it)  a  nation,  and  that  one  the  Jewish  nation  (to  whom  alone  it 
is  covenanted),  before  it  could  be  re-established  in  a  most  glorious  form 
under  the  Messiah.  Nationally  rejected  for  a  time — yet  to  continue  the 
seed  of  Al)raham  recourse  is  had  to  adopting  individuals  out  of  all  nations 
— until  tlie  repeal  of  this  rejection  and  of  the  punishment  pertaining  to  it, 
it  is  simply  impossible  to  fulfil  the  covenant  promises  as  written.  To 
spiritualize  those  covenants  as  some  do — to  make  them  conditional  as 
others  do— to  ignore  them  as  many  do,  is  to  malce  the  most  sacred  of  cdl  the 
Divine  Record  unreliable,  and  tlie  oath  of  God,  as  well  as  the  faith  of  believ- 
ing Jews,  of  little  value.  If  the  covenants  teach  any  truth  clearly,  it  is  this  : 
that  the  Jewish  nation  and  the  Kingdom  are  inseparably  connected  ; — that 
tbe  one  cannot  possibly  exist  without  the  other.  It  follows,  therefore,  that 
during  the  period  of  national  rejection  and  punishment  (i.e.  during  "  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  "  the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem"),  imposed 
on  account  of  sinfulness,  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  in  existence. 


Prop.  67.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  423 

Ohs.  4.  The  Kiiigdom^  being  thus  postponed,  no  Theocracy  was  estab- 
lished. Men,  indeed,  claim  this  for  the  church,  but  this  is  a  grave  mistake 
and  misleading.  Let  the  reader  refer  to  our  Propositions  on  the  Theocracy 
and  he  will  see  that  the  leading  essential  element,  that  which  constituted  a 
Theocracy,  was  the  fact  that  God  condescended  to  act  as  an  earthly  Ruler, 
Kow  it  is  self-evident  that  no  such  distinctive  feature  was  inaugurated  at 
the  First  Advent.  It  is  true,  as  Lange  {Com.  Heb.  1  :  5-14,  Doct.  8)  says, 
that  ''  the  Christocracy  is  the  fully  unfolded,  world-embracing  form  of  the 
Theocracy"  but  only  at  His  Sec.  Advent  when  He  is  manifested  as  the 
Theocratic-Davidic  King.  The  Theocratic-monarchy  in  its  covenanted 
form — not  spiritualized  but  real  as  predicted — must  be  exhibited  before 
the  Kingdom  can  be  manifested. 


424  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  68. 


Proposition  68.    This  Kingdoyn  is   then  essentially  a  Jewish 
Kingdom. 

This  follows  from  tlie  Abrahamic,  Sinai  tic,  and  Davidic  cove- 
nants ;  tills  is  uniformly  taught  by  the  Prophets  in  associating  and 
identifying  the  Kingdom  with  the  nationcdity  of  the  Jews  ;  this 
again  is  confirmed  by  the  election  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  oneness 
of  the  Kingdom,  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disciples, 
the  renewed  covenant,  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom,  the  engrafting  of 
Gentiles,  the  rejection  of  the  nation  only  until  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  are  ended,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.  The 
whole  tenor  and  analogy  of  Scripture  sustain  litis  j^osition  ;  and 
it  is  but  a  weak,  unsatisfactory,  inconsistent  procedure  to  deny 
what  is  so  plainly  the  burden  of  Holy  Writ. 

Such  a  denial  can  only  rest  in  a  destructive  criticism  and  arbitrary  handling  of  i}\e 
most  precious  covenanted  promises  contained  in  the  Bible.  It  can  only  be  sustained  by  a 
system  of  interpretation  w^hich  constantly,  with  singular  rashness,  asserts  that  the  plain 
grammatical  meaning  of  the  covenants  and  predictions  cannot  possibly  be  maintained. 
Doctrines  are  summarily  disposed  of  by  bestowing  upon  them  the  epithet  "  Jewish/^ 
and  learned  men  suppose  that  the  doctrines  contained  in  our  faith  receive  their  condem- 
nation by  being  designated  "Jewish.'"  It  is  a  favorite  phrase  with  some  writers,  and 
scornfully  emphasized,  and  judging  from  the  frequency  with  which  it  is  used,  it  is  re  ■ 
garded  as  one  ot  the  most  effectual  means  to  bring  our  doctrines  into  disrepute  with  unre- 
flecting and  unscholarly  persons.  Let  us  briefly  refer  to  the  reasons  for  employing  this 
phrase  against  us,  and  show  how  inexcusable  and  uncharitable  such  an  exhibition  of 
intended  "  sarcasm"  is  in  those  who  profess  the  name  of  Christian.  It  is  evidently  in- 
tended to  indicate  that  our  doctrines  are  erroneous,  thus  making  "  Jewish"  or 
"  Judaic"  an  equivalent  to  "  error."  Yet  these  same  writers  profess  to  believe  much 
that  is  "  Jewish."  They  believe  what  Jews  said  and  wrote,  they  profess  that  "  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews,"  that  Jesus  and  the  apostles  were  Jews,  that  we  Gentiles  are  en- 
grafted upon  the  Jewish  stock,  etc.  Why  then  institute  a  comparison  which,  if  it  has 
any  logical  force,  must  be  antagonistic  to  their  own  faith  and  hope,  founded  so  largely 
upon  what  is  "  Jewish"?  It  is  used  by  way  of  reproach,  to  stigmatize  our  views  as  if 
they  were  antichristian,  etc.  How  unjust  this  is,  will  appear,  if  such  writers  only  con- 
sider how  largely  they  themselves  are  indebted  to  a  Jewish  source  for  many  of  the  most 
precious  articles  of  their  own  faith.  Gratitude,  to  say  nothing  of  other  motives,  ought 
to  restrain  such  a  usage  of  terms.  It  is  employed  to  hold  others  up  to  ridicule,  to  irri- 
tate, etc.  But  this,  in  the  eyes  of  the  intelligent  and  of  the  humble  Biblical  student,  re- 
coils upon  its  authors,  seeing  that  it  seriously  reflects  upon  their  own  appreciation  of 
indebtedness  to  Jews  for  the  sublime  and  saving  truths  of  Christianity.  If  any  doctrine 
of  ours  is  erroneous  and  as  such  stands  related  to  errors  of  the  Jews  (as  Pharisees,  etc.), 
let  the  fact  be  demonstrated  by  proper  argument,  instead  of  seeking  refuge  in  terms  which 
are  so  general  and  include  so  much  that  is  noble  and  excellent. 

Obs.  1.  It  is  a  standing  proposition,  even  among  some  who  profess  to 
be  defenders  of  Christianity,  that,  as  Renan  (Life  of  Clirist,  p.  373),  ex- 
presses it,  "  the  general  progress  of  Christianity  has  been  to  separate  more 
and  more  from  Judaism,"  and  the  inference  is  drawn  that  the  wider  such  a 
separation  is  made,  tlie  letter  for  true  religion.     Everything  distinctively 


Prop.  68.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  425 

Jewish  is  to  be  sacrificed,  giving  place  to  a  subdituted  Gentileism.  This 
is  especially  true  of  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ;  the  Jewish  view 
IS  denounced,  and  a  wide  departure  substituted  as  better  adapted  to  the 
wisdom,  standing,  etc.,  of  Gentiles. 

This  will  be  met  in  succeeding  propositions.  Briefly  let  us  trace  the  rise  and  prog- 
ress of  this  rejection  of  "  Jewish  conceptions,"  this  scornful  usingof  the  term  "  Jew- 
ish,''' (or  as  Ruge  calls  it,  ""Asiaiisamus").  The  apostolic,  and  immediate  succeeding, 
church  was  (as  we  shall  show  Proj^s.  69-75 )  intensely'  Jewish  in  its  conceptions.  The 
reproach  of  being  Jewish  belongs  to  a  period  later  than  that  distinguished  for  its  jDure 
Chiliasm  (comj).  candid  remarks  of  Neander,  Ch.  His.,  vol  1,  p.  294,  etc.).  The  univer- 
sality and  unity  of  teaching  prohibited  the  usage  of  the  word  in  any  other  than  a  respect- 
ful sense.  But  when  the  general  Millenarian  views  were  attacked  by  Origen  and  others, 
this  state  of  things  changed.  Origen  (L.  2,  c.  12)  says  :  "Those  who  deny  the  Mil- 
lennium are  those  who  interpret  the  sayings  of  the  Prophets  by  a  trope,"  those  who  main- 
tain the  Mill.  "  disciiDles  of  the  letter,"  who  interpret  "  Judaico-sensu,  after  the  manner 
of  the  Jews."  From  this  arose  the  reproach,  often  reiterated,  thus  expressed  by  Jerome 
{Hieron.  in  Es.  1.  18  in  Proem,  p.  477  Ed.  Bend.— quoted  by  Prof.  Bush,  Mill.  p.  16)  "  If 
we  understand  Revelation  literally,  ice  mustjudaize/'  etc.  This  usage  was  accelerated  by 
(1)  the  adoption  and  extension  of  the  spiritualistic  Interpretation  ;  (2)  the  rise  and  prog- 
ress of  the  Papacy  ;  (3)  the  fall,  conduct,  and  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  nation  ;  (4)  the 
persecution  of  the  Jews.  In  the  course  of  time  such  was  the  bitterness  against  the  Jews, 
that  everything  "  Jewish"  was  despised.  Of  course  when  Bishops  (even  e.g.  Cyril  of 
Alexandria,  see  Socrates  His.  EccL,  vii.  13),  persecuted  Jews  it  was  easy  to  discard 
"  Jewish  forms. "  A  variety  of  prejudices  excited  and  fostered  this  anti-Jewish  spirit, 
which  continued  unchecked  for  many  centuries.  In  more  modern  times,  out  of  a  host 
unduly  biased,  Semler  may  be  adduced  as  materially  strengthening  the  movement  by 
which  everything  objectionable  is  to  be  discarded  imder  the  cry  of  "  Jewish  notions." 
He  even  undermined  the  authority  of  Scripture  under  the  j)lea  of  its  Jewish  character, 
making  it  local  and  temporary  (Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  2,  p.  386),  so  that  Tholuck 
well  remarked  that  "  he  carried  the  torch  which  kindled  the  conflagration,"  Thousands 
of  volumes  are  filled  with  its  spirit,  and  at  times  it  becomes  simply  outrageous,  as  e.g. 
in  The  Lyceum  (a  Free  Religionist  periodical  designed  for  the  young,  in  Jan.  No.  1875) 
says  :  "  We  detest  the  thought  of  an  old  Jewish  God  living  in  this  age  of  the  world." 
Multitudes,  however,  who  have  imbibed  this  prejudice  against  "  Jewish  conceptions," 
could  never  be  brought  to  utter  anything  so  disgusting  as  the  Lyceum's  blasphemies. 
Yet  men  of  ability  venture  into  this  direction  of  disparagement,  as  e.g.  Beecher  (as  re- 
ported in  Cm.  Daily  Gazelle,  Nov,  11th,  1874),  who  spoke  slightingly  of  the  Patriarchs  "  as 
compared  with  the  manhood  we  now  have,"  etc.  Comment  is  unnecessary  to  such  en- 
dorsement of  Parkerism,  etc. 

Obs.  2.  It  is  fully  admitted  by  able  writers,  of  all  classes,  that  the  Script- 
ures, taken  in  t/ieir  literal  as2)cct,  do  expressly  teach  a  Jewhli  Kingdom  ; 
but  our  opponents  contend  that  this  literal  rendering  is  to  be  discarded /or 
a  spiritual  or  viystical  one,  mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  literal  has  not 
been  verified.  But  we  cannot,  dare  not  tlins  receive  the  Word  of  God. 
This  Jewish  form  is  decidedly  in  our  favor  ;  we  accept  of  it  gratefully,  and 
with  it  of  the  reproach  heaped  upon  it.  For  it  is  Jeiuish,  based  on  je?vish 
coA'enants,  the  Jeiuish  Scriptures,  the  Jewish  Prophets  and  Apostles,  the 
Jewish  nationality  connected  with  the  Theocratic  ordering,  and  the  Jewish 
Son  of  Man  in  descent  and  office.  We  would  not  abate  this,  if  we  could, 
believing  it  to  be  indispeiisahle  in  order  to  preserve  the  true  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  the  unity  of  Purpose  in  its  establishment.  The  time  too,  ]f 
we  are  to  credit  recent  utterances,  has  gone  by  when  sober  reasoning  based 
on  Scripture  is  to  be  set  aside  by  charges  of  doctrine  being  "  too  Jewish.'' 
Able  works,  showing  the  intimate  connection  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests., 
acknowledging  and  pressing  our  indebtedness  to  that  which  is  "  Jewish," 
are  paving  the  way  for  such  a  result  among  the  joious  thoughtful.     The 


426  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PR(^.  68. 

masses,  indeed,  will  not  be  readied,  but  the  scholarly,  if  also  devout,  can- 
not overlook  it. 

We  accept  of  the  intended  reproach  given  by  Herbert  Spencer  {The  Study  of  Sociol- 
ogy), when  he  designates  the  New  Test.,  by  the  significant  phrase  "  The  Jewish  New 
Testament."  We  rejoice  in  its  Jewish  cast  as  a  matter  logically  essential  to  secure  cove- 
nanted blessings.  But  when  Sara  S.  Hennell  {Christianity  and  infidelity)  declares,  that  the 
Gospel  of  Christ  was  "  a  noble  outburst  of  Jewish  fanaticism,"  which  our  times  are  out- 
growing, it  is  only  too  evident  that  she  never  studied  its  connection  with  a  covenanted 
Divine  Purpose,  and  its  continued  vital  relationship  to  "  the  Hope  of  Israel."  The  Essays 
and  Beviews,  repeating  the  rationalistic  ideas  of  others,  utterly  discards  everything  dis- 
tinctly Jewish  under  the  word  "  Judaism,"  and  as  part  of  its  religious  scheme  gives  us  a 
"  Christianity  without  Judaism,"  the  result  of  which  is  to  sever  Christianity  as  much  as 
passible  from  the  Old  Test.  Mansel  in  the  Bampton  Lectures  (p.  287)  remarks,  "Mr. 
Powell  in  his  zeal  for  '  Christianity  without  Judaism,'  seems  at  times  to  forget  that  Juda- 
ism, as  well  as  Christianity,  was  a  revelation  from  God."  Powell,  however,  would  soften 
this  objection  by  the  low  estimate  he  takes  of  revelation.  His  contempt  for  "  Judaical 
origin,"  "  the  Judaical  school,"  and  "  Judaical  Theology,"  includes  of  course  the  very 
foundations  of  the  Kingdom,  the  covenants  and  related  predictions.  For  he  opposes 
not  merely  that  which  God  designed  to  be  temporary  under  this  term,  but  the  oath-hound 
promises  of  God  iipon  which  Christianity  (as  pro  visionary,  etc.)  itself  rests.  Let  the 
reader  consider  the  precise  promises  of  the  Jewish  covenants  and  the  Jewish  predictions, 
all  uniting  in  a  glorious  Messianic  Kingdom  under  the  reign  of  a  personal  Son  of  David 
on  a  restored  Theocratic  throne  with  a  Jewish  supremacy,  overthrow  of  enemies,  irresist- 
ible power,  vast  dominion,  etc.,  and  it  is  utterly  impossible,  without  a  total  perversion  of 
the  covenants  and  prophecies,  to  separate  the  Jewish  cast  from  Christianity  which  is 
designed  to  prepare  ''  heirs"  to  inherit  these  promises  and  this  Kingdom  loith  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  It  is  folly  to  ignore,  or  to  deny,  this  Jewish  relationship,  and  in  place 
of  it  attempt  to  make  out  a  fulfilment  of  these  things  in  the  past  history  of  a  fighting, 
struggling  Church. 

Ohs.  3.  It  is  certainly  strange  that  the  old  prejudice,  originally  urged  by 
Celsus  against  the  Jews  as  in  no  special  and  favorable  relationship  to  God, 
should  be  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  many  at  the  present  day  so  that 
everything  that  can  be  even  remotely  reduced  to  a  so-called  "  Jewish 
form"  or  "  Jewish  husk"  excites  a  degree  of  bitterness  and  hostility, 
which,  to  say  the  least,  indicates  something  akin  to  the  Gentile  "  liigh- 
7nindedness,^^  against  which  we  are  cautioned  by  Paul  (Rom.  11). 

In  tracing  (see  note  1)  this  prejudice,  the  old  monkish  and  popish  view  had  much  to 
do  with  its  extension.  To  account  for  its  prevalence  in  more  recent  times,  we  must  also 
look  to  the  results  flowing  from  the  fashion  revived  by  Voltaire  and  others,  viz.  :  of  at- 
tacking Christianity  through  Judaism.  In  resisting  such  attacks  even  good  men  went  too 
far,  sejDarating  Christianity  from  the  Jews,  making  the  former  something  independent 
of  the  latter,  and,  in  the  midst  of  a  misjudged  zeal,  manifesting  contemjDt  toward  every- 
thing "Jewish."  The  rule  of  Jerome,  quoted  under  Prop.  23,  seems  to  have  been  their 
guide  in  the  controversy.  To-day  we  have  books  (e.g.  Renan,  etc.),  circulated,  which 
proclaim  that  Jesus  entertained  resiDecting  the  Kingdom  "  Jewish  expectations,"  that 
deceived  Himself  and  His  immediate  followers  ;  works  in  reply  apologetically  admit 
"  the  Jewish  forms"  either  as  a  necessary  accommodation,  or  as  a  transition  excrescence, 
or  as  something  only  to  be  apprehended  in  a  very  spiritual  sense.  Our  position  is  such, 
that  we  are  not  driven  to  that  abject  apologetical  tone,  which,  to  the  triumph  and  delight 
of  unbelievers,  must  either  admit  the  ignorance  of  the  disciples  or  deny  the  express 
words  of  Revelation,  or  engraft  another  and  different  meaning  upon  the  grammatical 
sense.  We  cordially  accept  of  these  "  Jewish  expectations"  {as  found  in  the  Bible),  and 
show  (1)  their  logical  connection  with  a  consecutive  Plan,  (2)  why  they  have  not  yet  been 
fulfilled,  (3)  lohen  they  will  be  realized,  (4)  and  what  provision  is  made  for  their  ultimate 
verification.  Surely  the  time  is  passed  with  the  intelligent  "  to"  (so  Paley  justly  said) 
"  wound  Christianity  through  the  sides  of  Judaism." 

The  charge  of  Celsus  against  the  early  Christians  that  they  deserted  the  ancient  Jewish 
doctrine  (the  exact  reverse  of  unbelieving  objection  of  the  present  day),  is  a  misappre- 
hension of  the  truth,  as  clearly  shown  by  various  writers.     But  is  not  this  specification 


Prop.  68.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  427 

virtually  correct  when  urged  against  those  who  reject  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  cove- 
nants, Abrahamic  and  Davidic  ?  The  ruaia  doctrines,  which,  by  way  of  pre-eminence,  are 
Jewish,  pertaining  to  the  Jewish  nation  as  such,  cannot  safely  be  excluded  without  en- 
tailing, to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  such  an  accusation.  Chiliasm  alone  refutes  it  by  a 
practical  faith  and  hope. 

Obs.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  arising  from  the  covenants,  must, 
in  the  nature  of  tlie  case,  ie  essetitially  Jeiuish,  being  covenanted  to  a  Jew- 
ish jjeople  (and  engrafted  ones,  tlie  seed  of  Abraham),  and  standing  related 
to  a  Jetvisli  tlirone  and  Kingdom  (the  incorporated  Theocratic-Davidic). 
Hence  we  are  prepared  to  accept  of  the  statement  of  Shedd  {His.  Ch, 
Doc),  that  our  views  were  of  Jeicisli  origin  (discarding  his  ungenerous 
reference  to  Cerinthus,  with  which  compare  the  candor  of  Neander,  or  the 
Eeply  of  Shimeall),  in  a  sense  however  different  from  his  own  ;  also,  of 
Mosheim  {Com,  de  Rebus  Chris.,  p.  721),  that  they  were  derived  from  the 
Jeivisli  views  of  the  Kingdom  ;  or,  of  Walch  {His,  of  Her,,  vol.  2,  p.  143), 
that  they  are  of  Biblical  origin,  sustained  by  the  Aj)oc,,  and  explained  by 
Jewish  opinions.  A  multitude  of  writers,  either  honestly  or  in  scorn, 
attribute  to  it  (viz.  :  our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom)  a  Jewish  origin  (as  e.g. 
Prop.  Bush  in  Millemiiuni ; — Dr.  Hodge  in  Sys,  Div,,  vol.  3,  makes  it  an 
objection,  so  also  many  of  our  Reviews,  books  written  in  opposition  to  us, 
etc.),  and  this  is  asserted  by  way  of  evidence  to  indicate  weakness,  but  we 
receive  as  corroborative  of  real  strength  and  unity.  The  most  learned  the- 
ologians (as  we  shall  quote  hereafter)  are  beginning  to  see  this,  and 
acknowledge  our  doctrine  to  be  a  legitimate  outgrou'th  from  that  which 
preceded  it. 

Rev.  Dr.  Sprecher,  translator  of  Dr.  Dorner,  informed  me  that  Dorner  fully  admits 
Chiliasm  to  be  a  legitimate  historical  reality,  and  not  merely  derived  from  Jewish  con- 
cei)tions  that  are  to  be  discarded.  Many  begin  to  occupy  a  similar  position.  Even  un- 
belief (as  e.g.  Potter  in  The  Genius  of  Christianity  and  Ft^ee  Religion)  declares  "  Christian- 
ity to  be  developed  Judaism,"  basing  it  upon  the  fact  that  the  link  between  Jesus  and 
the  Hebrew  people  is  found  in  "  the  Messianic  idea,"  as  given  in  "  the  Jewish  prophets 
and  literature. ' ' 

Obs,  5.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to-day  as  much  "  the  King  of  the 
Jews'''  as  He  was  when  the  superscription  was  placed  upon  the  cross. 
This  title  iwe-eminently  belongs  to  Him  as  the  covenanted  Davidic  Son,  as 
the  2)romised  Theocratic  King,  and  we  hail  its  associatio?i  with  the  cross, 
inasmuch  as  it  proclaims  the  assurance  that  the  malignity  of  His  enemies, 
resulting  in  His  death,  cannot  and  will  not  remove  His  rightful  claim  to 
the  position  of  Jewish  King.  So  long  as  we  have  such  a  King  of  Jeimsh 
birth  and  the  legal  Heir  of  the  Jewish  throne  and  Kingdom,  it  is  unbecom- 
ing to  employ  the  term  "  Jewish^ ^  in  any  other  than  a  respectful  sense. 

Obs.  6.  To  illustrate,  aside  from  the  covenants  and  reasoning  already 
given,  how  intensely  Jewish  this  Kingdom  is,  we  refer  (by  way  of  anticipa- 
tion) the  reader  to  two  or  three  particulars.  (1)  At  the  restoration  of  this 
Jewish  nation,  while  Gentile  nations  shall  experience  great  blessedness,  the 
siqjremacy  among  all  nations  is  accorded  to  the  Jewish  7iation,  as  e.g.  Micah 
4  .  8,  and  7  :  15-20  ;  Zeph.  3  :  14-20  ;  Zech.  chs.  10,  12,  14,  etc.:  (comp. 
Prop,  114).  (2)  Jerusalein  shall  be  wonderfully  exalted  in  that  dav,  as  e.g. 
Zech.  8:3;  Jer.  3  :  17  ;  Joel  3  :  17  ;  Isa.  24  :  23,  etc.^  (3)  T7ie  land  itself 
shall  be  highly  honored,  as  e.g.  Ezek.  36  :  34,  36  ;  Isa.  51  :  3  ;  Zech.  2  :  12  ; 


428  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  68. 

Isa.  60  :  15  and  62  :  4,  etc.  To  separate  these  predictions  from  their  con- 
nection with  the  Jewish  nation,  is  a  destroying  of  their  consistency  and 
force,  for  the  same  identical  nation,  Jerusalem,  and  land  that  was  suffering 
under  Gentile  dominion,  is  to  enjoy  such  honor  and  happiness.  To  apply 
these  predictions  to  another  and  mystical  nation,  city,  and  land  is  to  make 
tlie  threats  all  "  Jewish"  and  the  blessings  all  of  a  Gentile  nature  ; — which 
procedure  is  a  gross  violation  of  the  well-founded  laws  of  language.  Hence 
we  reject  it  as  unwarranted,  deceptive,  a  degradation  of  the  election,  and 
as  virtually  making  God  unfaithful  to  oath-bound  'promises.'^ 

^  Even  Renan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  56)  notices  the  predictions  in  this  style  :  "  that  one 
day  Jerusalem  would  be  the  Capital  of  the  whole  world,  and  that  the  human  race  would 
become  Jewish,"  etc.  The  last  remark  he  no  doubt  founds  on  the  Jewish  supremacy  and 
Theocratic  rule  of  David's  Son,  but  it  is  not  quite  accurate  seeing  that  Gentile  nations 
are  predicted  as  continuously  existing,  acknowledging  and  enjoying  the  blessings  of 
such  a  rule.     Comp.  Prop.  168. 

2  The  anti-Judaic  spirit  manifested  by  Neander,  himself  a  Jew,  has  been  noticed  by 
others.  Thus  e.g.  the  writer  of  the  art.  on  "  Neander"  {North  Brit.  Review,  Feb.  1851), 
observes  :  "  His  phraseology,  his  ideas,  his  princijjles,  bear  no  trace  whatever  of  a  Jew- 
ish origin,  if,  indeed,  the  violence  of  the  reaction  be  not  the  best  proof  that  he  was  a 
Jew.  This  has  told  for  good,  by  leading  him  always  to  exalt  spirit  above  form,  the  in- 
ward principle  above  the  outward  manifestation,  the  religion  of  the  heart  above  ceremo- 
nial worship.  It  has  sometimes  told  for  evil,  by  making  him  often  confound  spiritual  Juda- 
ism with  formal  Pharisaism."  To  this  we  add  :  it  told  largely  for  evil,  seeing  that 
moulded  by  his  philosophy,  it  prevented  him  from  observing  the  continued  and  ever- 
abiding  relationship  that  Christianity  sustains  to  pure  Judaism  in  its  covenants  and 
prophecies.  (Comp.  Dr.  Shaff's  remarks  on  Neander  in  His.  Apos.  Church.)  Multitudes 
assume  his  position.  On  the  other  hand,  eminent  writers,  who  themselves  advocate 
Chiliasm,  use  expressions,  which  are  liable  to  misapprehension.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Dorner 
(Person  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  408)  says  :  "Christian  Chiliasm,  so  far  from  being  derivable 
from,  may  in  part  be  more  justly  regarded  as  a  polemic  against,  Judaism  on  the  part  of 
Christianity.  This,  in  particular,  is  its  character,  when  it  has  apparently  borrowed 
most  features  from  Judaism."  Dorner  here  evidently  refers  to  one  form  of  Judaism  lim- 
ited to  circumcision  and  the  observance  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  (and  Rabbinical  traditions), 
which  Chiliasm  unrelentingly  opposed,  and  then  to  a  broader  form  which  embraced  the 
covenants  and  promises,  adopted  by  Chiliasm.  Now  many  persons  make  "  Judaism" 
and  "  Jewish"  synonymous  with  the  contracted  form,  and,  prejudiced,  are  unable  to  ap- 
preciate the  higher  form,  and  the  depth  and  preciousness  of  its  many  promises.  There 
is  a  Judaism  founded  on  the  temporary  provisions  of  the  Mosaic  economy  and  the  tra- 
ditions of  the  past,  which  is  irreconcilable  with  our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and 
there  is  a  Judaism  grounded  upon  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants,  and  the 
promises  to  the  nation,  which  is  inseparably  connected  with  our  belief — indeed,  is  fun- 
damental to  it.     The  Props,  on  the  election  24,  and  55-65,  alone  evidence  this  union. 


Prop.  69.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  429 


Proposition  69.  The  death  of  Jesus  did  not  remove  the  notion 
entertained  by  the  disciples  and  apostles  concerning  the  King- 
dom, 

It  is  asserted  in  numerous  works  that  tlie  death  of  Jesus  caused 
such  an  immediate  revolution  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples  that  it 
destroyed  cdl  their  anticipations  of  the  expected  restored  Davidic 
Kingdom.  This  is  done  without  due  reflection,  seeing  that  it  is 
opx)osed  by  the  plainest  statement. 

Thus  e.g.  Barnes  {(Join.  Acts  1  :  9),  eager  to  set  aside  the  Jewish  faith  in  the  Kingdom 
of  Israel  as  expressed  by  the  disciples  in  Acts  1  :  6,  affirms  the  following  :  "  If  their  Sav- 
iour was  in  heaven,  it  settled  the  question  about  ihe  nature  of  the  Kingdom.  It  was  clear 
that  it  was  not  designed  to  be  a  temporal  Kingdom."  Thus  the  ascension,  and  the 
ignoring  of  the  postponement,  is  made  the  basis  for  denying  the  grammatically  expressed 
fulfilment  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  and  for  sustaining  a  spiritualizing  system  !  That 
the  Messiah  being  now  "  in  heaven"  does  not  "  settle  the  question  about  the  nature  of 
the  Kingdom"  for  Barnes,  is  self-evident  from  ihe  singular  variety  of  Kingdoms  that  he 
has  introduced,  and  which  we  quote  under  Prop.  3.  Sara  S.  Hennell  ( Thoughts  in  Aid 
to  Faith),  takes  the  ultra  view  that  Jesus,  "  the  noble  enthusiast,"  influenced  by  deep 
feeling  aroused  by  prophecy  and  his  surroundings,  ambitiously  undertook  the  mighty 
project  of  establishing  a  Kingdom — "  conceive  the  grandeur  of  it  ;  to  bring  down  a  reign 
of  righteousness  on  earth  !" — but  he  failed  through  his  enemies,  died  "  a  martyr"  to  his 
ambition,  and  before  his  death  taught  his  followers  "  to  fix  all  their  hopes  on  heaven.''  She 
eulogizes  the  "  artistic  beauty,' '  the  "  nobleness"  of  Jesus  while  making  him  a  mistaken 
enthusiast,  a  fanatic  and  deceiver,  and  concludes  as  a  deduction  from  her  unhistorical  por- 
traiture of  Him  and  her  confessed  ignorance  of  the  facts  of  His  life  and  their  basis  in  the 
covenants,  that  the  origin  of  Christianity  can  be  traced  to  natural  causes,  for  "  there  is 
unfolded  in  one  unbroken  stream,  the  most  marvellous,  though  strictly  natural,  chapter  in 
the  world's  experience."  From  temporal  visions  Jesus  turned  to  spiritual,  and  His  death 
enforced  the  latter.  But  this  does  not  satisfy  some,  for  they  see  that  the  death  of 
Jesus  did  not  remove  the  Jewish  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  and  hence  they  look  around  to  find 
another  founder  of  Christianity  and  select  the  Apostle  Paul.  Thus  e.g.  Schlessinger 
( 77*6  Historical  Jesus  of  Nazareth),  after  exhibiting,  more  or  less  correctly,  the  Messianic 
idea  as  it  existed  in  the  Jewish  nation  through  the  prophets,  concludes,  in  view  of  the 
New  Test,  testimony,  that  "  Jesus  was  nothing  but  a  Jew,"  the  disciples  being  the  same, 
and  then,  by  the  grossest  perversion  of  Paul's  teachings,  makes  the  Christian  system  to 
originate  with  Paul,  who  boldly  cut  the  new  religion  loose  from  its  parent  trunk,  Judaism. 
We  shall  show  again  and  again,  by  quoting  Paul  frequently,  that  he  entertained  fully  and 
completely  the  Jev/ish  view  of  the  Kingdom,  and  with  all  the  other  teachers,  located  its 
establishment  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  death  of  Jesus  made  no  change  in  the  Kingdom 
preached  by  His  followers. 

Obs.  1.  It  is  true  that  the  death  of  Jesus  (notwithstanding  the  intima- 
tions previously  given,  as  seen  in  Props.  58,  66,  etc.)  must  have  placed 
them  in  a  perplexed  attitude,  and  must,  before  His  resurrection,  have 
appeared  contradictory  to  their  expectations.  This  much  the  record  inti- 
mates. The  question  Jiow  to  reconcile  this  sad  event  with  their  contiimed 
view  of  covenant  and  prophecy  pressed  them  heavily.  Xot  appreciating 
the  necessity  (in  more  respects  than  one)  of  that  death  to  seal  the  covenant 
and  make  its  fulfilment  (as  e.g.  in  the  triumph  over  death)  possible,  the 


430  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS-GDOM.  [PkOP.  69. 

question  Tvonld  naturally  arise,  liotu  can  this  Kingdom  be  established  when 
the  King,  David's  Son,  Himself  yields  to  death?  Still  the  faith  in  the 
wonderful  words  and  works,  clouded  by  this  distressing  event,  was  sus- 
tained in  a  measure  by  the  astonishing  death  itself  and  the  things  con- 
nected therewith,  while  the  resurrection,  restoring  the  Messiah  to  them, 
reconfirmed  that  faith  in  His  altility,  etc.^  to  fulfil  tlie  covenants  and 
Pro}}hets,  so  that  it  ever  after  shone  forth  with  undiminished  strength  and 
lustre. 

Nast  (6*03/1.  Matt.  16  :  21-28),  following  others,  gives  this  as  a  reason,  why  Jesus  pre- 
dicted His  own  death  and  resurrection  :  ' '  This  very  announcement  was  intended  to 
strike  at  the  root  of  their  carnal  Messianic  exjDectations,"  i.e.  the  same  "  carnal  "  expec- 
tations ihai  ihey  preached  !  Such  a  reason  is  purely  imaginative,  and  derogatory  to  the 
truth.  If  so  designed  (which  we  utterly  deny)  it  signally  failed  with  these  inspired  men, 
seeing  that  even  after  His  death  they  entertained  them.  Nast  himself  {Com.  Matt. 
11  :  1-6,  etc.)  admits  that  the  death  itself  did  not  remove  them,  for  he  undertakes  to 
correct  the  preachers  that  Jesus  trained,  and  informs  us  that  before  and  immediately 
after  the  ascension  the  apostles  had  still  very  partial  or  meagre  ideas  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God. 

Ols.  2.  If  writers  are  correct  in  their  deductions  of  the  effects  of  Christ's 
death  in  revolutionizing  the  minds  of  the  disciples,  then  there  ought  to  be 
— if  it  was  a  result  intended  by  Divine  Providence — a  distinct  announce' 
ment  of  the  same  in  the  New  Test.  We  ought  to  find  (1)  that  they  had 
been  mistaken  in  their  previous  apprehensions  of  the  Kingdom,  and  (2) 
that  the  death  of  Jesus  and  events  following  indicated  this  to  them.  But 
nothing  of  this  kind  is  found  in  the  record,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to 
infer  it. 

We  append  a  specimen  of  the  contradictions  in  which  those  are  involved,  who  main- 
tain that  Christ's  death  removed  an  erroneous  view  of  the  Kingdom  from  the  apostles' 
minds.  Thus  e.g.  Barnes,  Com.  Acts  1  :  6  contends  that  "  the  apostles  had  entertained 
the  common  opinion  of  the  Jews  about  the  temporal  dominion  of  the  Messiah,"  etc. 
He  then  informs  us  that  the  death  of  Jesus  was  calculated  to  "  effectually  check  and 
change  their  opinions  respecting  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,"  etc.  (He  does  not  seem 
to  notice  how,  if  the  discij)les  were  in  error,  this  reflects  upon  the  Master  who  then — if 
Barnes  is  correct — sent  them  forth  and  allowed  them  to  preach  error.)  In  all  this  Barnes 
overlooks  his  own  comments  in  other  places.  Thus  on  Matt.  13  :  11  "  because  it  is  given 
to  you  to  know  the  mysteries  of  heaven  but  to  them  it  is  not  given,"  he  professes  that 
to  the  disciples  it  was  given  to  know  the  truth  respecting  the  Kingdom,  but  not  to  others. 
How  can  his  comment  on  the  latter  passage  be  true,  if  his  comment  on  Acts  1  :  6  is 
correct  ?  Commentators,  m  ich  admired,  afford  many  such  palijable  antagonisms,  and 
this  largely  detracts  from  their  many  excellences. 

OI)S.  3.  For  the  present  it  is  sufficient  to  produce  a  single  passage  which 
amply  proves  our  Proposition  ;  others  will  be  added  as  we  proceed.  The 
death  of  Jesus  took  place  ;  His  resurrection  occurred  ;  He  remained  after 
His  resurrection  with  those  previously  sent-forth  j^reachers  of  the  Kingdom 
^' forty  days,  and  s^jecclciny  of  the  things  jjeiiaining  to  the  Kingdom  of  God  ^^ 
(Acts  1  :  3).  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  conceive,  when  the  Kingdom  was 
the  2^rincipal  topic  of  conversation,  that  if  these  apostles  were  still  ignorant 
of  the  very  nature  of  the  Kingdom  and  Christ's  death  was  to  be  the 
medium  for  their  enlightenment,  some  decided  information  to  remove  the 
xdleged  "  error"  was  not  granted  to  them  during  these  forty  days.  The 
tenor  of  the  narrative  shows  that  in  all  their  conversations  respecting  the 
Kingdom  nothing  was  said  that  changed  the  faith  of  the  apostles.  They 
still  held  the  belief  that  they  had  authoritatively  preached.     The  proof  is 


Prop.  69.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  431 

found  in  the  question  (v.  6),  ^^Lord,  wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  again 
the  Kingdom  to  Israelf  This  is  admitted  by  all — verij  reluctantly  indeed 
by  some  commentators  and  writers' — to  mean  that  they  still  Relieved  in  a 
restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  under  the  reign  of  the 
Messiah.  The  reply  of  Jesus,  as  we  already  had  occasion  to  observe,  con- 
firms their  belief  ;  for  instead  of  rejecting  their  idea  of  the  nature  of  the 
Kingdom,  He  takes  that  for  granted  as  substantially  correct,  and  only 
refers  to  the  time  when  it  should  again  be  restored  to  Israel  as  something 
reserved  by  the  Father,  thus  meeting  the  question  proposed  which  related 
to  the  time} 

1  Aside  from  the  unwilling  concessions  found  in  our  anti-Millenarian  commentaries, 
it  is  sufficient  to  direct  the  reader  to  the  statements  of  Brooks'  {El.  of  Froph.  Inter.,  p. 
62,  etc. )  showing  that  those  who  have  no  sympathy  with  our  views  are  forced  to  admit 
in  this  place  a  still  believed  in  national  restoration  of  the  Jews.  So  e.g.  "  Govinus  the 
Jesuit,  in  his  comment  on  Acts  1  :  G,  says  that  Cyprian,  Jerome,  Chrysostom,  Theoph- 
ilus,  Alexandrinus,  Augustine,  Bede' '  understood  it.  Indeed,  an  interminable  list  might 
be  produced,  but  are  unnecessary,  as  we  give  many  under  various  propositions. 

'■^  I'airbairn  {On  Froph.,  p.  183),  presses  this  passage  beyond  its  intent,  when  he  makes 
it  an  absolute  measure  of  the  future  "  condition  of  the  church  as  regards  her  knowledge 
of  coming  epochs  in  her  history, "  which  *'  could  not  be  annulled  by  any  subsequent  in- 
formation on  the  subject."  This  is  certainly  a  bold  assertion,  in  the  face  of  additional 
communications  being  afterward  given  relating  to  epochs  of  time,  when  he  himself,  a 
few  sentences  on,  is  forced  to  acknowledge  that  the  AjDOcalypse  does  give  us  an  idea  of 
intervals  of  time,  etc.  Agreeing  with  Fairbairn  that  the  exact  day  and  hour  is  un- 
known, and  that  we  can  only  approximativelj^  know  the  periods  of  ultimate  fulfilment, 
yet  we  firmly  believe,  from  the  information  imparted  and  the  signs  given,  that  this  ap- 
proximation is  more  "  than  probable  grounds  of  expectation."  This,  after  all,  Fairbairn 
virtually  admits,  for  on  p.  182  is  the  remark,  "  He  gives  certain  signs  of  the  aj^proach- 
ing  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  of  His  own  personal  return  to  the  world,  by  the  care- 
ful consideration  of  which  His  followers  might  not  be  taken  unawares  by  either  event.'* 
But  we  must  not  anticipate  (see  Projps,  173  and  174). 

Ods.  4.  The  conversation  between  Jesus  and  the  disciples  pertaining  to 
the  Kingdom,  and  the  question  of  the  latter  just  before  the  ascension,  most 
effectually  disproves  the  assertions  of  eminent  writers  that  the  Kingdom 
was  already  established  sometime  in  the  ministry  or  life  of  Jesus  (Proj).  56). 
The  narrative  given  by  Luke  unmistakably  proves  that  such  theories  are 
incorrect,  since  the  apostles — hearers  and  preachers,  and  confidants — knew 
Qiothing  whatever  of  such  an  already  established  Kingdom.  Their  preach- 
ing, instructions,  etc.,  manifest  that  they  had  not  even  the  most  distant 
idea  of  such  an  important  measure  if  it  had  really  existed.  It  is  impossible 
to  credit  such  theories  over  against  the  direct  testimony  of  men,  who,  of  all 
persons  living,  were  tlie  most  likely  to  know  and  express  the  truth. 

Strange  that  learned  men  and  able  theologians  can  find  a  covenanted  Kingdom  ex- 
isting (even  if  it  is  one  in  the  heart)  during  the  ministry  of  Christ,  when  the  ajDostles,  at 
this  most  favorable  period,  were  utterly  unconscious  of  the  same.  Whom  shall  ice  credit — 
preachers  appointed  by  Jesus  Himself  and  under  His  special  instruction,  or  those  who 
liatly  contradict  the  apostles'  knowledge  at  this  stage  of  historical  development  ?  We 
give  some  illustrations  of  the  mode  of  handling  the  divine  statements.  Brown  (Tom. 
Acts  1:6),  after  intimating  without  a  particle  of  proof  that  Jesus  (v.  3)  had  imparted  in- 
struction respecting  a  spiritual  Kingdom,  tells  us  (v.  6),  "  Doubtless  their  carnal  views 
of  Messiah's  Kingdom  had  by  this  time  been  modified,  though /;oio  /«r  it  is  impossible  to 
say.  But  as  they  plainly  looked  for  some  restoration  of  the  Kingdom  to  Israel,  so  they 
are  neither  rebuked  nor  contradicted  on  this  point."  The  apostles  then  had  previously 
preached  a  carnal  Kingdom,  and  they  still  retained  a  portion  of  it,  but  with  it  all.  Brown 
conjectures,  they  had  some  glimmering  of  Brown's  spiritual  Kingdom  !  How  does  he 
reconcile  this  charge  of  carnality  with  his  comment  on  Matt.  3  :  2  where  he  says  :  "  A 


432  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  69. 

Kingdom  for  which  repentance  was  the  proper  preparation  behooved  to  be  essentially 
sjjiritual"  (overlooking  that  when  the  Theocracy,  a  civil  and  religions  organization,  was 
established  it  also  demanded  the  confession  of  sin  and  repentance),  when  the  very  men 
appointed  to  urge  this  rej)entance,  failed  to  acknowledge  it.  So  Killen  (77ie  Ancient 
Church,  p.  190)  follows  the  prevailing  track.  After  previously  informing  us  how  Jesus 
specially  instructed  and  trained  preachers,  who  held  that  which  "was  vague  as  well  as 
much  that  was  visionary"  concerning  the  Kingdom  (the  very  thing  they  were  to  preach), 
he  then  gravely  informs  us,  without  the  slightest  proof ,  that  "  during  the  interval  between 
the  resurrection  and  ascension, "  the  apostles  so  profited,  because  He  "  then  opened 
their  understanding,"  that  "  the  true  nature  of  Christ's  Kingdom  was  now  fully  dis- 
closed  to  them,"  and  this  he  repeatedly  tells  us  is  "  the  spiritual  Kingdom"  now  estab- 
lished. But  where  is  the  evidence  of  this  gross  ignorance  and  this  sudden  enlighten- 
ment ?  It  is  simi)ly  and  solely  imaginary,  and  thus  introduced  to  give  his  modern  ideas 
an  apparent  Scriptural  support.  Much  of  this  loose  writing  exists.  Others  in  reference 
to  this  interval  are  more  cautious,  as  e.g.  Scott  (Com.  loci),  who,  however  unwilling,  is 
forced  to  say  :  "  But,  notwithstanding  all  which  He  had  taught  them,  they  still  enter- 
tained some  thoughts  of  a  temporal  Kingdom,"  and  these  expectations,  he  informs  us, 
were  eradicated  on  and  after  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  interval  is  thus  given  to  us  with- 
out an  effort  to  retain  it  ;  and  it  jjoorly  accords  with  various  comments,  on  events  and 
sayings  preceding  it,  found  in  his  commentary.  It  is  sad  to  find  so  many  writers  of 
ability  (as  e.g.  Ebrard,  (rosp.  His.,  p.  332,  etc..  Art.  "  Offices  of  Christ  "  in  M'Clintock 
and  Story's  Cyclop.),  who  declare  that  during  the  ministry  of  Jesus,  He  and  the  disciples 
taught  that  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  had  come,"  "  loas  come, "  when  the  record  so  flatly 
contradicts  the  usage  of  such  language,  and  the  f)reachers,  who  are  stated  to  have  said 
so,  were  utterly  unconscious  of  any  such  a  Kingdom  established,  even  during  this  interval. 
It  is  refreshing  to  turn  from  such  contradictory  presentations  to  the  simple  facts  as  ap- 
preciated by  others.  Thus  Eev.  Andrew  Fausset,  the  Commentator,  in  our  "  Lord's 
Prophecies"  (Christ.  Herald,  Ap.  10th,  1879),  refers  to  "  Repent  ye,  for  the  Kingdom  of 
God  is  at  hand,"  and  then  asking  why  this  Kingdom  did  not  immediately  appear,  cor- 
rectl}''  answers  by  a  reference  to  the  non-repentance  and  unbelief  of  the  nation,  as  proven 
by  the  address  of  Jesus,  Matt.  23  :  37-39,  saying,  "  these  words  indicate  that  the  unbe- 
lief of  the  Jews  caused  the  postponement  of  Christ's  Kingdom."  Such  a  position  enables 
us  to  receive  Acts  1  :  6,  and  kindred  passages,  without  degrading  the  disciples  and  apos- 
tles into  "  carnal  "  believers,  etc.  The  apostles  were  not  "  ignorant  and  mistaken"  at 
this  period,  and  we  may  well  believe,  that  the  question  was  actuated  by  the  honor  and 
glory  it  would  bring  to  their  Master,  by  the  personal  interest  they  felt  in  it,  owing  to  the 
specific  promise  of  rulership  in  it,  and  by  the  blessing,  according  to  prediction,  it  would 
prove  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  the  world.  It  was  just  such  a  question  as  hearts  full  of 
love,  faith,  and  hope  would  suggest  with  a  resurrected  Messiah  before  them.  The  ques- 
tion vindicates  their  deep  interest  in  "  the  Ghristship'  of  Jesus,  and  His  answer  confirms 
their  confidence  in  Him. 


Prop.  70.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  433 


Proposition  70.  Tlie  apostles,  after  Christ's  ascension,  did  not 
jyreach,  either  to  Jews  or  Gentiles,  that  the  Kingdom  was  estab- 
lished. 

They  could  not  consistently  preach  that  it  was  established,  be- 
cause (1)  the  covenant  forbids  it,  the  express  terms  of  it  not  being 
verified  ;  (2)  the  rejection  of  the  kingdom  by  the  Jews  and  its  con- 
sequent postponement  during  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  forbids 
it ;  (3)  the  seed  of  Abraham  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  given 
not  being  yet  gathered  out,  forbids  it ;  and  (4)  the  non-arrival  of 
the  Sec.  Advent  forbids  it. 

It  is  painful  to  notice  how  our  recent  apologetical  writers  (as  e.g.  Eow,  Ch.  Evidences, 
Hampton  Lectures,  1877),  while  not  denying  a  future  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  make  the 
Messianic  prophecies  to  be  mainly  realized  at  the  First  Advent  and  in  the  Ch.  Church. 
This  is  a  grave  mistake,  uiierly  opposed  to  the  covenants,  prophecies,  and  teachings  of 
the  apostles,  all  of  which  point  us  to  the  Sec.  Advent  for  the  astounding  and  most  joyful 
Messianic  manifestations.  Such  an  error,  if  entertained,  vitiates  any  system  of  belief, 
and  weakens^the  defence  of  Christianity  itself,  because  it  perverts  and  misapplies  Script- 
ure and  the  Gospel  History.  Many  Pre-Millenarians  (as  e.g.  Dr.  Nast  in  Art.  "  Christ's 
Mill.  Keign,"  West.  Ch.  Advocate,  July  23d,  1879)  hold  that  a  "  Kingdom  of  grace"  was 
established  in  the  Church  (which  they  also  designate  "  new  dispensation,"  etc.),  or  in 
the  heart  of  believers  (a  spiritual  Kingdom),  but  hold  that  this  is  to  give  place  to  "  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ' '  in  its  full  covenanted  and  proper  prophetic  sense,  viz.  :  "  an  undis- 
puted Theocracy  on  the  earth."  While  we  feel  compelled,  logically  and  ^crijMrally  {a.sv>e 
shall  show  in  detail),  to  reject  this  view  as  untenable  and  misleading,  yet  it  is— in  view 
of  the  unity  of  Scripture  being  more  largely  preserved  by  it— immensely  preferable  to 
the  prevailing  theories  on  the  subject.  Those  holding  to  this  opinion  are  self-contra- 
dictoiy,  which  is  evidenced  by  the  following  illustration.  In  their  comments  on  Matt. 
3  :  2  they  already  find  this  Kingdom  of  grace,  but  coming  to  Acts  1  :  6  it  is  postponed 
to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  when  we  come  to  that  period,  we  find  the  Kingdom  in- 
ferred—the Church  established  being  simply  preparatory.  Because  Jesus  is  the  Mes- 
siah, it  does  not  follow  that  He  now  fills  the  covenanted  and  predicted  position  assigned 
to  Him  ;  men  hastily  conclude  that  He  does  (a  multitude  of  writers  assert  it,  and  make 
it  fundamental  in  their  system),  but  we  show  from  the  Scriptures,  step  by  step,  that  we 
have  to  wait  for  the  Sec.  Advent  before  the  Messianic  manifestation  in  connection  with  the 
Kingdom  can  be  realized. 

OI)S.  1.  Our  entire  argument  thus  far  (with  achlitional  reasons  that  will 
be  advanced)  does  not  allow  us  to  entertain  any  other  opinion  than  the  one 
stated  in  the  Proposition.  After  the  declarations  of  Jesus  that  "  the 
house"  (Davidic)  would  remain  desolate  until  His  return,  that  He  would 
leave,  remain  away  for  an  indefinite  time,  that  the  Kingdom  was  connected 
Avith  His  coming  again,  etc.,  it  is  reasonable  to  look  for  a  corresjmuhng 
style  of  preaching  in  His  chosen  witnesses.  This  we  find  in  such  profusion 
that  it  is  a  favorite  charge  with  infidels  (as  Strauss,  Bauer,  Kenan,  etc.) 
that  the  apostles  still  adhered  to  "  the  Jeivish  ideas  of  the  Kingdom''  ;  the 
apologists  (as  Neander,  etc.)  admit  that  "  Jewish  forms"  were  retained. 


434  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  70. 

but  contend  that  these  were  to  be  (alas  !  how  true)  gradually  obliterated  in 
'^  the  developing  consciousness  of  the  church." 

Many  writers  of  the  Tubingen  school  and  others,  regarding  Christianity  as  the  result- 
ant of  a  Petrine  and  Pauline  development,  attemjjt  to  distinguish  between  these  periods. 
The  Petrine  being  essentially  Jewish  is  the  prevailing  type  of  Christianity  during  the 
first  period,  but  was  finally  displaced  and  absorbed  by  the  Pauline,  which  is  regarded  as 
more  anti-Jewish.  In  this  way  they  endeavor  to  account  (overlooking  the  Alexandrian 
and  Gnostic  influence)  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  notions  of  the  Kingdom,  al- 
though all  admit  that  even  the  Pauline  and  Johannine  are  not  entirely  freed  from  "  a 
Jewish  cast."  Unfortunately  not  only  Ptationalistic  but  prominent  defenders  of  Chris- 
tianity (as  Neander,  Nevin,  etc.),  have  seized  upon  this  Petrine  and  Pauline  theory,  and 
incorjoorated  it  into  their  own  line  of  apologetics,  under  its  shelter  apologizing  for  the 
modern  view  of  the  Kingdom  being  so  different  from  that  of  the  early  Church.  (Comp. 
Props.  72,  74,  75,  76.)  This  is  done  at  the  expense  of  concessions,  which,  to  say  the  least, 
vitiate  or  lessen  apostolic  authority.  Every  theorj^  of  this  kind  forgets  that  to  Peter 
was  first  specially  committed  the  ke3^s  of  this  Kingdom  both  to  Jew  and  Gentile  (comp. 
Prop.  6-1),  and  that  from  this  circumstance  alone  he  was  in  no  way  inferior  to  Paul  or 
John.  Is  it  possible  to  believe  that  one  to  whom  such  keys  were  entrusted,  should  be 
ignorant  of  the  Kingdom  to  an  extent  that  requires  another's  services  to  set  it  right  ? 
No  !  the  whole  theory — hypothetical — introduces  an  uncalled-for,  and  unproven,  antago- 
nism between  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  (comp.  Prop.  187-8),  which  only  exists  in  a 
philosophical  conceit.  Differences  in  characteristic  writing,  in  witnessing  statements, 
manner  of  presenting  truth,  exist  between  Peter,  John,  and  Paul,  but  none  in  doctrine, 
or  in  the  truth  itself,  or  in  the  teachings  concerning  the  Kingdom.  On  the  subject  of 
the  Kingdom  they  were  a  unit,  and  none  of  the  difi'erences  alluded  to  (as  e.g.  in  Paul's 
laying  so  much  stress  on  justification  by  faith,  rendered  necessary  by  his  special  mis- 
sion to  Gentiles  to  secure  their  engrafting,  or,  in  his  portraj'al  of  the  overthrow  of  the 
Mosaic  ritual,  made  incumbent  by  the  same,  etc.),  are  of  a  nature  to  form  an  antagonism 
between  them.  This  is  seen  from  our  line  of  argument,  enabling  us  to  quote  as  freely 
from  Paul  as  we  do  from  Peter.  This  divine  unity  of  doctrine  is  essential  to  their  char- 
acter as  witnesses  ;  for  just  so  soon  as  we  admit  that  in  any  important  doctrine  (as  that 
of  the  Kingdom)  any  one  of  the  apostles  was  in  error  (however  ajDologetically  and  phil- 
osoiDhically  presented  so  as  not  to  shock  our  sense  of  propriety-),  then  his  testimony  is  low^- 
ered  to  a  mare  human  standard.  Even  if  men  endeavor  to  screen  such  an  one,  charge- 
able with  misconception,  from  ignorance  and  of  bearing  false  witness,  by  saying  that  un- 
der "  the  Jewish  form"  or  "  Jewish  husk"  there  was  still  "  a  germ"  (invisibly  small)  of 
truth,  which  must  pass  through  a  process  of  development  before  it  can  be  appreciated, 
yet  all  this,  done  with  the  most  excellent  and  jjious  motives,  is  only  opening  the  flood- 
gates of  infidelity,  for  it  is  an  undermining  of  unity  and  apostolic  character.  Well  may 
the  Tiibingen,  Parker,  and  other  schools,  triumphantly  ask,  after  such  vain  concessions, 
if  the  apostles  were  mistaken  in  their  notions  of  the  Kingdom,  how  can  we  trust  them  as 
infallible  guides  in  other  matters?  The  sad  truth  is,  that  this  specious,  fallacious  the- 
orizing is  a  fearful  blow  dealt  to  apostolic  knowledge  and  authorit3^  Instead  of  having 
a  sure  foundation  in  the  AVord,  it  is  placed  in  "  church- consciousness, "  in  develop- 
ment, growth,  church  authority,  etc.  And  moreover,  when  it  comes  to  finding  those 
microscopical  germs,  scarcely  two  are  agreed  as  to  their  appearance,  shape,  or  to  their 
resultant  growth.  The  enemies  of  the  Bible  are  not  slow  in  seizing  this  vantage  ground 
offered  to  them,  and  are  finding  these  germs  and  developments— using  the  theory  most 
eft'ectually — in  Comparative  Theology,  and  making  Christianity  only  a  stage  of  develop- 
ment toward  a  higher  jalane,  etc.  Volume  after  volume  of  recent  American  books  with 
this  plausible  philosophical  hypothesis  running  through  them,  are  bearing  the  fi'uit  of  its 
adoption.  They  echo  the  sentiments  of  the  German  "Friends  of  Light,"  that  the  Script- 
ures were  good  enough  in  the  early  history  of  the  church,  but  were  never  intended  for 
the  present  highly  intelligent  and  cultivated  times  !  It  may  be  said,  that  this  is  pushing 
the  theory  to  an  extreme  ;  but  we  can  scarcely  deny  that  it  is  a  legitimate  one,  when 
employed,  as  it  is,  to  disparage  apostolic  teaching  as  contained  in  a  "  husk." 

Obs.  2.  The  weakness  and  Jewish  cast  assigned  to  the  early  church  teach- 
ing respecting  the  Kingdom,  is  the  place  of  persistent  attack  from  unbe- 
lievers. It  is  remarkable,  and  indicative  of  the  truthfulness  of  our  position, 
that  for  some  time  the  chief  assaults  have  been  turned  in  this  direction. 


PkOP.  70.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDOM.  435 

For,  if  it  can  be  shown — taking  advantage  of  the  admissions  and  conces- 
sions of  believers,  which  allow  a  change  of  view  in  the  church  doctrine  of 
the  Kingdom — that  the  faith  of  the  apostles  was  discarded  by  the  church  as 
" /oo  Jewish,'^  then  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the  very  foundations  of 
Christianity  are  unreliable  and  the  superstructure  erected'  upon  them  is 
unsafe.  This  insidious  (and  unjust  to  the  Record)  charge  is  skilfully 
directed  and  paraded  by  thousands  of  pens.  If  any  of  the  apostles  were 
wrong,  may  not  all  others  be  equally  in  error?  Invalidate  the  testimony 
of  one  on  a  leading  doctrine  so  that  it  becomes  antagonistic — directly  hos'- 
tile — to  another  ;  declare  that  the  doctrinal  position  of  one  or  more  was 
tolerably  well  calculated  for  that  age  but  not  for  successive  eras,  and  you 
have  no  infallible  directory.  Believers  stand  amazed,  amid  the  enlighten- 
ment of  the  age,  to  find  the  multitude  of  unbelievers  so  vast.  Alas  !  we 
say  it  sorrowfully,  these  are  the  legitimate  fruits  of  following  a  spiritualistic 
system  of  interpretation  which  dares  not  accept  of  the  language  and  faith  of 
the  apostles,  and  of  the  early  church  as  recorded  concerning  the  Kingdom  ; 
which  vainly  wishes  that  the  Millennarian,  the  Jewish  Tiew  of  the  Kingdom, 
had  never  existed.  We  repeat  :  the  church  hy  forsaking  the  old  landmarks 
of  this  doctrine  Avill  reap  in  bitterness  the  sad  results  of  its  own  sowing. 
In  forsaking  the  ^orimitive,  covenanted  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  so  funda- 
mental ;  in  declaring  that  the  first  Christians  were  in  error  on  this  most 
important  and  essential  matter  ;  in  heaping  upon  apostolic  fathers  and 
martyrs  the  epithets  of  "carnal,"  "sensual,"  "material,"  "gross," 
"  Jewish,"  and  "  fanatical  "  interpretation,  she  has  been  paving  the  way 
and  forging  the  weapons  for  the  present  unrelenting  attack  upon  the 
citadel  of  Christianity  itself.  And  just  so  long  as  she  continues  to  enter- 
tain her  view  (now  so  prevalent)  of  the  preaching  of  the  disciples,  she  is 
incapable  oi  fairly  meeting  and  setting  aside  the  arguments  of  unbelievers. 

The  gross  attack  of  Bolingbroke,  owing  to  alleged  discrepancies  in  preaching,  etc.,  in 
endeavoring  to  make  out  that  the  New  Test,  contains  two  distinct  (iospels,  one  given 
by  Christ  and  another  by  Paul,  has  been  refined  ;  the  theory  of  doctrinal  develoi:)nient 
from  the  germ  supplying  the  abundant  material.  Dr.  Priestley  {Letters  1  and  2  to  Mr. 
Burn,  quoted  by  Fuller  in  Calv.  and  Soc.  Sys.  Comp.,  Let.  12),  not  knowing  what  to  do 
with  some  Scripture,  remarks  :  "  some  texts  of  the  Old  Test,  had  been  improj^erly  quoted 
by  waiters  in  the  New,"  being  "  misled  by  Jewish  prejudices."  This  is  repeated  by 
multitudes,  and,  what  is  remarkable,  more  or  less  endorsed,  in  some  form  or  other,  by 
theologians  and  apologists.  Thus  to  give  a  single  illustration  (in  a  different  spirit)  from 
an  eminent  author,  able  and  interesting  :  Oosterzee  (Theol.  of  N.  Test.,  p.  378),  says  that 
the  Apocalypse  sustains  a  '^purely  Israelitish  character''  (see  e.g.  p.  53  where  the  Jewish 
views  are  stated),  and  that  it  indicates  "  that  even  the  most  highly  developed  of  the 
Apostles  at  the  end  of  his  course,  had  by  no  means  torn  himself  from  the  TJieocratic  national 
ground  in  which  he  had  ever  been  rooted."  We  thank  such  men  for  their  frank  and  noble 
concessions  of  truth,  however  adverse  it  may  be  to  their  own  theories,  esj)ecially  when 
it  is  done  not  in  the  spirit  of  unbeli€f  hut  tov  the  sake  ot  the  truth.  Multitudes  pro- 
ceeding on  the  theory  that  the  Messianic  Kingdom  was  established  in  the  Ch.  Church, 
take  it  for  granted  that  the  apostles  changed  their  views.  Thus  e.g.  Walker,  in  the 
Philos.  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation,  constantly  presents  it,  and  locates  (p.  245)  the  period  of 
enlightenment  as  follows  :  "  On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  promised  Spirit  descended. 
The  apostles  at  once  perceived  the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ's  Kingdom."  But  the  proof 
is  lacking,  and  over  against  Walker  we  place  the  above  declaration  of  Oosterzee's  that 
John  had  not  changed  in  his  last  writing.  Covenant,  prophecy,  unity,  all  forbid  such 
a  change,  especially  in  communications  divinely  received. 

Obs.  3.  Our  argument — fortified  (1)  by  Scripture,  (2)  by  charges  of  infi- 
delity, (3)  by  frank  concessions  of  apologists — accepts  of  these  "  Jewish 
conceptions"  of  the  apostles  as  legitimately  correct  and  imperatively  de- 


436  THE  THEOCRATIC  Kiis'GDo:^!.  [Prop.  70. 

manded  by  the  covenants  and  the  Divine  Purpose.  One  writer  attempts  to 
get  rid  of  these  "  Jewish  forms"  by  dividing  the  chnrch  into  Petrine,  Paul- 
ine, and  Johannine  (some  make  the  Pauline  last)  stages  or  eras,  lauding 
and  magnifying  the  one  to  the  prejudice  of  the  other,  and  making  the 
former  to  be  absorbed  by  the  latter  ;  another  writer  (as  e.g.  M.  Pecaut) 
says  that  Paul  continually  betrays  his  "  Jewish  conceptions  ";  Semler,  and 
others,  inform  ns  that  John's  writings,  especially  the  Apocalypse,  are  in 
harmony  with  a  "  Jewish  spirit  ";  another  writer  (as  e.g.  Westm,  Revieiv, 
Oct.  1861,  Art.  5)  tells  ns  that  all  of  them  give  us  "  an  expansion  of  the 
great  Hebrew  Theocratic  conception,"  These  expressions  are  given  to  ns 
apologetically,  or  sneeringly  (with  intended  sarcasm),  but  in  themselves  they 
contain  so  much  truth  that  the  apology  or  sarcasm  becomes  uncalled  for 
and  harmless  ;  for  we  are  fully  prepared  and  warranted  to  accept  of  these 
'"'Hehrew  Theocratic  conceptions.^''  Scholten  (Oosterzee's  Theol.  N.  Test., 
p.  395)  may  see  only  "  forms  derived  from  an  earlier  mechanical  view  of 
the  world,  which  show  that  John  had  not  yet  entirely  risen /ro^/i  his  former 
Judaism  ";  Renan  {Life  of  St.  Paul,  p.  250)  may  tell  ns,  that  "  the  great 
chimera  of  the  coming  Kingdom  of  God  was  thus  tJie  creative  and  mother 
idea  of  the  new  religion,"  and  in  another  place  (p.  162),  "the  dream 
which  had  been  the  soul  of  the  movement  of  ideas  brought  about  by  Jesus, 
continued  to  be  the  fundamental  dogma  of  Christianity  ;  everybody  believed 
in  the  speedy  coming  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  in  the  unexpected  manifes- 
tation of  a  great  glory,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  Son  of  God  would 
appear,"  etc.,  and  that  Paul  "  expresses  Messianic  hopes  clothed  in  the  g art) 
of  Jewish  materialism'^ ;  Neander,  Pressense,  and  a  host  of  others,  may 
Q^eln  ct  a  ntlg  admit  the  "Jewish  forms,"  "Jewish  conceptions,"  "Jewish 
materialism,"  "  Jewish  husks,"  etc.  (telling  us  that  growth  was  to  cast  these 
aside),  but  we  gladly  accept  of  tlie  very  things  which  are  thus  wrongfully 
supposed  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  truth  itself. 

Some  writers,  overlooking  their  own  concessions  in  other  places,  endeavor,  with  their 
Pauline  theory,  to  clear  Paul  as  much  as  possible  from  Jewish  views.  Under  the  shelter 
of  Paul's  consistent  objections  to  some  Jewish  views  (viz.  :  those  relating  to  the  ceremo- 
nial and  sacrificial  law  abrogated  in  Jesus,  which  we  also  hold),  they  endeavor  to  make 
out  that  he  rejected  everything  essentially  Jewish.  Our  argument,  as  we  proceed,  will 
show  the  unfounded  nature  of  this  theory.  It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  Reuss  (His.  Ch. 
Tlieol,  p.  303),  after  his  admissions  concerning  apostolic  adhesion  to  Jewish  conceptions 
(thus  introducing  antagonism  between  apostles),  in  his  eagerness  to  rid  Paul  of  Judaistic 
views,  roundly  asserts  :  "  lohoni  {Christ)  he  {Paul)  did  not  regard  as  the  mighty  monarch  of 
a  Kingdom  to  come.' '  Where  is //;e  j^roof  of  siich  a  sweeping  assertion?  The  exact  con- 
trary is  evidenced  from  even  a  partial  comparison  of  Paul's  teachings.  This  will  ajjpear 
in  the  course  of  our  argument  under  various  pro23ositions,  where  we  will  show  that  Paul 
lays  much  stress  on  the  Sec.  Advent  and  the  future  Kingdom  then  introduced,  employing 
largely  the  very  Jewish  phraseology  and  ideas  which  were  universally  applied  by  the  Jews 
to  the  Messianic  or  Davidic  restored.  Kingdom.  There  is  no  contradiction  between  Paul 
and  the  other  apostles,  as  is  seen  in  his  equally  pressing  the  imjDortance  of  the  Second 
Advent,  the  futurity  of  the  Kingdom,  the  location  of  the  restitution,  inheriting,  the  day 
of  Jesus  Christ,  etc.  But  as  all  these  points  will  come  before  us  in  regular  order,  we 
need  not  anticipate  them. 

Obs.  4.  We  take  the  position  that  if  the  witnesses  of  the  truth  thus  occu- 
pied— as  enemies  and  friends,  assailants  and  defenders  declare — "  a  Jeivish 
standpoint,'^  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  do  so  in  hehalf  of  the  truth  itself. 
A  little  reflection  here,  in  view  of  the  special  character  and  mission  of  the 
apostles,  will  lead  any  unbiased  mind,  which  acknowledges  the  inspiration 


Prop.  70.]  the  theocratic  kk^gdom.  437 

and  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  to  feel  that  any  theory  which  places  the 
apostles  in  an  attitude,  dodrinally,  antagonistic  to  the  future  posture  of 
the  church,  is,  and  imist  be,  radically  defective.  A  mind  and  heart  imbued 
with  deep  reverence  for  the  Word,  ought  to  be  prepared  to  investigate  the 
doctrinal  views  of  the  persons  divinely  commissioned  to  proclaim,  authorita- 
tively, the  truth,  and  to  do  this  with  the  utmost  imjKtrtiality.  Such,  too, 
ought  not  to  allow,  without  the  most  decisive  proof ,  that  the  apostles  were 
mistaken  in  their  "  Jewish"  position. 

In  this  matter  we  only  follow  the  excellent  suggestion  of  Dr.  Hodge,  one  of  our  op- 
ponents, when  he  says  (*Sys\  TheoL,  vol.  3,  p.  793,  comp.  p.  797),  "what  the  apostles  be- 
lieved, we  are  hound  to  believe  ;  for  St.  John  said  :  '  He  that  knoioeth  God,  heareth  ns.'  " 
This  is  true,  but,  alas,  how  little  regarded  even  by  those  who  are  friends  and  admirers  of 
the  apostles  !  The  quotations,  apologies,  etc.,  given  already  evidence  this  ;  many  more 
will  be  adduced  as  we  advance. 

Obs.  5.  Additionally  it  may  be  said  :  (1)  If  the  apostles  preached  that 
the  covenanted,  predicted  Kingdom  was  established,  why  do  they  not 
directly  declare  this  as  a  fact,  and  thus  remove  error  and  prevent  the  in- 
coming Chiliasm  ?  Is  there  a  single  passage  which  directly  teaches  that  the 
Christian  church  is  the  Kingdom  ?  No  such  declaration  or  passage  is  to 
be  found  in  all  the  apostolical  writings.  (2)  Hence  it  is  a  fact  which  can- 
not be  gainsaid  that  those  who  hold  to  a  present  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom  exclusively  rely  upon  rnfere?itial  proof.  This  feature  alone — a 
doctrine  derived  from^^^rre  inference — should  place  the  reader  on  his  guard 
so  that  he  may  well  consider  whether  such  inferential  testimony  can  possi- 
bly outweigh  the  previously  given  covenants  and  teachings  of  Jesus.  An 
inference  may  be  right  or  wrong,  and  this  must  be  carefully  tested.  It  has 
no  decisive  weight  against  direct  testimony,  but  must  give  way  to  the  latter. 
Let  us  add  :  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  leading  doctrine  of  an  oath-bound 
covenant,  of  the  early  preaching  of  the  disciples,  and  of  all  prophecy,  to 
leave  it  (the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom)  deducible  from  mere  inference 
resulting  from  human  opinion  on  the  subject.  Inferences  too  so  com- 
pletely of  human  origin,  that  the  most  learned  and  pious  differ  among 
themselves  as  to  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  it,  and  the  time  of  its 
establishment.  It  is,  therefore,  a  just  conclusion,  that,  in  a  matter  of  so 
high  moment,  if  God  really  (as  claimed)  established  the  Kingdom  cove- 
nanted to  David  and  predicted  by  the  prophets  in  the  church  or  in  the 
hearts  of  believers,  etc.,  then  those  former  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  ought 
(since  we  are  told  that  they  were  mistaken,  etc.)  ccs  honest  men — to  say 
nothing  of  their  apostleship — both  to  have  confessed  their  previous  error 
(for  if  in  error,  as  claimed,  simple  justice  required  this),  and  to  have  plainly 
and  unequivocally  declared  the  presence  of  the  Kingdom  in  human  hearts, 
or  in  the  church,  or  in  the  world.  But  they  did  neither  of  these  things  : 
the  first  they  could  not  do,  because  they  had  not  been  ignorant,  false 
preachers  of  the  Kingdom  ;  the  second  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  do, 
since  it  would  have  convicted  them  of  having  previously  preached  an 
erroneous  Kingdom,  of  abandoning  the  solemnly  given  covenants,  and  of 
holding  forth  a  Kingdom  which  has  none  of  the  divinely  covenanted  and 
predicted  characteristics.  (Passages  from  which  the  opposite  is  inferred, 
will  be  examined  in  detail  hereafter.)  Inferences,  therefore,  which  are  in 
antagonism  to  the  previously  ascertained  tenor  of  the  Word,  to  the  antici- 
pations of  the  pious  Jews,  to  the  former  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the 


438  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  70. 

disciples,  are  justly  open  to  grave  suspicion,  and  one  to  be  discarded  as  too 
unreliable  for  doctrinal  teaching. 

Obs.  6.  Take  the  first  sermons  of  Peter,  and  nothing  is  said  of  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom,  although  multitudes  inform  us  that  it  was  only 
then  manifested.  Turning  to  Acts  2  :  14-36  and  3  :  12-26,  we  ascertain  the 
following  :  that  in  the  former,  speaking  to  Jews  instead  of  making  out 
that  the  covenant  was  to  be  spiritualized  and  applied  to  Christ,  Peter 
boldly  asserts  that  Jesus  was  to  sit  on  David's  throne,  that  He  was  raised 
up  and  exalted  for  this  purpose,  that  lie  was  seated  at  God's  right  hand 
until  the  period  arrives  (comp.  e.g.  Rev.  19  and  20)  for  making  His 
enemies  His  footstool,  and  that,  therefore.  He  is  both  Lord  and  Christ. 
(Let  not  the  reader  forget  here,  the  meaning  of  Christ  to  the  Jewish  mmd 
— see  Prop.  205.)  Let  the  student  place  himself  in  the  posture  of  the 
Jewish  hearers  at  that  preaching,  with  their  Jewish  expectations  of  the 
Kingdom  and  "  the  Christ,''  and  he  will  see  at  once  that  this  sermon  was 
most  admirably  adapted  to  confirm  the  Jews  in  their  faith  of  the  Kingdom. 
Peter's  argument  takes  the  Jewish  view  of  the  Kingdom  to  be  the  correct 
one,  and  as  one  ivell  hnoivn  (Props.  19-44),  and  hence,  without  entering 
into  particulars,  endeavors  to  show  that  Jesus  is  that  Messiah  under  whom 
the  covenanted  sitting  upon  David's  throne  will  yet  eve)dually  be  realized 
— His  resurrection  and  present  exaltation  giving  us  the  needed  assurance. 
The  Kingdom  is  not  disputed,  but  He  who  is  to  be  the  Messiah,  the  King, 
is  the  subject  controverted  and  thus  brought  forward.  This  is  confirmed 
by  the  second  discourse,  in  which  it  is  distinctly  announced  that  this  Jesus, 
thus  declared  to  be  the  Messiah,  shall  remain  in  heaven  until  the  period  of 
restitution  spoken  of  by  the  prophets,  and  always  linked  with  the  Messianic 
Kingdom,  shall  arrive  ;  for  this  Jesus  shall  come  again  to  be  the  Restorer 
as  the  proj^hets  announce.  Now  let  the  reader  consider  how  the  hearers  of 
Peter  regarded  the  times  of  restitution  (comp.  Prop.  144),  comprehending 
under  it  the  Messianic  reign,  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom,  etc.,  and  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  conceive  of  any  other  impres- 
sion made  upon  their  minds  than  that  the  ICingdom  ivas  still  future,  and 
would  be  established  when  Jesus  would  come  again.  The  proof  is  found  in 
the  historical  fact,  that  the  first  Christians  thus  understood  Peter.  The 
times  of  restitution  and  the  times  of  the  Kingdom  are  strictly  equivalent 
phrases  to  the  Jewish  mode  of  thinking  and  belief  ;  hence  the  language  of 
Peter,  as  consistency  demanded,  is  in  strict  accord  with  our  Proposition. 
Many  of  our  opponents  are  forced  to  give  us  Acts  chs.  2  and  3,  as  fully 
sustaining  continued  "  Jewish  expectations." 

Thus  e.g.  Pressense  {Early  Years  of  Clirls.,  p.  46),  says  that  the  apostles  after  the  day 
of  Pentecost  "still  enveloped  that  truth  (i.e.  the  truth  of  Christ),  in  Jewish  forms,"  and 
(p.  48)  adds:  "  they  (the  first  Christians)  believed  in  an  immediate  return  of  Jesus 
Christ '  to  restore  all  things.'  They  supposed  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  at  hand 
and  that  the  last  days  foretold  by  Joel  had  begun  to  dawn.  Acts  2:17  and  3  :  19,  20. 
Thus  they  awaited  those  days  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  which  was  to 
inaugurate  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ."  Schmid  {Bib.  Theol,  N.  Test.,  p.  337),  frankly 
admits  that  Acts  3  :  18-25  viewed  with  Peter's  utterances  in  his  epistles,  refers  to  the 
Old  Test,  prophecy  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,  which  "  is  to  he  completed  at  His  second 
appearance.''  (Comp.  Prop.  144.)  A  large  amount  of  similar  testimony  could  readily  be 
IDroduced  from  the  writings  of  our  opposers — some  of  which  we  present  under  other  Prop- 
ositions,— and  this  is  the  more  valuable  since  it  is  reluctantly  forced  from  them,  being, 
as  they  well  see  and  acknowledge,  at  variance  with  their  j)reconceived  notion  of  the 
Kingdom.     "We  admire  the  integrity  of  such  men,  who  in  honesty,  however  adverse  the 


Prop.  70.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  439 

confession  may  be  to  their  own  views  of  the  Kingdom,  frankly  admit  "  the  Jewish  stand- 
point" of  the  first  preachers  of  the  Kingdom  ;  while  we  censure  the  weakness— if  not 
worse — of  that  class  who  either  dare  not  confess  it,  or  jaretend,  against  overwhelming 
evidence,  that  it  does  not  exist,  being  afraid  that  an  honest  acknowledgment  would  re- 
coil upon  their  own  system  of  faith.  The  truth  of  God  never  suffers  by  exposure  and 
freedom  ;  it  is  confinement  and  restrainment  that,  if  it  does  not  seriously  injure,  at 
least  eclipses  it,  Fairbaiin  {On  Froph.,  p.  506),  however  much  he  endeavors  to  give  a 
modern  hue  to  these  sermons  (and  thus  makes  out  that  Peter  at  one  time,  at  least,  had 
preached  a  false  Kingdom,  viz. :  before  the  day  of  Pentecost),  makes  important  conces- 
sions (1)  that  the  times  of  restitution  occur  at  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  (2)  that  the  sending  of 
Jesus  again,  is  that  Advent  ;  (3)  that  even  "  the  seasons  of  refreshing"  if  "the  sense 
absolutely  require  it,"  "might  be  identified  with  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all 
things"  (although  he  thinks  it  not  necessary)  ;  (4)  that  (p.  168)  it  were  against  all  proba- 
bility to  suppose  that  the  apostle  meant  to  speak  of  the  jorojihecy  (of  Joel)  as  having 
found  a  complete  fulfilment  in  the  events  of  that  particular  day,  or  as  being  in  any  meas- 
ure exhausted  by  these." 

Ohs.  7.  Paul's  teaching  fully  corresponds  with  that  of  Peter.  Thus  e.g. 
in  the  1st  and  2d  chs.  of  2  Thess.  he  unites  the  Kingdom  with  the  Advent 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and,  instead  of  a  present  covenanted  Kingdom  existing, 
predicts  that  before  the  still  future  ^^  day  of  Chris f  is  manifested  there 
will  be  a  falling  away,  and  the  Son  of  perdition,  the  Antichrist,  will  be 
revealed.  That  is,  before  the  predictions  relating  to  the  promised  glory  of 
the  Messiah's  Kingdom  can  be  realized,  certain  events  must  first  transpire, 
and  that  trouble,  trial,  and  persecution,  more  or  less,  await  those  who  are 
called  and  are  under  the  influence  of  the  truth.  (Comp.  e.g.  the  Jewish 
conceptions  of  Rom.  8  :  19-23  ;  11  : 1-32  ;  13  :  11,  12,  etc. ;  1  Cor.  1  :  7,  8  ; 
4:5,  8  ;  6:2,  3,  9,  14,  etc.  ;  2  Cor.  1  :  14  ;  3  :  16,  etc.  ;  Gal.  1:4; 
3  :  16-18,  etc.  ;  Eph.  1  :  10-21  ;  2  :  12-19  ;  4  :  30,  etc.  ;  Phil.  1:6,  10  ; 
2  :  10,  11,  16,  etc.  ;  and  so  through  all  his  writings, — constantly  speaking 
of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  and  locating  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  held 
by  the  Jews  to  the  future  coming  of  this  Jesus,  by  employing  the  language 
and  ideas  of  the  Jews  applied  to  the  Messiah.) 

Obs.  8.  James  in  his  Epistle,  instead  of  a  kingdom  now  established, 
calls  believers  "  heirs  of  a  hingdom,^'  and  exhorts  to  a  patient  waiting  for 
"  tlie  Coming  of  the  Lord  "  when  the  promises  will  be  realized,  thus  strictly 
verifying  Christ's  statements.  In  Acts  15  :  13-17,  in  the  council  of  the 
apostles,  James  corroborates  the  non-establishment  of  the  Kingdom  by 
showing  that  ''after  this"  (i.e.  after  the  gathering  out  of  the  Gentiles) 
'^ I  (Jesus)  will  retur7i  and  ivill  build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David,  2uhich 
is  fallen  doivn,"  etc.     The  postponement  is  most  plainly  taught. 

The  apostles  all  agreed  to  this  postponement  as  presented  by  James.  Let  the  careful 
consider  :  that,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  this  must  he  so,  or  else  the  apostles  come 
in  direct  conflict  with  the  statements  of  Jesus  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  58,  66,  etc.).  In  this 
matter  there  must  be,  in  order  to  preserve  their  character  of  ajDostleship,  a  full  and  cor- 
dial agreement. 

Obs.  9.  John  in  his  Epistles,  instead  of  proclaiming  a  present  existing 
kingdom,  tells  us  of  antichrist,  encourages  to  faithfulness  and  looking  for 
the  comi7ig  of  Jesus.  In  the  Apoc,  given  to  show  the  future  revelation  of 
Jesus,  he  shows  the  trials  and  tribulations  of  the  church  during  a  period  of 
time  still  future  to  him,  and  positively  asserts  that  only  at  a  certain  time 
(Rev.  11  :  15  and  20  :  4)  the  dominion  or  Kingdom  of  Christ  would  be 
manifested.     Jude,  in  his  short  Epistle^  refers  us  to  tlie  coming  King  when 


440  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  70. 

mercy  and  glory  are  to  be  revealed  to  His  saints.  Thus  all  the  leading 
first  preachers  present  the  same  2)ostponement  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and  it  is  a 
jjerversioR  of  their  language  to  make  them  testify  to  anything  contrary  to 
this  and  their  former  preaching.  Indeed,  it  is  more  than  this  ;  it  is  to 
make  them  contradictory,  unrelicible,  and  hostile  to  the  Covenants  and 
Prophecy. 

Ols.  10.  The  simple  fact,  running  through  the  Epistles,  is  that  ^'Ae  King- 
dom is  spoke7i  of  as  still  future  and  constantly  associated  with  the  si^eedy  Ad- 
vent of  Jesus.  '  The  expectancy  of  that  Adv^ent  and  related  kingdom  forbids 
the  entertainment  of  the  substituted  notion  of  a  kingdom  now  so  widely  pre- 
valent. This  linking  of  the  Kingdom  with  the  Second  Advent  is  noivhere 
spoken  of  (as  now  reiterated  by  eminent  writers)  as  the  development  of  a 
new  stage  in  the  Kingdom.  The  passages  already  adduced  abundantly 
confirm  our  position,  for,  instead  of  teaching  what  the  Alexandrian,  monk- 
ish, popish,  and  modern  schools  so  loudly  affirm  (viz.  :  that  the  covenanted 
Kingdom  had  already  arrived  and  was  in  full  realization  and  progress), 
they  point  us  to  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Jesus  for  the  glorious  estahlisliment  of 
tlie  Is^ingdoin.^  We  give  but  a  single  illustration  of  the  apostolic  mode  of 
presenting  this  subject  :  Take  1  Pet.  1  :  10-13,  and  we  have  (1)  the  inheri- 
tance and  savaltion  (Jewish  phrases)  "  ready  to  he  revealed  in  the  last 
time^^  ;  (2)  to  be  realized  ^^  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,'^  'Utt  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  ";  (3)  and  this  is  the  same  inheritance  and  salva- 
tion which  the  prophets  predicted,  linking  it  Avith  the  Messianic  Kingdom 
on  earth.  Why  should  we  then,  contrary  to  the  entire  tenor  of  the  Word, 
attempt  to  locate  the  fulfilment  of  this  salvation,  etc.,  at  a  period  of  time 
different  from  that  specified  by  the  apostle  and  his  co-laborers  ;  or,  why 
should  we  disconnect  that  which  the  Spirit  ("  knowing  the  deep  things  of 
God  ")  has  expressly  joined  together?  Let  any  one  carefully  consider  the 
phraseology  of  the  New  Test,  in  reference  to  the  coming  again  of  Jesus, 
and  observe  how  there  is  united  with  it  all  the  Jewish  hopes  of  kingdom, 
restitution,  redemption,  dominion,  reigning,  crowning,  destruction  of 
enemies,  deliverance  of  His  people,  etc.,  and  he  w^ill  clearly  see  that  the 
distinctive  Messianic  hopes,  the  hopes  that  centre  in  the  qfficicd  Christ,  are 
2)Ostponed  to  the  expected,  precious  Sec.  Advent  of  the  Messiah.'^ 

'  To  a  person  who  has  never  collated  the  jDassages  relating  to  the  subject,  it  will  be 
surprising,  if  he  undertakes  it,  to  find  hoih  how  numerous  they  are,  and  how  unanimous 
the  voice  of  the  apostles  in  making  the  same  representations.  (Lists  are  given  in  Bick- 
ersteth's  Guide,  Brooks'  EL  of  Proph.  Inierp.,  Seiss'  Last  Times,  Shimeall's  I  will  come 
again,  etc.).  What  Van  Oosterzee  so  aptly  applies  to  Peter,  will  be  found,  to  a  very  great 
extent,  true  of  all  the  apostles  :  "  as  well  the  discourses  as  the  lirst  Ej^is.  of  Peter  teach 
us  to  recognize  this  apostle  especially  as  the  Apostle  of  Hope,  in  this  sense,  that  the  return 
of  the  Lord  equally  dominates  his  whole  presentation  of  Christian  truth,  his  whole  con- 
ception of  the  Christian  life." 

^  Overlooking  this  feature,  many  writers  find  obscurity  and  difficulties,  when  none 
exist.  Thus  e.g.  Reuss,  neglecting  this  key  given  so  plainly  in  Hebrews  (as  in  2  :  5  ; 
4  :  9  ;  9  :  28  ;  10  :  36,  37,  etc.),  says  :  "  How  involved,  obscure,  and  ambiguous  is  the 
Scriptural  demonstration  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (Heb.  4  :  3  etc.),  the  design  of 
which  is  to  establish  the  certainty  of  God's  promises."  Of  course,  token  men  spiritualize 
God's  promises  and  survey  them  only  from  a  modern  mystical  standpoint  there  must 
necessarily  be  ambiguity,  l)ut  let  any  one  place  himself  on  cocenanted  ground  and  then  he 
will  see  the  clearness  of  the  argument,  (1)  to  show  that  Jesas  is  the  Messiah,  (2)  that 
the  promises  will  be  fulfilled  in  and  by  Him,  (3)  that  even  as  Priest  He  makes  provision 
for  their  fulfilment,  (4)  that  His  very  death  ensures  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  (5j 


Prop.  70.]  the  theoceatic  Ki^^GDo:\r.  441 

and  that  such  a  realization  of  covenant  promises  will  be  experienced  at  His  Sec.  Coming 
unto  Salvation.  Thus  this  epistle  falls  in  fully,  clearly,  and  powerfully  with  the  other 
portions  of  Scripture. 

Ohs.  11.  If  we  critically  consider  the  confession  of  Peter,  it  leads  us  to 
the  same  conclusion.  Peter  confessed  that  Jesus  was  "  tlie  Christ,  tlie  Son 
of  the  living  God,^^  and  received  for  this  the  special  approval  of  Jesus  and 
acknowledgment  that  ^"  fiesh  and  Mood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee  hut 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven'^  (Matt.  16  :  IG,  17).  Now  this  approbation, 
calling  Peter  "^/e.s-s(?c//' and  the  declaration  that  the  Father  revealed  it, 
clearly  indicate  that  Peter  Icneto  the  significancy  and  proper  meaning  of  the 
title  ''the  Christ.''^  This  is  self-evident  from  the  narrative.  What  view 
of  ''the  Christ'^  did  Peter  entertain  excepting  solely  that  of  the  Jeivish 
expectations,  and  that  Jesus,  and  none  other,  was  indeed  the  promised 
Christ.  When  Peter,  therefore,  made  this  confession  he  believed  as  funda- 
mental to  it,  that  "  the  Chris  f  was  the  kingly  title  of  Jesus,  that  which 
indicated  Him  as  "  the  anointed  "  One,  coming  as  the  King  to  restore  the 
Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom.  This  is  not  mere  conjecturing  Peter's  view 
of  the  Christship,  for  we  have  overwhelming piroof  that  such  in  reality — and 
consistently  too  with  Covenant  and  Prophecy — was  his  opinion.  The  proof 
is  found  in  ^('/.s'  1  :  6  (comp.  also  Prop.  205,  etc.).  The  reader  will  also  re- 
flect that  if  the  modern  doctrinal  view  of  "  the  Christ'^  was  in  Peter's  mind, 
is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Peter  or  Jesus  would  have,  on  this  occa- 
sion, disabused  the  other  disciples  of  their  Jewish  conceptions  of  the  Mes- 
siahship  ;  and  can  w^e  consistently  account  for  Peter's  rebuking  Jesus  when 
lie  shortly  after  spoke  of  His  death  and  resurrection,  Matt.  16  :22.^  But 
when  we  see  that  Peter's  conceptions  of  "  tlie  ChrisV^ — as  shown  to  exist — 
were  approved  hy  Jesus  Himself,  who  shall  dare  to  decry  them  as  "  igno- 
rant" and  "antiquated."  To  do  the  latter  is  both  presumptuous  and 
dangerous.  No  !  Peter  hiew  what  was  comprehended  under  the  phrase 
"  the  Christ,"  and  however  ignorant  in  reference  to  the  manner  and  time 
in  which  "  the  Christ"  would  be  openly  manifested  as  such  in  His  glorious 
work,  he  certainly  was  not  mistaken  in  the  meaning  that  he  attached  to  it. 
Notice  then  what  follows  :  without  the  slightest  change  or  hint  of  a  differ- 
ent meaning  Peter  contimies  to  preach  to  the  Jews  "the  Christ,"  which 
was  understood  by  all  to  denote  the  One  anointed  to  l?e  the  King  on  David^s 
restored  throne.  If  this  was  not  its  meaning,  ho2U  could  inspired  men  leave 
the  Jews  and  others  under  the  impression,  without  correction,  that  such 
continued  its  meaning,  only  pointing  to  the  still  future  Advent  for  the 
manifestation  of  this  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ"  in  the  fullest  sense  entertained.^ 

^  It  is  saddening  to  see  into  what  palpaLle  contradictions  most  excellent  men  are  in- 
volved, who  deny  Peter's  conception  of  "  the  Christ,"  and  jjersistently  reject  "  Jewish 
conceptions"  of  the  Messiah.  We  give  an  illustration  (the  reader  can  readily  find  a 
multitude)  :  Barnes,  Com.,  Matt.  16  :  16,  17,  endeavors  to  give  an  unwarranied  turn  to 
this  confession,  an  Anti-Judaic  one,  as  if  Peter  did  not  entertain  the  Jewish  views,  and 
as  if  the  words  meant  :  "  You,  Jews,  were  expecting  to  know  the  Messiah  by  His  external 
splendor.  His  pomp  and  j)ower  as  a  man,"  etc.  He  thus  ascribes  to  Peter  a  highly 
wrought  spiritual  conception  of  "  the  Christ,"  according  with  modern  ideas.  Now  notice, 
in  the  same  chapter,  on  verse  22,  he  interprets  Peter's  conduct  as  resulting  from  this  : 
"He  expected,  moreover,  that  He  would  be  the  triumphant  Messiah,"  etc.,  and,  on  Acts 
1  :  6,  the  apostles,  including  Peter  (for  he  makes  no  exception),  are  charged  with  hold- 
ing the  exact  Jewish  expectations  of  a  "  temporal  dominion  of  the  Messiah,' '  etc.  In  the 
one  place  he  has  the  proper  idea  of  Christ,  and  in  the  other  places  he  is  represented  as 
holding  erroneous  views.     Our  argument  shows  that  Peter,  however  ignorant  of  the 


442  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIJ^GDOM.  [PrOP.  70. 

means  and  time  of  accompli  slim  ent,  consistently  held  to  one  continuous  proper  meaning 
of  "  Christ,"  corresponding  with  his  preaching  as  a  disciple  and  an  apostle. 

2  Admirable  writers  make  the  grave  mistake  of  changing  the  dehnite  title  of  "the 
Christ"  (comp.  Prop.  205).  i\pologists  fall  into  the  same  serious  error,  as  e.g.  Leathes 
{I'he  Religion  of  the  Christ,  Lee.  6,  on  "the  Christ  of  Acts")  correctly  points  out  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  concerning  His  death,  that  such  a  death  aj^peared  destructive  to  the 
Jewish  faith  of  the  Christ,  and  that  the  Christshii?  was  fully  asserted  notwithstanding 
the  death,  but  unfortunately  (overlooking  the  distinctive  title  in  its  covenanted  relation- 
ship, and  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom)  deduces  from  this,  grounded  on  His  resur- 
rection and  ascension,  that  "  the  Christship,"  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  was  most 
amply  realized  in  the  establishment  of  the  Church,  although  unable  to  designate  a  single 
Messianic  feature  thus  fulfilled.  The  facts  of  the  Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles,  Apoc,  and  early 
Church,  all  show  that  this  is  an  erroneous  conclusion,  calculated  to  lead  into  a  perver- 
sion of  much  that  is  precious.  Leathes  applies  the  same  reasoning  to  the  Epistles,  and 
comes  out  with  the  astounding  assertion,  that  by  His  ascension,  the  establishment  of 
the  Church,  and  the  conferring  of  spiritual  life  and  gifts,  "  He  thus  Himself  shows  the 
fulfilment  of  psalm  and  proj^hecy  more  than  if  He  had  restored  again  the  Kingdom  to 
Israel,  and  had  gathered  in  subjection  to  the  throne  of  David  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world  and  the  glory  of  them."  How  sad  it  is,  to  see  excellent  men,  who  desire  to  honor 
Jesus,  make  that  which  is  preparatory  to  he  the  full  realization  of  covenant  and  proph- 
ecy. The  simple  truth,  that  the  apostles  showed  that  this  Jesus,  once  dead,  but  risen 
and  exalted,  was  the  Messiah  promised,  and  that  at  His  Sec.  Advent — not  before—this 
covenanted  and  predicted  Christship  would  be  manifested  in  power  and  glory,  is  com- 
pletely overshadowed  by  a  preconceived  theory  to  which  all  Scripture  must  bend.  Do 
we  need  to  be  surprised  at  the  lack  of  faith  in  the  Church,  when  good  men,  in  vast  num- 
bers, lend  themselves  to  such  a  work. 

Ohs.  12.  The  testimony  in  behalf  of  our  position  is  ciimnlative.  Some 
may  be  added  here,  leaving  the  additional  for  other  Propositions  (as  e.g. 
93-104,  etc.).  Much  of  the  language  of  Scripture  pertaining  to  this  dis- 
pensation is  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  idea  of  a  Messianic  Kingdom, 
not  merely  in  its  covenanted  and  prophetic  outlines  but  in  its  several  de- 
tails. Thus  e.g.  if  the  covenanted  Kingdom  really  existed  as  many  tell 
lis,  Jww  can  the  church  be  exhibited,  over  against  the  proj^hetic  delinea- 
tions, in  a  position  equivalent  to  widowhood,  or,  at  least,  separation  from  a 
beloved  one,  which  mars  happiness,  Luke  5  :  33-35.  This  certainly  finds 
no  correspondence  with  the  Messianic  Kingdom  as  given  in  the  Old  Test. 
Again  :  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  revealed  in  "  the  day  of  tlie  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,^''  but  after  the  ascension  of  Jesus,  the  apostles  did  not  see  this  day 
(so  Jesus  previously  informed  them,  Luhe  17  :  22),  for  they  regarded  it  as 
still  future  (locating  it  with  the  Sec.  Advent,  as  in  1  Cor.  7  :  8  ;  1  Thess. 
5  :  2,  23  ;  Phil.  1  :  6,  10,  comp.  with  2:16  and  3  :  20,  21,  etc.).  Now 
all  this  employing  Jewish  phraseology  without  any  indication  of  change  of 
meaning,  can  only  be  reconciled  with  the  pjstponement  of  the  Kingdom  to 
the  Sec.  Advent.  The  careful  student  of  Scripture  must  have  been  arrested 
by  this  additional  peculiarity,  corroborative  of  our  argument,  that  in  many 
places  (as  e.g.  1  Cor.  1  :  7,  8,  etc.)  the  apostles  raj^tidly  pass  from  the 
present  to  the  Advent,  the  intervening  period  being  not  worthy  to  be  com- 
pared, owing  to  the  absence  of  the  King  and  Kingdom,  to  what  transpires 
at  the  Messiah's  return  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  distinguishing  character- 
istics of  a  purely  Messianic  nature  are  attributed  to  the  Sec.  Coming,  and 
the  period  intervening  being  merely  j^reparatory,  is  passed  by.  If  the  pre- 
dicted Messianic  times,  the  Millennial  glory,  are  to  precede  (as  many  de- 
clare) the  Sec.  Advent,  could  such  a  style  of  writing  be  adopted  witliout 
f/iViO^^or/v^Y/ the  predictions  of  God  and  the  things  of  the  Messiah?  Our 
argument  finds  this  distinguishing  feature  in  harmony  with  all  the  utter- 
ances of  the  Spirit,  and  regards  it  as  a  necessary  sequence  of  tlie i^ostfonement. 


PeOP.  70.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  443 

Surely  the  student  requires  no  apology  at  the  length,  and  the  details,  of  our  argument. 
Ihe  fundamental  nature  of  the  subjects  considered,  and  their  influence  in  forming  a  cor- 
rect view,  are  a  sufficient  justification.  The  illustrations  of  diverging  opinions,  may  be 
regarded  as  numerous,  but  the  student  will  find  them  valuable,  because  they  serve  to 
show— frequently  in  the  very  words  of  their  supporters— the  line  of  reasoning  by  which 
they  are  sustained,  and  then  the  defectiveness  of  the  same  is  either  pointed  out  in  the 
text  or  note.  We  give  considerable  space  to  this  early  history,  and  we  feel  excused  in  so 
doing,  when  our  opponents  concede  that  its  close  study  is  rnost  weighty.  Thus  e.g.  Pres- 
sense  {The  Early  Years  of  Christianity,  in  Pref.)  well  remarks  :  "Of  all  the  topics  of  the 
day,  none  is  of  gr-aver  importance  than  the  early  history  of  Christianity,  and  the  founda- 
tion of  the  Church.     Everything  points  inquiry  in  this  direction,"  etc. 

Obs.  13.  That  our  Proposition  is  true  appears  from  the  immediate  result 
of  their  preaching.  The  early  church,  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  all  that  were 
nearest  to  the  apostles  and  the  Elders,  kneiu  of  no  established  Kingdom  but 
looked  for  one  to  come  at  the  Advent  of  Jesns.  This  is  evidenced  by  the 
intensely  Chiliastic  position  of  the  Primitive  Church.  Ho2v  can  the  reader 
account  for  this,  unless  our  view  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  correct  one.  When 
the  apostles,  and  tlieir  co-laborers,  "  jyreftc'Aec/  the  tilings  concerning  the 
Kingdom  of  God,^^  "jyrertc'/zec/  the  Kingdom  of  God,'^  how  does  it  happen 
that  tlie  only  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  East  and  West,  in  the  churches 
under  their  supervision  (comp.  Props.  73-77),  is  the  one  that  we  advocate  ? 
Is  this  merely  accidental?  Can  a  single  writer  be  quoted  who  lived  in  the 
First,  and  Second,  and  part  of  the  Third,  centuries,  and  who  j^roclaimed  the 
modern  view  of  the  Kingdom,  now  so  generally  entertained  ?  Let  men  in 
answer  to  this,  take  refuge  in  the  development  theory,  in  accommodation, 
in  transition,  in  substituted  revelation,  etc.,  but  all  such  subterfuges  prove 
unsatisfactory,  at  the  same  time  invalidating  the  credibility  of  inspired 
teachers  under  whose  jJersonal  supervision  and  instruction  such  a  doctrine 
was  allowed  to  prevail. 

Men  who  lack  the  scholarly  attainments  of  Neander,  Bush,  etc.  (and  hence  cannot 
make  the  concessions  and  admissions  of  such  men)  endeavor  to  bring  discredit  upon  our 
doctrine  by  linking  it  with  heresy  (as  coming  from  Cerinthus,  or  Jewish  converts),  but 
aside  then  from  the  impossibility  of  tracing  the  Church  excepting  through  "  heretics," 
these  professed  critics  conveniently  overlook  the  historical  fact  (so  Neander,  etc.),  that 
Millenarians  were  among  the  stoutest  opposers  of  Cerinthus  and  the  gross  Judaizing  (in 
reference  to  the  law)  tendency  ;  they  forget  that  not  only  Christian  Churches  composed 
of  Jews  but  also  those  among  the  Gentiles,  equally  held  to  our  doctrine  ;  and  that  the 
writers  on  all  sides  claimed  that  they  received  the  doctrine  both  from  the  Scriptures  and 
the  recent  traditionary  testimony  of  the  apostles  and  elders.  (Comp.  the  succeeding 
Props.) 

Eecent  works  frankly  acknowledge  our  statements,  and  endeavor,  in  view  of  their  un- 
controverted  existence,  to  show  that  the  Scriptures  themselves  are  unreliable,  and  that 
apostolic  authority  is  not  so  great  as  has  been  deemed.  Thus  e.g.  Desprez  {John,  or  the 
Apoc.  of  the  -^"610  Test.)  when  speaking  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"'  (in  the  chajDter 
on  this  subject)  holds  that  the  view  we  have  thus  far  presented  icas  taught  by  Jesus  and 
the  disciples,  that  it  was  perpetuated  in  the  church,  etc.,  giving  the  jDroof  of  the  facts  as 
stated.  Thus  far  Desprez  is  certainly  correct,  but  alas  !  he  only  leaves  a  part  of  the 
Divine  Kecord  to  testify  ; — for  seeing  that  these  expectations  were  not  realized,  he  has- 
tily jumps  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  unavailing  and  utterly  unreliable,  forgetting 
that  Jesus,  the  apostles,  and  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  all  unite  in  asserting  the  j^ostpone- 
ment  of  this  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent  (and  for  good,  substantial  reasons).  This 
procedure  destroys  the  reliability,  the  integrity  of  Scripture.  This  stumbling-block  of  a 
"  speedy  Advent,"  its  "  nearness,"  etc.,  forces  Desprez  to  look  at  the  subject  with  human 
eyes  and  weakness,  overlooking  that  when  the  Spirit  sjDeaks,  in  the  measuring  of  time 
according  to  His  own  vastness  of  conception,  that  a  period  necessarily^  long  to  man, 
when  contrasted  with  the  briefness  of  his  own  life  and  generations,  is  but  brief — "  a  mo- 
ment " — with  the  Infinite. 


444  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  70. 

Ohs.  14.  Others,  seeing  how  this  Kingdom  is  united  with  the  Sec.  Com- 
ing of  Jesus,  and  unable  to  find  consistently  the  establishment  of  the  King- 
dom under  the  preaching  of  the  disciples,  and  yet,  with  their  theory  of  a 
Kingdom,  compelled  to  have  some  kind  of  a  Kingdom  in  actual  existence 
during  this  dispensation — resort  to  the  most  arbitrary  spiritualistic  inter- 
p)retation  to  locate  the  Sec.  Advent  m  tlie  past  so  that  a  resultant  Kingdom 
may  logically  be  connected  with  it.  This  will  be  fully  answered  as  we  pro- 
ceed in  the  argument. 

An  illustration  or  two  must  suffice  :  The  Antinomian  Perfectionists  in  their  Articles 
of  Faith  (quoted  Oherl'm  Review,  May,  1847,  make  in  Art.  28  Christ's  Sec.  Coming  to  occur 
at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  Art.  2,  they  say  :  "  We  believe  that,  at  the  peri- 
od of  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ,  Christianity  or  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  properly  be- 
gan.' '  The  Swedenborgians  claim  that  the  Sec.  Advent  took  place  in  Swedenborg's  time, 
and  hence  engraft  upon  it  their  distinctive  "New  Jerusalem"  theory,  which  includes  the 
grand  characteristics  of  the  blessed  Messianic  Kingdom.  Other  writers  locate  this  Sec. 
Advent  at  His  resurrection  or  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  forgetting  that  after  these  days 
the  apostles  continued  to  speak  of  it  as  future.  The  most  rejDulsive  view  is  that  of  mak- 
ing the  coming  of  Titus  and  the  Romans  to  represent  the  blessed  Advent  of  Jesus — 
although  some  eminent  writers  have  endorsed  it— since  in  the  prophecy  of  Jesus  relating 
to  this  event,  He  discriminates  between  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  His  own  Ad- 
vent. None  of  the  Primitive  Church,  after  Jerusalem  was  destroyed,  for  a  moment 
made  such  an  unwarranted  application  ;  their  knowledge  of  covenant  and  prophecy  pre- 
vented such  a  prostitution  of  "  the  blessed  hope. "  As  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to 
this  Sec.  Advent  at  length,  it  is  sufficient  now  to  remark  :  that  as  such  theories  also  set 
aside  the  oath-bound  covenants  and  the  prophecies  based  on  them  (m  their  plain  gram- 
matical sense),  giving  them  a  spiritualistic  or  mystical  dress  foreign  to  their  real  import, 
they  become,  by  this  very  process  of  transmutation  and  substitution,  unworthy  of  our 
credence.  Such  a  state  of  things  as  followed  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Christian  Church,  and  has  existed  down  to  the  present  day,  is  not,  cannot 
he  the  covenanted,  predicted  Kingdom  of  the  Old  Test.,  because  there  is  no  real  corre- 
spondence between  the  former  and  the  latter.  Men  may  pretend  to  such  an  agreement, 
but  it  is  forced  and  unnatural;  it  is  done  at  the  expense  of  the  grammatical  word  and  by 
forcing  upon  it  a  sense  that  the  laws  of  language  do  not  admit. 


Prop.  71.]  the  theocratic  kutgdom.  445 


Proposition  71.   The  language  of  the  Aijostles  confirmed  the  Jews 
in  their  MessianiG  hopes  of  the  Kingdom. 

This  is  seen  (1)  from  their  employing  the  Jewish  phraseology 
used  to  designate  the  Messianic  times  ;  (2)  from  their  applying 
these  to  the  future  advent  of  Jesus,  and  urging  their  hearers  to 
exi3ect  that  such  a  Coming  will  fulfil  the  prophets  ;  (3)  from  the 
fact  that  the  Christianized  Jews,  in  their  respective  congregations, 
held  doth  to  this  Sec.  Advent  (having  received  Jesus  as  the  Mes- 
siah), and  to  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  at 
the  second  aj^pearing  of  Jesus. 

Obs.  1.  This  is  admitted  by  the  ablest  writers,  not  only  infidels^  bnt  by 
such  men  as  Neander.  It  is  corroborated  by  the  church  history  of  the 
earliest  period,  informing  us,  wHlwutany^  dissent,  that,  so  far  as  known,  all 
the  Jewish  believers  held  precisely  the  views  that  we  are  defending.  Be- 
fore we  can  permit  our  doctrine  to  fall  even  under  unjust  suspicion,  it 
would  be  well  if  our  opponents  would  candidly  consider  this  historical  fact, 
and  ask  themselves  a  few  questions  suggested  by  it.  How  does  it  come 
that  under  tlie  direct ^])ersoncd  j^reacJiing  of  the  apostles  such  views  of  the 
Kingdom  were  entertained,  unless  it  resulted  from  tlie  manner  of  teach- 
ing ?  How  does  it  come  that  such  opinions  were  so  genercdly  received  under 
apostolic  nurture,  that  the  modern  views  and  ideas  are  not  found  even 
stated  ?  If  these  people  were  in  error  on  so  important  a  point,  was  it  not 
the  duty  of  the  apostles  and  the  Elders  to  enligliten  them — to  leave,  at  least, 
a  ptrotcst  against  it  on  record?  Is  it  reasonable,  that  churches  under  the 
direct  pastoral  care  of  inspired  meji  should  be  so  wholly  given  up  to  cdleged 
grave  error?  These,  and  similar  questions,  ought  to  bo  considerately 
answered  before  these  early  Christians  are  branded  as  "gross"  and 
"  carnal"  errorists.  If  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  now  generally  entertained, 
is  the  correct  one,  it  certainly  is  exceedingly  strange,  utterly  inexplicalle, 
that  it  was  not  ttien  introduced,  and  that  it  required  uninspired  men  to  pro- 
duce it.  If  the  early  church  was  in  error  on  so  leading  and  fundamental  a 
doctrine,  then  the  teachers  of  the  same  are  justly  chargeable  with  both  intro- 
ducing and  continuing  this  error,  for  instead  of  contradicting  the  Jewish 
views  of  the  people,  the  apostles  use  the  very  words  and  phrases  most  emi- 
nently calculated  to  confirm  tlie  Jewisli  belief  This  is  seen  in  employing, 
as  e.g.  ''  the  times  of  restitution,"  '^  the  world  to  come,"  "  redemption," 
''salvation,"  "the  age  to  come,"  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  day  of 
Christ,"  etc.,  and  without  any  indicated  change  of  meaning  apply  them  to 
the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  Messiah.  This  application  naturcdly 
and  logically  led  the  Jewish  believers  to  fix  their  fond  expectations  of  the 
Kingdom  upon  tlie  Sec.  Coming,  and  not  on  the  First.  In  this,  as  we  have 
shown  in  preceding  Propositions,  they  only  legitimately  followed  tlie  divine 


446  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  71. 

teaching  of  Jesus  Himself,  who  declared  tliat  His  Kingdom  was  postponed 
(e.g.  Prop.  66,  58,  etc.)  to  the  time  of  His  Coming  again.  Our  opponents 
have  either  failed  in  accounting  for  this  feature,  or  in  attempting  it  have 
only  succeeded  in  lowering  the  standing  of  the  apostles  as  teachers.  Our 
position  enforces  no  necessity  for  abject  apologizing,  because  of  such  a  be- 
lief in  the  early  church,  induced  by  the  instruction  received.  We  cordially 
accept  of  it  as  highly  indicative  of  the  truth — nay,  as  its  essential  sequence, 
the  truth  itself.  It  is  the  identical  faith,  enforced  by  covenant  and 
prophecy,  by  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  disciples,  and  apostles,  which, 
above  all  others,  we  should  find  in  the  Primitive  Church.^ 

'  The  most  ultra  of  the  unbelievei's  pronounce  the  whole  matter  an  imposture.  Many- 
proofs  of  this  might  be  given,  but  a  single  example  will  sutiice.  In  the  BeWjlo- Philo- 
sophical Journal  of  Chicago,  Jan.  17th,  1874,  is  a  work  advertised  (also  published  in  this 
Journal's  house),  in  which  the  author  Jones  (a  "Religio-Philosophicalist")  assumes  that 
he  has  carefully  examined  and  compared  together  the  New  Test,  and  Josephus,  and  pre- 
sents us  with  the  following  sage  conclusion  :  "  that  Christ  and  His  Apostles  were  gross 
impostors  ;  that  Josephus  and  St.  Paul  were  no  one  else, but  Christ  Himself,  after  He 
had  risen  from  the  dead,  still  had  never  been  dead, "  etc.  Such  nauseating  matter  is 
stjded  "  criticism"  ;  when  it  is  simply  the  ravings  of  the  lowest  form  of  the  fanaticism 
of  error, — the  outpourings  of  a  depraved  heart, — and  worthy  only  of  contempt  from  the 
better  class  of  unbelievers. 

'^  Many  writers  have  noticed  this  peculiar  usage  of  Jewish  phraseology  and  that  the 
phrases  "  end  of  the  age,"  "  last  days,"  "  last  times,"  etc.,  were  regarded  by  the  Jews 
as  the  period  just  previous  to  and  immediate  to  the  establishment  of  the  Messianic  King- 
dom. The  apostles  continue  their  use,  referring  them  to  the  still  future,  including  this 
dispensation,  so  that  in  their  estimation  these  times  could  not  jjossibly  include  an  ex- 
isting covenanted  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  in  Heb.  1  :2  etc.  Comp.  Olshausen's  Co;/;,.,  vol. 
2,  p.  229,  who  quotes  Acts  2  :  17  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  20  and  1  :  5  ;  John  6  :  39,  40  ;  1  John  2  :  18  ; 
Eom.  2:5;  Rev.  6  :  17,  and  9  :  18,  sajdng  this  corresponds  with  the  Old  Test,  expres- 
sions ;  Gen.  49  :  1  ;  Isa.  2:2;  Mic.  4:1;  Dan.  12  :  13,  and  8  :  17,  and  9  :  40,  which 
again  answers  to  "  the  end,"  Matt.  24  :  6,  14.  (Comp.  Props.  8G,  87,  89,  137,  138,  140, 
etc.)  Redemption  was  always  united  in  the  Jewish  mind  with  the  coming  and  King- 
dom of  the  Messiah,  and  so  it  continued,  and  as  Calvin  {InsL,  ch.  25,  sec.  2),  observes, 
the  Sec.  Advent  itself,  in  view  of  the  results,  is  called  ^^our  Redemption.'"  The  unbeliev- 
ing Jews  themselves  continued  to  emj)loy  this  phraseology.  Thus  e.g.  R.  Akiba  (Mil- 
man's  His.  Jews,  vol.  3,  j).  100),  when  supporting  the  pretensions  of  the  false  Messiah, 
Barchocab,  said  of  him  :  "  Behold  the  Star  that  is  to  come  out  of  Jacob  ;  the  days  of 
Redemption  are  at  hand."  So  also  (p.  214,  vol.  3),  the  Karaite  belief,  in  Art.  10,  speaks 
of  "  a  coming  Redemption  through  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David."  A  multitude  of 
illustrations  might  be  given,  but  these  are  sufficient  to  indicate  how  deeply  these  words 
and  phrases  were  engrafted  into  the  Jewish  mind. 

Ohs.  2.  After  such  appeals  as  Paul  makes  (Acts  26  :  6,  7,  8)  to  the 
Jewish  hope  (Prop.  182)  ;  after  linking  the  Jewish  "  Kest"  with  the  Com- 
ing Messiah  (Prop.  143)  ;  after  uniting  the  Jewish  view  of  Judgeship  and 
Judgment  with  the  Second  Advent  of  Jesus  (Props.  132,  133,  and  134)  ; 
after  making  the  Millennial  glory  dependent  upon  the  future  Advent  (Props. 
120  and  121)  ;  after  joining  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  with 
Christ's  return  (Props!  Ill,  112,  113,  114)  ;  after  endorsing  and  enforcing 
the  Jewish  first  resurrection  as  preceding  the  glorious  Messianic  times 
(Props.  125-129)  ;  after  all  these,  and  similar  points  of  union,  it  is  difficult 
to  see  how  men  and  women  with  Jewish  views,  holding  tenaciously  to  cove- 
nant and  prophecy,  could  possibly  understand  the  apostles  in  any  other  sense 
than  a  Jewish  or  Chiliastic  one.  Let  the  reader  consider  that  this  agree- 
ment is  found  not  merely  in  one  or  two  things  but  runs  through  a  great 
variety,  even  embracing  all  the  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  a  restored 
Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah. 


PeOP.  71.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIIS^GDOM.  447 

Fairbairn,  and  others,  assume  that  right  after  the  resurrection  (which  they  cannot 
reconcile  with  their  own  interj^retation  of  Matt.  11  :  12),  Jesus  ruled  as  the  predicted 
King  in  the  covenanted  Kingdom.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  hold  that  (discriminating  the 
Divine  Sovereignty,  see  Props.  79  and  80),  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  preparative, 
qualifying  the  Son  of  Man  for  that  predicted  rule  ;  and  to  prove  that  His  Theocratic 
reign,  as  covenanted,  does  not  immediately  follow  the  resurrection  and  ascension  (how- 
ever exalted  David's  Son  may  be),  but  is  connected  with  a  return  (as  the  apostles  tes- 
tify), it  is  only  necessary  to  turn  to  Paul's  statement.  Acts  17  :  31,  "  (Jod  hath  appointed  a 
day''  (Prop.  133)  "  in  which  He  will  judge"  (taking  the  ScrijDtural  idea  of  Judge, — see  Prop, 
133),  "</;e  world  in  righteousness,  by  that  man  lohom  lie  hath  ordained;  whereof  lie  hath  given 
assurance  unto  all  men  in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  Jrom  tJte  dead/'  The  resurrection  gives 
the  jyledge  that  that  period  will  most  assuredly  arrive,  while  our  opponents  themselves 
admit  that  the  time  of  this  manifestation  is  future.  The  careful  student  will  notice  that 
the  credit  of  being  "  the  Christ,"  is  dependent  upon  His  having  risen  from  the  dead;  and 
hence  after  the  confession  of  Peter  He  charged  His  disciples  to  tell  no  man  that  He  was 
the  Christ  (joining  Mark  9  :  9,  which  gave  an  illustration  of  the  Christship)  "till  the 
Son  of  Man  were  risen  from  the  dead."  But  the  meaning  of  "  Messiah"  or  "  Christ"  is 
utterly  hostile  to  a  purely  spiritual  reign  in  heaven,  as  we  have  already  sliow^n  ;  it  being 
the  express  title  of  the  Theocratic  King  reigning  over  the  restored  Davidic  throne  and  King- 
dom. Thus  the  Jews  and  early  Christians  understood  it,  and  such  continues  its  mean- 
ing. His  exaltation  only  increases  the  assurance  that  He  "  the  Christ' '  will  ultimately  be 
manifested  as  such  in  power  and  great  glory.  If  all  this  were  to  be  changed,  as  Pair- 
bairn,  etc.  suppose,  then  when  the  subject  was  up  before  the  Jews  (as  e.g.  Acts  17  :  3) 
Paul  and  the  other  apostles  ought  to  have  corrected  the  Jewish  conceptions  of  the 
Christship  of  Jesus.  We  (1  Thess.  1  :  10)  "  wait  for  His  So7i  from  heaven,  whom  He 
raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  io  come." 

Ohs.  3.  The  language  of  the  apostles  is  in  such  liarmony  with  the  views 
of  the  Jews  respecting  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  that  our  opponents,  instead 
of  giving  any  explicit  passages,  are  driven  to  infer  an  existing  Kingdom  ; 
and  this  very  illogical  inference,  as  we  have  repeatedly  shown,  involves 
them  in  numerous  inconsistencies  and  contraditions.  Aside  from  the  sin- 
gularity of  a  Kingdom,  specially  covenanted  and  predicted,  being  set  up  (as 
alleged  by  our  opposers)  and  this  so  loosely  left  to  inference  (so  that  they 
disagree  both  concerning  its  meaning  and  the  time  of  establishment),  it  is 
incredible  for  this  to  have  transpired  'without  being  directly  asserted  and  the 
fact  becoming  well  known  to  the  hearers  of  the  apostles.  A  Kingdom  set 
up,  and  yet  the  church,  for  several  centuries  remain  unconscious  of  the 
matter  !  Men  may  charge  us  with  credulity,  but  such  a  view  far  exceeds 
our  power  of  belief,  seeing  that  covenant  and  prophecy  describe  its  estab- 
lishment as  a  thing  so  open,  so  notable,  so  visible  to  all,  that  no  one  can 
2)0ssibly  mistake  its  existence.  How  can  Fairbairn  and  others,  who  so  mod- 
ernize Peter's  two  sermons,  account  for  the  belief  of  the  very  churches  to 
which  Peter  preached  ;  a  faith  which  constantly  looked  for  a  kingdom  still 
future  and  one  that  should  bear  the  significant  and  unmistakable  marks  of 
covenant  and  prophetic  promise. 

Those  inferences,  therefore,  however  plausible  they  may  be,  had  either  no  existence 
or  no  force  among  the  earliest  converts,  being  regarded  as  illegitimate,  opposed  to  the 
Old  Test,  delineation  of  the  Kingdom,  Men,  in  apparent  triumph,  may  now  tell  us  that 
this  arises  from  their  Jewish  prejudices  ; — let  it  be  so  then,  if  such  are  grounded  in  cov- 
enant and  proi^hecy,  preserve  the  unity  of  the  Scripture,  and  preserve  for  us  the  true 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom.  Having  previously  referred  to  inferences,  it  may  be  added  :  — 
we  are  not  oi^posed  to  inferential  or  deductive  interpretation  (if  properly  and  lawfully 
conducted),  seeing  that  notable  examples  (as  e.g.  1  Cor.  15  :  27  ;  Matt.  22  :  31,  32,  etc.) 
are  given  in  Scriptures,  and  all  works  on  Bib,  Interp.  endorse  them,  but  attention  is 
directed  to  this  matter  for  several  reasons.  It  is  simply  incredible  that  the  establish- 
ment of  a  Kingdom,  covenanted,  etc.,  can  be  left  to  inference.  Again  :  multitudes 
speak  of  the  modern  view  as  so  self-evident,  that  the  impression  is  made  as  if  it  were  the 


448  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  71. 

subject  of  direct  affirmation.  The  passages  assumed  to  infer  it  will  come  up  in  regular 
review  hereafter.  Again:  some  writers  (as  e.g.  Jones,  Sober  Views  of  the  Mill,  p.  26)  turn 
around  and,  to  cover  up  their  own  defects  in  this  direction,  charge  our  system  of  faith 
with  being  built  on  inferences  and  deductions,  and  then,  to  make  it  odious,  declare  that 
nothing  can  be  an  object  of  faith  that  is  not  plainly  revealed  in  the  Word  of  God,  for  other- 
wise we  are  "  building  on  the  sand  and  not  on  the  rock  of  truth."  Without  entertaining 
such  a  wholesale  prejudice  against  inferences  (for  they  are  valuable  in  their  place),  it 
may  be  consistently  said  :  that  when  we  produce  the  plain  grammatical  sense — one  that  all 
admit  exists  in  the  Word, — we  are  not  justly  chargeable  with  inference  ;  when  the  literal 
import  of  covenant,  prophecy,  preaching,  etc.  is  sustained  against  another  inferred  and 
engrafted  sense  (given  by  men  uninsjDired),  ought  not  the  former  have  precedence  over 
the  latter  ?  The  reader  will  be  abundantly  able  to  judge  from  what  follows,  which 
party— for  all  the  Scripture  relating  to  the  subject  used  by  writers  on  both  sides  of  the 
q^^estion  will  be  brought  forward — is  the  most  liable  to  the  charge  of  founding  the  doc- 
trine on  inference. 

Ohs.  4.  The  apostles,  in  their  writings,  constantly  speak  of  the  Kingdom 
as  something  that  was  well  understood  and  fully  comprehended  as  to  mean- 
ing. Nowhere  do  we  find  the  modern  explanation  and  definition  given  to 
it  ;  and,  according  to  our  argument,  being  covenanted  and  fully  described 
by  the  prophets,  it  needed  no  such  additions,  being  already  clearly  appre- 
hended. If  the  Kingdom  had  been  some  entire  new  thing  (as  some  assert), 
or  if  it  was  to  be  in  a  form  different  from  that  described  in  the  literal  lan- 
guage of  the  Old  Test.,  then/il  the  apostles  became  conscious  of  such  a 
change  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  afterward,  one  of  two  things  ought  to 
have  been  done  by  them.  They,  if  honest  and  capable  instructors,  ought 
to  have  told,  especially  to  the  Jews,  that  the  covenant  with  David  as  they 
(the  hearers)  understood  it  could  not  he  realized,  or,  that  the  language  was 
to  he  understood  differentlij  in  a  spiritual  or  mystical  sense,  or,  that  another 
and  materially  different  Kingdom  (a  spiritual  one,  or,  the  church  as  one) 
was  now  established  thus  fulfilling  covenant  promise — using  just  such  lan- 
guage as  modern  (if  correct)  writers  employ  on  tlie  subject.  How  could 
they  leave  their  thousands  of  hearers  without  giving  them  (if  in  error  on 
so  great  a  point)  some  definite  explanation  of  this  kingdom  if  it  varied  so 
greatly,  as  learned  men  make  it,  from  ^^  Jeivish  conceptions.^^  The  truth  is 
that  it  required  no  such  explanations,  for  the  apostles  were  addressing  per- 
sons to  whom  the  Old  Test,  was  familiar,  to  whom  the  covenants  and 
Kingdom  were  well  known  ;  and  hence  they  labored  to  show  that  this 
Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  that  at  Ilis  Sec.  Coming  the  predicted  restitution 
and  Kingdom  would  appear,  and  that  to  secure  entrance  into  that  King- 
dom repentance  and  faith  in  that  Coming  Christ  were  indispensable. 

The  critical  student  will  here  find  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  early  rapid  growth  of 
Christianity.  Consider  the  excessive  prejudices  of  the  Jewish  mind  in  favor  of  cove- 
nant and  prophecy  as  they  pertained  to  their  favorite  Messianic  expectations,  and  then 
how  can  we  reconcile  such  a  sudden  revulsion  of  view  and  feeling  in  the  many  Jewish 
believers,  unless  there  be,  as  we  have  shown,  certain  joints— fundamental — of  contact  and 
union  ?  Imagine  the  modern  theories  of  the  Kingdom  then  preached,  and  what  would 
have  been  the  result  ?  Certainly  a  controversy  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Messianic  King- 
dom, etc..  Bauer,  and  others,  think  that  the  immediate  conversion  of  three,  and  more, 
thousands  is  so  enormous  that  it  must  be  mythical,  but  the  Messianic  idea  and  fulfil- 
ment applied  to  Jesus  at  His  Second  Coming  explains  the  leverage  possessed  by  the 
apostles, — the  truth  being  enforced  through  the  power  and  evidences  of  the  Spirit. 


PkOP.  72.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KliS'GDOM.  449 


Propositioin-  72.     Tlie   doctrine    of  the   Kingdom^  as  preaclied 

hy  the  apostles^  was  received  by  the  early  churches. 

This  is  not  only  reasonable,  but  shown  to  be  a  fact^  from  the 
apostles  having  no  occasion  dnring  their  entire  ministry  to  censure 
any  orthodox  believers  or  churches  for  misapprehending,  or  hold- 
ing to  a  false  view  of,  the  Kingdom.  The  decided  and  convincing 
impression  is  made  by  the  apostolic  writings  that  these  first  Chris- 
tian churches  were  7iot  ignorant  of — hut  correctly  understood — the 
imyortant  and  cardinal  subject  of  the  Kingdom. 

So  decisive  is  this,  that  leading  Apologists,  like  Neander,  take  refuge  under  the 
development  theory,  obtaining  the  true  doctrine  in  the  advancing  and  growing  "  con- 
sciousness of  the  Church."  Forced  to  admit  our  historical  position,  they  endeavor — 
sacrificing  the  apostles  and  elders — to  secure  their  own  view  of  the  Kingdom  under  the 
plea  of  an  after-Churchly  development.  Those  persons,  especially,  who  desire  to  be 
esteemed  so  Churcldy  and  so  precise,  in  their  orthodox}^  ought  to  give  this  subject  a 
careful  investigation  in  accordance  with  their  professed  princij^les, — but  even  when 
asked,  their  reply  may  be  that  of  Jer.  6  :  16,  We  append  one  or  two  testimonies  (comp. 
Props.  75,  76,  and  77  for  more)  in  reference  to  the  prevailing  belief.  Ebrard  (Herzog's 
Beal  Ency.,  vol.  10,  p.  579)  says:  "The  apostolic  tradition  (so  say  Hase  and  others 
correctly)  was  so  decided,  that  Chiliasm  was  the  ruling  helief  in  the  first  three  centuries  of 
the  church.  .  .  .  The  Commentary  of  Theoj)hilus  (Hagenbach's  silent  witness)  is 
lost,  but  the  belief  in  Christ's  Coming  to  establish  His  Kingdom  on  earth  in  glory  formed 
the  essential  object  and  anchor  of  their  hope.  They  recognized  the  World-Power  as  one 
in  the  service  of  Satan,  and  they  looked  for  no  deliverance  from  it  save  by  His  Coming." 
Semisch  (Herzog's  R.  Ency.,  vol.  1,  p.  658)  remarks  :  "  Before  the  end  of  the  first  century, 
Chiliasm  was  the  common  helief  in  the  Church  that  had  been  gathered  from  the  heathen. " 
He  then  states,  in  detail,  how  all  the  writers  on  the  subject  down  to  Jerome  were  express 
Chiliasts,  excepting  Origen  and  his  school.  Our  argument,  if  Scripturally  founded,  ought 
— as  a  logical  result — to  find  the  early  Church  in  this  identical  doctrinal  position.  The 
prevailing  Church  belief  is  asserted  by  works  having  no  sympathy  with  our  views,  as 
e.g.  Appletons'  New.  Amer.  Cyclop.,  Chambers's  Cyclop.,  and  many  others. 

Obs.  1.  Let  the  student  candidly  consult  the  faith  of  the  early  churches 
and  see  for  himself  what  it  was,  viz. :  that  the  intimations  of  Scripture, 
the  statements  of  the  Fathers,  the  concessions  of  Neander,  Mosheim,  and 
a  host  of  others,  and,  in  brief,  all  that  w^e  have  on  record  of  that  period, 
condusiveJy  jrrovcs  that  the  doctrine  held,  loth  in  Jewish  and  Gentile 
regions,  was  at  first  (during  the  First,  Second,  and  greater  part  of  the 
Third,  Century,)  that  which  we  have  defended.  This  feature,  so  notice- 
able in  the  Jews  under  the  prophets,  under  Jesus,  and  under  the  Apostles, 
and  thus  contimioushj  iwrpetuated,  led  Auberlen  (Proph.  Dan.,  p.  372)  to 
pertinently  remark,  that  Jesus,  and  the  Prophets  and  Apostles,  were 
"'Chiliasts.''^  The  early  Church  in  its  entire  range  was  Chiliastic,  and 
eagerly  looked,  longed,  and  prayed  for  the  exjjeded  Kingdom  still  future. 
Enemies  and  friends,  historians  and  theologians,  frankly  acknowledge  this 
distinguisliing  cliaracfcristic  of  that  period. 


450  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

Thus  e.g.  Gibbon's  statements  {Bed.  and  Fall  Bom.  Emp.,  ch.  15),  Carrodi's  His.  of 
Ghiliasm  (pronounced  even  by  Prof.  Stuart  as  uncandid),  Whitby's  Ireat.  on  Mill.,  Bush's 
Treat,  on  Mill.,  the  Church  Histories  of  Neander,  Mosheim,  Kurtz,  etc.,  the  Art.  "  Chiliasm'^ 
in  Herzog's  Encydop.  (by  Semisch),  or  Art.  Millennium  in  Kitto's  Ency.,  Lardner's 
Credibility,  Kees',  Appletons',  and  other  Encydopcedias,  Cliillingworth's  Argument  drawn 
from  the  Doctrine  of  the  Millenaries,  against  Papal  Infallibility,  Hagenbach's  His.  of 
Doctrines,  Greswell's  Exposition  of  the  Parables,  Bickersteth  On  Froph.,  Brooks's  El.  Proph. 
Interp.,  Seiss's  Last  Tomes,  Shimeall's  Beply  to  Shedd,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Brookes's 
Maranalha,  Ebaugh's  brief  history  in  liupjj's  Orig.  IFis.  of  Belig.  Denominations,  works 
on  the  Apocalypse,  and  commentaries  on  the  same,  as  Prof.  Stuart's,  Spaulding,  Win- 
chester, etc.,  Millenarian  writers,  as  Duffield,  Begg,  Bonar,  Cunningham,  Mode,  Bh. 
Henshaw,  etc.  Thus  presenting  unbelievers,  opposers,  critics,  historians,  commenta- 
tors, and  believers,  uniting  in  the  same  testimony.  We  here  assert  that  no  ivriter  has 
yet  been  able  to  present  the  prevailing  modern  views  as  entertained  by  any  writer  of 
the  Primitive  church  ;  no  statement  qaoted,  giving  the  writing,  is  to  be  found  anywhere. 
Dr.  Bonar  (Prop/i.  Landmarks)  has  well  said  :  "As  to  the  history  of  our  doctrines,  the 
conclusions  to  which  all  inquiries  upon  this  subject  have  come  is,  that  during  the  three 
first  centuries  it  prevailed  universally,  its  only  oj^ponents  being  the  Gnostics.  This  is  now 
an  ascertained  historical  fact,  which  we  may  well  ask  our  opponents  to  account  for,  as  it  pre- 
supposes that  Chiliasm  was  an  article  of  "the  Apostolic  Creed.''  Chillingworth's  testimony 
{Works,  vol.  3,  p.  369)  is  that  it  was  "  held  true  and  Catholic,"  "  and  by  none  of  their 
contemporaries  condemned,"  "being  grounded  upon  evident  Scripture,"  etc.  Hagen- 
bacli  {LTis.  of  Doctrines),  after  quoting  Justin's  declaration  that  it  was  the  general  faith 
of  all  orthodox  Christians,  gives  the  following,  in  italics,  from  Giesler's  Ch.  History  : 
"  In  all  the  works  of  this  period  (the  first  two  centuries)  Millenarianism  is  so  prominent, 
we  cannot  hesitate  to  consider  it  as  universal  in  an  age  v/hen  such  sensuous  motives 
were  certainly  not  unnecessary  to  animate  men  to  suffer  for  Christianity."  We  are  only 
now  concerned  with  the  historical  fact,  Giesler's  explanation  appended  for  its  existence 
is  not  history,  but  his  individual  (mistaken)  opinion.  Bh.  Russell  {Discourse  on  the  Mill, 
p.  236)  says  :  "  There  is  good  ground  for  the  assertion  of  Mede,  Dodwell,  Burnet,  and 
writers  on  the  same  side,  that  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  centmy  the  belief 
(in  Christ's  return  and  personal  reign  on  earth)  loas  universal  and  Undisputed.'''  Other 
testimonies  will  be  quoted  as  we  proceed. 

Obs.  2.  Men,  who  would  gladly  blot  this  evidence  out  of  existence  as 
being  adverse  to  their  notions  of  propriety  and  of  the. Kingdom,  still  can- 
didly, impelled  by  the  overwhelming  testimony,  admit  the  fact,  that  the 
Primitive  Church,  generally,  if  not  universally,  held  our  views. 

Thus  e.g.  Bush  {On  Mill,  p.  20,  etc.)  admits  the  prevalence  of  Chiliasm,  "that 
during  the  first  three  centuries  it  was  very  extensively  embraced  "  and  then  quotes  ap- 
provingly Chillingworth,  "that  Chillingworth  prefers  it  as  a  serious  charge  against  the 
Church  of  Rome,  which  lays  such  lofty  claims  to  the  perpetuation  within  her  own  bosom 
of  the  pure,  unadulterated  doctrines  of  the  apostolic  and  primitive  ages,  that  in  this 
matter,  if  in  no  other,  she  has  grossly  falsified  the  creed  of  antiquity,  inasmuch  as  there 
is  ample  evidence  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Chiliasts  was  actually  the  Catholic  faith  of  more 
than  one  century  ;  and  certainly  there  are  few  judges  more  competent  to  pronounce 
upon  the  fact."  While  Prof.  Bush  acknowledges  the  extent  of  belief,  he  thinks  that  it 
was  thus  allowed  to  prevail  because  it  produced  at  that  time  better  results  than  "  even 
a  more  correct  construction  of  the  sacred  oracles"  could  effect  ;— thus  agreeing  with 
Gibbon  in  his  estimate  of  its  transient  merits,  making  error  for  the  time  better 
adapted  to  secure  the  prosperity  of  the  church  than  truth  !  On  p.  26  he  also  re- 
marks :  "  During  the  first  ages  of  the  church,  when  the  style  of  Christianity  was  to  be- 
lieve, to  love,  and  to  suffer,  this  sentiment  seems  to  have  obtained  a  prevalence  so  general 
as  to  be  properly  entitled  all  but  absolutely  Catholic,"  etc.  He  then  refers  to  the  gradual 
change  wrought  through  Origen,  Augustine,  Jerome,  etc.,  and  the  Constantinian  era.  Dr. 
Alger  {Grit.  His.  Doc.  Fat.  Life,  p.  319)  fully  believes  that  the  Evangelists  and  early  Chris- 
tians understood  Christ  to  teach  a  literal  personal  Sec.  Advent,  etc.,  but  he  doubts 
whether  Jesus  really  meant  to  be  thus  understood.  He  endeavors  to  rid  himself  of  the 
early  views  by  spiritualizing,  and  a  course  of  reasoning  reflecting  most  deeply  upon 
the  ignorance  of  persons  specially  appointed  to  i:>reach  the  truth.  Pressense  ( Tfie  Early 
Days  of   Christianity,  p.  46)  says  :  "  If  there  is  full  evidence  that  they  (the  apostles) 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  451 

declared  the  truth  of  Christ  in  all  its  essentials,  the  evidence  seems  to  us  no  less  dear 
that  they  still  enveloped  that  truth  in  Jewish  forms."  Which  are  we  to  credit,  then  : 
"  the  Jewish  forms"  or  Pressense's  developed  "  germ"  out  of  this  "  husk  "?  Who  is  to 
distingiiish  between  "  the  kernel"  and  the  alleged  "  rind  "?  What  idea  does  this  give 
lis  of  apostolic  intelligence  ?  We  only  now  say,  so  extended  and  plain  is  this  testimony 
given  by  opponents,  that  some  of  the  latter  endeavor  to  conceal  it  from  their  readers, 
lest  it  should  exert  an  influence  in  our  favor.  Some  even  (as  Dr.  Macdill  in  the 
"Instructor,"  1879)  resort  to  the  ruse  of  quoting  the  unfavorable  opinions  as  to  our 
doctrine  given  by  various  opponents  ;— just  as  if  denunciation  was  argument  and  met  the 
historical  question.  The  nature  of  the  doctrine,  etc.,  will  come  up,  as  we  proceed,  and 
the  denunciations  be  fully  met.  Of  course,  the  intelligent  reader  will  discriminate 
between  the  historical  fact  of  the  extension  of  our  belief  as  given  by  opponents  (as  e.g. 
Neander,  Mosheim,  etc.),  and  their  individually  expressed  opinions  as  to  its  Scrip tural- 
ness,  origin,  etc.     The  one  is  history,  the  other  is  personal  matter. 

Ohs.  3.  The  Primitive  Church, — receiving  this  faith  under  the  guidance 
of  Apostles,  and  Elders  consecrated  by  apostolic  hands,  giving  us  the 
names  of  Apostles  and  Elders  as  expressly  teaching  it,^  appealing  more  or 
less  to  Scripture  and  to  their  predecessors  in  the  same  belief, — cannot  have 
its  doctrine,  so  fundamental,  in  this  matter  set  aside  and  superseded  without 
placing  it,  and  its  instructors,  in  a  very  dubious  and  unenviable  light.' 

1  Thus  Papias  says  :  "If  I  met  a  brother  who  had  known  the  Apostles,  I  asked  him 
carefully  what  they  had  said  ;  ichat  Andrew,  Peter,  Philip,  Ttiomas,  James,  John,  arid 
Matthew  had  said.  I  thought  I  could  gather  more  from  a  living  testimony  than  from 
books."  Again  he  remarks  (quoted  by  Brooks,  El.  Proph.  Interp.,  p.  37)  :  "  That  what 
he  relates  are  the  very  loords  of  the  elders,  Andrew,  Peter,  Thomas,  James,  John,  Matthew, 
Aristio,  and  John  the  Presbyter,  as  related  to  him  by  those  of  whom  he  constantly  made 
the  inquiry,"  and  pledges  himself  to  the  "truth  and  fidelity  of  what  he  reports." 
Papias  is  said  (by  Irenasus)  to  have  been  one  of  John's  hearers,  and  he  was  intimate  with 
Polycarp.  Is  it  credible  that  in  so  vital  a  matter  as  the  Kingdom,  when  the  gospel 
itself  was  "  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom,'  the  Fathers  nearest  to  the  apostles  could  have 
been  mistaken  ?  If  so,  what  assurance  have  we  that  they  not  also  misapprehended  all 
other  points?  Justin  Martyr  also  appeals  to  "a  certain  man  among  us,  whose  name 
was  John,  one  of  the  Apostles  of  Christ."  The  reader  may  consult  lists  of  Millenarian 
Fathers  given  in  Brooke's  El.  Proph.  Interp.,  Seiss's  Last  Times,  etc.  They  include— with 
the  reasons  given— Barnabas,  Clement,  Hermas,  Ignatius,  Polycarp,  Papias,  Justin 
Martyr,  Tatian,  Melito,  Irenaus,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Tertullian,  ranging  from  a.d, 
70  to  about  A.D.  192.  Such  Fathers  as  Lactantius,  Methodius,  Epiphanius,  Gregory  of 
Nyssa,  Paulinus,  Victorinus,  Apollinaris,  and  others,  follow  these.  In  reference  to  our 
use  of  Barnabas  (for  critics  are  divided,  see  e.g.  Hagenbach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  64, 
and  Arts,  in  Encyclops.,  respecting  the  author  ;  although  since  the  Greek  has  been 
discovered  by  Tischendorf,  many  indorse  the  work  as  that  of  Barnabas),  it  may  be  said, 
whatever  its  merit,  etc.,  that  it  can  be  legitimately  quoted  as  one  of  the  earliest  of 
Christian  wa-i tings,  and  fidly  indicative  of  the  views  then  held.  More  than  this  :  no  one 
can  censure  us  for  such  a  use,  when  (Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  86)  Anti- 
Millenarians,  as  Clement  and  Origen,  who  did  so  much  to  obscure  our  doctrine,  quoted 
the  Epistle  as  "  in  equal  esteem  with  the  Scriptures." 

■■'  Those  who  make  light  of  this  primitive  faith  cannot  help  feeling  the  sarcastic 
remarks  of  Gibbon  (ch.  15,  Decl  and  Fall),  or  cannot  avoid,  logically,  the  conclusions  of 
Desprez  (John),  and  of  a  multitude  of  unbelievers.  It  is  simply  impossible  fo  «cco?(?(f 
for  the  belief  without  lowering  the  credibility  and  authority  of  the  first  teachers  of  the 
church,  unless  we  accept  of  it  as  legitimate  and  the  natural  outgrowth  of  a  correct  teach- 
ing. The  lowest  form  of  attack  in  meeting  our  views  is  to  stab  these  Fathers,  charging 
them  with  unreliability,  credulity,  superstition,  etc.  This  manner  of  procedure  is  as 
old  as  Eusebius  and  Jerome.  Just  as  Eusebius  e.g.  makes  out  Papias  illiterate  and  weak 
when  referring  to  his  Millenarian  sentiments,  and  yet  receives  him  (B.  3  :  32)  as 
"eloquent  and  learned  in  the  Scriptures"  on  other  points,  so  e.g.  Prof.  Stuart  {Com. 
Apoc),  in  his  estimate  of  the  early  Fathers,  underrates  them  on  Millenarian  grounds- 
being  in  their  theological  views  so  vitally  different  from  his  own — and  yet  often  quotes 
them,  with  evident  relish  and  forgetfulness  of  his  estimate,  w^hen  they  happen  to  be  in 
agreement  with  himself.     So  with  Channing   (Remarks  on    Milton,  Works,  p.  189),  Le 


452  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

Clerc  {Bib.  25  :  289),  and  others,  who  represent  them  as  just  emerging  from  darkness 
into  light,  and  hence  abounding  in  chiklish  credulity,  etc. 

The  chief  point  alleged  as  evidence  of  the  weakness  of  Papias  and  Irenseus  (and  which 
brought  forth  the  scoffing  of  Whitby,  Middleton,  Stuart,  Macdill,  and  others)  is  the  oft- 
quoted  "grape  story"  (referring  to  the  astounding  fruitfulness  of  the  vine,  etc.).  But 
let  the  reader  consider  that  Papias'  writings  being  lost,  and  Irena3us'  being  in  a  transla- 
tion (the  Greek  also  lost),  it  is  impossible  to  correct  or  substantiate  the  exact  language 
originally  used  (comp.  candid  remarks  of  Brooks,  EL  Froph.  Interp.,  p.  56,  and  Farrar's — 
Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  320,  foot-note — allusion  to  and  explanation  of  the  same,  as  well 
as  Greswell  On  the  Parables,  vol.  1,  p.  296).  It  may  be  a  hyperbole  like  that  of  John 
21  :  25  in  reference  to  the  predicted  productiveness  of  the  earth  during  the  Mill,  era, 
to  which  others  have  added,  under  the  impression  of  heightening  the  effect.  It  may  be 
even  error,  for  in  the  details— and  as  given  from  hearsay  and  reported  as  such,  exaggera- 
tion may  have  found  scope — the  best  of  men  may  fall  into  mistake.  But  this  does  7iot 
invalidate  the  leading,  fundamental  doctrine  ;  it  really  confirms  it,  seeing  that,  under 
the  influence  of  such  a  doctrine  and  its  related  restitution  to  Paradisiacal  fruitfulness, 
such  statements  are  engrafted  upon  it.*  Those  who  reject  Papias  and  Iren^eus  on  the 
ground  of  exaggeration,  ought  then  in  consistency  to  reject  Origen  and  many  of  the 
other  side  following,  who  have  been  guilty  of  far  greater  extravagances  in  doctrinal 
statements.  Indeed,  the  writer  feels  that,  while  rejecting  the  story  in  its  present  form, 
or  regarding  it  as  hyiDerbolical,  it  rec^uires  far  more  credulity  to  receive  some  of  the 
statements  of  the  defamers  of  these  Fathers  (as  e.g.  Eusebius'  "  New  Jerusalem," 
equivalent  to  Rome,  Prof.  Stuart's  "  Neroic  Theory,"  Whitby's  "New  Hypothesis," 
etc.)  than  to  accept  of  these  utterances  attributed  to  them.  To  be  witty  at  the  expense 
of  some  advocate,  or  to  find  some  believer  extravagant  in  view,  does  not,  by  any  means, 
disprove  our  doctrine. 

Another  disreputable  mode  of  j^rocedure  to  lower  the  Fathers  in  the  estimation  of 
others  or  to  make  them  contradictory,  is  (1)  to  interpolate  or  omit,  (2)  to  ascribe  to 
them  what  they  never  said,  (3)  and  to  ascribe  to  them  some  heretical  sentiments.  In 
reference  to  the  first,  Brooks  shows  {El.  Proph.  Interp.,  p.  52,  53)  that  in  printed  copies 
of  Justin  the  word  "  not''  was  omitted  in  the  sentence  which  exjjressly  asserts  that 
those  who  are  not  following  the  pure  doctrine — who  are  the  unorthodox — reject  the 
Chiliastic  view.f  Popish  influence,  no  doubt,  appears  in  this  omission  (see  another 
suppression  mentioned,  p.  54).  Bh.  Newton  (vol.  2,  p.  370)  has  shown  that  Dr.  Mid- 
dleton {Inquiry,  p.   26)  in  quoting  Justin  Martyr  has  interpolated  the  phrase  "in  the 


*  Comp.  Dr.  Neander's  statement  {Genl.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  405-6)  respecting  spurious 
works  and  interpolations,  making  it  difficult  to  obtain  the  exact  views  held.  Various 
writers  hold  that  this  grape  story  is  "  a  burlesque  on  the  term  thousand,  written  by  some 
opponent  of  the  doctrine  in  corrupting  the  text  of  Papias,"  and  "doubtless  much  more 
of  the  '  fanciful  and  sensuous  '  has  a  similar  origin,  for  Chillingworth  says  that  '  imput- 
ing to  them  that  which  they  held  not  '  was  one  of  the  means  of  overbearing  the  Mille- 
narian  doctrine"  (so  e.g.  Editor,  Proph.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  194). 

f  The  student  who  desires  to  investigate  the  controversy  respecting  the  suppression  of 
the  word  "  not,"  will  find  in  favor  of  its  retention  :  Mede,  Works,  B.  3,  P.  2,  p.  533  ; 
Arch.  Tillotson,  Works,  vol.  3,  p.  380  ;  Daille,  Use  of  the  Fathers,  p.  289  ;  Chillingworth  s 
Works,  p.  732  ;  Muencher,  His.  Cli.  Doctrine,  vol.  2,  p.  450,  etc.  Dr.  Macdill  refers  to  the 
following  as  favoring  the  suppression  of  the  word  "  not  :"  Thiiiby,  Hagenbach,  Nean- 
der  (!),  Shedd  (!),  Kelly  (a  Pre-Mill.  !),  Rossler,  Semisch  (!),  Ed.  of  the  Parisian  Ed.  ;  to 
which  we  add  Jebb.  Dr.  Morehead,  in  his  reply  to  Dr.  Macdill  (in  the  Chicago  U.  P. 
Ch.  paper.  The  Instructor,  1879),  takes  the  former  view.  We  only  add  the  following  :  (1) 
That  some  mss.,  according  to  Holmes  (quoted  by  Brooks,  El.  Froph.  Inter.,  p.  54),  contain 
the  negative  ;  (2)  that  the  word  "  not"  makes  Justin  and  Irenasus  to  be  in  correspond- 
ence ;  (3)  that  the  Parisian  Editor  finds  the  suppression  an  obscurity  and  irreconcilable 
with  Irenseus  (comp.  Brooks,  p.  54)  ;  (4)  that  many  scholars,  including  our  opponents, 
receive  the  negative  as  essential  in  order  to  make  good  sense  ;  (5)  that  the  negative  is  suj}- 
ported  by  the  general  testimony  respecting  the  generality  of  belief  ;  (6)  that  the  omis- 
sion of  the  word  "  not  "  does  not  affect  the  orthodoxy  of  view,  for,  while  it  then  allows 
that  Christians  rejected  Chiliasm,  yet  still  it  makes  Justin  say  that  all  Christians  exactly 
orthodox  ("  right-minded  in  all  things")  were  Chiliasts  ;  (7)  that  to  vindicate  the  orthodoxy 
of  opposers,  the  entire  passage  (which  we  quote  under  Prop.  76)  ought  to  have  been  sup- 
pressed. 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  453 

enjoyment  of  all  sensual  pleasures,"  whicli  Justin  never  employed.  Even  (so  Brooks) 
the  eulogy  of  Eusebius  on  Papias  as  a  man  "  most  eloquent  and  skilful  in  the  Script- 
ures" is  omitted  in  many  copies,  although  found  in  the  ancient.  It  would  not  answer 
to  laud  a  Chiliast.  (On  the  other  hand.  Brooks  notices  how  an  anti-Millenarian  is 
praised  by  Dr.  Maclaine  in  his  translation  of  Mosheim's  EccL  His.,  when  he  adds  to 
Dionysius  the  words  "learned  and  judicious"  not  found  in  the  original.)  It  was  not 
considered  wrong  to  perpetrate  (comj3.  Moske'im,  vol.  1,  p.  100,  Middleton's  Inquiry,  p. 
158,  Madan's  Thelyphthora,  Pref.,  p.  12,  etc.),  for  the  truth's  sake,  "  j^ious  frauds." 
Beaten  {Accou7it  of  Irenoeus,  p.  240)  says  :  "  As  the  opinions  of  Iren^eus  on  the  Millennium 
are  different  from  those  which  prevailed  subsequently  with  almost  universal  consent 
in  the  Western  Church,  that  portion  of  his  Treatise  is  rarely  found  complete  in  our 
present  mss.,  the  copyists  not  thinking  it  proper  or  worth  their  while  to  copy  what  was 
generally  disapproved  by  the  church.  .  .  .  The  live  last  chapters  of  the  fifth  book 
are  wanting  m  all  but  two  mss."  Fortunately,  too,  this  work  was  recovered  and  pub- 
lished  to  the  world  by  Erasmus,  and  not  by  a  Protestant  or  Millenarian.  Mede  (  Works, 
■p.  748)  charges  Jerome  with  being  an  "  unequal  relator  of  the  opinions  of  his  ad- 
versaries," and  adds  :  "  What  credit  he  deserves  in  this  instance  may  appear  by  some 
fragments  of  those  authors  still  remaining,  whom  he  charged  with  the  opinion  directly 
contrca^y  to  that  which  they  expressly  affirmed."  It  is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  such 
a  writer  as  Fairbairn,  on  the  poor  authority  of  Jerome,  asserts  {On  Proph.,  p.  254)  that 
the  Fathers,  without  exception,  "  with  one  voice,"  including  of  course  the  Millenarians, 
rejected  the  notion  of  a  Jewish  territorial  restoration.  Let  the  reader  turn  to  the  quota- 
tions that  we  freel}'  give  from  e.g.  Barnabas,  Irena^us,  Justin,  Tertullian,  he  will  find 
an  ample  refutation  of  this  statement.  (The  views  of  these  Fathers  respecting  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  Davidic  covenant  and  j^rophecy,  the  location  of  the  Mill,  age  before  the 
general  judgment,  etc.,  show  the  student  how  they  understood  this  matter.)  Some 
recent  writers,  without  a  particle  of  fairness  and  justice,  repeat  Jerome's  charge — a 
false  representation  as  shown  by  Mede,  Lardner,  and  many  others— against  us  (aimed 
especially  at  Tertullian),  "  that  the  saints  shall,  in  the  Millennium,  have  a  great  enjoy- 
ment of  carnal  and  corporeal  pleasures"  (eomp.  Brooks,  p.  59,  who  gives  Tertullian's 
exact  language,  which  distinguishes  betiveen  the  resurrected  and  glorified  saints,  and  those 
persons  who  are  spared — see  Props.  152,  153,  154,  etc.).  To  reiterate  what  is  so  utterly 
unfounded  in  fact,  and  which  has  so  frequently  been  exposed  as  untrue,  is  evidence  of 
enmity  and  a  lack  of  desire  for  truth.* 

But  the  lowest  possible  polemical  trick  is  to  endeavor  to  associate  these  Fathers  loith 
heresy,  as  Papias  with  ultra  Judaism,  Irengeus  and  Justin  with  Cerinthism,  Tertullian 
with  extravagant  Montanism,  and  Lactantius  with  Manicheeism.  We  are  not  concerned 
in  defending  those  men  ;  able  pens  have  triumphantly  shown  that  in  no  sense  have  they 
been  guilty  of  heresy  but  were  the  opposers  of  heresy.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the 
candid  statements  of  Neander,  Mede,  Lardner,  Brooks,  Taylor,  Lee,  Semisch,  Greswell, 
Dodgson,  Mosheim,  and  a  host  of  others.  As  to  Cerinthus,  admitting  that  he  held  all 
that  is  alleged  (although  it  has  often  been  noticed  that  the  Mill,  theory  as  presented  to 
us  does  not  harmonize  with  his  other  views,  see  e.g.  Art.  Cerinthus,  Ency.  Brit.,  etc.),  yet 
our  opponents  overlook  the  fact,  that  Cerinthus  was  strongly  opposed  and  crushed  by 
Millenarians.  The  assertion  of  the  Ency.  of  Relig.  Knowl.,  Art.  Cerinthus,  that  "  he  is 
to  be  regarded  as  the  first  person  who  held  the  doctrine  of  a  mundane  Millennium,"  is 
abundantly  refuted  by  the  testimony  of  the  ablest  writers,  church  historians,  etc.,  who 
assert  (what  needs  no  confirmation,  since  our  argument  fully  develops  it)  that  the  Jews 
held  to  it,  and  that  it  was  jKrpetuated  in  the  Jewish-Christian  church.  It  is  said  by 
Waterland,  Michaelis,  and  others,  that  the  Ajjostle  John  wrote  against  Cerinthus  (as 
asserted  by  Irenrous  and  taken  from  Polycarp).  Let  this  be  as  it  may,  John  wrote  at  the 
time  when  he  knew  the  doctrine  of  Cerinthus.  Now,  is  it  credible,  if  the  doctrine  of 
the  Millennium  is  an  error,  that  John  in  the  Apoc.  should  employ  the  very  ideas  and 
language  to  perpetuate  it,  as  seen  in  the  church  ?  Thus  we  see  how,  by  such  gi*ave 
charges,  men  not  only  involve  the  early  church  in  heresy,  trace  the  church  itself 
through  heretical  men,  but  make  the  apostles  justly  chargeable  with  its  continuance.     It 

*  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Books  of  Reference  contain  such  unfounded  charges,  as  e.g. 
Rees'  Cyclop.,  which  takes  from  Whitby  (following  Jerome)  the  misstatement  that  the  risen 
saints  "  propagate  their  species,"  as  the  doctrine  of  the  ancient  Millenarians.  Not  a  par- 
ticle of  proof ,  in  the  shape  of  a  direct  quotation  from  any  of  the  Fathers,  can  be  given  to 
substantiate  such  an  assertion.  Surely,  when  this  is  lacking,  simple  honesty  and  justice 
demand  the  withdrawal  of  this  mode  of  attack. 


454  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIISTGDOM.  [PeOP.  72. 

is  a  sad  fact,  that  if  many  of  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Fathers  were  now  living,  they 
could  not,  with  their  views  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  be  received  as  preachers  in  thou- 
sands of  pulpits.  In  reference  to  Cerinthus,  the  student  will  do  well  to  consider  the 
temperate  language  of  Mosheim  [Com.  on  the  State  of  the  Church,  etc.)  respecting  his 
doctrine,  attributing  much  that  is  said  of  him  to  prejudice  and  hatred.  For  it  must 
ever  be  borne  in  mind  that  what  we  know  of  Cerinthus  (as  holding  Chiliasm)  comes 
from  the  bitter  adversaries  of  Millenarianism,  while  the  Chiliastic  opposers  of  Cerinthus 
never  mention  his  holding  so  grossly  to  a  carnal  Millennium.  Lardner  ( Works,  vol.  2. 
p.  701)  also  thinks  that  Cerinthus  is  misrepresented  in  some  things,  and  this  is  the 
opinion  of  Bh.  Bull,  Mede,  and  many  others.  Mansel  {Gnostic  Heresies,  -p.  114)  says  : 
"  both  Mosheim  and  Neander  consider  the  accounts  of  the  sensual  Chiliasm  of  Cerinthus 
to  be  7nisrepresentations."  The  critical  student  can  readily  see  wfiy  it  is  impossible  to 
reconcile  Chiliasm  with  his  alleged  views.  Cerinthus,  as  all  affirm,  was  a  Gnostic,  and 
his  doctrine  (as  e.g.  making  Jesus  in  his  humanity  a  transient  vehicle  or  mere  phantom, 
— which  John  opposed,  although  giving  us  Eev.  20  :  1-6)  was  utterly  hostile  to  a  Mil- 
lenarian  position.  Hence  Neander  doubts  the  Chiliasm  of  Cerinthus  as  reported,  simply 
because  it  would  be  antagonistic  to  his  own  system,  and  (Genl.  CJi.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  47) 
after  giving  in  detail  his  doctrine,  adds  :  "  It  may  be  a  question,  indeed,  whether  he 
entertained  such  gross  and  sensual  notions  of  this  Millennial  Sabbath  as  Caius  and 
Dionysius  imputed  to  him  ;  for  such  views  would  hardly  be  in  keeping  with  his  system 
as  a  whole.  Hdf  spoke  indeed  of  a  wedding-feast — an  image  then  commonly  employed 
to  signify  the  blessed  union  of  the  Messiah  with  his  saints  ;  but  on  such  an  image  any 
one  who  was  both  unfamiliar  with  the  figurative  language  of  the  East,  and  interpreted 
his  language  under  the  bias  of  unfriendly  feelings,  might  easily  put  a  wrong  construction. 
Dionysius  indeed  says  that,  in  speaking  of  festivals  and  sacrifices,  he  was  only  seeking 
to  veilhis  own  gross  and  sensual  notions.  But  what  warrant  had  he  for  such  an  asser- 
tion ?  If  Cerinthus  had  really  taught  such  a  grossly  sensual  Chiliasm,  there  would  be 
in  this  something  so  repugnant  to  the  whole  spirit  of  Gnosticism,  and  so  strongl}'  tending 
to  the  Jewish  point  of  view,  as  to  make  it  necessary  for  us  to  rank  him  with  the 
Judaists,  rather  than  with  the  Gnostics."  As  to  Chiliasts,  he  says  in  relation  e.g. 
to  Justin  (GenL  Oh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  423)  :  "An  antipathy  to  Gnosticism,  and  to  the 
doctrines  of  Marcion,  is  strongly  marked  in  both  works  ;  and  with  this  feeling  Chiliasm 
at  that  time  readily  sympathized."  In  other  places  he  alludes  to  early  Chiliasts  being 
hostile  to  Gnosticism  in  all  its  forms.  This  is  the  candid  statement  of  one  who  is  no 
sympathizer  with  our  doctrine,  over  against  the  repeated  false  misrepresentations  of 
opponents  at  the  present  day,  who,  with  delight,  repeat  the  old  oft-refuted  statements 
respecting  Cerinthus,  but  are  very  careful  not  to  refer  to  such  critical  statements  of 
scholars. 

Obs.  4.  This  generally  admitted  view  of  the  Kingdom  entertained  by  the 
early  chnrches,  is  supposed  by  many,  especially  at  the  present  day,  to  form 
a  decided  objection  to  Christianity.  Infidels  exultingly  parade  it,  en- 
deavoring to  take  advantage  of  it  to  show  that  the  teachers  and  members 
were  alike  fallible  and  ignorant  men, — hence  untrustworthy.^  Christians 
endeavor  to  break  its  force  by  (1)  denying  its  generality  or  asserting  that 
but  comparatively  few  held  the  belief^  (2)  by  disconnecting  the  faith  of  the 
church  from  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles,^  and  p)  by  ascribing  it  to  a 
Jewish  or  heretical  origin.''  We,  on  the  contrary,  hold  that,  according  to 
the  truth,  it  was  impossible  for  the  first  churches  under  the  personal  teach- 
ing and  supervision  of  inspired  men  to  have  any  other  faith  respecting  the 
Kingdom  than  that  which  history  ascribes  to  the  first  Christians.  The 
belief  of  those  churches  is  a  logical  result,  legitimate  outgrowth  of  previous 
teaching,  and  the  only  one  that  harmonizes  with  the  most  essential  portion 
of  God's  Word,  viz.:  the  Covenants. 

1  Gibbon  {Bed.  and  Fall  Bom.  Emp.,  ch.  15,  p.  535),  describing  the  Chiliastic  view,  and 
correctly  noticing  that  "  the  ancient  and  popular  doctrine  of  the  Millennium  was  intimate- 
ly connected  with  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ,"  finally  remarks  :  "  The  assurance  of  such 
a  Millennium  was  carefully  inculcated  hy  a  succession  of  fathers  from  Justin  Martyr  and 
Irenseus,  who  conversed  with  the  immediate  disciples  of  the  ajDostles,  down  to  Lactantius, 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kiis^gdom.  455 

who  was  preceptor  to  the  son  of  Constantine."  Our  opponents  in  reply  to  Gibbon  have 
very  unfairly  asserted  that  he  was  mistaken  as  io  the  extent  in  which  it  was  held,  when  he 
adds  :  "  Though  it  might  not  be  universally  received,  it  appears  to  have  been  the  reigning 
sentiment  of  orthodox  believers,'' '  etc.  This  has  been  repeated  before  and  since,  and  tho 
authorities  given,  which,  to  say  the  least,  are  uncontrovertible.  The  use  made  of  it  by 
Gibbon  follows,  that  *'  The  doctrine  of  Christ's  reign  upon  earth  was  at  first  treated  as  a 
profound  allegory,  was  considered  by  degrees  as  a  doubtful  and  useless  opinion,  and 
was  at  length  rejected  as  the  absurd  invention  of  heresy  and  fanaticism."  Of  course, 
the  church  and  the  truth  suffer  by  such  a  comiDarison,  for  if  the  modern  prevailing 
view  is  the  correct  one,  then  the  Primitive  Church  was  perpetuated  by  errorists  and 
fanatics,  or,  if  the  Primitive  Chiliastic  position  is  one  in  accordance  with  the  truth,  then 
the  modern  rejection  of  it  is  a  wide  departure  from  the  true  landmarks.  The  student, 
unless  he  can  show  that  Gibbon  is  mistaken  (which  none  of  his  annotators  have  ventured 
to  do),  must  in  all  candor  consider  this  dilemma.  The  favorite  tactics  of  man}^  un- 
believers is  to  contrast  the  modern  prevailing  view  respecting  the  Messiah  and  His 
Kingdom  with  that  of  the  apostolic  and  Primitive  Church,  point  out  the  palpable  dis- 
crepancies, and  the7i  deduce  from  it  the  conclasion,  that  the  growing  intelligence  of  the 
Church  could  not  tolerate  the  Jewish  doctrine  which  superstition  and  ignorance  had 
perpetuated.  MiUiy  works  present  this  line  of  reasoning  in  order  to  disjparage  the 
founders  of  Christianity. 

-  Thus,  to  give  an  illustration  out  of  a  host  :  Lindsay  (Art.  Mill,  in  Eiicy.  Brit.),  in 
stating  the  belief  of  the  early  churches,  says,  in  opposition  to  overwhelming  testimony  to 
the  contrary  :  "  the  opinion  does  not  seem  to  have  become  general  in  the  church,"  and 
looking  for  proof  in  behalf  of  such  a  sweeping  assertion,  we  are  referred  to  Origen  in  these 
words  :  "  Indeed,  we  are  expressly  informed  by  Origen  that  it  was  confined  to  '  those  of 
the  simpler  sort,'  and  to  such  as,  '  refusing  the  labor  of  intelligence,  followed  the 
superficial  mode  of  literal  interpretation.'"  This  is  certainly  uncandid,  for  we  have 
here  (1)  nothing  said  of  the  extent  of  belief  prevailing  ;  (2)  the  testimony  of  an 
opponent,  who  in  other  places  speaks  well  of  Chiliasts  ;  (3)  the  ebullition  of  feeling 
excited  against  opi)onents  w^io  would  not  receive  Origen' s  spiritualistic  and  allegorical 
method  of  interpretation  ;  (4)  the  virtual  indorsement  of  Origen's  system  as  "  the  labor 
of  intelligence,"  over  against  that  of  his  opponents  ;  (5)  and  the  allov/ing,  through  this 
indirect  impeachment  of  folly  and  ignorance,  that  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Fathers 
holding  Chiliasm,  were,  in  comparison  with  Origen  and  his  class,  "  the  simpler  sort," 
etc.  (See  for  Origen,  Prop.  76.)  The  only  additional  proof,  also  indirect,  derived 
from  Neander,  is,  that  "  the  defensive  attitude"  assumed  "  by  the  advocates  of  the 
doctrine  affords  a  strong  presumption  that  it  was  not  the  doctrine  of  the  church  in 
general."  This  is  a  mere  begging  of  the  question,  seeing  (1)  that  the  generality  is  based 
on  the  fact  that  for  a  long  period  the  church  Fathers,  as  far  as  known,  icere  exx>ress  Mil- 
lenarians  ;  (2)  that  this  is  the  direct  testimony  of  Justin,  and  is  implied  in  the  expression 
of  others  (as  e.g.  Irenseus  conversing  with  others  and  gathering  material  from  them, 
etc.)  ;  (3)  that  a  difference  of  view  among  the  orthodox  believers  is  never  hinted  at  as 
existing,  as  e.g.  Irenreus,  the  disciple  of  Polycarp,  or  Justin  Martyr,  in  arguing  and 
teaching  enforce  a  unity  of  belief  in  the  very  manner  of  expression— as  if  the  doctrine 
were  general  ;  (4)  the  upholding  of  the  doctrine  so  prominently  by  the  leading  Apologists 
of  Christianity  (Justin)  indicates  its  extent  ;  (5)  "  the  defensive  attitude"  is  assumed,  as 
Justin  expressly  asserts  (not  against  orthodox),  against  "  even  those  of  that  race  of 
Christians  who  follow  not  godly  and  pure  doctrine."  Every  tjvo  in  church  history 
well  knows  that  Gnosticism,  and  othei'  tendencies,  ojjposed  to  our  doctrine,  were 
already  working  in  the  church  and  outside  in  the  first  century,  and  this  abundantly 
accounts  for  the  argumentative  and  defensive  style  adopted.  More  than  this  :  it  is 
explained  by  the  simple  fact  that  they  thus  better  repressed  the  objections  that  Jews 
might  allege  against  Christianity  (comp.  Prop.  193).  Other  illustrations  will  be  given 
under  Prop.  75,  and  we  simply  reproduce  a  challenge  often  made  and  repeated  by  the 
Editor  of  the  Prophetic  Times  (vol.  1,  p,  71)  :  "  We  challenge  our  opponents  to  produce 
the  evidence  of  the  entertainment  of  anti-Millenarian  views  by  any  orthodox  and  ac- 
knowledged Christian  teacher  for  the  first  two  hundred  years  of  our  era."  When  this 
evidence  is  produced  then  Lindsay,  Neander,  and  others  may  have  something  substantial 
to  build  upon  ;  until  it  is  produced  we  are  slow  to  receive  their  statements.  Hence  such 
writers  as  Ueberweg  (His.  of  Philosophy,  vol.  1,  p.  264,  when  referring  to  the  early 
Patristic  period)  are  most  certainly  incorrect,  when  they  say  :  "  There  arose  in  Chris- 
tianity, in  opposition  to  the  reality  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  world,  the  idea  of  a  Kingdom 
of  God  founded  on  purity  of  heart.  The  expectation  of  the  Messiah  among  the  Jewish 
people  was  si^iritualized,"  etc.     Now  the  incontestable  facts  of  history  make  this  idea 


456  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

of  a  Kingdom  and  this  spiritualizing  a  later  development— a,^  we  shall  show — and  Ueberweg 
and  others  take  the  liberty  of  transferring  what  belongs  to  a  later  period  to  an  earlier  one. 
Such  works,  of  course,  influence  other  minds  to  occupy  a  view  unsupported  by  his- 
torical fact.  A  writer  in  the  Princeton  Review  (Ap.  1851,  p.  217),  led  on  by  Ids  zeal  against 
Millenarianism,  remarks  :  "  That  the  commission  is  to  teach  all  nations  without  dis- 
tinction that  Christ  is  now  King,  that  He  occupies  the  throne  of  David,  that  the  King- 
dom is  spiritual,  that  that  Kingdom  is  the  Church,  that  the  agencies  for  preserving  and 
enlarging  it  are  purely  moral  and  spiritual  (except,  of  course,  God's  providential  control 
of  all  things),  and  that  it  is  to  spread  over  the  whole  earth,  are  truths  which  the  Christian 
world  has  believed  from  the  times  of  the  apostles  until  now."  Indeed  !  we  should  like  to  have 
the  history  for  all  this,  which  thus  loads  the  commission  (see  Prop.  175)  with  "  truths" 
not  contained  in  it.  Such  statements  are  not  solely  dictated  by  ignorance  ;  other 
motives  evidently  prompt  them,  for  we  have  a  higher  opinion  of  the  historical  knowl- 
edge of  such  opponents  than  to  attribute  the  former  to  them. 

3  The  critical  student,  desirous  to  secure  truth,  will  notice  the  lack  of  candor  in 
numerous  Encyclopaedias,  Eccles.  Histories,  Dogmatics,  etc.,  in  tracing  our  doctrine. 
Thus  e.g.  reference  as  to  its  origin  is  made  to  a  heretical  source,  the  nuDiber  of  ad- 
herents are  rej)resented  as  insignificant  as  possible,  etc.,  and  not  a  single  allusion  is 
made  to  the  doctrinal  views  of  the  apostles  or  disciples  which  they  preached  when  sent 
out  by  Jesus,  and  which  are  admitted  by  all  commentators  and  critics  (in  view  of  Acts 
1  :  6.  etc.)  to  have  been  intensely  Jewish  and  in  fid  I  accord  with  our  doctrine.  Let 
the  mind,  unbiassed,  ponder  Props.  43,  44,  etc.,  and  can  a  plausible  reason  be  assigned 
why  the  views  of  disciples,  under  the  personal  instruction  of  Jesus,  should  be  thus 
persistently  ignored.  Suppose  even  that  they  were  in  error,  yet  in  a  historical  account 
of  our  doctrine,  certainly  such  evidence  ought  not,  in  common  justice,  be  omitted.  But 
the  uncandidness  is  manifested  even  to  a  greater  extent.  Killen  {Ancient  Church)  pro- 
fessing to  give  (ch.  5,  p.  445,  etc.)  "  The  Doctrine  of  the  Cliurch,"  during  the  lirst  three 
centuries,  entirely  ignores  the  existence  of  our  doctrine,  although  he  can  enter  into  details 
respecting  trivial  affairs— a  sad  defect  in  impartial  history,  evincing  prejudice  in  the 
historian,  and,  may  we  add,  fear  of  the  antiquity  of  our  views.  In  another  place  and 
connection  (p.  3G'J)  he  can,  however,  complacently  reproduce  Eusebius'  disparaging 
remarks  respecting  Papias  and  Irena^us  in  connection  with  an  allusion  to  our  doctrine, 
without  the  slightest  reference  to  other  places  where  these  Fathers  are  eulogized.  The 
design  is  apparent.  Others  imbibe  and  exhibit,  alas  !  the  same  unfairness,  not 
realizing  that  they  thus  weaken  their  own  ground  and  strengthen  our  position.  We  give 
another  illustration  :  A  writer  in  the  Princeton  Review,  July,  1856,  p.  541,  tells  us  that 
Waldegrave  has  shown  that  after  the  Second  Advent  all  the  saints  shall  be  transplanted 
into  the  third  heaven,  and  that  the  only  Kingdom  to  be  realized  is  one  eternal  in  the 
heavens  above,  and  then  adds  :  "  Such  is  the  clear,  tried,  ancient  Catholic  holding  of  God's 
people,  in  all  ages,  which  is  to  be  superseded  by  the  sensuous  imagery  (Millenarianism » 
of  an  earthly  Kingdom."  The  palpable  misstatement  of  the  first  clause  of  the  sentence 
is  only  ecjualled  b}^  the  sneer  levelled  at  God's  own  Purpose  in  the  last  one.  Such 
wholesale  afdrmations  can  only  delude  the  ignorant. 

■i  Thus  e.g.  Milman  in  his  notes  on  Gibbon  can  only  say  that  (p.  533  and  535,  foot- 
notes) our  doctrine  is  "  purely  Jewish"  or  '^  a  fable  of  Jewish  dotage."  But  this  is  no 
answer  to  Gibbon  ;  it  leaves  the  matter  as  it  was  before,  without  the  least  attempt  to 
explain  how  it  comes  that  churches.  East  and  West,  were  for  so  long  a  time  intensely 
Jewish  in  their  views  of  the  Kingdom  (comp.  Props.  G8,  69,  76,  etc.).  Had  the  apostles 
and  their  immediate  successors  no  power,  if  in  error,  to  check,  or  at  least  to  protest 
against,  such  a  tendency  ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  derived  from  heresy,  it  only  makes 
matters  worse,  for  then  how  is  it  possible  to  trace  the  pure  orthodox  Church.  If  our  op- 
ponents had  only  one,  or  two,  or  more,  of  the  very  early  Fathers  to  sustain  their 
position,  then,  and  only  then,  might  they  frame  something  like  a  logical  argument  favor- 
ing such  a  derivation.  But  such  writers  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  first  and  second 
centuries,  and  even  in  the  third  they  are  few  in  number.  So,  again.  Dr.  Lindsay  (Art. 
"  Mill."  in  Encyclop.  Brit.)  admits  and  argues  (although  leaving  out  the  Scriptural  basis 
of  the  covenant)  the  Jewish  origin  of  our  doctrine  ;  that  it  was  held  from  "  comparatively 
an  early  age,"  etc.  ;  and  then,  coming  to  the  Christian  Church,  remarks  :  "  From  the 
Jews  this  notion  of  a  personal  reign  of  the  Messiah  with  His  saints  on  earth,  was 
adopted  by  several  in  the  early  church,  by  whom  the  passage  in  the  Apoc,  above  re- 
ferred to,  was  confidently  quoted  in  support  of  this  opinion."  What  shall  we  say  (1) 
to  the  unfair  method  of  making  the  impression  by  the  word  "  several "  as  if  but  a  few, 
very  few,  entertained  our  view,  over  against  Justin's  direct  assertion  that  all  that  were 
orthodox  held  to  it  ;  (2)  and  to  the  one-sidedness  of  the  whole  article,  endeavoring  to 


PeOP.  72.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  457 

indicate  that  our  doctrine  was  obtained  from  Jewish,  sources  outside  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
from  a  rigid  literal  interpretation  of  one  portion  of  the  Apoc.  Why,  in  all  candor  and 
justice,  does  he  not  allow,  e.g.  Barnabas  or  Irena^us  or  Justin  to  give  the  covenant  and  the 
prophecies  upon  which  they  base  their  views?  Is  it  right  to  ignore  the  express  testimony 
of  Scripture,  which  these  and  other  worthies  alle<je  in  behalf  of  their  doctrinal  position  V 
(Comp.,for  Jewish  belief  before  and  at  the  First  Advent,  j).  240,  etc.,  of  Freedom  and 
Fellowship  in  Beligion.) 

In  reference  to  the  charge  of  heresy  (see  Obs.  3,  note  2),  it  may  briefly  be  said  that 
this  originates  from  an  xmacquaintance  with  the  history  of  our  doctrine,  from  an  over- 
looking of  its  Scriptural  basis  and  the  character  of  the  men  who  have  embraced  it,  from 
receiving  the  accusation  from  others  without  examination,  or  from  pure  malice  and 
bigotry.  Writers  eminent  for  learning  and  ability,  who  are  opposed  to  us,  well  knowing 
how  extensively  our  views  were  held  by  men  who  lived  and  died  for  the  church,  are  very 
guarded  not  to  bring  such  a  charge,  seeing  tliat  if  brought  it  is  irnpossiUe  to  trace  the 
church  from  the  apostles  saving  through  a  "  heretical"  medium.  In  the  earl}^  church 
Chiliasts  were  its  preachers,  defenders,  and  apologists.  Indeed,  we  are  indebted  to 
many  of  our  scholarly  opponents  (as  e.g.  Neander,  Bush,  etc.)  for  defending,  ably, 
Millenarian  Fathers  against  such  a  charge.  And  the  defense  is  simple  and  just,  seeing 
that  these  very  Fathers  were  the  men  icho  op>posed  directly  the  heretical  tendencies  of 
the  early  age.  Some  Protestants  might  even  learn  a  lesson  of  charity  from  Eoman 
Catholics.  While  Romanism  hates  the  doctrine  and  forbids  its  belief  (because  so 
antagonistic  to  its  pretensions),  yet  some  writers  of  this  class  are  too  wise  to  brand  it 
as  heresy.  Although  anxious  for  the  sake  of  their  church  to  make  its  numbers  as  few 
as  possible,  and  its  doctrines  erroneous,  yet  Schlegel  {Philos.  His.,  Sec.  11),  calling  it 
an  "  error  or  rather  illusion"  "  m  the  history  of  those  early  ages  of  the  church,"  adds  : 
"  Nor  did  its  partisans  constitute  a  sect,  but  it  was  merely  the  exaggerated  opinion  of 
some  individuals  in  the  bosom  of  the  church,  who  were  animated  by  no  intentions  hostile  to 
Christianity."  He  calls  them  ^'- many  virtuous  and  praiseworthy  men."  It  is  a  fact  that 
even  the  first  prominent  opposer  of  Chiliasm,  Origen  (e.g.  Neander,  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p. 
551),  speaks  in  language  of  toleration  ;  the  same  is  true  of  Jerome  and  others  (comp. 
Prop.  76). 

Ods.  5.  Our  doctrine  has  a  Jewish  origin,  founded  upon  Jewish  cove- 
nants, Jewish  251'edictions,  Jewish  faith,  and  a  Jewish  Messiah  (Prop.  68, 
69,  etc.).  Many  writers,  wliether  intended  as  a  reproach  or  as  a  historical 
fact,  trace  our  doctrine  to  a  Jewish  source.  This  is  correct,  whether  sar- 
castically or  soberly  presented.  We  have  already  quoted  (Prop.  68), 
Shedd,  Mosheim,  Walch,  Prof.  Bush,  Hodge,  Milman,  and  Lindsay  as 
attributing  its  rise  to  a  Jewish  faith.  How  could  it  be  otherwise  when,  as 
we  have  shown  and  proven  under  previous  Propositions,  the  Jews  at  the 
Pirst  Advent  and  the  disciples  sent  forth  to  preach  the  Kingdom  held  pre- 
cisely to  our  doctrines  respecting  the  Kingdom  and  the  reign  of  the  saiuts  ; 
when,  as  Auberlen  (Obs.  1)  aptly  said,  all,  including  Jesus  and  the  proph- 
ets, were  Chiliasts.^  Chiliasm  is  not  doctrinally  fixed  by  the  duration  of 
the  reign  (Prop.  159),  but  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  Messianic 
Kingdom.^ 

'  Out  of  the  abundance  of  material,  a  number  of  additional  references  and  quotations 
may  prove  acceptable  to  the  reader.  The  Art.  "  3Iille.nniuni  '  in  M'CIintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  referring  to  Josephus  (Art.  18,  1,  3  ;  War  2,  8,  14),  Daniel  (12  :  2),  Barnabas, 
Book  of  Enoch,  Test,  of  Twelve  Patriarchs,  Sibylliue  books,  etc.,  says  :  ^'  it  was  early 
adopted,  especially  by  Jewish  Christians,''  and  ^'  it  jsenetrated  into  the  Gentile  branch  of 
the  church  and  spread  extensively."  Neander  (Genl.  Ch.  History,  vol.  2,  p.  396,  ascribes 
to  a  Jewish  origin  "  the  idea  of  a  Millennial  reign  which  the  Messiah  would  set  up  on  the 
earth,"  and  this  is  several  times  repeated  (we  give  a  quotation  from  him  under  the  Prop. 
of  Jev,'ish  objections).  In  his  His.  of  Dogmas  he  informs  us  that  Millenarianism  was 
generall}'  taught,  giving  all  the  eminent  church  Fathers  of  the  period  as  supporting  it 
(Barnabas,  IrentBUs,  Papias,  Justin),  and  he  endeavors  to  discriminate  between  a  refined 
and  a  sensuous  form  in  which  it  was  taught,  asserting  "  by  many  it  was  held  spiritually, 
and  clashed  not  with  the  Christian  spirit"  (but  who  those  "  many"  were  who  thus  held 
it  purely,  "  spiritually,"  he  does  not  inform  us,  and  we  must  conclude  them  imaginary 


'458  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

persons,  of  whom  we  have  no  record  whatever).  He  then  traces  the  doctrine  back  to 
Judaism,  ^'  for  among  the  Jews  the  representation  was  current  that  Messiah  would  reign  a 
thousand  years  on  earth"  and  he  tells  us  that  this  notion  was  derived  from  Ps.  90  :  41, 
the  symbolical  character  of  the  six  days  of  Creation,  and  the  seventh  being  a  Sabbath 
(comp.  Prop.  143,  for  testimony  corroborating  Neander).  So  cumulative  and  irresistible 
is  the  proof  that  we  leave  an  opponent  to  sum  it  vqy,  and  give  the  details  as  follows  :  The 
Princeton  Review  (Ap.,  1850,  p.  329),  in  a  hostile  notice  of  Rev.  Imbrie's  sermon,  "  The 
Kingdom  of  God,"  pronounces  our  view  " //te  Jetcis/i  doctrine;  and  by  Jewish  we  mean 
that  actually  held  by  the  Jews.  They  taught,  1.  That  the  Messiah  was  to  aj)j)ear  and 
reign  in  person  gloriously  in  Jerusalem.  2.  That  all  the  Jews  were  to  be  gathered  in 
the  Holy  Land.  3.  That  the  pious  dead  were  to  be  raised  to  share  the  blessings  of  the 
Messiah' s  reign.  4.  That  the  Messiah  and  His  people  were  to  reign  over  all  nations  for 
a  thousand  years.  5.  That  at  the  end  of  that  period  Satan  was  to  be  loosed,  and  a  great 
conflict  ensue,  after  which  were  to  come  the  general  resurrection  and  hnal  judgment. 
This  theory  was  by  man^  Christians,  during  the  second  and  third  centuries"  (observe, 
he  omits  the  first,  as  if  none  existed  then,  over  against  the  positive  testimony  m  our 
favor),  "  adopted  bodily.  The  only  difference  was,  that  what  the  Jews  exj^ected  to 
occur  at  the  first  coming,  these  Christians  anticipated  at  the  Second  Advent  of  Uie  Messiah.'' 
We  most  cordially  accept  of  this  statement.  Having  already  given  extensive  quotations 
respecting  the  Jewish  views  held  (as  in  Prop.  20,  etc.),  we  only  need  a  few  in  addition. 
Ebrard  {Gosp.  His.,  p.  2,  ch.  2),  in  opposing  Bruno  Bauer's  assertion  that  the  Messianic 
idea  originated  with  Jesus  and  was  afterward  elaborated,  presents  the  "  Data  concerning 
the  expectation  of  a  Messiah,"  refuting  so  gross  a  statement  by  giving  historical  facts. 
These  show  that  the  Jews  "  looked  for  the  promised  re-establishment  of  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom,"  which  was  "  ^//,e  Kingdom  of  tlie  Messiah,"  and  that  "there  was  a  distinct 
expectation  of  a  personal  Messiah,  a  Davidic  King,  and  a  political  Saviour."  M'Clintock  and 
Strong's  Cyclop.,  Art.  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  thus  gives  the  Jewish  view  :  "  The  Jews,  at 
large,  gave  to  these  prophecies  a  temporal  meaning,  and  expected  a  Messiah  who  should 
come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and,  as  King  of  tJie  Jewish  nation,  restore  the  ancient 
religion  and  worship,  reform  the  corrupt  morals  of  the  people,  make  expiation  for  their 
sins,  free  them  from  the  yoke  of  foreign  dominion,  and,  at  length,  reign  over  the  whole 
earth  in  peace  and  glory."  The  student  is  directed  to  an  interesting  Art.  by  Rev, 
Schodde  in  Tlie  Lutheran  Quarterly  (July,  1879),  entitled  "  The  Messianic  Idea  in  Pre- 
Christian  Apocalyptic  Literature"  (and  he  refers  to  Drummond's  The  Jewish  Messiah, 
London,  1877  ;  T/ie  Sibylline  Books  in  Edinb.  Review,  July,  1877  ;  Excursus,  in  Prof. 
Stuart's  Apoc,  etc.).  He  declares  that  the  Jewish  Messianic  idea  j)revalent  at  the  First 
Advent  was  incorporated  in  the  Pre-Mill.  view,  showing  the  similarity  by  various  quota  • 
tions.  An  extract  maybe  in  place.  He  mentions  the  "  Psalterium  Salamonis"  or  18 
Psalms,  supposed  to  be  written  shortly  before  the  First  Advent,  which  laments  the 
destruction  of  David's  Kingdom,  looks  for  the  Son  of  David,  and  a  restoration  under 
him  of  a  Theocratic  Kingdom,  with  spirituality  and  external  glory.  This  work  speaks 
of  the  Messiah  as  God's  "  Anointed,"  and  prays  that  God  would  hasten  in  mercy  to 
raise  up  and  inaugurate  the  long  expected  Kingdom  of  His  Anointed.  One  prayer  is  : 
"God  hasten  His  mercy  over  Israel,  and  deliver  us  from  the  uncleanliness  of  the 
impious  heathen.  The  Lord  Himself  is  our  King  to  all  eternity. "  They  speak  of  this 
King  being  of  the  house  of  David,  and  fully  recognize  the  Theocratic  nature  of  the 
Kingdom.  The  "  Assumptio  Mosis,"  of  which  only  fragments  remain,  refers  to  the 
Messianic  Kingdom,  and  to  the  inaugurator  as  being  the  Celestial  One,  the  Most  High  God, 
the  Eternal  One,  i.e.  God  Himself.  The  student  may  well  consider  the  statement  of 
Shedd  {IFis.  Ch.  Doc,  B.C.,  who  received  the  merited  strictures  of  Lillie,  Shimeall,  etc.), 
who  speaks  of  our  doctrine  as  "  a.later  Jewish  doctrine,"  and  then  adds  :  "  The  disciples 
of  Christ,  being  themselves  Jews,  were  at  first  naiur ally  infected  with  these  views."  The 
simple  historical  fact,  as  noticed  by  Chillingworth  and  others,  is  this  :  that  the  nearer  you 
come  to  tlie  apostolic  period,  tlie  more  generally  was  it  taught  by  the  Fathers  as  held  by  the  Jews 
and  disciples.  Jerome  and  others,  consequently,  m  view  of  the  agreement,  call  it 
''  Judaizing ;"  and  our  most  bitter  opposers  (as  e.g.  Knai^ja,  Ch.  Theol,  p.  323)  fully 
admit  that  the  Jews  as  "  a  current  opinion"  held  that  "  Be  (Christ)  would  be  a  temporal 
deliverer  and  a  King  of  the  Jews,  and,  indeed,  a  Universal  Moyiarch,  who  would  reign  over 
all  7iations.  Thus  they  interpreted  Ps.  2  :  2,  6,  8,  Jer.  23  :  5,  6,  Zech.  9:4  seq."  (He 
might  have  given  many  Scriptural  passages  thus  used.)  "The  apostles  themselves  held  this 
opinion  until  after  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  Matt.  20  :  20,  21,  Luke  24  :  21,  Acts  1  :  6." 
Commentators  find  our  view,  as  Jewish,  in  various  other  passages,  as  e.g.  Luke  1  :  71, 
and  17  :  20  and  19  :  11,  Acts  2  :  26,  30,  etc.  Indeed,  there  is  not  one  but  refers  to  our 
idea  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  as  received  by  the  Jews  in  the  times  of  the  First  Advent. 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  459 

2  Cliiliasm  or  Millenarianism  (the  former  word  derived  from  the  Greek,  and  the  latter 
from  the  Latin,  exj^ressive  of  a  thousand  years)  is  most  generally  used  to  denote  the 
doctrine  of  the  Pre -Mill.  Advent  of  the  Messiah,  and  His  personal  reign  on  earth,  at 
least  during  the  thousand  years.  Dr.  Breckenridge  (Pref.  to  Judge  Jones's  JS^otes)  has 
well  observed  that  the  word  "  Millenarian"  has  become  extremely"  vague,"  as  our  op- 
ponents  who  hold  to  a  future  Millennium  are  also  in  a  certain  sense  "  Millena- 
rians. "  Originally,,  however,  it  was  exclusively  employed  to  designate  our  doctrine 
(and  thus  it  is  still  retained  by  many  writers),  incorporating  with  it  the  definite 
notion  (Rev.  20)  of  the  one  thousand  years  (which,  however,  in  the  estimation  of 
leading  Foreign  and  American  advocates,  does  not  limit  the  reign— see  Prop.  159).  As 
others  also  have  adopted  a  Millennium,  the  following  designations  have  been  extensively 
received  and  used  to  distinguish  with  greater  accuracy  the  various  beliefs  :  "  Pre- 
Millenarian, "  one  who  holds  to  the  Mill,  age,  introduced  by  the  personal  Advent  and 
reign  of  the  Messiah  ;  "  Post-Millenarian,"  one  who  has  the  same  age  brought  in 
without  the  Advent,  placing  the  latter  at  its  close  ;  "  Anti-Millenarian,  one  who  rejects 
the  doctrine  of  such  an  era  ;  "  Past-Millenarian,"  one  who  locates  the  Mill,  age  in  the 
past,  or  extends  it  from  the  past  to  the  present  in  the  course  of  realization  (these  last, 
however,  are  more  frequently  designated  as  "Anti-Millenarian,"  i.e.  opposed  to  a 
future  Millennium), 

Ohs.  6.  Tlie  early  churcli  Theology  on  this  doctrine — notwithstanding 
the  sneers  of  Gibbon  and  his  fellow  unbelievers,  notwithstanding  the  pain- 
fully apologetic  language  of  Prof.  Bush,  Dr.  Neander,  and  others — is  not 
only  reasonable,  hut  the  most  reasonable,  because  of  its  vital  connection  with 
what  preceded.  Reuss  {His.  of  Cli.  Tlieol.  in  Ch.,  "On  Salvation") 
declares,  that  faith  fastened  on  its  "  object  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
Messianic  dignity,  which  necessarily  included  the  assured  realization  of 
the  promises /o?^6'A/;^^  tlie  Kingdom;'^  and  after  repeatedly  statiug  in  his 
work  that  the  early  Theology  was  largely  taken  up  with  views  respecting  the 
Kingdom  (for  this  naturally  resulted  from  the  views  of  tlie  ChristsJiip  or 
llessiahship  of  Jesus),  he  informs  us,  that  the  position  of  those  who  were 
the  faithful  was  "  obedience  to  God,  which  is  to  give  us  a  title  to  the 
Kingdom,  and  faith  in  Jesus,  wJio  ivill  soon  come  to  establish  it,^''  Faith 
and  obedience  inspired  hope  that  the  covenanted  2^'i^oniises,  pertaining  to  the 
Kingdom,  would  be  verified  through  Christ  at  His  coming  again  ;  any 
other  position,  in  view  of  what  preceded  and  surrounded  them,  would 
have  been  unnatural  and  opposed  to  the  truth. 

We  will  allow  a  Liberalist  to  state  from  his  standpoint  the  Primitive  belief.  Thus  e.g. 
Voiiex  {Freedom  and  Fellowship  in  Religion,  Essay  5,  "  Christianity  and  its  Definitions") 
says  :  "  In  that  childlike  age,  among  a  childlike  people,  something  more  was  needed 
than  a  bare  proclamation  of  moral  and  spiritual  truth,  with  whatever  power  of  personal 
genius.  And  this  need  was  supplied  by  ihe  old  Hebrew  concejotion  of  the  speedy  coming 
of  ihe  Messianic  Kingdom — a  conception  that  ajopealed  with  all  the  vividness  of  a  drama 
to  the  spiritual  imagination,  and  hopes  and  fears  of  man.  This  idea  is  the  one  thread  of 
unity  that  runs  through  all  the  varieties  of  writings  in  the  New  Test,  from  Matt,  to  Rev, 
It  was  this  that  gradually  lifted  Jesus  Himself  out  of  all  human  and  historic  proportions 
into  the  colossal  magnitude  in  which  He  has  been  seen  by  Christendom  for  eighteen 
centuries.  It  was  the  belief,  after  His  crucifixion,  i/i  His  second  Messianic  Advent — an 
event  which  His  followers  looked  for  in  their  lifetime— that  gave  the  immediate  animating 
impulse  to  their  cause,  and  attracted  such  numbers  of  people  to  confess  Him  as  the 
expected  Christ  ;  for  this  Advent  was  to  solve  all  life's  trials  and  perplexities  ;  it  was  to 
bring  redemption  to  the  sinful,  rest  to  the  weary,  wealth  to  the  destitute,  and  comfort 
to  the  sorrowing.  And  around  this  simj)le,  childish  hope,  which  was  yet  full  to  bursting 
with  the  deep  life  of  spiritual  aspirations  and  yearnings,  the  first  Christian  Church  was 
gathered — a  sect  of  Judaism  accepting  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  and  looking  for  His  Sec. 
Coming  to  complete  and  establish  His  Sovereignty."  Compare  in  same  work  Abbot's 
"  Genius  of  Christianity  and  Free  Religion,"  in  wliich  "  the  Messianic  faith  is  the  soul^  of 
the  entire  New  Test.,  giving  unity  to  the  Gospels,  Epistles,  and  Apoc,  and  making 


460  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  72. 

Christianity  a  vital  organism  ;"  "  the  Messianic  idea  is  the  great  taproot  of  Christianity." 
Martineau  {Nat.  Review,  Ap.,  1863)  is  approvingly  quoted  :  "  Whoever  can  read  the  New 
Test,  with  a  fresh  eye  must  be  struck  with  the  prominence  everywhere  of  the  Messianic 
idea.  It  seems  to  be  the  ideal  framework  of  the  whole — of  history,  parable,  dialogue  ; 
of  Paiiline  reasoning  ;  of  Apocalyptic  visions."  Similar  testimony  to  a  large  extent 
might  be  adduced,  but  this  is  sufficient  to  indicate  how  these  men  clearly  apprehend 
the  original  and  true  meaning  of  the  Messiahship  as  retained  by  the  early  church  (which 
is  incontrovertible),  and  from  it  deduce  the  fact  (alas  !  sadly  evident  in  the  church) 
that  the  Messianic  idea  was  changed.  This  is  true,  but  not  in  the  wa}^  that  they  account 
for  it,  either  as  a  logical  change  by  development  (so  Abbot),  or  as  a  requisite  accommoda- 
tion to  Gentilism  by  Paul  (so  Frothinghain),  or  as  a  childlike  opinion  adapted  to  a 
transition  period  (so  Potter).  Allowing  any  of  these  results  as  legitimate  (taken  too 
from  Christian  Apologists),  undermines  the  New  Test,  record,  the  inspiration  and  au- 
thority of  the  apostles,  and  lowers  the  Primitive  faith  to  a  mere  childish  standard.  Our 
reply  to  all  this  wiU  be  found  under  various  Propositions. 

Ois.  7.  The  apologetic  replies  of  those  who  reject  our  doctrine,  given 
to  infidels,  etc.,  to  account  for  the  Primitive  faith,  are  tmwortliy  of 
churches  established  itncler  'apostolic  teacliing  and  influence.  Eaton 
(Perm,  of  Christ.,  p.  262)  gracefully  acknowledges  the  early  church  view, 
and  rebukes  Gibbon  because  he  treats  the  early  belief  as  a  vulgar  super- 
stition, saying  :  "  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  this  writer  that  the 
secret  of  the  success  of  the  Christianity  may  well  have  lain  in  tlie  liarm.ony 
of  its  doctrines  with  tlie  religious  needs  of  the  time,  the  deliverance  which 
it  held  forth  from  the  impending  ruin  at  the  end  of  the  world,  by  many 
deemed  so  near,"  etc.  Aside  from  the  inaccuracy  of  "  the  end  of  the 
world"  believed  in  (for  the  early  Christians  had  no  idea  of  tlie  modern  view 
of  such  an  end,  but  looked  for  tlie  end  of  the  age  or  dispe?isation,  to  be 
followed  by  another  more  glorious  under  Christ — (compare  Props.  140, 
137,  141,  138,  etc.) — the  rebuke  falls  harmless  unless  we  take  higher  ground 
than  the  mere  "needs  of  the  time."  Prof.  Bush  (On  Mill,  p.  22) 
accepts  of  Gibbon's  language  that  "  for  wise  purposes,  this  error  was  per- 
mitted in  the  church,"  and  argues  that  such  views  of  the  Kingdom  were 
undoubtedly  for  the  best  in  the  early  history  of  the  church.  If  this  is  so, 
well  may  infidelity  sneer  at  and  ridicule  the  establishment  of  the  Christian 
church.  With  inspired  men  as  its  teachers  ;  with  apostles,  supposed  to 
know  what  the  Kingdom  is,  its  leaders  ;  with  elders  to  whom  the  church 
was  entrusted  for  guidance  ;  with  the  restrictions  cast  around  error,  the 
duty  enjoined  of  holding  the  truth,  the  honor  and  faithfulness  of  God 
Himself  connected  with  it — the  church  needs  no  such  umuorthy  defence, 
making  ^^  error"  essential  to  its  establishment,  success,  and  progress. 

We  have  works  written  by  able  men,  in  which,  in  order  to  prevent  the  force  of  the 
evidence  given  in  our  behalf  by  the  early  church,  under  the  heading  of  "  Juda^o-CJiris- 
iianity,"  they  frankly  admit  how  generally  our  doctrine  was  held — even  by  apostles— and 
argue  that,  in  the  case  of  all  these,  it  was  a  necessary  precedence  for  the  future  develop- 
ment of  the  truth  ;  that  as  knowledge  increased  "  the  husk"  was  discarded,  etc.  Thus 
e.g.  Reuss  in  his  His.  of  Ch.  Theol.  of  the  Apostolic  Age.  This,  strij^ped  of  its  philosophical 
verbiage,  simply  means  :  (1)  that  these  apostles  and  their  immediate  successors  were  in 
gross  error,  i.e.  possessed  the  mere  "  husk  ;"  (2)  that  error  is  a  requisite  preliminary  to 
bring  out  the  truth  ;  (3)  that  error  was  a  necessary — hence  permitted — condition  in  that 
period  of  the  church  ;  (4)  that  the  true  source  of  our  knowledge  is  not  in  the  teachings  of 
the  apostles  (as  e.g.  Petrine  school),  but  in  the  progress  of  knowledge  through  "  the 
consciousness  of  the  church  ;"  (5)  that  for  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  we  are 
indebted,  not  to  men  specially  commissioned  to  preach  the  Kingdom,  but  to  uninspired 
men  who  afterward  arose  as  teachers.  Having  already  replied  to  this,  these  things  are 
pointed  out  to  indicate  the  inconsistent  and  irrdigious  shifts  to  which  even  good  men  are 
driven  when  denying  the  truthfulness  of  the  early  church  view  of  the  Kingdom,     No  one, 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  461 

therefore,  need  to  be  surprised  that  the  Millenarianism  of  the  Primitive  Church  winged 
the  shaft  hurled  at  it  by  the  Antinomian  Perfectionists  in  the  Confession  of  their  Faith 
(published  in  their  organ,  The  Perfectionist,  quoted  by  the  Oberlin  Review  for  May,  1874). 
In  Art.  24  they  say  :  "  We  believe  that  the  history  which  the  Bible  contains  of  the 
church  after  Christ's  ascension,  commonly  called  the  Primitive  Church,  is  a  history 
rather  of  the  latter-day  glory  of  Judaism  than  of  the  commencement  of  Christianity." 
Prejudice  can  scarcely  exceed  this  in  the  minds  of  professed  unbelievers.  Alas  !  how 
all  this  recoils  upon  the  truth  itself,  and  paves  the  way  for  numerous  extravagances. 

Let  us  take  one  of  the  most  candid  and  charitable  of  men,  Dr.  Neander,  who  honestly 
supjjoses  a  difficulty  (where  none  exists),  and  in  endeavoring  to  soften  or  remove  it, 
makes  us  conscious  of  an  incongruity.  In  his  efforts  to  clear  Chiliasm  (C7<.  lUs.,  vol. 
1.  p.  3G4,  etc.)  from  Ebionitism  (or  else  the  church  proper  could  only  be  traced  through 
Ebionism)  he  adduces  two  reasons  for  the  rise  of  the  former  :  (1)  a  tolerance  or  recejDtion 
of  the  letter  in  accordance  with  previous  views  ;  and  (2)  a  sensuous  element.  This  does 
not  remove — it  only  increases— the  difficulty.  For  how  does  it  come  that,  under  tJie 
direct  auspices  of  the  ai:)ostles  themselves,  this  reception  of  "  the  letter"  and  of  "  a 
sensuous  element"  (as  he  is  pleased  to  call  it)  occurs?  If  the  early  church  were  so 
generally  under  the  influence  of  the  letter,  ichat  churches  had  the  Spirit  ?  If  the 
history  of  the  church  is,  as  he  informs  us,  that  in  which  the  leaven  works  in  its  (i.e. 
churches)  most  impure  state,  then  the  succeeding  stages  ought  progressively  to  rise  in 
purity.  But  is  this  sustained  by  history  ?  Do  such  explanations  soften  the  charge  of 
unbelievers  that"  error"  extensively  prevailed  and  was  one  of  the  means  of  success? 
To  indicate  how  poorly  prepared  Neander  was  to  vindicate  his  own  hypothesis — to  escape 
from  the  dilemma  — unless  to  sacrifice  to  a  fearful  extent  the  integrity  and  authority  of 
apostleshii?,  it  is  only  necessary  to  contrast  two  passages.  Thus  e.g.  in  First  Planting  of 
Chris.,  vol.  1,  p.  362,  he  thus  correctly  represents  James's  sentiments  :  "  He  considers  the 
acknowledgment  of  tlie  Messiahship  of  Jesus  as  essentially  belonging  to  genuine  Judaism, 
believers  in  Jesus  as  the  only  genuine  Jews,  Christianity  as  perfected  Judaism,"  etc.  Now, 
to  get  rid  of  James's  connection,  he  deliberately  gives  him  this  Christian  character  : 
"  We  might  infer  (with  Schreckenburger)  that  James  wrote  this  Epistle  at  a  time  whe7i 
Christianity  had  not  thoroughly  penetrated  his  spiritual  life,  during  the  earliest  period  of 
his  Christian  development  ;  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  we  are  justified  in  drawing 
such  a  conclusion,  for  no  proof  can  be  given  that  he  enlarged  his  doctrinal  views  at  a  later 
period.  It  is  possible  that  he  remained  confined  in  this  form  of  impeifect  doctrinal  de- 
velopment, although  his  heart  was  penetrated  by  love  to  God  and  Jesus."  Any  theory 
of  the  Kingdom  which  in  its  support  must  thus  lower  apjostolic  teaching  is  most  certainly 
defective  and  dishonoring  to  the  Word.  It  may,  indeed,  do  no  serious  injury  to  a  man 
like  Neander  (see  his  faith  in  dedication)  with  his  development  theory,  but  it  is  fraught 
loith  evil  to  thousands.  Such  men  as  Bauer,  Parker,  etc.,  only  find  the  strongest  possible 
confirmation  to  their  unbelief  in  such  a  line  of  reasoning,  which  undermines  Scriptural 
authority,  and  leaves  the  inspired  teachers  ignorant  of  a  leading,  fundamental  doctrine, 
to  the  preaching  of  which  they  were  specially  called.  All  the  Apologetics,  noticed  in  a 
course  of  reading,  simply  amounts,  in  this  direction,  to  the  following  :  an  "  error"  is 
admitted  ;  various  reasons  are  assigned,  attributable  to  a  transition  state,  for  its  per- 
mission ;  and,  on  the  supposition  that  the  prevailing  modern  view  is  the  correct  one,  a 
change  is  allowed  as  the  result  of  increased  light.  When  Dr.  Mosheim  and  others 
acknowledge  a  Jewish  origin,  and  then  suppose  that  Christian  teachers  received  it 
because  they  hoped  by  it  to  make  the  Jews  more  willing  to  embrace  Christianity,  they 
are  opposed  by  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers  ;  and  so  with  all  other  suppositions  which 
degrade  the  intelligence  or  the  integrity  of  the  Fathers. 

Obs.  8.  The  important  historical  posit io7i  (comp.  follo'^^ing  Propositions) 
that  our  doctrine  thus  obtains,  should,  in  the  mind  of  the  theological 
student,  possess  co7isideraJ)le  weight.  If  this  link  were  missing — if  our  op- 
ponents could  point  to  this  faith  lacking  in  the  churches  established  by  the 
apostles — then  an  essential  one  (required  as  a  logical  sequence,  a  necessarg 
result)  would  be  missing  in  our  connected  chain.  We  confess  to  a  feel- 
ing of  satisf action,  of  gratification,  that  it  thus  exists,  abundantly  attested 
to  by  our  opponents.  While  unbelieyers  deride  it  as  uncouth  and  mis- 
shapen, while  even  believers  regard  it  as  of  foreign  forging,  an  excrescence, 
we,  on  the  other  hand,  esteem  it  as  most  desirable   and  2^recions.     This 


462  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

early  faith  in  tlie  Kingdom,  is  evidence  of  consistent  divine  teacliing,  of 
apostolic  sujoervision,  of  God's  deterniination  to  fidfll  His  oatli-Jjonnd  cove- 
oiant,  of  the  true  Scriptural  concep>tion  of  tlie  Messiah  as  covenanted,  of  the 
validitij  of  adojjting  grace,  and  of  our  ultimately  inheriting,  at  the  Sec. 
Advent,  ''' the  sure  mercies  of  David.'' 

In  continuation  of  our  illustrations  drawn  from  a  class  of  writers,  who,  in  attempting 
to  break  the  force  of  our  historical  position,  more  or  less  ignore  the  facts  of  history  and 
allow  themselves  to  build  hypotheses  upon  unproven  assertions,  we  select  Dr.  Knapjj. 
In  his  Chris.  TheoL,  sec.  154,  he  admits  that  the  Jews  understood  that  the  Messiah 
would  restore  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  etc.  ;  that  in  the  early  churches  "  many 
Christians''  indulged  the  same  hope,  even  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  ;  that  in  the 
sec,  century  the  belief  also  extensively  prevailed  ;  that  "  Origen  in  the  third  century 
was  the  first  who  wrote  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine,"  etc.  He  then  boldly  asserts  : 
"  The  apostles  wholly  abandoned  the  opinion  after  the  ascension  of  Christ,  and  expected 
no  other  coming  than  that  at  the  judgment  of  the  world  ;"  and  again  (Sec.  118)  :  "  The 
apostles  never  indulge  in  such  expectations,  but  take  every  opportunity  to  contradict  them." 
To  this,  briefly,  it  may  be  replied  :  Knapp  is  not  very  candid  in  his  statements  respecting 
the  extent  to  which  our  doctrine  was  held,  so  much  so,  that  the  American  editor  (who 
has  no  sympathy  with  us)  refers  to  it.  (2^  Writers  in  abundance,  such  as  Neander, 
etc.  (who  are  no  Millenarians),  in  direct  opposition  to  Knapp,  frankly  acknowledge  its 
generality,  and  that  the  aj)ostles  had  not  abandoned  the  idea  (imless,  cts  some,  it  be 
Paul),  and  appeal  to  the  views  held  at  Thessalonica,  etc.,  as  confirmatory  of  the  same. 
(3)  If  the  apostles  "  abandoned  the  opinion"  and  took  "  every  opportunity  to  contradict 
them,"  why  do  it  not  decidedly  when  the  whole  question  was  called  up  by  the  Thes- 
salonians,  or  by  the  Council  at  Jerusalem  ?  Why  continue  to  adopt  "Jewish  forms, 
ideas,  and  language?"  (4)  Knapp  has  conceded  that  the  apostles  did  not  know  the 
truth  respecting  the  Kingdom  until  after  the  ascension,  although  they  had  been  previously 
sent  out  to  preach  the  Kingdom  (hence,  they  preached  error,  etc.)  ;  wJiy  then  did  they  not 
apologize  for  their  preaching  an  erroneous  Kingdom,  and  tell  us,  if  Knapp  is  correct, 
how  and  when  they  were  enlightened?  (5)  If  this  process  of  enlightenment  began,  why 
put  it  ofl:  until  after  the  ascension,  when  pjreviously  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  were 
given  to  them,  and  after  Christ's  death  the  Kingdom  was  the  special  topic  of  com- 
munication for  fortj'  days  ?  (6)  Why  endeavor  to  make  the  impression  that  Millenarians 
do  not  link  this  coming  of  the  Messiah  with  the  Judgment  (comjj.  Props.  132  and 
133)  ?  (7)  And  finally,  if  the  apostles  were  so  averse,  as  he  alleges,  to  this  idea  of  the 
Kingdom,  how  does  he  account  for  the  strange  fact,  that  under  their  personal  super- 
vision, and  without  a  single  recorded  rebuke  (they  taking  every  opportunity  to  con- 
tradict it),  the  doctrine  should  nevertheless  so  extensively  prevail  that  in  the  first,  second, 
and  third  century  no  writer,  no  teacher  appears,  until,  according  to  his  own  statement, 
Origen  first  opposes  it?  Surely,  if  Knapp's  statements  are  to  be  received,  the  exact 
reverse  of  all  this  ought  to  have  happened,  viz.  :  his  (Knapp's)  notion  ought  to  have 
prevailed,  and  Chiliasm  brought  in  afterward  as  an  attachment,  etc.  Indeed,  in  a 
multitude  of  works,  especially  designed  for  students  of  Theology,  we  find  far  more 
sweeping  assertions  than  even  this  illustration  affords  ;  and,  if  we  are  to  credit  them, 
the  apostles  clearly  taught  the  most  modernized  ideas  respecting  the  Kingdom,  but,  un- 
fortunately for  their  credibility,  let  them  be  examined,  and  not  one  gives  an  explicit, 
direct  passage  to  support  his  theory — the  proof  alleged  being  either  mere  assertion  or 
invariably  and  solely  inferential.  There  are  also  numerous  works  which  profess  to 
describe  what  the  faith  of  a  Christian  Church,  modelled  after  one  established  by  the 
apostles,  should  be.  But  a  remarkable  feature  in  nearly  all  such  portraitures  is  the 
omission  of  the  prevailing  Millenarian  faith,  as  not  suited  to  a  modern  improved  stand- 
point. 

Ols.  9.  This  early  church  belief  is  to  many  a  tender  subject,  one  that 
they  would  gladly  ignore,  and  hence  it  is  either  silently  passed  by,  or  kept 
as  much  as  possible  in  the  background,  or  else  contemptuously  dismissed. 
It  is  only  the  later  attacks  of  unbelievers — as  e.g.  in  the  delineations  of 
early  Christianity  by  Strauss,  Bauer,  Renan,  etc. — that  has  again  promi- 
nently pressed  the  subject  to  our  notice. 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kin^gdom.  463 

The  power  of  prejudice,  or  the  desire  to  soften  history  in  behalf  of  supposed  truth, 
is  too  palpably  seen  in  this  direction.  Thus  e.g.  in  some  recent  works  (as  in  Killen's 
Old  Caiholic  Church)  where  "  the  doctrine  of  the  great  body  of  believers"  is  referred  to, 
this  doctrine,  once  so  generally  entertained,  is  utterly  ignored  as  if  it  had  never  existed. 
In  Dogmatics,  in  Ecclesiastical  Histories,  in  Theologies,  etc.,  it  is  briefly  noticed  (while 
great  space  can  be  given  to  Gnosticism,  Donatism,  etc.)  and  made  as  if  it  had  no 
influence  in  the  formation  of  the  church — to  fall  into  the  background.  Some,  as  if 
fearful  of  its  recoil  upon  their  own  theor}^  seem  to  be  afraid  to  give  even  a  candid  his- 
torical statement  of  its  generality.  Even  Neander  and  Mosheim,  with  all  their  conces- 
sions and  frank  admissions,  do  not  allow  it  that  j)ervading  prominence  which  it 
certainly  possessed  {according  to  their  own  admissions)  in  the  early  church  to  mould  the 
character  and  lives  of  the  first  Christians.  These  and  other  writers,  in  discussing  the 
First  Centuries,  fall  back  upon  the  views  afterward  engrafted,  and  without  the  slightest 
proof  to  sustain  them,  assume  them  to  have  jDrevailed  from  the  very  beginning.  In 
doing  this  they  necessarily  involve  themselves  in  contradictions,  which  we  expose  under 
various  Propositions.  Some  writers,  again,  when  forced  to  make  the  admissions, 
endeavor  to  weaken  their  force  by,  as  we  have  noticed,  charging  the  Fathers  as  ignorant 
and  superstitious  (but  excellent  men  outside  of  the  Millenarian  doctrine).  A  thousand 
pens  have  detracted  these  early  advocates  by  disparaging  them  by  way  of  contrast  with 
succeeding  Fathers,  telling  us  that  the  former  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  an 
Origen,  Augustine,  Jerome,  etc.  (forgetting  Matt.  11  :  25-30,  and  that  later  Fathers, 
with  all  their  ability  and  learning,  introduced  far  greater  errors  into  the  church).  The 
candid,  reflecting  student  will  in  all  this  notice  (1)  that  the  repressing,  withholding,  or 
softening  down  of  facts  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  real  truth  of  doctrine  ;  (2) 
that  the  weakness,  and  even  credulity,  of  men  decides  nothing  respecting  doctrine 
which  finds  its  basis  in  the  Scriptures  ;  (3)  that  if  the  personal  qualifications  of  men  are 
to  determine  the  truthfulness  of  Scriptural  doctrine,  then  the  fancy,  extravagance,  and 
imprudence,  more  or  less  associated  with  every  doctrine  of  the  Bible  by  men,  would 
leave  but  little  for  our  acceptance. 

Obf^.  10.  In  our  iDvestigation  of  so  important  a  doctrine  as  that  of  the 
Kingdom,  we  should  be  guarded,  seeing  that  the  apostle  tells  us  that  "  the 
mystery  of  iniquity"  began  to  work  in  his  day,  and  that  it  would  ulti- 
mately burst  forth  with  increased  and  growing  power.  The  leaven  then 
working  would  extend  and  manifest  itself  vi  perverted  doctrine — doctrine 
antagonistic  to  that  once  proclaimed  and  believed.  That  form  of  doctrine 
of  a  later  (jrowtli  which  supersedes  and  takes  precedence  of  the  earlier  form, 
should  undoubtedly  he  more  suhject  to  the  suspicion  of  being  a  perversion 
than  the  primitive  view.  Taking  this  position,  then  tJie  Alexandricni  doc- 
trine of  the  Kingdom,  so  hostile  to  the  older  form,  is,  to  the  say  the  least, 
open  to  grave  suspicion,  and  ought  not  to  be  received  without  careful  exam- 
ination and  decided 2)roof  m  its  behalf. 

01)s.  11.  Many  persons  are  prejudiced  against  our  doctrine  and  its  recep- 
tion by  the  early  church,  on  the  ground  that  its  first  Christian  patrons 
were  "  Jews"  or  inclined  to  "  Judaism."  This  has  already  been  answered, 
and  reference  is  made  to  it  in  this  place  in  order  that  the  reader  may 
notice  this  peculiarity  perpetuated  from  the  Apostles  down  through  the 
Apostolic  Fathers  and  their  successors  who  were  Chiliasts.  While  all  these 
held  that  their  doctrine  was  derived  irom.Je?vish  Scriptures,  Jewish  Proph- 
ets, and  a  Jeioish  Covenant,  corresponding  with  the  faith  of  pious  Jews, 
yet  they  at  the  same  time  resisted  with  all  their  ability  tJie  errors  which 
had  been  engrafted  on  Judaism  by  Pharisaism,  Sadduceeism,  and  Hellen- 
ism (as  well  as  by  Essenism  and  Samaritanism).  Now  many,  influenced 
by  the  charge  of  "  Judaism"  and  "Jewish,"  confound  this  impure  his- 
torical Judaism  (which  ought  rather  to  be  called  after  its  parentage, 
Pharisaism,  etc.)  with  p2{re  Judaism^  i.e.,  that  Judaism  which  was  not 


464  THE  THEOCRATIC    KIISTGDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

abrogated  by  the  change  of  dispensation.  They  forget  that  Millenarians 
were  tlie  very  first  who  opposed,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Jewish  spirit  of  self- 
righteousness,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  tlie  Jewish  libertinism,  as  antago- 
nistic to  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  Herein  consists  the  injustice  of  that 
spirit  of  criticism  which  refuses,  persistently,  to  distinguish  between 
these  Primitive  believers  and  their  opposers,  but  classes  them  together. 
Dorner  {Person  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  409)  is  more  discriminative  and  just 
when  he  derives  Ohiliasm  from  the  Scriptures  and  in  opposition  to  ritual- 
istic Judaism  says,  "  it  may  in  part  be  more  justly  regarded  as  a  polemic 
against  Judaism  on  the  part  of  Christianity." 

Even  the  poor  thieves  on  the  cross  cannot  escape  the  censure  of  some,  being  de- 
nounced as  "  Chiliastic  enthusiasts,"  just  as  if  persons  guilty  of  vice  or  crime  could  not 
also  entertain  jDroper  views  of  truth.  It  is  trae  that  Lange  {Com.  p.  525)  calls  the  one 
"a  noble  Chiliast  ;"  and  the  reception  and  gracious  promise  given  by  Jesus  to  this 
Chiliast  should  put  to  shame  the  epithets,  etc.,  that  some  believers  are  pleased  to  be- 
stow upon  us  so  liberally.  We  commend  the  learning  and  candor  of  Whitby  (the  leader 
of  our  oj)ponents)  in  his  account  of  the  faith  of  the  early  Fathers  {Treaiise  on  Tradi- 
tion, see  it  quoted  in  detail,  Proph.  Times,  vol,  6,  pi3.  83-86),  acknowledging  its  univer- 
sality by  naming  the  Fathers  ;  its  orthodoxy ;  its  being  professedly  derived  from  Christ 
and  the  apostles  ;  its  embracing  certain  distinctive  features  which  the  named  Fathers 
teach;  its  being  founded  on  the  sayings  of  the  prophets,  our  Lord,  and  the  apostles  ;  its 
being  not  merely  asserted  as  "  a  probable  opinion,  but  as  a  thing  which  they  were  cer- 
tainly assured  of"  (quoting  Justin  and  Irenseus  as  declaring  "  We  know,''  etc.,  and  that 
it  was  ^^  most  manifestly''  so  "  toithout  controversy")  ;  and  then  its  being  opposed  to  all 
kinds  of  heresy  as  evidenced  by  its  writings,  and  against  ultra  Judaism  as  seen  e.g.  in 
Justin  Martyr's  reply  to  Trypho.  It  is  true  that  he  employs  this  line  of  reasoning,  in 
detail,  against  the  tradition  of  Rome— just  as  Chillingworth— but  it  is  none  the  less  true, 
and  none  the  less  forcible  against  his  own  "  ?ic?o  hypothesis."  We  append  this  intended 
bitter  but  delectable  morsel  (quoted  by  the  Luth.  Observer,  Dec.  27th,  1878)  from  the  pen 
of  Dr.  Hall,  of  New  York,  which  gives  our  doctrine  a  Jewish  origin  :  "  This  (Pre-Mill.) 
alleged  scheme  of  interijretation  -if  anything  so  loose,  variable,  and  undefined  can  be 
called  a  '  scheme  ' — is  very  old,  older  than  the  '  Fifth-Monarchy  '  idea,  older  than  Chiliasm  (!). 
It  has  its  earliest  exponent  in  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  (Matt.  20  :  20-23).  She 
came  to  the  Messiah,  worshipping  Him,  and  desired  a  certain  thing  of  Him.  '  Grant 
that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  thy  left,  in 
thy  Kingdom.'  She  reflected  the  spirit  of  her  countrymen,  who  adhered  to  Jesus  at  that 
time.  Their  hope  was  of  a  material,  secular,  powerful  kingdom,  theocratic  withal — like 
Solomon's— with  themselves  as  its  '  nobility  and  gentry.'  Like  many  sincere  and  hon- 
est persons,  she  was,  at  that  stage  of  her  intellectual  and  spiritual  life,  unable  to  com- 
prehend  the  true  state  of  the  case,  and  the  Great  Teacher  did  not  enter  into  explana- 
tions. He  taught  as  His  hearers  were  '  able  to  bear  it.'  The  study  of  His  answer  ought 
to  be  profitable  to  Pre-Millenarians.  The  question  is  obviously  in  the  Jewish  sense.  But 
the  answer  is  as  obviously  in  quite  a  different  sense."  We  confess  that  we,  as  a  Pre- 
Mill.,  have  studied  this  answer  with  "  profit,'"  for  we  find  that  the  mother  was  a  Chiliast— 
of  our  faith — and  that  the  Saviour  confirmed  her  in  her  Chiliasm  by  not  denying  that  such 
places  were  in  store  for  some  accounted  worthy  of  them,  but  by  affirming  that  they  would 
be  given  by  the  Father  at  the  proper  time  to  the  proper  persons.  We  utterly  fail  to  see 
Hall's  "  obviously  different  seiise,"  seeing  that  Jesus  left  her  re-established  by  His  corrobo- 
rative answer  in  her  idea  of  the  Messia,nic  Kingdom.  (Comp.  Props.  154  aiid  156.)  But 
while  Chiliasm  was  thus  in  harmony  with  Jewish  views,  based  on  the  covenants  and  proph- 
ecies, it  was  bitterly  and  unrelentingly  hostile  to  mere  Pharisaism,  or  the  ritualistic 
Judaism.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  Chiliastic  treatises  written  against  the  Jews.  This  is 
so  plain,  that  Robertson  {C/i.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  116)  says  :  "  Christian  Chiliasm  showed  no 
favor  to  the  fleshly  Israel,  nor  even  to  the  holy  city."  This  e.g.  is  seen  in  their  teach- 
ing the  engrafting  of  Gentiles  without  circumcision,  the  continued  punishment  of  the 
nation  for  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  the  existing  times  of  the  Gentiles,  etc. 

Obs.  12.  The  student,  who  is  really  desirous  to  see  how  extensively  our 
doctrine  was  held,  will  consider  these   points  of  evidence  adduced.      (1) 


Prop.  72.]  the  theocratic  kit^gdom.  465 

How  universally  the  Jews  held  to  our  doctrine,  e.g.  Prop.  20  ;  (2)  How 
this  was  confirmed  by  the  Proiohecies,  e.g.  Props.  21,  33,  35,  51  ;  (3)  how 
this  belief  grew  out  of  the  covenants,  e.g.  Props.  46,  47,  48,  49,  52  ;  (4) 
that  the  preaching  of  John  re-established  the  faith  in  many,  e.g. Props.  38, 
39,  40  ;  (5)  that  the  preaching  of  the  disciples  was  calculated  to  increase 
the  belief,  as  e.g.  Props.  43,  54,  55,  etc.  ;  (6)  that  no  controversy  was 
raised  on  the  subject,  e.g.  Prop.  44  ;  (7)  that  the  preaching  of  Jesus  con- 
firmed the  faith  in  His  disciples  and  hearers,  as  e.g.  Props.  42,  43,  44,  54, 
55,  57,  58,  etc. ;  (8)  how  the  continued  faith  in  the  same  was  preserved 
and  perpetuated  by  the  postponement  taught,  e.g.  Props.  57  to  C8  ;  (9) 
that  the  death  of  Jesus  did  not  remove  the  belief,  Prop.  70  ;  (10)  how 
the  preaching  and  language  of  the  apostles  was  calculated  to  enforce  the 
belief,  e.g.  Props.  71,  72,  73.  (Thus  far  there  is  a  connected  chain,  which 
indicates  how  generally  our  doctrine  must  have  been  entertained  ;  but  the 
proof  is  far  from  being  exhausted.  Candor  requires  the  consideration  of 
what  follows.  (11)  That  the  doctrine  was  received  through  the  apostles 
shown  more  clearly  under  Props.  73,  in  no  controversy  springing  up  con- 
cerning it ;  under  Prop.  74  in  the  belief  of  a  speedy  Advent ;  under  Prop. 
75  in  its  perpetuation,  and  Prop.  76,  gradual  change. 

Even  this  is  only  part  of  the  proof,  as  much  more  will  be  found  under  succeeding 
Propositions,  in  quotations  from  the  ancients  and  moderns,  in  doctrinal  statements, 
etc.  The  reader  will  also  notice  that  the  concessions  in  favor  of  the  extent  of  our  view 
in  the  Primitive  Church,  are  drawn  chiefly,  and  in  many  instances  exclusively,  from  able 
writers  who  are  Anti-Chiliastic  and  unfriendly  to  our  doctrine.  The  testimony  is  there- 
fore the  more  impartial  and  deserving  of  attention.  Our  desire  in  all  this  is  to  elicit  the 
truth,  seeing  that  truth  is  useful— leading  to  other  truth,  avoiding  bigotry,  giving 
motives  for  action,  forming  character,  commending  us  to  God  and  man,  and  is  eternal, 
while  error  is  misleading  and  injurious.  But  may  we  not  ask  the  reader  to  consider, 
ichy  it  is  that  so  many  men  hate  and  detest  our  doctrine  so  cordially— heaping  upon  it  the 
choicest  of  epithets  expressive  of  its  anti  Christian  nature— when  their  oicn  upon  this  sub- 
ject is  ?io^  once  mentioned  in  the  Primitive  Church  ;  when  their  own  is  not  orthodox,  but  even 
falls  under  the  general  condemnation  which  embraces  all  views  in  antagonism.  Surely  the 
historical  superiority  of  our  doctrine  in  being  thus  taught  and  defended  in  and  by  the 
Church  should  lead  those  great  friends  of  "  Orthodoxy, "  who  so  readily  raise  the  cry  of 
"  heresy,"  etc.,  to  be  more  modest  in  their  tone  and  mild  in  their  manner.  We,  there- 
fore, repeat,  quoting  Stackhouse  {Compl.  Body  of  Divinity)  :  "It  cannot  be  denied,  in- 
deed, but  that  this  doctrine  (Chiliasm)  has  its  antiquity,  and  was  once  the  general  opinion  of 
all  07-thodox  Christians/'  We  may,  therefore,  appropriately  repeat,  what  Dorner  {The 
Person  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  415)  declares  :  "  The  primitive  Chiliasm  represented  a  noble 
and  precious  principle,  and  we  may  fairly  demand  for  it  a  juster  treatment  in  the  future." 

Ohs.  13.  We  are  abundantly  authorized,  by  the  amount  of  Scriptural 
and  historical  evidence  adduced,  to  most  earnestly  protest  against  the  con- 
tinued uncandid  and  unscholarly  attempts  to  fasten  upon  our  doctrine  an 
origin  opposecl  to  the  plainest  historical  fact,  and  the  numerous  conces- 
sions of  the  most  learned  of  our  opponents. 

Thus  in  religious  newspapers,  etc.,  it  is  again  and  again  asserted  that  our  doctrine 
is  "heresy,"  that  it  originated  with  Papias,  or  with  Cerinthus,  or  "  a  grovelling  Judaism" 
(one  writer  not  content  with  ascribing  one  origin,  in  the  course  of  his  article  gives  all 
three,  and  denounces  it  as  "  heretical ").  Books  of  reference  take  up  these  false  state- 
ments, and  publish  them  as  historical  facts.  The  favorite  charge,  in  order  to  make  our 
doctrine  unpalatable,  is,  that  it  is  derived  from  Cerinthus  ;  so  e.g.  Gerhard  (quoted 
with  evident  relish  by  Brown)  says  :  "  The  first  author  of  the  Chiliastic  doctrine  in  the 
Church  of  the  New  Test,  seems  to  have  been  Cerinthus,  the  pestilent  heretic."  (With 
this  compare  the  remarks  of  Neander,  etc.,  under  Obs.  3,  note.)  We  allow  an  opponent 
to  our  doctrine  to  testify  as  follows  :  Mosheim  {His.  Com.  First  Th.  Cents.,  vol.  2,  p.  245, 


466  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS^GDOM.  [PrOP.  72. 

etc.)  says  :  "  Among  the  ancients  and  the  moderns,  many  have  supposed  that  Cerinthus 
first  propagated  this  error  (the  doctrine  of  a  future  reign  of  Christ  on  earth).  Few,  how- 
ever, will  readily  agree  with  them,  if  they  consider  that  this  sentiment  was  embraced  by 
many — e.g.  Irenteus,  Tertullian,  and  others— who  abhorred  Cerinlhus  and  accounted  him 
a  pest  to  Christianity.  Nor  do  I  think  that  Eusebius  is  to  be  trusted  when  he  tells  that 
the  expectation  of  a  Millennium  flowed  down  to  the  subsequent  doctors  from  Papias,  a 
bishop  of  Jerusalem  in  the  second  century.  For,  as  Papias  was  not  the  first  excogitor  of 
the  opinion,  but  received  it  from  others,  as  Eusebius  himself  concedes,  it  is  clear  that 
at  least  some  Christians  before  Papias  had  embraced  this  opinion.  And  Irenjeus  cites 
Papias,  not  as  being  the  author  of  this  oj^inion,  but  as  bearing  testimony  to  it.  Pres- 
sense  (quoted  Prop.  74,  Obs.  3,  note)  makes  our  doctrine  to  have  originated  in  the  Thes- 
salonian  church,  which  adopted  "  Judaistic  elements.'"  Some  few  say  that  Chiliasm  arose 
from  the  Apocryphal  Apocalypses,  but  this  is  discarded  by  every  critic  of  eminence,  who 
make  these  to  have  originated  just  as  the  Apocryphal  Gospels,  viz.  :  perversions  of  pre- 
vious existing  doctrine,  to  accommoddte  the  imaginary  theory  of  the  writers.  Prof. 
Briggs  refers  to  Papias,  and  then  says  of  him  :  "  Who  can  fail  to  give  their  assent  to 
Schiirer's  (the  very  highest  authority  on  this  subject)  judgment,  '  The  dreams  of  Papias  re- 
specting the  Millennial  Kingdom  were  derived  from  the  Aj)ocalypse  of  Baruch.'  "  In  an- 
swer to  the  question,  "  Who  can  fail  to  give  their  assent  V"  the  reader  will  observe  our 
authorities  derived  from  opponents,  etc.,  as  quoted,  and  contrast  them  with  the  bitterly 
prejudiced  statement  of  a  "heresy-hunter."  For  to  indicate  the  "  animus"  of  Prof. 
Briggs's  series  of  articles  (signed  "  Westminster"  in  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879),  we  have  only 
to  say  that,  not  satisfied  with  this  derivation  of  the  doctrine,  he  gives  us  this  choice  his- 
torical information  and  application  :  "  Those  men  of  Corinth  and  Galatia,  who  claimed 
superior  orthodoxy  to  the  apostle  Paul,  are  the  historical  progenitors  of  Cerinthus  and 
Papias,  and  their  followers  in  all  ages,  who  propose,  with  the  men  of  the  late  Confer- 
ence" (that  met  in  Dr.  Tyng's  church  in  N.  York  and  included  eminent  representatives 
of  the  various  Protestant  churches,  and  among  them  over  forty  able  and  devoted  men  of 
his  own  church,  the  Presbyterian)  "  to  bring  back  the  Church  to  what  they  claim  to  be 
'  vital  doctrine.'  "  (But  this  we  must  expect  from  a  man  who  threatens  his  brethren  in 
the  ministiy  with  eccles.  trial  and  censure— as  an  argument  (!).  A  writer  in  the  N.  Y. 
Evangelist,  Dec,  1879,  thinks  that  "trials  of  heresy  may  arise  in  our  church  (Presbyte- 
rian) over  the  doctrines  of  the  Millenarians. "  The  Herald  and  Presbyter,  qnoting  this, 
significantly^  remarks  :  "  We  doubt  it.  Heresy-hunters  are  not  numerous  among  us,  and 
they  are  chiefly  of  the  old  school.  A  good  proportion  of  them,  moreover,  are  Millenarians. 
In  all  xDrobability  we  shall  escape  the  danger.") 

Obs.  14.  Let  the  careful  reader  answer  the  following  question,  and  he 
will  see  how  eminently  consistent  with  fact  is  our  doctrinal  position. 
How  could  John,  under  Divine  guidance,  well  knowing  the  Jewish  yiews 
that  were  current  (which  our  opponents  fully  admit  as  we  have  shown), 
pen  down  tlie  portraiture  of  a  Messianic  reign  (Rev.  20  : 1-6  and  11  :  15- 
18),  which  in  its  plain  grammatical  sense  coi^resjjonds  so  accurately  with 
the  prevailing  Jewish  opinions,  unless  such  a  sense  contains  the  truth  ? 
God  would  not,  could  not,  take  the  dearest  cherished  Messianic  hopes  and 
parade  them  in  such  an  expressed  sense  to  deceive  believers,  when  He  in- 
tended a  different  sense  to  be  placed  upon  the  words.  God  does  not 
undertake  that  which,  if  perpetrated  by  a  man,  we  would  unhesitatingly 
denounce  as  dishonest,  disreputable,  and  cruel.  (Compare  Prop.  75,  Obs. 
5,  and  note.) 


PeOP.  73.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KII^GDOM.  467 


Propositioi^  73.     Tlie  doctrine  of  the  KingdoTn  preaclied  hy  the 
Apostles  and  Elders^  raised  up  no  controversy  toith  the  Jeivs, 

Neither  in  the  New  Test,  nor  in  any  of  the  Patristic  writings,  do 
we  find  the  least  hint  given  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ex- 
cited any  controversy  with  the  Jews  ;  which  it  undoubtedly  would 
have  done  if  antagonistic  to  the  Jewish  view.  This  is  strong, 
corroborative  evidence  that  the  doctrine  was  in  accordance  with 
the  Jewish  Messianic  exj)ectations.  For,  with  the  Jewish  doc- 
trine, drawn  from  tlie  Damdic  covenant  and  prophecies  of  a 
restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  prevailing,  it  would  have 
been  impossible  to  engraft  the  later  and  modern  views  without 
exciting  bitter  and  unrelenting  hostility. 

No  controversy  arose  Between  the  Jews  and  the  disciples  before  the  ascension  of  Jesus 
(see  Prop.  44),  and  this  continued  afhr  the  ascension,  for  the  only  subjects  in  contro- 
versy pertained  to  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  (i.e.  whether  Jesus  was  "  the  Christ,")  the 
call  of  the  Gentiles,  the  Mosaic  law,  the  sufficiency  of  repentance  and  faith  in  Jesus,  etc. 
Indeed,  as  our  argument  shows  (comp.  Props.  69,  70,  71),  the  same  gospel  of  the  King- 
dom was  i)reached  after  the  death  and  ascension  of  Jesus  that  was  j)roclaimed  before. 
And  to  this  very  knowledge  of  the  j)revious  proclamation,  appeal  is  made  as  e.g.  Acts 
10  :  36,  37,  thus  indicating  in  the  strongest  manner  that  no  change  —as  now  advocated 
by  the  multitude — was  inaugurated. 

Ohs.  1.  Jews,  indoctrinated  into  the  covenants,  were  the  first  converts, 
and,  with  their  faith,  it  would  have  been  utterly  impracticable  to  have  in- 
fluenced them  to  receive  Jesus  as  **  the  Messiah,''  unless  it  was  understood 
that  these  covenants  were  at  some  time  in  the  future  to  le  realized  through 
Him.  If  the  after-adopted  Alexandrian  and  modern  notion  of  the  King- 
dom is  the  correct  one,  then,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  before  such 
Jews  could  be  moved,  it  must  have  been  shown  that  the  covenants  were  to 
be  spiritualized,  and  that  a  Kingdom  vei-y  different  from  that  contained  in 
tlie  grammatical  sense  of  the  covenant  was  intended.  But  where,  excepting 
in  the  later  writings  of  Origen,  etc.,  have  we  any  such  declarations?  The 
reason  for  all  this  can  only  be  found  in  the  original  Christian  view  of  the 
Kingdom  corresponding,  so  far  as  the  covenanted  Messiah's  Kingdom  is 
concerned,  with  the  Jewish  expectations. 

Ol)s.  2.  Consider  (1)  how  large  numbers  of  the  Jews  were  converted  to 
Christianity,  accepting  of  Jesus  as  "  the  Messiah,"  because  of  the  fact 
that  they  were  led  to  believe  {a)  that  at  the  Sec.  Advent  the  glorious  pre- 
dicted Messianic  Kingdom  would  be  established,  and  (b)  that  the  life  and 
death  of  Jesus  (His  resurrection  and  exaltation  included),  evinced  Him 
'iX,^  lyre-eminently  qualified  to  be  "  the  Messiah"  and  as  possessing  the  requi- 
site po^ver  to  fulfil  the  covenant  promises.  (2)  How,  as  the  early  doctrine 
became  obscured,  substituted,  and  finally  driven  from  the  field,  the  conver- 


468  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  73. 

sions  of  the  Jews  became  rarer  and  almost  entirely  ceased,  excepting  such 
as  were  produced  under  compulsion.  How  else  account  for  so  great  a 
change,  unless  it  be  in  the  gradual  engrafting  of  other  than  Jewish  ideas  to 
the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  making  the  Messiah  less  and  less  in  correspond- 
ence with  the  Messiah  of  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures  ? 

Abbott  (Freedom  and  Fellowship  in  Relig.,  p.  237),  pertinently  asks  :  "  Was  it  an  acci- 
dent that  the  new  faith  took  its  name,  not  from  the  individual  Jesus,  but  from  His  roj'ai 
office?"  This  leads  Abbott,  by  tracing  back  the  name,  to  declare  that  "  Christianity  is 
developed  Judaism."  We  only  now  say,  that  this  selection  of  name  would  scarcely  have 
been  made,  unless  the  believers  were  Millenarians,  thus  distinctively  retaining  in  the 
very  name  the  continued  S e^X'sh.  expectations  which  are  summed  up  in  "  the  Christ."  It  was 
the  very  name  of  "  Messiah,"  retaining  in  force  its  original  meaning,  that  was  attractive 
and  inviting  to  Jews.  Thus  e.g.  with  the  Messiahship,  as  an  integral  pavt  of  its  official 
meaning,  was  attached  the  restoration  of  the  identical  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  overtlirown. 
Such  restoration  as  the  prophets  unitedly  predicted,  with  the  reigu  following,  consti- 
tuted the  Messiah.  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever,  that  the  modernized  doctrinal  ap- 
plication of  the  name,  now  so  prevalent,  was  at  this  period  utterly  unknown, — at  least, 
no  evidence  exists  in  any  writing  of  its  having  been  entertained  by  any  one  in  the  form 
now  usually  presented  by  divines  (comp.  Prop.  205). 

Obs.  3.  The  early  Jews,  instead  of  accusing  Christians  of  rejecting  such 
a  Kingdom,  charged  the  primitive  believers  with  entertaining  such  a  view, 
and  souglit  to  bring  them,  on  account  of  the  same,  into  difficulties  with 
the  Roman  Emperors.  The  same  accusation  which  malignancy  urged  so 
fatally  against  Jesus  before  Pilate,  was  repeated  against  His  followers  on 
several  occasions.     This  indicates  the  kind  of  belief  that  was  held. 

Thus  (Eusebius,  Feci.  His.,  B,  3,  ch.  19)  by  a  perversion  (viz.  :  in  its  imminency. 
etc.)  of  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  would,  at  some  future  time,  restore  the  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom,  and  obtain  world-wide  dominion,  the  fears  of  Domitian  were  excited  lest 
he  lose  (so  Hegesi^Dpus)  his  Empire  (the  same  fear  that  operated  in  the  mind  of 
Herod).  The  Emperor,  enraged  at  the  belief  that  a  descendant  of  David's  would  appear 
and  set  up  a  universal  kingdom  (Mosheim,  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  56,  Gibbon's  Decl.  and 
Fall,  vol.  2,  ch.  16),  before  which,  of  course,  the  Roman  would  have  to  submit,  ordered 
all  the  posterity  of  David  to  be  sought  out.  They  were  brought  from  Palestine  (Euse- 
bius), but  as  they  disclaimed  any  efforts  of  their  own  to  effect  this,  exhibited  faith  only  in 
a  dead  and  buried  kinsman,  were  themselves  poor,  expected  the  Kingdom  through  God's 
power,  etc.,  Domitian  concluded  that  he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  them,  and  dismissed 
them  with  contempt.  The  belief,  however,  led  him  (and  no  doubt  others)  to  look  coldly 
on  Christians  and  to  persecute  them.  This  incident,  if  a  true  account,  indicates:  (1) 
the  belief  of  Christians  concerning  the  Kingdom  ;  (2)  that  they  attribiated  its  establish- 
ment to  Jesus  at  His  coming  again  ;  (3)  that,  being  Theocratic,  it  was  to  be  set  up  by  His 
power,  in  a  supernatural  manner  ;— all  of  which,  as  it  now  does  to  multitudes,  appeared 
highly  improbable  to  the  Emperor.  Another  instance  is  given  thus  by  Pressense  {Early 
Years  of  Chris.,  p.  157),  when  referring  to  the  troubles  at  Thessalonica  :  "  Wresting  the 
words  that  he  (Paul)  had  spoken  with  reference  to  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  His  speedy 
Coming  to  reign,  (Acts  17  :  7),  they  accused  Him  before  the  Praetor  of  conspiring  against 
Ccesar.''  Here  we  have  (1)  the  Jews  endeavoring  to  take  advantage  of  the  received  doc- 
trine of  Christ's  coming  Kingdom  ;  (2)  contrasting  it  as  something  that  would  be  hostile 
to  the  Roman  Power  ;  (3)  this  could  only  be  done  by  showing  that  they  (the  Christians) 
held  to  a  fulfilment  of  the  Davidic  Covenant  through  the  intervention  and  power  of  a  Coming 
Jesus  ;  (4)  such  a  divine  interference,  connected  with  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  etc., 
was  regarded  by  those  in  authority  as  a  mere  idle  superstition.  Let  it  be  noticed,  that 
in  none  of  the  answers  given  before  Roman  authorities,  is  the  covenanted  idea  of  the 
Kingdom  ignored  and  the  modern  notion  substituted  by  way  of  defence,  Milman  {His. 
of  the  Jews,  p.  423,  vol.  2)  remarks  :  "  The  Christian  Hegesippus  relates  that  Vespasian 
commanded  strict  search  to  be  made  for  all  who  claimed  descent  from  the  House  of 
David,  in  order  to  cut  off,  if  possible,  all  hopes  of  the  restoration  of  the  royal  house,  or 
of  the  Messiah,  the  confidence  in  whose  speedy  coming  still  burned  with  feverish  ex- 
citement in  the  hearts  of  all  faithful  Israelites.     This  barbarous  inquisition  was  con- 


Prop.  73.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  469 

tinued  in  the  reign  of  Domitian,"  etc.  Milman  does  not  sufficiently  discriminate  that 
these  believers  were  Jewish  Christians,  as  their  replies  evidenced.  He  correctly  says 
(vol.  2,  p.  425),  "  It  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  its  descent  from  Judaism,  of  which 
Christianity  was  long  considered  a  modification,  tended  to  increase  tlie  hostility  against 
the  unoffending  Christians,  which  their  rapid  progress  had  excited."  Salvador,  a  Jew 
(quoted  by  Milman,  same  page),  tells  ns  :  "  Jews  and  Christians  were  still,  to  a  certain 
extent,  confounded  in  the  po^^ular  mind  ;  and  fear,  political  jealousy,  and  hatred  do  not 
sharpen  the  powers  of  just  discrimination."  How  could  this  be  so  unless  some  things 
were  held  m  common,  as  e.g.  the  covenants,  prophecies,  the  idea  of  a  Messiah  and  King- 
dom, etc. 

It  is  also  noticeable  that  Chiliasts  were  persecuted  when  they  rejected  the  claims  of 
pretended  Messiahs  among  the  Jews.  Thus  e.g.  when  Barchocheba  claimed  to  be  the 
promised  Messiah  (a.d.  136),  and  raised  the  extensive  revolt  against  the  Romans,  it  is 
said  that  he  endeavored  to  persuade  the  Christians  —when  Chiliasm  abounded — to  join 
him.  But  they,  deej)ly  imbued  with  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  the  Messiahship,  with  the 
past  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  with  the  predictions  relating  to  the  manner  of  establishing 
the  Kingdom  (as  e.g.  to  be  preceded  by  a  resurrection  of  saints,  etc.),  refused  to  identify 
themselves  with  such  a  movement,  and  were,  in  consequence,  cruelly  persecuted  by  him. 

Obs.  4.  This,  again,  is  sustained  by  the  apostles'  argumentation  with  the 
Jews.  Aside  from  the  usage  of  Jewish  phraseology,  without  explaining  it 
as  moderns  do  ;  apart  from  the  action  of  the  apostles  in  Council  (Acts  15), 
which  cannot  be  made  to  accord  with  the  later  notions  of  the  Kingdom  ; 
■ — it  is  found  that  the  apostles  never  were  compelled  to  combat  the  Jewish 
idea  of  the  Messiah,  or  of  the  Kingdom.  We  have  a  noted  instance  of  this 
in  Paul,  who  disputed  with  the  Jews  (e.g.  Acts  28  :  17-29),  ''  ex])ounded 
and  testified  tlie  Kingdom,  of  God,  persiiading  them  concerning  Jesus,  lotli 
out  of  tlie  la'w  of  Moses  and  out  of  tlie  proj^liets.'^  He  speaks  of  "  the  hope 
of  Israel,''^  '■^ j) reaching  the  Kingdom  of  God,'^  and  never  once  intimates 
that  the  Jews  were  mistaken  in  their  views  of  the  Kingdom  as  derived  from 
the  Covenant.  The  dispute  (as  we  find  e.g.  Acts  26  : 1-23)  was  not  con- 
cerning the  Kingdom,  but  respected  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,^ ^  whether  He 
indeed  be  the  Messiah. 

This  is  so  fully  admitted  by  numerous  writers  that,  on  the  ground  of  a  future  change 
being  intended  in  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  the  charge  of  deception  and  perversion  is 
urged  against  Paul  by  some  (as  e.g.  the  Duke  of  Somerset),  while  others  gravely  inform 
us  that  the  Jews,  owing  to  prejudice,  etc.,  were  unprepared  for  the  truth,  and  hence  Paul 
accommodated  himself  to  their  weakness.  But  all  this  lowers  apostolic  integrity  and 
authority.  The  simple  facts  are  as  presented  in  the  record  :  the  Kingdom  in  the  Jewish 
mind  is  the  great  object  of  hope,  and  therefore,  in  preaching  to  Jews  it  must  be  made 
prominent ;  this  Paul  does  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  is  covenanted  and  pre- 
dicted, and  then  goes  on  to  show  that  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  even  the  Crucified  One,  is  the 
Messiah  to  establish  the  covenanted  Kingdom  at  His  Sec.  Coming.  In  evidence  of  this, 
appeal  must  necessarily  be  made  to  the  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  Jesus, 
the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  the  Second  Advent,  the  prophecies  illustrative  of 
these  things,  the  pre-eminent  qualifications  of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  etc.  For,  if  it  can  be 
shown  that  Jesus  is  tridy  ''the  Messiah,''  then  the  rest  follows  as  a  natural  result — the  Jew 
sees  how  the  Kingdom  can,  and  will,  come,  the  covenant  itself  being  renewed  and  con- 
firmed by  His  death  and  resurrection. 


470  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIIS^GDOM.  [PllOP.  74. 


Pkopositiois-  74.  Tlie  helief  in  the  speedy  Advent  of  Christy  en- 
tertained hotli  hy  the  A2)ostles  and  the  churches  under  tlieni^  in- 
dicates what  Kingdom  was  believed  in  and  taught  hy  the  first 
Christians. 

If  ifc  can  be  sliown  tliat  the  apostles  and  their  converts  believed 
in  a  speedy  Advent,  that  they  looked  for  it  near  at  hand,  as  im- 
mediate and  impending  sooner  or  later,  then  it  folloics  that  the 
Alexandrian  modern  view  of  the  Kingdom  could  not  have  been 
entertained  by  them.  They  then,  of  necessity,  owing  to  the  short- 
ness of  time  intervening,  must  have  linked  the  Kingdom  they 
proclaimed  with  the  Sec.  Advent  (e.g.  2  Tim.  4  :  1,  etc.). 

Let  the  student  carefully  consider  this  Prop,  and  following  Obs.  and  notes,  and  he 
will  find  it  logically  proving  that  the  Church-Kingdom  view,  and  all  other  theories  op- 
Ijosed  to  the  Primitive  one  advocated  by  us,  are  radically  wrong  and  unscriptural. 
Otherwise  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion,  that  inspired  men,  the  founders  of  the  Ch. 
Church,  were  in  gross  error,  and  taught  things  irreconcilable  with  the  idea  of  their  mis- 
sion and  the  perpetuity  of  their  work  ;  or  that,  in  other  words,  directed  by  the  Spirit 
and  specially  consecrated  to  proclaim  the  Kingdom  of  God,  they  still  toially  failed  to 
appreciate  the  labor  designed  for  them.  By  our  line  of  argument,  the  intelligence,  in- 
tegrity, and  authority  of  the  apostles  are  fully  sustained  ;  by  our  opponents'  concessions 
and  abject  apologies  in  their  behalf,  they  are  in  these  particulars  correspondingly 
degraded.  Infidelity  looks  on  and  laughs— laughs  at  our  credulity,  but  still  more  loudly 
laughs  at  the  straits  and  subterfuges  resorted  to  by  our  opponents  to  save  the  credibility 
and  inspired  ascendency  of  the  apostles.  Every  writer  of  ability  and  learning— what- 
ever theory  he  may  adopt  respecting  the  Kingdom — acknowledges  the  apostolic  and  early 
belief  in  a  speedy  Sec.  Advent.  We  append  a  few  :  Eothe  {Dogmatic,  2  P.  j).  58)  re- 
marks :  "  The  apostles  unanimously  expected  the  return  of  Christ,  to  enter  upon  this  King- 
dom (Chiliastic)  on  earth."  Donaldson  (editor  of  Ante-?^icene  Library),  in  his  His.  Lh. 
Doc.  and  Lit.,  vol.  2,  p.  261,  declares,  respecting  the  Pre-Mill.  doctrine  advocated  by  Jus- 
tin :  "  The  opinion  just  adduced  is  one  in  which  the  whole  CJmrch  shared.  All  expected 
Christ  to  appear  on  earth,  to  raise  His  saints,  to  grant  them  the  possession  of  the  earth, 
and  to  bless  them  with  uninterrupted  happiness."  Schaff  {His.  Apos.  vhurch,  p.  275) 
speaks  of  "  the  expectation  of  the  speedy  return  q/  Christ  in  glory,  as  "  probably  one  of  Paul's 
favorite  themes  ;  that  he  exhorts  the  Thessalonians  "to  be  always  ready  to  meet  the 
Lord,  who  shall  come  unexpectedly,  like  a  thief  in  the  night,  and  warns  them,  for  this 
very  reason,  among  other  errors,  against  presuming  to  calculate  the  day  and  hour  of  His 
appearing."  Similar  testimony  will  be  quoted  in  following  Props.  We  now  give  one  from 
an  unbeliever— many  such  exist— who  presents  a  historical  statement  with  the  purpose 
of  lowering  the  teaching  of  the  N.  Test,  and  Patristic  theology.  Fiske  ("  The  Christ  of 
Dogma,"  in  Tke  Unseen  World,  p.  112)  says  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  Messiah's  Second  Com- 
ing was  also  received  without  opposition,  and  for  about  a  century  (?)  men  lived  in  con- 
tinual anticipation  of  that  event,  until  hope  long  deferred  produced  its  usual  results  ; 
the  writings  in  which  that  event  was  predicted  were  gradually  explained  away,  ignored, 
or  stigmatized  as  uncanonical  ;  and  the  church  ended  by  condemning  as  a  heresy  the 
very  doctrine  which  Paul  and  the  Judaizing  apostles,  who  agreed  in  little  else,  had  alike 
made  the  basis  of  their  speculative  teachings."  Alas  !  how  true  in  many  respects  is  this 
presentation,  and  how  merited  the  sarcastic  allusion  to  the  church's  departure  from  "  the 
old  paths,"  once  trodden  in  faith  and  hope.  (Fiske's  statement  is  a  revamping  of  Gib- 
bon's, ch.  15,  Decl.  and  Fall.)    So  Kenan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p,  266),  in  view  of  this,  says  that 


Prop.  74.]  the  tiieockatic  kingdo^i.  471 

"The  first  Christian  generation  lived  entirely  upon  expectations  and  dreams,"  but  that 
it  required  "more  than  a  century"  for  the  church  to  disengage  itself  (however,  p.  251, 
more  or  less  held  afterward)  from  such  views  and  "  a  fantastic  Kingdom  of  God." 

Ohs.  1.  Let  any  one,  for  a  moment,  consider  the  covenanted  and  pro- 
phetic portrayal  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  here  on  earth^ — its  extension, 
universality,  blessing,  etc., — and  then  regard  the  comparative  brief  period 
(in  expectancy),  allowed  for  the  Advent  by  the  Primitive  church,  and  it 
hecomes  absurd  to  crowd  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  prophecy  respect- 
ing that  Kingdom  into  the  supjjosed  brief  period  of  ti)ne.  Take  it  for 
granted  even,  as  we  will  show,  that  the  apostles  anticipated  a  longer  time 
than  their  successors  did  to  intervene  ;  yet  the  very  language,  eayressive 
of  sliortness  of  time,  used  by  them  still  am-phj  sustains  our  position.  This 
expectancy  of  the  Sec.  Advent  indicates  (1)  that  they  had  no  idea  of  an 
existing  Messianic  Kingdom  ;  (2)  that  they  looked  for  such  a  Kingdom  to 
follow  the  anticipated  Advent  ;  (3)  that  they  did  not  regard  the  church  as 
the  covenanted  Kingdom,  bat  as  simply  provisionary. 

How  strangely  those  who  refuse  to  accept  of  the  Primitive  faith  seek  for  apologies  to 
shield  their  modern  notions — to  give  them,  if  possible,  an  odor  of  traditional  sanctity. 
Thus  e.g.  Pressense  {The  Early  Years  of  Christianity,  p.  407)  says  :  "  The  destriiction  of 
Jerusalem  was  to  have  yet  a  further  effect — it  was  to  enlarge  the  views  of  the  Christians 
as  to  the  future  of  the  church,  and  to  give  indefinite  expansion  to  the  horizon  of  proph- 
ecy. They  had  xuitil  now  been  living  in  daily  expectation  of  the  end  of  the  world  and 
the  immediate  return  of  Christ."  He  argues  that,  owing  to  this  destruction,  now  Chris- 
tians i^utoff  the  Advent  to  the  distant  future,  and  that  tliey  believed  "  that  a  long  future 
of  conflict  was  before  the  church."  To  prove  this  last  assertion  he  refers  to  "  Hegisip- 
2JUS  (Eusebius'  His.  Eccl.  2  :  32),  relating  that  the  Emperor  Domitian,  on  questioniug 
some  Christians  in  Palestine  (who  were  connected  with  the  Saviour  by  ties  of  kindred) 
as  to  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  His  return,  received  this  repty  :  '  His  Kingdom  is  not 
an  earthly  kingdom  or  of  this  world,  but  a  heavenly  and  angelic  Kingdom,  which  will 
come  in  the  fulness  of  the  ages,  when  He  shall  return  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.' " 
But  (1)  the  indisputable  fact  is,  that  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  greatly  confirmed  the 
church  in  its  Millenarian'taith.,  for  such  a  literal  fulfilment  of  Christ's  predictions  led  to  an 
increased  belief  in  His  near  coming  and  Kingdom.  But  this  Pressense  himself—  contradicting 
his  own  theory— fully  admits,  when  (p.  308)  he  says  that  "  the  3Iillenarian  doctrine  became 
in  the  seco7id  century  so  loidely  diffused.''  Hence  it  was  not  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
that  checked  it,  but  the  later  Alexandrian  opposition.  (2)  In  reference  to  the  alleged 
proof,  it  is  only  necessary  to  say  that  it  is  the  very  language  that  a  Millenarian  can  hold, 
who,  for  prudential  reasons,  does  not  enter  into  details — seeing  that  everj'  Millenarian 
holds  it  to  be  a  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  Divine  institution,  etc.,  "which  will  come  in  the 
fulness  of  the  ages."     (Comp.  Prop.  73,  note.)" 

Obs.  2.  The  Scriptures  abundantly  testify  to  this  belief  in  a  near  Advent, 
and  all  of  the  apostles  testify  to  the  same,  as  e.g.  Paul,  Rom.  13  :  11,  12  ; 
Phil.  4:5;  Heb.  10  :  25,  36,  37  ;  Tit.  2  :  13,  etc.;  James  5:7-9;  Peter,  1 
Pet.  4:7;  John,  Apoc.  22  :  12,  20,  etc.  The  most  eminent  writers, 
believers  and  unbelievers,  candidly  aclcnoivledge  this  feature,  how^ever 
they  may  differ  in  accounting  for  it.  It  is  doing  violence  to  denv  that 
which  is  so  plainly  stated.  Neander  {Ad.  to  His.  Plant,  of  Ch.  Chircli, 
vol.  2,  p.  65,  Bohn's  Ed.)  urges  the  fact  that  the  apostles  did  not  look  for 
the  conversion  of  the  world  but  for  the  speedy  Advent  of  Christ,  and 
remarks  :  "  Every  unprejudiced  reader  of  the  New  Test,  cannot  fail  to 
perceive  that  such  an  expectation  filled  the  souls  of  the  apostles." 
Then  showing  how  this  view  affected  their  notion  of  the  church,  he  adds  : — 
"  It  was  not  the  idea  of  a  renovated  time  that  Christianity  first  attempted 
to  realize,  but  everything  appeared  only  as  a  point  of  transition  to  a  new, 


472  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  74. 

heavenly,  eternal  order  of  things  which    would    commence  at  the  Sec. 
Advent." 

We  admire  the  candor  of  Neander,  who  so  frankly  gives  us  v/hat  is  antagonistic  to 
his  own  system.  For  additional  statements  on  the  Apostolic  belief  in  the  nearness  of 
the  Advent,  see  e.g.  vol.  2,  p.  5,  his  Aniignosiicus,  or  the  ISpirlt  of  Teriullian,  p.  251,  Com. 
on  James,  Eng.  tr.,  p.  106,  etc.  (comp.  Prop.  49,  Obs.  7,  note  1).  Prof.  Bush  {Mill,  p. 
23),  in  referring  to  the  early  church  looking  for  the  Sec.  Advent,  says  :  "  For  aught  we 
know,  in  fact,  tlte  apostles  themselves  might  have  been  of  the  prevailing  belief,  as  we  have 
met  with  no  reasoning  which  convinces  us  that  they  always  understood  the  full  reach 
and  import  of  their  own  writings. ' '  (Thus  the  apostles  are,  to  sustain  a  theory,  reckoned 
ignorant  of  their  own  language  !  And  these  too  are  inspired  men  !)  Renan  {Life  of 
Paul,  p.  250)  tells  us  :  "  The  two  Syriac  words  Maran-aiha  (the  Lord  is  about  to  come) 
became  the  watchword  of  the  Christians  among  themselves  ;  the  short,  animated  expres- 
sion, which  they  passed  from  one  to  another  to  encourage  themselves  in  their  hoping," 
The  Westm,.  Review  (Oct.,  1861,  Art.  5,  p.  249)  declares  :  "  Gradually  there  grew  up  in 
the  early  Christian  community,  grounded,  it  may  be,  on  half-remembered  sayings  of  the 
cracified  Jesus,  an  expectation  of  a  Second  Advent,  in  which,  as  the  mysterious  being 
announced  by  Daniel,  the  rejected  Hero  of  the  human  race  shotdd  reappear,  throned  on 
a  white  cloud,  to  overthrow  the  last  representative  of  the  impious  world  Empire,  and 
to  institute  the  eternal  Kingdom,  so  long  desired,  so  often  announced,  so  repeatedly 
230stponed."  The  reader  scarcely  need  be  reminded  that  such  quotations  might  be 
indefinitely  extended.  The  sarcasm  of  the  infidel  and  the  reluctant,  apologetic  admis- 
sions of  believers  form  a  mass  of  material  interesting  to  the  investigator,  but  too  un- 
wieldy for  our  limits.  In  our  researches  we  confess  to  surprise  and  pain  that  such  a 
writer  asReuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol.,  p.  272)  should  sarcastically  write  of  the  earlj'  believers  in 
this  rude  style  :  calling  them  "  men  who  remained  quietly  at  home,  loaiting  the  Sec. 
Coming  of  the  Lord,  instead  of  going  forth  to  meet  Him  on  the  grand  highway  of  human 
history."  It  will  be  a  blessed  lot,  if  Reuss,  either  in  abundant  labors  or  in  journeyings 
for  the  good  of  man,  will  be  found  equal  to  many  of  the  men  that  he  ridicules. 

That  the  apostles  believed  in  a  speed}^  Advent  is  the  opinion  of  Hodge  {Sys.  Div.,  vol. 
3,  p.  876),  Olshausen  {Com.,  makes  the  extreme  that  even  Paul  expected  to  live  until 
the  Advent,  vol.  4,  p.  399,  vol.  5,  p.  280),  Conybeare  and  Howson  {Life,  etc.,  of  St.  Faid, 
vol.  1,  p.  401),  Oosterzee  {Theol.  H.  Test.,  p.  333,  etc.),  Meyer's  Com.,  and  Coms.  gen- 
erally. But  Rees'  Cycloj).,  Art.  Mill.,  following  the  guiding  of  Whitby,  asserts,  without 
a  particle  of  proof  to  sustain  it,  (1)  that  the  apostles  never  believed  in  this  personal  reign 
of  Christ  or  in  Chiliasm  (over  e.g.  against  first  preaching  of  Kingdom,  and  Acts  1:6); 
and  (2)  "  that  the  apostles  never  entertained  the  delightful  hope  of  seeing  their  Master 
coming  into  the  world  again' '  (which  is  too  sweeping,  unless  we  confine  it,  as  the 
writer  probably  intended,  to  their  day  or  lifetime  ;  this,  as  we  shall  show,  may  be  true, 
and  yet  does  not  affect  our  argument).  Hase  {His.  Ch.  Church,  ch.  2,  s.  43),  to  weaken 
the  antiquity  and  authority  of  our  doctrine,  remarks  on  "Ecclesiastical  Life  :"  "All 
hope  of  an  earthly  Theocracy  was  apparently  destroyed  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  but 
Christians  generally  believed  that  Christ  ivas  to  return  to  the  world  a  second  time,  and 
many  indulged  the  hope  that  they  would  live  to  witness  His  advent.  This  faith  gave 
birth  to  the  boldest  expectations,  partaking  generally  of  a  sensuous  character,  and  while 
it  seemed  a  yiational  necessity  and  a  religious  consolation  to  the  Jewish,  it  was  a  source  of 
anxiety  and  perplexity  to  the  Grecian  congregations."  To  this  we  briefly  reply  :  (1) 
The  correspondence  with  Jewish  faith  is  acknowledged  ;  (2)  a  Theocracy  on  earth  was 
postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  (3)  this  made  the  Advent  itself  so  desirable  ;  (4)  many 
of  the  alleged  "  sensuous"  expectations  are  only  such  to  those  who  .^spiritualize  the 
covenants  and  i^redictions  ;  (5)  that  the  Grecian,  as  well  as  the  Jewish,  congregations 
loved  this  Advent,  and  had  correct  views  concerning  it  ;  (6)  that  Hase  contradicts 
himself  as  to  the  universality  and  effect  of  the  belief,  as  we  shall  show  hereafter  by 
quotations  from  him.  Hagenbach  (7/t.9.  of  Doc,  sec.  75),  usuallj^  careful  in  his  statements, 
falls  into  an  error,  when  speaking  of  the  Apologetic  era  extending  to  a.d.  254,  saying  : 
"  The  disciples  of  Christ  having  received  from  their  Master  the  promise  of  the  Second 
Coming,  the  first  Christians  looked  for  this  event  as  near  at  hand,  in  connection  with  the 
general  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  final  judgment."  The  facts  are,  as  he  himself 
afterward  particularizes,  that  the  doctrine  of  a  general  resurrection  was  of  later  origin, 
developed  by  the  Alexandrian  school  ;  the  first  Christians,  as  far  as  known,  not  ad- 
vocating it,  but  holding  to  a  first  and  second  resurrection.  Hagenbach  impartially 
vindicates  Justin  holding  to  two  separate  resurrections,  declaring  (p.  214)  "that 
Chiliasm  did  not  come  into  the  orthodox  Church  through  Cerinthus,"  that  (p.  215) 


PeOP.  74.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS-GDOM.  473 

"  Justin  (Dial,  p.  306),  writing  at  the  time  of  Papias,  says  that  it  was  the  general  faith  of 
all  orthodox  Christians  ;  and  that  only  the  Gnostics  did  not  share  it  (comp,  Irenae.  5  :  25, 
26,  Tertul.  c.  Marc.  3  :  24)."  He  then  quotes  Giesseler's  {Ch.  His.,  1,  156,  Dog.,  p.  231) 
emphatic  dech^ration,  that  "  in  all  the  works  of  this  period  (the  first  two  centuries) 
Millenarianism  is  so  prominent  that  we  cannot  hesitate  to  consider-  it  as  universal  in  an  age 
when  such  sensuous  motives  were  certainly  not  unnecessary  to  animate  men  to  suffer 
for  Christianity."  (Thus  making  "sensuous"  error  necessary  to  sustain  the  martyrs!^ 
Hagenbach,  to  save  his  own  Church  theory,  and  give  it  some  kind  of  ancient  support, 
endeavors  to  weaken  Giesseler's  statement  by  saying  :  "  Compare,  however,  the  writ- 
ings of  Clement  of  Rome,  Ignatius,  Polycarp,  Tatian,  Athenagoras,  and  Theophilus  of 
Antioch,  in  none  of  which  Millenarian  notions  are  propounded."  Macdill  ("The 
Instructor,"  May,  1879)  reproduces  this  assertion,  and  says  "  no  traces"  of  our  doctrine 
are  to  be  found  in  them.  This  is  misleading  and  urfair,  as  will  appear  in  a  brief  reply  : 
(1)  these  writers  have  left  but  little  concerning  their  views  on  Eschatology,  and  that  little 
corresponds  with  Pre-Mill.  views  ;  (2)  the  correspondence  is  so  grekt  that  many  of  our 
opponents  concede  these  Fathers  to  us,  as  we  shall  show  under  Prop.  75  ;  (3)  the  simple 
fact  they  all  looked  for  a  speedy  Advent  is  pre-eminently  in  our  favor  ;  (4)  they  do  not  give 
tJiC  slightest  hint  of  being  opposed  to  our  views  ;  (5)  they  present  no  trace  of  the  modernized 
notions  ;  (6)  the  general  statements  of  Irenaeus,  Justin,  and  Tertullian  respecting  the 
universality  of  our  belief  includes  them,  for  otherwise — being  prominent  Fathers— an 
exception  would  have  been  indicated  ;  (7)  the  burden  of  showing  by  direct  quotations 
from  them,  that  they  were  not  Millenarian,  has  never  been  assumed  by  any  critic  or 
writer.  Our  opponents,  by  a  resort  to  such  subterfuges,  making  the  impression  on  the 
ignorant  that  these  men  were  in  opposition  to  Millenarianism,  only  evidence  the  weak- 
ness of  their  cause.  A  scholar  certainly  will  not  permit  himself  to  be  deceived  in  this 
manner  by  so  shallow  an  artifice,  unworthy  of  the  men  who  produce  them. 

Obs.  3.  A  number  of  ways  have  been  devised  to  meet  and  interpret  these 
expectations  of  a  near  Advent.  (1)  To  receive  them  as  the  truth  ;  (2)  to 
designate  them  as  "  Jewish  fables  ;"  (3)  to  pronounce  them  mere  human 
utterances,  designed  for  a  purpose,  and  unworthy  of  credence  ;  (4)  to  call 
them  "  a  husk,"  which  contains  a  germ  of  truth  to  be  afterward  devel- 
oped ;  (5)  to  define  them  as  an  accommodation  to  a  transition  period  ;  (6) 
to  hold  them  forth  as. longings  inspired  by  enthusiasm  and  love  for  Christ  ; 
(7)  to  explain  them  as  denoting  an  expected  spiritual,  instead  of  a  personal, 
coming  ;  (8)  to  interpret  them  as  indicative  of  an  anticipated  providential 
coming  in  judgment.  The  system  of  interpretation  adopted  by  us  (Prop. 
4),  and  the  principles  underlying  the  same  (Props.  5,  9,  16,  17,  etc.),  ex- 
clude all  these  methods  of  explanation  excepting  the  first. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  examine  these  theories  in  detail,  seeing  that  our  argument,  as 
v/e  proceed,  fully  meets  them.  Some  few,  as  Noyes,  the  "  Perfectionists,"  etc.,  hold  that 
the  Sec.  Co  ning  took  place  aboiit  40  years  after  the  crucifixion  ;  others  that  (as  Prince, 
Thomas,  etc.)  it  was  to  be  manifested  in  themselves  ;  while  still  others  contend  that 
Christ,  in  some  way  unexplained,  had  come  or  was  to  come  in  and  through  them,  either 
spiritually  or  by  the  conference  of  power,  etc.  The  latter  view  is  found  in  some  mysti- 
cal sects,  who  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  claim  that,  in  virtue  of  such  a  coming,  the 
New  Heavens  and  New  Earth,  the  New  Jerusalem  itself,  was  to  be  created  and  erected 
by  themselves,  or  else  was  manifested  through  themselves  (e.g.  Swedenborgians, 
Shakers,  etc.).  We  only  now  refer  to  a  strange  effort  on  the  part  of  Pressense  {The  Erniy 
Days  of  Christianity,  p.  308)  to  make  the  impression  that  Millenarianism  arose  in  the 
Thessaloni an  church,  and  was  from  thence  disseminated.  He  saj^s  :  "  The  Thessalonians 
were  in  daily  expectation"  (see  Prop.  160)  "  of  the  return  of  the  Saviour,  1  Thess.  4  :  11, 
2  Thess.  2  :  2,  and  3  :  10.  This  was  the  first  manifestation  of  the  Millenarian  doctrine, 
which  became  in  the  second  century  so  widely  diffused,  and  so  strongly  imbued  with 
Judaistic  elements."  This  is  flatly  contradicted  (1)  hj  the  ScrijAitral  basis  of  our  doc- 
trine ;  (2)  by  the  history  of  it  among  the  Jews,  and  its  existence  at  the  First  Advent ;  (3) 
by  the  history  of  the  doctrine  in  the  church  at  Jerusalem  (as  e.g.  the  teaching  of  James 
in  the  Council)  ;  (4)  by  its  history  in  all  the  churches  as  given  in  these  Propositions  ; 
(5)  by  the  teaching  of  the  apostles,  as  Pressense  himself  admits,  concerning  the  near- 


474  THE  TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  74. 

ness  of  the  Advent,  etc.  ;  *  (G)  by  the  fact  that  this  teaching  of  Millenarianism  had  per- 
meated the  whole  church  before  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  were  given,  for  otherwise  we 
cannot  account  for  its  universality,  as  testified  to  in  these  pages  b}^  eminent  men  of  all 
shades  of  opinion.  Pressense,  by  this  effort  to  give  it  an  earthly  and  fanatical  parentage, 
is  not  candid.  We  can  well  imagine,  if  he  had  been  in  Paul's  place,  what  a  letter  he 
would  have  written  to  these  Millenarian  Thessalonians,  censuring  them  for  starting  a 
doctrine  found  in  God's  oath-bound  covenants,  and  the  subject  of  a  thousand  prophecies. 

Obs.  4.  Among  those  who  are  helievers  in  a  literal  Sec.  Advent,  various 
theories  are  proposed  by  way  of  explanation.  Fairbairn's  (On  Froph.,  p. 
445)  idea  is,  "  that  the  real  explanation  of  the  matter  lies  in  their  singu- 
lar strength  of  faith,  and  which  led  them,  in  a  manner,  to  overleap  the 
gulf  of  ages,  to  identify  the  present  with  the  future,  and  to  realize  great 
events,  whether  near  or  remote,  in  their  jjressing  magnitude  and  impor- 
tance." But  we  see  in  t\\\^  far  more  than  mere  faith  and  personal  ^presenta- 
tion of  the  truth.  Neander's  notion  {Com.  on  James,  p.  106)  that  it  arose 
from  a  longing  desire  of  the  Apostolic  church  in  a  "  transition  point,"  and 
{Gh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  G5)  that  it  was  natural  for  them  to  do  so,  not  yet  being 
fully  acquainted  with  the  truth  ;  and  Olsliausen's  view  {Com.,  vol.  2,  p. 
222)  of  its  being  an  accommodation  to  Old  Test,  language,  inspired  by  the 
lively  ardor  and  desire  of  the  Apostles  : — these  give  but  a  low  estimate  of  in- 
spiration, and  make  the  wishes  and  circumstances  of  the  Apostles  the  crite- 
rion of  truth.  Olshausen  also  {Com.,  Matt.  24)  suggests  that  the  predic- 
tions of  Christ's  speedy  coming  are  conditional,  being  dependent  on  the 
repentance  of  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed.  But  the  positive  language 
in  which  they  are  couched,  and  the  events,  continuous,  connected  with 
\-\\Qm  forbids  such  a  view  (Prop.  18),  which  otherwise,  with  varied  and  con- 
stant repetition,  would  be  well  adapted  to  lead  astray.  The  Apostles  in  their 
public  and  private  instructions  never  give  the  least  hint  that  it  is  to  be 
thus  understood,  and  none  of  their  hearers  or  immediate  successors  enter- 
tained sucli  a  notion.  There  is,  however,  force  in  the  suggestion,  as  we 
shall  show,  if  the  number  of  the  elect  is  taken  into  consideration.  Ooster- 
zee  {Tlieol.   K.    Test.,^.   12G)  says  :  ^' It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  Lord 


*  We  give  an  illustration  from  the  same  work  (p.  286)  which  involves  singular  con- 
tradictions, viz.  :  it  makes  Paul  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career  the  author  of  our 
doctrine,  but  which  he  afterward  modified  :  "  The  views  of  the  apostle  (^Paul)  as  to  the 
nearness  of  the  closing  period  of  history,  which  is  to  be  inaugurated  by  the  personal 
return  of  Christ,  seem  to  have  undergone  some  modifications.  In  the  first  stage  of  His 
apostolic  career  He  supposes,  with  alt  the  Christians  of  that  time,  that  but  a  ver}^  few  j^ears 
will  intervene  before  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  ;  he  is  even  persuaded  that  it 
will  arrive  before  his  own  death,  1  Thess.  4  :  15.  Subsequently,  in  the  Roman  prison, 
on  the  eve  of  sealing  his  testimony  with  his  blood,  he  receives  new  light.  This  is  very 
evident  from  his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  Phil.  1  :  20-25.  He  learns  before  his 
death  that  centuries  are  to  be  granted  to  the  Church  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  work,  and 
for  sowing  the  seed  of  the  Gospel  in  the  vast  field  opened  to  missionary  labor."  Observe, 
however,  (1)  he  contradicts  his  statement  resjiecting  the  Thessalonians  ;  (2)  he  allows  the 
universality  of  belief  ;  (3)  he  makes  Paul,  specially  enlightened,  guilty  of  propagating 
error  ;  (4)  he  misapprehends  Paul's  allusion  to  nearness  and  his  own  death,  Obs.  4  ;  (5) 
there  was  no  such  change  of  view  in  the  Roman  prison,  the  passage  referred  to  not 
giving  the  slightest  hint  of  a  change  of  view  in  the  nearness  of  the  Advent  ;  (6)  if  Paul 
was  thus  favored  with  a  change,  lohy  not  extend  it  to  all  the  apostles,  e.g.  John,  who 
repeated  the  nearness  find  warning  respecting  it  ;  (7)  neither  Paul  nor  any  of  the  apostles 
believed  in  "  the  closirg  period  of  history,  which  is  to  be  inaugurated  by  the  personal 
return  of  Christ" — this  is  Pressense' s  view,  derived  from  spiritualistic  sources — Paul 
(Rom.  11,  etc.)  belieyed  a  grand  history  was  only  then  to  commence. 

\- 


Prop.  74.]  the  theocratic  ki^^gdom.  475 

throngliout  His  teaching,  as  well  as  in  His  last  eschatological  discourses, 
represents  His  coming  as  very  near  at  hand.  This  was  the  natural  con- 
sequence of  the  prophetic  form  of  conception,  in  which  the  difference  of 
time  and  space  falls  into  the  background,  the  exhortation  to  watchfulness 
and  active  labor  receiving  greater  force  from  reference  to  the  near,  un- 
expected, and  decisive  future.''  There  is  propriety  in  the  reason  thus  as- 
signed, but  it  does  not  cover  the  entire  ground,  failing  to  tell  us  why  this 
is  ''  the  prophetic  form  of  conception." 

To  indicate  how  the  leaven  oi  infidelity  is  working,  see  the  Art.  oi  Rev.  Dr.  Buckley 
in  the  Independent  (Dec,  1878),  on  "The  Proph.  Conference."  He  admits  that  the 
apostles  frequently  refer  to  the  nearness  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  saying,  however,  "  As  a 
result  of  this  extraordinary  language  and  other  causes,  ihe  apostles  and  early  Christians 
fell  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  Christ's  final  coming  would  take  place  before  that 
generation  should  pass  awa}^"  and  he  quotes  Isaac  Watts  and  Albert  Barnes  to  show 
that  the  apostles  were  in  error.  Now  if  these  iyispired  men  were  in  error  on  so  important 
a  point,  what  assurance  have  we  that  they  are  not  equally  in  error  on  other  imi^ortant 
matters  ?  We  venture  to  say  that  on  a  missionary  platform,  advocating  the  conversion 
of  the  world  by  the  present  instrumentalities,  Buckley  will  totally  overlook  this  asser- 
tion of  his,  and  eulogize  the  apostolic  conceptions  of  the  extent  and  j^erpetuity  of  their 
work  in  this  Whitbyan  direction.  Watson  {Apol.  for  Christianity)  takes  the  same  view  of 
error,  and  then  presents  this  exceedingly  lame  apology  in  behalf  of  the  apostles  :  "  Their 
mistake  in  this  respect  ought  not  in  any  wise  to  diminish  their  authority  as  preachers  of 
the  Gospel."  Wh}^  not  V  Preachers,  appointed  to  preach  the  Kingdom,  specially  en- 
lightened to  proclaim  the  truth,  afiirming  that  they  received  and  gave  only  that  which  is 
true,  to  delude  a  vast  body  of  believers  by  express  affirmations,  which  are  only  "  j)er- 
sonal  conjectures,"  "  mistakes,"  "errors  of  judgment,"  and  all  this  is  in  no  wise  to 
diminish  our  confidence  in  their  authority,  etc.  ?  The  apology  is  self-contradictory  and 
insulting  to  the  apostles.  Better  make  none  than  to  give  one  which  degrades  ai30stolic 
teaching,  bringing  them  to  an  uninspired  level.  Beecher  {Ch.  Union,  Sep.  5,  1877),  in  a 
sermon  on  "  The  Future  Life,"  says  :  "  He  (Paul)  expected  to  see  Christ  in  this  world 
before  he  departed  ;  and  all  the  aj)ostles  believed  that  they  should  ;  and  there  are  some 
in  our  day  who  believe  that  they  shall.  I  think  that  you  will  see  Christ  ;  but  you  will 
see  Him  on  the  other  side.  You  will  go  to  Him,  He  will  not  come  to  you.  And  your 
going  to  Christ  will  be  spiritual,  and  not  carnal.  But  the  faith  of  the  apostles,  and  of 
others,  was  that  they  should  see  Christ  in  their  day.  In  this  matter,  however,  they 
were  mistaken.  The}^  believed  that  which  facts  and  time  overthrew.  Their  conviction 
was  founded  on  a  misinterpretation  of  the  language  of  our  Master."  Alas!  when 
eminent  ministers  thus  deliberately  degrade  the  apostles  !  What  then  becomes  of  the 
prayer  and  assurance  of  Jesus  that  they  should  be  led  into  the  truth  ?  What  value 
then  can  be  placed  upon  the  special  bestowment  of  the  Spirit  to  guard  them  against 
error  ?  What  assurance  have  we  that  they  are  not  in  error  on  other  important  points  ? 
No  !  never  can  we  receive  such  dishonoring  sentiments  ;  and  a  system  of  faith  which 
needs  them  is  most  certainly  defective. 

Obs.  5.  The  announcements  made  of  a  near  Advent  in  such  phrases, 
"  the  Lord  is  at  haoid/'  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh,''  etc.,  has 
excited  the  ridicule  of  infidels  as  evidence  of  grave  error  ;  has  provoked, 
in  some  instances,  from  professed  believers  reluctant  acknowledgments  of 
"  mistakes,"  and,  in  other  cases,  lamely  produced  apologies  derived  from 
the  personal  status  of  the  Apostles.  The  reed  groiind  for  the  usage  of 
such  language  has  been  too  much  overlooked.  A  remarkable  feature  in 
this  contest  over  the  expressions  and  meaning  of  the  Apostles  is  the  follow- 
ing :  unbelievers  and  believers  both  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  language  is 
given  in  the  old  Jetuish  pro2)hetic  form.  The  ancient  prophets  (as  e.g. 
Isa.,  Joel),  spoke  of  the  promised  Salvation,  the  day  of  the  Lord,  the  Com- 
ing of  the  Mighty  One,  as  being  near,  close  at  hand,  etc.,  when  the  fulfil- 
ment of   prophecy  shows  that    centuries  upon  centuries  must    intervene 


476  THE  THEOCEATIC   KIl^GDOM.  [PrOP.  74. 

before  it  is  fully  realized.  Xo  one  has  ohjeded  to  these  forms  of  prophetic 
expression,  on  the  ground  that  they  represented  remote  events  as  near 
because  it  was  reasonably  supposed  that  such  phraseology  was  in  strict 
accordance  with  a  professed  prophetic  revelation  given  in  the  largeness  of 
time  which  miist  characterize  the  utterances  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Precisely 
so  with  the  Sec.  Advent ;  being  a  doctrine'given  by  the  selfsame  Spirit, 
it  would  illy  correspond  with  His  previous  utterances  to  pronounce  it 
remote,  even  if  many  (according  to  human  measure  of  time)  centuries  in- 
tervened. For  the  latter,  although  distant  to  man,  would  not  be  so  with 
God,  to  whom  "  07ie  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as 
one  day.""  We  must,  therefore,  judge  the  Apostles'  language,  not  by  a 
human,  hut  ly  the  Divine  standard.  The  Spirit — if  of  God, — does  not  meas- 
ure time  as  we  do  ;  and  it  is  only  fair  and  honest  to  weigh  expressions 
regarding  time  given  under  the  direction  of  that  Spirit  hy  the  largeness  of 
view  which  characterizes  God  Himself.  If  the  Spirit  in  the  consciousness 
of  Omniscience,  Omnipresence,  Eternity,  the  Infinite, — of  previously  given 
declarations  corresponding  to  these, — had  in  the  proiohetic  announcements 
of  the  Apostles  employed,  even  to  designate  thousands  of  years,  the  language 
(to  accord  with  human  ideas)  "remote,"  ''far  distant,"  "long  time," 
etc.,  unbelievers  would,  probably,  be  the  very  first  to  point  out  the  incon- 
sistency of  such  phraseology  with  the  Divine  attributes,  and  justly  claim 
that  such  expressions  are  indicative  of  human  infirmity.  We  hold,  conse- 
quently, that  the  declarations  of  the  Apostles  respecting  the  nearness  of  the 
Advent,  are  in  strict  accordance  with  the  truth,  and  that,  in  themselves 
properly  apprehended,  they  contain  decided  evidence  of  the  Spirit  having 
given  them.  And,  as  they  sustain  an  intimate  relation  to  the  perfection  of 
the  Spirit,  they  cannot  be  interpreted,  without  undue  violence,  as  an  ac- 
commodation to  human  imperfection. 

God's  Word  is  not  man's  that  presents  this  nearness  ;  hence  God,  and  not  man, 
informs  us  according  to  His  own  view,  whether  it  is  near  or  distant.  To  God  it  is  but  a 
brief  period,  and  this  principle  relating  to  time  still  future  is  recorded  in  various 
Scriptures.  Thus  e.g.  that  long  (to  man)  period  of  Jewish  tribulation,  extending  from 
the  Babylonian  Captivity  down  to  Christ,  down  to  our  own  times,  is  called  in  Isa.  54  :  7, 
"  a  small  moment.''  This  whole  dispensation  is  called  "  a  day,''  etc.  Now,  the  Primitive 
Church,  after  the  apostles,  instead  of  grasping  this  Divine  mode  of  sjDeaking,  took  the 
language  as  if  characteristic  of  man's  ideas  of  nearness,  and  apprehended  this  nearness 
as  imminent,  impending.  What  possiV)ly  increased  this  feeling  in  the  early  churches 
was  the  adoption  of  the  defective  (Sept.)  chronology,  by  which  it  was  supposed  that 
nearly  six  thousand  years  had  elapsed,  and  the  Sabbatism  was  expected  (compare 
candid  remarks  of  Prof.  Bush,  On  Mill.,  p.  23  and  p.  4).  But  against  this,  it  may  be 
alleged,  that  the  apostles  looked  for  the  Advent  during  their  lifetime.  In  answer,  see 
Obs.  8.  Two  additional  points  may  be  suggested  :  (1)  Prophetic  tiTfie,  either  as  to 
beginning,  or  ending,  or  both,  is  reserved  by  God  as  specially  pertaining  to  Himself, 
and,  therefore,  any  references  to  such  time  will  be  given  according  to  God's  own  estimate 
of  time.  (2)  The  language  is  also  adapted  to  the  capability  of  salvation.  Before  the 
Advent  and  Kingdom  appears,  a  certain  predetermined  number  of  the  elect  must  first 
be  gathered.  As  the  destined  seed  of  Abraham  is  raised  up,  the  work,  which  to  human 
estimation  is  a  long  one,  to  God  is  but  a  short  one,  and  will  be — to  use  the  SjDirit's 
estimate — speedily  accomplished.  Hence  we  can,  and  do,  receive  the  comments  of  un- 
believers, etc.,  excepting  their  deductions  that  the  apostles  were  mistaken.  Thus  e.g. 
the  author  of  The  Beginning  of  Christianity  (p.  366)  says  in  reference  to  the  speedy 
Advent :  "  This  expectation  is  expressed  by  ail  the  apostles  in  terms  which  fairly  admit 
of  no  other  interpretation.  It  is  found  in  Paul  (Rom.  13  :  11,  12  ;  1  Cor.  7  :  29-31  ;  and 
10  :  11  ;  Phil.  4:5;  l\Tim.  6  :  14)."  "The  same  expectation  is  expressed  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (10  :  25,  37)  ;  in  the  Epistle  of  James  (5  :  3,  8)  ;  in  the  Epistles 
of  Peter  (1  Pet.  4:7;  2\Pet.  3  :  3)  ;  in  the  first  Epistle  of  John  (2  :  18)  ;  and  in  the 
Apocalypse  (1  :  1  ;  and  2\:  11  ;  and  22  :  7,  12,  20).     To  pat  any  other  construction  on 


PkOP.  74.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  477 

these  passages,  as  if  the  parousia  to  which  they  refer  was  anything  else  than  the  See. 
Advent  of  the  Lord  to  Judgment,  would  introduce  a  dangerous  license  in  the  interpreta- 
tion, and  one  which  miglit  be  employed  to  subvert  the  princii)al  doctrines  of  the 
Christian  system.  Under  the  general  expectation  of  the  apostles,  mistaken  though  it 
might  prove  to  be  in  the  one  jDarticular  of  time,  there  lay  a  fundamental  truth."  From 
our  standjjoint,  the  apostles  need  no  apology  for  employing  such  language  ;  for  its  use 
proves  them  to  have  been  inspired. 

OI)s.  6.  In  accord  with  the  truthfulness  of  the  Divine  statements  in  ref- 
erence to  time,  a  decided  advantage  is  derived  from  them  in  the  form 
given.  The  estimate  of  nearness  given  by  God  Himself,  in  measuring  pro- 
phetic periods,  throws  around  the  Sec.  Advent  a  purposed  indejini tenets,  a 
sufficiency  of  uncertainty,  an  impression  that  it  may  be  near,  to  be  con- 
ducive to  watchfulness  and  piety,  to  excite  vigilance,  energy  and  labor,  to 
impart  wisdom,  prudence  and  character,  to  incite  to  patient,  diligent 
and  faithful  study.  The  evidently  designed  chasms  in  chronology,  the 
selection  of  signs  which  more  or  less  attend  the  history  of  centuries,  the 
concealment  of  the  number  of  the  elect,  the  withholding  the  day  and  the 
hour,  the  speaking  of  things  present  owing  to  their  certainty  of  arrival, 
although  still  future,  the  brevity  of  dispensations  when  compared  with  the 
ages  of  eternity,— these  are  all  in  the  same  line,  suggestive  that  time  is 
given  to  present  motives  of  caution,  and  action. 

The  salutary  influence  of  this  stj^e  of  prediction  in  the  first  centuries  has  been 
admitted  by  infidels  (e.g.  Gibbon,  etc.),  by  believers  (e.g.  Bush,  etc.),  and,  we  are  told, 
was  eminently  adajDted  to  confirm  the  early  Christians  under  persecution.  But  it  is 
just  as  available,  Just  as  hope  and  strength  imparting  to-day  as  ever  ;  and  many,  who 
sympathize  with  us  or  who  reject  our  doctrine,  forcibly  acknowledge  this  feature.  We 
ajjpend  two  illustrations.  Van  Oosterzee  {Theol.  X.  Test.,  sec.  29),  sj^eaking  of  Peter 
and  the  ajjostles  generally  looking  for  the  Advent,  remarks  :  "  The  day  of  the  Lord's 
Parousia,  not  more  nearly  defined  by  the  Lord  Himself,  remained  and  remains  a  point 
of  individual  expectation,  upon  which  only  time  can  shed  the  true  light.  If  Peter 
shared  in  this  respect  the  expectation  of  the  whole  apostolic  age,  the  event  which  he 
looked  for  remains  not  the  less  the  object  of  expectation  for  all  future  ages,  and  the  hope 
commended  by  him  is  still  an  inexhaustible  fountain  of  consoling  and  sanctifying  influence." 
Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  77)  saj's  :  "  The  day  itself  was,  therefore,  purposely  left  in  con- 
cealment ;  it  remained  among  the  undiscovered  secrets  of  the  Godhead,  and  nothing 
more  than  probable  and  proximate  signs  were  given  of  its  approach,  as  of  an  event  to 
be  ever  expected  and  looked  for,  yet  never,  as  to  the  period  of  its  actual  occurrence,  to  be 
certainly  foreknown."  (Well  may  it  be  asked,  How  can  Fairbairn  reconcile  his  Mill, 
age  of  definite  time  to  precede  such  an  Advent,  with  the  posture  indicated  by  his 
language  ?)  Hence  it  becomes  us,  if  we  wish  to  imbibe  the  apostolic  spirit  portrayed, 
to  occupy  the  attitude  assumed  by  the  apostles  and  their  converts  (comp.  Prop.  182). 

Obs.  7.  In  view  of  the  inestimable  purposes  of  Salvation  connected  with 
the  Sec.  Advent,  the  latter  cannot  be  held  up  too  proniiiieiitly,  being,  as 
Holy  Writ  expresses  it,  "  the  Messed  Jiope.''^  The  nearness  connected  with 
the  preciousness,  makes  the  Advent  so  extremely  desirable  and  the  object 
of  inspiring  hope.  Many  who  receive,  and  many  who  reject  our  doctrinal 
position,  hold  to  the  exceeding  worth  of  this  Advent,  both  to  its  immi- 
nency  (may  at  any  time  occur),  and  to  its  desirableness  (i.e.  ought  to  be 
desired  by  the  true  believer). 

Thus  e.g.  Lange  {Com.,  vol.  1,  p.  433)  says  that  it  may  occur  "  at  any  moment,"  and 
in  various  places  speaks  of  its  being  the  great  object  of  heartfelt  desire  and  hope. 
Neander  (vol.  1,  p.  182,  Ch.  His.)  designates  it  as  "  fitted  to  be,  not  an  object  of  dread, 
but  of  joyful,  longing  hope."  So  Barnes  {Coyn.,  2  Pet.  3  :  12)  and  Dr.  Brown  of  Glasgow 
[Ch.  /Sec.  Coming)  calling  it   "  the  polar  star,"  besides  a  host  of  others  (comp.  Props. 


478  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  74. 

173  and  182).  Hence  it  is  not  correct  to  say,  what  a  writer  in  the  Westminster  Review 
(Jan.,  1873,  p.  88)  sneeringly  asserts,  viz.  :  that  Christ  represented  His  religion  as 
"new  wine,"  but  "  now  it  is  old  wine  that  has  lost  some  of  its  original  ingredients  by 
evaporation,"  and  among  the  things  "  evaporated"  or  lost  he  numbers  "  the  anticipa- 
tion, not  to  be  laid  aside  for  a  moment,  of  the  immediate  return  of  Christ."  Admitting 
that  multitudes  have  removed,  ignored,  or  perverted  this  doctrine,  yet  it  is  also  true 
(aside  from  its  unchangeable  relationship  to  the  Word)  that  many,  even  of  our  op- 
ponents, cordially  receive  it  while  antagonistic  to  their  own  system  of  belief — i.e.  to  their 
Millenaial  theory. 

Obs.  8.  To  invalidate  the  credibility  of  the  Apostles,  some  allege  (even 
believers,  as  Olshausen,  etc.)  that  "  the  apostles  expected  the  return  of 
Jesus  in  their  lifetime."  But  this  remains  tinprove/i,  being  only  i7if er- 
red from  the  phrase  (1  Thess.  4  :  15)  "  toe,  which  are  alive  and  remain/'  and 
from  the  account  given  by  John  21  :  22,  23.  But  the  former,  as  after- 
ward explained  in  the  Second  Epistle,  and  the  latter  as  evidenced  by 
John's  own  interpretatio?i  (v.  23),  and  afterward  by  the  events  delineated 
in  the  Apoc,  forbid  such  an  inference. 

The  "  we"  appears  only  indicative  of  fellow-believers,  of  Christians  who  should  be 
successors — for  the  exhibition  of  the  apostasy  and  Antichrist  by  Paul  (including  a 
series  of  events  not  to  be  compressed  in  a  lifetime),  the  portrayal  of  future  events  in 
the  Apoc.  by  John  which  were  to  transpire  previously,  the  allusions  to  their  own  coming 
death  as  something  to  occur  before  the  expected  Advent — are  sufficient  evidence  that  the 
apostles,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  regarded  the  i:>eriod  of  the  Advent  as  in- 
definite in  the  future  to  follow  certain  events,  which  they  knew  (as  seen  by  references 
to  their  own  departure)  were  not  to  take  place  during  their  lifetime.  (The  j^assage 
Mark  9  : 1,  Matt.  16  :  28,  Luke  9  :  27,  will  be  noticed  in  Prop.  153,  on  the  Transfiguration.) 
One  of  the  editors  (either  Dr.  Brown  or  Dr.  Valentine)  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  July, 
1874,  in  Art.  "  Did  the  Apostles  expect  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ  in  their  own  day?" 
ably  answers  the  unwarranted  deductions  of  Olshausen,  Oosterzee,  Meyer,  and  others, 
conclusively  showing  that  they  did  not  anticipate  the  Advent  before  their  own  departure. 
This  Art.,  overlooking  what  we  have  stated  in  relation  to  the  Spirit's  estimate  of  time, 
gives  the  following  solution  to  the  language  employed  :  "  The  apparent  nearness  of  this 
event  may  result  from  its  transcendent  importance  and  its  relations  to  us  as  individ- 
uals. In  such  a  matter  the  element  of  time  is  almost  lost  sight  of,  and  we  stand  as  in 
the  presence  of  the  august  reality."  This  is  enforced  by  illustrations  and  a  quotation 
from  Lange  {Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  81,  82). 

Obs.  9.  The  apostles,  after  the  res.  and  ascension  of  Jesus,  never  used 
the  formula  "  the  Kingdom  of  lieaven  is  at  liand  f^ — thus  accepting  of  the 
change  in  the  manner  of  Christ's  teaching  (Prop.  58,  etc.),  and  linked 
by  the  phraseology  adopted  (Prop.  71,  etc.),  tlie  Kingdom  with  the  Sec. 
Advent.  For,  instead  of  the  previous  formula,  they  now  tell  us  that 
"  the  Cojning  of  the  Lord  draiveth  nigh/^  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand,"  etc.  They 
guard  us  thus,  by  the  very  choice  of  words,  against  the  notion  that  the 
Kingdom  was  already  established,  or  that  it  possibly  could  be  set  up  dur- 
i7ig  the  absence  of  the  King.  Under  the  former  preaching,  Jesus  being 
present,  the  Kingdom  was  announced  ;  under  thv3  apostolic,  Jesus  being 
absent  and  the  Kingdom  postponed.  His  Coming  again,  as  the  requisite 
prelude,  is  prominently  proclaimed. 

A  singular  feature  which  has  attracted  the  critical  student  is  this  :  Owing  to  the 
belief  in  the  speedy  coming,  the  rapid  development  of  Antichrist  and  his  overthrow,  the 
expected  approach  of  the  anticipated  Kingdom,  the  history  of  the  Church  for  several 
generations  is,  notwithstanding  the  progress  made,  almost  a  blank  on  questions  now 
regarded  as  highly  important,  as  e.g.  those  relating  to  church  government,  the  exact 
progress,  triumphs,  and  conflicts  of  Christianity.  So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  the 
first  and  second  centuries  have  become  a  kind  of  battle-field  between  the  various  theories 


Prop.  74.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  479 

of  church  government.  No  documents,  such  as  appeared  later,  defining  forms,  looking 
toward  perpetuity,  etc.,  appeared.  This  very  state— this  very  lack— suj^ports  our  posi- 
tion. Uhlborn  {Conflict  of  Chrisikmity  with  Heathenism,  p.  337)  refers  to  this,  saying: 
"  The  Coming  of  the  Lord  was  then  believed  to  be  quite  near,  and  this  hope  dominated 
the  whole  life.  No  provision  was  made  for  a  long  continuance  of  the  Church  on  earth, 
and  all  efforts  were  exclusively  directed  toward  remaining  in  the  world  without  spot  till 
the  day  of  Christ's  Coming."  (To  which  we  add  :  and  to  urge  others  to  receive  this 
Jesus  and  be  saved,  for  the  spread  of  the  Gosjiel  indicates  their  missionary  zeal,  not  as 
Reuss  (Prop.  74,  Obs.  2,  note)  has  it  that  they  stayed  "  at  home,"  etc.) 

Obs.  10,  The  Apostles  occupied  the  Tery  position  regarding  the  Sec. 
Advent,  enjoined  hy  tlie  Divine  Master ;  to  have  employed  any  other 
language  (e.g.  in  accord  with  modern  ideas)  than  that  used,  would  have 
been  a   violation  of  His  commands  (as  e.g.  presented  Matt.  chs.  24  and 

25). 

In  the  ScriiDtures  referred  to,  in  connection  with  the  exhortations  to  watchfulness, 
we  find  an  ej)itomized  history  of  events  running  from  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
down  to  the  Advent,  and,  in  strict  accordance  with  our  argument,  it  iiives  no  hint, 
not  even  the  slightest,  of  a  Kingdom  until  the  period  of  the  Advent  arrives.  The 
declarations  of  Jesus  and  those  of  the  apostles  are  in  harmony.  The  same  will  be 
found  in  other  respects  as  we  advance  in  the  argument,  if  the  modern  views 
engrafted  on  the  New  Test,  are  correct,  then  we  ought  to  find,  instead  of  these 
exhortations,  that  "  the  coming  of  the  Church  in  greater  power  and  glory  draws 
nigh,"  with  cautions  not  to  look  and  watch  for  the  Advent,  but  for  larger  and  still  larger 
triumphs  of  the  Church.  The  two  positions  are  utterly  antagonistic,  and  it  is  absurd  to 
endeavor  to  blend  them  together.  Either  the  New  Test,  teaches  the  one  or  the  other — 
both  are  irreconcilable  unless  violence  is  done  to  the  language.  Let  the  critical  student 
answer  the  following  question,  and  it  will  be  decisive  :  If  inspired  apostles  were  in 
error  respecting  the  Sec.  Advent,  so  that  they  could  not  locate  with  their  views  of  it 
(as  conceded  by  our  opponents,  as  quoted)  a  conversion  of  the  world,  or  even  a  long- 
extended  missionary  work  with  it,  what  would  such  inspired  men,  who  professed  to 
understand  the  prophecies,  do  icith  e.g.  Ps.  22  :  27,  28,  and  a  thousand  similar  predic- 
tions ?  Does  it  not,  consistently  and  logically,  follow,  that  if  in  their  estimation  ful- 
filled at  all,  they  must  of  necessity  be  realized  after  the  Sec.  Advent,  as  held  by  the 
Primitive  Churcli,  and  not  hefore  that  Advent,  seeing  that  they  give  no  room  for  the  same  ? 


480  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS-GDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 


Proposition"  75.     Tlie  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  as  held  by  the 
churches  established  by  the  Apostles,  was  perpetuated. 

This  was  done  by  tlie  Apostolic  Fathers,  by  succeeding  Christian 
Fathers,  and  by  other  writers  in  the  church.  The  same  is  cor- 
roborated by  Jewish  and  Pagan  authors,  and  also  by  Aj^ocryphal 
books. 

What  Buckle  {His.  Civil.,  vol.  1,  p.  215)  says  of  truth  in  general  is  applicable  to 
that  pertaining  to  this  Kingdom  :  "  No  great  truth  which  has  once  been  found  has  ever 
afterward  been  lost." 

Obs.  1.  Our  doctrine  is  traced  continuoiisly  from  the  Apostles  themselves, 
seeing  that  (Prop.  72,  Obs.  3,  note  1)  the  first  Fathers,  who  present  Mil- 
lenarian  views,  saw  and  conversed  either  with  the  Apostles  or  the  Elders  fol- 
lowing them.  So  extensively,  so  generally  was  Chiliasm  perpetuated,  that 
Justin  Martyr  positively  asserts  that  all  the  orthodox  adopted  and  upheld 
it.  Justin's  language  is  explicit  (Dial,  tuith  Trypho,  sec.  2);  for  after 
stating  the  Chiliastic  doctrine,  he  asserts  :  "it  to  be  thoroughly  proved 
that  it  will  come  to  pass.  But  I  have  also  signified  unto  thee,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  many — even  those  of  that  race  of  Christians  who  folloiu  not 
godly  and  pure  doctrine — do  not  acknowledge  it.^  For  I  have  demonstrated 
to  thee,  that  these  are  indeed  ccdled  Christians  ;  but  are  atheists  and  im- 
pious heretics,  because  that  in  all  things  they  teach  what  is  blasphemous, 
and  ungodly,  and  unsound,"  etc.  He  adds  :  "  But  I  and  whatsoever 
Christians  are  orthodox  in  all  things  do  know  that  there  will  be  a  resurrec- 
tion of  the  flesh,  and  a  thousand  years  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  built, 
adorned  and  enlarged,  according  as  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  and  other  j^rophets 
have  promised.  For  Isaiah  saith  of  this  thousand  years  (ch.  65  ;  17) 
'  Behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth:  and  the  former  shall  not  be 
remembered,  nor  come  into  mind  ;  but  be  ye  glad  and.  rejoice  in  those 
which  I  create  :  for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  to  triumph,  and  my  people 
to  rejoice,"  etc.  Moreover,  a  certain  man  among  us,  whose  name  is  John, 
J)eing  one  of  the  tivelve  apostles  of  Christ,  in  that  revelation  which  was 
shown  to  him  prophesied,  that  those  who  believe  in  our  Christ  shall  fulfil 
a  thousand  years  at  Jerusalem  ;  and  after  that  the  general,  and,  in  a  word, 
the  eveiiasting  resurrection,  and  last  judgment  of  all  together.  Whereof 
also  otir  Lord  spake  when  He  said,  that  therein  they  shall  neither  marry, 
nor  be  given  in  marriage,  but  shall  be  equal  with  the  angels,  being  made 
the  sons  of  the  resurrection  of  God."* 

'  This  is  the  passage  that  has  been  tampered  with  in  some  mss.,  the  "not"  being 
omitted  (comp.  Prop.  73,  Obs.  3,  note  2).  For  the  genuineness  of  the  passage,  see  e.g. 
Brooks'  El.  of  Projjh.  Interp.,  ch.  3.  Semisch  (Herzog's  Cyclop.)  remarks  on  it  :  "  Chiliasm 
constituted  in  the  sec.  century  so  decidedly  an  article  of  faith  that  Justin  held  it  up  as  a 
criterion  of  perfect  orthodoxy.''  Numerous  writers  have  made  the  same  comment.  This 
has,  unfortunately,  led  some  (as  Shimeall,  the  Christadelphians,  etc.)  to  apply  it  as  a 
measure  of  orthodoxy  at  the  present  day.  To  avoid  a  wrong  inference,  we  may  add, 
that  the  criterion  set  up  by  Justin  in  his  day  might  well  answer  the  purpose  at  that 


PPwOP.  75.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  481 

time,  but  is  inapplicable  to  the  present  day.  The  reason  is  simple  :  those  who  rejected 
Chiliasm  in  Justin's  time  were  also  guilty  of  subverting  the  essential,  fiuidamenhd  doc- 
trines  of  religion  (and  hence  the  force  of  his  comparison),  while  this  is  not  true  of  a 
large  number  of  our  opponents  at  this  day.  Such  a  comparison  instituted,  continued, 
and  pressed,  would  be  both  illiberal  and  unjust  (comp.  Prop.  72,  Obs.  1,  note  2). 

■^  Justin  Martyr's  testimony  is  so  overwhelming  that  some  of  our  opponents  seek  to 
break  its  force  by  various  shifts,  e.g.  by  disparaging  the  man,  by  advocating  an  inter- 
polation, by  silently  passing  him  in  the  enumeration  of  Fathers,  etc.  Prof.  Briggs, 
under  the  signature  of  "Westminster,"  in  the  New  York  Evawjelist,  professes  to  give 
an  utterly  unfair  and  unscholarhj  (as  we  shall  prove  again  and  again)  history  of  Mil- 
lenarianism.  On  the  strength  of  Jerome  omitting  Justin's  name  in  his  list  of  Chiliasts, 
the  Prof,  jumps  to  the  sage  conclusion  that  Justin  teas  no  Chiliast !  This  is  opposed  by 
the  writings  of  Justin,  by  all  our  standard  Church  historians,  and  by  a  multitude  of 
able  critics.  It  is  conceded  to  us  by  numerous  bitter  and  unrelenting  opposers  (such 
as  Shedd,  Prof.  Stuart,  Mosheim,  etc.).  The  omission  is  readily  accounted  for  by  Mede 
(  Works,  p.  813),  and  by  the  character  (Mosheim,  vol.  1,  p.  250,  with  which'  comp. 
Neander,  Kurtz,  etc.)  of  Jerome.  To  break  the  force  of  Justin's  testimon}^  by  laying 
stress  on  general  Eschatological  expressions  (v.'hich  we  can  also  cordially  adopt),,  and 
avoiding  the  statements  of  Justin  where  he  particularizes  the  order  or  manner  of  fulfil- 
ment, is  correspondent  with  Briggs'  entire  series,  which  for  unfairness,  perversions, 
deliberate  untruthfulness,  and  arrogance  (in  sadness  we  say  it)  bears  off  the  palm.  We 
only  add  :  that  Justin  is  far  more  competent  (in  view  of  the  time  he  lived,  his  scholar- 
ship, his  i^re-eminence  as  an  Apologist,  his  consistent  Christian  life  sealed  by  martyrdom 
for  the  truth)  to  tell  us  what  was  "  the  ortliodox  '  view  in  his  day  than  "  Westminster,' 
with  his  heart  filled  with  enmity  and  prejudice,  is  to-day.  The  reader  will,  we  hope, 
dispassionately  look  at  the  evidence  we  give  (much  of  it  from  learned  and  able  opj^osers, 
who  scorned  to  stoop  to  such  devices),  and  then  compare  it  with  Prot.  Briggs'  reply  to 
Dr.  West.  The  latter  asserted  in"  The  Proph.  Conference"  (that  met  in  Dr.  Tyng's 
church  in  New  York)  that  "  a  true  Christian  Chiliasm  was  the  orthodox  faith  of  the 
Primitive  Church  in  its  purest  days  "  Briggs  affirms  that  this  is  '*  unhistorical  and 
false,"  and  "that  it  was  rejected  among  the  earliest  of  heresies  In  its  grosser  forms 
and  merely  tolerated  in  its  finer  forms." 

To  give  the  reader  a  just  idea  {in  vindication  of  the  severity  of  our  strictures)  of  the 
bigotry  and  intelligence  of  this  '"  heresy-hunter,''  and  his  relish  for  '  hitier  herbs,"  as  well 
as  his  charitable  assumption  of  siiperiority  and  ecclesiastical  authority,  we  reproduce 
this  choice  morsel  ;  after  threatening  persecution,  as  against  heretics,  if  Millenarians  do 
not  keep  those  views  to  themselves  and  desist  in  calling  it  "  a  vital  doctrine,"  etc.,  his 
authoritative  animus  bursts  forth  as  follows  :  "  It  dei:)ends  entirel3'  upon  themselves 
what  the  future  is  to  bring  forth.  If  they  will  abandon  their  organization,  disband  their 
committee,  stojj  their  Bi])le  and  Prophetic  Conferences,  we  doubt  not  that  there  will 
soon  be  a  calm  again,  and  they  will  remain  undisturbed  in  their  ecclesiastical  relations  ; 
but  if  they  are  determined  to  go  on  in  their  aggressive  movement,  they  will  have  only 
themselv^es  to  blame  if  Vie  storm  should  become  a  whirlwind  that  toill  constrxiin  them  to  depart 
from  the  orthodox  churches,  and  form  another  heretical  sect."  This  is  evidence  that  he, 
after  all,  has  not  much  confidence  in  his  one-sided  argumentation,  for  if  he  trusted  in 
the  power  of  truth,  he  would  not  thus  lose  his  temper,  and  speak  of  men  (leaders) 
who  are  pre-eminently  superior  to  himself  in  every  qualification  relating  to  scholar- 
ship, intelligence,  usefulness,  devotion  to  the  service  of  the  •  Master,  etc.  Suppose 
we  should  make  such  demands,  and  propose  to  secure  "a  calm"  by  asking  them  to 
abandon  the  publicitj'  of  their  views,  to  stop  their  parade  of  the  Whitbyan  theory  at 
missionary  meetings,  etc.,  they  would  j?<.sf/i/ pronounce  it  arrogant,  claiming  that  views 
honestly  and  sincerely  believed  to  be  amply  sustained  by  Scripture  and  history  are  not 
to  be  got  rid  of  by  persecution,  but  by  solid  Scriptural  and  historical  reasoning.  When 
argument  is  loeak  threats  are  resorted  to  in  order  to  jwop  it  up,  thus  repeating  the  pain- 
ful history  of  the  past.  Do  Post-Millenarians  keep  their  views  to  themselves,  as  shown 
in  thousands  of  books,  pulpits,  platform  addresses,  newspapers,  Systematic  Theologies,, 
etc.  ?  Can  they  justly  ask  us  to  refrain  from  giving  equal  pi-ominency  to  our  doctrine,  if 
we  deem  it  advisable,  especially  when  we  believe  its  proclamation  to  be  a  God-com- 
manded duty  ?  Would  they  make  us,  by  threats  of  force,  dishonest  to  conviction  and 
hypocritical  in  belief  ? 

Obs.  2.  Numerous  testimonies  of  friends  might  be  adduced.  A  few  are 
given   by  way   of   illustration  (comp.   those  given  under  Props.   72-74). 


482  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

Judge  Jones,  under  the  name  "  Philo-Basilicus"  {Lit.,  vol.  3,  Essays, 
p.  73),  says  "  that  all  the  Fathers,  whose  writings  have  come  down  to  us, 
previous  to  Origen,  and  some  who  were  contemporary  and  subsequent  to 
him,  helieved  this  (Chiliastic)  doctrine  cannot  be  disproved.''  '  Bh.  Xewton 
(On  Proph.,  p.  591-2)  remarks  :  "  In  short  the  doctrine  of  the  Millen- 
nium tvas  genercdly  helieved  in  the  three  first  and  purest  ages,  and  this 
belief,  as  the  learned  Dodwell  hath  justly  observed,  was  one  principal 
cause  of  the  fortitude  of  the  primitive  Christians  ;  they  even  coveted 
martyrdom,  in  hopes  of  being  partakers  of  the  privileges  and  glories  of  the 
martyrs  in  the  first  resurrection."^ 

1  Shedd  {His.  of  Ch.  Doc.)  endeavors  to  make  the  unfair  impression  that  some  of  the 
Fathers,  from  whom  we  have  but  a  few  fragments  of  opinion,  were  not  Chiliastic,  saying 
that ' '  there  are  no  traces  of  Chiliasm  in  the  writings  of  Clement  of  Rome,  Ignatius, 
and  Polycarp."  This  is  uncandkl :  (1)  because  their  associates  and  followers  were  Chil- 
iastic, and  the  language  employed  by  the  latter  includes  the  former  ;  (2)  Justin's  test  of 
orthodoxy  embraces  them  ;  (3)  they  allege  in  the  fragments  nothing  against  our  doc- 
trine, and  much  less  anything  favoring  the  modern  (Prof.  Shedd's)  view;  (4)  they 
employ  phraseology  and  language  that  can  only  he  justly  reconciled  with  a  CJiiliastic 
belief.  In  reference  to  their  faith,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Shimeall's  Beply  to 
Shedd,  Seiss'  Last  Times,  Ap.  2,  etc.,  have  quoted  sufiQciently  from  these  writers  to  show 
that  they  were  Chiliastic.  Clement's  allusion  to  ''preaching  the  Coming  of  Christ,'' ot 
Christ's  Coming  "  suddenly''  and  "  quickly,"  of  "  every  hour  expecting  the  Kingdom  of  God 
in  love  and  righteous,  because  we  know  not  the  day  of  God's  appearing  ;"  Ignatius'  sjjeak- 
mg  of  "  the  last  times,"  of  "  expecting  Him  who  is  above  all  time  ;"  Polycarp' s  reference  to 
'' reigyiiyig  together  with  Him ;"  all  this,  taking  into  consideration  the  prevailing  usage, 
indicates  what  many,  even  hostile  to  us,  admit,  that  they  were  Chiliasts.  Shedd's  idea 
IS  not  only  to  unfairly  represent  our  doctrine  but  to  imply  that  the  modern  view  also 
prevailed,  of  which  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace.  Dr.  Lillie,  Dr.  Brookes,  and  others,  have 
rebutted  his  "  singularly"  (so  Lillie)  "  inadequate,  and  I  say  it  reluctantly,  somewhat 
unfair  chapter  on  Millenarianism."  Prof.  Shedd  does  not  meet  the  issue,  viz.:  that  it  is 
"  conceded  that  every  one  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  who  says  anything  at  all  on  the 
subject,  is  a  Chiliast,"  but  in  view  of  the  silence  of  some  Fathers  on  the  subject  in  the 
very  brief  writings  of  theirs  in  our  possession,  hastily  concludes  that  this  "  tenet  was 
not  the  received  faith  of  the  Church,  certainly  down  to  the  year  150."  The  student 
will  allow  its  "  due  weight"  to  such  a  conclusion,  indicative  of  the  fact  that  our  his- 
torical position  is  pressing  our  opponents  sorely,  seeing  that  they  can  resort  to  such  a 
method  to  weaken,  if  possible,  its  force  (comp.  Prop.  74,  Obs.  2.  note  1). 

-  Others  are  given  for  the  student.  Dr.  Bennet  (  Wor-ks,  vol.  2,  p  184)  :  "  The  Mil- 
lennial Kingdom  of  Christ  was  the  general  doctrine  of  the  Primitive  Ghuxch.  from  the  times 
of  the  apostles  to  the  Council  of  Nice,  inclusively."  As  the  testimony  of  Millenarians 
might  be  regarded  as  partial  or  biased,  the  reader  is  merely  referred  to  the  following  : 
Mede's  Works.  Greswell's  Exp.  of  the  Parables,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Brooks'  EL 
Proph.  Jnterp.,  Seiss'  Last  Times,  Elliott's  Horce  Apoc,  Gill's  Com.,  Sir  I.  Newton  On 
Proph.,  Auberlen  On  Proph.,  Bonar's  Apostolicity  of  Chiliasm,  Cox's  Millenarian' s  Answer, 
besides  many  others.  The  following  writers  can  also  be  advantageously  quoted  : 
Duffield,  Bh.  Henshaw,  Tyng,  Gaussen,  Sherwin,  Alstedius,  Shaeffer,  Maitland,  Pym, 
McCaul,  Brightman,  Anderson,  Manford,  Bryant,  Drummond,  Hooper,  Ogilvy,  Homes, 
and  others.  Dr.  West  delivered  a  good  paper  on  the  "  His.  of  the  Pre-Mill.  Doctrine^ 
before  the  Proph.  Conference  at  New  York, 

Ohs.  3.  The  testimony  of  opponents  (some  having  already  been  given, 
Props.  72-74)  may  properly  be  presented  because  impartial.  We  select  for 
this  purpose  the  originator  and  defender  of  the  generally  received  view 
(comp.  Prop.  175).  Dr.  Whitby  {Treatise  on  Tradition)  gives  us  the  fol- 
lowing often  quoted  statement  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  Millennium,  or  the 
reign  of  saints  on  earth  for  a  thousand  years,  is  now  rejected  by  all  Roman 
Catholics,  and  by  the  greatest  part  of  Protestants  ;  and  yet  it  passed  among 
the  best  Christians,  for  two  hundred  and  fifty  years,  for  a  tradition  apos- 


Prop.  75.]  the  theochatic  kiis^gdom.  483 

tolical ;  and,  as  such,  is  delivered  by  onany  Fathers  of  the  second  and 
third  century,  who  speak  of  it  as  the  tradition  of  onr  Lord  and  His  apos- 
tles, and  of  all  tlie  ancients  who  lived  before  them  ;  who  tell  ns  the  very 
words  in  which  it  was  delivered,  the  Scriptures  which  were  then  so  inter- 
preted ;  and  say  that  it  was  held  hy  all  Christia7is  that  icere  exactly  ortho- 
dox.'^ "  It  was  received  not  only  m  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  Church,  by 
Papias  (in  Phrygia),  Justin  (in  Palestine),  but  by  Irenaeus  (in  Gaul),  Nepos 
(in  Egypt),  Apollinaris,  Methodius  (in  the  West  and  South),  Cyprian, 
Victoriiius  (in  Germany),  by  Tertullian  (in  Africa),  Lactantius  (in 
Italy),  and  Severus,  and  by  the  Council  of  Nice"  (about  a.d.  323).  Even 
in  his  Treatise  on  the  Millenninm,  in  which  he  endeavors  to  set  aside  the 
ancient  faith  by  his  substitution  of  "  a  neiu  hypothesis,''  he  acknowledges, 
according  to  Justin  and  Irenaeus,  that  (ch.  1,  p.  61)  there  were  "  three 
sorts  of  men  :  (1)  The  Heretics,  denying  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh  and 
the  Millennium.  (2)  The  exactly  orthodox,  asserting  both  the  resurrection 
and  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth.  (3)  The  hdievers,  who  consented 
with  the  just,  and  yet  endeavored  to  allegorize  and  turn  into  a  metaphor 
all  those  Scriptures  produced  for  a  proper  reign  of  Christ,  and  who  had 
sentiments  rather  agreeing  with  those  heretics  who  denied,  than  those  ex- 
actly ortliodox  loho  maintained,  this  reign  of  Christ  on  earth.''' 

Such  evidence  from  Anti-Millenarians  is  cumulative.  The  reader  may  find  it 
interesting  to  glance  over  others.  Thus  e.g.  Bh.  Taylor  {Liberty  of  Prophesying,  sec.  2) 
remarks  (over  against  concessions  made,  as  Brooks  has  noticed,  in  his  Sermon  on  1  Cor. 
15  :  23)  :  "  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Millenaries  was  in  the  best  ages  esteemed  no  heresy, 
bnt  ti'ue  Catholic  doctrine ;  though  since  then  it  hath  had  justice  (?)  done  it,  and  hath 
suffered  a  just  (?)  condemnation."  Chillingworth  {Works,  p.  347),  already  referred  to 
(Prop.  73,  6bs.  1,  note  2),  says  :  "  It  appears  manifest  out  of  this  book  of  Irenaeus  that 
the  doctrine  of  the  Chiliasts  was  in  his  judgment  apostolic  tradition,  as  also  it  was  esteemed 
(for  aught  appears  to  the  contrary)  by  all  the  doctors,  and  saints,  and  martyrs  of,  or  about, 
his  time  ;  for  all  that  speak  of  it,  or  whose  judgments  in  the  point  are  any  way  recorded, 
are  for  it  ;  and  Justin  Martyr  professeth,  that  all  good  and  orthodox  Christians  of  his  time 
believed  it,  and  those  that  did  not,  he  reckons  among  heretics."  His  argument  is, 
briefly,  as  follows  :  "  That  this  doctrine  (of  the  Millennium  and  Christ's  personal  reign 
on  earth)  was  by  the  church  of  the  next  age  after  the  apostles  held  true  and  catholic, 
I  prove  by  these  two  reasons  :  first,  whatever  doctrine  is  believed  and  taught  by  the  vwst 
eminent  fathers  of  any  age  of  the  church,  and  by  none  of  their  contemporaries  opposed  or 
condemned,  that  is  to  be  esteemed  the  Catholic  doctrine  of  the  church  of  those  times  ;  but 
the  doctrine  of  the  Millenaries  was  believed  and  taught  by  the  most  eminent  fathers  of  the 
age  next  after  the  apostles,  and  by  none  of  that  age  opposed  or  condemned  ;  therefore  it 
was  the  Catholic  dodrine  of  those  tiines."  Such  testimony  can  be  multiplied  :  for  Mosheim 
(Ch.  His.)  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  prevailing  opinion  ;'  Gieseler  {Ch.  His.)  tells  us  that  it 
''became  the  general  belief  of  the  time  ;"  Lardner  {Cred.  of  Gosp.  His.)  informs  us  that 
"  the  Millennium  has  been  the  favorite  doctrine  of  some  ages  and  has  had  the  pjatronage  of 
the  learned,  as  well  as  the  vulgar,  among  Christians  ;"  Miinscher  {His.  Dog.)  testiiies  : 
"  Hoio  widely  the  doctrine  of  Millenarianism  prevailed  in  the  first  centuries  of  Chris- 
tianity, appears  from  this  that  it  was  universally  received  by  almost  all  teachers  ;"  En- 
cyclopedia Americana  (Art.  Mill.)  pronounces  it  "  a  universal  belief  among  the  Christians 
of  the  first  centuries."  The  student  desirous  of  additional  references  may  consult  for 
confirmatory  statements  Bush  {On  Mill.),  Neander  {Ch.  His.),  Burton  {Bampton  Lee, 
1829),  Stuart  {Com-.  Apoc),  Barnes  {Com.  Rev.),  Bh.  Kussel  {Dis.  on  Mill),  Hagenbach 
{His.  of  Doc),  Kitto  {Cyclop.,  Art.  Mill.),  Baumgarten  {His.  Apos.  Ch.),  Lechler  {Apos. 
and  P'ost-Apos.  Times),  Schlegel  {Philos.  of  His.),  Milner  {Ch.  His.),  Jones  {Ch.  His.), 
Shaff  {Ch.  His.),  Kurtz  {Ch.  His.). 

The  candid  admissions  of  those  who  are  no  believers  in  our  doctrine  are  so  interest- 
ing that  we  append  several  more.  Thus  e.g.  Dodgson  {Transl.  of  Tertidlian,  yo\.  1, -p. 
121-3)  speaks  of  our  belief,  according  to  Irenaeus  and  Justin,  "  as  belonging  to  the  full 
soundness  of  faith,"  that  "  Eusebius  states  it  to  have  been  the  prevailing  doctrine  in  the 
church,"  and  that  "  until  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  ;  (it  was)  held  by  most, 


484  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  75. 

questioned  hy  none  whose  name  has  beau  preserved."  Bh.  Russell  (Dis.  on  Mill.,  p.  236) 
remarks  :  "  so  far  as  we  view  the  question  in  reference  to  the  sure  and  certain  hope 
entertained  by  the  Christian  world  that  the  Redeemer  would  appear  on  the  earth,  and 
exercise  authority  during  a  thousand  years,  there  is  good  ground  for  the  assertion  of 
Mede,  Dodwell,  Burnet,  and  other  writers  on  the  same  side,  that  down  to  the  beginning 
of  the  fourth  century  ihe  belief  was  universal  and  undisputed.'"  Dr.  j^ast  (the  Com- 
mentator) in  an  Art.  in  "  The  West.  Ch.  Advocate''  (July  30,  1879)  remarks:  "  Hase, 
distinguished  for  the  accuracy  of  his  statements,  calls  Chiliasm  '  ihe  great  faith-article  of 
the  Primitive  Church. '  Prof.  Volk,  in  his  masterly  reply  to  Dr.  Keil,  says  also,  '  It  was 
fundamental  to  the  Church  from  the  beginning, ' ' '  Our  entire  line  of  argument  shows 
why,  of  necessity,  it  was  thus  "fundamental'  and  "the  great  faith-article"  of  the 
early  Church. 

OI)s.  4.  The  evidence  in  favor  of  the  general  perpetuation  of  the  doc- 
trine is  strengthened  by  the  concessions  of  those  who  were  among  the  first, 
and  most  bitter,  opposers.  Thus  e.g.  Jerome  {Co)n.  on  Jes.,  19  :  10),  sajs  : 
"  that  he  durst  )iot  eojidemn  the  {Millennial)  doctrine,  because  many  ec- 
clesiastical 2)er  sons  and  martyrs  affinn  the  same.'" 

This  is  quoted  by  Brooks  {El.  Proph.  Interp.,  p.  48).  Among  my  notes  I  find  the 
following  reference  :  See  Jerome's  Frcf.  to  Isa.,  65,  and  his  Com.  on  Jer.  19  :  10,  where 
he  admits  that  "  maiiy  Christians  and  martyrs  had  affirmed  the  things  that  he  denied  4 
and  that  a  great  multitude  of  Christians  agreed  in  them  in  his  own  day  ;  so  that 
though  he  could  not  follow  them,  he  could  not  condemn  them."  In  another  place  he  says  : 
"  a  multitude  of  persons  will  be  offended  with  me."  Comp.  also  Brooks'  (p.  49,  etc.) 
statements  concerning  Eusebius,  Augustine,  etc.  We  fully  admit  in  following  Proposi- 
tions that  through  such  men  as  Jerome,  Eusebius,  and  others— who  like  Eusebius 
could  flatter  the  Emperors  with  the  idea  that  the  Millennial  glory  was  alread}^  inaugurated 
under  their  sway,  and  that  Rome  itself  was  converted  into  the  New  Jerusalem —the 
doctrine  declined.  We  also  admit,  as,  in  full  accord  with  predictions,  that  during  the 
dark  ages  it  remained,  like  many  other  precious  doctrines,  under  an  eclipse.  The  very 
opposition  and  decline  here  noticed  is  only  an  additional  reason  for  retaining  the  doc- 
trine, because  if  extensively  poj^ular  and  universally  received,  and  continued  thus  down 
to  the  present,  its  history  would  not  harmonize  with  the  warnings,  cautions,  and  predic- 
tions relating  to  it,  showing  that  men  would  turn  away  from  it.  On  this  point  it  is 
only  necessary  to  again  quote  Whitby  {Treatise  on  Tradition,  as  given  p.  86,  Proph.  Times, 
vol.  6)  himself  :  "  This  doctrine  (Cliiliasm)  was  owned  in  the  first  ages  of  the  church  by 
the  greatest  number  of  the  Christian  clergy,  as  is  confessed  by  Eusebius  ;  that  by  the 
confession  of  St.  Jerome  many  ecclesiastical  men  and  martyrs  had  asserted  it  before 
their  time  (//.  Eccles.  1,  3,  c.  39,  in  Jer.  19),  and  that  even  in  his  days  it  was  the  doctrine 
which  a  great  multitude  of  Christians  followed  {Pivem,  in  lib.  13,  Com.,  in  Esa.), "  etc. 

Obs.  5.  The  reception  and  interpretation  of  the  Apoc,  also  indicates  the 
extent  of  Millenarian  doctrine.  It  being  held  to  contain  the  hopes  of  a 
Kingdom  to  come,  as  we  have  shown,  it  was  confidently  appealed  to  in 
our  behalf,  and  was  universally  received  by  the  orthodox  "^believors.  This 
continued  until  some  Anti-Chiliasts  endeavored, — seeing  no  escape  from  its 
teaching, — to  bring  it  into  discredit  ;  which  opposition  only  ceased  when  it 
was  found  that  its  plain  announcements  might  be  spiritualized.  Dr. 
Smith  (iY.  Test.  His.,  p.  723,  On  Rev,)  remarks  :  ''  The  interval  between 
the  Apostolic  age  and  that  of  Constantine  has  been  called  the  Chihastic 
period  of  Apocalyptic  interpretation." 

Gibbon  {His.  Decline,  etc.,  vol.  1,  p.  535)  sarcastically  alludes  to  this,  saying:  "A 
mysterious  prophecy,  which  still  forms  a  j^art  of  the  sacred  canon,  but  which  was 
thought  to  favor  the  exploded  sentiment,  has  very  narrowly  escaped  the  proscription  of 
the  church."  He  refers  to  the  complaint  that  Sulp.  Severus  made  respecting  its 
neglect  ;  for  as  Reuss  and  others  have  stated,  the  Greek  Fathers,  under  the  influence  of 
the  Alexandrian  theology,  from  the  time  of  the  third  century  manifested  an  antipathy 
to  the  book,  although  previously  it  was  held  as  the  great  and  important  Revelation  from 


Prop.  75.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  485 

Christ.  It  is  supposed  bj^  some  that  Caius  (about  a.d.  210)  first  started  the  opposition 
to  the  Apocalypse  ;*  this  was  strengthened  by  the  position  of  Dionysius  (about  a.d.  248), 
although  he  is  forced,  over  against  his  doubting  its  genuineness,  to  say  :  "  But,  for  my 
part,  I  dare  not  reject  the  book,  since  man// of  the  brethren  have  it  in  high  esteem," 
etc.  (comp.  Stuart's,  Hug's,  Michaelis',  Barnes',  and  other  Introductions  for  a  detailed 
account).  Gibbon  refers  to  its  omittal  by  the  Council  of  Laodicea  (a.d.  363).  The 
contest  over  the  book  resulted  from  its  supposed  Chiliastic  teaching  (so  Barnes,  etc.), 
and  Hug  (Introd.,  p.  654)  says  :  "  It  was  amid  the  disputes  concerning  the  Millennium 
that  the  first  explicit  and  well-authenticated  denial  of  the  Apoc.  occurred. ' '  Bh.  Kussel 
(On  Mill.)  states  :  "  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  so  long  as  tlie  prophecies  regarding  the 
Millennium  were  interpreted  literally  the  Apocalypse  was  received  as  an  inspired  pro- 
duction, and  as  the  work  of  the  apostle  John  ;  but  no  sooner  did  theologians  find 
themselves  compelled  to  view  its  annunciations  through  the  medium  of  allegory  and 
metaphorical  description,  than  they  ventured  to  call  in  question  its  heavenly  origin,  its 
genuineness,  and  its  authority."  Art.  Apoc.  (by  Prof.  Schem)  Apj^leton's  Cyclop.,  says  : 
"  The  rejection  of  the  canonical  and  apostolical  character  of  the  book  was  chiefly 
prompted  by  opposition  to  Chiliasm  ;  and  when  the  interest  in  the  Chiliastic  contro- 
versies declined,  the  church  generally  received  the  Apoc.  as  the  work  of  the  apostle 
John."  Hence  Mede  (  Works,  p.  6U2)  said  :  "I  have  demonstrated  that  the  1000  follow 
the  times  when  the  beast  and  the  false  proj)het,  and  consequently  the  times  of 
Antichrist,  which  those  who  oi^pose  the  Chiliasts  have  found  so  necessary"  (i.e.  assume 
existing)  "  as  to  force  them  to  deny  the  Apocalypse  to  be  Scripture  ;  nor  was  it  ever 
admitted  until  they  had  found  some  commodious  interpretation  of  the  1000  years. "  We 
append  Home's  [Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  379)  statement  :  "  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that 
the  authenticitj'  of  this  book  was  very  generally,  if  not  universally,  acknowledged  during 
the  first  two  centuries,  and  yet  in  the  third  century  it  began  to  be  questioned.  This  seems 
to  have  been  occasioned  by  some  absurd  notions  concerning  the  Millennium,  which  a 
few  well-meaning  but  fanciful  expositors  grounded  on  this  book  ;  which  notions  their 
opponents  injudiciously  and  presumptuouslj^  endeavored  to  discredit,  by  denying  the 
authority  of  the  book  itself."  (He  quotes  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Dr.  Priestly  as  regard- 
ing it  one  of  the  best  attested  books  of  the  New  Test.,  which  is  the  uniform  opinion  of 
the  best  critics,  destructive  and  orthodox.)  The  student  will  find  numerous  similar 
testimonies  in  the  Introductions  to  the  Apocalypse  (as  e.g.  Barnes,  Lange,  Alford, 
Liicke,  etc.),  so  that  (so  Lange  Eev.,  p.  64)  in  summing  up  "  the  Pre  Constantinian 
Period"  of  Apoc.  interpretation,  it  is  thus  given  :  "  hundamental  Thought :  The  Jldlennial 
Kingdom  is  to  come  ;  according  to  the  Chiliastic  view,  its  coming  is  imminent."  M  Clmtock 
&  Strong's  Cyclop.,  Art.  "  Revelation,"  remarks  :  "  The  interval  between  the  apostolic 
age  and  that  of  Constantine  has  been  called  the  Chiliastic  period  oi  Apocalyptic  inter- 
pretation. The  visions  of  John  were  chieflj''  regarded  as  representations  of  general 
Christian  truths,  scarcely  yet  embodied  m  actual  facts,  for  the  most  part  to  be  exempli- 
fied or  fulfilled  in  the  reign  of  Antichrist,  the  Coming  of  Christ,  the  Millennium,  and 
the  day  of  judgment.  The  fresh  hopes  of  the  early  Christians,  and  the  severe  persecu- 
tions they  endured  taught  them  to  live  in  those  future  events  with  intense  satisfaction 
and  comfort."  Compare  the  statements  of  Herzog's  Encyclop.,  Appleton's  Cyclop.,  and 
others  ;  especially  the  Introd.  by  Dr.  Elliott  in  his  Horce  Apoc.  Pressense  (The  Early 
Days  of  Christianit}'.  p.  501,  Ap.,  note  L),  advocating  the  authenticit}'  of  the  Ai:»oc., 
remarks:  "  The  first  doubts  on  this  subject  were  expressed  by  the  sect  of  the  Alogi. 
who  denied  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.  These  doubts  were  carried  further  by  Caius. 
and  finally  by  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (Eusebius  7  :  25),  and  more  or  less  confirmed  by 
Eusebius.  But  it  is  needful  to  study  the  grounds  takpn  by  Dionysius,  in  order  to  be 
convinced  that  he  reasons  entirely  from  a  priori  arguments,  and  that  it  is  fear  of  the 
Chiliasts  or  Millenarians  which  leads  him  to  throw  doubt  upon  the  book  of  Revelation." 


*  The  student  is  referred  to  a  contradiction — those  who  assert  that  Caius  rejected  the 
Apoc,  ground  such  a  rejection  on  the  supposition  that  he  esteemed  Cerinthus  the 
author  of  it— now,  the  Benedictines  (Buckle,  3Hs.,  vol.  3,  p.  211)  allege,  that  when  the 
Apoc.  was  violently  attacked  by  Cerinthus  and  other  heretics,  the  early  Fathers,  as 
Justin,  Irenaeus,  Theophylact,  etc.,  believed  it  to  be  written  by  John.  However  this 
may  be,  two  things  are  certain  :  (1)  that  if  the  doctrines  of  Cerinthus  are  correctly 
reported  he  could  not  be  the  author  of  the  book,  seeing  it  contains  much  opposed  to  the 
same  ;  (2)  John  being  the  author  and  the  opponent  of  Cerinthus,  would  not  adopt  views 
endorsing,  moi-e  or  less,  those  of  Cerinthus, 


486  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

Obs.  6.  The  extent  to  which  the  doctrine  prevailed  is  also  apparent  from 
the  Apocryphal  books.     The  counterfeit  is  based  upon  the  genuine. 

Thus  e.g.  Gieseler  {Ch.  Ills.,  vol.  1,  p.  100),  after  saying  that  "  in  the  character  of 
the  spurious  writings  of  this  period  (the  Sec.  Century)  we  can  trace  the  peculiar  features 
of  the  age  ;  their  purpose  being  either  to  encourage  the  persecuted,  or  to  convince  the 
unbelieving,  and  not  unfrequently  to  give  the  sanction  of  antiquity  to  the  tenets  of  a 
particular  sect.  In  this  way  the  old  spurious  writings  of  the  Jews  were  interpolated  by 
the  Christians,  as  the  Book  of  Enoch  and  the  Book  of  Ezra  ;  and  others  were  new 
manufactured  as  the  Testament  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs,  the  Ascension  of  Isaiah,  and 
the  Shepherd  of  Hermas.  Of  a  different  character  were  the  books  of  Hystaspes,  and 
the  Sibylline  Prophecies,  which,  as  well  as  the  Acts  of  Pilate,  seem  to  have  been  chiefly 
intended  for  the  heathen."  "In  all  these  works  the  belief  in  the  Millennium  is  so 
evident  that  no  one  can  hesitate  to  consider  it  as  universal  in  an  age,  when  certainly  such 
motives  as  it  offered  were  not  unnecessary  to  animate  men  to  suffer  for  Christianity. 
This  belief  rested  mainly  on  the  book  of  Revelation.  The  Mill,  was  represented  as  the 
great  Sabbath  which  was  very  soon  to  begin,  and  to  be  ushered  in  by  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead."  Prof.  Stuart  {Oom.  Apoc,  vol.  1,  Introd.,  etc.)  largely  quotes  from  them, 
and  shows  their  Chiliastic  tendency.  See  also  Greswell  {On  the  Parables,  vol.  5,  Part  2) 
and  numerous  writers,  such  as  Lawrence  (who  translated  several),  Corrodi,  Liicke, 
Wieseler,  Bleek,  etc.  Comp.  Art.  on  The  Sibylline  Books  in  LittelVs  Liv.  Age,  Sept,  29th, 
1877,  taken  from  the  Edinb.  Rev.,  which  says  that  Ewald,  Bleek,  and  others  have 
supposed  that  this  Jewish  expectation  of  a  Messianic  Kingdom  was,  more  or  less,  based 
on  Daniel's  i)redictions.  The  writer  says  of  these  books  that  "  they  explicitly  pro- 
pound the  idea  of  a  Kingdom  of  the  just  upon  earth  anterior  to  the  final  resurrection 
and  general  judgment."  We  do  not  receive  and  vindicate  those  books  as  e.g.  Whiston 
( Vindlc.  of  the  Sibylline  Books),  and  we  do  not  decry  them  as  e.g.  Justin  {Rem.  Eccl.  His.), 
but  simply  receive  them  as  indicative  and  corroborative  of  views  largely  held  at  an  early 
period,  preceding,  at,  and  after  the  First  Advent. 

Ots.  7.  This  feature^  in  order  to  weaken  the  force  of  our  Proposition,  is 
asserted  by  some,  viz. :  that  our  doctrine  was  confined  to  the  Jewish 
churches.  Thus  e.g.  Shedd  {His.  Ch.  Doc,  p.  291)  declares  :  *' it  is  not 
surprising  to  find  that  Millenarianism  was  a  peculiarity  of  tlie  Jeivish 
Christian,  as  distinguished  from  the  Gentile  Christian  church,  at  the  close 
of  the  first  century."  The  facts  as  given  by  history,  and  attested  to  by 
Neander,  Mosheim,  Lightfoot,  Lardner,  Whitby,  and  a  host  of  others, 
flatly  contradict  this  declaration.  The  Gentile  Christian  churches  down 
to  the  third  century  (until  Caius,  Origen,  and  Dionysius),  received  it 
jiist  as  freely  and  entertained  it  just  as  heartily  as  tlie  Jewish  Christian. 
Prof.  Shedd  gives  no  historical  proof  to  sustain  his  position.  The  con- 
trary is  clearly  seen  (1)  by  the  Gentile  churches  which  adopted  it,  as  e.g. 
Thessalonica,  Vienna,  Lyons,  Carthage,  etc. ;  (2)  by  the  Gentile  Fathers, 
and  their  converts,  which  adopted  it,  of  whom  we  have  more  than  of 
Jews  ;  (3)  by  the  generality  of  view  entertained,  there  being  no  recorded 
attack  by  any  writer  until  the  time  of  Caius,  Origen.  and  Dionysius  ;  (4) 
by  both  the  Greek  and  Latin  Fathers,  the  East  and  West,  adopting  it. 

Such  a  concealment  of  facts,  admitted  too  by  many  of  our  opponents,  is  evidence  of 
loeakness  and  unfairness.  The  simple  truth  is,  that  both  in  the  East  and  the  West,  both 
in  the  Pauline  and  the  other  apostolic  churches,  both  in  minds  previously  imbued  by 
the  Jewish  or  the  Hellenic  culture,  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  still  future,  was 
cordially  entertained.  Dr.  Neander  (vol.  1,  p.  364)  makes  some  judicious  remarks  on 
this  point,  when  he  clears  Justin  of  Ebionism.  The  drift  of  such  assertions  is  very 
apparent,  viz.  :  to  make  our  doctrine  odious  under  the  impression  that  it  is  exclusively 
"  Jewish"  —  overlooking  what  we  have  already  said  on  this  subject,  and  that  the 
Chiliastic  Fathers  were  themselves  the  opposers  of  the  fanatical  Jewish  opinions  and 
prejudices  based  on  a  servile  observance  of  the  Mosaic  law.  Even  in  the  Pauline 
churches  much  was  retained  essentially  Jewish  in  doctrine,  but  the  candid  student  will 


Prop.  75.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  487 

(liscrimiDate  between  this  and  what  was  regarded  as  non-essential.  The  extreme  Jewish 
idea  of  the  continued  obligatory  observance  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  law  was  combated 
by  the  early  Chiliasts,  as  e.g.  evinced  in  their  oj)position  to  the  Ebionists,  but  this  was 
done  loitkout  discarding  doctrines  founded  on  covenant  and  prophecy,  and  remaining 
untouched  by  the  abrogation  of  the  Judaic  ritual.  The  critic  will  candidly  distinguish  ; 
the  one-sided  disj^utant  will  mingle  together  things  that  essentially  differ.  The  plainest 
facts  have  no  force  with  the  latter,  as  e.g.  the  testimony  of  Justin  (as  given  by  Neander, 
vol.  1,  p.  364)  that  Chiliasts  were  found  among  the  converted  Pagans.  The  student  will 
not  fail  to  observe  how,  in  their  eagerness  to  find  some  leverage  against  us,  our  op- 
ponents present  directly  hostile  theories  to  account  for  the  historical  origin  of  our 
doctrine  ;  thus  e.g.  Pressense,  as  we  have  previously  quoted,  ascribes  its  commence- 
ment to  the  Gentile  Thessalonians,  and  Shedd  to  the  Jewish  churches. 

Obs.  8.  Various  methods,  lacking  candor  and  fairness,  are  resorted  to  in 
order  to  avoid  giving  our  doctrine  its pre-eniiue?it  historical  sfafus.  Some 
of  these  have  been  referred  to  (see  Proi^s.  73-74),  others  will  follow. 

1.  Some  writers,  seeing  the  j^reponderance  on  our  side,  purposelj^  lower  Patristic 
learning  (Prop.  72).  Hamilton,  Shedd,  etc.,  only  lower  the  quite  early  Fathers  (Chil- 
iastic),  and  give  their  decided  preference  to  the  later  ones  (with  all  their  monkish,  popish 
tendencies),  on  the  plea  that  "their  learning  and  talents  far  surpassed  any  in  the  first 
centuries  of  the  church."  Just  as  if  Scrij^tural  doctrine  dejjended  on  human  learning 
and  talent,  and  ?)o<  on  divine  declarations.  The  student  wall  notice,  that  when  the  Refor- 
mation restored  the  right  of  private  interpretation  and  judgment,  it  also  resulted  in 
depreciating  Patristic  works.  The  Reformers  attacked  Origen,  Jerome,  and  others  ; 
criticism  assailed  the  enthroned  later  Patristic  Theology,  pointing  out  its  palpable 
contradictions  and  errors.  The  result  was,  that  for  a  time  all — without  discrimination — 
fell  into  neglect,  the  scathing  rebukes  of  the  Reformers  and  the  searching  tests  de- 
stroying their  reputation  and  authorit3^  But  after  a  while  a  reaction  set  in  ;  their 
works  were  again  read  and  quoted,  and  found  to  be  valuable,  if  not  in  imparting  au- 
thorit}^  at  least  in  giving  the  history  of  doctrines  and  of  the  church.  The  republication 
of  them  in  various  forms,  the  desire  that  every  writer  has  to  have  them  sustain  a 
discussion  of  doctrine,  the  numerous  quotations  found  in  able  w^orks,  the  exhaustive 
researches  in  early  history  through  their  aid,  fully  indicate  the  esteem  in  which  they  are 
held.  After  repeated  disputes  concerning  their  merit,  it  is  finally  conceded  by  the  best 
critics  that  while  all  may  be,  more  or  less,  defective  in  some  points,  the  nearer  the 
Fathers  are  to  the  apostles  the  purer  the  doctrine  promulgated  (i.e.  less  of  error  is  im- 
parted), and,  jjrovided  a  unity  exists,  the  greater  weight  it  should  possess.  In  depre- 
ciating the  earlier  Fathers,  as  some  do,  we  lower,  in  a  measure,  Christianity  itself— i.e.  it 
can  only  be  legitimately  traced  in  its  continuity  through  such  disparaged  Fathers.  The 
Fathers  are  only  worthy  of  reception  in  so /ar  as  their  writings  correspond  vfiih.  the  Script- 
ures, and  are  valuable  in  giving  us  an  idea  how  the  Scrii^tures  were  interpreted  and 
understood.  To  uphold  them  as  infallible,  or  to  decry  them  as  unworthy  of  attention  is 
to  entertain  an  extreme  ;  to  treat  them  as  Stuart,  and  others,  is  to  give  force  to  the 
sarcasm  of  Chillingworth,  that  divines  "  account  them  as  Fathers  when  they  are  for 
them,  and  children  when  they  are  against  them."  On  the  Fathers,  compare  "  The 
Ante-Nicene  Library,''  Daille  *'  On  the  right  use  of  the  Fathers''  (Hallam's  Introd.  Lit.  of 
Europe,  vol.  2,  p.  404),  Riddle's  Manual  Ch.  Antiq.,  Wake's  Ejyis.  Ajjost.  Fathers,  Whis- 
ton's  Prim.  Christians,  Middleton's  Free  Inquiry,  and  Eccl.  His.  in  general. 

2.  Cyclopaedias  in  articles  written  by  persons,  either  hostile  to  our  doctrine  or  un- 
acquainted with  its  history,  give  a  very  one-sided  description  of  it.  In  addition  to  the 
instance  presented  under  Prop.  73,  others  can  readily  be  given.  Thus  e.g.  Appleton's 
Amer.  Cyclop,  aj^pears  reluctantly  to  say  :  "  It  is  admitted  on  all  sides  that  Millenarian 
views  were,  if  not  general,  at  least  very  common  in  the  ancient  church,"  and  while  cor- 
rectly giving  the  .Fathers  who  supported  them,  it  artfully  associates  with  them  Mon- 
tanism,  etc.  It  perverts  the  language  of  Justin  (comp.  Prop.  72),  saying  that  he  "  knew 
many  orthodox  Christians  icho  icere  not"  Millenarian,  when  the  exact  reverse  is  true 
(comp.  Brooks  El.  Proph.  hiterp.,  Seiss'  "  A  Question  in  Eschatology,"  p.  17,  foot-note, 
who  refers  to  Daille,  Miinscher,  Miinter,  Schwegler,  etc.).  Forgetting  the  distinctive 
teaching  of  Millenarianism,  viz.:  that  of  the  personal  Advent  followed  by  the  Kingdom 
of  the  Theocratic  King  here  on  earth  introducing  the  promised  Mill,  glory,  the  article 
introduces  the  belief  in  the  end  of  the  loorld  at  the  tenth  century  and  afterward,  Mil- 
lerism,  Swedenborgianism,  etc. — all  of  which  rejected  the  Chiliastic  teaching  on  the  subject 


488  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

of  the  Kingdom.  While  interesting  and  candid  facts  are  given,  it  is  apparent  that  the 
writer  had  no  distinct  idea  of  Millenarianism  dodrinally,  or  else  he  certainly  would  not 
have  attempted  to  identify  with  it  those  (1)  who  had  only  one  single  point  of  union 
with  it,  viz.  :  in  the  belief  of  a  personal  Advent,  and  (2)  who  had  no  sympathy  with  it 
even  in  a  single  point,  viz.  :  spiritualizing,  even  the  Advent  as  the  riwedenborgians 
and  Shakers.  In  the  Millenarian  doctrine  the  personal  Sec.  Advent  is  only  the  grand 
means  for  introducing  the  glorious  Kingdom  and  reign  here  on  earth  ;  in  the  theories 
thus  engrafted  upon  us  it  is  either  spiritualized  away  as  something  of  the  past,  or  it  is 
supposed  to  end  all  sublunary  things  by  a  general  judgment  and  destruction.  Such 
works  being  specially  designed  for  reference,  lead,  unintentionally,  many  to  be  prejudiced 
against  our  doctrine.  Take  Buck's  'Theol.  Die,  Art.  "Mill.,"  and  as  introductory- 
prejudging  the  matter  and  prejudicing  the  reader— our  faith  is  represented  '*  according 
to  an  ancient  tradition  in  the  Ghurcn,  grounded  on  some  doubtful  texts  in  the  Apoc. 
and  other  Scriptures."  Then  to  neutralize  its  historical  force,  its  extensiveness  is  thus 
underrated  :  "  Though  there  has  been  no  age  of  the  Church  in  which  the  Millennium 
was  not  admitted,  by  indluidual  divines  of  the  first  eminence,  it  is  yet  evident,  Jrom  the 
writings  of  Eisebius,  IrencKus  (?),  Origen,  and  others,  among  the  ancients,  as  well  as  from 
the  histories  of  Dapin,  Mosheim,  and  all  the  moderns,  that  it  was  never  adopted  by 
the  whole  Church,  or  made  an  article  of  the  established  creed  in  any  nation."  (But 
admit  this,  and  if  it  forms  a  valid  reason  for  rejecting  the  doctrine,  how  then,  tried  by 
this  test,  would  Back's  modern  Whitbyan  theory  fare?  Our  oj^ponents  are  exceedingly 
careful  not  to  make  a  trial  of  this  test  oi  orthodoxy.)  After  giving  some  Mill,  tenets,  as 
mainly  founded  on  Rev.  20  :  1-6,  he  says  :  "  This  passage  all  the  ancient  Millenarians 
took  m  a  sense  grossl}^  literal,  and  taught,  that,  during  the  Millennium,  the  saints  on  eatih 
were  to  enjoy  every  bodily  delight.'"  With  this  idterly  unfair,  disrespectful,  and  erroneous 
representation,  oar  doctrine  is  contemptuously  dismissed,  and  the  spiritual  view  given. 
We  abundantly  refute  his  statements  in  the  quotations  given  (even  from  opponents), 
and  show  by  direct  citations  from  the  Fathers  that  they  founded  the  Messianic  King- 
dom, which  they  expected,  on  the  covenants  and  propliecies,  and  that  they  carefully  dis- 
criminated between  the  glorified  saints  and  the  nations  in  the  flesh,  and  in  their  holding 
to  inestimable  spiritual  and  heavenly-derived  blessings  connected  with  the  Millennium. 
Such  unpardonible,  professed  historical  representations,  making  our  belief  ridiculous  at 
the  expense  of  scholarship  or  honesty,  can  be  multiplied.  We  append  an  illustration,  to 
show  how  Chiliastic  Fathers  are  treated.  In  the  Art.  "  Irenaeus,"  M'Clintock  A  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  the  writer  (Prof.  J.  H  Worman\  after  highly  eulogizing  Irena3us,  and  in 
evidence  of  his  deserving  the  same  giving  his  doctrines  held,  passes  to  his  Millenarian 
views,  saying  :  "  The  ijeculiar  Millennial  views  of  Irena^us,  which  stamp  him,  by  his  close 
adherence  to  Papias,  as  a  Chiliast,  we  hardly  care  to  touch  ;  they  are  certainly  the  weak 
spot  in  our  author,  but  deserve  to  be  i:)assed  not  only  without  comment,  hut  even  unnoticed.''' 
Alas  !  what  prejudice  will  effect. 

3.  Editors  in  critical  notes  appended  to  works,  frequently  give  unhistorical  statements, 
which  practic;illy  degrades  the  belief  of  the  early  church.  Thus,  to  illustrate  :  Gibbon 
{Decline  and  Fall,  etc.,  vol.  1,  p.  532)  remarks  :  "It  was  universally  believed  that  the  end 
of  the  workV  (Gibbon  ought  to  have  said,  to  be  correct,  "end  of  the  age'')  "and  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven  were  at  hand,"  etc.  The  Editor,  Milman,  remarks  in  a  note  : 
"  this  was,  in  fact,  an  intngral  part  of  the  Jewish  notion  of  the  Messiah,  from  which 
the  minds  of  the  Apostles  themselves  were  but  gradually  detached.  See  Berthold, 
Christologia  Jadoiorum,  concluding  chapters."  Here,  without  the  least  proof  being 
assigned,  and  with  a  reference  to  the  Jewish  view  which  must  have  highly  colored  the 
previous  preaching  of  the  aj^ostles,  Milman  takes  an  important  supposed  change  for 
granted  (which,  if  true,  places  the  apostles  during  their  discipleship  in  the  jDosition  of 
ignorant  preachers  of  the  Kingdom),  and  one  too,  which,  if  it  really  occurred,  places 
the  believers  of  the  first  centuries  in  a  false  attitude,  of  direct  antagonism  to  the  apostles. 
The  remark  does  not  help,  in  the  least,  to  invalidate  Gibbon's  statement,  but  only 
makes  it  the  more  formidable,  seeing  that  the  prevailing  belief  under  apostolic  super- 
vision is  left  unaccounted  for  and  unexplained.  Such  loose  criticisms,  with  just  such 
lack  of  proof,  abound  in  numerous  works,  and  are  received,  without  examination,  by 
many  solely  on  the  reputation  of  the  critic,  and  the  result  is  that  our  doctrine  suffers. 

4.  While  some  Eccles.  Historians  candidly  give  a  tolerable  fair  statement  of  the  early 
view,  its  generality  and  the  names  of  the  Fathers  who  held  it,  etc.,  there  are  others 
who  grudgingly  and  in  the  briefest  manner  adhere  to  it.  Thus  e.g.  a  student  not  posted 
in  the  history  of  the  doctrine  could  not  possibly  infer  from  the  brief  account  of  Kurtz 
{Ch.  His.)  the  extent  and  perpetuation  of  our  faith.  Others,  again,  mention  it  but  with 
words  of  disresi)ect  and  condemnation,  even  when  exj)ressing  no  personal  opinion  on 


Prop.  75.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  489 

other  alleged  errors.  Others,  refusing  to  consider  the  important  influence  that  it 
exerted  in  the  early  church,  almost  entirely  (some  entirely  as  Jones'  Ch.  His.)  ignore  it, 
until  they  come  to  the  history  of  the  Anabaptists.  Such  authors  are  read  by  many 
incapable  of  discriminating,  and  thus  necessarily  prejudice  other  minds  against  us. 
Even  Mosheim  (^whom  we  largely  quote)  is  rebuked  by  Gibbon  {Bed.  and  Fall,  vol._  1, 
p.  535,  note  66)  as  a  "  learned  divine  not  altogether  candid,"  for  the  manner  in  which 
he  presents  this  matter.  But  Mosheim  makes  far  greater  admissions  in  Com.  de  liehus 
Chris.,  and  does  justice  to  the  prevalence  of  the  doctrine.  The  reader  must  consider, 
what  was  said  under  Prop.  73,  viz  :  that  the  early  belief  is  a  tender  subject  to  many, 
seeing  that  they  cannot  reconcile  its  existence  and  prevalence  with  their  modern 
notions.  Hence,  with  the  best  of  motives,  they  hastily  pass  over  it  m  order  that 
the  contrast  between  the  early  and  the  later  faith  may  remain,  as  much  as  possi- 
ble, in  the  background.  Others,  however,  exhibit  the  unfriendliness  felt,  by  care- 
fully mentioning  Chiliasm  in  connection  with  enthusiasts  and  fanatics,  but  not  the 
slic^htest  reference  is  allowed  when  the  names  of  eminent  scholars  and  divines,  who 
hefd  it,  are  mentioned.  The  concessions,  seemingly  forced  by  historical  necessity,  are 
reluctantly  given,  and  as  tersely  as  possible.  Thus  to  illustrate:  Hase  Ihs.  Ch. 
Church,  omits  a  proper  detailed  (such  as  the  subject  demands)  mention  of  xrimitive 
Chiliasm,  and  thus  violates  his  affirmation  in  the  Pref.,  p.  12.  For,  when  explaining 
what  mioht  safely  be  omitted  in  a  Church  History,  he  remarks  :  "  No  particular  event 
connected  with  theological  science  ever  needs  to  be  noticed,  except  when  it  becomes 
important  as  a  prominent  circumstance  belonging  to  the  age,  and  may  properly  be  re- 
garded as  characteristic  of  the  times."  He  slightly  notices  Chiliasm,  and  then  m  con- 
nection with  Cerinthus,  Montanus,  Irenaeus,  and  Tertullian.  Large  space  can  be  given 
to  heresies,  to  inferior  doctrines  and  events,  while  the  briefest  allusions  are  penned 
respecting  this  doctrine  once  so  prominent,  belonging  to  an  age,  and  characteristic  of 

5  Professed  writers  on  Chiliasm  are  recommended,  although  admitted  to  be  very 
unfair  in  their  statements.  Thus  e.g.  H.  Corrodi's  His.  of  Chiliasm,  which  one  of  our 
opponents  (Prof.  Stuart,  Com.  on  Apoc,  latter  part)  characterizes  as  a  book  that  must  be 
read  with  caution,  being  uncandid  and  unreliable,  is  extolled  by  others.  Such  works, 
with  their  sweeping  assertions,  and  their  efforts  to  link  with  our  doctrine  opinions  and 
parties  in  nowise  related  thereto,  practically  degrade  the  belief  of  the  first  churches, 
givinc^  fo'-ce  to  the  sarcasms  of  unbelievers.  Corrodi  (whose  views  Dorner,  Person  of 
Christ  V  1  p  240,  rejects,  as  too  blindly  followed  by  others)  has  merely  given  a  carica- 
ture of  our  doctrine,  allying  with  it  many  (as  we  shall  show  hereafter)  whose  opinions 
are  utterly  antagonistic  to  Chiliasm,  and  far  more  in  accord  and  sympathy  with  his  own 
doctrinal  position  than  ours.  He  lays  great  stress  on  the  vagaries  incorporated  by 
some  fanatics,  just  as  if  his  own  doctrine,  as  well  as  all  others,  had  not  m  like  manner 
been  perverted.  The  professed  histories  of  Prof.  Briggs  in  the  N.  Y.  Evangelist  (1^79), 
of  Dr  Macdill  in  The  Chicago  Instructor,  are  of  a  similar  nature,  corresponding  with  the 
brief  mention  of  Prof.  Stuart  {Apoc.)  and  others.  The  simple  fact  that  the  histories  of 
Millenarianism  in  such  works,  cyclopaedias,  reviews,  etc.,  are  one-sided  and  unjust  led 
Appleton's  Amer.  Cyclop,  to  assert  that  a  His.  of  Chiliasm  w^as  still  a  desideratum,  saying: 
"  A  good  histon/  of  Millenarianism  in  the  Christian  Church  is  still  a  desideratum,  as  the 
works  published  do  not  exhaust  the  subject"  (it  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  scholar,  properly 
qualified,  and  able  to  discriminate  between  our  doctrine  and  that  of  others,  will  yet 
supply  tills  acknowledged  want).  We  are  indebted  on  our  side  to  compressed  state- 
ment as  given  by  Mede,  Brookes,  Bickersteth,  Greswell,  Seiss,  Shimeall,  West,  Moore- 
head,  and  others.  ,  ^     ,     ,   ,  l.       -r^-    •    -i. 

6  Writers  on  the  His.  of  Ch.  Doctrine,  Dogmatical  Theology,  Eschatology,  Sys.  Divinity, 
etc  have  given  rather  a  caricature  of  the  history  of  this  doctrine  than  a  correct  account 
of  the  facts  as  they  existed,  although  a  few  concede  largely  in  our  favor.  Having  gwen 
some  specimens  already,  we  only  refer  to  a  recent  illustration.  Prof.  Shedd,  m  his  Ihs. 
of  Ch  Doc  (an  admirable  work  in  many  respects),  unquestionably  misstates  a  number 
6f  things  in  reference  to  our  belief.  This  is  clearly  seen  from  the  evidence  that  we 
have  thus  far  produced.  The  reader  is  referred  to  Shimeall' s  Bei)ly  to  Shedd  for  strictures 
on  some  of  his  statements.  This  mode  of  procedure  necessarily  injures  our  view  m 
the  estimation  of  persons  to  whom //ie /asforicai/ads  are  unknown.        _  .  •        •      •+ 

7.  Writers  against  our  doctrine,  seeing  the  historical  force  that  it  sustains  m  its 
relationship  to^'the  first  centuries,  carefidly  avoid  all  allusion  to  it.  Thus  e.g.  Brown 
(Christ's  Sec.  Coming)  makes  no  reference  to  the  church  history  of  the  doctrine  ;  and 
many,  ignorant  of  the  real  facts,  are  deceived  in  supposing  that  it  was  confined  as  an 
error,    to   comparatively  a  few  persons.      In  addition,   it  may  be   remarked,  that   it 


490  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

Brown' s  reasoning  is  correct,  viz.  :  that  Chiliasm  is  unscriptural,  then  it  only  increases 
the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  prevailing  Primitive  Church  view  with  the  apostolic 
sujoervision  and  the  purity  of  transmitted  doctrine.  It  is  evident  acknowledgment  of 
weakness,  when  a  work  specifically  directed  against  us  i:)asses  by  this  Primitive  belief 
without,  at  least,  attempting  to  explain  the  same.     But  this  is  trae  of  numerous  works. 

8.  Some  authors,  with  all  their  candid  concessions,  attempt  (as  e.g.  Bush,  On  Mill,  p. 
12,  etc. )  to  make  the  impression  that  the  very  early  Fathers  were  divided  into  two  parties, 
one  holding  to  a  literal,  the  other  to  a  spiritual,  interj)retation  of  the  Kingdom.  But, 
unfortunately  for  themselves,  in  the  enumeration  they  are  not  able  to  present  on  the  side 
of  the  latter  a  single  one  of  the  earliest  Fathers.  To  illustrate  :  we  give  the  Fathers  cited 
by  Bush  himself  as  follows :  on  the  literal  side  Barnabas,  Justin,  Irenasus,  Cyprian, 
Tertullian,  Lactantius,  with  Bh.  Bull,  and  Lardner  as  apologists  for  them  ; — on  the 
spiritual  side,  Origen,  Epij)hanius,  Genadius,  Augustine,  Jerome,  and  Dionysius.  The 
ordinary  reader  not  conversant  with  dates  is  apt  to  be  deceived,  regarding  these  as 
contemporary,  when  the  truth  is,  that  the  Spiritualists  only  arose  in  the  third  and  follow- 
ing centuries. 

9.  Other  writers  present  this  in  a  still  more  offensive  form  in  order  to  delude  the 
unwar3\  Thus  e.g.  Hamilton  in  his  work  against  Millenarians  (p.  308)  boldly  remarks  : 
"  that  its  (Chiliastic)  principles  were  opposed  and  rejected  by  almost  every  Father  of  the 
church,  with  the  exception  of  Barnabas,  Clement,  Papias,  Justin  Martyr,  Irena3us,  Nepos, 
Apollinarius,  Lactantius,  and  Tertullian."  This,  of  course,  cannot  deceive  the  scholar, 
who  well  knows  that  Hamilton  cannot  j^roduce  a  single  Father  before  the  third  century  in 
opposition  to  us,  but  it  is  eminently  calculated  to  deceive  and  j^rejudice  the  unlearned. 

10.  Some,  who  are  evidently  afraid  of  the  antiquity  of  our  doctrine,  proceed  to  even 
greater  length,  entirely  ignoring  the  earlier  Fathers.  Thus  e.g.  Jones  ("  Lee.  on  the 
Apoc,"  p.  9,  Pref.),  s^Deaking  of  the  same,  says  :  "we  will  concede  to  you  that  these 
opinions  are  not  novelties  ;  we  can  trace  them  as  far  back  as  the  beginning  of  the  third 
century."  This  unscholarly  procedure,  in  the  face  of  abounding  testimony  to  the 
contrary,  merits  a  severe  rebuke. 

11.  Another  favorite  method  to  disparage  our  views  is  the  giving,  in  a  professed 
account  of  the  early  belief,  an  exceedingly  weak  and  one-sided  exhibition  rf  the  ^Scriptural 
basis  upon  which  it  rests.  Thus  e.g.  Lindsay  {Ency.  Brit.,  Art.  Mill.)  entirely  omits  the 
covenants  and  projDhecies  as  quoted  by  the  Fathers  (which  we  reproduce  in  this  work), 
and  confines  himself  almost  exclusivelj^  to  Rev.  20,  just  as  if  that  really  was  the  founda- 
tion of  our  system  of  belief,  forgetting  that  Chiliasm,  based  on  covenant  and  prophecy, 
existed  before  the  Revelation  was  given.  Even  an  o^jponent  like  Bh.  Russel  (Bis.  on  the 
Mill,  p.  39)  pointedly  says,  that  there  is  "no  room  for  doubt  that  the  notion  of  a 
Millennium  preceded  by  several  centuries  the  introduction  of  the  Christian  faith"  (comp. 
Shimeall's  Esohatology,  or  a  Reply  to  Prof.  Shedd,  p.  59,  etc.). 

12.  Various  other  methods  are  resorted  to  in  order  to  diminish  the  force  of  our  doc- 
trinal j)osition  in  the  early  faith  of  the  church,  and  as  these  have  already  been  referred 
to,  the  briefest  enumeration  must  suffice.  (1)  Our  doctrine  is  dismissed  as  Judaic  or 
Jewish  (Props.  69-73),  just  as  if  that  settled  the  whole  question  ;  (2)  that  good  and  great 
men  did  not  receive  it,  just  as  if  doctrine,  Scriptural,  depended  upon  man's  reception  of 
it  ;  (3)  that  fanatics  and  enthusiasts  held  to  it,  thus  overlooking  the  fact  that  this  is  true 
of  almost  every  doctrine,  and  that  this  is  no  test  of  the  truth  of  any  doctrine  ;  (4)  the 
Fathers  are  made  out  as  credulous,  sui^erstitious  (Proj?.  72,  Obs.  1,  note  4),  while  the 
greater  defects  of  Anti-Chiliastic  Fathers  are  ignored  ;  (5)  they  are  made  to  say  what 
they  never  wrote  (Prop.  73,  Obs.  1,  note  4\  so  that  even  Prof.  Stuart  {Com.  Apoc.) 
refers  to  it  as  a  fact  that  sentences  indorsing  Millenarianism  have  been  altered,  omitted, 
or  others  substituted  (as  e.g.  Victorinus  spiritualized  by  Jerome)  ;  (6)  the  Fathers  are 
made  out  to  be  the  followers  of  Cerinthus  (Prop.  72,  Obs.  1,  note  4)  or  of  Papias,  or  the 
advocates  of  Montanism  (when  some  of  them  lived  long  before  Montanus  arose),  or  else 
they  are  simply  discarded  as  errorists,  unworthy  to  be  followed  ;  (7)  they  conceal  the 
actual  views  held  by  the  Fathers  who  opposed,  because  such  opinions  are  likewise 
antagonistic  to  their  Whitbyan  notion  ;  (8)  they,  without  positively  saying  so,  leave  the 
impression,  by  the  artful  opposition  presented,  that  the  modern  notions  respecting  the 
Millennium  loere  then  also  entertained  in  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Church,  although 
unable  to  quote  any  one  favoring  the  same. 

13.  Still  another  method  is  to  make  Millenarianism  responsible  for  the  vagaries  of 
every  writer  (forgetting  to  apply  the  same  rule  to  the  still  greater  absurdities  of  our  op- 
ponents). One  of  the  editors  of  The  Proph.  Times  (vol.  5,  No.  6,  p.  90)  has  well  said, 
"  that  on  the  basis  of  this  method  of  reasoning,  Bossuet's  Histoire  des  Variations  is  con- 
elusive  against  Protestanism." 


PkOP.  75.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  491 

14.  Others  prominently  present  the  disagreements  between  Millenarian  writers  in 
details,  etc.,  and  from  thence  illogically  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  whole  is  erroneous, 
forgetting  that  the  same  reasoning  would  destroy  the  credibility  of  any  or  all  of  the 
great  doctrines  of  the  Bible  (as  the  Atonement,  Lord's  Supper,  etc.).  Brookes  [Maranaiha, 
p.  19)  shows  that  there  is  far  more  agreement  between  Pre-Millenarians  than  between 
Post-Mi llenarians,  and  that  Pre-Millenarians  are  in  agreement  on  the  grand  outlines 
although  belonging  to  all  the  various  differing  denominations.  These  outlines  in 
which  they  agree  are  the  Pre-Mill.  Personal  Advent,  the  first  resurrection  Pre-Millennial, 
the  Messianic  Kingdom  Millennial,  the  future  Millennial  reign  of  the  saints,  the  restitu- 
tion, etc.  Our  opponents  differ  among  themselves  as  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  location  of 
the  Millennium,  etc.,  so  that  they  are  divided  into  various  parties  with  antagonistic 
theories,  and  no  bond  of  union — saving  hostility  to  Chiliasm  -to  unite  them.  (Those 
differences  wiU  be  shown  by  us  hereafter. ) 

Obs.  9.  Altliougli  the  doctrine  was  opposed  in  the  third  and  following 
centuries,  yet  it  continued  for  some  time  to  have  many  who  held  to  it. 
The  custom  of  Christians,  as  Tertullian  informs  us,  to  pray  "  that  they 
might  have  ])  art  in  the  first  resurrection,^^  was  not  easily  rooted  out,  for, 
as  Cyprian  (about  a.d.  220)  tells  us,  the  thirst  for  martyrdom  was 
increased  by  the  hope  that  suffering  for  Christ  would  entail  a  more  distin- 
guished lot  in  His  coming  Kingdom.  Nepos,  Lactantius,  Methodius,  Paul- 
inus,  Gregory  of  JSTyssa,  Yictorinus,  Apollinaris,  taught  the  Millenarian 
doctrine.^  Seiss  (Ap.  Cb.  2,  to  Last  Times)  gives  additional,  Hippoly- 
tus,  Commodian  (of  whom  Clarke,  Sacred  Lit.,  p.  194,  says  :  "he  received 
the  doctrine  of  the  Millennium,  which  was  the  common  belief  ot  his  time"), 
Cyprian,  the  Council  of  Nice,  and  Sulpicius  Severus.  Shimeall  {Eschatol- 
ogy)  adds  to  these,  Melito  (one  of  the  earlier  Fathers,  contemporary  with 
Justin,  Bisliop  of  Sardis,  whom  Jerome  and  Gennadius  affirm  to  be  Mil- 
lenarian), and  Coracion.  It  makes,  however,  no  material  difference  how 
many  names  may  be  added  as  writers  in  the  third  and  fourth  centuries, 
since  (1)  it  has  been  shown  to  have  been  the  prevailing  belief  previously, 
and  (2)  a  falling  away  from  the  faith — the  early  faith — is  predicted,  and 
believers  are  warned  (e.g.  2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4,  etc.)  against  it. 

1  Undoubtedly  many  others  could  be  added,  if  we  possessed  their  writings.  Brooks 
(£7.  Proph.  Inter}).)  gives  these,  and  thus  alludes  to  Ej^iphanius  (about  a.d.  365)  as  men- 
tioning "  the  doctrine  being  held  by  many  in  his  time,  and  sj)eaks  favorably  of  it  himself. 
Quoting  the  words  of  Paulinus,  bishop  of  Antioch,  concerning  one  Vitalis,  whom  he 
highly  commends  for  his  piety,  orthodoxy,  and  learning,  he  says  :  '  Moreover,  others 
have  affirmed  that  the  venerable  man  should  say,  that  in  the  first  resurrection  we  shall 
accomplish  a  certain  millenary  of  years,'  etc.,  on  w^hich  Epiphanius  observes,  '  And  that 
indeed  this  millenary  term  is  written  of,  in  the  Apocalypse  of  John,  and  is  received  of 
very  many  of  them  that  are  godly,  is  manifest.''  "  Lib.  3:2.  It  is  in  view  of  such  testimony 
that  ApjDleton's  Cyclop.,  Art.  Mill.,  remarks  :  "  The  old  view  continued  to  find  ad- 
vocates during  the  third  century,  among  whom  Tertullian,  Nepos,  bishop  of  Arsinoe, 
and  Methodius,  bishop  of  Tyre,  were  prominent.  In  the  fourth  century,  though  it  had 
still  many  adherents  among  the  people,  it  found  no  longer  any  advocate  of  note  among  the 
Christian  writers,  yet  Jerome,  who  did  not  believe  in  it  himself,  did  7wt  dare  to  condemn 
it."  An  indirect  argument  is  employed  to  denote  the  continued  prevalence  of  the  doc- 
trine by  Millenarian  writers  (as  Brookes,  Bickersteth,  Greswell,  and  others)  in  the 
course  adopted  by  the  Nicene  council.  Although  the  council  was  busy  settling  disputed 
questions,  yet  nothing  was  said  against  our  view,  which  imjjlies  (1)  that  many  among 
the  council  must  have  held  the  doctrine,  or  (2)  that  they  regarded  it  as  so  far  based  on 
Scripture  and  the  tradition  of  the  church  that  those  who  held  it  were  orthodox  brethren, 
or  (3)  that  it  was  so  extensively  held  outside  of  the  council  among  Christians  that  pru- 
dence dictated  no  utterance  against  it. 

Obs,  10.  The  apologies  that  those  make  who  admit  the  prevailing  early 
belief  and  yet  regard  it  as  erroneous,  are  derogatory  to  the  truth, — to 


492  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

Christianity  itself.  Having  alluded  to  this  (see  and  compare  Prop.  72, 
Obs.  4,  and  note),  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  it  will  not  answer,  in  order 
to  get  rid  of  this  early  church  view,  to  do  as  Grotius  (whom  Gibbon,  Deal, 
and  Fall,  vol.  1,  p.  533,  approvingly  quotes)  does,  who  "  ventures  to  in- 
sinuate that  for  wise  purposes,  the  pious  deception  was  j^ermitted  to  take 
place,"  or  as  a  later  writer  (Bush,  On  Mill.,  p.  21),  who  thinks  that  owing 
to  "  special  trials"  and  "  uncultivated  minds,^'  the  error  was  winked  at 
because  ''the  error  in  itself  was  an  itmocetit  one.'"  Such  apologies  are 
worse  than  none,  recoiling  back  with  fearful  force  (as  infidels  exultingly 
see  and  enforce)  upon  the  founders  of  the  Christian  church,  under  whose 
direct  auspices  it  was  extended.  The  reason  for  all  this  unnecessary  apolo- 
getics springs  from  a  supposed  better  belief  substituted  in  place  of  the 
earlier. 

In  reference  to  so  important  a  matter  as  the  Kingdom,  we  unhesitatingly  adopt  the 
language  of  Eaton  (Perm,  of  Chris.,  p.  46),  "  we  cannot,  however,  accept,  we  can  only 
repudiate  and  challenge  all  asserted  improvements,  whether  by  substitution  or  omission, 
in  the  subject  matter  of  Christianity  itself,  effected  by  alleged  advances  in  knowledge 
and  civilization."  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  related  as  it  is  to  the  true  conception 
of  the  title  "  the  Christ,"  is  a  vital  part  of  "  the  subject  matter  of  Christianity,"  and, 
properly  considered  (as  will  be  shown),  cannot  be  set  aside  by  such  dishonoring  reason- 
ing. Hence  we  must  reject  as  a  pitiful  exculpation.  Prof.  Briggs'  idea  that  in  the  early 
Church  the  Millenarian  error  was  probabl}"  needed  to  advocate  a  principle  against 
Gnosticism,  and,  therefore,  in  Irenseus,  and  some  more,  it  may  be  overlooked  and  for- 
given. From  this  it  appears  that  error  and  falsehood  may  be  projilahly  employed  to 
advance  the  interests  of  Christianity  ;  this  is  not  the  first  time  that  the.  notion  was 
entertained, 

Obs.  11.  It  has  been  observed  by  some  that  this  doctrine  of  the  early 
church,  if  true,  should  have  been  continuously  presented  in  a  prominent 
orthodox  form  (i.e.,  confessionally),  and  because  not  so  held,  it  cannot  be 
true.  But  this  entirelv  overlooks  the  predicted  defection  from  tlie  truth 
(as  e.g.  2  Thess.  2,  2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4,  etc.),  and  the  warnings  given  to  us  to 
return  to  the  truth  ^^ previously  imparted  ;  it  elevates  the  mere  deductions 
and  confessional  position  of  tlie  church  above  that  of  the  Scriptures  in  its 
covenants  and  prophecies  ;  it  forgets  that  the  probationary  attitude  of  man 
and  the  exercise  of  his  will  has  an  important  bearing,  making  a  rejection 
of  truth  possible  ;  and  it  ignores  the  fact,  that  precisely  the  same  line  of 
argument  Adiich  applies  to  a  foretold  apostatizing  from  truth,  and  to  the 
propriety  (necessity)  and  good  results  of  a  revival  of  doctrine  by  the 
Reformation,  can,  with  equal  force,  be  used  in  the  defence  of  this  single 
doctrine. 

The  student  will  observe  that  the  very  persons  who  urge  this  objection  are  very 
careful  to  conceal  from  the  ordinary  reader  two  important  facts  connected  with  this 
matter,  viz.  :  (1)  that  the  earliest  creeds  were  so  worded,  by  simply  taking  Scriptural 
phraseology,  and  without  entering  into  the  order  or  manner  of  fulfilment,  that  all,  Mil- 
lenarian or  Anti-Millenarian,  could  subscribe  to  them  ;  and  (2)  that  the  modern  notion  of 
the  Millennium  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  ancient  or  more  recent  confessions  (see  Prop. 
78).  If  the  objection  iias  propriety  it  certainly  must  include  their  own  doctrine.  Hence 
the  reasoning  of  Prof.  Briggs,  demanding  a  confessional  standard  in  the  Primitive  Church 
has  not  a  particle  of  force,  but  is  positively  condemnatory  of  his  own  doctrine,  seeing  that 
neither  his  doctrine  nor  ours  is  confessionally  presented,  but  that  both  of  us  can  accept 
e.g.  the  Apostles'  Creed  and  the  Nicene  Creed,  which  only  deal  in  generalities.  He 
keenly  feels  this,  and,  therefore,  lays  stress  on  later  developments. 

On  this  point  it  is  eminently  proper  to  present  the  misleading  statements  of  eminent 
historians  who,  opposed  to  Chiliasm,  seek  to  apologize  for  its  existence  by  way  of  belittling 
its  extent  of  belief.     Neander  {Genl.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  397),  with  all  his  concessions 


PkOP.  75.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDO:vr.  493 

1  T,-      i«f<.r.^o  r.f  PTiiliasU   is  unfair  in  this  :  "  What  we  have  just  said,  however   is 
noftobe  nnde  stoodt'rCM^^^^^^  a  part  of  iherjene.^  creed  of  the 

Shnrch  Our  sources  of  infonuation  from  the  different  branches  of  the  Church  m  these 
ParTrtimes  arc  L  scanty  to  enable  us  to  make  any  positive  assertion  on  this  point. 
ZerfvTi  we  meet  CM  fsm,  as  in  Papias,  Irena^us,  Justin  Martyr- eveiTthmg  seems  to 
mdicate   haU  from  one  country  and  from  a  single  fountain  head."     ^ow 

'£'T^^:^c^^d^n.Msioric.cl  for  the  following  -f-s  (1)  tliere  was  no  ,...rd^^^^^ 
of  the  Church  published  m  those  early  times  with  which  Chiliasm  can  possib  j  be  com- 
?.nrpd  •  i'?X  mentallv  forms  a  creed  of  his  own  development  (a  later  one)  with  ichichhe 
pred     (2)  he  mental  }  lo  u^^^^  he  Dresumes  on  an    Anti-Chiliastic  tendency  which 

other  h-ind   his  declaration  is  most  positively  contradicted  by  Justin,  Iienaeus,  and  le  tui 
and  Kelly  believe  that  ancient  Chiliasm  xvas_«  "P'^-^^.f^^f^^':  '^;'^;;r„S  to   „clg 

ss'sssTissm-srssss, 

so  contemptible  as  to  embrace  -a  scheme,  so  ^"^^"P^^^f  orthis  Wn  and  many  of  our 
however  adverse  they  may  prove  to  his  own  belief. 

Ohx.  13.  It  has  been  alleged  by  others,  that,  tf ="S  t'^^«.':'i^J''^'^,„^t'le^ 
whole,  and  considering  tlie  vast  multitude  since  the  ^'-^J ^ ,f  "">  "PO^«es 
that  have  rejected  the  doctrine,  but  comparativel^y  «  «  «7?  «»'"5.r  lia^e 
held  to  this  view  of  the  Kingdom  ;-and,  hence,  i  ongh  to  be  lejecea. 
We  reply,  that  as  numbers  are  no  Jest  of  religions  J.f  t™\V^,  ?,Vfl^« 
lished'4«m/orr7/e«;  as  doctrine  is  to  be  found  m  '^s  F"  ty  1»  "^^^^^^^ 
and  not-in  tlie  voice  of  the  multitude  ;  as  Chris  Himself  has  conhned  tue 
reception  of  His  words  to"  a  few,"  '>  S'«f  ^/^^'i^V  J3  ,W„etion  are 
and  not  to  the  "  many  ;"  as  the  warnings  of  a  '"±f'Z\t"nZevl 
plainly  imparted,  we  are  not  concerned  either  m  defending  oui  numoeis, 


494  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

or  in  admitting  our  minority.  Historical  facts,  abundantly  verifying  pre- 
dictions, are  sufficient  to  satisfy  us.  It  is  to  be  admitted,  however,  that — 
to  escape  the  notion  of  a  novelty  or  a  later  substitution, — it  is  a  source  of 
gratification  to  find  so  many  advocates  of  the  trutli  pertaining  to  this  sub- 
ject, and  especnilly  to  find  them  in  the  very  i)erlod  of  the  church's  history, 
where,  reasonably,  they  ouglit  to  appear  as  witnesses. 

Many  of  our  opponents  strenuously  protest  against  our  making  Chiliasm  universal  in 
the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Church.  Now,  in  this,  as  our  quotations  show,  we  only 
follow  the  declarations  of  scholars  who,  without  any  doctrinal  bias,  give  their  decided 
opinion  respecting  its  extent.  For  the  reason  assigned  in  the  Obs.  we  are  not  con- 
cerned in  pressing  this  universality  or  insisting  upon  it  as  a  decided  fact,  although  stated 
as  such  by  Justin  and  Tertullian.  1.  We  are  satisfied  with  its  being  ike  common,  prev- 
alent faith  of  the  orthodox  Churches,  East  and  West,  North  and  South,  as  the  evidence 
conclusively  shows.  2.  We  have,  no  doubt,  that  Gnostics,  and  errorists,  and  probably 
some  Christians  (more  or  less  leavened)  opposed  the  doctrine  from  the  beginning  (for 
doctrine  of  every  kind  finds  its  opposers  or  jjerverters  in  every  age),  for  such  antagonism 
we  must  reasonably  expect.  3.  The  universality  is  only  apparent  in  this  :  that  while 
the  early  Fathers  advocated  it,  7iot  one  of  the  early  Fathers — contemporary — opposed  it  ; 
such  opposition  proceeding  from  later  Fathers.  4.  This  earnest  protest  against  the  uni- 
versality by  our  present  opponents,  holding  to  the  Whitbyan  theorj',  does  not  help 
their  cause  in  any  respect,  seeing  that  the  alleged  hostility  to  our  doctrine  did  not  spring 
from  a  regular,  systematic  defence  of  the  Whitbyan  doctrine ;  for  every  opponent  (as  we 
shall  show)  arising  from  the  third  century  advocated  a  Millennial  theory  which  they  (the 
Whitbyans)  do  not  receive.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  men  who  first  set  themselves 
against  our  doctrine  were  likewise  in  error  (although  they  must  be  profusely  eulogized, 
as  done  by  Prof.  Briggs— because  they  oj^posed  alleged  error  with  error).  5.  The  re- 
sult of  this  contest  over  the  universality  of  our  doctrine,  as  thus  developed,  shows,  if 
vfe  are  to  credit  our  antagonists,  that  the  Universal  Church  was  in  decided  and  grievous 
error— a  portraiture  certainly  not  very  complimentary  to  a  Church  founded  and  just 
perpetuated  by  inspired  men  and  elders  consecrated  by  apostolic  hands.  Our  position 
takes  a  higher  view  of  the  doctrinal  position  of  the  Church,  and  gives  it  that  dignity  and  honor 
which  belong  to  it  ;  that  of  our  opponents  simply  belittles  and  degrades  it.  The  abun- 
dant quotations  presented  by  us  confirm  this  statement. 

Ohs.  13.  Since  many  of  our  opponents,  in  order  to  make  an  erroneous 
impression  on  those  unacquainted  with  Eccles.  History,  'purposely  mingle 
the  later  Fathers  with  the  earlier  (as  if  they  were  contemporary),  it  will  be 
proper  to  give  the  Fathers  in  chronological  order,  so  that  the  ordinary 
reader  can  &qq  for  him  self  v^h^n  they  lived,  and  form  his  own  judgment  re- 
specting their  position  in  history.  This  decides  the  cpiestion  of  priority, 
and  also  that  of  the  later  introduction  of  opposing  influences.  We  will, 
therefore,  mention  those  that  are  expressly  named  by  both  ancients  and 
moderns. 

1.  Pre- Mill.  Advocates  of  the  1st  Century. 

a  1.  (1)  Andrew,  (2)  Peter,  (3)  Philip,  (4)  TJiomas,  (5)  James,  (G)  John, 
(7)  Mattheiv,  (8)  Aristio,  (9)  John  the  Presbyter — these  all  lived  between 
A.D.  1-100  ;  John,  it  is  supposed — so  Mosheim,  etc. — died  about  a.d.  100. 
(All  these  are  cited  by  Pap  las,  who,  according  to  Ireneeus,  was  one  of 
John's  hearers,  and  intimate  with  Polycarp.  John  is  also  expressly 
mentioned  by  Justin.  Xow  this  reference  to  the  apostles  agrees  with  the 
facts  that  we  have  proven:  (a)  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  did  hold  the 
Jewish  views  of  the  Messianic  reign  in  the  first  part  of  this  century,  and 
(^)  that,  instead  of  discarding  them,  they  linked  them  with  the  Sec.  Ad- 
vent.) JSText  (10)  Clement  of  Rome  (Phil.  4:3),  who  existed  about  a.d. 
40-100.  (His  Chiliasm,  in  the  small  remains  left,  is  apparent  from  three 
particulars  :  ((^)  "  preaching  the  Coming  of  Christ  ;"  {b)  rebuking  scoffers 


Prop.  75.]  the  theocratic  ki:n-gdom.  495 

at  the  alleged  delay  of  that  Coming,  and  expressing  the  hope  "  that  He 
shall  come  quickly  and  not  tarry  ;' '  (c)  and  occupying  the  Chiliastic  posture 
of  '''every  hour  expecting  the  Kingdom  of  God.''  Such  sentiments  only 
accord  with  the  then  prevailing  Millenarian  views  ;  if  opposed  to  it,  as 
some  too  eagerly  affirm  because  no  detailed  expression  of  eschatological 
opinions  have  reached  us,  hoio  could  he,  when  Jewish  views  were  all 
around,  thus  employ  language  pre-eminently  adapted  to  confirm  Chili- 
asm,  unless  in  sympathy  with  it.)  (11)  Barnabas,  about  a.d.  40-100. 
(Whether  the  Epistle  is  that  of  Barnabas  who  was  with  Paul,  or  of  some 
other  one,  makes  no  material  difference,  seeing  that  all  concede  him  to 
us,  and  admit  that  it  was  written  quite  early,  and  must  be  indicative  of  the 
views  then  held.)  (12)  Hernias,  from  a.d.  40  to  150.  (We  give  this 
lengthy  date  to  accommodate  tlie  dispute  respecting  the  Hermas  who  is  the 
author  of  the  Pastor.  Some  who  do  not  receive  Chiliasm  make  him  the 
earlier  mentioned  Kom.  16  :  14  ;  others,  a  later  Hermas,  who  wrote  about 
A.D.  150.  All  agree  that  he  is  a  Chiliast,  and  his  location  as  to  time  is, 
probably,  decided  by  our  doctrinal  preferences.)  (13)  Ignatius,  Bh.  of 
Antioch,  died  under  Trajan,  about  a.d.  50-115  (some  date  his  death  a.d. 
107).  (His  references,  in  the  brief  fragments,  to  "  tlie  last  times''  and  the 
exhortation  in  those  times  to  "  expect  Hi))i/'  is  in  correspondence  with 
our  doctrine.)  (14)  Folyca7y,  Bh.  of  Smyrna,  a  disciple  of  the  Apostle 
John,  who  lived  about  a.d,  70-167.  (In  view  of  his  association  with 
Chiliasts,  and,  in  the  few  lines  from  him,  locating  the  reigning  of  the 
saints  after  the  Coming  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  of  the  saints,  has 
led  Dr.  Bennet  and  others  to  declare  him  a  Millenarian.)  (15)  Papias, 
Bh.  of  Hierapolis,  lived  between  a.d.  80-163.  (His  writings  come  chiefly 
through  an  enemy — Eusebius — but  all  concede  him  to  be  a  Chiliast,  and 
declare  that  he  was  tlie  disciple  and  pupil  of  St.  John,  and  the  companion 
of  Polycarp.)  This  is  the  record  of  names  in  favor  of  Millenarianism, — 
names  that  are  held  in  honorable  esteem  because  of  their  faith  and  works 
in  the  Christ,  extending  to  death. 

b  1.  Now  on  the  other  side,  not  a  single  name  can  be  presented,  which 
(I)  can  be  quoted  as  positively  against  us,  or  (2)  which  can  be  cited  as 
teaching,  in  any  shape  or  sense,  the  doctrine  of  our  opponents.' 

2.  Pre- Mill.  Advocates  of  ttie  "Zd    Cent. 

a.  (I)  Potliinus,  a  martyr,  died  aged  99  years  (a.d.  177,  Mosheim,  vol. 
1,  p.  120),  hence  a.d.  87-177.  (His  Chiliasm  is  evident  from  the  churches 
of  Lyons  and  Vienne,  over  which  he  presided,  being  Chiliastic,  from  his 
associate  Iren^us  being  his  successor,  who  describes  the  uniformity  of 
faith.  Adv.  Hceres,  50,  1.  10.)  (2)  Justin  Martyr,  about  a.d.  100-168 
(although  others,  as  Shimeall,  give  a.d.  89-165).  (He  needs  no  reference, 
as  we  largely  quote  him.  Comp.  Semisch's  Art.  on  him  in  Herzog's  Real 
Encyclop.)  (3)  Melito,  Bh.  of  Sardis,  about  a.d.  100-170,  a  few  fragments 
alone  preserved.  (Shimeall,  in  his  Reply,  says,"  Jerome  and  G&nadius 
both  affirm  that  he  was  a  decided  Millenarian.")  (4)  Hegisippus,  between 
A.D.  130-190.  (Neander,  Genl.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  pp.  430,  432,  designates 
him  "  a  church  teacher  of  Jewish  origin  and  strong  Jewish  prepossessions," 
and  an  advocate  of  "  sensual  Chiliasm.")  (5)  Tatian,  between  a.d.  130- 
190.  (He  was  converted  under  Justin,  and  is  designated  by  Neander  as 
"  his  disciple.")  (6)  IrencBus,  a  martyr  (being,  Mosheim,  Cli.  His.,  vol.  1, 
Amer.  Ed.,  note,  p.  120,  "  born  and  educated  in  Asia  Minor,  under  Poly- 
carp and  Papias,  must  therefore  be),  about  a.d.  140-202.     (We  frequently 


496  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  75. 

and  largely  quote  from  liim.)  (7)  The  Chnrclies  of  Vienne  and  Lyons,  in 
a  letter  a.d.  177  (which  some  attribute  to  Iren^us  and  others  to  a  Lyonese 
Christian — author  unknown)  lias  distinctive  traces  of  Chiliasm  in  the  al- 
lusion to  a  prior  or  first  resurrection.  (8)  Tert^dhan,  about  a.d.  150-220. 
(We  frequently  give  his  views.)  (9)  Hipjmlytns,  between  a.d.  160-210. 
(He  was  a  disciple  of  IreucTus,  and— according  to  Photius — he  largely 
adopted  Irenasus  in  his  work  against  Heresies,  and  in  his  Com.  on  Dan., 
fixed  the  end  of  the  dispensation  five  centuries  after  the  birth  of  Jesus.) 
(10)  Apollinaris,  Bh.  of  Hierapolis,  between  a.d.  150-200.  (He  is  claimed 
by  us,  and  conceded  by  e.g.  Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  Sec.  139.)  Nearly 
every  witness  is  a  martyr. 

h.  Now  on  the  other  side,  not  a  single  writer  can  be  presented,  not  even 
a  single  name  can  be  mentioned  of  any  one  cited,  who  opposed  Chiliasm  in 
this  century,  unless  we  except  Clemens  Alexandrinus  (see  3);  much  less  of 
any  one  who  taught  the  Whitbyan  view.  Now  let  the  student  reflect  : 
here  are  t^oo  centuries  (unless  we  make  the  exception  stated  at  the  close  of 
the  2d),  in  Avhich  positively  no  direct  opposition  whatever  arises  against 
our  doctrine,  but  it  is  held  by  the  very  men,  leading  and  most  eminent, 
through  whom,  toe  trace  the  Church.  What  must  we  conclude  ?  (1)  That 
the  common  faith  of  the  Church  was  Chiliastic,  and  (2)  that  such  a  general- 
ity and  unity  of  belief  could  only  have  been  introduced — as  our  argument 
shows  by  logical  steps — by  the  founders  of  the  Ch.  Church  and  the  Elders 
appointed  by  them. 

3.  Pre-MiJl.  Advocates  of  the  3d  Cent. 

a.  (1)  Cyprian,  about  a.d.  200-258.  (lie  greatly  admired  and  imitated 
Tertullian.  We  quote  him  on  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  the  Sabbat- 
ism,  etc.  Shedd,  in  his  His.  of  Hoc,  vol.  2,  p.  394,  says  that  "  Cyprian 
maintains  the  Millenarian  theory  with  his  usual  candor  and  moderation.") 
(2)  Commodian,  between  a.d."  200-270.  (Was  a  decided  Millenarian. 
Comp.  e.g.  Clarke's  Sac.  Lit.  Neander,  Genl.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  448 — 
censures  him  as  follows  :  "  The  Christian  spirit,  however,  in  these  ad- 
monitions, which  otherwise  evince  so  lively  a  zeal  for  good  morals,  is  dis- 
turbed by  a  sensuous  Jewish  element,  a  gross  Chiliasm  ;  as  for  example, 
when  it  is  aflfirmed  that  the  lordly  masters  of  the  world  should  in  the 
Millennium  do  menial  service  for  the  saints."  Neander  overlooks  how 
early  childlike  piety  might  contemplate  Ps.  149:5-9;  Isa.  60:6-10; 
Mic.  7  :  16,  17,  and  kindred  passages.)  (3)  Nepos,  Bh.  of  Arsinoe,  about 
A.D.  230-280.  (Jerome,  Whitby,  Shedd,  etc.,  make  him  a  pronounced 
Chiliast.)  (4)  Coracion,  about  a.d.  230-280.  (He  is  always  united  with 
Nepos  by  various  writers,  comp.  Hagenbach's  i//^-.  of  Doc.)  (5)  Victori- 
nns,  about  a.d.  240-303.  (He  is  expressly  called  a  favorer  of  Nepos  and 
the  Chiliasts  by  Jerome,  de  Viris  HI.,  c.  74.)  (6)  Methodius,  Bh.  of 
Olympus,  about  a.d.  250-311.  (Of  whom  Neander  — (rc^i/.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2, 
p.  496 — says,  he  had  "  a  decided  leaning  to  Chiliasm."  Conceded  to  us  by 
Whitby,  Hagenbach,  and  others.)  (7)  Lactantius  (although  his  works  were 
chiefly  composed  in  the  next  cent.,  yet  being  contemporary  with  Chiliasts 
so  long  in  this  century,  we  include  him),  between  a.d.  240-330.  (We  quote 
from  him,  although  Jerome  ridicules  his  Millenarianism.  Prof.  Stuart 
calls  him,  "  a  zealous  Chiliast.")  Others,  whom  we  strongly  incline  to  re- 
gard as  Millenarians,  owing  to  their  constant  association  with  Chiliasts, 
etc.,  we  omit,  because  the  remains  and  the  statements  that  we  have  are  so 
meagre  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  give  a  decided  expression  of  opinion. 


PkOP.  75.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  497 

b.  In  this  century  we  for  the  first  time,  unless  we  except  Clemens 
Alexandrinus,  come  to  o^^posers  of  our  doctrine.  Every  writer,  from  the 
earliest  period  down  to  the  present,  who  has  entered  the  lists  against  us, 
has  been  able  only  to  find  these  antagonists,  and  we  present  them  in  their 
chronological  order,  when  they  revealed  themselves  as  adversaries.  They 
number  four,  but  three  of  them  were  powerful  for  mischief,  and  speedily 
gained  adherents  (comp.  Prop.  76).  The  first  in  order  is  (1)  Caius  (or 
Gains),  who  is  supposed,  by  Kurtz  {Ch.  His.),  to  have  written  about  a.d. 
210,  or  as  Shedd  {His.  Hoc),  in  the  beginning  of  the  3d  cent.  (Much  that 
he  is  alleged  to  have  said  comes  to  us  through  bitter  Anti-Chiliastic  sources, 
and  must  be  correspondingly  received  with  some  allowance.)  (2)  Clemens 
Alexandrinus,  who  succeeded  Pantfenus  (died  a.d.  202,  so  Kurtz),  as  pre- 
ceptor in  the  Catechetical  School  of  Alexandria,  and  exerted  a  powerful  in- 
fluence (on  Origen  and  others)  as  a  teacher  from  a.d.  193-220.  (He 
became  a  Christian  under  Pantsenus,  after  having  devoted  himself  to  Pagan 
philosophy,  and  only  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life  made  the  disciples, 
who  so  largely  moulded  the  subsequent  interpretation  of  the  Church.)^  (3) 
Origen,  about  a.d.  185-254.  (We  shall  refer  to  him  under  the  next  Prop.) 
(4)  Pionysius,  about  a.d.  190-265.  (See  next  Prop.)  There  is  no  doubt 
but  others  were  largely  led  to  accept  of  Anti-Chiliastic  teaching  (seeing 
what  an  opposition  sprung  up  in  the  4th  cent.),  but  these  are  tlie  cham- 
pions mentioned  as  directly  hostile  to  Chiliasm.  Now  let  the  student 
carefully  weigh  this  historical  record,  and  he  will  see  that  the  Church 
history  indubitably  seals  our  faitli  as  the  general,  prevailing  belief,  for  the 
most  that  can  possibly  be  said  respecting  the  opposition  is,  that  in  the 
closing  years  of  the  2d  century  men  arose  who  started  an  antagonism  dis- 
tinctively presented  and  urged  in  the  3d  cent.,  and  which  culminated  in  the 
4th  and  succeeding  centuries.  Hence,  our  Prop,  is  abundantly  confirmed 
by  the  doctrinal  status  of  the  early  Church  ;  indeed,  it  is — if  our  line  of 
argument  respecting  tlie  apostolic  belief  remaining  unchanged  concerning 
the  Kingdom  is  conclusive — the  very  position  that  the  Church  in  its  intro- 
duction must  occupy.  How  illogical  and  unscriptural,  therefore,  for  men 
to  strive  to  weaken  the  testimony  of  those  Fathers,  and  to  apologize  in 
their  behalf,  by  making  them  ignorant,  superstitious,  sensual,  etc.,  thus 
tracmg  the  Church,  established  by  inspired  men  and  their  selected  succes- 
sors, though  ignorant,  superstitious,  and  sensual  believers,  until  the 
learned,  enlightened,  and  spiritual  Clemens,  Caius,  Origen,  and  Dionysius 
arose  and  brought  light  which  "  the  consciousness  of  the  Church''  appre- 
ciated. 

'  Prof.  Shedd  {His.  Ch.  Doc.)  endeavors  to  take  from  ns  Clement,  Ignatius,  and  Poly- 
carp,  on  the  ground  of  silence.  To  this  Shimeall  in  his  Beply  has  well  answered,  showing 
the  traces  of  Chiliasm  by  quoting,  and  laying  stress  on  their  associating  familiarly  with 
Chiliasts.  Indeed,  the  express  manner  in  which  Irenseus  and  Justin  speak  of  the  unity  of 
faith  includes  them,  or  else,  in  respect  to  persons  so  eminent  exception  would  have  been 
made.  Prof.  Briggs  {X.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879)  is  not  satisfied  with  Shedd's  seizure,  but  also 
claims,  on  the  same  ground,  Hermas.  But  all  this  does  not  help  the  doctrinal  status  of 
either  Shedd  or  Briggs.  If  simple  silence,  in  the  briefest,  fragmentary  writings,  is  a  test 
of  opposition  or  of  Whitbyism,  we  have  yei  to  learn  this  rule  and  the  reasons  upon  which  it 
is  supported.  In  reference  to  Polycarp,  it  may  be  added,  that  he  is  so  referred  to  hy 
Irenceus  in  a  letter  to  Florinus  {Euseb.,  v.  1,  c.  20),  who  professes  to  receive  the  same 
doctrines  held  by  him,  that  many  class  the  master  and  disciple  together.  Prof.  Briggs 
is  unfortunate  in  his  efforts  to  take  adherents  from  us,  such  as  Cyprian,  Apollinaris, 
Melito,  Methodius,  Victorinus,  and  others,  because  the  most  unrelenting  opi)onents 
concede  them  to  us,  fully  admitting  their  Chiliastic  teaching.     But  such  efforts  should  not 


498  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  75. 

surprise  us,  when  against  the  uniform  testimony  of  ancients  and  moderns,  as  well  as 
the  writings  open  to  all,  he  even  attemj^ts  to  take  Justin  Martyr  from  us  !  A  faith  must 
hadly  need  propping  when  it  calls  for  such  desperate  and  suicidal  efforts.  Let  the  reader 
ponder  this  fact,  that  neither  Shedd  nor  Briggs  can  quote  the  direct  language  of  any 
writer  of  this  period,  and  later,  who  advocates  their  modernized  ideas  of  the  Millennium. 
This  fact  they  artfully  conceal. 

2  We  allow  Clemens  as  against  us,  simply  on  the  ground  of  his  supposed  influence  in 
making  Origen  Anti-Chiliastic,  because  he  was  his  teacher.  But  we  do  this  under  a 
protest.  We  find  him  enumerated  as  among  the  Chiliasts  by  a  number  of  writers.  It  is 
admitted,  on  all  hands,  that  there  is  nothing  decided  from  him  respecting  a  Mill,  theory 
on  the  one  side  or  on  the  other.  Therefore  he  cannot  be  quoted  by  either  party  as 
positively  favoring  Chiliasm  or  Anti-Chiliasm.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  claimed  as 
Chiliastic  because  (comp.  Burnet's  Theory  of  the  Earth,  vol.  2,  p.  188,  Dufiield  On 
Froph.,  p.  29,  Prop.  Times,  vol.  1,  p.  73,  etc.)  he  still  holds  to  the  Chiliastic  ideas  of 
the  7th  Milliad  introducing  "  the  Eest, "  and  of  the  Kingdom  being  introduced  by  judg- 
ments. It  is  certain  that  more  in  harmonj'  with  Chiliasm  can  be  quoted  from  him' than 
that  which  is  hostile  to  it.  But  this  serious  objection  inclines  us  to  be  sufficiently 
generous  to  place  his  name  in  the  limited  list  of  our  opponents,  viz.  :  his  system  of  inter- 
pretation, which  formed  afterward,  in  the  hands  of  Origen  and  his  successors,  such  a 
leverage  against  our  doctrine.  While  Clemens  could  not,  with  the  introduction  of  his 
system,  entirely  rid  himself  of  Chiliastic  views  on  some  important  points,  yet — whether 
he  foresaw  it  or  not — its  entii'e  tendency,  as  the  development  showed,  was  to  form  the 
weapons  subsequently  so  freely  used  in  crushing  our  belief. 

Obs.  14,  When  surveying  the  historical  ground,  which  so  accurately 
corresponds  with  the  Scriptural,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  those 
writers — both  friends  and  foes — wlio  insist  upon  the  great  extent  of  Chili- 
asm in  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Church  ai^e  most  certainly  correct. 
We,  therefore,  cordially  indorse  those  who  express  themselves  as  Miincher 
{Ch.  His.,  Yol.  2,  p.  415),  that  "it  (Chiliasm)  was  u)iiversaUy  received  by 
almost  all  teacher Sj^^  and  (pp.  450,  452)  refers  it,  with  Justin,  to  "  the 
tvhole  orthodox  community, ^^  summing  up  with  this  decided  conclusion  : 
"  With  these  observations,  the  result  of  criticism  is  manifest,  that  in  the 
Catholic  Church  the  doctrine  of  the  1000  years'  Kingdom  was  the  domi- 
nant  doctrine,  and  the  rejection  of  it  was  regarded  as  an  approach  to  Gnos- 
ticism. That  the  defenders  of  Chiliasm  were  fewer  than  Justin  has  repre- 
sented— as  Schroeckh  asserts — is  a  position  which  cannot  be  historically 
maintained.^^  With  this  statement  every  unbiassed,  unprejudiced  mind 
must  coincide  when  regarding  the  historical  facts  which  support  it. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  men,  who,  like  Newman,  Pusey,  etc.,  make  much  of  tradi- 
tion, elevating  it  to  a  Romish  position,  are  very  careful— following  thus  the  Romish 
Church — to  reject  the  earliest  tradition  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  Chiliasm,  being  so 
hostile  to  their  exclusive  Church-Kingdom  view,  which  forms  the  foundation  of  their  system, 
is  particularh/  nnwelcom.e  and  offensive.  This  is  true  of  all  who  are  inclined  to  a  mystical, 
Romish  belief  of  Church  autliority  and  salvation.  But  here  is  an  evident  and  palpable 
inconsistency,  taking  their  own  doctrinal  position  for  granted,  because  they  forsake  the 
earlier  tradition  for  the  later,  and  deny  that  to  be  orthodox  which  once  was  promulgated 
as  a  test  of  orthodoxy.  This  only  indicates  that  for  the  sake  of  some  system  of  belief, 
sincerely  held,  and  filling  the  mind  with  prejudice,  not  only  the  plainest  Scriptures  but 
the  most  evident  historical  facts  will  be  ignored  or  set  aside.  They  even  in  their  ardor  for 
the  later  tradition  pronounce  Chiliasm  a  "  heresy,"  when  it  is  noteworthy,  as  Chilling- 
worth,  Lardner,  Greswell,  Neander,  and  many  others  have  observed  that  these  very 
Chiliastic  Fathers  were  the  bulwark  of  the  Church  against  all  kinds  of  error,  especially 
Gnosticism  in  all  its  forms,  several  having  specially  written  against  heresies  then  pre- 
vailing. 


PeOP.  76.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  499 


Proposition"  76.  The    doctrine  of  ilie   Kingdom   was   changed 
under  the  Gnostic  and  Alexandrian  influe7ice. 

What  tlie  doctrine  was  in  the  first  churches,  viz.  :  a  belief  that 
in  the  millennial  age,  still  future,  Christ  would  personally  come  and 
reign,  restoring  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  and  fulfilling  the 
covenant  promises,  has  been  shown  ;  now  to  j^rove  the  defection 
indicated  in  our  Proposition,  in  order  to  strengthen  our  argument, 
we  shall  rely  upon  the  testimony  of  writers  who  are  not  in 
doctrinal  sympathy  with  us.  It  would  be  an  easy  matter  to  bring 
a  large  number  of  witnesses  to  testify,  but  a  few,  prominent  for 
learning  and  ability,  will  suffice  to  show  the  truthfulness  and  force 
of  the  same. 

Ohs.  1.  The  student  will  carefully  notice  that  with  the  view  the  early 
church  had  of  ''  tlie  Chj^isfship,^'  of  tlie  Kingdom  as  expressly  covenanted 
and  predicted,  of  the  postponemeiit  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  of 
the  sjjeedji  Coming  of  the  Messiah  to  inaugurate  the  Kingdom,  of  the 
period  of  tried  intervening,  etc.,  it  was  siviplg  imijossible  for  tlie  early 
believers  to  identify  the  church  as,  in  any  sense,  the  Kingdom  of  Clod  as 
covenanted  and  prophesied.  It  was  only  ivhcn  the  Scriptures  and  the 
promises  were  spiritualized,  ivlien,  under  the  influence  of  release  from  per- 
secution and  incoming  churchly  prosperity,  the  church  itself  was  exalted 
through  civil  patronage,  that  the  Primitive  doctrine  was  gradually  but 
surely  set  aside,  and  tlie  churcJi  itself  was  made  (as  by  Origen)  "  tlie  mystic 
Kingdom  of  heaven,^ ^  or  (as  by  Eusebuis)  "  tlie  very  image  of  the  Kmgdom 
of  Christ,'"'  or  (as  by  Augustine)  ''  the  City  of  God.'' 

Brookes  (Maranaiha,  p.  536)  quotes  Bengel  as  saying:  "  When  Christianity  became  a 
worldly  power  by  Constantino,  the  hope  of  the  future  was  weakened  by  the  joy  over  the 
present  success."  Auberlen  {Daniel,  p.  375)  remarks  :  "  Chiliasm  disappeared  in  pro- 
portion as  Koman  Papal  Catholicism  advanced.  The  Papacy  took  to  itself,  as  a  robbery, 
that  glory  which  is  an  object  of  hope,  and  can  only  be  reached  by  obedience  and 
humility  of  the  cross.  When  the  Church  became  a  harlot,  she  ceased  to  be  a  bride  who 
goes  out  to  meet  her  bridegroom  ;  and  thus  Cldliasm  disappeared.  This  is  the  deep  truth 
that  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  Protestant,  anti-papistic  interpretation  of  the  ApocalyiDse" 
(see  next  Prop. — this  allusion  is  made  here,  because  the  principles  of  interpretation  flow- 
ing from  Gnosticism  and  Alexandrianism  led  to  such  a  development  and  application). 
Andreas  (Lardner's  Credibility,  vol.  5,  p.  79)  fully  admits  (a.d.  550-600)  the  primitive  view 
as  still  entertained  by  some,  as  follows  (On  Eev.)  :  "  Others  think  that  after  the  comple- 
tion of  6000  years  shall  be  the  first  resurrection  from  the  dead,  which  is  to  be  peculiar 
to  the  saints  alone  ;  who  are  to  be  raised  up  that  they  may  dwell  again  on  this  earth, 
where  they  had  given  proofs  of  patience  and  fortitude  ;  and  that  tliey  may  live  here  a 
thousand  years  in  honor  and  plenty,  after  which  will  be  the  general  resurrection  of  good 
and  bad."  He  says  that  the  Church  (his  portion  of  it)  does  not  receive  it,  holding  to  a 
reign  in  tHe  third  heaven,  etc.,  and  advocating  this  interpretation  :  "  By  the  thousand 
years  we  understand  the  preacliing  of  the  Gospel,  or  the  time  of  the  Gospel  dispen- 
sation." 


500  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  76. 

Obs.  2.  The  Encij.  Amer.,  Art.  "  Mill.,"  briefly  states  the  case  :  "  The 
Gnostics,  despising  matter,  were  adversaries  to  the  dogma  of  the  Millen- 
nium. .  .  .  And  ultimately  the  philosophical  school  of  Alexandria." 
Mosheim  {Ecdcs.  His.,  Cent.  3d,  sec.  12),  after  declaring  :  "  that  the 
Saviour  is  to  reign  a  thousand  years  among  men,  before  the  end  of  the 
world,  had  been  believed  by  many  in  the  preceding  century,  without 
offence  to  any,"  adds,  "  in  this  century  the  Millenarian  doctrine  fell  into 
disrepute,  through  the  influence  especially  of  Origen,  who  strenuously  op- 
posed it,  because  it  contravened  some  of  his  opinions."  In  his  Com.  of 
the  First  Three  Gen.  (vol.  2,  sec.  38),  he  observes  :  "  Among  the  Jewish 
opinions  to  which  in  this  age^^/i/Zoso^^A^?/  proved  detrimental,  the  most  dis- 
tinguished was  that  of  the  reign  of  Christ  a  thousand  years,  with  the  saints 
restored  to  their  bodies.  This  opinion,  I  believe,  was  introduced  into  the 
church  near  the  commencement  of  tlie  Cliristian  commonwealth.  A?id 
doiun  to  tlie  times  of  Origen,  all  the  teachers  who  were  so  disposed  openly 
professed  and  taught  it,  although  there  were  some  wlio  either  denied  it,  or 
at  least  called  it  into  question.'  But  Origen  assailed  it  fiercely  ;  for  it 
was  repugnant  to  his  philosophy  ;  and  by  the  system  of  biblical  interpreta- 
tion which  he  discovered,  he  gave  a  different  turn  to  those  texts  of  Script- 
ure on  which  the  patrons  of  this  doctrine  most  relied."  ""It  is  certain 
that  in  the  second  century,  the  opinion  that  Clirist  would  reign  a  thousand 
years  on  the  earth,  was  diffused  over  a  great  part  of  Christendom,  and  that 
the  most  eminent  doctors  favored  it ;  and  no  controversy  with  tliem  was 
moved  by  those  who  thought  otherwise.  Tertullian  speaks  of  it  as  the  com- 
mon doctrine  of  tlie  whole  church.^''  "  It  is  certain,  from  Justin  Martyr 
and  others,  that  very  many,  and  they  men  of  great  influence,  thought  as  he 
did  (i.e.  were  Millenarians),  nor  were  they  on  that  account  taxed  with  cor- 
rupt doctrine."  "But  in  the  third  century  the  reputation  of  this  doc- 
trine declined  ;  and  first  in  Egypt,  through  the  influence  especially  of 
Origen.  .  .  .  And  yet  it  could  not  be  exterminated  in  a  moment  ;  it  still 
had  respectable  advocates."  Mosheim  proceeds  in  various  places  to  show 
how,  by  a  philosophizing,  most  violent,  system  of  interpretation,  which 
began  '^  most  zvretchedly  to  pervert  and  twist  every  part  of  those  Divine 
oracles  \n\\\q\\  opposed  itself  to  their  philosophical  tenets  or  notions,"  the 
literal  interpretation  was  finally  crushed.  He  thus  contrasts  the  interpre- 
tation adopted  by  the  two  systems  :  "lie  (Origen)  wished  to  Tiave  the  lit- 
eral and  obvious  sense  of  the  words  disregarded,  and  an  arcane  sense,  lying 
concealed  in  the  envelope  of  the  words,  to  be  sought  for.  But  the  advo- 
cates of  an  earthly  Kingdom  of  Christ  rested  their  cause  solely  on  the  nat- 
ural and  propter  sense  of  certain  expressions  in  the  Bible."  ^ 

'  The  student  will  notice  the  evident  reluctance  manifested  by  the  qualifying  word 
"  near,"  and  that  while  some  (Gnostics,  etc.)  may  have  denied  it,  it  is  uiteiiy  impossible  for 
Mosheim  to  produce,  or  quote,  a  single  orthodox  writer  loho  did  this  at  that  period.  Such 
softening  expressions  are  to  be  found  in  respectable  works,  of  various  writers,  but  not 
one  has  yet  produced  his  authority  for  such  assertions  ;  and,  therefore,  we  are  forced  to 
conclude  that  the  icish  is  father  to  the  statements.  The  concessions,  partially  given  in 
frankness,  are  all  that  our  position  requires,  and  we  feel  under  obligations  to  Mosheim,  and 
others,  for  presenting  them,  although  in  direct  opposition  to  their  own  doctrinal  tenets. 

-  "Neander  follows  in  the  main  Mosheim  enlarging  on  many  points,  and  is  equally 
decisive  in  tracing  the  gradual  overthrow  of  the  once  prevailing  doctrine  to  Gnostic  and 
Alexandrian  influence.  Quotations  from  him  will  follow.  Kurtz  (Ch.  His.,  i).  146) 
remarks  :  "  Since  the  time  of  Papias  the  expectation  of  a  Millennial  reign  of  glory  at  the 
close  of  the  present  dispensation  had  been  fondly  cherished  by  the  Christians,  who, 
under  their  continued  persecutions,  looked  for  the  sj)eedy  return  of  the  Lord.     Only  the 


Prop.  76.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  501 

spiritualisis  of  Alexcmdria  (Clement,  Origen,  etc.)  opposed  ihefie  vleics,  and,  hy  allegonccd 
interpretations,  e^^loxneiS.  ix\\ixy  the,  Biblical  arguments  in  favor  of  them."  'Gibbon  {Ded. 
and  Fall,  vol.  1,  p.  535),  with  his  usual  sarcasm,  after  alluding  to  the  doctrine  that  "  it 
seems  so  well  adajDted  to  the  desires  and  aj^prehensions  of  mankind,  that  it  mufjt  have 
contributed  in  a  very  considerable  degree  to  the  progress  of  the  Christian  faith,"  remarks: 
"  But  when  the  edifice  of  the  church  was  almost  completed,  the  temporary  support  was 
laid  aside.  The  doctrine  of  Christ's  reign  upon  earth  was  at  first  treated  as  a  profound 
allegory,  was  considered  by  degrees  as  a  doubtful  and  useless  opinion,  and  was  <d  length 
rejected  as  the  absurd  invention  of  heresy  and  fanaticism."  Beaven  {Account  of  Irenm'us, 
p.  255),  after  reviewing  the  ground,  says  :  "  There  is  no  writer  of  any  importance  down 
to  the  time  of  Origen,  icho  impugned  the  doctrine  of  the  personal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth.  ' 
Olshausen  (favorable  to  Millenarianism,  but  somewhat  disposed  to  spiritualize  the 
Kingdom  in  its  application  to  the  church)  remarks  (Cbm.  on  Matt.  3  :  2)  :  "  Even  in  the 
apostolic  times  sprung  up  the  germs  of  the  Gnostic  idealism,  which,  in  its  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom,  denied  any  fiiture  real  and  outward  manifestation  of  the  divine  dominion." 
He  also  shows  how  the  Alexandrian  school  developed  this  ideal  feature. 

Obs.  3.  Gnosticism,  with  its  Yaried  forms  and  subtle  modifications,  was 
early  prevailing,  and  whilst  nearly  all  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  suffered, 
more  or  less,  under  its  moulding  influence,  that  of  the  Kingdom  especially 
became,  under  its  plastic  manipulations,  07ie  widely  different  from  the 
Scriptural  and  early  church  doctrine.  In  its  dualistic  theories,  its  inter- 
mediary existences,  its  evolutions  of  the  Divine,  etc.,  it  struck  a  heavy  blow 
at  the  promised  kingship  of  the  Son  of  Man  as  David's  Son  ;  it  changed  the 
royal  title  of  "  the  Messiah,"  "  the  Christ"  into  a  mere  name  equivalent 
to  that  of  Jesus  ;  it  discarded  as  foolish,  or  received  as  containing  a  hid- 
den meaning,  the  prophecies  relating  to  this  future  Kingdom  :  and  with 
its  peculiar  tenets  of  making  man  rise  to  God  Himself — a  becoming  identi- 
fied with  Deity — //  rejected  altogether  the  notion  of  such  a  Kingdom  con- 
tained in  the  letter  of  Holy  Writ,  and  believed  in  by  contemporary  Chris- 
tians. Emanation  then,  as  now  in  its  Pantheistic  form,  has  no  sympatliy 
for  the  early  Patristic  Kingdom.  Asceticism,  the  belief  in  the  inherent 
corruption  of  matter,  and  its  kindred  brood,  then,  just  as  now,  was  antag- 
onistic to  it.  While  Docetism,  the  outgrowth  (so  some  writers)  of  one 
form  of  Gnosticism,  denying  as  it  did  the  reality  of  the  human  body  of 
Jesus,  the  Christ,  effectticdhj  closed  all  access  to  an  understanding  of  the 
Kingdom,  sjnritmdizing  not  only  the  body,  but  everything  else  relating  to 
Him  as  Messiah.  One  party,  impelled  by  their  principles,  not  only 
ignored  Judaism  as  antagonistic  to  Christianity,  but  insisted  that  the  Oid 
Test,  contained  error  and  should  be  rejected  as  a  true  exponent  of  the  will 
of  the  Supreme  God.  (The  Old  Test.,  while  true  in  itself,  was  only  a  his- 
tory drawn  up  under  the  guidance  of  the  Demiurge — hence  inferior  and 
liable  to  deceive  ; — comp.  Neander  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  383).  The  Chiliasts 
maintained  the  contrary,  largely  quoting  from  the  Jewish  Scriptures.  To 
reconcile  these  opjiosite  tendencies,  another  and  succeeding  party  arose, 
who  assumed  that  reason  occupied  the  position  of  umpire,  and  from  the 
deductions  of  reason  instituted  a  medium  between  the  two,  retaining  some- 
thing from  both  Gnosticism  and  Chiliasm,  so-  far  as  interpretation  was 
concerned,  but  also  spiritucdizing  tlie  Kingdom,  applying  it  to  the  church, 
etc.  From  this  arose  the  rejection  of  the  peculiar  and  distinguishing 
characteristics  belonging  to  both  Chiliasm  and  Gnosticism.  Hence,  it  was 
the  relationship  that  error  sustained  to  Christianity — adopting  the  phrase- 
ology of  the  latter  but  with  other  meanings  attached,  wearing  the  garb  of 
friendshij)  and  even  of  piety — that  gradually  undermined  the  formerly  re- 
ceived doctrine  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom. 


502  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  76. 

Precisely  the  same  tactics  were  exhibited  in  that  period,  that  we  find  to-day  in  the 
writings  of  Free-Religionists,  etc.  Gnosticism,  in  some  of  its  phases  and  workings,  is 
far  from  being  extinct,  as  evidenced  in  a  refined  Pantheism  that  finds  its  advocates  even 
among  the  professed  orthodox. 

Ohs.  4.  It  is  well  to  keep  in  view  the  direct  means  employed  to  get  rid  of 
the  Chiliasfcic  idea  of  the  Kingdom.  (1)  Cains  (or  Gains)  and  Dionjsins 
first  cast  donbt  upon  the  genuineness  and  inspiration  of  the  Apocalypse,  it 
evidently  being  supposed  that  the  appeals  made  to  it — in  view  of  its  corre- 
spondence with  preceding  Jewish  ideas — could  not  otherwise  be  set  aside. 
(2)  By  rejecting  the  literal  sense,  and  substituting  a  figurative  or  alle- 
gorical ;  this  ejfectually  modified  covenant  and  prophecy.  (3)  Such  portions 
of  the  Old  Test,  as  literally  taught  the  doctrine,  had  their  prophetic  in- 
spiration discredited,  as  in  the  Clementines  (comp.  Neander  on  them).  (4) 
Accepting  all  the  prophetical  portions,  and  what  could  not  be  conveniently 
allegorized  and  applied  to  the  church,  was  attributed  to  heaven  for  fulfil- 
ment (as  seen  in  Origen  and  his  followers).  (5)  Making  promises  directly 
given  to  the  Jewish  nation  as  such,  either  conditional  in  their  nature  or 
else  merely  typical  of  the  blessings  accruing  to  Gentiles.  These,  after 
what  has  been  written,  need  no  comment. 

The  student  will  also  observe  another  cause  mentioned  by  Gibbon,  Mosheim, 
Neander,  etc.  It  appears  from  the  testimony  of  history  that  Chiliasts— under  the 
pressure  of  persecution  from  which  they  earnestly  sought  deliverance,  and  under  the 
misapprehension  that  Antichrist  was  already  exhibited  in  the  Roman  power,  hoped  for 
the  speedy  Advent  of  Christ  and  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom.  Now,  this  view  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  and  this  hope  of  a  speedy  anticipated  deUverance  caused  them  to  feel 
unwilling  to  engage  in  wars  of  conquest,  or  even  to  enter  into  the  civil  service  of  the 
Empire.  This  feeling  and  resultant  conduct,  based,  rightly  or  wrongly,  upon  their  view 
of  the  Empire  and  its  expected  destruction  under  the  coming  Messiah  and  Kingdom, 
was  naturally  most  offensive  to  the  Roman  Emperors  and  their  adherents,  and  also  to  that 
portion  of  the  clergy  who  were  for  concAliaiin<j  the  existing  temporal  power.  This  became 
the  more  so,  when  the  church  began  to  realize  the  protection  of  the  State  preparatory 
to  a  union  of  the  two,  and  the  reaction  without  due  discrimination,  made  Chiliasm  itself 
offensive. 

Ois.  5.  Another  deadly,  most  effective  weapon  was  the  philosophy  of 
that  period.  At  first  it  was  only  represented  as  "  the  wall  and  the  hedge 
of  the  vineyard,"  but  it  was — notwithstanding  apostolic  warnings — very 
soon  assiduously  cultivated  as  part  of  the  vineyard  itself.  The  first  insid- 
ious approach  was,  that  this  "  wall  and  hedge"  was  so  run  as  to  exclude 
from  the  vineyard  of  truth  whatever  human  reason  regarded  as  objection- 
able ;  the  second  followed  as  a  necessary  (through  human  infirmity  and 
shortsightedness)  result,  error  itself  was  graciously  accepted,  diligently 
planted,  cultivated,  and  grown.     The  crop  was  abundant. 

It  is  only  necessary,  in  confirmation,  to  direct  the  student  to  the  able  histories  of 
Neander,  Mosheim,  Kurtz,  Geissler,  etc.,  for  abundant  proof  in  reference  to  the  fatal 
influence  of  philosophy  as  then  taxi^it,  "  which"  (as  Mosheim)  "struck  at  the  very  vitals 
of  religion,  and  tended,  in  no  small  degree,  to  affect  the  credit  of  those  sacred  writings  on 
which  the  entire  system  of  Christian  discipline  relies  for  support. "  It  is  a  sad  com- 
mentary on  human  frailty  that  no  important  doctrine  existed  which  did  not  suffer, 
more  or  less,  from  this  spirit  of  Rationalism  and  Apostatizing.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that 
the  tendencies  and  teaching  of  some  are  far  more  destructive  than  that  of  others  ;  but 
viewed  as  a  whole,  injury  to  the  truth  resulted  both  from  the  extremists  and  from  those 
who  sought  to  diminish  the  extravagances  of  the  former.  The  same  still  holds  true 
to-day,  for  the  most  determined  opponents  that  we  have  are  those  who  endeavor  to  bend 
religious  doctrine  to  some  favorite  system  of  philosojihy. 


Prop.  76.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  503 

OI)S.  G.  Eccl.  History  informs  us  that  Pliilosophy  obtained  tJie  vidorij 
in  tiiis  struggle  between  the  ancient  and  hiter  system  of  interpretation  and 
resultant  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom.     This  mainly  arose  from  two  causes  : 

1.  It  has  been  truly  observed,  in  tracing  the  rise  and  progress  of  ideas, 
that  "  ideas  obtain  authority  and  dominion,  not  altogether  from  their 
intrinsic  truth,  but  rather  from  t\\Q\Y  constant  asseveration,  especially  when 
they  fall  in  with  the  common  hopes  and  fears,  the  wants  and  necessities 
of  human  nature.  The  mass  of  mankind  have  neither  leisure  nor  abil- 
ity to  examine  them  ;  they  fatigue  and  so  compel  the  world  to  acceptance" 
(Milman's  Latin  Chris.,  vol.  3,  p.  437).  Thus  repetition  alone  is  often 
the  parent  of  faith,  and  then  of  authority,  especially  if  the  continued  re- 
hearsal is  done  {a)  by  the  learned,  whom  the  vulgar  regard  with  great  re- 
spect ;  ib)  by  those  in  civil  or  ecclesiastical  authority,  whom  the  common 
people  reverence  ;  {c)  by  persons  who  are  in  a  condition  to  enforce  the 
same  by  the  extension  or  withdrawal  of  patronage  and  emoluments  ;  {d) 
by  individuals  and  communities  in  order  to  accord  v/ith  popular  views  and 
prejudices  (which  may  be  seen  by  contrasting  the  Alexandrian  notion  of 
the  Kingdom,  heaven,  etc.,  with  the  heathen  ideas  of  the  same)  in  Escha- 
tology — being  thus  more  in  sympathy  with  preconceived  notions,  popular- 
ly entertained,  than  with  that  of  the  doctrine  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom. 

2.  The  Origenistic  system  of  interpretation,  being,  more  or  less,  under 
the  patronage  of  the  learned  and  great,  the  ambitious  for  civil  and  eccle- 
siastical preferments,  the  flatterers  of  the  Emperors  and  of  the  Empire, 
became  intrenched  in  the  church,  because  of  its  adulation  of  the  church, 
turning  it  into  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  it  paved  the  way  for  increased 
power  and  riches.  With  its  pliant  aid,  it  was  easy  to  get  rid  of  the  pro- 
phetical denunciations  which  seemed  derogatory  to  the  Emperors  and  Em- 
pire— to  remove  the  belief  of  a  Kingdom  to  come  wiiich  involved  the  sup- 
posed dignity  and  perj^et nation  of  the  Roman  powder,  to  emasculate  the 
])rophecies  pertaining  to  the  future,  which  noio  could  be  applied — even  the 
New  Jerusalem  state  (as  by  Eusebius) — to  tlie  then  present  period.  The 
Alexandrian  substitution  of  the  Kingdom,  surrounded  by  talent,  wealth, 
power,  influence,  and  catering  to  the  wishes,  hopes,  and  ambition  of 
humanity,  j)rospered  and  extended  itself.  As  time  progressed,  it  was  fos- 
tered and  cherished  by  mystical  and  scholastic  tendencies,  and  finally 
strengthened  and  confirmed  by  various  philosophical  systems. 

Admitting  the  valuable  results  that  may  have  flowed  from  some  of  these  systems  thus 
connected,  in  resisting  Eationalistic  influences  running  to  an  extreme  and  in  counteract- 
ing the  subtle  arguments  of  infidelity,  yet  so  far  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  (which 
is  the  point  constantly  aimed  at  in  our  argument)  has  been  concerned,  their  constant 
aim  has  been  to  apologize  for,  or  to  ridicule,  or  to  crush,  the  apostolic  view  of  the  Kingdom. 
Their  influence  in  this  direction  (with  but  few  exceptions,  as  e.g.  in  later  systems,  as. 
Rothe's,  etc.)  has  only  been  disastrous.  In  league  with  the  spirit  of  Alexandrian  inter- 
pretation, in  sympathy  with  the  old  monkish  notions  of  the  Kingdom,  in  fraternization 
with  mystical  and  scholastic  ideas,  they  have  endeavored  to  make  out  the  existence  of  a 
Kingdom  in  unison  with  these  ;  and  churchly  men,  pious  and  talented,  believing  that 
they  could  be  moulded  into  effective  instruments  to  elevate  and  defend  the  church  as  the 
divine  Kingdom  of  promise,  have  seized,  used,  and  perpetuated  them,  not  realizing  their 
destructive  nature.  Human  wisdom  has  been  substituted  for  the  divine,  and  even  dared 
to  become  the  measure  of,  or  the  standard  for.  the  divine.  Philosophy,  with  its  boasted 
standing,  leavened  with  Origenistic  ideas,  imbued  with  a  refined  Gnosticism,  sympathiz- 
ing with  the  Ideal  or  the  Pantheistic,  has  mistaken  either  the  Sovereignty  of  God  or  the 
Church  for  the  covenanted  Kingdom  ;  others,  not  seeing  the  blunder,  accept  of  its  teach- 
ings until,  at  present,  this  teaching  seems  to  he  imbedded  in  the  churches  as  a  fundamental 
truth.     This  could  be  the  more  readily  effected  seeing  that  philosophy  takes  into  its 


504  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  76. 

train  men  of  intelligence  and  deep  thinking,  of  leadership  in  literature  and  religion, 
while  the  mass  of  mankind,  unaccustomed  to  laborious  thought  and  relying  upon 
such  men  for  guidance,  blindly  follow  their  lead.  But  the  days  even  of  such  a  fetter- 
ing philosophy  are  fast  numbered,  because  there  is  abroad  an  independent  mode  of 
thinking  (alas,  too  often  running  into  unbelief  and  the  wildest  extremes)  that  receives 
the  declaration  of  no  one  without  weighing  or  testing.  Two  modes  of  thinking  can 
only  now  largely  affect  and  control  the  masses  :  one  is  dealing  with  truth  and  proving 
it  to  be  such  by  the  most  reliable  testimony — either  from  Scripture  (for  those  who 
believe  in  it),  or  from  history  (for  the  student),  or  from  nature  (for  the  naturalist),  or 
from  science,  art,  etc.  (for  the  scientist).  The  other  is  to  cater  in  some  form  to 
the  corrupt  nature  of  man  (and  this  even  ma^j  be  brought  into  an  unnatural  alliance 
v/ith  the  other),  and  the  more  this  is  done  under  the  garb  of  order,  love,  liberty,  etc., 
the  better  it  will  be  received.  The  love  for  the  truth  and  the  love  for  self-indulgence  are 
the  two  leading  motives  to  be  appealed  to  ;  and  we  are  assured  from  Scripture  that,  so 
far  as  this  dispensation  is  concerned,  the  latter  will  constantly  gain  the  victory  as  to  num- 
bers. We  should,  therefore,  cautiously  receive  the  utterances  of  man,  unless  they  come 
to  us  with  the  imprint  of  truth,  fortified  by  ample  scriptural  proof.  Especially  so  when 
they  come  to  us  under  the  philosopher's  cloak,  for  then  if  a  fallacy  exists,  it  is  much 
more  difficult  to  detect  it,  being  enshrouded  in  a  garb  to  unclasp  which  requires  skilful 
hands.  What  Luther,  and  many  others  said  respecting  the  iniluence  of  philosophy  in 
the  Church  can  be  truthfully  repeated  to-day,  at  least  in  reference  to  the  subject  of  the 
Kingdom  philosophy,  whatever  its  mission  may  be  intellectually  and  morally,  is  not 
necessary  to  an  understanding  of  this  Kingdom  (Prop.  9),  The  Kingdom  is  founded  on 
covenant  and  prophecy,  and  not  on  human  speculations.  We  find  this  Kingdom  only  in 
the  Scriptures  and  not  in  human  systems  (Prop,  10).  We  do  not  even  require  its  aid  in 
ascertaining  the  sense  or  meaning  of  Scripture  (Prop.  4).  Philosophy,  if  she  is  (as  some 
claim,  and  justly  too)  a  handmaiden  to  Christianity,  is  a  very  humble  one,  that  has  too 
often,  under  the  desire  to  serve,  injured  her  mistress.  Her  true  position  is  not  the  one 
assigned  to  her  by  many,  as  a  kind  of  guardian  (often  changing,  as  seen  in  successive 
phases  and  stages)  of  the  inner  shrine,  but  that  of  a  mere  servitor  sweeping  the  outer 
court.  She  has,  through  her  friends,  arrogated  to  herself  the  chief  seat  ;  in  a  discussion 
of  this  kind,  when  the  appeal  doctrinally  must  be  to  the  Scriptures,  she,  if  a  true  and 
valuable  servitor,  must  descend  from  the  same,  acknowledging  the  supremacy  of  Holy 
Writ,  and  submitting  to  its  authority. 

Obs.  7.  Another  cause  wliicli  operated  largely  to  diminisli  the  belief  in 
the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  was  the  coldness  and  enmity  which  arose 
between  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians,  when  they  separated  into 
parties  antagonistic  to  each  other.  History  conclusively  shows  that  the 
peace  formerly  maintained  between  them  through  the  wise,  jDrudent,  and 
conciliating  conduct  of  tJie  early  leaders,  was  ultimately  removed,  Noth- 
ing contributed  so  largely  to  this  as  the  removal  (through  Gnostic  and 
Alexandrian  influence)  of  the  distinctive  Jewish  idea  of  the  Messiahship 
and  resultant  Kingdom,  the  bond  of  faith  that  had  united  Jew  and  Gentile 
into  fraternal  believers.  We  need  not  enter  into  the  saddening  controversy 
— a  mournful  commentary  on  human  frailty  and  passion — but  one  of  the 
results  arrests  attention,  viz, :  that  the  Gentile  Christians  in  their  animos- 
ity to  Judaism,  which  sought  to  impose  its  legality  and  ritualism,  finally 
were  carried  to  such  an  extreme  that,  without  discriminating  between 
what  was  abrogated  and  the  things  of  God  that  remained  in  force,  every- 
thing that  savored  in  their  estimation  of  Judaism  teas  cast  aside,  including 
of  course  the  long-entertained  Jewish  notion  of  the  Kingdom. 

As  already  intimated,  a  mystical,  transcendant  philosophy,  a  spiritual  system  of  inter- 
pretation, aided  them  in  getting  rid  of  the  hated  Jewish  forms,  traditions,  and  beliefs. 
Epithets,  a  fruitful  source  from  whence  moderns  still  draw  an  ample  supply,  were  heaped 
on  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  as  once  entertained,  including  sacli  as  "gross,"  "  car- 
nal," "  material,"  "  degrading,"  "  fleshly,"  "sensual,"  "  earthly,"  etc.,  Vt^hich  still  flow 
so  readily  from  the  pens  of  a  certain  class—"  heresy-hunters." 


PPwOP.  76.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  505 

01)s.  8.  Notably,  the  conversion  of  Constantine,  the  deliverance  and  ex- 
altation of  tlie  church,  and  finally  the  union  of  State  and  church  under  Im- 
perial supervision  and  protection,  served  to  make  Millenarianism  nnpalata- 
hle.  This  has  been  remarked  by  numerous  writers,  and  the  fact  is  incon- 
trovertible. We  leave  others,  who  have  no  sympathy  for  our  doctrine, 
testify.  Thus  e.g.  Smith  {New  Test.  His.,  p.  723),  after  stating  that 
"  the  interval  between  the  apostolic  age  and  that  of  Constantine  has  been 
called  the  Chiliastic  period  of  Apocalyptic  interpretation,"  proceeds  : 
"  Immediately  after  the  triumph, of  Constantine,  the  Christians,  emanci- 
pated from  oppression  and  persecution,  and  dominant  and  prosperous  in 
their  turn,  began  to  lose  their  vivid  exiyeciation  of  our  Lord's  speedy 
Advent  and  their  spiritual  conception  of  His  Kingdom,  and  to  look  upon 
the  temporal  supremacy  of  Christianity  as  a  fulfilment  of  the  promised 
reign  of  Christ  on  earth.  The  Eoman  Empire,  become  Christian,  was  re- 
garded no  longer  an  object  of  prophetic  denunciation,  but  as  the  scene  of 
a  Millennial  development.  This  view,  however^  was  soon  met  by  tlie  figura- 
tive'n\iQY[)X(it\ii\oi\  of  the  Millennium,  as  the  reign  of  Christ  in  the  hearts  of 
all  true  believers."  Kurtz  {Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  sec.  40,  par.  8),  after  refer- 
ring to  the  opposition  of  Clement,  Origen,  Dionysius,  adds  :  "  But  as  the 
aspect  of  outward  affairs  changed  under  the  reign  of  Constantine  the 
Great,  these  views  (Chiliastic)  lose  their  hold  on  men's  minds.  The  church 
now  prepared  for  a  long-continued  period  of  temporal  2:»ros2)erity,  and  the 
State  church  ofi  that  time  forgot  the  Millennial  glory  of  the  future.^^ 

The  remodelling  of  the  Church  by  Constantine,  to  conform  it  to  the  government  of  the 
State  (compare  Mosheim  and  Neander)  ;  the  endowment  of  it  with  wealth  and  worldly 
honors  ;  the  constituting  it  the  easy  road  to  preferment,  rank,  power,  and  riches  for 
the  aspiring  ;  the  making  it  through  imperial  favor  the  popular  channel  of  religion,  so 
completely  intoxicated  men — not  apprehending  the  serious  calamities  to  result  from  the 
same— that  instead  of  looking  foi-  the  Messianic  Kingdom  io  come,  they  now  sujjposed  and 
taught  that  the  prophecies  relating  to  the  Kingdom  were  fuUflUng — that  the  Kingdom  itself 
uias  already  esiablished  under  Constantinian  splendor,  and  that  some,  like  Eusebius,  dared 
even  to  applj^  the  predictions  relating  to  the  nev*^  heavens  and  new  earth  to  this  era.  An 
amazing  change  took  place  in  the  minds  of  men,  wdien,  forsaking  the  xjlain  teaching  of  the 
Word  and  the  early  faith,  they  jiermitted  themselves  to  he  blinded  by  the  outward  joopu- 
larity,  the  State-union  and  the  imperial  friendship  conferred  upon  the  Church.  The 
reader  will  find  in  Brooks's  El.  Proph.  Inferp.,  Elliott's  llorce  Ap)OC.,  and  numerous  Mil- 
lenarian  works,  abundant  references  to  this  cause  of  decline  in  our  doctrine.  We  can 
only  briefly  notice  the  remarkable  change  of  opinion  resulting  from  the  change  in  the 
Church's  external  condition.  Before  Constantine,  the  Church,  under  Chiliastic  leading, 
had  always  associated  the  idea  of  Antichrist  with  Home,  find  that  the  Eoman  poAver  wouid 
certainly  be  destroyed  at  the  expected  Advent  of  the  Messiah.  This  was  taught  down 
even  to  Lactantius  {Be  Jnstit.,  ch.  15),  and  was  so  imbedded  in  the  minds  of  many  that 
Jerome  himself  {Com.  on  Ban.  9),  giving  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers  on  this  point,  could 
not  contradict  it  as  false.  All  this  was  humiliating  to  a  professed  Christian  emperor,  to 
the  subservient  followers  of  imperial  honors,  and  to  the  hierarchical  seekers  of  office, 
and  "  the  convenient  explication  was  discovered  and  adopted  by  manj'  that  Antichrist 
was  pagan  Rome,  and  that  from  the  date  of  Constantine's  conversion  the  millennium  com- 
menced.'' (A  view  that  has  been  revived  by  Grotius,  Bush,  etc.,  thus  caricaturing  the 
magnificent  prophecies  of  the  Millennium  by  applying  them  to  a  period  disastrous  to  the 
Church,  full  of  bitter  discussions  and  persecutions,  pregnant  with  deceit,  violence,  and 
entailed  evils.)  Shimeall  {Eschatalogy,  p.  49)  says  :  "  The  policy  of  Constantine,  while  it 
tended  to  eradicate  the  last  remaining  vestiges  of  the  primitive  landmarks  of  Christianity 
and  the  Church,  contributed  also  to  pander  to  the  ambition  of  an  aspiring  clergy  after 
'  the  pre-eminence.'  Hence  the  gradual  suppression  of  that  (Millenarian)  doctrine, 
which  the  open  hostility  of  some,  and  the  timid,  temporizing  policy  of  others,  succeeded 
to  effect.  This  was  brought  about  by  their  adoption  of  the  Origenic  rule  of  interpreting 
the  teachings  of  Isaiah  and  St.  John  on  the  one  hand,  and  tlie  explaining  of  them  in 
accordance  with  the  theory  of  Eusebius,  which  made  Rome  the  JS'eio  Jerusalem  of  the 


506  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PHOP.  76. 

Apocalj'pse  on  the  ground  that  Constantino  turned  the  heathen  temples  into  Christian 
churches,  etc.,  on  the  other."  Dr.  SchaflE  (His.  Ch.  VImrch,  vol.  1,  pp.  299-3U1)  presents 
the  same  testimony  as  Neander,  Mosheim,  Kurtz,  etc.,  resiJecting  the  extent  of  Millena- 
rianism  in  the  Prim.  Church,  saying,  for  example  :  "  The  most  striking  point  in  the 
Eschatology  of  the  ancient  Church  is  the  widely  current  and  very  prominent  Chiliasm,  or  the 
doctrine  of  the  visible  reign  of  Christ  in  glory  on  earth  with  the  risen  saints  for  a  thou- 
sand years,"  etc.  After  referring  to  the  Fathers  who  taught  it,  he  then  remarks  :  "  In 
the  age  of  Constantino,  however,  a  radical  change  took  place  in  this  belief.  After  Chris- 
tianit3%  contrary  to  all  expectation,  triumphed  in  the  Roman  Empire,  and  was  embraced 
by  the  C;esars  themselves,  the  Millennial  reign,  instead  of  being  anxiously  waited  and  prayed 
for,  began,  to  he  dated  either  from  the  first  appearance  of  Christ,  or  from  the  conversion  of 
Constantino,  and  tobe  regarded  as  realized  in  the  glory  of  the  dominant  imperial  State  Church.'" 
Certainly  it  was  not  in  the  selfish  nature  of  "Patriarchs,"  "Metropolitans  or  Arch- 
bishops," "  Bishops,"  and  others,  who  received  princely  endowments,  to  desire  the  Coming 
and  Reign  of  the  Christ — they  rather  wished  their  stations,  honors,  and  emoluments  to 
remain  in  perpetuity. 

Obs.  9.  Another  metliod,  pointed  out  by  Brooks,  Mede,  etc.,  which 
materially  aided  in  removing  our  doctrine,  was  tlie  Hiippi^cssing  of  Mille- 
narian  works.  Thus  e.g.  the  works  of  Papias,  several  from  the  pen  of  Ire- 
n^eus,  the  Treatise  of  Nepos  against  the  AUegorizers,  Tertullian's  on  Para- 
dise, and  others,  were  successfully  removed.  Indeed  the  writings  of  some 
of  the  Fathers  were  so  totally  obliterated  that  it  is  only  by  intimations 
in  the  writings  of  opposers  that  we  know  that  they  were  Chiliastic  in  sen- 
timent. While  the  ravages  and  changes  of  time,  the  destructiveness  in- 
cident to  age,  may  account  for  the  removal  of  some,  yet  the  extent  of  the 
suppression  (together  with  corruptions,  omissions,  substitutions  of  other 
writings)  clearly  indicates  tlie  animus  of  aversion  and  hostility. 

Then  it  was  also  customary  to  speak  of  Chiliastic  adherents  as  if  they  taught  «  mosi 
gross  doctrine,  well  knowing  that  the  means  of  refutation  were  not  at  hand.  At  times, 
however,  they  contradict  themselves,  speaking  in  one  place  well  of  the  men  whom  they 
in  another  stigmatize.  This  is  true  of  Papias  and  others.  We  give  another  illustration 
referred  to  by  Mede  and  others.  Eusebius  says  of  Nepos  that  he  taught  "  a  Mill,  of 
sensual  luxury  on  earth''  But  in  the  same  chapter  he  makes  Dionysius,  who  wrote  against 
Nepos,  to  say  :  ^^ I  greatly  reverence  the  man,"  and  "  grecdly  love  Nepos  both  on  account  of 
his  faith  and  industry,  and  his  great  study  of  the  Scriptures" — which  he  scarcely  would 
have  said  if  Nepos  was  as  "  sensual  "  as  Eusebius  rejiorts.  The  comf)lacency  with 
which  Neander  and  others  relate  Eusebius'  story  of  Dionysius  converting  Coracion  and 
a  large  number  of  Chiliastic  clergy  at  a  conference  held  for  a  disputation  at  Arsinoe  is 
remarkable— a  story  which  bears  on  its  very  face  the  evidence  of  being  a  concocted  one, 
having  no  substantial  basis.  Observe  (1)  that  Eusebius  was  exceedingly  bitter  against  the 
Chiliasts,  and  untruthful  (as  Mede  and  others  have  shown)  in  other  statements  respecting 
them.  (2)  Such  a  unanimous  jaelding  of  an  entire  conference  of  opponents  is  a  result 
opposed  to  human  nature  and  experience.  (3)  This  story  was  concocted  some  time  after 
the  alleged  occurrence  took  place,  and  we  have  none  of  the  marvellous  argumentation 
which  produced  such  a  result  given.  (4)  The  statement  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the 
principles  of  interpretation  mutually  held,  and  with  the  Scrij^tures  held  by  Chiliasts, 
which  are  not  so  readily  set  aside.  (5)  The  story  very  flippantly  takes  it  for  granted 
that  Millenarians  have  but  little  Scriptural  foundation  for  their  belief,  and  that  the 
spiritualistic  interpretation  is  all  powerful.  (6)  We  have  no  statement  of  Coracion  or 
of  any  of  the  alleged  converts,  of  such  a  result.  (7)  We  know  that,  notwithstanding  the 
stated  conversions,  many  in  Egj'pt  and  other  places  remained  Chiliasts.  (8)  If  Dionj^- 
sius  had  such  extraordinary  success  and  was  really  so  powerful  in  argument,  it  is  pre- 
sumable— as  Chiliasm  was  extensive — that  this  line  of  reasoning  and  arguments  would 
have  reached  beyond  Arsinoe.  Now  absolutely  nothing  that  has  reached  us  from  him 
has  any  Anti-Chiliastic  force,  which  a  tyro  could  not  meet. 

Ohs.  10.  While  it  may  justly  be  regarded  invidious  to  attempt  to  lower 
the  character  or  position  of  opponents  in  defence  of  a  doctrine  (which  has 


Prop.  76.]  the  theocratic  ki^gdo^i.  507 

been  largely  done  against  ns),  yet  in  self-justification— seeing  that  many 
writers  (as  Jones,  Shedd,  etc.)  unduly  exalt  the  first  opponents  of  Chiliasm 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  Millenarian  Fathers — it  may  be  well,  briefly,  to  allow 
impartial  (because  in  no  doctrinal  sympathy  with  us)  testimony  demon- 
strate to  loliom  we  are  indebted  for  the  decline  of  our  doctrine.  Respecting 
Origen  (comp.  Luther's  view  of.  Prop.  4,  Obs.  1,  note  1  ;  Michelet's  Life  of 
Lutlier,  p.  273,  and  Ap.  p.  419,  etc.  ;  and  Milner's,  Mosheim's,  Presseiise's, 
Prop.  4,  Obs.  6),  notwithstanding  his  learning  and  ability,  the  ablest  writers 
coincide  in  saying  that  Ma  mode  of  handling  the  Scriptures  resulted  most 
disastrousli/ to  the  church.  In  reference  to  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Dio- 
nysius,  and  all  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  the  reader 
to  the  temperate  remarks  of  Neander,  and  other  historians,  on  the  entire 
tendency  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  which  was  unfavorable  to  a  correct 
interpretation  of  Scripture.  Regarding  Jerome  and  Eusebius,  it  will  suf- 
fice to  say,  that  the  same  historians,  admitting  the  value  of  their  labors  in 
some  directions,  also  state  their  unreliability  in  controversy,  their  devo- 
tion to  asceticism  (Jerome's),  and  their  gross  misinterjn-etation  and  mis- 
application of  Scripture. 

It  is  not  our  desire  to  detract  from  the  honor  due  to  Origen  (as  e.g.  in  his  labors  on 
the  Hexapla,  Treatise  against  Celsus,  etc.),  Jerome  (as  e.g.  in  his  Latin  version  of  the 
Old  Test.,  etc.),  and  others.  But  the  tendencies  of  their  Scriptural  interpretations  and 
expositions  being  simple  matter  of  history,  and  liberally  animadverted  on  hy  our  oppo- 
nents, form  a  legitimate  subject  to  be  thus  introduced.  (Such  animadversions  are  freely 
given  on  our  side  in  Brooks's  El.  of  Fro%)h.  Inter.,  Shimeall's  Eschatology,  Seiss'  Last 
Times,  etc.,  and  need  not  be  repeated.)  When  Shedd  (His.  Ch.  Doc.)  and  others  shield 
themselves  under  the  bare  statement  that  our  doctrine  was  crushed  under  the  influence 
of  the  Alexandrian  school  (but  carefully  avoiding  to  tell  us  the  pradicAil  and  evil  tendency 
of  this  school  in  Biblical  interpretation),  it  is  but  just  to  direct  the  reader's  attention  to 
the  same  (comp.  Prop.  4).  Prof.  Briggs  in  his  series  of  articles  decries  all  that  are  admit- 
ted to  be  Chiliasts,  and  eidogizes  all  that  followed  the  lead  of  the  Alexandrian  school.  In 
view  of  his  extravagant  praise,  we  append  a  few  additional  testimonies.  First,  as  to 
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Killen  {The  Old.  Ccdh.  Ch.,  p.  10)  says  of  him  :  "  His  spiritual 
taste  was  sadly  vitiated  by  his  study  of  the  heathen  philosophy,  and  his  tendency  to  in- 
dulge in  cdlegorical  interpretations  renders  him  an  unsafe  guide  as  an  exjDositor  of  the 
Scriptures."  On  p.  374  he  says  of  him  that  he  "  allegorized  Scripture  in  a  icay  as  danger- 
ous as  it  i':as  ahsiird,"  and  gives  some  specimens  (with  which  compare  those  presented  by 
Fairbairn,  Typology,  who  gives  Luther's  and  Calvin's  opinion  on  such  performances). 
This  estimate  of  Clement  is  substantially  presented  by  every  Church  historian  of  emi- 
nence—some even  being  more  severe  in  their  strictures.  And  we  direct  attention  to  the 
fact  that  whatever  retention  of  Chiliastic  ideas  he  maintained,  he  was  the  one  who 
introduced  this  allegorizing  system  at  Alexandria,  which  proved  so  fatal  not  only  to 
Chiliasm  but  other  doctrines.  In  view,  therefore,  of  his  disastrous  influence  in  adopting 
Philo's  method  and  introducing  it  into  the  Church,  we  present  the  following  estimate  of 
his  system  of  interpretation  in  the  Art.  "Alexandrian  Christianity'''  {The  North  Brit.  Rev., 
Aug.  1855)  :  "  If  we  are  asked  how  Clement  understood  his  Bible,  we  must  answer,  piace 
tanti  viri,  very  badly  indeed.  In  interpretation  he  is  a  mere  disciple  of  Philo  ;  as  that 
writer  had  dealt  with  Moses,  so  he  deals  with  the  prophets  and  the  writers  of  the  New 
Test.  ;  and  he  applies  his  principle  apparently  without  any  fixed  rules  at  all.  He  imag- 
ined that  every  passage  of  Scripture  undoubtedly  contained  a  hidden  meaning,  or  rather 
any  numher  of  hidden  meanings  :  the  same  passage  might  mean  this,  that,  and  the  other 
thing,  (dl  at  the  same  time ;  and  so  he  set  to  v»  ork  at  it,  as  children  do  at  a  charade,  and 
expected  a  discovery  of  hidden  truth  from  God's  blessing  upon  i^iously  intended 
guesses."  His  fame  rests  not  in  exegesis  ;  his  admirers  (Kingsley,  etc.)  praise  him  for 
his  philosophy  and  earnestness.  As  to  Origen,  Killen  (above,  p.  374)  says  of  his  using 
this  system  and  departing  from  the  literal  sense  :  "  In  this  way  the  divine  record  may  be 
made  to  support  any  crochet  which  happens  to  jolease  the  fancy  of  the  commentator." 
The  writer  in  the  North  Brit.  Review  (above)  remarks  :  "  His  (Origen's)  principles  of 
Scriptural  interpretation  are  Philo's,  reduced  to  a  still  completer  system  ;  and  the  most 
remarkable  feature  in  it  is  his  bold  avowal  of  his  belief  that  the  simple  literal  meaning 


508  THE   THEOCEATIC   KI]SrGDOM.  [PkOP.  76. 

is  often  not  only  untrue  hut  impossible.  On  the  strength  of  this  expression  Stranss  claims 
him  as  an  ally.  But  the  views  of  the  two  men  are  totally  dilierent.  Origen  believed  in 
the  complete  inspiration  of  ever^^  word  of  Scripture,  and  he  thought  that  the  allegorical 
sense,  which  was  the  most  precious^  was  always  strictly  true  ;  but  that  God  inserted  untruths 
and  impossibilities  in  the  literal  text  in  order  that  the  reader  might  not  be  content  with  it, 
but  look  beneath  it  for  the  deeper  and  more  precious  truth.  Indeed,  in  order  to  recom- 
mend this  allegorical  theory  he  even  immensely  exaggerates  the  discrepancies  of  the  lit- 
eral text,  and  tind  sdifficulties  where  no  one  else  would  have  thought  of  finding  them." 
("  For  example,  he  pronounces  the  text,  '  If  any  man  smite  thee  on  the  right  cheek,  turn 
to  him  the  other  also,'  to  be  very  absurd  in  its  literal  meaning  ;  not  because,  as  some 
have  thought,  it  exaggerates  the  duty  of  submissiveness,  but  because,  since  a  man  naturally 
uses  his  right  hand,  he  could  not  possibly  strike  his  adversary  on  the  right  but  on  the  left 
cheek.  We  wish  one  of  his  pupils  had  been  saucy  enough  to  give  him  a  practical  proof 
of  the  superiority,  in  such  cases,  of  experiment  over  theory.")  The  Ency.  Brit,  says  of 
Origen  {Be  Princip.,  211,  s.  2)  that  he  described  those  who  refused  his  views  as  such, 
who  "  refusing  the  labor  of  intelligence,  followed  the  superficial  mode  of  literal  interj^reta- 
tion."  Hase  {His.  Ch.  Church,  p,  94),  after  having  referred  to  the  characteristics  of  the 
Alexandrian  theology  in  bringing  out"  a  hidden  sense' '  by  means  of  "  allegorical  interpre- 
tation," which  should  develop  a  "  signification  worthy  of  God,"  adds  :  "  It  was  through 
his  (Origen' s)  infiuence  that  the  expectation  ichich  then  prevailed  with  respect  to  a  near 
approach  of  Christ's  Second  Advent,  and  a  Millennial  Kingdom,  hegayi  to  be  regarded  as 
heretical,  or  at  least  fanatical.'"  Bees'  Cyclop.,  art.  ^'Mill.,''  admits  that  the  ancient  belief  of 
the  doctrine  "  touching  the  new  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth,  after  the  resurrec- 
tion, was  held  for  near  three  centuries  before  it  was  charged  as  erroneous,  as  appears  from 
Eccles.  History"  (quoting  M.  Launoy  as  authority),  speaking  of  it  as  taught  "  by  several 
of  the  greatest  men  among  the  Primitive  Fathers,"  and  then  thus  refers  to  the  decline 
brought  about,  '^principally  through  the  influence  and  authority  of  Origen,  who  opposed  it 
with  the  greatest  warmth,  because  it  was  incompatible  with  some  of  his  favorite  senti- 
ments." (Comp.  arts,  on  "  Origen"  in  Herzog's  Beal  Encyclop.,  M'Clintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.,  etc.)  The  disciples  of  Origen,  such  as  Dionysius,  Hieracus,  and  others,  carried 
out  his  system,  and,  of  course,  assisted  in  the  decline.  Among  these  later  on  may  be 
especially  enumerated  Gregory  Thaumaturgus,  who  {Panegyric  in  Orig.,  ch.  15,  quoted 
by  Neander  in  Oenl.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  491)  most  extravagantly  eulogizes  Origen  as  spe- 
cially favored  "  by  communion  with  the  divine  Spirit,"  "  so  that  this  man  had  received 
from  God  that  greatest  of  gifts,  the  call  to  be  to  men  an  interpreter  of  the  words  of  God  ; 
to  understand  God's  Word  as  God  speaks  it,  and  to  announce  it  to  men  as  man  can 
understand  it."  Men  now  imitate  Gregory,  and  profess  to  go  into  ecstasies  over  Origen 's 
astounding  interpretations.  Prof.  Briggs  {N.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879)  writes  in  the  highest 
terms  of  the  Alexandrian  school  and  its  followers,  simply  because  they  are  Anti-Chiliastic. 
To  such  we  commend  the  rebuke  given  by  a  writer  (in  the  North  Brit.  Review,  Maj^  1858, 
J).  273)  to  D'Aubigne  (in  Christianity  in  the  First  TJiree  Cents.)  as  follows  :  "We  are  sorry 
to  see  Dr.  Merle  D'Aubigne  eulogizing  Origen  as  '  the  greatest  luminary  of  ecclesiastical 
antiquity.'  Concede  to  Origen  learning,  fervor,  and  a  self-sacrificing  life  ;  but  do  not 
canonize  as  a  luminary  one  who  did  more  to  darken  Scripture  and  to  obscure  some  of  its  funda- 
mental truths  than  any  Father  of  the  first  five  Centuries." 

Ohs.  11.  The  opposition  to  our  doctrine,  when  once  inaugurated,  was 
greatly  aided  by  the  talent  and  ability  of  a  few  great  names.  Conspicu- 
ously among  these  is  that  of  Augustine.  Probably  no  work  has  appeared 
that  had  such  a  powerful  influence  in  overwhelming  the  more  ancient  doc- 
trine, as  Augustine's  leading  one,  The  City  of  God.  This  was  specially  de- 
signed to  teach  the  existence  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  church  beside  or 
contemporaneous  with  the  earthly  or  human  Kingdom.  The  pi'oof  for 
this  is  remarkably  weak  ;  the  supposed  fact  being  largely  tuken  for  ff?^a7ited, 
and  a  superstructure  erected  upon  a  hyjjotheticcd  foundation. 

Let  the  student  carefully  read  "The  City  of  God,"  and  he  will  find  that  Augustine  to 
make  out  his  theory  (vol.  1,  p.  436)  arbitrarily  quotes  Ps.  87  :  3  ;  48  :  1,  and  46  :  4,  which 
do  not  apply  (as  we  shall  show  hereafter)  to  the  church  in  this  dispensation  ;  and  (vol.  2, 
p.  202)  in  his  eagerness  he  actually  has  the  marriage  of  the  Church  with  Christ  already 
consummated,  thus  violating  the  order  laid  down  in  the  Bible.     Indeed,  the  proof  alleged 


PkOP.  76.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  509 

by  him  is  so  slightly  inferential,  and  so  loosely  applied,  that  it  is  scarcely  worthy  of  even 
a  sej'ious  refutation.  The  book  never  could  have  exerted  so  wide  an  influence,  if  it  had 
not  accorded  so  full}'  with  the  already  favorite  Church-Kingdom  theory.  We  give  an 
example  of  his  exegetical  proof  :  thus  (b.  18,  ch,  31)  he  adduces  Obad.  21,  which  he  ren- 
ders, "  And  those  who  are  saved  again  shall  come  up  out  of  Mt.  Sion  that  they  may 
defend  Esau,  and  it  shall  be  a  kingdom  to  the  Lord."  His  comment  is  :  that  Mt.  Sion 
is  Judea  where  Christ  was  and  is  ;  Mt.  Esau  is  the  church  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  the  latter, 
being  defended,  becomes  a  kingdom.  Similar  far-fetched  and  puerile  inferences  are  scat- 
tered over  his  pages,  while  (Eusebiuslike)  the  Millennial  predictions,  the  utterances  of 
Habakkuk's  prayer,  etc.,  are  all  indiscriminately  assigned  to  the  church  in  this  dispensa- 
tion, and  as  now  existing.  Having  a  Kingdom  on  hand  to  portray,  it  must  be  eulogized 
at  the  expense  of  the  Scriptures  and  stern  facts.  The  truth  is,  when  looking  over  the 
writings  of  Augustine,  Origen,  Jerome,  and  others,  who  so  largely  contributed  to  bring 
our  doctrine  into  disrepute,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that,  however  valuable  they 
may  be  in  other  respects,  the  line  of  reasoning  (for  surely  argument  it  cannot  be  called) 
and  inferential  proof  adopted  to  sustain  their  own  views  of  the  church  being  the  then  con- 
stituted Messianic  Kingdom  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  is  entirely  and  j)urely  of  human 
origin,  finding  no  support  in  Scrij^ture,  but  being  actually  in  open  antagonism  to  the  oath- 
bound  covenant  of  God.  It  is  a  fact,  also,  that  neither  Origen  or  Augustine  could  entirely 
give  up  all  the  characteristics  of  Chiliasm,  but  still  received  some  of  its  features,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  quotations,  hereafter  given,  from  them.  It  is  in  consequence  of  the 
retention  of  some  features  belonging  to  Chiliasm,  that  Bh.  Taylor  {Lib.  of  Proph.,  sec.  5) 
ranks  Origen,  notwithstanding  his  decided  opposition,  a  Millenarian,  and  this  it  is  sup- 
posed (by  Brooks)  "  because  Origen  lets  drop  his  expectation  of  the  renovation  of  all 
things  in  the  seventh  millenary  of  the  world."  How  largely  Augustine  moulded  the 
Church  can  be  seen  in  our  Church  histories,  the  recent  works  of  Mozley,  Dorner,  etc.,  on 
Augustine. 

OI)s.  12.  The  cessation,  in  almost  a  total  manner,  of  the  conversion  of  the 
Jews,  also  materially  aided  in  extinguishing  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom. 
Spiritualizing  and  allegorizing  both  the  covenants  and  prophecies,  chang- 
ing the  significant  title  of  "The  Christ"  into  a  mere  doctrinal  name, 
heaping  upon  Gentiles  the  promises  belonging  to  the  Jews,  substituting 
the  church  for  the  Messianic  Kingdom  in  its  true  covenanted  Theocratic 
form,  the  conversion  of  Jews  was  arrested,  and,  as  a  result,  the  advocates 
(for  the  Jewish  mind  posted  in  the  promises  of  the  Old  Test.)  of  Chiliasm 
were  proportionately  lessened. 

After  the  Gnostic  ideas  and  the  Alexandrian  school  obtained  the  ascendency,  the 
preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  so  widely  different  from  that  previously  proclaimed  by  the 
Fathers,  was  no  longer  effective  with  the  Jews,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  loas  opposed 
to  the  Kingdom  presented  in  covenant  and  prophecy.  The  "  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  as 
given  e.g.  by  Barnabas,  Irenseus,  or  Justin,  was  widely  different  from  "  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom"  as  presented  e.g.  by  an  Augustine,  Jerome,  or  Eusebius.  The  former  corre- 
sponded with  the  Old  Test,  delineations  ;  the  latter  could  only  be  engrafted  upon  the 
Old  Test,  by  the  most  extravagant  spiritualizing  and  perversion  of  Holy  Writ — by  aflat  denial 
of  the  plain  grammatical  sense  and  the  substitution  of  a  sense  which  the  words  do  not 
properly  and  primarily  bear.  This,  of  course,  repelled  the  Jewish  mind  and  bore  its  fruit 
in  a  continually  diminished  number  of  Jewish  conversions  until  they  almost  entirely 
ceased.  The  great  link  which  united  Jewish  and  Gentile  believers  in  Jesus  as  "  the 
Messiah"  {which  embraced  the  hope  of  the  same  kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent)  was  rudely  severed 
when  the  Chiliastic  doctrine  was  discarded.  So  long  as  the  hope  was  held  out  to  the 
Jews  in  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  that  Jesus  would  come  again  to  fulfil  the  Abrahamic- 
Davidic  covenant,  to  rebuild  the  very  tabernacle  of  David  fallen  down  and  m  ruins,  to  restore 
all  things,  to  verify  the  prophetic  promises  based  on  the  covenants  just  as  their  obvious 
sense  conveyed— so  long  were  many  of  the  Jews  accessible,  and  jo^'fully  received  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  as  "  the  Messiah,"  and  looked  for  His  Coming  the  second  time  unto  the  \yxe- 
dicted  salvation.  But  when  this  hope  was  taken  away  and  denounced  as  "  carnal  "  ;  when 
it  was  ridiculed,  and,  as  Baronius  informs  us,  was  "  hissed  from  the  stage''  under  a  preten- 
tious Gnosis  ;  when  in  place  of  the  restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  a  real  Theo- 
cratic rule  on  the  earth  under  the  Messiah,  men  palmed  off  the  Church,  which  in  no 


510  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDO]M.  [PrOP.  76. 

respect  bore  any  resemblance  to  the  promised  Kingdom,  as  this  predicted  Kingdom — iheii 
the  only  bond  of  union  and  of  sympathy,  through  which  the  Jews  could  be  easily 
reached,  was  also  removed.  The  sad  and  calamitous  resiilts  naturally  followed,  from 
which  the  lover  of  mercy,  justice,  and  humanity  sorrowfully  turns. 

Obs.  13.  This  enables  us  to  dispose  of  the  historical  inaccuracy  of  those 
who,  overlooking  the  causes  of  decline  mentioned,  tell  us  that  the  decrease 
of  Chiliasm  is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Pauline  Theology  superseding  the 
Petrine  or  Johannine.  Learned  disquisitions,  abounding  with  mere  asser- 
tion, are  given  on  this  point  ;  but  to  sustain  this  philosophical  conceit,  it 
is  requisite  to  close  the  eyes  to  well-known  facts  that  utterly  disprove  the 
theory.  It  is  a  cleverly  contrived  plan  to  throw,  if  possible,  an  apostolic 
mantle  over  a  later  broached  theory  of  the  Kingdom. 

This  cannot  be  true,  since  (as  has  already  been  shown)  both  Paul  and  Peter  taught  the 
same  covenants  and  i^romises,  the  basis  of  Chiliasm,  and  confirmed  ihe  same  hope  by 
numerous  utterances  ;  since  such  a  position  takes  it  for  granted  (there  being  no  proof) 
that  there  is  a  conflict  doctrinally  between  Paul  and  Peter,  the  one  bringing  forth  doc- 
trine more  suited  to  Grecian  culture,  and  the  other  doctrine  more  adapted  to  Jewish  ; 
since  the  Fathers,  East  and  West,  taught  Chiliasm  and  were  utterly  umtware  of  the  modern 
notion  of  such  a  conflict  or  contemiDlated  substitution.  Neander,  himself  too  strongly 
attached  to  this  theory  and  often  pressing  it  to  an  extreme  to  favor  his  pet  development 
theory,  comes  nearer  to  the  truth  and  the  facts  as  they  existed,  when  he  traces  the  causes 
of  this  decline  to  the  allegorical  spirit  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  and  hostility  to  Mon- 
tanism.  No  writer  can  do  justice  either  to  the  early  Fathers  who  were  Chiliasts,  or  to 
the  real  causes  which  affected  Millenarian  doctrine,  who  ignores  how  the  Abrahamic  and 
Davidic  covenants  were  comprehended  and  embraced  in  the  faith  of  the  Church,  and  by 
what  means  they  were  eliminated  or  spiritualized. 

Obs.  14.  The  abuse  that  this  doctrine  received  undoubtedly  alienated 
the  minds  of  some  who  were  not  able  to  discriminate  between  the  true  and 
the  false,  or  who  associated  doctrine  with  the  personal  character  of  its  ad- 
vocates instead  of  determining  its  truthfulness  by  Holy  Writ.  Bh.  Xewton 
(On  Proph.,  Dis.  25)  observes  :  *'  This  doctrine  grew  into  disrepute  for 
various  reasons.  Some,  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  writers  have  debased  it 
with  a  mixture  of  fables  ;  they  have  described  the  Kingdom  more  like  a 
sensual  than  a  spiritual  kingdom,  and  thereby  they  have  not  only  exposed 
themselves,  but  (what  is  infinitely  worse)  the  doctrine  itself  to  contempt 
and  ridicule.  It  hath  suffered  by  the  misrepresentations  of  its  enemies, 
as  well  as  by  the  indiscretion  of  its  friends  ;  many,  like  Jerome,  have 
charged  the  Millenarians  with  absurd  and  impious  opinions  which  they 
never  held  ;  and  rather  than  they  would  admit  the  truth  of  the  doctrine, 
they  have  not  scrupled  to  call  into  question  the  genuineness  of  the  book 
of  Revelation,"  etc.  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  fact  that  Chiliasts 
also  belonged  to  various  already  arising,  and  antagonistic,  parties  had  a  de- 
cided influence  with  many  in  rejecting  the  doctrine,  as  e.g.  the  Montanists, 
the  Apollinarians,  etc. 

The  candid  student,  however,  well  knowing  both  how  true  doctrine  may  become  allied 
with  error  and  how  men  may  be  charged  with  error  when  innocent  of  the  same,  will  care- 
fully consider  such  a  point  in  all  its  bearings  before  deciding.  To  do  this  j^roperly 
respecting  the  charge  of  Montanism,  preferred  against  Tertiillian,  it  would  be  well  not 
only  to  notice  what  enemies  have  said  on  the  subject  but  also  friends.  The  excellent 
remarks  of  Neander,  Lee's  His.  of  Montayiism,  Brooks's  statement,  and  others,  are  worthy 
of  attention.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  if  men,  under  the  influence  of  personal  feel- 
ing and  passion,  allied  this  doctrine  with  that  which  is  erroneous,  others,  through  whom 
the  orthodox  church  is  properly  traced  by  every  Church  historian,  held  to  this  Kingdom 


Prop.  76.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  511 

in  its  strictly  covenanted  form,  excluding  the  idea  of  sensualism  or  corruption,  and 
teaching  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  blessings  in  it.  Dr.  Seiss,  Ap.  Note  E.,  p.  335,  etc., 
of  Last  Times  gives  an  interesting  detail  of  "  Millenarian  views  of  the  spirituality  of 
Christ's  Kingdom,"  quoting  from  Irenaus,  Justin,  Melito,  and  Tertullian,  to  show  that 
they  did  advocate  "  spiritual  good  as  a  leading  characteristic  of  the  Kingdom  to  come,"'  and 
then  gives  Dr.  Greswell's  testimony',  directing  attention  also  to  the  spiritually-minded 
men  who  have  hitherto  received  it,  and  concluding  by  exx)osing  the  art  which,  as  Hartley 
says,  some  men  have  of  bringing  truth  into  disrepute,  as  follows  :  "  Among  the  many 
arts  practised  in  order  to  bring  any  truth  into  discredit,  none  is  more  popular  than  that 
of  exhibiting  it  to  public  view  joined  icith  the  absurd  tenets  of  some  that  have  espoused 
it,  and  which  is  not  improperly  called  dressing  up  tridh  in  a  fool's  coat  on  purpose  to  make 
it  ridiculous  ;  and  this  often  succeeds  with  the  undiscerning  vulgar,  who  judge  only  by 
the  outward  api^earance  of  things."  These  tactics  were  practised  in  old  times  by  Origen, 
Jerome,  Eusebius,  and  others,  and  they  are  repeated  in  modern  times  by  a  Corrodi, 
Stuart,  Sanborn,  Seyffarth,  Briggs,  and  a  host  of  others.  It  has  pjrejudiced  thousands 
against  us  then  and  now,  who  failed  to  see  the  lack  of  candor,  honesty,  and  justice  in  the 
unscholarly  procedure.     No  doctrine,  however  precious,  but  can  be  thus  caricatured. 

Obs.  15.  The  prophetical  teaching,  in  explanation  of  certain  prophecies, 
engrafted  upon  the  apostolic  and  quite  early  Chiliasm,  had  its  weight  in 
detaching  many  from  the  doctrine,  forgetting  that  the  elucidation  of  de- 
tails or  the  opinions  of  fallible  men  respecting  the  manner  of  fulfilment, 
could  not  possibly  affect  the  grand  outlines  or  the  heart  of  the  doctrine, 
because  the  former  proceed  from  men  liable  to  mistake,  but  the  latter  is 
fixed,  irrevocably  in  the  oath-bound  covenant  and  the  predictions  resulting 
from  the  same.  Thus,  to  illustrate  :  many  writers  have  shown  that  the 
Chiliasts,  more  or  less,  down  to  Constantine's  conversion  thought  that 
Kome  would  be  the  seat  of  the  Antichrist  and  the  Roman  power  would  be 
destroyed.  This  was  widely  circulated,  and  finally  became  a  part  of  the 
Chiliastic  creed,  impressed  by  persecution  and  the  hope  of  deliverance,  and 
was  so  regarded  by  its  opponents.  Xow  the  prophecy  as  believed,  instead 
of  bemg  verified,  seemecl  to  be  utterly  vain  and  idle  ivhen  the  Empire 
became  professedly  Christian.  The  result  was,  that  the  failure  of  a  i^ortion 
of  the  Chiliastic  scheme,  as  ^/ze/i  entertained,  was  deemed,  without  examina- 
tion, to  be  sufficient  proof  of  the  unsoundness  of  every  other  part,  and  the 
whole  was  rejected. 

Precisely  as  men  do  to-day.  Because  Bengel,  Gumming,  or  Baxter,  or  some  others  in 
the  explication  of  some  prophecies,  have  made  prophetic  statements  which  time  has 
proved  to  be  mistaken  ;  because  Flemming,  Parens,  Wood,  and  others  misapprehended 
dates  and  events,  the  whole  doctrine  is  rejected  with  ridicule  and  laughter,  ynst  as  if  the 
doctrine  depended  uj^on  the  interpretation  of  the  precise  time  of  the  Advent  or  the 
course  of  certain  events,  and  7wt  upon  the  solemnly  covenanted  Word  given  with  precise- 
ness  and  unmistakable  distinctness.  Good  men  may  indeed  be  mistaken  in  details  or  in 
the  exact  order  of  events,  or  in  the  application  of  prophetical  time  and  announcements, 
owing  to  our  limited  knowledge  of  the  future,  and  yet  all  this  does  not  affect  thefounda' 
Hon  of  our  doctrine,  which  stands  imbedded  in  "•  the  everlasting  covenant/'  "the  sure  mer- 
cies of  David." 

Obs.  16,  The  opposition  that  Chiliasts  maintained  against  various  errors 
and  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  Scripture,  excited  hostility  against 
them,  and  contributed  to  aid  in  the  suppression  of  the  doctrine. 

In  this  discussion  it  is  important  for  the  student,  in  order  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of 
the  early  Chiliasts,  of  their  doctrine,  and  of  the  opposition  excited,  to  notice  whom  they 
doclrinally  opposed.  This  has  been  candidly  done  by  the  researches  of  Neander  (who 
clears  them  from  unjust  charges  imposed  by  later  enemies)  and  others,  but  a  succinct 
statement  is  still  needed.  In  addition  to  what  has  been  said,  a  passing  remark  on  a 
number  may  be  illustrative  of  our  meaning.     The  Chiliasts  opposed  the  Ebionists,  the 


513  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINaDOM.  [PrOP.  76. 

ultra,  extreme  Jewish  sects,  mainly  on  the  ground  because  the  latter  denied  the  pecul- 
iar, distinctive  person  of  Christ  demanded  to  fulfil  the  Ahrahamic-Davidic  Kingdom. 
They  combated  all  who  were  tenacious  of  the  observance  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial, 
abrogated  through  the  founding  of  the  Christian  Church.  They  opposed  the  Oriental 
Theosophists  because  they  spiritualized  the  letter  entirely  away,  thus,  among  other 
things,  rendering  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenants,  as  they  read,  impracticable.  They 
resisted  what  is  called  by  some,  "  The  Aristocratic  element,"  as  manifested  in  various 
Gnostic  systems,  the  incor}3oration  of  Platonic  and  Oriental  ideas,  the  combinations  of 
false  reasoning  and  a  subtle  philosoi^hy  in  so  far  as  they  denied  a  literal,  grammatical 
interpretation  of  Scripture  (especially  of  the  covenants),  and  a  divine  and  supreme 
authority  of  Holy  Writ.  They  materially  aided  in  rooting  out  Cerinthianism,  not  only 
on  account  of  its  Christology  contradicted  by  the  covenants,  but  by  reason  of  its  un- 
biblical  (if  correctly  reported,  being  dependent  on  later  and  hostile  testimony)  Chiliasm, 
seeing  that  none  of  the  Fathers  favored  such  a  sensual  system.  They  contradicted  vari- 
ous forms  of  doctrine,  having  its  advocates  as  e.g.  the  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,  the  disbelief  in  the  future  glorification  of  the  body,  the  rejection  of  the  final 
removal  of  the  curse  and  of  evil,  the  inherent  eternal  evil  of  nature,  the  unbelief  in  the 
restitution  of  all  things,  etc.  They  withstood  the  Basil  ideans  owing  to  its  Christology 
and  to  its  giving  to  the  ultimate  deliverance  of  man,  the  race,  and  creation,  a  form 
difterent  from  that  specified  in  the  prophetical.  They  resisted  the  Saturninians  with 
their  denial  of  a  real  body  to  Christ,  their  notions  of  the  Kingdom  and  way  of  life. 
They  combated  the  Marcioaites,  the  Bardesenites,  Tatianites,  Valentinians,  Carj)ocra- 
tians,  Origenists,  besides  others  who  were  regarded  as  heretics.  They  resisted,  on  the 
one  hand,  a  gross  materialism,  and,  on  the  other,  an  encroaching  Idealism,  It  appears, 
from  these  contests  and  the  faithful  devotion  to  the  essential  truths  of  Christianity,  that 
the  Chiliasts  were  esteemed  as  strictly  orthodox.  This  honorable  feature  is  given  to 
them  l)oth  by  enemies  and  friends— even  their  most  violent  opponents,  as  Origen,  Diony- 
sius,  Jerome,  and  others,  do  not  deny  their  orthodoxy.  Indeed,  after  the  declarations  of 
Irenreus  and  Justin,  that  those  who  were  exactly  orthodox  held  to  our  doctrine  ;  after  the 
continuous  tine  of  Fathers  through  whom  the  Christian  Church  is  traced,  it  would  be  both 
unsafe  and  unjust  to  give  them  any  other  position.  But  all  tJiis  necessarily  created 
opposition  against  them,  and  as  this  resistance  finally  accorded  with  the  prevailing 
adopted  Alexandrian  influence,  various  parties  united  in  decrying  them  and  in  treating 
their  doctrine  with  contempt.  The  manner  in  which  the  primitive  doctrine  was  grad- 
ually crushed  reminds  us  of  the  parasite  in  Cuba  or  India,  which  enfolds  and  strangles 
the  life  out  of  the  loft}'  tree.  The  tiny,  silken  threads  grew  into  strong  compressive 
cables  and  trunks  encompassing  the  hapless  victim,  until  he  yielded  to  the  long  accumu- 
lating pressure. 


Prop.  77.]  the  theocratic  kit^-gdom.      '  513 


Proposition"  77.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom^  as  held  by  the 
early  churchy  id  as  finally  almost  exterminated  under  the  teach- 
ing and  power  of  the  Papacy. 

This  is  so  plain  a  historical  fact  that  it  needs  no  special  evidence 
to  sustain  it.  Roman  Catholic  writers,  ecclesiastical  historians, 
and  others,  have  repeatedly  recorded  the  statement,  and  no  denial 
of  it  has  ever  appeared. 

Rome,  once  Cliiliastic,  became  intensely  Anti-Chiliastic.  Renan,in  the  Second  Lee.  of 
tlie  Four  recently  delivered  in  London  (at  the  request  of  Dean  Stanley)  on  early  Church 
History,  declares  that  the  church  at  Rome  was  of  Jewish- Christian  foundation,  directly 
sprung  from  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  and  strongly  attached  to  MiUenarianism.  The  reasons 
tor  the  change  have  been  already  presented  in  detail.  The  writer  on  "Eevelation"  in 
M'Clintock  &  Strong's  Cyclop,  (and  who  cannot  be  charged  with  Chili astic  sympathies) 
thus  candidly  says  :  "  Immediatelj^  after  the  triumph  of  Constantine,  the  Christians, 
emancipated  from  oppression  and  persecution,  and  dominant  and  prosi^erous  in  their 
turn,  began  to  lose  their  vivid  expectation  of  our  Lord's  speedy  Advent,  and  their  spirit- 
ual conception  of  His  Kingdom,  and  to  look  upon  the  temporal  supremacy  of  Christianity 
as  a  fulfilment  of  the  promised  reign  of  Christ  on  earth.  The  Roman  Empire,  become 
Christian,  was  regarded  no  longer  as  the  object  of  prophetic  denunciation,  hut  as  the  scene 
of  a  Millenyiial  development,''  with  which  comp.  Prof.  Bush's  "■Mill.''  If  there  is  any  pro- 
priety and  force  in  the  position  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  in  the  reasoning  of  Bellar- 
mine,  Bossuet,  Mohler,  and  others,  that  tradition  should  he  authoritative  with  Scripture  in 
deciding  doctrine,  then  surely  the  traditions  of  the  first  centuries  ought  to  have  made, 
by  their  overwhelming  weight,  the  Romish  Church  Chiliastic.  But  in  this  case  ambi- 
tion, pride,  conscious  power,  the  possession  of  honors  and  wealth,  etc.,  override  tradi- 
tion, as  they  often  have  done  Scripture  (comp.  Obs.  4).  Chillingworth's  reasoning  on 
this  remains,  and  ever  will  remain,  unanswerable. 

Obs.  1.  The  Papacy  has  been  ever  hostile  to  onr  doctrine,  owing  to  the 
Chiliastic  opposition  to  its  pretensions,  its  provisions  looking  to  futurity, 
its  hierarchical  endowments,  corruptions,  and  bold  assumptions  of  being 
the  promised  Kingdom.  The  early  Millenarians,  without  exception,  re- 
garded the  Roman  Empire  and  the  rising  Papacy  with  distrust  because  of 
their  belief  that  the  Antichrist  would  in  some  way  or  form  be  identified 
with  one  or  the  other.  Before  the  union  of  Church  and  State,  the  Empire 
was  the  object  of  suspicion  ;  after  the  union,  while  the  belief  was  still  con- 
tinued respecting  Rome,  men  began  to  surmise,  as  the  hierarchical  tenden- 
cies were  more  and  more  developed  in  the  increasing  power  of  the  Bishops 
of  Rome,  that  those  Bishops  themselves  were  paving  the  way  for  the 
Roman  Antichrist.  This  opinion  was  strengthened  by  the  conduct  of 
some  of  the  Popes,  so  that  they  were  plainly  designated  either  as  Anti- 
christs or  forerunners  of  the  Antichrist.  This  view,  of  course,  would  be 
offensive  to  the  heads  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  naturally  resulted  in 
their  decrying  Chiliasm  and  condeynning  it  as  derogatory  to  the  honor  of 
the  church.  Pride,  dignity,  ambition,  power,  could  not  tolerate  a  view 
which,  necessarily  brought  with  it,  expressed,  or  even  implied,  reproach. 


514  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  77. 

Various  writers  have  expressed  this  as  follows  :  Bh.  Newton  (On  Proph.,  Dis.  25) 
remarks  :  "  Wherever  the  influence  and  authority  of  the  church  of  Rome  have  extended, 
she  hath  endeavored  by  all  means  to  discredit  this  doctrine  ;  and,  indeed,  not  without 
sufficient  reason,  this  Kingdom  of  Christ  being  founded  on  the  ruins  of  the  Kingdom 
of  Antichrist."  Dr.  Burnett  [Tlieory  of  the  Earth,  vol.  2,  p.  193),  after  showing  how  the 
Romish  church  discountenanced  the  doctrine,  and  that  he  never  met  with  a  Popish 
doctor  who  regarded  it  with  favor,  concludes  :  "  The  Millennium  being  properly  a 
reward  and  triumph  for  those  who  come  out  of  persecution,  such  as  have  lived  always 
.n  pomp  and  prosjjerity  can  pretend  to  no  share  in  it  or  benefit  by  it.  This  has  made 
the  chiirch  of  Rome  have  always  an  ill  eye  upon  this  doctrine,  because  it  seemed  to  have  an 
ill  eye  upon  her.  And  as  she  grew  in  splendor  and  greatness,  she  eclipsed  and  obscured 
it  more  and  more,  so  that  it  would  have  been  lost  out  of  the  world  as  an  obsolete  error, 
if  it  had  not  been  revived  by  some  of  the  Reformation."  Cox  {A  Millenarian' s  Answer,  p. 
43)  says  :  "  27ie  grand  chasm  in  the  historj'  (of  Chiliasm)  seems  to  be  those  awful  cen- 
turies of  Rome's  supremacy,  when  almost  every  truth  was  hidden.  Indeed,  some  of  the 
l^arasites  of  Constantino,  like  Ahab's  Zedekiah,  did  not  scruple  to  say  that  the  21st  and 
22d  chapters  of  Revelation  were  fulfilled  in  his  time.  Thus  did  Satan  mimic  the  King- 
dom God  had  promised,  and,  as  one  has  well  observed,  constitute  the  Pope  his 
Melchisedec,  his  high  priest  to  rule  over  the  nations."  Brooks  (JS"/.  Proph.  Interp.,  p. 
51)  writes  :  "  When  the  Christian  Bishop  of  Rome  came,  in  progress  of  time,  to  be 
elevated  to  the  high  rank  which  he  attained  under  the  paj^acy,  the  inconvenience  of 
explaining  Rome  to  be  the  capital  city  of  the  Antichrist  and  the  '  Babylon '  and 
'  Harlot '  of  the  Apocalypse,  was  ynore  sensibly  felt  than  ever  ;  because  it  could  not  be 
asserted  without  giving  occasion  for  the  very  obvious  conclusion,  that  the  Bishop  of 
Rome  would  some  day  apostatize,  together  with  the  church  in  general  over  which  he 
was  the  head.  Accordingly,  from  the  time  of  Justinian,  efforts  were  both  openly  and 
clandestinely  made  to  get  rid  of  the  doctrine  altogether,  by  removing  or  corrupting  the 
evidence  in  its  favor,  or  by  affixing  to  it  the  stigma  of  heresy."  Seiss  (Last  Times,  p. 
246-7)  declares  :  "  It  is  a  sad  fact,  however,  that  from  the  fourth  century  until  the 
sixteenth,  this  doctrine  gradually  lost  its  hold  upon  the  minds  and  hearts  of  professed 
Christians,  and  went  down  into  almost  absolute  neglect.  But  with  it  went  down  the  great 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  and  nearly  everything  that  is  distinguishing  in  gospel 
religion.  It  fell  only  as  ropery  arose  ;  and  it  is  only  as  it  rises  again  that  Popery  shall 
shrink  and  quail.  So  long  as  men  think  they  see  and  hear  Christ  in  the  Pope  and 
believe  that  they  are  worshipping  and  honoring  Christ  by  serving  and  obeying  hier- 
archies regarded  as  yure  divino,  we  need  never  expect  them  to  believe  that  Christ  will  ever 
reign  here  in  person.  The  two  ideas  are  fundamentally  antagonistic.  If  Christ  is  Him- 
self to  reign  here  in  universal  empire.  He  has  not  given  that  Empire  into  the  hands 
of  a  vicar  ;  and  if  He  has  made  the  Pope  the  supreme  Lord  of  the  world,  it  is  settled 
that  He  will  never  reign  here  otherwise  than  by  the  Pope.  Either  proposition  confutes 
the  other.  The  two  cannot  live  together.  And  this  puts  into  our  hands  the  key 
to  the  true  explanation  how  the  church  has  come  to  lose  sight  of  the  primitive 
and  apostolic  faith  upon  this  subject." 

Obs.  2.  In  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  the  Chiliastic  Kingdom  of  the 
Abrahamic-Davidic  covenant  as  taught  by  the  Fathers,  tJie  liojje  in  the  con- 
stantly expected  Advent  of  Jesus  to  establish  such  a  Kingdom,  tlie  antici- 
ixited  struggle  with  an  Antichrist  in  ecclesiastical-political  power,  the  view 
entertained  respecting  the  church  as  a  struggling,  tried  body  awaiting 
deliverance  and  triumph  alone  through  the  personal  Advent  of  the  Messiah 
• — these  prevented  aspiring  prelates  and  the  ambitious  learned  from  indors- 
ing it.  It  was  an  easy  matter,  by  adopting  the  Origenistic  interpretation 
of  several  senses,  to  reject  the  covenanted  restored  Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom  under  a  personal  Messiah,  and  to  substitute  in  its  place  ayi  exist- 
ing Kingdom  under  the  rule  of  appointed  hierarchs,  and  claim  that  in 
and  through  them  Christ  was  already  reigning  in  His  promised  Kingdom. 
This  caricature  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom  was  varnished  over  by  the  most 
laudatory  and  fulsome  language  (even  applying  to  it  the  predictions  alone 
applicable  to  the  mighty  Theocratic  King)  which  self-interest  and  vain- 
glory could  suggest.     Very  soon,  too,  these  declarations  were  summed  up 


Prop.  77.]  the  theocratic  kii^gdom.  515 

and  declared  to  be  "  tlie  voice  of  the  clmrcli ;''  the  later  Fathers  supersed- 
ing those  who  previously  entertained  Chiliastic  doctrine,  now  so  detractive 
and  humiliating  to  Popish  presumption. 

It  is  noticeable  that  Romanism  pronounces  only  such  "  Doctores  Ecclesige"  who  have 
no  decided  leaning  to  Millenarianism,  leaving  Chiliasts  like  Papias,  etc.,  simply  "  Scrip- 
tores  Ecclesiastici"  (TJeberweg's  His.  PUlos.,  vol.  1,  p.  275).  Those  who  spiritualized 
the  faith  of  the  Primitive  Church  were  in  the  highest  odor  of  sanctity.  Dr.  Pise,  in  the 
Introd.  (p.  7-8)  to  Rutter's  (Rom.  Cath.)  Life  of  Jesus  Christ,* exalts  the  ancient  Fathers 
as  in  unity  with  Roman  Catholicism  (without,  however,  intimating  how  the  more  unvient 
in  many  points  disagree,  as  abundantly  shown  by  Barrow,  Chillingworth,  Cumming, 
etc.),  and  then,  by  way  of  contrast,  points  out  how  Luther,  Calvin,  Melanchthon,  Peter 
MartjT,  Beza,  Dudith,  etc.,  depreciate  them  (without  noticing  that  they  mainly  objected 
against  tlie  later  who  departed  the  most  from  the  Primitive  doctrine,  and  that  they 
received  them  when  in  accord  with  the  Scriptures).  It  is  those  yery  "  doctores"  that 
the  Reformers  found  had  departed  the  farthest  from  the  "  old  paths."  so  that  e.g.  taking 
Jerome,  Luther  {Table  Talk,  "  Of  the  books  of  the  Fathers,"  ch.  135)  remarks  :  "  Jerome 
should  not  be  numbered  among  the  teachers  of  the  Church."  This  reminds  us  that  this 
Father,  so  eulogized  by  some  of  our  opponents  because  of  his  one  sided  Anti-Chiliasm,  is 
thus  presented  in  "  The  Old  and  New,"  Sep.,  1871,  Art.  "  Jerome,''  which  after  acknowl- 
edging his  merits  in  several  respects,  sums  ui^  the  "  Jerome  of  quarrelsome  memory"  as 
follows  :  "  As  supporter  of  the  claims  of  the  rising  Paj)acy,  as  satirist  of  marriage  and  of 
the  holiest  laws  of  nature,  as  compiler  of  monkish  legends  and  defender  of  monkish 
practices,  as  defamer  of  the  earliest  Christian  Protestantism,  and  apologist  for  the  martyr 
worship  and  paganized  ceremonies  of  the  Roman  Church,  Jerome  must  be  classed  with 
those  who  have  hindered  the  progress  of  the  race  in  morals  and  religion,"  etc. 

Obs.  3.  When  a  church  arrogates  to  itself  the  great  honor  of  showing 
forth  loithin  its  t?07'ders  the  predicted  millennial  glory  (as  e.g.  Eusebius  and 
others,  dating  its  inauguration  from  Constantine,  or  Augustine  and  others, 
dating  the  same  from  the  First  Advent  of  Christ)  ;  when  it  enforces  the 
belief  by  a  wJ/oIesale  appropriation  of  prophecy  without  the  least  regard  to 
its  connection,  covenant  basis,  prospective  attitude,  relation  to  the  Jewish 
nation,  union  with  the  Sec.  Advent,  etc.;  when  it  hedges  this  around  by  a 
confessional  barrier,  and  calls  for  all  its  membership  to  receive  it  as  the 
trutli — then,  especially  when  it  has  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  power  under 
its  control  to  compel  obedience,  it  is  not  strange  that  the  doctrine,  so  hostile 
to  these  arrogant  assumptions  as  ours,  should  be  hated  and  depressed. 

The  Hierarchy  could  not,  as  a  matter  of  mere  consistency,  receive  the  notion  of  a 
Kingdom  (viz.  :  that  of  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  in  the  covenanted  Theocratic-Davidic) 
which  protested  against  and  condemned  its  substitution.  Hence  Shimeall  (Eschatology, 
p.  49)  correctly  observes  :  "  Then,  too,  the  Popes,  in  after  ages,  discountenanced  Mille- 
narianism, inasmuch  as  it  militated  against  their  anti  christian  usurpation  and  dogma,  that 
the  Millennium  commenced  with  Romish  domination  in  the  church."  Dr.  West  {His. 
Pre-Mill  Doc.)  says:  "  By  union  of  church  and  state,  and  perversion  of  victory,  the 
foundation  was  laid  in  the  Empire  for  a  carnal  and  a  Satanic  caricature  of  the  Millennial 
Kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth  before  the  time— a  Millennium  sunk  in  the  gross  material- 
ism and  idolatry  of  a  medieval,  political,  and  military  Christianity.  By  union  of  Church 
and  State  the  martyr  doctrine  itself  ic as  martyred,  no  council  resisting,  and  vanished  from 
view  with  the  departing  glory  and  last  remnant  of  a  suffering,  but  pure  apostolic 
church."  How  the  union  of  Church  and  State,  introducing  an  antagonism  of  view 
utterly  irreconcilable  with  Chiliasm,  facilitated  the  overthrow  of  Millenarianism,  is 
also  briefly  noticed  by  Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  sec.  139.  Dr.  Fisher,*  Art. 
'"''Mill.'"  M'Clintock  &  Strong's  Cyclop.,  although  a  Post-Mill.,  most  candidly  says:  "It 
(the  Mill,  doctrine)  teas  still  common,  however,  in  the  time  of  Jerome,  who  himself  was 
one  of  its  opponents.  But  gradually  the  tenet  which  had  .90  widely  prevailed  became  , 
obnoxious  and  proscribed.  One  great  reason  of  this  remarkable  change  of  sentiment  is 
to  be  found  in  the  altered  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Church."  The  latter,  he  re- 
marks, led  to  the  idea  of  bringing  the  world  into  subjection  to  the  Church.  It  is  the 
just  view  of  many  that  Constantine'  s  conversion  and  the  results  were  not  productive  of 


516  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIN^GDOM.  [PrOP.  77. 

good.     In  addition  to  writers  quoted,  see  Stanley's  Life  of  Arnold,  vol.  1,  p.  52,  Mackin- 
non's  His.  of  Civ.,  vol.  1,  p.  77,  etc. 

Obs.  4.  Chillingwortli  (Woi^ks,  Dis.  5) — of  whom  Prof.  Bush  declares, 
*'  Certainly  there  are  few  persons  more  competent  to  pronounce  on  the 
fact" — makes  a  strong  argument  against  the  Church  of  Rome,  in  its  refus- 
ing to  accept  of  our  doctrine  when  professing  to  receive  by  tradition  the 
pure  doctrines  of  the  primitive  and  ajjostolic  age.  He  conclusively  proves 
the  generality  of  the  doctrine  entertained  ;  that  for  some  time  it  was  un- 
contradicted ;  that  all  the  Fathers,  East  and  West,  held  it ;  that  they  pro- 
fessed not  only  to  teach  it  "  «5  doctors  hut  as  witnesses  j^'  that  it  was 
esteemed  as  an  "  apostolic  tradition''  received  by  persons  in  personal  com- 
munication with  apostles  and  elders  ;  that  it  was  regarded  as  the  faith  of 
orthodox  believers  ;  and  then,  in  the  light  of  all  this  accumulated  evidence, 
argues  that,  in  this  matter  at  least,  the  Koman  Church  "  has  grossly  falsified 
the  creed  of  antiquity,  inasmuch  as  there  is  ample  cvideyice  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  Ch'iliasts  was  actually  the  Catholic  faith  of  more  than  one  century." 
Bowers  {His.  Popes),  in  his  life  of  Damasus,  takes  the  same  ground,  for, 
after  describing  the  Millenarian  doctrine  and  its  extent,  he  remarks  : 
"  And  yet  such  a  doctrine  is  noiv  rank  heresy  in  the  Church  of  Rome.  But, 
by  declaring  it  such,  have  they  not  overset  their  own  system,  which  places 
tradition  upon  a  level  with  the  canonical  books  of  the  Scripture  ?  Can 
they  allege  a  more  ancient  tradition,  one  more  universally  received,  or 
equally  coujitenajiced  hy  Scripture,  in  favor  of  the  many  traditional  articles 
of  faith  which  they  have  obtruded  upon  the  world  ?  Papias  declares  he 
received  the  above-mentioned  doctrine  of  those  who  had  learned  it  iimne- 
diately  of  the  apostles.  If  such  a  tradition  be  rejected  as  false,  what  otJier 
has  a  right  to  be  admitted  as  trueV 

Judge  Jones  (Essays  on  the  Com.  of  the  Kingdom,  Ess.  5),  after  declaring  "  that  the 
system  of  Pojjery,  morally  speaking,  could  not  have  been  established,  except  iipon  the 
virtual  or  practical  denial  of  this  very  doclrine,"  remarks  :  "  Hence  it  is  that  while  most 
Eomanists  have  treated  the  doctrine  as  a  heresy,  others  feeling  their  traditions  must 
fail,  if  Papias,  Irenaeus,  Justin  Martyr,  Tertullian,  Lactantius,  and  their  contempo- 
raries, should  be  denounced  as  heretics,  endeavor  to  escape  the  dilemma,  by  making  a 
distinction  between  what  these  fathers  have  said  in  the  name  of  the  churcli,  and  have 
delivered  as  the  doctrine  of  the  church,  and  ichat  they  choose  to  consider  their  per- 
sonal opinions  and  conjectures.  Some  of  them  trace  the  doctrine  to  certain  joassages 
in  the  Apocalypse,  which  they  suppose  these  fathers  misinterpreted  ;  while  others 
affirm  that  they  borrowed  it  from  Plato.  The  answer  given  by  Chill ingworth  to  this 
mode  of  getting  over  the  difficulty  is  conelusive.' '  It  may  be  here  observed  (what  Jones, 
Cox,  and  many  others  have  noticed)  that  it  is  not  only  the  church  of  Rome  that  is,  in 
view  of  its  organization,  ambitious  projects,  etc.,  hostile  to  our  doctrine,  but  this  ap- 
plies to  all  those  religious  bodies  having  "  a  High- Church'"  tendency,  and  making  much 
of  "  tradition"  (as  e.g.  Episcopalian  High  Churchism,  Mercersburg  Theology,  Pusey- 
istic  party,  ultra  Symbolical  Lutheranism,  etc.),  which  tells  us,  with  insidious  and 
subtle  reasoning,  that  the  Bible  is  to  be  interpreted  by  the  past  faith  of  the  Church, 
and  yet  which,  with  all  its  professed  churchliness,  obstinately  and  utterly  discards 
this  once  generally  received  faith  of  the  church.  The  same  is  true,  in  sadness  M^e  write  it, 
of  all  churches  that  are  highly  prospered  in  extension,  wealth,  and  influence  (except- 
ing alone  individual  members,  who  have  faithfully  entered  their  protest),  to  whom 
our  doctrine  is  unwelcome  for  reasons  already  sufficiently  assigned.  Ruling  in  an 
existing  Kingdom,  it  does  not  suit  the  spirit  and  aims  of  a  multitude  to  receive  a 
doctrine  which  necessarily  is  humbling  and  derogatory  to  their  pretensions  and  predic- 
tions of  the  future. 

Obs.  5.  It  may  then  be  briefly  stated  as  a  self-evident  fact,  that  the  entire 
spirit  and  aim  of  the  Papacy  is  antagonistic  to  the  early  church  view, 


Prop.  77.]  the  theocPwAtic  kingdom.  517 

being  based  on  coveted  ecclesiastical  and  secular  power,  on  extended  juris- 
diction lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  Primate.  When  episcopal  palaces  with 
their  palatial  endowments  were  erected  under  the  fostering  care  of  the 
Emperors  ;  whe7i  the  rulers  of  the  church  enjoyed  the  rich  vestments, 
emoluments,  and  honor  of  office  ;  zvhe?i  magnilicent  churches,  with  altars 
and  walls  adorned  and  enriched  by  the  costly  gifts  of  its  devotees,  were 
built  all  over  the  Empire  ;  tvhen  ambitious  men,  under  the  cloak  of  an 
established  Messianic  Kingdom,  formed  the  idea  of  a  universal  govern- 
ment ;  zvhefi  men  addicted  to  pleasures  tasted  the  enjoyments  afforded  by- 
rich  revenues  and  the  servile  honor  paid  to  them  by  the  multitude  ;  2vhen  a 
system  was  founded  which  decided  that  the  reign  of  the  saints  had  already 
begun — that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  ruled  on  earth  in  Christ's  place  ;  that  the 
deliverance  from  the  curse  would  only  be  effected  in  the  third  heaven  ; 
that  in  the  church,  as  a  Kingdom,  there  was  "  an  aristocracy"  to  which 
unhesitating  obedience  must  be  rendered  ;  that  the  prophetical  announce- 
ments respecting  Messiah's  Kingdom  were  fultilling  in  Romish  2)redomi- 
nance,  splendor,  and  wealth  ;  that  the  rewarding  and  elevation  of  saints 
was  not  dependent  upon  the  Sec.  Advent,  but  upon  the  power  lodged  in  the 
existing  Kingdom,  etc.,  etc. — then  it  tuas  that  Cliiliasm,  so  distasteful  and 
obnoxious  to  these  claims  and  doctrines,  fell  beneath  the  powerful  and 
world-pervading  influence  exerted  against  it. 

Judge  Jones  {Essays  on  Com.  of  Kingdom)  observes  :  "  Ungodly  men,  allured  by 
ambition,  and  who  desired  noihinrj  less  than  the  coming  of  Christ,  got  influence  in  the 
church,  and  they  constructed  a  system,  every  part  of  which  speaks  in  language  not  to 
be  misunderstood,  '  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming.'"  See  also  in  the  same  connection 
his  remarks,  how  this  is  found,  more  or  less,  in  Protestant  churches.  It  is  a  sad  truth, 
that  our  most  bitter  enemies  are  those  who  are  fostered  by  endowments  looking  to  a  per- 
petuity of  present  agencies,  etc.  It  is  but  just  to  add,  that  while  Jones  is  correct  in 
specifying  "  ungodly  men,"  yet  it  is  also  true  that  many  sincere  and  pious  hearts  were 
drawn,  b}^  fallacious  reasoning  and  the  trust  that  they  were  aiding  the  truth  and  Christ's 
glory,  in  receiving  and  extending  this  opposition  to  Primitive  doctrine,  position,  and 
usage.  For  we  Uiust  not  forget  that  aside  from  selfishness  and  personal  interest  seriously 
affecting  our  doctrine,  mysticism,  in  all  its  forms,  with  its  higher  inner  light  and  lower- 
ing of  written  revelation  before  spiritual  contemplation,  has  ever  disastrously— in 
Romanism  and  Protestantism— manifested  Us  scorn  at  Chiliasm,  owing  to  the  influence 
of  its  devotees.  A  glance  at  church  history  is  decisive,  for  such  men  as  Hilary,  Maximus, 
Bernard,  John  Scotus  Erigena,  Hildegard,  Francis,  Eckhart,  Tassler,  Thomas  a  Kempis, 
Molinos,  and  even  such  as  Fenelon,  Pascal,  Madame  Gayon,  Law,  and  a  multitude  of 
others,  could  not  possibly  accept  our  doctrine,  seeing  that  their  fundamental  principles 
and  their  method  of  interpreting  Scripture  were  utterly  opposed  to  it.  Thus  a  variety 
of  j)owerful  influences  (comp.  preceding  Prop.)  were  at  work,  hand  in  hand. 

01)8.  6.  The  institution  of  monkery  exerted  a  powerful  influence  in  caus- 
ing the  rapid  decline  of  our  doctrine.  They  formed,  owing  to  their  privi- 
leges, numbers,  sanctity,  etc.,  the  most  effective  2\\\q^  in  upholding  Papal 
claims  and  doctrines,  and,  of  course,  in  decrying,  with  the  populace,  all 
antagonistic  utterances.  From  the  fourth  century  down,  they  greatly 
moulded  or  impressed  the  sentiments  and  views  of  the  church,  and,  there- 
fore, the  student,  in  estimating  the  causes  leading  to  a  suppression  of  Chil 
iasm,  must  not  forget  to  estimate  the  leverage  exerted  by  monkery. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  monkery,  as  Mosheim,  Neander,  etc.,  have  presented 
their  vast  influence  in  building  up  the  Papacy,  etc.  Yet  it  is  noticeable  that  the  earlier 
favorers  of  monasticism,  like  Jerome,  while  rejecting  our  doctrine,  were  still  unwilling  to 
brand  it  as  a  heresy  ;  this  spirit  of  toleration,  with  increasing  bigotry  and  ignorance, 
finally  ceased. 


518  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM!.  [PeOP.  77.. 

Ohs.  7.  The  authority  of  Councils  in  the  interest  of  hierarchical  tenden- 
cies materially  aided  in  obscuring  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom.  Indirect- 
ly, by  exalting  and  confining  the  kingship  of  Christ  to  His  Divine  nature, 
and  correspondingly  lowering  the  human,  forgetting  that  tlie  coverianted 
kingship  is  given  to  "  the  Son  of  Man''  who  is  of  the  Davidic  lineage. 
This  resulted  mainly  from  tbe  Arian  and  other  controversies  respecting 
the  natures  of  Christ,  when  one  extreme  led  to  its  opposite.  Directly,  by 
indorsing  the  polity  of  the  church  and  state,  the  ambitious  projects  aiming 
at  universal  power,  and  the  supposed  Kingdom  as  exhibited  under  the 
leadership  of  one  Bishop.  The  decisions  of  Councils  were  finally  elevated 
to  an  equality  with  the  Scriptures,  and  thus  aided  in  crushing  the  doc- 
trine. 

What  these  Councils  were  (i.e.  of  what  fallible  persons  composed,  what  indications  of 
weakness,  passion,  bitterness,  etc.)  has  been  ably  and  satisfactorily  shown  by  various 
writers  (Mosheim,  Neander,  Kill  en,  Stanley,  Justin,  etc.,  too  clearly  teach  us  that  the 
majorities  were  only  too  often  composed  of  bigoted,  fanatical,  and  domineering  prel- 
ates, whose  only  desire  w^as  to  compel  all  men  to  believe  in  all  things  just  as  they  did, 
to  exalt  their  church  by  any  means,  even  to  the  anathematizing  of  all  who  would  not 
submit).  After  the  Council  of  Nice,  none  gave  utterance  to  anything  in  sympathy  with 
Chiliasm.  In  the  first  General  Council  of  Nice  (a.d.  325),  being  nearly  related  in  time 
to  the  preceding  Chiliastic  Fathers,  we  have  the  following  :  in  addition  to  the  definition 
of  the  faith  and  the  canons,  the  Council  set  forth  certain  forms  of  ecclesiastical  doctrine. 
Gelasius  Cysicenus  {His.  Act.  Con.  Nlc.)  has  recorded  the  latter,  and  among  them  is  the 
one  on  the  last  clause  (viz.  :  "  I  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  life  of  the 
world  to  come")  of  the  Nicene  Creed.  It  reads  :  "  the  world  was  made  inferior  because 
of  foreknowledge  ;  for  God  foreknew  that  man  would  sin.  Therefore  we  exj^ect  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth  according  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  ;  the  Epiphany  and  Kingdom 
of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Je.'ius  Chrifit  then  appearing.  And  as  Dan.  says  (ch.  7  :  18) 
the  saints  of  the  most  High  shall  take  the  Kingdom.  And  there  shall  he  a  pure  and  holy  land, 
the  land  of  the  living  and  not  of  the  dead  :  which  David,  foreseeing  with  the  eye  of  faith, 
exclaims,  1  believe  to  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living — the  land  of  the  meek 
and  humble.  Blessed,  saith  Christ  (Matt.  5  :  5)  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth. 
And  the  prophet  saith  (Isa.  26  :  6),  The  feet  of  the  'meek  and  humble  shall  tread  upon  it." 
This  is  quoted  b}^  numerous  writers,  such  as  Mede,  Burnet,  Brooks,  Seiss,  Cox,  Hartley, 
Shimeall,  Investigator  of  Proph.,  etc.  Brooks  remarks  that  Dupin,  the  Romish  his- 
torian, calls  this  into  question,  while  others  of  the  same  church  contend  for  its  correct- 
ness. If  it  is  to  be  received  as  genuine  (as  many  contend,  seeing  that  it  is  to  the  Eomish 
interest  to  detract  from  it),  it  would  appear  that  many,  at  least,  of  the  three  hundred 
bishops  composing  the  Council  were  Millenarian — for  this  statement  is  purely  Chiliastic — 
and  tliat  the  influence  and  teachings  of  Lactantius  (who  was  then  an  old  man  and  died 
about  that  time)  and  others  were  not  forgotten.  Let  us  add  :  that  the  extract  is  still 
valuable  in  indicating  how  anciently  such  expressions  in  the  Creed  which  simply  ex- 
jDressed  a  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  were  understood,  viz.  :  not  necessarily 
to  imply  a  simultaneous  resurrection  of  all  at  one  and  the  same  time.  This  again 
shows,  as  we  shall  argue  hereafter,  that  the  leading  creeds,  as  the  Apostles'  and  Niceno- 
Constantinopolitan,  as  well  as  the  brief  formulas  of  Irenaeus  and  TertuUian  (comp.  note 
to  Murdoch's  Mosheim  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  81,  Harper's  Ed.),  were  in  direct  sympathy  with 
Chiliasm  (over  against  Shedd's,  Sanborn's,  and  others'  statements  to  the  contrary),  seeing 
that  Millenarians  cordially  embraced  the  same,  and  even  thus  tersely  expressed  a  great 
truth  without  entering  into  details  respecting  the  order  of  the  resurrection.  Besides  this  : 
while  giving  this  as  proof  that  (aside  from  Lactantius  and  others)  at  this  period  Mil- 
lenarian doctrine  was  not  yet  extinct,  yet,  we  confess,  that  we  are  not  great  admirers  of 
a  Council  called  and  presided  over  by  such  a  man  as  Constantine,  and  in  which  were  men 
(comp.  Dunn,  Stanley,  Killen,  etc.)  who  evinced  by  their  conduct  that  they  were  pas- 
sionate and  frail.  Our  doctrine  is  not  based  on  Councils  ;  and  we  do  not  quote  the  latter 
to  give  it  any  authority,  but  only  as  a  historical  fact  bearing  on  the .  continuance  of  its 
extent,  at  a  time  when  at)uses  came  trooping  in  and  the  doctrines  heretofore  held  were 
beginning  to  fade  before  the  incoming  Hierarch.  Uhlhorn  {Conflict  of  Cliris.  with 
Heathenism,  p.  352)  shows  that  after  the  Church  introduced  hierarchical  tendencies  and 
dreams  of  conquest,  then  "  the  hope  of  the  speedy  Advent,  lohich  shone  so  brightly  m  the 


Prop.  77.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  519 

early  days,  lias  now  become  dimmed,"  and  while  "  the  earlier  period  had  no  thought  of 
any  victory  but  that  which  Christ  icas  to  bring  at  His  Coming,"  the  church  now  entertained 
hopes  of  victory  over  the  Empire  and  the  world.  This  was  largely  aided  by  Councils, 
aided  and  sujpported  by  imperial  patronage  and  power. 

Obs.  8.  Theology,  under  the  constant  surveillance  of  a  church  jeaMis  of 
its  delegated  kingly  authority,  in  its  more  systematic  arrangements,  was 
entirely  controlled  so  as  fo  favor  the  sulstihited  Kingdom.  We  find,  there- 
fore, in  all  such  works,  running  down  through  the  scholastic  age  to  the 
Eeformation,  a  set  apologetic  defence  of  the  Romish  notions  of  the  King- 
dom. Starting  with  the  idea — often  taken  for  granted  as  a  settled  premise 
or  inferred  by  far-fetched  inferences — that  the  Romish  Church  is  the  pre- 
dicted Kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  everything  is  made  to  hend  to  that  theory. 
The  utterances  of  later  Fathers,  the  decrees  of  Councils,  and  the  self-in- 
terested statements  of  Popes  and  Prelates,  are  appealed  to  with  unbounded 
confidence,  just  as  if,  in  so  fundamental  a  matter,  the  fallihle  utterances  of 
man  were  equal,  if  not  sujierior,  to  Scripture  itself  ; — and  as  many  of  these 
thus  quoted  had  been  canonized  by  the  church  they  favored,  tlieir  saint- 
.yliip  corroborated,  in  the  eyes  of  many,  the  claims  and  doctrines  indorsed. 
To  oj^tpose  such  a  swollen  stream,  guarded  by  thousands  upon  thousands  of 
devoted  adherents,  was  simply  to  risk  reputation  and  life. 

We  reproduce  the  language  of  a  valued  friend.  Dr.  Seiss,  Last  Times,  p  290,  says  : 
"  I  have  proven  to  you  that  such  (Chiliastit)  were  substantially  the  hopes  of  the  church 
before  Christ  came  as  the  child  of  Mary  ;  taat  Jesus  and  his  inspired  apostles  spoke  of 
these  hopes  as  deeply  founded  in  the  purposes  and  promises  of  God  ;  that  they  were 
entertained,  preached,  and  gloried  in  by  those  who  received  their  instructions  from 
ajjostolic  lips,  and  by  the  Luthers,  and  Arndts,  and  Paleys,  and  Baxters,  and  Wesleys, 
and  Halls,  and  Edwardses,  and  Chalmerses  of  the  first  three  hundred  years  of  the 
Christian  Church  ;  that  no  Christian  ever  disputed  them  previous  to  the  time  of 
Origen  ;  and  that  they  are  now  held  and  proclaimed  by  hundreds  and  thousands  among 
the  purest,  the  most  eloquent,  the  most  learned,  and  the  most  useful  of  the  children  of 
God  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  How  the  church  came  to  lose  sight  of  these  hoiDes,  I  have 
also  indicated.  It  was  Popery  that  obscured  them  and  cast  them  into  darkness.  First 
came  Origen's  fanciful  method  of  interpreting  the  Scriptures,  casting  uncertainty 
upon  the  clearest  statements,  and  introducing  a  way  of  exposition  which  all  men  unite 
in  lamenting  and  condemning.  Then  came  the  desire  to  render  the  Christian  faith 
palatable  to  a  Roman  Emperor,  and  then  to  the  papal  usurper,  leading  to  a  repudiation 
of  a  part  of  the  Bible,  and  the  mutilation  and  interpolation  of  the  writings  of  the 
fathers.  And  thus,  as  the  joint  loork  of  Origen's  vagaries  and  the  sycophantic  spirit  and 
corruj^t  principles  of  some  who  came  after  him,  a  disposition  was  made  of  these  great 
anticipations  from  which  every  good  man  should  recoil  with  horror.  It  was  a  stroke  of 
Satan  to  cheat  the  Bride  of  Jesus  out  of  her  sublimest  dowry.  To  this  day  the  church 
is  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  that  deception.  Nor  can  we  do  duty  to  ourselves 
or  to  the  truth  of  God,  and  yet  patiently  acquiesce  in  a  decision  brought  about  in  a 
way  so  unchristian  and  xinwarraniaUe.  Nay,  I  feel  confident,  that  when  once  we  haye  fairly 
examined  this  whole  matter  the  pure  Millenarian  doctrine  will  be  held  and  preached  as 
one  of  the  most  glorious  articles  of  our  most  holy  faith."  So  Dr.  Willis  Lord  {The 
Blessed  Hope,  p.  79)  remarks  :  "  In  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Church  it  is  certain  that 
for  more  than  three  centuries  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ  was  expected  to  take  place 
hefor^e  the  Millennium,  and  that  the  bliss  and  glory  of  that  period  would  fiow  from  His 
presence  and  reign.  Especially  was  this  so  while  Paganism  still  held  the  seat  of  power, 
and  the  church  was  despised  and  persecuted.  Most  keenly  did  she  then  feel  the  sorrows 
of  widowhood,  and  long  for  the  return  of  her  absent  Lord.  That  return  would  bring  the 
day  of  her  redenq^tion  and  joy.  When,  however,  Constantine  mounted  the  throne,  and 
the  church  with  him,  her  spirit  and  her  faith  changed.  Favor  with  men,  and  increasing 
flatteries,  honors,  wealth,  and  power,  made  the  world  seem  less  barren,  and  more 
attractive.  Gradually,  but  surely,  the  blessed  hope  gave  way  to  the  jDower  of  present 
possession  and  enjoyment  ;  the  once   desolate  widow  became  elated,  jDroud,   and  self- 


520  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIl^GDOM.  [PrOP.  77. 

sufficient  ;  and  she  said  in  her  heart,  '  I  sit  as  a  queen,  and  shall  have  no  sorrow.'     For 
many  generations,  it  would  have  been  ihe  dread  of  the  visible  church  to  have  the  Lord  to 


Obs.  9.  The  historical  fact  that  Millenarianism  was  thus  crashed  is  far 
from  being  dislionorabh  to  us.  Indeed,  we  rather  glory  in  the  occurrence, 
as  indirect  proof  of  tJie  truthfuhiess  of  our  position,  seeing  that  as  a  defec- 
tion from  the  truth  was  predicted  by  the  apostles  to  take  pUice,  that  very 
form  of  doctrine  departed  from — provided  once  generally  held,  and  con- 
tained (even  in  the  literal  sense)  in  the  Word — it  must  be  regarded  as  ap- 
proaching the  nearest  to  sound  doctrine.  The  warnings  speciallij  given  re- 
specting this  doctrine  in  its  leading  feature  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  etc.,  iin- 
inidal:ahhj  indicate  a  foreseen  denial  of  its  characteristics.  Hence,  we  have 
corroborating  evidence  in  its  favor,  when  we  hear  the  Eoman  Catholic 
Baronius  telling  us  :  "  The  figments  of  the  Millenaries  being  rejected  every- 
where, and  denied  by  the  learned,  ivith  hisses  and  laughter,  and  being  also 
jnit  under  the  ban,  were  etitirely  extirpated.'" 

The  reader  will  observe  that  if  our  doctrine  had  always  remained  ihe  generally  received 
doctrine  of  the  church  it  would  not  meet  the  requirements  of  prediction  respecting  ihe 
lack  of  faith  in  Christ's  coming,  the  attitude  of  professed  servants  who  say  that  He 
delayeih  His  coming,  the  abounding  of  unbelief  and  apostas}',  etc.  This  same  Baronius  says 
(Bowers,  His.  Popes,  vol.  1,  p.  97)  that  Damasus  condemned  the  Millenarians  in  the 
Council  of  Rome,  a.d.  378.  But  Bowers  shows  that  he  is  wrong,  since  (tfier  that  Council 
"  many  eminent  men  in  the  church  held  it,  and  Suli^icias  Severus  among  the  rest,  wiihout 
being  deemed  heretics  on  that  score."  Mede,  Brooks,  etc.,  evidently  (saying  that 
Damasus  condemned  the  Millenarians,  and  Mede,  Works,  p.  6G4,  also  says  that  Damasus 
suppressed  the  works  of  Victorinus  and  Sulpicius)  took  this  either  from  Baronius,  or 
from  Lorinvis,  the  Jesuit  (Lorinus  in  his  Com.  on  Acts  1  :  6,  refers  to  "  ihe  heresy  of 
CJdliasm,  which  Pope  Damasus  had  condemned  in  Apollinaris"),  and  both  Baronius  and 
Lorinus  were  misled  by  the  condemnation  of  Apollinaris,  who  with  views  that  the 
Pope  rei^robated,  also  entertained  Chiliasm  in  some  of  its  features.  After  looking  over 
all  the  testimony  a\ai  able  on  the  subject,  it  is  our  decided  opinion  that  ihe  suppression 
of  the  doctrine  was  later  than  the  time  of  Damasus,  and  that  Bower  is  correct  in  his 
opinion.  In  confirmation  of  this,  it  is  only  necessaiy  to  say  that  Apollinaris  was  not 
condemned  as  a  Chiliast  but  for  other  alleged  error,  and  Ihat  Jerome  (with  whom 
Damasus  was  intimate,  and  who  upheld  and  praised  Damasus)  himself— opposed  to 
Chiliasm— dare.s  not  condemn  it  as  heresy  (saying  that  "  many  Christians  and  martyrs  had 
affirmed  the  things  (Chiliasm)  which  he  denied  ;  and  that  a  great  multitude  of  Christians 
agreed  in  them  in  his  own  day,  so  that  though  he  could  not  follow  them,  he  could  not 
condemn  them''),  which  he  certainly  would  have  done,  or  intimated,  had  the  Bishop,  his 
jDcrsonal  friend,  decreed  it.  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Baronius  is  correct,  that 
we  admit  his  statement  ("  the  heresy,  however,  loquacious  before,  loas  silenced  then,  and 
since  that  time  has  hardly  been  heard  of"),  and  that  Damasus,  with  the  aid  of  the 
Council,  suppresssd  Millenarianism.  It  certainly  cannot  be  flattering  to  the  prevailing 
view,  that  this  was  done  by  a  Pope  ivith  ihe  character  of  Damasus,  and  by  a  clergy  which 
sustained  the  reputation  given  to  them  at  that  time.*  It  must,  indeed,  be  particularly 
gratifying  to  some  of  our  opponents  that  the  charge  of  "  heresy  "  preferred  against  us 
comes  from  such  a  source,  so  that  e.g.  Dr.  Hamilton  declares  :  "Yet  this  doctrine  of 
the  Chiliasts  was  condemned  by  the  church— since  that  time  all  are  accounted  heretics 
that  maintained  it."     In  our  reading,  this  charge  has  been  found  repeated  again  and  again 


*  Comp.  e.g.  Bowers,  His.  Popes,  noticing  the  statements  of  Baronius  and  others.  The 
character  of  Damasus  is  very  far  from  being  saintly,  if  we  are  to  credit  Roman  Catholic 
writers.  It  is  a  strange  contrast  to  notice  Jerome's  time-serving  spirit  thus  brought 
out  :  Jerome  himself  had  called  Damasus  a  "  virgin  doctor  of  the  virgin  church,"  but 
after  his  patron  was  dead  and  he  had  left  Rome,  "  the  virgin  church''  was  suddenly  trans- 
formed into  "  the  scarlet  whore,"  and  the  clergy,  into  "  the  senate  of  pharisees."  A  toler- 
able specimen. 


Prop.  77.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  521 

by  respectable  writers,  but  none  of  them  dare  to  tell  us  by  what  class  of  men  this  was 
done,  for  such  an  exposure  would  blunt  the  edge  of  their  weapon  and  make  it  recoil 
upon  themselves.  The  fact  is,  that  Millenarians  esteem  it  an  honor  that  their  doctrine 
was  first  suppressed  by  prelates  possessing  the  character,  etc.,  that  history  accords  to  them. 
The  truth  is,  that  while  our  doctrine  was  obnoxious  to,  and  detested  by,  the  Bishops, 
and  many  of  the  leading  clergy,  through  partisanship,  yet  it  was  not  so  early  authorita- 
tively condemned,  seeing  that  such  a  condemnation  would  involve  a  disastrous  con- 
troversy respecting  the  regular  perpetuation  of  the  church.  The  Bishops  and  Prelates 
were  too  shrewd  to  do  this,  seeing,  as  they  did,  that  this  would  involve  so  many  of  the 
Fathers  that  it  would  be  difficult  and  hazardous,  yea,  impossible,  to  trace  the  true^  church 
unless  through  "  heretics."  Hence  the  cautious  policy  was  adopted,  not  to  condemn  it  in 
any  regidar  decree,  but  in  establishing  as  the  faith  of  the  church  its  opposite,  and 
making  all  submit  to  the  latter  as  the  truth.  What  must  we  think,  however,  of  the  spirit 
animating  Prof.  Briggs  {X.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879),  who,  with  evident  relish,  approvingly 
quotes  Baronius'  declarations,  and  eulogizes  the  Popish  doctors,  and  even  praises  the  long 
"dark  ages"  of  triumphant  Popery,  pronouncing  them  ''the  heroic  ages,''  and  then 
wallows  in  the  old  slander  of  associating  Chiliasm  with  fanatics,  outside  of  *'  the 
historic  church."     The  scholarly  certainly  cannot  be  influenced  by  it. 

Obs.  10.  Baronius  and  others  have  asserteJ  that  for  a  long  time  the 
doctrine  was  "  entirely  extirpated."  This  is  not  strictly  correct.  It  cer- 
tainly was  brought  into  such  disfavor  by  a  ruling  Romish  Church  that 
during  "  the  dark  ages,"  down  to  the  Reformation,  it  was  scarcely  knoivn. 
Still  we  have  intimations,  plain  and  decided,  that  it  was  held  by  individu- 
als (as  e.g.  Jerome  mentions  in  his  day,  what  Lorinus,  the  Jesuit,  says  of 
Tully  Crispold,  quoted  by  Brooks,  El.  Projih.  Interp.,  p.  GO;  comp.  Bernard, 
etc.,  quoted  by  Seiss,  j).  2G,  in^l  Question  in  Eschatology,  etc.),  and,  at  least, 
in  some  of  its  features,  by  the  Vaudois  or  Waldenses,  Albigenses,  Lollard, 
or  Wickliffites,  and  the  Bohemian  Protestants  (comp.  the  extracts,  some 
of  which  will  hereafter  be  given,  presented  in  Elliott's  HorcB  Apoc,  Taylor's 
Voice  of  the  Cliurch,  etc.).  This  testimony  could,  undoubtedly,  be  ex- 
tended, if  we  only  had  the  opinions  of  many  who  fell  under  Romish  con- 
demnation, and  of  whom  it  is  said  that  they  were  detested  and  rooted  out 
on  account  of  opposition  to  Romish  doctrines.  But  even  if  all  such  in- 
timations were  lacking,  it  would  only  indicate  hoiv  ^vide-reaching  the  apos- 
tasy had  grown,  ho2u  fearfully  prediction  on  the  subject  was  verified,  and 
Itow  important  it  was  for  the  old  truth  to  be  revived. 

Prof.  Briggs  [K.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879)  exults  in  the  fact  that  ''  the  great  churches  of 
Rome,  Alexandria,  and  Asia  Minor  condemned  the  heresy,''  and  that  "  the  consolidation 
of  Christian  faith  in  creed  and  liturgy,  effectually  excluded  Chiiiasm  more  and  more 
from  the  church,  until  it  was  banished  for  many  centuries."  Admit  the  crushing  of  our 
doctrine,  and  then  ask  hy  whom  was  it  done,  and  how  it  was  accomplished,  and  the 
historical  answer  certainly  cannot  be  flattering  to  our  oj^ponents.  The  period  of  time, 
the  many  centuries,  when  it  lay  depressed,  is  sufficiently  delineated  by  Romish  and 
Protestant  writers  to  set  aside  the  extravagant  eulogies  bestowed  uj^on  them  by  Prof. 
B.  in  order  to  sustain  his  hitter  anti-chiUastic  prejudices.  But  it  does  seem  strange  for 
a  Protestant,  and  a  professed  scholar,  to  so  far  forget  himself,  that,  in  order  to  make  a 
doctrine  odious,  he  will  exalt  those  who  have  been  the  most  unrelenting  persecutors  of  the 
forerunners  of  principles  and  a  liberty  in  which  the  Protestant  Church  to-day  rejoices  ; 
and  to  correspondingly  degrade,  as  unworthy  of  the  least  attention,  men  who  advocated 
those  principles  and  that  liberty,  because  they  held  to  "  Chiliastic  notions."  Those 
who  opposed  the  encroachments  of  the  Papacy  and  resisted  its  abuses,  are  to  be  derided, 
because  they  said  (D'Aubigne's  His.  Ref.,  vol.  3,  p.  415)  in  their  heli^lessness  :  "Let  us 
lift  up  our  heads,  looking  to  the  Lord,  loho  will  come  and  will  not  tarry."  Individual 
members  of  the  Romish  Church,  as  well  as  protesting  communities  outside  of  it,  who 
denounced  hierarchical  tendencies,  resisted  usurpations,  and  expressed  a  belief  in  a 
speedy  Advent  to  remove  existing  evils  and  introduce  a  Sabbatism,  are  to  be  judged 
only  as  estimated  Ijy  their  cruel  enemies,  because  they  expressed  sentiments  too  much  allied 
with  the  Chiliastic.     Why  not  go  a  step  farther,  and  include  the  Reformers  themselves,  who 


522  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP,  77. 

also  expressed  such  views,  utterly  antagonistic — as  we  sliall  sliow— to  modern,  Whitbyan 
theories  of  the  Millennium  ? 

Under  the  preceding  Propositions  reference  has  been  made  to  this  continuation,  and 
Jerome's  statements  respecting  many  holding  it  in  his  day.  Later  on  the  traces  are 
rarer,  until  they  cease,  unless  we  regard  those  testimonies  that  Dollinger  has  given  in 
Prophecies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  as  favoring  Chiliasm  in  some  of  their  aspects.  We  pass 
them  by  for*  this  reason  :  although  opposed  to  the  Eomish,  general,  view  of  the  Millen- 
nium, yet  there  is  such  an  admixture  of  error  that  they  cannot  properly  be  regarded  as 
Chilias'tic.  Let  us  e.g.  take  one  of  the  most  noted,  the  Prophecies  of  Joachim,  and  the 
EvangeUum  ceternwn  of  the  Fratricelli,  and  these  were  widely  removed  from  the  Primitive 
Chiliasm,  losing  sight  entirely  of  the  specific  covenanted  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  the 
Messiah,  which  was  the  idea  of  the  early  ('hurch.  A  brief  mention  of  the  scheme  enter- 
tained, is  sufficient  to  demonstrate  this  fact.  These  held  that  we  have  had  a  dynasty  of 
the  Father  extending  from  Adam  to  the  First  Advent  ;  then  followed  a  dynasty  of  Jesus 
Christ,  lasting  1000  years  or  more  from  that  Advent  ;  this  last,  in  which  they  lived,  was 
to  be  succeeded  by  the  dynasty  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (golden  age),  which  was  indefinite  or 
limited,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  believer.  A  number  of  views,  hostile  to  the  prevailing 
Augustinian,  may,  for  aught  we  know,  have  arisen  from  the  remains  of  Chiliastic  belief 
still  existing  here  and  there.  Some  of  the  former  advocates  of  the  Papal  doctrine 
renounced  it  for  Chiliastic  views,  as  Le  Pere  Lambert  (a  French  Roman  Catholic, 
whose  '*  Expositions,"  favoring  a  Pre-Mill.  Advent,  restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  reign  of 
Christ,  was  translated  into  German  by  Von  Mayer),  Lacunza  (Ben-Ezra,  a  Spanish  Jew, 
whose  work,  "The  Com.  of  Messiah  in  Glory  and  Majesty,"  was  translated  by  Edward 
Irving),  John  Baptist  Pagini  (a  Roman  Cath.  Priest,  in  his  work,  "  The  End  of  the  World, 
or  the  Sec.  Com.  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ).  The  fact  is  that  some  Roman- 
ists could  not  drift  so  far  away  from  the  old  landmarks,  but  what  they  would  revive 
sentiments  and  the  idea  of  the  Millenaries,  more  accordant  with  Chiliastic  antecedents 
than  the  Popish  notion,  but  these  feeble  utterances  were  crushed  under  the  weight  of 
Church  authority.  Here  and  there  we  have  intimations  of  the  continued  existence  of 
the  doctrine  even  down  to  the  16th  century.  Thus  e.g.  Appleton's  Cyclop.,  Art.  Maise 
Amyrant,  a  French  Calvinist  theologian,  born  1596,  who  "  acting  in  concert  with 
Richelieu,  aimed  at  a  reconciliation  between  the  Protestant  and  the  Catholic  Church," 
wrote  a  work,  "  Against  the  Millenarists."  Although  knowing  nothing  of  the  contents  of 
the  work,  its  title  implies  that  a  growing  class  must  have  existed,  or  it  would  not  have 
been  issued.  One  thing  is  certain  that  no  union  could  be  effected  between  Protestants 
being  Millenarians  and  Romanists. 

Obs.  11.  Various  writers  in  tracing  our  doctrine  have,  through  inadver- 
tency or  misapprehension  of  our  belief,  made  the  uiiscJioIarli/  inistake  of  at- 
tributing a  revival  of  our  faith  to  the  extended  belief  in  the  Advent  of 
Jesus  to  judgment  about  the  year  a.d.  1000  and  succeeding  dates,  and, 
with  evident  relish,  endeavor  to  make  our  system  accountable  for  the 
calamitous  results  (so  graphically  described  by  Mosheim).  But  this  belief 
arose  from  the  Ro7nish  view,  and  not  from  Millenai'iajiism.  The  proof  is  self- 
evidenty  and  the  least  knowledge  of  the  facts  will  make  it  apparent  to  every 
one.  The  Augustinian  theory,  so  generally  adopted  by  the  Popish  doc- 
tors, commenced  the  Millennium  with  the  First  Advent  of  Christ,  and  con- 
sequently, in  agreement  with  this  view,  when  the  one  thousand  years,  dated 
from  the  First  Advent,  expired.  Popery,  driven  to  a  conclusion  by  its  oiun 
adopted  Millennial  theory,  looked  for  the  Coming  to  Judgment,  and,  with 
its  doctrine  of  the  end  of  the  world,  etc.,  for  a  general  destruction  of  all 
sublunary  things.  Now  this  was  the  opposite  of  Millenarian  views,  which 
made  the  Millennium  future,  to  be  introduced  by  a  resurrection,  and  to  be 
followed  by  a  glorious  restoration  of  all  things.  The  misapplication  of  the 
Millenary  (making  it  Pre-Advent)  and  of  the  Sec.  Advent  (making  it  Post- 
Millennial)  is  piurelij  Romish  error,  and,  in  view  of  the  extent  in  which  it 
was  held  and  the  miseries  that  it  entailed,  is  decisive  proof  how  largely 
Millenarianism  had  been  obliterated. 


PllOP.  77.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  523 

This  mistake  has  been  incorporated  in  several  cyclopaedias  (as  Appleton's,  Brit.,  etc.) 
and  also  Millerism  which  lacks  the  purely  Chiliastic  features  of  a  future  Millennium,  the 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.  (although  the  parties  sprung  from  Millerism  have  in  most 
cases,  as  the  majority  of  Sec.  Adventists,  returned  to  a  more  pure  Chiliastic  doc- 
trine). Writers  against  our  belief  introduce  this  Bomish  observation  derived  from  Au- 
gustinian  teaching,  most  offensively  against  us,  never  regarding  in  the  least  the  numerous 
replies  made  by  us  in  explanation.  In  illustration  :  one  of  the  most  unfair  and  un- 
charitable performances  is  Prof.  Sanborn's  Essay  on  Millenarktns  {Bib.  Sac,  July,  1855), 
in  which  among  other  mistakes  we  are  charged  with  the  extravagances  of  the  middle 
ages  (when  our  doctrine  was  really  buried  under  a  cloud  of  darkness)  introduced  by 
Post-MUlennialists,  and  with  the  errors  of  men  who  were  Antl-Millenarians.  Strange  that 
learned  men,  when  our  doctrine  is  so  accessible  and  history  is  so  plain  in  describing  our 
views  and  that  of  others,  cannot  discriminate  between  our  Pre- Millennial  position  and 
that  occupied  by  Post-Millennial  and  Anti-Millennial  advocates.  We  sometimes  are  almost 
led  to  suspect  that  the  oversight  is  intentional,  but,  in  charity,  trust  that  it  results 
through  simple  misapprehension.  As  one  (Brookes)  has  well  expressed  it  :  "  the  fanatical 
crowds  that  were  so  alarmed  were  not  Pre-Millennialists,  6r(/Post-Millennialists."  Hence 
it  is  unjust  to  burden  us  with  the  vagaries  that  belong,  as  all  history  attests,  to  our 
opponents.  As  this  accTisation  is  constantly  repeated,  we  append  several  testimonies, 
which  present  the  truth  in  the  matter.  Hagenbach,  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  sec.  202,  quot- 
ing Liicke,  etc.,  shows  that  the  Augustinian  view  adopted  to  avoid  Millenarianism  as 
formerly  entertained,  was  the  cause  of  the  expectation  and  commotion.  Dr.  Fisher, 
Art.  "  MIL,"  M'Clintock  &  Strong's  Cyclop.,  justly  traces  this  expectation  of  Advent  to 
Augustine's  views,  saying  :  "As  the  year  of  our  Lord  1000  approached,  it  was  a 
natural  corollary  that  the  judgment  and  end  of  the  world  would  then  occur."  This 
is  true,  because  the  Mill,  was  then  supposed  to  end,  and  the  Popish  ideas  of  judgment 
and  its  results  were  then  to  be  realized.  Compare  Faber's  Liquh'y  into  History  and 
Iheol.  of  the  Anc.  Vallenses  and  Albigenses,  p.  389,  etc.,  Guizot's  Civ.  in  Europe,  p.  95,  and 
the  Arts,  in  Herzog  and  other  cyclops. 


524  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 


Proposition   78.  The  early  cliurcli  doctrine   was  revived  after 
the  Reformation. 

Several  hundred  names,  including  some  of  the  most  eminent, 
learned,  and  pious  in  the  church,  are  given  in  such  works,  as 
Taylor's  Yoice  of  the  Churchy  Brooks's  El.  Proph.  Interpretation^ 
Zeiss' s Last  Times ^  Elliott's  HorcB.  Apoc,  Shimeall's  Eschatology^ 
Cox's  Mlllenarian^ s  Answer.,  Anderson's  Apology,  Time  of  the 
End.,  West's  Essay  on  Ills,  of  Doc,  and  various  others,  embracing 
many  living  after  the  Reformation,  who  again  revived  the  early 
faith  of  the  church  in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  still  future,  and  to  be 
set  up  at  the  Sec.  Advent. 

The  works  alluded  to  give  many  interesting  extracts  confirmatory  of  the  Chiliastic 
views  held  at  this  revival  of  the  doctrine.  Bh.  Newton  {D'ls.  On  Proph.,  No.  25).  after 
referring  to  the  suppression  of  the  doctrine  through  the  influence  of  Rome,  says  :  "  No 
wonder,  therefore,  that  this  doctrine  lay  depressed  for  many  ages  ;  but  it  sprang  up 
again  at  the  Reformation,  and  will  flourish  together  with  the  study  of  Revelation." 
Appleton's  Cyclop.,  Art.  "31111.,"  with  all  its  one-sidedness,  frankly  remarks  :  "The 
Reformation  of  the  16th  century  gave  a  new  impulse  to  Millenarian  views,"  that  the 
Anabaptist  movement  was  only  a  ' '  caricature  of  the  old  Christian  doctrine, ' '  that  ' '  it 
was  preached  with  enthusiasm  by  many  sects  and  theologians  of  the  16th  and  17th 
centuries,"  mentioning  Wiegel,  Comenius,  Jurieu,  Mede,  Bengal,  Oettinger,  Hahn, 
Stilling,  Lavater,  and  also  Hass,  Rothe,  Hoffman,  Delitzsch,  Kurtz,  Hebart,  Thiersch, 
Nitzsch,  P.  Lange,  Ebrard,  Irving,  Gumming,  and  others,  as  its  advocates  during  this 
period  and  later.  Abbott  and  Conant  {Die.  of  Belig.  Knowledge)  say  :  "  These  views 
(Chiliastic)  may  be  traced  to  the  earliest  history  of  the  church,  and  were  advocated  by 
the  fathers  up  to  the  4th  century.  They  then  declined,  iill  the  Reformation  gave  them  a 
new  impulse,  since  which  time  they  have  prevailed  through  the  entire  church  to  a  large 
extent. 

01)s.  1.  Candor  requires  of  us  to  state  this  peculiarity  attached  to  those 
who  were  thus  Chiliastic.  (1)  Some  held  strictly  to  the  Primitive  view,  as 
contained  in  otir  argument,  believing  only  in  one  Kingdom  (while  acknowl- 
edging the  general  Divine  Sovereignty,  etc.),  still  future,  which  was  to 
accord  with  the  Davidic  covenant  and  related  prophecies.  The  church, 
exceedingly  precious,  was  regarded  as  only  provisional  and  introductorij 
to  this  Kingdom.  (2)  Others,  with  a  cordial  faith  in  such  a  future  King- 
dom, also  upheld  a  Kingdom  as  present  existing  in  the  church — a  kind  of 
prelude  to  the  coming  one — thus  retaining  in  part  the  Origenistic  or 
Augustinian  idea.  (3)  Some  declare  for  a  present  Kingdom  in  the  church, 
and  also  for  a  future  one  here  on  earth  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  but  incorporate 
with  the  latter  mystical  conceptions  or  spiritualizing  deductions  (which  de- 
tract  from  the  early  view),  as  e.g.  making  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  invisi- 
ble, retaining  the  Son  of  Man  during  this  period  in  the  third  heaven,  etc., 
thus  violating  the  express  terms  of  the  covenant  and  promises.  (4)  Others, 
again,  with  or  without  a  decisive  Church-Kingdom  theory,  have  adopted 
certain  salient  features  of  Chiliasm  (as  e.g.  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  the 
restoration  of  all  things,  the  rise  of  the  Antichrist  and  his  destruction  by 


Prop.  78.]  the  tiieockatic  kingdom.  525 

the  personal  coming  of  Jesus,  the  first  resurrection  literal,  the  Sabbatism, 
etc.),  so  directly  antagonistic  to  prevailing  views  and  so  much  in  harmony 
with  our  doctrine  that  they  may  be  classed  as,  at  least,  partly  Cbiliastic. 
The  first  three,  and  some  of  the  fourth  class,  reject  the  notion  that  the 
present  dispensation,  in  any  sense,  contained  the  covenanted,  jwedicted 
Kingdom  of  the  Messiah ;  tliey  all  looked,  however  they  may  regard  the 
church  as  provisional  and  even  an  introductory  reign,  to  the  Sec.  Advent 
for  the  realization  of  the  glorious  Kingdom  as  promised  by  the  prophets, 
as  covenanted  by  God,  and  as  believed  in  by  the  early  church.  This  King- 
dom, pre-eminently  Messianic,  they  all  believed  was  introduced  hy  a  per- 
sonal Advent  and  a  prior  resurrection  of  the  saints. 

Hence  on  the  great  outlines  they  are  a  unit,  however  they  may  differ  as  to  details. 
For  they  are  all  Pre- Millenarian  in  view,  and  look  to  the  Kingdom  to  be  set  up  here  on 
earth  after  the  Sec.  Advent  for  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  jDrophecy.  In  a  subject  so 
vast  and  comiDlicated,  it  is  reasonable,  owing  to  human  weakness  and  infirmity,  to  expect 
a  divergence  of  view  as  to  details,  the  order  of  events,  and  the  meaning  of  various  pre- 
dictions. A  greater  divergency  and  antagonism  of  view,  even  pertaining  to  fundamentals, 
exist  among  our  opponents,  but  this  is  no  reason  why  we  should  reject  their  views, 
seeing  that  no  doctrine  of  the  Bible  has  escaped  such  treatment.  It  is  therefore  unfair 
to  (as  Brown)  object  to  our  doctrine  because  differences  of  opinion  exist  as  to  the  fulfil- 
ment of  details,  and  conceal  the  greater  differences  prevailing  on  their  own  side.  Besides 
this,  as  our  argument  progresses,  it  will  be  shown  that  these  differences  largely  and 
almost  invariably  result  from  a  departure  from  the  oath-bound  covenants  and  the  plain 
grammatical  sense  of  the  Word.  The  truth  is,  that  some  Pre-Millenarians  are  so  largely 
leavened  by  the  jjre vailing  spiritualizing  interpretations,  that  they  cannot  entirely 
rid  themselves  of  its  influence.  It  is  also  true,  as  the  crudeness  of  the  works  indicate, 
that  some  Pre-Millenarians,  without  a  careful  study  of  the  subject,  have  rushed  into 
print  and  presented  but  a  meagre  and  one-sided  aspect  of  the  doctrine,  utterly  failing  to 
observe  the  force  of  the  fundamenial  covenants. 

Ob.^.  2.  While  some  of  the  Reformers  entertained  partly  Cbiliastic  views, 
others  expressed  themselves  in  a  way  co?itradictory  to  pure  Millenarianism. 
But  whatever  their  sentiments,  not  one  of  them  believed  in  the  modernWhit- 
iyan  view  of  the  Millennium.  Those  who  were  not  Cbiliastic,  at  least  sup- 
ported, as  we  shall  show,  tlie  Chiliastic  position  thus  far,  that  they  did  not 
adopt  the  idea  of  a  Millenniiwi  still  future,  to  be  ushered  in  before  the  Sec. 
Advent.  They  were  Augustinian  in  doctrine,  and  utterly  refused  the 
modern  prevailing  doctrine  «6^  ant i- Scriptural  and  delusive  (comp.  e.g.  the 
quotations  from  them  under  Prop.  175). 

In  reference  to  the  Reformers  we  give  place  to  no  one  in  deep  respect  for  them  as 
devoted  men  of  the  church,  but  we  have  greater  esteem  for  the  authority  of  Scripture 
(^Props.  9  and  10).  The  Reformers,  with  all  their  greatness,  were  fallible,  and  differed 
among  themselves.  Now  it  is  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  Protestant  Church  in 
opposition  to  the  Romish  that  when  men  differ  among  themselves  the  question  of  such 
difference  is  to  be  decided  by  an  appeal,  not  to  church  authority,  or  to  the  weight  of 
any  man's  writings,  but  to  the  Scriptures.  This  was  the  position  of  the  Beformers 
themselves,  and  they  frequently  asserted  that  they  themselves  should  only  be  followed  in 
so  far  as  their  views  corresponded  with  the  Scriptures.  They  themselves  acknowledged 
their  liability  to  error  ;  that  many  things  in  the  Bible  were  still  obscure  to  them  ;  and 
that  by  study,  prayer,  continued  application,  progress  would  be  made  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  A  pompous  amount  of  quotations  might  be  adduced  from  them  to  sustain 
these  points,  but  we  think,  no  one  will  dispute  a  fact  that  is  so  apparent  and  essential 
to  progress.*    For,  if  we  blindly  believe  and  only  believe  what  some  great  and  good  men 

*Comp.  e.g,  Mosheim  Ch,  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  19,  and  Schlegel's  note,  Kurtz's  Ch,  His., 
vol.  2,  sec.  20,  DAubigne's  His.  Ref.,  Schmucker's  Lutheran  Symbols,  and  writings  of 
Auberlen,  Sprecher,  Conrad,  and  a  host  of  others. 


526  THE  THEOCRATIC   KII^GDOM.  [PllOP.  78. 

have  said,  we  (a)  yield  the  liberty  of  private  judgment  given  by  God  ;  (6)  set  up  an 
infallibility  unrecognized  by  the  Word  ;  (c)  render  ourselves  liable  to  error;  (d)  dishonor 
the  doctrinal  position  of  Holy  Writ  ;  (e)  remove  advancement  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  ;  (/)  and  place  the  writer  whom  we  indorse  in  a  false  position.  Augustine  has  so 
happily  and  delicately  expressed  this,  when  he  answered  a  Donatist  who  had  quoted 
the  authority  of  Cyprian  against  him,  that  it  may  properly  be  introduced  as  illustrative 
of  our  opinion  :  "But  now  seeing  that  it  is  7iot  canonical  which  thou  recitest,  with  that 
liberty  to  which  the  Lord  hath  called  us,  I  do  not  receive  the  opinion,  differing  from 
Scripture,  of  that  man  whose  praise  I  cannot  reach,  to  whose  great  learning  I  do  not 
compare  my  writings,  whose  wit  I  love,  in  whose  speech  I  delight,  whose  charity  I 
admire,  whose  martyrdom  I  reverence." 

2.  It  has  been  asserted  by  numerous  writers  that  the  Eschatology  of  the  Reformers  is, 
more  or  less,  defective.  Thus  e.g.  Auberlen  (Div,  Rev.,  p.  224,  seq.)  says,  that  "  the 
Eschatology  of  the  elder  Protestantism  is  now  generally  admitted  to  be  imperfect" 
(comp.  Dorner's  His.  Prot  Theol,  vol.  2,  p.  170,  etc.,  also  Art.  2,  Evang.  quarterly  Review 
for  Jan.,  1875,  written  either  by  Dr.  Brown  or  Dr.  Valentine,  one  of  the  editors, 
Martenson,  Ch.  Dog.,  etc.).  Various  reasons  are  assigned  for  this  by  different  writers, 
such  as,  that  the  defectiveness  arose  from  their  recent  emergence  from  Popery  (being 
unable  to  rid  themselves  entirely  from  its  influencs),  from  the  bias  obtained  through 
the  teaching  of  the  later  Fathers,  especially  Augustine,  from  their  being  trammelled  by 
the  popish  notion  of  the  church,  from  their  attention  being  specially  diverted  to  other 
subjects  at  that  time  more  the  objects  of  controversy,  from  their  not  being  placed  in  a 
favorable  position  for  the  developing  of  the  truth  in  this  direction,  etc.  However 
explained,  the  fact  remains,  and  their  language,  whatever  the  reason  may  be,  sometimes 
implies  doubt,  sometimes  a  feeling  after  the  old  paths,  and  sometimes  it  is  con- 
tradictory. * 

3.  After  the  Reformers  occurred  what  they  themselves  were  directly  opposed  to,  viz. : 
their  writings  and  confessions  (especially  the  latter)  were  elevated  to  an  authority  equal 
to  that  of  the  Scriptures.  All  historians  sadly  testify  to  this  unfortunate  procedure. 
The  impartial  student  must  acknowledge  that  there  is  justice  in  the  strictures  of 
certain  writers  respecting  the  course  taken  by  some  of  the  followers  of  the  Reformers. 
Thus  e.g.  Hallam  {Introd.  Lit.  of  Europe,  vol.  2,  p.  200)  alludes  to  the  right  of  Private 
Judgment,  as  an  essential  principle  of  Protestantism,  but  which  was  afterward  con- 
stantly violated  by  the  stringent  imposition  of  Confessions,  in  the  understanding  of  which 
Confessions  no  liberty  was  allowed,  even  in  non-essentials.  This  gave  force  to  one  of 
the  reproaches  cast  upon  the  Reformation  by  the  adherents  of  Rome  (and  reproduced 
by  Free  Religionists,  etc.,  of  the  present  day),  viz.  :  that  after  according  liberty  of 
judgment  to  reject  the  authority  of  the  Romish  church  and  form  others,  it  then  with- 
draws that  liberty  and  devotes  all  who  dissent  from  them  to  obloquy,  heresy,  and  even 
to  bonds  and  death.  Hallam  remarks  :  "  these  reproaches,  it  may  be  a  shame  for  us 
to  own,  can  be  uttered  and  cannot  be  refuted "  (comp.  Milner's  His.  Literature,  etc.). 
Hence  it  has  been  said  (vol,  1,  p.  370)  that  the  Reformation  "  was  but  a  change  of 
masters  " ;  and  if  we  are  to  credit  certain  rigid  symbolists  of  our  country  and  Europe, 
these  old  confessions  {loith  a  mass  of  superadded  matter)  are  still  to  be  our  masters,  to 
be  received  unqualifiedly,  placed  on  a  Romish  footing  of  equality  with  the  Scriptures. 
This  spirit  necessarily  excluded  proper  development  and  true  advancement  ;  fettered  by 
a  bigoted  confessional  of  standard  by  which  everything  drawn  from  the  Scriptures  is  to 


*  Compare  also  on  this  defectiveness  Dr.  Lange,  in  his  Introd.  to  Rev.,  and  p.  401  ;  also 
the  Art.  '^Antichrist,"  in  Herzog's  Encyclop.,  the  remarks  of  the  Com.  in  Lange's  Com., 
1  Thess.,  p.  24,  and  Dr.  Lillie's  note,  etc.  Dr.  Kling,  Art.  "Eschatology,"  in  Herzog's 
Encyclop.,  declares  that  the  Reformers  while  resisting,  on  the  one  hand,  the  fanatical 
Anabaptist  view,  and,  on  the  other.  Popish  errors,  still  held  to  a  defective  Eschatology, 
the  original  doctrine  not  being  correctly  held,  but  which  was  restored  as  the  church 
advanced  in  her  prophetical  studies.  The  best  proof  of  such  a  defective  Eschatology  is 
found  in  the  fact  that  the  most  ultra-symbolists,  who  specially  pride  themselves  on  a 
strict  adherence  to  Reformation  doctrine,  do  not  hold  the  Eschatology  as  given  by  the 
Reformers,  as  e.g.  the  time  of  the  Millennium,  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  the  non- 
conversion  of  the  world,  and  the  Antichrist.  Such,  while  opposing  us,  are  very  careful 
io  conceal  their  oicn  defection  from  the  Reformer's  teaching.  Accusing  us  of  a  departure 
— as  if  it  were  fatal— they  themselves  are  open  to  the  same  accusation,  if  it  has  any 
force. 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  527 

be  measured,  the  Confessions  became  the  measure^'  of  Scripture.  But  this  is  only  part  of 
the  truth  ;  for  however  extended  this  spirit,  yet  good  and  true  nien,  followers  of  the 
Reformers,  endeavored  to  restrain  this  spirit,  so  fatal  to  advance  in  knowledge. 
German,  English,  French,  and  other  theologians  of  eminence  have  protested  against  this 
extreme  confessional  observance,  and  have  shown  that,  owing  to  this  proscription  and  the 
virulent  controversies  engendered  by  it,  a  fruitful  source  of  continued  ignorance  upon 
various  points,  and  a  shutting  of  the  door  to  advance  in  the  truth,  have  been  entailed. 
Hallam  and  others  overlook  this  protest,  because  in  the  earlier  period  it  unfortunately 
proved  itself  a  small  minority,  which  by  degrees,  however,  has  swelled  to  a  large  number. 
It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  illustrative  of  human  prejudice  and  passion,  that  while,  on 
the  one  hand,  it  was  acknowledged  that  such  confessions  were  fallible — the  then  ex- 
pressed understanding  of  the  Scriptures  by  their  authors —they  still  w^ere,  on  the  other 
hand,  held  as  certain,  from  which  there  could  be  7io  dissent  without  meriting  censure 
and  punishment.  From  all  this  (comp.  Prop.  10)  we  learn,  that  while  it  is  a  duty  and 
pleasure  to  honor  the  Reformers  and  their  utterances  (in  so  far  as  they  accord"  with 
truth),  we  cannot,  without  detracting  from  our  Christian  manhood,  and  from  the  honor 
due  alone  to  the  Scriptures,  elevate  these  men  and  their  works  to  the  position  of  the 
inspired  prophets  and  apostles.  If  God  had  intended  the  Scriptures  to  be  circumscribed 
by  such  assigned  limits,  jDrovision  undoubtedly  would  have  been  made  to  secure  to  us  a 
confession  not  evidencing  in  its  very  construction  the  marks  of  human  w^orkmanshij). 

4.  Simply  as  a  reminder  to  our  opponents  (as  e.g.  Seiffarth)  who  urge  the  Reformers 
as  if  they  were  infallible,  we  illustrate  the  fact  that,  with  all  their  greatness  and  valuable 
labors,  they  may  also  be  in  error  in  their  interpretation  of  Scripture.  Thus  e.g.  both 
Liuther  {Table  7 alk)  and  MelsLUchthon  {Irdtia  Dodrince  Fhysica),  as  shown  by  White  (T/ic 
Warfare  of  Science ;  and  see  his  references  to  Bretschneider,  Lange,  and  Prowe),  op- 
posed the  Copernican  system  by  appeals  to  Scripture, -Joshua,  the  Psalms,  Ecclesiastes, 
etc.,  proving  that  the  earth  is  the  centre  of  the  universe.  In  their  conscientiousness 
Luther  calls  Copernicus  "  an  upstart  astrologer"  and  "fool,"  w^hile  Melanchthon  pro- 
nounces him  guilty  of  "  a  want  of  honesty  and  decency  to  assert  such  notions  publicly.' ' 
This  teaches  us  that  good  and  great  men  may  misjudge  and  misinterpret,  under  the 
impression  that  they  are  doing  God's  service. 

Obs.  3.  The  subject  requires  that  we  should  more  particularly  allude  to  the 
views  of  the  Reformers,  and  those  after  them,  who  were  not  directly  Chilias- 
tic  in  doctrine.^  They  (as  e.g.  Luther,  Melanchthon,  Zwingli,  Calvin, 
and  Knox)  occupied  the  Augustinian  or  Popish  position  (see  works  giving 
extracts  from  their  writings,  such  as  Elliott's  Horce  Apoc,  Taylor's  Voice 
of  the  Cliurcli,  etc.),  viz.  :  that  the  church,  in  some  sense,  was  the  King- 
dom of  God  (preparatory  to  a  higher  stage),  and  that  the  Millennial  period 
(one  thousand  years)  included  this  dispensation  or  gospel  period  (some  of 
the  Millennial  descriptions  being  applicable  only  to  a  future  period  cither  in 
heaven  or  the  renewed  earth),  and  hence  was  nearing  its  close.  But  each 
of  these  recorded  their  belief,  in  the  duty  of  every  believer  to  be  constantly 
looldng  for  the  Advent ,  in  a  speedy  Advent,  in  there  being  no  future  Millen- 
nial glory  hefore  the  coming  of  Jesus,  in  the  church  remaining  a  'miaed  state 
to  the  end,  in  the  design  of  the  present  dispensation,  in  the  jjvincipJe  of 
interjjretation  adopted,  in  unbelief  again  extending  and  widening  hefore 
the  Advent,  in  tlie  renewal  of  this  earth,  etc. — doctrines  in  unison  with 
Chiliasm.  The  simple  truth  in  reference  to  them  is  this  :  that  they  were 
not  Chiliasts,  although  teaching  several  points  that  matericdly  aid  in  sus- 
taining Chiliasm  (as  e.g.  in  those  enumerated),  and  in  some,  as  Luther  and 
Melanchthon,  holding  that  at  the  end  of  the  6th  Chiliad — the  close  of  six 
thousand  years — Christ  would  appear  and  introduce  a  glorious  Sabbatism 
(Prop.  143).  They  were  thus  really  A7iti-Mille?iarian  m  the  sense  of  ex- 
pressing faith  in  a  proper  Millennium  yet  to  come,  or  in  that  of  believing 
in  a  Millennium  already  past,  and  this  ca7i  le  abundantly  j^roven  from  their 
writings,  in  their  declarations  of  the  future  anticipated  condition  of  the 


528  THE   TIIEOCPwATIC   KIIS-GDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

world,  in  their  hopes  of  an  Advent  drawing  nigh,  and  in  their  emphatic 
denial  of  a  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to  the  expected  Advent.  There- 
fore it  is  that  neither  Millenarians  {excepting  in  the  features  stated)  nor 
Whitbyans  (i.e.  believers  in  a  future  Millennium  brought  about  without 
the  Advent  through  present  agencies)  can  wholly  claim  them.' 

1  Because  Millenarians  quote  Luther,  etc.,  to  sustain  certain  features  of  our  doctrine, 
we  are  sometimes  unjustly  charged  as  if  we  referred  to  them  as  express  Chiliasts  ;  and 
this  too  notwithstanding  the  explicit  statements  given  by  us  resj^ecting  their  doctrinal 
position.  Many  Millenarian  works  (as  Elliott's,  Brooks',  Cox's,  Seiss',  Taylor's,  and 
others)  allow  in  full  their  AugiisUnian  position,  but  only  refer  to  them  (1)  to  show  that 
nowhere  do  they  endorse  the  modern  Whitbyan  doctrine  ;  (2)  that  they  pointedly  condemn 
the  present  prevailing  view  ;  (3)  and  that,  in  important  points,  they  fully  and  unreservedly 
coincide  with  our  Millenarian  attitude.  Our  Disponents  of  the  Whitbyan  school  cannot 
claim  them,  seeing  that  their  position  is  directly  hostile  to  that  of  the  Reformers.  In  the 
course  of  extended  reading,  we  have  yet  to  find  a  single  sentence  in  the  Reformer's 
writings,  that  our  opponents  can  directly  quote  in  their  behalf  as  being  in  sympathy 
with  the  Whitbyan  hypothesis.  Our  ability  to  do  this  in  behalf  of  some  of  our  views 
seems  to  be  a  tender  matter  with  Whitbyan  folowers. 

Our  opponents  very  artfully  quote  from  the  Reformers  such  matter  as  they  suppose  is 
Antichiliastic,  but  are  very  careful  to  avoid  two  kinds  of  utterances  given  by  the  same 
men  :  (1)  those  that  are  in  cordial  sympathy  with  Chiliastic  doctrine  ;  (2)  those  that  are 
in  direct  conflict  with  the  modern,  Whitbyan  notion.  Prof.  Briggs,  in  the  N.  Y.  Evangel- 
ist, 1879  (republished  in  the  Lutheran  Quarterly),  endeavors,  by  a  concealment  of  the  actual 
facts,  to  leave  the  impression  that  the  Reformers  were  in  accord  with  the  prevailing 
modern  view.  Articles  like  these— and  they  are  numerous— are  insidiously  constructed, 
and  well  calculated  to  prejudice  the  ignorant  or  unwary.  Our  opjsonents,  when  driven 
to  the  wall,  fully  acknowledge  that  the  Reformers  were  wrong  in  their  Eschatology 
relating  to  the  Millennium.  Scarcely  any  theologian  adoj)ts  their  view  to-day,  it  having 
been  discarded  for  the  futurity  of  the  Mill.,  is  a  question  no  longer  debated.  Con- 
sequently the  Reformers  are  immensely  more  in  agreement  with  us  than  with  our  opposers, 
as  we  show  by  our  quotations  from  tliem.  No  one  denies  that  the  Reformers  held  to  a 
present  spiritual  Kingdom  preparatory  to  a  future  one  (as  many  Millenarians  also  do),  or 
that  they  rejected  a  proper  Mill,  age  in  the  future  (which  is  just  as  hostile  to  our  Post- 
Mill,  friends  as  it  is  to  us),  for  the  simple  fact,  which  colored  their  Eschatology,  is  that 
they,  more  or  less,  adopted  the  Augustinian  notion  of  a  past,  present,  or  existing  Mill. 
age,  identifying  it  with  this  disi^ensation.  That  the  Reformers  were  opposed  to  the 
carnal,  fanatical  Anabaptist  movement  is  what  every  Chiliast  does,  on  the  ground  of 
locating  the  Mill,  age  after  the  Advent  and  after  the  res.  and  translation  of  the  saints, 
Whitb^^ans,  certainly,  ought  not  to  seek  the  shelter  and  authority  of  the  Reformers  m 
this  indirect  method  (which  is  both  unscholarly  and  dishonest,  because  it  seeks  by  the 
suppression  of  tJi.eir  real  views  to  make  them  seem  favorabty  disposed),  when,  in  the  most 
fundamental  things  pertaining  to  their  theor}^  they  were  directly  in  antagonism  (comp. 
quotations  from  them  e.g.  under  Prop.  175).  It  is  strange  that  men  have  not  the  acute- 
ness  to  see  that  when  they  endeavor  to  array  others  against  us  who  have  less  sympathy 
with  their  own  theory  than  with  ours,  they  are  only  heaping  up  material  condemnatory  of 
their  own  views.  What  service  is  gained,  or  what  proof  is  obtained  in  behalf  of  the 
Whitbyan  "  hypothesis,"  by  showing  that  certain  persons  were  not  favorable  toChiliasm 
proper  (although  they  adopted  and  taught  certain  prominent  Chiliastic  doctrines),  when 
the  same  persons  plainly  reject  the  Whitbyan  theory  as  unscriptural  and  misleading? 
W/iat  weight  should  be  given  to  such  testimony,  which  forms  the  staple  of  numerous 
essays  against  us  ?  Compare  for  the  Reformer's  views  Elliott's  Ilora;  Apoc,  and  Arts, 
in  Herzog,  M'Clintock  <fe  Strong,  etc.  Lange,  Introd.  to  Rev.,  p.  67,  etc.,  refers  to 
Luther's  view -as  that  "  the  thousand  years  extend  from  the  time  of  the  Apocalyptist  to 
Gregory  VII.,  '  and  this  is  stated  in  numerous  Pre-Millenarian  works. 

-  The  same  is  true  of  many  theologians  who  followed  the  Reformers,  for  while  opposed 
to  the  direct  ancient  Chiliasm  of  the  Primitive  Church  they,  adopting  the  views  of  the 
Reformers,  held  to  no  future  Millennium  before  the  Advent  of  Christ.  Thus  to  illus- 
trate :  for  example,  Quenstedt  (Theolog.  Didactico-polemica,  4,  p.  649),  Hunnius  (Epit. 
Credendorum,  pp.  266,  sex.  291),  Hutter  (Compend.,  p.  171),  and  others  given  by  Dr. 
Seiss  (.4  Question  in  Eschatology),  with  which  compare  Scbmid's  Dogmatics,  etc.  The  in- 
telligent and  careful  student  will  also  notice  (what  happens  frequently  in  late  commen- 
taries, etc.)  that  some  theologians  of  this  class  while  stating  succinctly  their  belief  in  no 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  529 

future  Millennium  before  the  Advent  of  Christ,  in  other  places  drop  expressions  which 
either  make  their  utterances  contradictor}'  or  leave  the  impression  that  they  were  in 
doubt  respecting  their  own  position.  The  fact,  however,  as  stated  by  us  is  this  :  that 
such  a  view  is  held  by  but  few  at  present.  The  Protestant  position  has  (as  noticed  by 
Hengstenberg,  Apoc,  vol.  2,  p.  334,  Stuart,  Apoc,  vol.  2,  p.  463),  m  view  of  its  Apocalyptic 
application  to  the  Papacy,  approached  a  Chiliastic  one,  and  locates  the  lOUO  years'  reign 
in  the  future,  after  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  Antichrist.  It  is  unnecessary, 
because  of  the  almost  universal  rejection  of  their  Millennial  theory,  to  enter  into  a  de- 
tailed statement.  Under  other  Props,  will  be  shown  (e.g.  Prop.  158,  etc.),  the  Scriptural 
and  historiciil  reasons  which  lead,  inevitably,  to  its  abandonment.  The  advocates  of  this 
view  are  mentioned  e.g.  by  Lange,  Inlrod.  to  Rev.,  and  the  denouncement  of  these  "  servile 
adherents  to  orthodoxy,"  etc.,  is  given  p.  401,  etc. 

Ohs,  4.  In  noticing  the  history  of  Chiliasm,  it  is  very  important  for  the 
student  to  discriminate  between  the  various  beliefs  in  antagonism  to  it. 
By  overlooking  this  some  writers  have  made  serious  mistakes,  (1)  in  calling 
those  Millenarians  who,  before  the  j)(iTsonal  Advent  and  the  resurrection  of 
the  saints  (both  cardinal  doctrines  in  our  system)  look  for  a  Millennium 
(as  e.g.  Anabaptists,  Shakers,  Swedenborgians,  etc.);  (2)  in  making  ont 
those  favorable  to  the  Whitby  an  theory  (a)  who  oppose  ns  and  are  really 
Anti-MilJenarian,  or  (b)  who  decry  Chiliasm,  but  are  themselves  Post-Mil- 
lenarian,  or  {(i)  in  producing  those  who  are  Millenarians  as  if  oi^posed  to 
it,  as  e.g.  in  quoting  from  their  writings,  as  in  the  case  of  JBunyan  and 
others,  the  belief  in  the  conversion  of  the  world,  without  knowing  that 
when  they  come  specifically  to  exijlain  the  manner  of  its  accomplishment 
it  is  purely  in  the  Chiliastic  order.  Hence  the  careful  writer  on  the  sub- 
ject will  distinguish  between  the  various  theories  :  (1)  Pure  Chiliasm  as 
entertained  by  the  early  church,  which  held  as  distinguishing  characteris- 
tics that  the  church  was  not  the  Kingdom,  but  that  the  Kingdom  was  de- 
pendent on  ^  Pre- Millennial  personal  Advent,  a  Fre-Millennial  resnrrectio?i 
of  the  saints,  etc.,  when,  after  such  an  Advent  and  resurrection,  the  2^er- 
xonal  reign  of  Christ  and  the  saints  would  be  introduced  ;  (2)  mixed 
Chiliasm,  {a)  holding  to  the  early  view  as  stated,  with  the  exception  of 
making  also  the  church  a  preliminary  Kingdom,  and  {b)  receiving  all  of 
the  second,  including  the  personal  Advent  and  resurrection,  but  making  the 
reign  one  in  heaven,  or  invisibly  ;  (3)  the  Augustinian  or  Popish  view, 
which  makes  the  church  in  this  dispensation  the  Kingdom,  and  does  not 
look  for  one  to  come  in  a  still  future  Millennial  period  ;  (4)  another  Popish 
view,  indorsed  also  by  a  few  Protestants  (Grotius,  Prideaux,  Bush,  Vint, 
etc.),  that  the  church"^is  the  Kingdom,  and  that  the  Millennial  era  is  to  be 
dated  from  Constantino's  conversion  ;  (5)  the  Anti-Millenarian  theory, 
which,  without  any  Millennial  doctrine  (or  else  making  the  Millennial  de- 
scriptions apply  to  heaven),  regards  the  church  as  a  Kingdom,  and  denies 
that  there  Avill  be  any  Millennium  in  the  future  ;  (G)  the  Post-Millennial 
view  (which  adopts  either  3  or  4),  but  extends  the  church  already  (as  Swe- 
denborgians) into  a  New  Jerusalem  state  ;  (7)  the  view  of  those  who  regard 
the  church  a  Kingdom,  but  (as  Shakers,  etc.)  have  it  in  Millennial  glory  in 
their  own  organization  ;  (8)  the  doctrine  of  such,  who,  without  any  Chili- 
astic Kingdom — also  making  the  church  a  Kingdom — simply  teach  the 
nearness  of  the  Advent  and  the  destruction  of  the  world  (as  Millerites, 
etc.);  (9)  the  singular  opinion  of  some  (as  Seventh-Day  Adventists),  who, 
also  teaching  that  the  church  is  a  Kingdom,  declare  the  nearness  of  the 
Advent,  but  consign  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  and  of  the  saints  during  the 
one  thousand  years  to  the  third  heaven,  to  be  followed  by  a  renewal,  etc.; 


530  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

(10)  the  Whitbyan  hypothesis,  which  makes  the  church  a  Kingdom,  and 
looks  for  a  higher  stage  of  it  in  the  fiitnre  Millennial  age,  merging  ulti- 
mately into  the  heavenly  Kingdom  ;  (11)  the  opinion  of  a  few,  that  the 
church  is  no  Kingdom,  but  will  ultimately  be  incorporated  into  one  in  the 
third  heaven  ;  (12)  the  development  theory,  which  teaches  that,  while  an 
invisible  Kingdom  exists  in  the  church,  the  church  will  still  more  and 
more  develop  itself  into  the  outward  form  of  a  Kingdom,  without  noting 
any  particular  era  for  the  same  ;  (13)  the  Rationalistic  view,  that  the  church 
is  no  Kingdom,  and  none,  in  any  proper  sense,  is  to  be  expected  ;  (14)  and 
the  notion  of  some  (as  Anabaptists,  Fifth  Monarchy  men),  that  prior  to 
the  Advent  and  resurrection  they  could,  through  violence,  etc.,  introduce 
the  Kingdom  of  Christ  in  its  Millennial  greatness. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  nearly  all  in  this  list  are  based  on  the  Alexandrian  in- 
terpretation, and  are  the  offshoots  of  the  Origenistic  system,  discarding  a  grammatical 
interpretaUon  of  covenant  and  prophecy.  Hence  their  direct  antagonism  to  the  Davidic 
covenant,  and  the  promises  founded  on  the  same,  and  which  is  sought  to  be  I'econciled 
by  special  sj)iritualizing  to  suit  the  theory. 

Obs.  5.  A  number  of  writers  have  sought  to  bring  discredit  on  our  doc- 
trine by  declaring  that  it  never  was  embraced  in  any  public  and  acknowl- 
edged confession  of  the  church,  either  before  or  after  the  Reformation. 
A  few  remarks,  indicative  of  the  facts,  may  be  in  place,  in  order  that  the 
reader  may  decide  for  himself  tuhaf  lueight  is  in  the  objection. 

1.  Even  if  this  were  true,  two  things  are  worthy  of  attention  :  (1)  That 
Creeds  and  Confessions  do  ?iot  circumscrihe  the  Word  of  God,  oy prevent  (i 
deeper  and  more  Scriptural  insiglit  in  Divine  things,  seeing  that  they  are 
simply  the  expression  of  the  understanding  that  certain  persons  or  bodies 
have  of  the  truth  at  a ixirtieular  period.  The  fallibility  of  these  Confes- 
sions is  apparent,  in  that  no  two  of  them  coincide  in  all  particulars,  and 
that  one  is  antagonistic  to  another.  (See  Props.  9  and  10.)  (2)  Oar  op- 
ponents who  present  this  objection  weaken  their  own  cause  by  urging  it, 
because  some  of  these  Confessions  contain  Chiliastic  features,  or  are  in 
greater  sympatfiy  with  our  doctrine  than  with  their  own,  and  none  of  the 
leading  ones  indorse  the  Whithyan  theory.  The  objection  would  have 
force  if  the  Confessions  directly  taught  their  own  Millennium  doctrine, 
bat  as  this  is  not  the  case,  it  can  only  prejudice  the  ignorant  or  unreflect- 
ing.^ 

2.  If  we  take  the  quite  early  creeds,  the  Apostolic  and  the  Nicene,  we 
find  them  held  equally  by  Chiliasts  and  Anti-Chiliasts,  for  they  contain 
notliing  respecting  the  Kingdom  or  Millennium.  If  we  are  to  take  Gelasius' 
(Prop.  77,  Obs.  7,  note  1)  explanation  of  the  Nicene,  then  they  were  re- 
garded as  embracing  Chiliastic  views.  Writers  of  ability  have  traced  the 
Apostles'  Creed  to  express  Chiliasts,  as  e.g.  to  Iren^us  and  Tertullian. 
One  thing,  at  least,  is  very  evident  to  the  student,  that  the  brief  allusions 
to  Eschatology  are  of  such  a  nature  that  both  parties  can  heartily  adopt 
them,  since  they  only  embrace  some  salient  features  without  attempting  to 
explain  how,  or  in  what  order,  they  are  to  be  realized.^ 

3.  Coming  to  later  confessions,  we  find  them,  the  leading  ones,  to  ex- 
press Eschatology  in  such  a  form  (as  e.g.  the  fact  of  a  resurrection,  of  an 
Advent,  of  a  judgment,  etc.)  that  Millenarians,  Post-  and  Anti-Millenari- 
ans  can  cordially  subscribe  to  them.  It  is,  however,  alleged  that  some  have 
been  specifically  hostile  to  Chiliasm,   and  two,  with  evident  relish,   are 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kixgdom.  531 

brought  forward  as  evidence,  viz.:  the  Augsburg  Confession  and  the  Eng- 
lish Confession  of  Edward  VI. 

(1)  The  Augsburg  Confession.  Knapp,  Schmid,  Shedd,  and  a  number 
of  writers  assert  tliat  the  Augsburg  Confession  2iositively  condemns  Chili- 
asm.  On  the  other  hand,  Semisch,  Auberlen,  Floerke,  Delitzsch,  Spener, 
Bengel,  Crusius,  and  others  affirm  the  contrary.  The  intelligent  reader 
will,  in  such  a  discussion,  be  influenced  by  the  statements  of  eminent  men 
who  disinterestedly,  and  after  mature  consideration  of  the  subject,  declare 
that  the  Confession  does  not  reprove  and  reprobate  ancient  Chiliasm  as 
held  by  the  Fathers,  but  only  the  form  of  doctrine  as  advocated  hy  the 
Anabaptists.  We  refer  in  illustration  to  the  i)aper  drawn  up  by  members 
of  the  Faculty  of  the  University  of  Dorpat  in  reply  to  questions  proposed 
by  the  Lutheran  Synod  of  Iowa.  It  is  signed  by  Drs.  Havernach,  Kurtz, 
Von  Oetengen,  Von  Engelhart,  and  Volck,  and  fully  answers  the  ques- 
tion, whether  Chiliasm  is  in  conflict  with  the  Confession  and  the  Lutheran 
Church,  in  the  most  decisive  negcdive.'^ 

(2)  The  Confession  of  Edward  VI.,  brought  forward  by  Shedd  and  others, 
can  only  be  fairly  and  scholarly  treated  by  considering  :  {a)  That  the  Art., 
adopted  in  1553,  to  which  they  refer,  was  only  nine  years  afterward  ivith- 
drawn  (which  fact  they  are  very  careful  to  keep  from  their  readers),  thus 
indicating  that  any  censure  intended  was  fully  revohed.  (b)  That  in  the 
later  revisions  it  continued  to  be  omitted,  thus  showing  that  a  condemna- 
tory spirit  was  not  indorsed,  [c)  That  in  immediate  connection  with  the 
Confession  was  published  "  The  Catechism  of  Edward  VI.,"  drawn  up  by 
his  Prelates  (said  to  be  Cranmer,  Burnet's  His.,  vol.  3,  B.  4  ;  or  Neale, 
His.  Puritans,  vol.  1,  p.  63,  Poynet,  afterward  Bh.  of  Winchester), 
which  contains,  on  the  questions  respecting  "  Thy  Kingdom  come,"  the 
strongest  Chiliastic  views  (see  them  given  e.g.  by  Brooks,  Cox,  Taylor, 
etc.).  {d)  And  that  prominent  Prelates  (as  Bh.  Latimer,  Arch.  Cranmer, 
Bradford,  etc.)  who  received  the  Confession  entertained  Millenarian  doc- 
trine.'* (3)  Coming  toother  Confessions,  we  find  upholders  of  our  doctrine 
and  opposers  of  it,  both  holding  to  the  same.  Thus  e.g.  the  Westminster 
Assembly.  In  proof  of  our  position  we  refer  to  the  fact  stated  by  an 
Anti-Miilenarian  (hence  disinterested),  Dr.  Baillie,  that  "  the  most  of  the 
chief  Divines  here"  (meaning  the  Assembly)  "  not  only  Independents  but 
others,  such  as  Twiss,  Marshall,  Palmer,  and  many  more,  are  ex2jres8 
Chiliasts.^'^  Again,  if  we  refer  to  the  Belgic  Confession,  produced  by 
Shedd,  Millenarians  can  most  cordially  subscribe  to  the  Art.  respecting  the 
time  of  the  Advent  and  the  completion  of  the  number  of  the  elect.  The 
same  is  true  of  many  others,  and  it  appears  as  if  the  language  was  pur- 
posely guarded  to  allow  a  common  confessional  union,  which  could  only  be 
done  by  avoiding  direct  Chiliasm  or  its  opposite. 

4.  Several  Confessions  (confined  to  small  bodies  of  believers)  have  Chili- 
astic Articles.  One  of  the  most  noticeable  of  these  is  that  drawn  up  by  the 
Baptists  (for  since  they  form  a  large  organization,  the  same  is  discarded, 
or  held  only  by  individuals,  or  small  portions  of  the  Baptists)  in  a.d. 
1660,  and  presented  to  Charles  II.,  signed  by  John  Bunyan  and  others 
(said  to  have  represented  "more  than  twenty  thousand  Baptists"),  in 
which  the  purest  early  Patristic  Millenarian  doctrine  is  contained,  discrim- 
inating the  order  of  resurrection,  making  a  literal  first  resurrection  to  occur 
at  the  Sec.  Advent,  having  a  glorious  Messianic  Kingdom  then  established, 
etc' 


532  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

'  That  they  are  diredly  opposed  to  the  Whitbyan  doctrine,  looking  for  the  righteous  to 
predominate  m  government,  etc.,  is  evident  by  looking  at  e.g.  Augsburg  Confession,  Art. 
17,  the  Apology  of  the  Augsburg  Confession,  and  Articles  of  Smalcald  (Miiller's  Symb. 
Buck.,  p.  245,  298).  The  Latter  Confession  of  Helvitia  (Niemeyer's  Col.  Conf.,  p  485-6), 
and  the  Confession  of  the  Westminster  Assembly,  and  others  as  given  by  Seiss  in  A 
Question  in  Eschatology,  pp.  33-40,  with  extracts.  (Comp.  Prop.  175.)  The  reasoning 
therefore  of  Prof.  Briggs,  and  others,  is  totally  irrelevant,  and  if  it  has  any  force  whatever, 
must  he  decisive  against  themselves.  For,  while  there  is  no  creed  or  confession  which 
directly  and  positively  teaches  the  Whitbyan  theory,  we  have  some  creeds  (which  we 
shall  (piote  hereafter)  that  directly  teach  Chiliasm,  and  we  have  all  the  great  leading  ones 
to  directly  present  prominent  Chiliastic  doctrines  held  by  us,  and  such  as  are  utterly  irrec- 
oncilable with  the  modern  "  hypothesis." 

'•^  Comp.  King's  His.  Apos.  Creed,  Bh.  Pearson  On  the  CVeed,  Mosheim's  Eccl.  His.,  vol. 
1,  p.  79,  and  Murdock's  note,  etc.,  and  notice  the  reference  to  Irenteus  and  Tertullian. 
Observe  also  that  in  the  enlargement  of  the  Creed,  as  now  used,  by  the  Romish  Church 
the  same  features  are  retained  so  that  both  partie  could  still  receive  it.  The  eschatol- 
ogy of  the  Athanasian  Creed  follows  the  others,  with  more  of  a  leaning  toward  Romanism. 
See  the  Creeds  as  given  by  Dr.  SchafE  in  Creeds  of  Christendom.  The  Scriptural  statements 
(using  the  exact  phi-aseology),  or  the  general  expressions  (without  any  attempt  to  explain 
order,  etc.),  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  allow  both  parties  to  adopt  them  as  true  ;  the 
difference  and  antagonism  only  appeared  when  the  manner  of  fultilment  or  realization 
was  expounded.  Thus  e.g.  to  believe  in  a  res.  of  the  dead  is  the  faith  of  all,  but  when 
the  order  and  manner  of  the  res.  is  afterward  discussed  (aside  from  the  creeds)  differ- 
ences appear,  etc. 

2  The  rei^ly  is  so  admirable  in  spirit  that  we  append  a  few  extracts.  It  has  been  pub- 
lished in  German  as  a  Tract,  and  in  English  in  the  Evang.  Quarterly  Reviev^  ana  Tlie  Lu- 
theran. Giving  reasons  drawn  fromMelanchthon,  Luther,  and  others,  for  the  declaration  : 
"  There  is  no  doubt  that  our  Confession  here  (art.  XVIL),  has  not  in  view  the  Old  Catholic 
Chiliasm  in  its  various  forms,  but  that  of  the  Miinzer  Anabaj)tists,  and  the  fanatical 
errorists  akin  to  them,"  the  writers  proceed  as  follows  :  "  The  fact,  therefore,  is  incon- 
trovertibly  this,  that  the  Augsburg  Confession  has  only  to  do  with  the  Anabaptist  errors  and 
efforts  of  those  times.  It  places  affirmatively  the  chief  eschatological  facts,  in  their 
principal  features,  over  against  the  rejected  error,  without,  for  example,  any  special  ex- 
planation as  to  how  we  are  to  understand  the  Coming  of  Christ,  or  the  Last  Day,  what 
the  Scriptures  teach  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  how  the  passage  in 
Rev.  20  :  1-6,  in  connection  with  the  entire  Scripture,  is  to  be  explained.  Especially 
has  it  not  at  all  yet  expressed  itself  concerning  the  precise  substance  of  the  last  question, 
namely  :  wdiether  this  prophecy  must  be  looked  upon  as  one  already  fulfilled,  or  as  one, 
the  fulfilment  of  which  is  yet  future.  Each  one  may  answer  these  for  himself,  in  such 
way  as  he  may  deem  defensible  by  the  Word  of  God  and  the  concensus  of  church  doc- 
trine. We  look  upon  these  questions,  neither  as  finally  determined,  nor  as  allowing,  in 
attempts  to  solve  them,  a  departure  from  the  prophetic  and  apostolic  word  ;  further, 
that  the  attention  which  this  subject  commands  is  a  characteristic  feature,  and  one  wor- 
thy of  notice  of  the  Church  and  theology  of  the  present  da}'.  They  are,  in  fact,  yet  open 
exegetical  questions,  every  solution  of  which  cannot  be  assented  to  ;  nor,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  every  Christian  and  theological  conviction,  resting  upon  an  earnest  and 
churchly-minded  Scriptural  investigation,  which  does  not  agree  with  ohl  dogmatists,  to 
be  at  once  rejected  with  fanatical  Chiliasm,  or  even  to  be  suspected  as  Chiliastic."  After 
showing  that  church  fellowship  cannot  Confessionally  be  denied  to  any  one  "  on  account 
of  differences  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Chiliastic  Kingdom,  concerning  which  our  confes- 
sion has  not  at  all  yet  expressed  itself,''  the  writers  continue  :  "  We  are  indeed  not  able  to 
see,  under  what  churchly  confessional  claim  it  can  be  forbidden  to  the  individual,  and 
especially  to  the  theologian,  in  the  Lutheran  Church,  to  search  the  prophetical  Scriptures 
in  the  manner  designated,  and  upon  their  basis  to  form  a  Christian  and  theological  faith — 
conviction  concerning  the  final  acts  of  redemption  ;  nor  with  what  churchly  right,  inas- 
much as  our  Church  recognizes  no  exegetical  tribunal,  we  can  refuse  to  regard  similar 
questions  of  doctrine,  so  long  as  the  expressed  saving  faith  remains,  as  anything  else 
than  they  really  are,  namely  :  open  questions."  They  add  :  "  It  is  our  conviction,  that 
it  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  there  is  nothing  more  given  for  faith  and  the  Church  to 
search  after  and  to  learn  ;  or  that  it  lies  in  the  power  of  the  Church,  especially  the  more 
she  nears  her  final  goal,  to  go  out  of  the  way  of  these  questions." 

That  the  reader  can  see  for  himself  that  it  does  not,  and  cannot,  condemn  the  Chiliasm 
of  the  Apostolic  and  later  Fathers,  we  reproduce  that  portion  of  art.  XVII.  which  is 
alleged  as  condemnatory  :  "  they  condemn  those  who  spread  abroad  Jewish  opinions. 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  533 

that  before  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  pious  will  engross  the  government  of  the  world 
and  the  wicked  be  everywhere  oppressed, "  -(the  German:  "they  condemn  those  who 
circulate  the  Judaizing  notion,  that  i)rior  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  godly  will 
establish  a  world-dominion  and  all  the  wicked  will  be  exterminated  ").*  Now  every  one 
can  see  that  the  form  of  doctrine  here  condemned  is  not  the  one  entertained  by  the  ancient 
Chiliasts,  for  not  one  of  them  locates  this  Kingdom  jyrior  to,  or  Ijefore,  the  resurrection,  and 
not  one  of  them  teaches  that  this  can  be  effected  by  the  pious  but  oydy  by  the  Sec.  Advent 
and  the  power  of  the  Messiah.  The  error  thus  reprobated  belongs  to  the  Anabaptists, 
and  all  that  class  {including  cdso  the  Whitbyans)  who  teach  that  before  the  resurrection,  and 
consequently  befo7-e  the  Advent,  and  before  the  end  of  this  dispensation,  the  Church  will 
so  advance,  etc.,  that  "  the  pious  will  engross  the  government  of  the  world,"  institute  a 
''  world-dominion,"  and  suiDpress  the  wicked.  The  Millenarian  view,  having  for  cardinal, 
doctrines  rt  prior  ^dt^en^  and  resurrection,  is  not  chargeable  with  so  gross  an  error;  and 
those  who  urge  this  Confessional  objection  are  not  sufficiently  candid  to  acknowledge  that 
it  is  condemnatory — if  it  has  any  logical  force  whatever— of  the  present  prevailing  Whiibyan 
theory  of  the  Millennium. 

The  reader  is  referred  to  an  art.  on  the  question,  "  Does  the  Augsburg  Confession  con- 
demn Chiliasm  .'"  by  Dr.  Seiss  in  the  Append.  (Note  D.)  to  The  Last  Times.  He  makes  at 
length  the  following  points  :  (1)  By  name  Chiliasm  is  not  condemned.  (2)  The  descrip- 
tion of  the  opinions  condemned  does  not  describe  Millenarianism,  for  it  is  no  docirine  of 
ours  "  that  the  pious  are  to  have  a  separate  Kingdom  to  themselves  before  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead."  We  look  for  a  Kingdom  only  after  the  resurrection,  and  the  authori- 
ties in  behalf  of  our  doctrine  are  given.  (3)  Reference  is  made  in  the  Confession  to  the 
Anabaptists,  and  it  is  decisively  shown  from  historical  authorities  that  the  doctrine  of 
the  Anabaptists  widely  differed  from  the  Millenarian.  (4)  The  declarations  of  Luther, 
Melanchthon,  and  others,  are  produced  to  indicate  the  same.  (5)  Millenarians  of  emi- 
nence and  ability  are  adduced,  who  subscribed  to  the  Confession,  such  as  Spener,  Bengel, 
and  others.  (6)  That  the  Confessors  did  not  sit  in  judgment  over,  and  condemn  the 
Apostolic  and  Primitive  Fathers,  who  were  Chiliastic,  for  whom  in  other  places  they 
profess  esteem. 

It  is  unfortunate  and  misleading,  that  even  in  Cyclopedias,  His.  of  Doctrines,  etc., 
efforts  are  made  to  link  ancient  and  modern  Chiliasm  with  the  vagaries  of  Anabaptists 
and  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men.  and  hastily  to  infer  that  when  these  are  confessionallyor 
otherwise  condemned  by  the  Reformers  and  others,  that  this  also  is  condemnatory  of 
Chiliasm  in  all  its  phases.  Such  a  line  of  procedure  if  applied  to  other  doctrine,  would 
leave  but  little  for  us  to  receive.  The  vagaries  of  Anabaptists,  such  as,  that  before  the 
Advent  and  resurrection  the  promised  Kingdom  is  to  be  established,  that  it  is  to  be  set 
up  by  human  means  and  instrumentalities,  that  Christ  will  then  reign  through  self-appointed 
prophets,  vicars,  kings,  etc. — which  Chiliasm  poiniedly  repudiates,  are  fully  described  by 
Mosheim,  Ranke,  Hardwick,  Miller,  VValch,  etc.,  so  that  a  student  cannot  plead  ignorance 
when  indorsing  such  an  error.  So  also  with  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men  ;  histoiy  (Burnet, 
Wilson,  etc.),  attests,  that  the  Fifth  Monarchy  of  Daniel,  they  expected  (with  perhaps 
few  exceptions,  as  Tillinghast  and  others)  to  raise  up  through  their  own  agency  before  the 
Coming  of  Christ,  and  contended,  therefore,  that  all  power,  civil  and  spiritual,  should  be 
already  given  to  them.  Hence  they  entered  into  open  rebellion  against  the  existing 
powers,  etc.,  a  principle  tdierly  at  variance  with  ancient  and  modern  Chiliasm. 

Numerous  testimonies  expressive  of  the  intended  meaning  of  the  art.  could  be  given. 
And  as  our  opponents  persistently  urge  it  as  an,  objection,  a  few  more  are  appended. 
Dr.  Lange  in  several  places  (e.g.  Rev.  p.  351,  Amer.  Ed.)  refers  to  this  misinterpretation 
of  the  Confession,  e.g.  saying  :  "  The  elder  Lutheran  theology  continues  most  involved 
in  the  toils  of  medifeval  tradition.  The  slavish  theology  of  the  letter  has  found  a  sup- 
port m  the  view  of  John  Gerhard  in  particular.  The  Apocatypse,  Gerhard  declares,  is  a 
deutero-canonical  book — the  Kingdom  of  Christ  will  never  on  earth,  not  even  at  the  end 

*  We  refer  the  critical  student  to  the  incorrect  usage  of  "  Jewish  opinion"  and  "Ju- 
daizing notion"  in  the  art.  For,  as  we  have  abundantly  proven,  in  former  Props.,  in 
quotations  from  our  opponents,  Jewish  authorities,  and  recent  works  on  the  Doc.  of  the 
New  Test.,  it  is  not  even  correct  to  associate  the  Anabaptist  error  with  Jewish  views, 
because  the  Jews  associated  a  res.  of  the  godly  with  the  Advent  of  the  Messiah  and  His 
reign,  etc.  It  is  only  true,  when  taken  in  a  limited  sense,  expressed  e.g.  by  Jews  who 
permitted  themselves  to  be  imposed  on  by  false  Messiahs.  Here  even  it  is  proper  to 
discriminate,  so  that  injustice  is  not  done  to  the  Jewish  expressed  faith.  The  Jews,  as 
a  class,  took  no  part  in  this  movement. 


534  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

of  the  days,  be  one  of  external  sovereignty  (a  sentiment  dictated,  doubtless  by  a  m'lsun- 
der standing  of  art.  XVII.  of  the  Augsburg  Confession)— all  the  dead  are  to  arise  in  one 
day — there  is  to  be  but  one  general  resurrection  of  the  dead  at  the  Parousia  of  the  Lord. 
Accordingly,  it  is  further  stated,  the  beginning  of  the  Mill.  Kingdom  probably  falls  in 
the  time  of  Constancine— Gog  and  Magog  are  to  be  regarded  as  significant  of  the  Turks. 
A  partiality  for  this  prejudiced  tradition  can  in  general  be  regarded  only  as  the  sad  fruit 
of  partyisni.'"  (Comp.  p.  401.)  In  Richter  s  Erklarte  Haus  Bi'jel,  Tom.  6,  1134,  in  advo- 
cacy of  our  views,  it  is  said  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  one  thousand  years'  Kingdom,  or 
Flower  and  Golden  Time  of  the  Church  uj)on  this  present  earth— which  the  prophets 
have  so  amply  pictured— is  thoroughly  in  accordance  with  the  Evangelical  Church  doc- 
trine, for  in  the  17th  art.  of  the  Augsburg  Confession  there  is  not  a  syllable  (steht  kein 
wort)  about  the  one  thousand  years,  nor  about  the  one  thousand  years'  Kingdom,"  etc. 
So  the  Berlenherg  Bibel,  Tom.  6,  pp.  397-399,  advocates  Chiliasm,  and  declares  that  the 
art.  is  not  in  conflict  with  it,  but  that  "  a  mere  carnal,  world-kingdom  is  justly  rejected." 
Thus  others  might  be  quoted,  as  Olshausen,  Bengel,  Steir,  Auberlen,  Delitzsch,  Koppe, 
Piscator,  Spener,  Ebrard,  Lisco,  Roos,  Kohler,  Bauer  Er.,  and  many  others.  Mallery 
{Prop.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  97)  justly,  in  rejdy  to  Shedd,  observes  :  "  What  the  Augsburg 
Confession  does  condemn,  is  the  now  prevalent  notion  of  a  Millennium  of  righteousness 
and  goad  government  before  the  Lord's  coming.  It  condemns  the  notion  of  the  conver- 
sion of  the  world  under  the  present  dispensation,  the  idea  now  regarded  as  orthodox, 
but  one  which  Luther  constantly  condemned. "  The  student,  too,  will  observe  the  force 
of  the  word  "  prior"  or  "  6e/bre"  used  designedly,  for,  as  we  shall  hereafter  show  by 
numerous  quotations,  the  Reformers  did  believe  that  after  the  resurrection  and  after  the 
Sec.  Advent  this  earth  renewed,  etc.,  would  be  given  to  the  pious  and  that  they  would  glo- 
riously reign — thus  incorporating  into  their  faith  doctrines  in  sympathy  with  Chiliastio 
views.  As  illustrative  of  view,  we  quote  Koch  {Das  Tausendjuh.rige  Reich),  who  says  : 
"  Here,  first  of  all,  the  false  Chiliasm  advocated  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation  by  the 
fanatical  Anabaptists,  is  to  be  mentioned.  They  taught  a  future  glorious  Kingdom  of 
Christ  on  earth,  but  imagined  that  the  immediate  erection  of  this  Kingdom  was  a  matter  of 
the  first  importance  to  the  Christian  Church.  By  her  own  might,  sword  in  hand,  it  must 
be  established,  just  as  it  was  attempted  by  Thomas  Munzer  to  overthrow  the  Christ- 
opposed  powers  of  this  world  (even  as  Israel  Overthrew  the  Canaanites  formerly),  in  order 
to  proclaim  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  as  the  Fifth  Monarchy,  which  was  to  succeed  the 
four  universal  monarchies  described  by  Daniel.  Against  this  conception  of  the  1000 
years' Kingdom— a?i(i  only  against  this — was  the  17th, art.  of  the  Augsburg  Confession 
directed,  which  rejected  the  Jewish  opinion  that  believers  should  enjoy  on  earth,  before 
the  resurrection,  a  worldly  kingdom,  after  a  general  crushing  out  of  the  wicked.  But  not  merely 
by  the  Augustana,  but  also  by  the  Scriptures,  is  this  false  Chiliasm  condemned,  because, 
as  already  shown,  the  erection  of  the  Millennial  Kingdom,  according  to  the  prophets' 
words,  is  not  the  result  of  any  such  Church  action,  but  comes  only  by  means  of  the  returning 
Lord,  an  event  which  the  Church  awaits  with  patience,  and  which  at  last  it  can  only 
realize,  not  by  works,  but  by  suffering.  Kindred  with  this  false  Chiliasm,  is  a  conception 
of  modern  theology,  according  to  which  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  be  realized  tjy  means 
of  Church  action,  not,  indeed,  violently,  but  gradually  and  in  a  j^eaceful  way.  The  sanc- 
tifying influence  of  Christianity  is  to  evermore  powerfully  extend  itself,  in  ever-widening 
circles,  the  power  of  sin  evermore  retreating  before  it,  until,  finally  at  the  close  of  its 
historical  development,  all  humanity  shall  be  glorified  into  a  Kingdom  of  God.  Even 
this  finer  form  of  Chiliasm"  (as  e.g.  given  by  Whitby,  Edwards,  Brown,  Glasgow,  etc.),  "  like 
the  coarse  form  advocated  by  the  Anabaptists,  is  coyulemned  by  the  Apoc.  of  John.  Ac- 
cording to  this,  wickedness  does  not  decline  in  the  course  of  history,  but  rather  ascends 
to  its  most  fearful  antichristian  height,  while  on  the  other  hand,  also,  tlie  Church  is  puri- 
fied by  means  of  her  tribulation,  in  the  last  time.  Not  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  the 
moral  influence  of  Christianity,  jjuts  an  end  to  antichristianity,  but  the  judgment  cf  the 
returning  Lord,  with  which  the  glorious  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth  makes  an  entrance." 
(Compare  Starke,  Steffann  and  Ebrard,  p.  440,  Lange's  Com.  Rev.) 

4  Brooks'  El.  Proph.  Jnterp.,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Cox's  Millenarian' s  Answer,  Tlie 
Time  of  the  End  by  a  Congregationalist,  Shimeall's  Eschatology,  and  other  works  give  the 
evidence  respecting  this  Confession,  and  copious  extracts  from  the  Catechism  and  from 
the  Prelates  indorsing  it,  unmistakably  proving  that  many  who  were  Chiliastic  received 
it  ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  withdrawal  of  the  article  was  intentional  "  either"  (so 
Brooks)  "from  the  increase  of  Millenarian  principles  at  this  time  ;  or  at  least  from  the 
conviction  that  they  were  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  extravagances  of  Cerinthus  or 
of  Munzer."  Bickersteth  (Prom.  Glory,  p,  93,  note)  refers  to  the  opinion  of  the  Reform- 
ers (Tyndale,  Bradford,  Latimer,  Becon)   and  of  Edward  YI.'s  Catechism,  and  then  to 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  535 

the  speedy  withdrawal  of  this  art.,  adding  :  "  The  idea  of  a  carnal  Mill,  of  worldly  pleas- 
ures is  justly  denounced  by  all  thoughtful  Christians.  The  common  idea  of  the  Reform- 
ers, derived  from  Rome  and  continued  for  some  time  after  the  Reformation,  was,  that 
the  Mill,  was  past,  an  opinion  generally  now  abandoned.  The  41st  art.  was  wholly 
withdrawn  from  the  authorized  Articles  of  1562.  The  prevailing  opinion  of  the  Re- 
formers was,  that  the  judgment  to  come  was  to  be  ex^peded  speedily,  without  any  interven- 
ing Mill.,  and  that  our  Saviour  would  soon  return  in  His  glory  ;  and  hence  the  services 
have  nothing  that  interferes  with  our  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious 
apjjearance  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;  and  have  also  many  expres- 
sions of  conhdence  in  His  return,  and  the  Kingdom  then  to  be  inherited  by  the  saints." 

5  Brooks,  M.  Propk.  Interp.,  p.  72,  quotes  the  letter  from  Baillie  (Let.  No.  117,  pre- 
sented also  in  Anderson's  Leiier  io  the  Author  of  Millenarianism  Indefensible,"  and  quoted 
in  various  works),  and  gives  among  the  "  mmiy  more"  known  to  have  been  Millenarian, 
Ash,  Bridge,  Burroughs,  Caryll,  Goodwin,  Gouge,  Langley,  and  Sterry,  all  members  of  the 
Assembly.  To  these  as  expressing  Chiliastic  views  to  some  extent,  Shimeall  [Eschatology, 
p.  89)  adds  :  Selden,  Ains worth,  Gataker,  and  Featly.  No  wonder  that  Baillie  writes 
that  this  "  error  so  famous  in  antiquity"  is  "  so  troublesome  among  us."  Prof.  Briggs  in  his 
bitterness  against  Chiliasm  affirms,  7nost  unjustly,  that  the  Westminster  Conf.  rejects  Pre- 
Mill.  as  en'or  and  heresy  (Dr.  Macdill  follows  him  closely  in  the  same  unhisiorical  charge)  ; 
now  Dr.  Craven  in  his  reply  to  the  grave  charge  {N.  Y.  Evangelist,  Jan.  and  Feb.  1879), 
makes  the  following  points,  which  serve  as  a  most  ample  refutation.  {1)  The  majority  of 
the  committee  (viz.  :  Goodwin,  Bridge,  Caryll,  and  Greenhill — who  had  been  members 
of  the  Westminster  Assembly),  who  framed  the  Savoy  Confession,  were  express  Pre- 
Millenarians.  (2)  Pre-Millenarians  promme«i/y  took  part  in  framing  the  Confession,  and 
evidently — as  a  compromise — to  preserve  unity  and  harmony,  so  worded  the  same,  giv- 
ing general  and  Scriptural  statements  (without  any  intimation  of  order  or  manner)  that  all 
could  accejjt  of  it.  (3)  As  a  diversity  of  ojiinion  existed  relating  to  the  events  j^receding 
and  connected  with  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  only  basis  of  union  was  to  avoid  a  discussion 
of  the  order  and  manner  of  fulfilment,  which  was  done,  (4)  The  use  of  the  phrases  "  day 
of  judgment,"  "  Kingdom,"  etc.,  as  well  as  the  adoption  of  Scrii^ture  on  controverted 
subjects  icithout  explanation,  did  not  forbid  Pre-Mills.  or  Post-Mills,  to  accept  of  the  same. 
(5)  That  the  admission  of  Prof.  Briggs  that  Pre-Mills.  (as  Sterry,  Burroughs,  and  Good- 
win) were  in  the  Westminster  Assembly,  and  utterly  unconscious  of  being  denounced  and 
condemned,  is  sufficient  evidence  in  our  favor.  (6)  Tnat  these  and  other  Pre-Mills. 
labored  with  Post-Mills,  in  the  same  Church,  and  were  never  tried  and  disciplined  for 
their  doctrinal  views,  is  conclusive  proof  how  the  same  were  regarded.  (7)  That  Homes' 
intensely  Pre-Mill.  work  "  The  Res.  Bevealed,"  was  indorsed  by  a  committee  (Caryll  and 
Sterry)  of  the  Assembly,  is  decisive  that  no  condemnatory  idea  was  ever  entertained.  (8) 
That  the  testimony  of  Baillie  {Letters,  vol.  2,  p.  414-15),  and  of  Masson  {Life  of  3Iillon, 
vol.  2,  p.  146),  both  opponents,  as  to  the  extent  of  the  belief,  and  ttie  eminence  of  its  be- 
lievers, is  irresistible  to  any  unprejudiced  mind.  (9)  That  Twisse,  "  a  thoroughgoing 
Pre-Millenarian,  should  have  been  selected  for  the  position  of  Moderator,"  is  evidence  either 
of  the  esteem  in  which  Chiliasts  were  held,  or  of  the  number  of  Chiliastic  adherents  in 
the  Assembly,  or  of  both.  (10)  Caryll,  as  one  of  the  committee  to  whom  Homes'  Chilias- 
tic work  was  given,  not  only  pronounces  the  book  "  very  useful  for  the  saints  and  worth}'- 
of  public  view,"  but  states  that  its  doctrines  h.a.\e  "  gained  ground  in  the  hearts  and  judg- 
ments of  very  many,  both  grave  and  godly  men,  who  have  left  us  divers  essays  and  discourses 
on  the  subject."  We  leave  the  candid  reader  to  say  whether,  in  view  of  such  facts,  there 
is  the  slightest  foundation  for  Prof.  B.  's  uncharitable  deductions  ;  and  whether  the  latter 
do  not  spring  more  from  the  heart  than  from  the  mind.  The  feeling  and  opinion  even 
later  is  illustrated  e.g.  in  the  Life  of  Ed.  L-ving  (by  Mrs.  Oliphant,  j).  335)  ;  it  being  stated 
that  the  authorities  of  the  Church  tacitly  admitted,  by  non-interference,  attendance,  etc., 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  Millennium  was  "  open  to  a  diversity  of  view."  We  shall  have 
occasion  to  quote  this  Confession  under  another  Prop.,  as  in  symjiathy  with  some  Chil- 
iastic views,  viz.  :  the  looking  for  the  Advent  enforced  as  a  duty  without  an  interven- 
ing Millennial  age,  and  the  nonconversion  of  the  world, 

•*  The  student  is  referred  to  Crosby's  His.  of  the  Baptists,  vol.  2,  App.  85.  We  give  a 
few  extracts  to  illustrate.  The  Confession  declares  the  unalterable  faith  of  the  signers, 
saying,  "for  which  we  are  not  only  resolved  to  suffer  persecution  to  the  loss  of  our 
goods,  but  also  life  itself,  rather  than  decline  from  the  same  ;"  and  this  enforces  the 
Chiliasm  as  a  deliberate  conviction.  It  then  plainly  announces  :  ''  We  believe  that  there 
will  be  an  order  in  the  resurrection  ;  Christ  is  the  first-fruits,  and  then  next,  or  after,  they 
that  are  GuisVs  at  His  Coming  ;  then,  or  afterward,  cometh  the  end.  Concerning  the 
Kingdom  and  reign  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we  do  believe  that  He  is  now  in  heaven 


536  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

at  His  Father's  right  hand,  so  we  do  believe  that,  at  the  time  appointed  by  the  Father,  He 
shall  come  again  in  power  and  great  glory  ;  and  that  at  or  after  His  coming  the  second 
time,  He  will  not  only  raise  the  dead,  and  judge  and  restore  the  world,  but  will  also  take 
to  Himself  His  Kingdom,  and  will,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  rebj)i  on  the  throiie  of  His 
father  Duvid,  on  Mount  Zion,  in  Jerusalem,  forever."  "  We  believe  that  the  Kingdom  of  our 
Lord  will  be  an  universal  Kingdom,  and  that  in  this  Kingdom  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  will  be  alone,  visible,  supreme  God  and  King  of  the  whole  earth.  MVe  believe  that  as 
this  Kingdom  will  be  universal,  so  it  will  be  also  an  everlasting  Kingdom,  that  shall  have 
no  end,  nor  cannot  be  shaken  ;  in  which  Kingdom  the  saints  and  faithful  in  Chiist  Jesus 
shall  receive  the  end  of  their  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  their  souls  ;  where  the  Lord  is  they 
shall  be  also.  We  believe  that  the  New  Jerusalem  that  shall  come  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven,  when  the  tabernacle  of  God  shall  be  with  them,  and  He  will  dwell  among  them, 
will  be  the  Metropolitan  City  of  the  Kingdom,  and  will  be  the  glorious  place  of  residence  of  both 
Christ  and  His  saints  forever,  and  will  be  so  situated  as  that  the  Kingly  palace  will  be  on 
Mount  Zion,  the  holy  hill  of  David,  where  His  throne  was."  The  Confession  insists  on  a  per- 
sonal Advent,  upon  Christ  s  obtaining  the  government  of  the  world,  the  saints  reigning 
on  the  earth  with  Him,  applying  Dan.  7  :  27  ;  Rev.  19  :  16  :  Ps.  22  :  28  ;  Zech.  14  :  9. 
etc.,  to  this  period.  The  contrast  in  the  present  and  future  condition  of  saints  is  thus 
drawn  :  "  '  For  unto  the  saints  shall  be  given  the  Kingdom,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
Kingdom,  under  (mark  that)  the  whole  heaven  '  (Dan.  7  :  27).  Though  (alas  !)  now  many 
men  be  scarce  content  that  the  saints  should  have  so  much  as  a  being  among  them  ;  but 
when  Christ  shall  appear,  then  shall  be  their  day,  then  shall  be  given  unto  them  power  over 
the  nations,  to  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  (Rev.  2  :  26,  27).  Then  shall  they  receive  a 
crown  of  life,  which  no  man  shall  take  from  them,  nor  they  by  any  means  turned  or 
overturned  from  it,  for  the  oppressor  shall  be  broken  m  pieces  (Ps.  72  :  4),  and  their 
vain  rejoicings  turned  into  mourning  and  bitter  lamentations,  as  it  is  written  (Job 
22  :5-7)." 

As  to  other  Confessions,  a  number,  indicative  of  the  extent  of  belief,  may  thus  be  speci- 
fied. The  "Free  Chris.  Church  of  Italy, "in  Genl.  Assembl}^  at  Milan,  June,  1870, 
adopted  the  following  Chiliastic  doctrine  :  "  Art.  VIII.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  come 
from  heaven  and  transform  our  body  of  humiliation  into  a  glorious  body.  In  that  day 
the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,  and  the  living  who  are  found  faithful  shall  be  trans- 
formed, and  thus  together  shall  we  be  caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air,  to  be  forever  with  the  Lord  ;  and,  after  His  Kingdom,  all  the  rest  shall  rise  to  be 
judged  in  judgment."  The  "  Second  Adventists, "  in  their  public  expression  of  Faith 
(Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church),  declare  their  belief  in  the  speedy  Advent,  the  first  and 
second  resurrections  separated  by  an  interval  of  a  1000  j^ears,  the  reign  of  Christ  and  the 
saints  on  the  earth,  etc.  They  are  far  more  Chiliastic  than  the  Millerites— the  latter 
being  chiefly  distinguished  for  belief  in  an  immediate  coming  and  fixing  the  time  for  the 
same.  "  The  Catholic  Apostolic  Church"  (a  succession  of  the  Irvingites)  presents  in  its 
Confession  of  Faith  a  strong  Chiliastic  belief,  for  which  they  are  noted.  Its  leading  doc- 
trine is  a  belief  in  the  speedy  Coming  of  Jesus,  and  expresses  it  "as  the  only  hope  of 
deliverance  to  the  sin-bardened  and  weary  creation."  (Comp.  art.  on,  in  M'Clintock  and 
Strong's  Cyclop.  It  has  extended  itself  in  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Switzerland, 
France,  Holland,  Belgium,  Denmark,  Austria,  Germany,  America,  etc.)  The  "  Seventh- 
Day  Adventists,"  entertain  several  of  the  Chiliastic  tenets.  "  The  Brethren,"  or  "  Dunk- 
ards,"  as  represented  by  Nead,  in  Nead's  TJieolog.  Writings  (seech.  20,  on  "  The  Sec.  Ad- 
vent"), hold  to  the  i3ersonal  return  and  reign  of  Jesus,  to  a  previous  tearful  lack  of  faith 
and  persecution,  to  a  restoration  of  the  Jews,  to  a  glorious  Mill.,  to  a  first  res.  preceding, 
and  to  a  second  res.  at  the  end  of  the  1000  years,  to  a  great  battle  between  Christ  and 
His  enemies,  to  the  perpetuity  of  the  race  after  the  Advent,  and  to  the  removal  of  the 
curse  and  the  Sabbatism.  Thus  many  of  the  essential  points  of  Primitive  and  Scriptural 
Chiliasm  are  incorporated.  What  number  or  particular  body  are  thus  presented  the 
writer  does  not  know.  A  few  copies  of  T/te  Brethren  at  Work,  a  Brethren  or  Dunkard 
periodical  published  at  Lanark,  111.,  fell  into  my  hands,  and  they  contained  the  advocacy 
of  the  Mill,  and  the  personal  reign  of  Christ  (as  e.g.  March  21st,  1878),  by  James  Wirt. 
*'  The  Church  of  God  "  (see  art.  by  Winebrenner,  in  Rupp's  Oiig.  His.  of  Belig.  Denom.) 
gives  as  an  art.  of  Faith:  "She  believes  in  the  personal  coming  and  reign  of  Jesus 
Christ,  Matt.  24  :  42-44  ;  Acts  1  :  11  ;  Phil.  3  :  20,  21  ;  1  Thess.  4  :  16,  17  ;  1  John  3:2; 
Rev.  1  :  17."  "  She  believes  in  the  resurrection  '  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust  ;' 
that  the  res.  of  the  just  will  precede  the  res.  of  the  unjust."  (In  1867,  the  Church  num- 
bered 11  elderships,  400  churches,  350  ministers,  and  over  25,000  members.)  In  con- 
versing with  ministers  and  members  of  this  Church,  they  exhibited  an  intelligent  Chilias- 
tic belief,  in  marked  contrast  with  many  others.     The  "  Plymouth  Brethren,"  or  Darby- 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  537 

ites,  entertain  a  prominent  Chiliastic  belief,  being  one  of  their  chief  characteristics,  as 
any  reference  to  their  exj)ressed  faith  will  abundantly  show.  The  "  Harmony  Society," 
or  the  Eappists  (followers  of  Eapp,  settled  at  Economy,  Pa.),  hold  Pre-Mill.  views.  The 
nearness  of  the  Millennium,  introduced  by  the  Sec.  Advent,  is  a  cardinal  doctrine  with 
them.  The  "  Mennonites"  (art.  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop,  says)  "  in  the  16th 
cent.,  held,  in  common  with  the  Anabaptists,  the  belief  in  Christ's  jjersonal  reign  during 
the  Millennium."  Buck's  Theol.  Die,  art.  "  Mennonites,"  remarks,  thatMenno  discarded 
the  extravagant  views  of  certain  Anabaptists,  but  retained  the  doctrine  of  "  the  Mil- 
lennium, or  1000  years'  reign  of  Christ  upon  earth."  How  largely  this  doctrine  continued 
among  them,  the  writer  is  unable  to  say,  for  they  now  number  altogether,  it  is  suj^iaosed, 
about  200,000,  divided  into  several  branches.  The  "  Apostoolians"  {Ency.  llelhj.  KnowL), 
one  of  the  branches,  is  decidedly  Millennarian.  The  "  Christadelphians"  have  largely  in- 
corporated Chiliasm,  and  make  it  essential  to  their  system.  It  is  most  prominently  pre- 
sented in  their  published  "  Principles,"  and  other  works.  Various  offshoots  of  the 
"  Pietistic  movement"  were  largely  affected  by  Chiliasm,  as  for  e.g.  the  "  Society  of 
Korn"  (art.  on,  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.),  which  was  under  "  the  Millenarian  in- 
fluence of  Jung  Stilling  and  Michael  Hahn. "  (The  followers  of  Hahii  in  1817  "  num- 
bered 18,000.")  The  "  Moravians"  favored  Chiliastic  views,  however  perverted  by  ideal 
and  mystical  concej)tions.  Writers  professing  to  give  the  faith  of  the  "  Unitas  Fra- 
trum,"  present  the  Millenarian  view,  as  e.g.  Bish.  Spangenberg  in  his  last  ch.  of  Eaposi- 
iion  of  Ch.  Doctrine.  Various  parties,  imbibing  Spener's  pietism  and  Oetinger's  theos- 
oph}^  incorporated  Chiliasm,  as  e.g.  the  "  Michaleans"  (and  in  contrast  with  them  the 
"  Pregizerians"),  of  whom  Kurtz  {Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  291)  says  :  "  They  had  a  common 
ground  in  their  Chiliasm,  and  in  the  doctrine  of  restoration."  Chiliastic  views  are  dom- 
inant in  small  parties,  as  in  the  "One-faith  people,  "in  the  adherents  of  Barbour,  of 
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  in  the  followers  of  Russell,  of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  as  well  as  in  others 
whose  location  has  escaped  the  writer's  recollection.  The  same  is  true  of  some  German 
Millenarians  near  Tiflis,  the  capital  of  Georgia  (Hendersons  Bib.  Besearches  in  Bnssia, 
pp.  524-529,  and  Pinkerton's  Bussia,  pp.  143-151).  The  first  attempt  to  form  a  Univer- 
salist  sect  embraced  distinctive  features  of  Chiliasm  allied  with  Universalism,  as  seen  in 
the  "  Rellyanites  or  Rellyan  Universalists"  (Art.  on,  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.), 
whose  theory  of  Restitution  is  in  the  main  allied  with  Chiliastic  views,  revived  by  Bar- 
bour, Russell,  etc.,  in  the  77iree  Worlds  and  their  respective  newspapers.  As  this  fact  is 
not  generally  known,  we  quote  the  following  from  James  Relly's  (at  one  time  connected 
with  Whitefield)  and  his  followers'  belief  :  "  In  general  they  appear  to  believe  that  there 
will  be  a  resurrection  to  life  and  a  res.  to  condemnation  ;  that  believers  only  will  be 
among  the  former,  who,  as  firstfruits,  and  kings  and  priests,  will  have  part  in  the  first 
resurrection,  and  shall  reign  with  Christ  in  His  Kingdom  of  the  Millennium  ;  that  unbe- 
lievers who  are  after  raised  must  wait  the  manifestation  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world  un- 
der that  condemnation  of  conscience  which  a  mind  in  darkness  and  wrath  must  neces- 
sarily feel  ;  that  believers,  called  kings  and  priests,  will  be  made  the  medium  of  com- 
municating to  their  condemned  brethren,  who,  like  Joseph  to  his  brethren,  though  he 
spoke  roughly  to  them,  in  reality  overflowed  with  affection  and  tenderness  ;  that  ulti- 
mately every  knee  shall  bow  and  every  tongue  confess  that  in  the  Lord  they  have  right- 
eousness and,  strength,  and  thus  every  enemy  shall  be  subdued  to  the  Kingdom  and  glory 
of  the  great  Mediator."  (Those  who  have  recently  revived  this  Restitution  scheme, 
change  some  features,  as  e.g.  the  obstinate  and  recalcitrant  are  given  over  to  "  the  second 
death,"  etc.)  Even  the  Mormons,  together  with  much  that  the  Church  receives  in  gen- 
eral, incorporate  Chiliastic  features.  Jos.  Smith  in  his  His.  of  the  Latter  Day  Saints  (Ruj^p's 
Grig.  His.  of  Belig.  Denoms.)  says  :  "  We  believe  in  the  literal  gathering  of  Israel,  and  in 
the  restoration  of  the  Ten  Tribes  ;"  "  That  Christ  will  reign  personally  upon  the  earth, 
and  that  the  earth  will  be  renewed  and  receive  its  paradisaical  glory."  But  (Art.  "  Mor- 
mons," M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  teach  a  gross  future,  illustrated  by  the  future 
marriage,  etc.  (The  influence  that  the  association  of  Chiliasm  with  singular  or  fanatical 
views  has  upon  many — who  overlook  the  fact  that  the  most  jarecious  and  fundamental 
Christian  doctrines  are  similarly  treated — will  be  treated  under  Prop.  179  ) 

Ohs.  6.  The  Chiliastic  doctrine  is  not  confined  to  any  one  branch  of  the 
Protestant  Church.  Its  advocates  are  to  he  found  in  all  denomination.'^, 
more  or  less,  and  embrace  men  eminent  for  piety,  abundant  labors,  and 
ability.  The  lists  that  are  given  in  various  works  include  Reformers, 
Martyrs,   English    Church   Divines,    Lutherans,   Reformed,    Westminster 


538  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

Assembly  Divines,  English  Dissenters,  New  England  Divines,  Baptists, 
Presbyterians,  American  Episcopal  Divines,  Congregationalists,  Mission- 
aries, etc.,  forming  a  noble  band  of  adherents  to  the  early  faith. 

The  student  is  referred  to  the  lists  given  in  Brooks's  El.  Proph.  Iniei-p.,  Taylor's  Voice 
of  the  Church,  The  Time  of  the  End  by  a  Congregationalist,  Seiss's  i«s/  Times,  Shimeall's 
Eschatology,  Elliott's  llorce  Apoc,  McCaul's  The  Old  Paths,  Wood's  Believer  s  Guide,  The 
Investigator,  4th  vol.,  Manford's  Apology  for  Millenarianism,  Driimmond's  Dialogues  on 
Prophecy,  and  Defence  of  the  Students  of  Prophecy,  Bryant's  Millenarian  Vieics,  West's  His. 
Pre-Mill.  Doc,  etc.  Macaulay  {Essays  onthe  Jews,  1831)  referred  to  this  feature  :  "  Many 
Christians  believe  that  the  Messiah  will  shortly  establish  a  Kingdom  on  the  earth  and 
reign  visibly  over  all  its  inhabitants.  Whether  this  doctrine  be  orthodox  or  not,  we  shall 
not  inquire.  The  number  of  peoj^le  who  hold  it  is  very  much  greater  than  the  number  of 
Jews  residing  in  England.  Many  of  those  who  hold  it  are  distinguished  by  rank,  wealth, 
and  ability  ;  it  is  preached  from  pulpits  both  of  the  Scottish  and  of  the  English  Church. 
Noblemen  and  members  of  Parliament  have  written  in  defence  of  it,  who  expect  "  that 
before  this  generation  shall  pass  away,  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  will  be  swallowed  up 
in  one  Divine  Empire."  While  many  of  the  names  that  we  give  are  veriiied  by  a  per- 
sonal perusal  of  their  works  or  extracts  from  them,  many  are  presented  on  the  authority 
of  others,  and  we  may  thus  inadvertently  place  some  of  those  who  are  more  thoroughly 
Millenarian  with  those  who  are  less  so,  and  the  reverse.  A  complete  list  of  writers,  clas- 
sified as  to  their  exact  views,  is  still  a  desideratum,  and  until  this  is  done,  injustice  may 
unintentionally  be  done  to  authors. 

Ohs.  7.  After  the  Reformation,  however,  the  Reformers  and  others  in- 
dorsed certain  distinctive  features  belonging,  as  parts  of  the  system,  to 
Millenarian  doctrine,  we  are  chiefly  indebted  to  a  few  leading  minds  for 
bringing  forth  a  return  to  the  old  Patristic  faith  in  all  its  essential  forms. 
Prominently  among  these  are  the  following  :  the  profound  Biblical  scholar 
Joseph  Mede  (born  1586,  died  1638),  in  his  still  celebrated  CJavis  A])ocaIi/p- 
tica  (translated  into  English)  and  Exjjosition  on  Peter ;  Th.  Bnghtman 
(1644),  Expositions  of  Daniel  and  Apoc.  ;  J.  A.  Bengel  (a  learned  divine, 
born  1687,  died  1752),  Exposition  of  the  Apocalypse  and  Addresses  on  the 
same  ;  also  the  writings  of  Th.  Goodwin  (1679)  ;  Ch.  Daubuz  (1730)  ;  Pis- 
cator  (1646)  ;  M.  F.  Roos  (1770)  ;  Alstedius  (1643  and  earlier)  ;  Cressener 
(1689)  ;  Farmer  (1660) ;  Fleming  (1708)  ;  Hartley  (1764)  ;  J.  J.  Hess  (1774)  ; 
Homes  (1654)  ;  Jurieu  (1686)  ;  Maton  (1642)  ;  Peterson  (1692)  ;  Sherwin 
(1665)  ;  and  others  (such  as  Conrade,  Gallus,  Brahe,  Kett,  Broughton, 
Marten,  Sir  I.  Newton,  Whiston,  etc.),  materially  aided  in  directing  atten- 
tion to  the  Millenarian  doctrine  and  to  influence  persons  to  Biblical  study 
on  the  subject.  When  these  were  followed  by  men  eminent  for  learning 
and  marked  ability  (some  have  been  mentioned,  others  will  follow)  ;  when 
the  leading  poets  and  commentaries  gave  an  additional  impulse  to  Mille- 
narian doctrine  by  their  forcible  portrayals  and  exegetical  comments  ;  when 
persons  of  the  highest  and  lowest  position,  in  all  ranks  and  professions,  of 
undoubted  piety  and  usefulness,  thus  united  in  expressing  Chiliastic  viev/s, 
the  doctrine  of  the  early  church  received  correspondingly  a  revival  and  re- 
viewed strength  in  tlie  hearts  and  hopes  of  believers. 

The  student  is  aware  that  when  the  revival  of  Pietism  (a  movement  against  a  cold 
Philosophical  and  Symbolistic  tendency)  took  jDlace  under  Spener,  Francke,  and  others, 
there  was  also  a  return  to  the  Chiliastic  faith.  Admitting  that  in  some  cases  it  might 
have  been  allied  with  fanaticism,  as  Mosheim  (vol.  3,  p.  381)  intimates,  yet  Mosheim 
(himself  Anti-Millenarian)  is  uncandid  when  he  says  that  they  "  also,  recalled  upon  the 
stage  opinions  long  since  condemned  ;  asserted  that  the  reign  of  a  thousand  years,  men- 
tioned by  John,  was  at  hand."  The  unfairness  consists  in  this  :  (1)  He  seems  to  sanction 
the  condemnation  of  the  doctrine  by  the  Komisli  Church  ;  (2)  he  links  this  doctrine  with 
extravagances,  as  if  inseparable  ;  (3)  he  forgets,  having  highly  praised  Spener,  that  Spener 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  539 

himself  defended  the  Millenarian  view  as  Scriptural,  and  not  opposed  by  the  Augsburg 
Confession  ;  (4)  that  works,  specially  written  to  set  forth  what  were  the  real  views  of  the 
Pietists  (as  e.g.  Klettwich's),  were  suppressed,  and  that  their  doctrine,  in  the  bitter 
controversies  that  ensued,  was  caricatured,  etc.  ;  (5)  Mosheim  permits  his  spirit  of  hatred 
to  the  doctrine  (as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Peterson,  etc.)  to  appear  on  several  occasions,  and 
hence  is  to  be  received  with  caution  ;  (6)  the  best  devotional  hymns  and  books,  as  well  as 
practical  works  on  religion,  have  sprung  from  that  movement.  It  would  be  well,  if  the 
detractors  of  the  Pietists  possessed  their  piety,  sincerity,  usefulness,  and  ability. 

Dr.  Fisher  in  Art.  "  Mill."  (M'Clmtock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  remarks  :  "  TheMill.  doc- 
trine, in  its  essential  characteristics,  has  had  adherents  among  some  of  the  mcst  sober- 
minded  theologians  of  the  Lutheran  Church  in  later  times.  Of  these,  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  is  John  Albert  Bengel,  the  author  of  The  Gnomon,  who  defended  his  opinion 
in  his  Com.  on  the  Apoc,  published  in  1740.  He  has  been  followed  by  other  divines  of 
repute  ;  and  the  doctrine  has  not  been  without  prominent  suj^jiorters  among  the  Luther- 
ans down  to  the  present  time.  One  of  the  latest  of  their  number  who  has  discussed 
this  question  is  the  Rev.  A.  Koch  (Das  Tausendfdhrige  Belch,  Basle,  1872).  This  writer 
endeavors  in  particular  to  refute  the  arguments  adduced  against  the  doctrine  of  a  Mil- 
lennium by  the  German  commentators  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  and  Kleifoth."  (Comp. 
Lange's  estimate  of  Hengstenberg,  etc.,  in  his  Inirod.  to  Rev.)  The  Dr.  also  says  :  "In 
all  the  other  various  orthodox  Protestant  bodies,  there  are  many  who  believe  in  the  per- 
sonal Advent  of  Christ  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  Millennial  Kingdom." 

Obs.  8.  There  is  a  class  of  able  men  whose  sentiments  were  favorable  to 
Millenarians — who  either  express  these  in  their  writings,  or  speak  approv- 
ingly of  Chiliastic  works — and  yet  by  many,  at  the  present  day,  are  sup- 
posed to  be  the  contrary.  In  illustration  of  this,  a  number  may  appropriately 
be  mentioned.  John  Wesley  has  often  been  claimed  as  Chiliastic  (and  is 
so  given  by  Taylor,  Shimeall,  and  others),  because  of  his  chiefly  adopting 
BengeVs  views  in  Revelation,  and  of  the  views  presented  in  some  of  his  ser- 
mons. This  has  been  denied,  and  utterances  seemingly  contradictory  pre- 
sented in  proof.  But  this  h.-^^  finally  heen  settled  by  a  Methodist  historian, 
Tyerman,  in  his  Life  of  John  Wesley ^  vol.  2,  p.  523,  etc.  After  giving 
very  candidly  Hartley's  Mill,  views  from  ''Paradise  Restored''  (affirming 
the  Pre-Mill.  Advent,  and  the  Mill,  reign  of  Jesus,  etc.,  which  Wesley 
indorsed,  see  Woi'hs,  vol.  6,  p.  7-i3),  Tyerman  then  gives  the  fact  that  John 
Wesley  read  and  approved  of  the  same,  writing  {Meth.  Mag.,  1783,  p.  498) 
to  the  author  :  "  Your  book  on  the  Millennium  was  lately  put  into  my 
hands.  I  cannot  but  thank  you  for  your  strong  and  seasonable  confirma- 
tion  of  that  comfortaUe  doctrine,  of  loliich  I  cannot  entertain  the  least 
douht,  as  long  as' I  heJieve  the  Bihle.'^'  Tyerman  most  frankly  and  honestly 
(worthy  of  special  notice)  adds  :  "  With  such  a  statement,  in  reference  to 
snch  a  book,  there  can  be  no  douU  that  Wesley,  like  his  father  before 
him,  teas  a  MiUenarian,  a  heliever  in  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Christ  to  reign 
on  earth,  visibly  and  gloriously,  for  a  thousand  years.  This  is  a  matter 
which  none  of  Wesley's  biographers  have  noticed  ;  and  yet  the  above  is  not 
the  only  evidence  in  support  of  it."  He  then  refers  us  to  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Middleton  (published  1749),  in  which  Wesley  indorses  Justin  Martyr's 
Mill,  views,  saying:  "  To  say  that  they"  (i.e.  the  Fathers  of  the  second 
and  third  cents.)  "believed  this,  was 'neither  more  nor  less  than  to  say 
theij  believed  the  Bible. ^'  Reference  is  also  made  to  an  article,  "  The  Ren- 
ovation of  All  Things,"  in  Wesley's  Arnnnian  Mag.,  1784,  p.  154,  etc. 
The  adoption  of  the  Millenarian  Bengel's  notes  for  the  Apoc,  in  his  Com. 
on  the  New  Test.,  his  expressed  views  on  the  Judgment  Day  (which  we 
quote.  Prop.  133),  the  deliverance  of  creation  (which  we  quote.  Prop.  146), 
and  related  subjects,  is  ample  testimony.  * 


540  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

Some  few  hare  denied  tliat  Dr.  Chalmers  was  Pre-Millenarian,  against  the 
express  sentiments  quoted  by  us  of  a  Pre-Mill.  Sec.  Advent,  a  non-conver- 
sion of  the  workl  preceding  that  Advent  (see  Prop.  175),  the  renovation  of 
the  earth  (Prop.  146).  However  he  may  have  been  influenced  by  some  of 
the  vagaries  of  Irvingism  not  to  give  great  prominency  to  his  views  on  the 
subject,  yet,  in  behalf  of  the  truth,  his  utterances  are  decided,  as  can  be 
seen  e.g.  by  comparing  his  Sahhath  Readings,  vol.  1,  pp.  311  and  108 
(comp.  Propli.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  110,  etc.,  for  detailed  statement).  So  also 
some  have  tried  to  claim  Spener  as  Post-Millenarian,  against  the  testimony 
of  history  and  his  own  writings.  It  is  well  known  to  students  that  Spener 
defended  Chiliasm,  and  showed  that  the  Augsburg  Confession  was  not  op- 
posed to  a  Scriptural  doctrine.  The  enemies  of  Spener  made  his  Chilias- 
tic  views  one  of  their  points  of  attack,  and  Pietism  (comp.  Kurtz's  Ch. 
His.,  Neander,  Mosheim,  etc.)  was  always,  more  or  less,  allied  with  Mil- 
lenarianism.  Some,  attracted  by  his  name,  attempt  to  make  out  a  very 
mild  form  of  Chiliasm,  but  Dr.  Kling,  Art.  Escliafology  in  Herzog's  Encij- 
cloi).,  pronounces  Spener  a  most  decided  Cliiliast,  inclined  even  to  the  fa- 
natical. (?)  Prof.  Stuart,  and  many  others  of  our  opponents,  concede  him 
to  us.  Dr.  Brown  of  Gettysburg,  in  an  Art.  published  in  the  Liith. 
Ohserver,  even  attempted  to  take  John  Bunyan  from  us,  but  the  Confes- 
sion of  Faith  (with  which  compare  him  on  the  "  First  Chapters  of 
Genesis")  quoted  under  Obs.  4,  is  a  complete  and  overwhelming  answer. 
As  to  Bish.  Butler,  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  his  Analog y,  Part  2,  ch.  7, 
and  to  his  Memoirs,  ]).  298  (quoted  by  Taylor,  and  others),  where  occur 
sentiments  o?iIg  in  accordance  with  pure  Chiliasm.  hi  reference  to  Rev. 
Hall,  the  celebrated  Baptist,  it  is  evident  that  in  his  early  life  he  was  op- 
posed to  Chiliasm,  as  is  seen  in  the  production  "  Chris.  Consistent  with 
Love  of  Freedom,"  where  occurs  the  phrase  "  the  long-exploded  tradition 
of  Papias  respecting  the  personal  reign,"  but  in  the  closing  years  of  his 
life  he  materially  modified  his  views,  coming  nearer  to  Bunyan's  Confes- 
sion, For  (Diiffield  On  Proph.,  p.  259)  Mr.  Thorp,  of  Bristol,  England, 
conversed  with  him  on  the  subject  a  few  days  before  his  decease,  and  he 
*'  regretted  that  he  had  not  preached  the  Millenarian  views  he  entertained." 
(May  not  others  be  found  in  this  category  ;  for  the  writer  personally  knows 
men  \n\\q  ■privately  entertain  Chiliasm,  but  never  present  it  publicly).^ 

^  Tyerman  tmliesitatingly  classes  among  Millenarians,  Charles  Wesley  (as  various  hymns 
evidence),  Fletcher  (as  a  letter  to  John  Wesley  positivelj'  asserts,  written  a.d.  1755, 
Fletclier's  Works,  vol.  16),  Piers,  and  others.  John  and  Charles  Wesley's  testimony  is  the 
more  disinterested  and  valuable,  since  on  the  one  hand  they  had  to  resist  the  indiffer- 
ence of  others,  and  on  the  other,  the  fanaticism  of  Bell  and  others,  who  (so  Tyerman) 
predicted  the  speedy  end  of  the  world.  Rev.  Dr.  Nast  (himself  a  leading  Methodist)  says 
(Art.  "Christ's  Mill,  reign,"  in  the  Weni.  Ch.  Advocate,  July  23d,  1879),  after  referring  to 
the  able  Pre-Mill.  advocates  in  the  various  denominations  :  "  I  admit  that  the  Methodist 
Church  is  not  so  largely  represented,  and  that  at  present  Pre-Mill.  views  are  unpopular 
among  us,  hut  it  loas  not  always  so.  Both  John  and  Charles  Wesley,  Dr.  Coke,  as  well  as 
Fletcher  and  Whitefield,  occupied  Pre-Mill.  ground,  and  also,  as  I  am  credibly  informed, 
in  our  day,  the  late  revered  Secretary  of  our  Miss.  Soc,  Dr.  J.  P.  Durbin."  Now  in  con- 
trast we  present  the  following :  Prof.  Worman,  in  his  extended  Art.  "  Methodism' ' 
(M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.),  says  :  "  The  Sermons  of  Jno.  Wesley,  and  his  Notes 
on  the  New  Test.,  are  recognized  by  his  followers  in  Great  Britain  and  America  as  the 
standard  of  Methodism,  and  as  the  basis  of  their  theological  creed."  If  so,  then  there  has 
been  a  wide  departure  on  Eschatology.  To  indicate  the  same  by  way  of  illustration,  we 
copy  this  notice,  without  comment,  from  the  Luih.  Observer,  March  1st,  1878  :  "  The  Eev. 
Arthur  P.  Adams,  Beverly,  Mass.,  so  Zions  Herald  states,  has  been  suspended  from 
the  Methodist  ministry  for  holding  and  teaching  doctrines  at  variance  with  those  of  the 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  541 

Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  He  held  that  Christ's  Sec.  Coming  is  near  at  hand,  and 
that  not  until  after  the  resurrection  occurs  can  the  redemption  scheme  of  Christ  he  com- 
plete" (i.e.  in  results).  It  is  proper  to  add,  as  Tyerman  remarks,  that  Wesley  was 
guarded,  so  as  not  to  give  place  to  extravagances  ;  as  e.g.  on  fixing  the  date  of  the  Ad- 
vent, Wesley  {Meth.  Mag.,  1827,  p.  392)  says  :  "  I  have  no  oi^inion  at  all  upon  when  the 
Mill,  reign  of  Christ  will  begin  ;  I  can  determine  nothing  at  all  about  it  ;  these  calcula- 
tions are  far  above,  out  of  my  sight."  Tyerman  then  repeats  :  "  Still,  Wesley  was  a 
believer  in  the  certainty  of  such  a  reign,  and  so  was  Fletcher,  as  we  have  already  seen,  and 
so  was  Wesley's  friend,  the  Vicar  of  Bexley,  Mr.  Piers,  and  so  seem  to  have  been  the 
writers  of  some  of  the  hymns  in  the  Meth.  Hymn  Book"  (quoting  several  hymns  with 
Pre-Mill.  sentiments).  Charles  Wesley's  Pre-Mill.  hymns  are  quoted  in  detail  in  Proph. 
Times,  1866,  p.  Ill,  etc.,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  vhurch.  Time  of  the  End,  etc.,  and  they  are 
so  decided  in  sentiment  that  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  any  one  should  fail  to  aj^pre- 
ciate  them. 

'^  Others,  who  entertained  distinctive  Chiliastic  features  and  located  the  predicted  King- 
dom of  Dan.  2  and  7  after  the  Second  Advent,  might  be  mentioned,  as  Archb.  Cranmer 
(see  the  Catechism  authorized  by  Edward  VI.,  and  written  by  him,  on  the  phrase  "  Thy 
Kingdom  come"),  Archb.  Newcome  (see  Bickersteth's  Diss,  on  Froph.,  p.  1(J6),  Dr.  Ben- 
son (see  Xoies  on  Ps.  76  :  10-18,  and  98  :  4-9),  Rudd  (see  Time  of  the  End,  p.  825),  Toplady 
(see  iSermons,  Lib.  3,  p.  470),  etc.  (Comp.  Taylor's  V^oice  of  the  Church  and  Seiss's  Ap.  to 
the  Last  Times,  from  whom  a  large  number  might  be  added.) 

Obs.  9.  It  would  bo  interesting  to  trace  the  rise  of  Millenarianism  m 
this  country.  That  it  was  e«r/^  incorporated  into  the  belief  of  vicaiy  of  the 
first  ^ireachers  of  this  country  is  evident  from  the  testimony  of  Cotton 
Mather,  who  himself  heart ili/  indorsed  it.  Thus  e.^.  m  the  Magnalia  he 
testifies  of  Rev.  John  Davenport  (died  in  Boston  1668),  that  he  appre- 
hended "  the  true  notion  of  the  Chiliad,"  and  "  preached  and  wrote"  about 
the  "  coming  of  the  Lord,  the  calling  of  the  Jews,  and  the  first  and  second 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  which  do  now  of  late  years  get  more  ground 
against  the  opposition  of  the  otherwise  minded,  and  find  a  kinder  enter- 
tainment among  them  that  '  search  the  Scriptures  ;'  and  that"  he  asserted 
"  a  personal,  visible,  powerful,  and  glorious  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  unto  judgment,  long  before  the  end  of  the  world."  He  calls  Rev. 
Thomas  Walley  (died  1679),  ''our  pious  Chiliast,  Walley,"  who  was  like 
Mede,  Davenport,  Hook,  and  who  understood  "  the  First  Resurrection  to 
be  corporeal,"  just  as  "  some  of  the  first  and  eminent  teachers  in  the  church 
believed."  Reference  is  made  to  Rev.  John  Eliot  (died  1690),  as  con- 
stantly pressing  "the  Coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;"  the  same  in- 
timations are  given  respecting  Whiting,  Samuel  Mather,  Increase  Mather 
(Pres.  Harvard  College),  himself,  and  others. 

We  append  additional  testimony.  In  the  Preface  to  The  Magnalia,  Mather  says  :  "  The 
first  and  famous  pastors  in  the  New  England  churches  did,  in  their  public  ministry,  fre- 
quently insist  on  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  glorious  Kingdom  on  earth  which  will  take  j)lace 
after  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  when  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  in.  It 
is  a  pity  that  this  doctrine  is  no  more  inculcated  by  the  present  ministry,  which  has  in- 
duced me  the  rather  to  preach  and  now  by  the  press  to  publish,  what  is  emitted  here- 
with.' '  And  now  that  this  must  be  understood  in  a  purely  Chiliastic  sense,  is  evident  from 
both  what  Cotton  Mather  and  his  father,  Increase  Mather,  have  taught  on  the  sub- 
ject. Thus  e.g.  Increase  Mather,  in  his  Discourse  on  Faith  (a.d.  1710),  and  The  Mys- 
tery of  Israel's  /Salvation,  teaches  :  "  He  (Christ)  will  then  {at  Coining)  remove  His  throne 
from  heaven  to  this  visible  world.  Then  loill  His  visible  Kingdom  appear  in  the  great- 
est glory  ;  when  also  there  will  be  a  personal  reign  and  residence  of  Christ  in  this 
lower  world."  "  When  they  that  corrupt  the  earth  are  destroyed,  a  new  earth  will  suc- 
ceed, in  which  shall  dwell  righteousness.  Then  will  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  become 
the  Kingdoms  of  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  forever  and  ever,"  etc.  But  Cotton  Mather 
is  more  plain  :  "  It  is  well  known,  that  in  the  earliest  of  the  primitive  times  the  faithful 
did,  in  a  literal  sense,  believe  the  '  second  coming '  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 


542  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

rising  and  the  reigning  of  the  saints  with  Him,  a  thousand  years  before,  the  rest  of  the 
dead  live  again,'  a  doctrine  which,  however,  some  of  later  years  have  counted  heretical  ; 
yet  in  the  days  of  Irenteus,  were  questioned  by  none  but  such  as  were  counted  heretics.  It  is 
evident  from  Justin  Martyr  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Chiliad  was  in  his  days  embraced 
among  all  orthodox  Christians  ;  nor  did  this  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  begin  to  be  doubted 
until  the  Kingdom  of  Antichrist  began  to  advance  into  a  considerable  figure,  and  then  it 
fell  chiefly  under  the  reproaches  o/  such  men  as  were  fain  to  deny  the  divine  authority  of 
the  Book  of  Revelation,  and  of  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter.  He  is  a  stranger  to  antiquity 
who  does  not  find  and  own  the  ancients  generally  of  the  persuasion.  Nevertheless,  at 
last  men  came,  not  only  to  lay  aside  the  modesty  expressed  by  one  of  the  first  Anti-Mil- 
lenarians,  namely,  Jerome,  but  also  with  violence  to  persecute  the  Millenary  truth  as  an 
heretical  pravity.  So  the  mj^stery  of  our  Lord's  '  appearing  in  His  Kingdom  '  lay  buried 
in  Popish  darkness,  till  the  light  thereof  had  a  fresh  dawn.  Since  the  Antichrist  entered 
into  the  last  half-time  of  the  period  allotted  for  him,  and  now  within  the  last  sevens  of 
years,  as  things  grow  nearer  to  accomplishment,  learned  ami  pious  men,  in  great  numbers, 
everywhere  come  to  receive,  explain,  and  maintain,  the  old  faith  about  it."  In  the  Student 
and  Preacher,  Mather  is  equally  decisive  :  "  The  Son  of  God,  about  to  descend,  will  inflict 
vengeance  on  them  who  know  not  God  and  obey  not  His  Gospel  ;  but  He  will  manifest 
His  Kingdom  of  the  saints  in  the  earth,  which  is  to  be  possessed  by  our  second  and  heavenly 
Adam  ;  and  this,  we  confess,  is  ascertained  to  us  by  promise,  but  in  another  state,  as 
being  «/;er  the  resurrection. "  "  They  indulge  themselves  in  a  vain  dream,  not  to  say 
insane,  who  think,  pray,  and  hope,  contrary  to  the  whole  sacred  Scripture  and  sound  reason, 
that  the  promised  happiness  of  the  Church  on  earth  loill  be  before  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  ap- 
pear in  His  Kingdom."  "  Wdhoul  doubt  the  kingdom  of  this  world  will  not  become  the 
Kingdom  of  God  and  His  Christ,  before  the  preordained  time  of  the  dead,  in  which  the 
reward  shall  be  given  to  the  servants  of  God  and  to  those  that  fear  His  name."  "  The  rest 
of  the  saints,  and  the  promised  Sabbath,  and  the  Kingdom  of  God,  in  which  His  will  shall 
be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  and  those  great  things  of  which  God  hath  spoken  by 
the  mouths  of  His  prophets,  all  prophesying  as  with  one  voice  ;  all  shall  be  confirmed  by 
their  fulfilment  in  the  new  earth,  not  in'our  defiled  and  accursed  earth."  Rev.  Joshua 
Spaldmg  {Lectures,  pp.  221-2,  etc.)  speaks  of  "  many  Christians,  who  were  looking,  not  for 
the  modern  Millennium,  but  for  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ,"  etc.,  and  adds  :  "  I  have  had 
the  testimony  of  elderly  Christian  people,  in  several  parts  of  New  England,  that  within 
their  remembrance  this  doctrine  was  first  advanced  in  the  places  where  they  lived,  and 
have  heard  them  name  the  ministers  who  first  preached  it  in  their  churches.  No  doc- 
trine can  be  more  indisputably  proved  to  have  been  the  doctrine  of  the  Primitive  Church 
than  those  we  call  Millenarian  ;  and,  beyond  all  dispute,  the  same  were  favorite  doctrines 
with  the  fathers  of  New  England  ;  with  the  words  of  one  of  whom,  writing  upon  this 
subject,  we  shall  conclude  our  observations  upon  their  antiquity  :  '  They  are  not  new,  bid 
old ;  they  may  be  new  to  some  men,  but  I  cannot  say  it  is  to  their  honor.'  "  In  another 
place  (p.  191)  he  says  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  Millennium  is  truth ;  and  the  prevailing  ex- 
pectation, that  it  is  fast  approaching,  and  is  now  very  near,  is  doubtless  rational,"  etc. 
The  same  is  true  doctrinally  of  Thomas  Prince  (a.d.  1728  to  1758),  pastor  at  Boston  (so 
Spauldings  Lectures),  of  Dr.  B.  Gale  (see  Barber's  His.  Collections  of  Connecticut,  p.  531, 
who  also  says  :  "  This  (Millenarianism)  appears  to  have  been  the  belief  of  pious  persons 
at  the  time  of  the  first  settlement  of  New  England,"  etc.). 

The  same  early  Chiliasm  is  traceable  in  other  denominations.  Thus  e.g.  in  the  early 
Lutheran  and  Reformed  Churches  quite  a  number  of  ministers  entertained  it.  The 
writer  was  informed  by  his  grandparents  and  parents  that  they  conversed  with  such  and 
heard  them  occasionally  present  Millenarianism.  The  brief  biographical  sketches  re- 
maining give  us  no  idea  of  the  form  in  which  they  held  it,  but  a  clue  is  obtained  by  the 
fact  that  the  works  of  Bengel,  Stilling,  and  others  like  them,  were  favorites  and  largely 
circulated.  Books  of  German  and  English  Chiliasts  were  held  in  esteem,  and  the  writer 
has  often  been  surprised  to  find  among  old  people  a  detailed  and  correct  knowledge  of 
the  doctrine,  and  on  inquiry  the  reception  of  the  same  was  generally  attributed  to  the  in- 
struction of  some  old  pastor  or  the  reading  of  such  works.  In  conversation  with  others, 
they  recalled  similar  reminiscences. 

Ois.  10.  The  progress  of  Cliiliastic  doctrine  in  this  country,  while  im- 
mensely in  the  minority,  has  been  highly  respectable,  as  admitted  even  by 
our  opponents.  It  embraces  many  of  the  ablest,  most  devoted  and  schol- 
arly men  that  the  church  has  produced. 


PeOP.  78.]  THE   THEOCExVTIC   KINGDOM.  543 

The  Lidli.  Observer  (always,  more  or  less,  an  opponent),  in  a  notice  (Oct.  25tli,  1878) 
of  a  Pre-Mill.  i:)amplilet,  "  Jesus  is  Coming,"  by  W.  i^.  B.,  says  that  onr  doctrine  "has  had 
eminent  supporters  in  the  Church.  Such  men  as  Sir  I.  Newton,  Dr.  Chalmers,  Dean  Al- 
ford,  and  Dr.  Breckenridge  have  been  among  its  advocates.  And  among  the  signatures 
to  a  call  for  a  series  of  public  meetings  to  be  held  in  New  York,  in  the  month  of  Octo- 
ber, are  the  names  of  learned  and  pious  men  representing  all  the  denominations  of  Protestant- 
ism.'" Prof.  Briggs,  and  a  few  others,  evidently  angry  at  the  increase  of  Chiliasm  in  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  suggested  discipline  on  the  charge  of  "  heresy,"  to  which  Eev.  Dr. 
Mutchmore  (quoted  Messiah's  Herald,  Jan.  15th,  1879j,  of  the  same  Church,  replies  :  "  It 
is  best  to  allow  our  pastors  to  use  their  own  judgment  in  preaching  on  the  matter.  What 
are  we  to  do  ?  Some  o/'  our  most  eminent  men  are  Pre-Millenarians,  and  we  have  no  article 
which  is  against  the  idea  of  Christ's  personal  reign  on  earth.  It  is  all  a  question  of  inter- 
pretation, on  which  our  highest  bodies  have  never  made  any  deliverance,  and,  in  my 
opinion,  they  never  should."  Kev.  Dr.  Mackay,  in  his  address  at  the  Milday  Conference 
(1879),  speaking  in  reference  to  Chiliastic  advocates  as  observed  in  his  recent  visit  to  the 
II.  S.  and  Canada,  said  :  "  I  thank  God  that  in  every  city  that  I  visited,  in  New  York,  Chi- 
cago, and  elsewhere,  the  most  spiritual  men  are  rousing  up  to  inquire  and  look  into  these 
things."  Many  such  declarations  might  be  given,  but  the  reader  can  soon  satisfy  him- 
seit  by  glancing  over  the  names  following.  We  append  a  list— imperfect  at  best— of 
American  and  Canadian  Chiliasts,  according  to  their  Church  relationship  as  far  as  known. 

Prot.  Episcopal  Church:  Dr.  S.  H.  Tyng,  sen..  Dr.  Tyng,  jr.,  Dr.  K.  Newton,  H.  Dana 
W^ard,  Eev.  J.  S.  Alwell,  Eev.  E.  T.  Perkins,  Eev.  Th.  W.  Haskins,  Eev.  Eob.  C.  Booth, 
Eev.  L.  W.  Bancroft,  Felix  E.  Brunot,  Dr.  Julius  E.  G rammer,  Bh.  T.  H.  Yail,  Eev.  T. 
W.  Hastings,  Bh.  ^V.  W.  Niles,  Canon  Baldwin,  Canon  W.  Bond,  Bh.  Southgate,  Dr.  F. 
Yinton,  Eev.  Morell,  Bh.  Mcllvaine,  Bh.  Henshaw,  Eev.  E.  Winthrop,  Eev.  Moigan, 
Eev.  Johnson,  Eev.  Farrer,  Eev.  Dobbs,  Eev.  Smith,  Eev.  Trenwith,  Eev.  Newton  (Gam- 
bier),  Bh.  Bedell,  Bh.  Hopkins,  Bh.  Williams,  Bh.  Huntingdon,  Bh.  Odenheimer,  D.  N. 
Lord. 

Reformed  iJpiscopal :  Bh.  W.  E.  Nicholson,  Eev,  G.  A.  Eeddles,  Eev.  W.  V.  Feltwell, 
Eev.  B.  B.  Leacock,  Eev.  M.  B.  Smith. 

Presbyterian:  Dr.  C.  K.  Imbrie,  Dr.  S.  H.  Kellogg,  Dr.  E.  E.  Craven,  Dr.  J.  H. 
Brookes,  Eev.  W^  J.  Gillespie,  Eev.  H.  M.  Parsons,  Dr.  N.  West,  Eev.  W.  J.  Erdman, 
William  Eej^nolds,  John  W^annamaker,  Eev.  F.  W.  Flint,  Eev.  E.  P.  Adams,  Eev.  J.  S. 
Stewart,  Eev.  D.  E.  Bierce,  Eev.  C.  C.  Foote,  Eev.  L.  C.  Baker,  Eev.  W.  B.  Lee,  Eev. 
E.  E.  Davis,  Dr.  S.  E.  Wilson,  B.  Dubois  Wyckofe,  Eev.  B.  F.  Sample,  Eev.  H.  M.  Ba- 
con, Eev.  D.  Mack,  Eev.  E.  P.  Marvin,  Dr.  E.  Patterson,  Eev.  E.  C.  Mathews,  Eev.  A. 
Erdman,  Eev.  J.  E.  Beriy,  Prof.  J.  T.  Duffield,  Saml.  Ashhurst,  Eev.  Prof.  E.  D.  Mor- 
ris, Eev.  D.  E.  Eddy,  Eev.  Wm.  P.  Paxon,  Dr.  ^Villis  Lord*,  Dr.  J.  G.  Eeaser,  Dr.  Mar- 
shall, Dr.  Fehx  Johnson,  Dr.  Kalb,  Dr.  F.  E.  Brown,  Dr.  Stanton,  Dr.  McCartee,  Dr. 
Geo.  Duffield,  Dr.  E.  J.  Breckenridge,  Dr.  Krebs,  Dr.  J.  Lillie.  Eev.  E.  C.  Shimeall,  Dr. 
Poor,  Dr.  Yan  Doren,  Eev.  Blauvelt,  Eev.  Dinwiddle,  Eev.  Laird,  Matthews,  Marquis, 
Congdon,  Eev.  Adair,  Eev.  Prof.  McGill,  Eev.  J.  C.  Eandolph,  Eev.  W.  Hogarth. 

United  Presbyterian:  Dr.  J.  T.  Cooper,  Dr.  W.  Y".  Moorehead,  Eev.  J.  P.  Sankey,  Eev. 
W.  J.  Gillespie,  Eev.  E.  W.  French,  Eev.  S.  B.  Eeed,  Eev.  E.  A.  McAycal,  Eev.  D.  A. 
W^allace,  Eev.  J.  G.  Galloway,  Eev.  J.  S.  McCulloch,  Eev.  W.  W.  Barr,  Eev.  G.  Hayser. 

Baptists :  Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon,  Eev.  J.  D.  Herr,  Eev.  J.  Hyatt  Smith,  Dr.  J.  W.  Bancroft, 
Eev.  H.  M.  Saunders,  Eev.  J.  P.  Farrer,  Eev.  Alf.  Harris,  Eev.  Jos.  Evans,  Eev.  J.  M. 
Stiffler,  Eev.  G.  M.  Peters,  Eev.  F.  E.  Tower,  Dr.  J.  E.  Jones,  Eev.  J.  T.  Becklev,  Eev. 
J.  J.  Miller,  Ed.  S.  White,  B.  F.  Jacobs,  Eev.  C.  Perrin,  Eev.  F.  L.  Chappell,  Eev.  Eob. 
Cameron,  Eev.  H.  F.  Titus,  Eev.  H.  A.  Cordo,  Eev.  G.  M.  Stone,  Dr.  S.  H.  Ford,  Eev. 
A.  J.  Frost,  Eev.  J.  C.  Wilmarth,  Prof.  Dr.  Weston,  Eev.  Barralle,  Eev.  Brow^n,  Eev. 
Colgrove,  Eev.  Wm.  Knapp,  Eev.  H.  Knapp,  Eev.  J.  C.  Waller,  Eev.  Taylor. 

CongregationaUst :  Dr.  E.  P.  Goodwin,  Eev.  W.  W.  Clarke,  Dr.  H.  D.  Kitchell,  Dr.  J. 
Wild,  Eev.  W.  E.  Joyslin,  Eev.  G.  C.  Miln,  Eev.  E.  C.  Hood,  Eev.  W.  W.  Syle,  Eev. 
Myron  Adams,  Eev.  G.  E.  Milton,  Abner  Kingman,  Eev.  Burton,  Eev.  Francis  Eussell, 
C.  M.  W^hittlesey,  Eev.  Lorimer,  Eev.  Morton,  Eev,  Bancroft,  Eev,  Andrews,  Eev.  Cun- 
ningham, 

lieformed  Church :  Dr,  Eufus  W,  Clarke,  Eev,  C.  Parker,  Eev.  J.  B.  Thompson,  Eev. 
W.  H.  Clarke,  Dr.  W^  E.  Gordon,  Dr.  J.  T.  Demarest,  Dr.  G.  S.  Bishop,  Eev.  E.  F. 
Clarke,  Eev.  Merritt,  Eev.  Ballagh,  Eev.  Brown,  Eev.  Dr.  Forsyth,  Dr.  S.  H.  Giesy. 

Methodists :  Prof.  H.  Lummis,  Eev.  Jno.  Parker,  Dr.  H.  Foster,  Eev.  Jesse  M.  Gilbert, 
Geo.  Hall,  T.  W.  Harney,  Eev.  W.  E.  Blackstone,  W.  E.  Grim,  Dr.  Geo.  ^Y.  Brown,  Geo. 
A.  Hall,  Dr.  Marshall,  Excell,  Dr,  J.  P,  Durbin,  Eev.  Dr,  Nast. 


544  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIT^GDO]\r.  [PrOP.  78. 

Lutheran:  Dr.  J.  A.  Seiss,  Eev.  Laird,  Eev.  Dr.  Oswald,  Rev.  A.  E.  Brown,  Dr.  J.  G. 
Schmucker  (and  Drs.  Helmuth,  Lachman,  and  D.  Kurtz,  who  recommended  his  Chiliastic 
work). 

Moravian:  Eev.  E.  Eeineke,  J.  G.  Zipple. 

Chiliastic  writers  belonging  to  various  bodies,  such  as  Second  Adventists,  or  branches  : 
Hastings,  Taylor,  Andrews,  Crozier,  Bliss,  Himes,  Litch,  Hale,  Thomas,  Wilson,  Camp- 
bell, Eeed,  Coghill,  Lyon,  Chown,  Cook,  Woodruff,  Catlin,  Allen,  Eamsey,  Fancher, 
Parry,  Chase,  CooDibe,'Niles,  Jacobs,' Seymour,  Champlin,  Lumbard,  Carpenter,  Batch- 
elor,  W^ellcome,  Grant,  Smith,  Burnham^,  Libby,  Brewer,  Pratt,  Shepherd,  Flagg,  Suth- 
erland, White,  Couch,  Higgins,  Burbank,  Piper,  Simpson,  Cole,  Hancock,  Bellows,  Aus- 
tin, York,  Teeple,  Morgan,  Preble,  Chittenden,  Cotton,  Moore,  Pearson,  Miller,  C.  Palmer, 
E.  K.  Barnhill,  S.  A.  Chaplin,  etc. 

Among  other  organizations  are  writers  of  the  "  Catholic  Apostolic  Church,"  "Plym- 
outh Brethren,"  "  Christadelphians  "  (Dr.  J.  Thomas  and  followers),  and  others. 

Miscellaneous.  Names  that  have  fallen  under  observation  as  Chiliasts,  but  whose  exact 
Church  relationship  is  iicknown  to  the  writer,  such  as  Storrs,  Beegle,  Wendell,  Eamsey, 
Woodworth,  Bh.  Ives,  Dr.  Broadhead,  Dr.  McCarty,  Lindsey,  Forsyth,  Eev.  Geo.  C.  Lor- 
imer,  E.  C.  Matlack,  Geo.  E.  Cramer,  Eev.  L.  Osier,  J.  M.  Orrick,  L.  B.  Eogers,  Geo. 
W.  Tew,  Eev.  C.  M.  Morton,  Eich.  Aorton,  Eev.  Almond  Barrelle,  Prof.  T.  W.  Bancroft 
(Brown  Univ.),  Wm.  Eeynolds,  Eev.  C.  Cunningham,  S.  J.  Andrews,  Eev.  F.  W.  Dobbs, 
Dr.  A.  W.  Pilzer,  J.  M.  Haldeman,  D.  C.  H.  Marquis,  Eev.  Dr.  Watson,  Eev.  Dr.  Miller, 
Dr.  J.  E.  Davenport,  Dr.  W.  Lloyd,  Eev.  A.  J.  Patton,  Eev.  J.  P.  Newman,  Dr.  E. 
Jeffrey,  M.  Baldwin,  Eev.  Dr.  Sinipson  (Louisville),  Eev.  Dr.  Shaw  (Rochester),  Rev. 
Graves,  Eev.  Brookman,  Dr.  Williamson,  Dr.  Eobinson,  Geo.  Eeynolds  (the  last  four  in 
Canada),  Eev,  R.  Campbell,  Rev.  W\  Cadman,  Thomas  (of  Canada),  Rev.  J.  M.  Weaver, 
Walter,  John  H.  Graff,  Eev.  B.  Philpot,  Rev.  S.  Bonhomme,  J.  Harper,  Anna  Siliman, 
Dr.  J.  W.  Hatherell,  Darby,  Thomas,  Harkness,  Br3\ant,  Davis,  Holgate,  James  Inglis, 
Dr.  J.  J.  Janeway,  Rob.  Kirkwood,  Rev.  W.  Newton,  J.  P.  Labagh,  Seth  Lewis,  Gran- 
ville Penn,  Dr.  Wm.  Ramsey,  HoUis  Read,  Hugh  White,  Rev.  John  G.  Wilson  (Ed. 
Froph.  Times),  Jno.  F.  Graff  ("  Greybeard  ' '),  AVoodbury  Davis,  D.  M.  Lord,  Dr.  Ramsey, 
Dr.  Halsey,  Dr.  Harkness,  A.  D.  Jones,  B.  S.  Dwiggens,  C.  T.  Russell,  N.  H.  Barbour,  J. 
M.  Stevenson,  J.  P.  Wheethee,  Wiley  Jones,  J.  H.  Patton,  W.  J.  Mann,  B.  Wilson,  J. 
A.  Simonds,  B.  W.  Keith,  G.  M.  Myers,  A.  B.  Magruder,  H.  V.  Reed,  L.  A.  Allen,  W. 
Laing,  E.  Hoyt,  J.  Pierce,  T.  Wilson. 

OI)S.  11.  The  advocates  of  Chiliasm  in  England,  Germany,  France,  and 
other  European  countries  form  a  band  that  contains  names  highly 
honored  by  the  church,  both  as  to  attainments  and  usefulness  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Jesus. 

We  present  the  following  without  reference  to  their  Church  relationship. 

England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland :  Dr.  A.  R.  Fausset,  Dr.  W.  P.  Mackay,  Bh.  Newton, 
Sir  I.  Newton,  Dr.  Chalmers,  Dr.  Candlish,  Home,  Bh.  Trench,  Bh.  Ellicott,  Twisse, 
Marshall,  Elliott,  Maitland,  Birks,  the  Drs.  Bonars,  Bickersteth,  Auriol,  Fremantle, 
Ryle,  Palmer,  Ash,  Noel,  Canon  Hoare,  Rainsford,  Wood,  E.  Garbett,  Bridge,  Burroughs, 
Kelly,  Cox,  Caryll,  Goodwin,  Gouge,  Wilson,  Brock,  Smith,  Trotter,  Langley,  Sterry,  Sel- 
den,  Ainsworth,  Gataker,  Fealty,  Greenhiil,  Stevenson,  Shepherd,  Dean  Alford,  Brooks, 
Pym,  Dalton,  Greswell,  Bnrgh,  Todd,  Irving,  Hewitson,  Dr.  M'Caul,  Anderson,  Begg, 
McCheyne,  Burns,  Gilfillan,  Hamilton,  Cumming,  Adolph  Saphir,  Frazer,  Jamieson, 
Cochrane,  Cunningham,  Sabine,  Hugh  Miller,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  Lord,  Jones, 
Habershon,  Alexander,  Tycho  Brahe,  Lord  Napier,  Lent. -Gen.  Goodwyn,  Haldane,  Stew- 
art, Rob.  Montgomery,  Preb.  Auriol,  Rev.  M.  Rainsford,  Dean  Fremantle,  the  Earl  of 
Shaftesbury,  BeJl,  Pruden,  Baxter,  Lord  Radstock,  Earl  Russell,  Rev.  C.  Skrine,  Rev. 
E.  Nangle,  Rev.  R.  Chester,  Capt.  J.  E.  Dutton,  Th.  W.  Greenwell,  Rev.  S.  V.  Edwards, 
J.  Denham  Smith,  Capt.  Moreton,  Dr.  C.  B.  Egan,  Bh.  Wordsworth,  Rev.  Gordon  Cal- 
throp,  Rev.  J.  Gosset-Tanner,  Rev.  C.  H.  Hamilton,  Rev.  Grattan  Guinness,  Rev.  S.  Grar- 
vatt,  Mr.  Soltau,  F.  G.  Bellett,  Mr.  Hyslop,  Mr.  Jenour,  Dr.  A.  Saphir,  Rev.  E.  Wilkes, 
Rev!  C.  H.  Hamilton,  Lord  Carlizle,  T.  R.  Andrews,  Col.  Sandwith,  Preb.  Cadman, 
Col.  Rowlandson,  Rev.  E.  H.  Brooke,  Rev.  T.  Flavel  Cook,  Rev.  H.  W.  Webb-Peploe, 
Preb.  Dalton,  Rev.  C.  J.  Goodheart,  Rev.  J.  Wilkinson,  Rev.  H.  E.  Fox,  Rev.  F.  A.  C. 
Lillington,  Canon  Garbett,  Rev.  Rev.  Frank  White,  E.  J.  Hytche,  Rev.  G.  A.  Sparks, 
E.  J.  Mahoney,  Cheyne  Brady,  Bh.  Horsley,  Tillotson  (a  Westm.  divine),  Mede,  Burnet, 


PkOP.  78.]  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  545 

F.  E.  Hastings,  Clias.  Maude,  Rev.  W.  Frith,  Diirant,  Farmer,  the  Bishop  of  Cashel,  the 
Bishop  of  Ripon,  Admiral  Vernon  Harcourt,  Hon.  A.  Kinnaird,  Capt.  John  Trotter,  Rev. 
Capel  Moleneux,  Rev.  James  Cochrane,  Rev.  Walter  Wood,  Geo.  Ogilvie,  Hon.  S.  R. 
Maxwell,  Rev.  James  Kelly,  Rev.  Dr.  Wilson,  Rev.  W.  Brock,  Rev.  W.  Trotter,  Rev.  B. 
Wills  Newton,  Rev.  Dr.  Stevenson,  Rev.  W^  Niven,  Wattson,  Waples,  Roach,  Pirie,  Mans- 
ford,  Mandeville,  McCausland,  Gregory,  Bellamy,  Rev.  S.  E.  Pierce,  Keach,  Tait,  Sirr, 
Wells,  Coke,  the  Wesleys,  Fletcher,  Piers,  iSkeen,  Brightman,  Frere,  Pitcairn,  Carleton, 
Waple,  Archer,  Dallas,  Brightman,  Woodhotise,  Wickes,  Bayford,  Villiers,  J.  Biencho, 
Beverly,  Grimshawe,  Woodroofe,  Barker,  Marsh,  Dibdin,  Fisk,  Fremantle,  Wilson, 
Reichart,  Harrison,  Holland,  Wigram,  Nolan,  Burgh,  Bh.  Clayton,  Cooper,  Drummond, 
Eyre,  Farmer,  Ed.  King,  A.  Jukes,  Flemming,  jr.,  W.  Vint,  Keith,  R.  Hort,  Dr.  J.  Knight, 
P.  Lancaster,  Flemming,  Ferer,  Th.  Loader,  Frey,  Gregg,  Girdlestone,  Habershon, 
Hallet,  Maitland,  Hartly,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  Manford,  Hawtrey,  Homes,  Dr.  W. 
Marsh,  Rob.  Maton,  J.  Hooper,  Rev.  Hugh  McNeile,  Hon.  and  Rev.  G.  T.  Noel,  Dr.  F. 
Nolan,  J.  Hussey,  W.  Perry,  Rev.  A.  Pirie,  Rev.  A.  R.  Purdon,  J.  Purnes,  Forster,  Nath. 
Ranew,  R.  Roach,  B.  W.  Saville,  James  Scott,  Dr.  Sayer  Rudd,  F.  Sergent,  Wm.  Sher- 
man, Peter  Sterry,  J.  G.  Zipple,  H.  W.  Woodward,  J.  H.  Stewart,  TiDinghast,  Th.  L. 
Strange,  Wm.  Thorpe,  Wm.  Whiston,  Jos.  Tyso,  Jos.  Tvson,  El.  Winchester,  Jer.  White, 
Leut.-G.  H.  Wood,  Walter  Wood,  Wm.  Witherby,  H.  W.  Woodward,  T.  Whowell,  Ben- 
son, Ambrose,  Rev.  Ch.  Brown,  Spurgeon,  Burnet,  Burk,  Pope,  Sherwood,  Dr.  G. 
Sharjje,  Dr.  S.  Charnock,  Wm.  Cowper,  Spalding,  R.  Clarke,  Wm.  Clayton,  Bh.  Cran- 
mer,  Charlotte  Elizabeth,  Gilfillan,  J.  Glass,  Dr.  R.  Hurd,  Wm.  Wogan,  Dr.  I.  W^atts,  Bh. 
Heber,  Gen.  J.  Harlan,  Rev.  S.  Johnson,  Jno.  Keble,  Jno.  Milton,  A.  M.  Toplady,  M.  F. 
Tupper,  Dr.  Jno.  Thompson,  J.  L.  Towers,  Rev.  L.  Way,  Cressener,  Jno.  Fox,  Dr.  Mar- 
goliouth,  Denham,  Niven,  Nangle,  Harker,  Dr.  Wilson,  Dr.  Stephenson,  French,  Dr. 
Leask,  Gillson,  Berks,  J.  Verner,  Foskett,  Scott,  Phillips,  Dr.  T.  J.  Bell,  W.  S.  Ross, 
Purdon,  Harris,  Code,  Rob.  Howard,  Hon.  W.  Wellesley,  Rob.  Baxter,  Henry  Drum- 
mond, Dr.  Rob.  Anderson,  Rev.  Wm.  Maude,  Rev.  N.  Starkey,  M.  Redman,  Esq.,  Rev. 
S.  Garrett,  E.  Phair,  Rev.  J.  Sabine  Knight,  Rev.  J.  Cochrane,  Hon.  S.  R.  Maxwell, 
Reads,  Wood,  Moleneux,  H.  Smith,  J.  Kelly,  Brack,  W.  Trotter,  Wills  Newton,  Niven, 
H.  Shepheard,  Dr.  J.  W^ilson,  Dr.  Stevenson,  Geo.  Ogilvie,  B.  Wills  Newton,  Rev.  T.  J. 
Malyon,  Rev.  E.  J.  Hytche,  H.  Weymott,  Rev.  G.  H.  Pember,  Rev.  N.  S.  Godfrey. 

Germany :  Bengel,  Jung  Stilling,  P.  J.  Spener,  M.  F.  Roos,  P.  M.  Hahn,  J.  M.  Hahn, 
Peterson,  Rothe,  Auberlen,  Martensen,  Dorner,  Christlieb,  Luthardt,  Delitzsch,  Lange, 
Olshausen,  Ebrard,  Meyer,  Baumgarten,  T.  C.  K.  Von  Hofmann,  Lechler,  Riggenbach, 
Floerke,  Schlegel,  Kiummacher,  Steir,  Kurtz,  Christiani,  Rinck,  Pfleiderer,  Koch, 
Schmid,  Steffan^  Diisterdieck,  F.  Semler,  Typke,  Gerken,  Opitz,  Leutwein,  Riihle,  von 
Lilienstern,  Sander,  Oetinger,  Lavater,  Crusius,  Cocceius,  Breithaupt,  Piscator,  Passa- 
vant,  Lisco,  Kohler,  C.  F.  P.  Leutwein,  Dr.  V.  U.  Maywahlen,  Huss,  Cloter,  Michael, 
Hebart,  Schneider,  Gotlob  Schultze,  Jno.  Dav.  Schaeffer,  Daubuz,  Kopj^e,  Fr.  Bauer, 
Freiderick  Kletwick,  Dr.  J.  Lange,  Jno.  G.  Schoner,  Dr.  F.  V.  Reinhard,  C.  R.  Reichel, 
Osiander,  J.  Nissen,  Kling,  Thomasius,  H.  Wilh.  J.  Thiersch,  Alb.  Koppen. 

France  and  SioUzerJand :  Prof.  Godet  of  Lausanne,  Gaussen,  Dr.  J.  Abbadie,  Pere 
Amelote,  E.  Guers,  P.  Jurieu,  Lambert,  Pierre  Poiret,  Lavater. 

Holland :  Van  Oosterzee,  Da  Costa,  Capadose. 

Miscellaneous  :  F.  W.  Stuckert,  Rev.  D.  G.  Mallery,  Rev.  Paul,  Roorda,  Hebert,  Gneis, 
Madam  De  Gasparin,  Rev.  R.  Hamilton  (Melbourne,  Australia),  Comenius,  Jurien,  Sera- 
nius,  Altingius,  Alsted,  Riemann,  Worthington,  Seitz,  Dreissenius,  Jarchi,  Kimchi,  Abra- 
banel.  Alabaster,  Durant,  Chas.  Jerram,  Mejanel,  Coleman,  Ben  Ezra,  Crool,  S.  A.  Black- 
wood, J.  G.  Bellett,  H.  W.  Soltau,  Wm.  Lincoln.  H.  Snell,  Bh.  Spangenberg  (Moravian), 
H.  Meynott,  Esq.  (Australia). 

Ohs.  12.  The  number  of  able  commentators  favoring,  indorsing,  and 
teaching  Chiliastie  doctrine  is  not  only  creditable,  but  extremely  satisfac- 
tory to  the  faithful  believer,  showing  that  men  who  specially  devote  them- 
selves to  the  study  and  explanation  of  the  Scriptures  fmd  Millenarianism 
clearly  taught  therein. 

We  instance  the  following  :  Bengel's  Gnomon  of  the  K.  T.,  a  work  still  in  the  highest 
esteem  ;  Olshausen' s  Com.  on  ihe  New.  Test.,  a  work  repeatedly  republished  ;  Gill's  Expos, 
of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.  ;  Steir's  Words  of  ihe  Lord  Jesus,  still  republished  ;  Alford's 
Gi'eek  Test,  with  Proleg.  and  Com.,  a  standard  work  ;   Lange's  Com.  of  ihe   Old  and  New 


546  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

Tests.,  especially  the  Amer.  Edition,  and  particularly  1  and  2  Thess.,  Ed.  by  Dr.  Lillie  ; 
Meyer's  Com.  on  New  Test.,  recently  republished  ;  Cocceius'  Commentaries  in  "  Opera 
Omnia" — was  charged  by  his  enemies  with  Ohiliasm,  Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  213  ; 
Die  BerlenburgerBibel,  1726,  4  vols,  large  fol.  ;  Richter's  Erkliirte  Haus  Bibel ;  Starke's 
iSijnopsis  of  the  New  Test.  ;  Piscator's  Com.  on  Old  and  New  Test.  ;  Coke's  Com.  on  Old  and 
New  Test.  ;  Jamieson,  Brown,  and  Fausset's  Com.  on  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  a  recent  one, 
and  Pre-Mill.  in  the  parts  edited  by  Fausset  ;  Judge  Jones's  Notes  on  Scripture  (in  the  re- 
publication this  title  was  changed) ;  Dr.  Nast's  Com.  on  New  Test.,  only  a  part  published. 

Commentaries  and  Expositions  on  detached  j)ortions  of  the  Scriptures.  Greswell 
{Parables),  Keach  {Parables),  Bonar  {Lev.  and  Psalms),  Tait  (Hebrews),  Ryle  (Exp. 
Thoughts,  Gospels),  Heisa {Lev.  and  Hebrews),  Gnmming  {Parables,  Rev.,  etc.),  Lillie  {TJiess.), 
Schmucker  {Rev.),  Daubuz  (Rev.),  Koppe  (Thess.),  Fry  (Rom.  and  Psalms),  Sirr  (Notes  on 
Luke),  G.  H.  M.  (Notes  on  Gen.,  etc.),  Wells  (Dan.  and  Rev.),  Demarest  (Peter),  Delitzsch 
(Gen.),  Sir  I.  Newton  (Dan.  and  Rev.),  Ebrard  (Rev.),  Skeen  (Rev.),  Haldane  (Rom.),  Mede 
(Apoc.  and  Peter),  Brightman  (Dan.  and  Rev.),  Bengel  (Apoc),  Goodwin  (Rev.),  I.  Lange 
(Apoc),  Auberlen  (Dan.  and  Rev.),  Elliott  (Apoc),  Lord  (Apoc),  Buck  (Math.  24,)  Frere 
(Dan.,Esd.,and  Rev.),  Pitcairn  (Ps.  2,)  Carleton  (Matt.  24),  Waple  (Apoc),  Woodhouse 
(Apoc),  Wickes  (Apoc),  Bliss  (Apoc),  Roos  (Dayi.  and  Rev.),  Sander  (Rev.),  Kohler  (Hag.), 
Birks  (Dr/n.),  Cressener  (vlpoc),  Hooper  (Apoc),  Knight  (Peter),  W.  Newton  (Dan.),  Pewn 
(Ezek.),  Thompson  (Matt.  25),  Tyso  (Ezek.  etc.),  Gaussen  (Dan.),  Cunninghame  (Apoc), 
Darby  (Dan.),  Holmes  (Apoc  and  Dan.),  Tregelles  (Dan.),  Brown  (Apoc),  Irving  (Apoc), 
Ward  (Rev.),  Wickes,  (Rev.),  Mandeville  (Heb.),  Waples  (Apoc),  and  others.  Commen- 
taries  and  Expositions  that  present  some  of  the  Chiliastic  features.  Clarke's  Com.  on  the 
Old  and  New  Test.  ;  Jarchi's  Com.  Hebraicus ;  Kimchi's  Com.  on  Prophets;  Abrabanel's  Com. 
on  Prophets ;  Stuart's  Com.  Apoc  (gives  the  doctrine  of  a  literal  first  resurrection);  Al- 
tingius'  Com.  Jeremiah;  Piscator's  Com.  on  Old  and  New  Tests.;  Caryll's  Exp.  on  Job; 
Gouge's  Com.  Hebrews;  Passavant's  Phil,  and  Eph.  ;  Lisco's  New  Test.;  Deprez  On 
Daniel ;  and  others. 

We  append  a  few  statements  respecting  Pre-Mill.  commentators.  Alford  (N  T,  vol. 
2,  p.  350),  speaking  of  the  Apocalyptic  interpreters  since  the  French  Revolution,  says  : 
"  The  majority,  both  in  number,  learning,  and  research,  adopt  the  Pre-Millennial  Advent,  fol- 
lowing the  plain  and  undeniable  sense  of  the  sacred  text."  Dr.  Ed.  Beecher  in  The 
Independeni  (Aug.  24th,  1871),  laments  over  the  "  increase''  of  Millenarian  ''power''  as  ex- 
hibited in  recent  commentators,  saying  :  "  This  is  true  of  Alford,  Ellicott,  Lange,  and 
his  co-laborers,  especially  Drs.  Lillie,  Auberlen,  and  Riggenbach.  To  these  we  must  add 
the  writings  of  English  and  American  Millenarians,  the  older  and  the  more  recent.  And 
there  is  at  present  no  adequate  counterpoise  to  the  weight  of  authoiity  of  the  commentators 
■whom  we  have  mentioned."  This  feature,  thus  frankly  acknowledged  by  an  opponent, 
is  a  source  of  gratification  to  us,  and  of  thankfulness  to  God  in  raising  up  such  advo- 
cates. 

Obs.  13.  Numerons  writers,  who,  in  their  occasional  works,  give  expres- 
sion to  Chiliastic  belief,  without  entering  largely  in  details. 

Such  as  e.g.  Milton,  the  various  Pre-Mill.  Commentators,  Chalmers,  Charnock,  Wogan, 
Dorner,  Mather,  Nissen,  Spurgeon,  Talmage  (somewhat  contradictory),  Gilfillan,  Moody, 
Burroughs,  Clayton,  Coleman,  Fox,  and  many  others. 

Obs.  14.  Authors,  who  prominently  set  forth  one  or  more  essential  feat- 
ures of  our  system,  either  in  elucidation  or  defence  of  the  same. 

Such  e.g.  Woodward,  Essays  on  Mill. :  Thorp,  Destinies  of  the  Brit.  Emp.  ;  Crool,  Rest 
of  Israel ;  Frey,  Judah  and  Israel ;  Winthrop,  Premium,  Es.say  on  Symbols  ;  Abdiel,  Essays  ; 
Begg,  Argument  for  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  ;  Nathan  Lord,  The  Millennium ;  W.  Newton, 
Lee  on  the  first  two  visions  of  Dan.  ,-  and  the  writings  of  White,  Thompson,  Burgh,  Tyso, 
Strange,  Stewart,  Beverly,  Eyre,  Flemming,  Sirr,  Labaugh,  and  many  others. 

Obs.  15.  Writers  who  give  a  very  fair  exhibit  of  the  system  of  doctrine, 
showing  the  relationship  that  one  part  sustains  to  the  other,  are  also  quite 
numerous. 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  547 

Thus  e.g.  Zeiss'  Last  Times,-  Brooke's  Maranailia  ;  Demarest  and  Gordon's  Christoe- 
racy ;  Bickersteth's  Practical  Guide;  Brooks'  EL  of  Proph.  Interpretation;  D.  N.  Lord's 
Coming  and  Reign  of  Christ ;  Dr.  McCaul's  Old  Paths,  etc,  ;  McNeile's  Sermons  on  the  Sec. 
Advent.  ;  Noel's  Prospects  of  the  Church  of  Christ;  Duffield's  Diss,  on  the  Propjhecies y  and 
the  writings  of  the  Bonars,  Pym,  Shimeall,  Molyneux,  Lord,  Birks,  Bryant,  Ramsey,  and 
many  others. 

Obs.  16.  The  controversial  writers  who  have  directly  written  in  defence 
of  Millenarianism  against  the  attacks  of  opponents  are  worthy  of  notice. 

Works  specially  designed  to  defend  Chiliasm  against  objections  are  numerous.  The 
following  maybe  designated  :  Duffield's  Mill.  Defended,  and  Reply  to  Stuart;  Shimeall' s 
Reply  to  Shedd  ;  The  Theol.  and  Lit.  Journal,  Ed.  by  D.  N.  Lord,  contains  a  large  number  of 
such  articles  ;  Dr.  Craven's  Reply  to  Prof.  Briggs  (K.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879)  ;  Dr.  Moore- 
head's  series  of  arts,  in  reply  to  Dr.  Macgill  (Chicago  Instructor,  1879)  ;  Randolph's 
series  of  arts.  (Danville  Tribune,  1879)  ;  The  Propjhelic  Times  in  its  entire  old  and  new 
series  ;  Lillie's  I\otes  on  the  Mill.  Controversy  (in  his  "  Perpetuity  of  the  Earth")  ;  Ander- 
son's Apology  for  the  Mill.  Doc.  :  Christocracy,  by  Drs.  Demarest  and  Gordon  ;  Bayford's 
Reply  to  Jones;  Tyson' s  Defence  of  the  Personal  Reign;  Drummond's  Defence  of  the  Stu- 
dents  of  Prophecy  ;  The  Literalisi  (5  vols.)  contains  some  able  articles  ;  Manford's  Apology; 
Spence's  Defence  of  the  Hope  of  Better  Times  ;  Sirr's  First  Res.;  Prudon's  Last  Vials; 
Bryant's  Mill.  Views;  Pym's  Ihoughis  on  Mill;  Maton's  Israel's  Redemption  Redeemed; 
Ogilvie's  Popular  Objections  ;  Cox's  Millenarians  Answer  ;  and,  in  brief,  the  writings  of 
Seiss,  Brookes,  Bonar,  Bickersteth,  Cunninghame,  and  many  others  (for  nearly  all  Chili- 
astic  works  devote  some  space  to  the  consideration  of  objections),  besides  the  quarter- 
lies, monthlies,  and  papers  specially  devoted  to  the  advocacy  of  Pre-Mill.  The  work  of 
Dr.  Brown  {Sec.  Coming)  was  answered  by  Lord  {Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal)^  Bonar  {The  Com. 
and  Kingd.  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ),  the  Duke  of  Manchester  (Ap.  to  the  Finished  Mys- 
tery), Wood  ( Tract),  Scott,  and  others. 

Obs.  17.  Various  writers  in  our  religions  papers,  periodicals,  simply 
either  give  their  initials  or  conceal  their  identity  by  a  no7)i  de  phnne,  while 
presenting  articles  of  a  Chiliastic  tenor,  are  not  to  be  overlooked  in  con- 
sidering the  number  of  advocates. 

Hence  it  is  difficult  to  form  anything  like  a  correct  estimate  of  numbers.  In  my  own 
denomination  (Evang.  Lutheran)  quite  a  number  of  persons  are  only  known  to  me  by 
occasional  articles  signed  in  this  way.  This  is  true  of  many  others.  Rev.  Ebaugh  in 
his  brief  His.  of  Mill,  in  Rupp's  Orig.  His.oi  Relig.  Denom's,  says  :  "  The  number  of 
Christians  who 'hold  substantially  the  foregoing  views  of  the  Millennium  [Chiliastic], 
cannot  be  computed  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  but  from  the  writings  of  distingushed 
divines,  both  in  the  European  and  American  churches,  we  are  warranted  in  estimating 
their  number  at  many  thousands  already."  We  have  also  quite  a-  number  of  Chiliastic 
works  given  anonymously,  such  e.g.  Tiine  of  the  End,  Spes  Fidelium,  or  The  Believe?'' s  Hope, 
Theopolis,  The  Sec.  Com.  of  the  Lord,  Review  of  Scripture,  Reign  of  Christ  on  Earth,  Millennial 
Church,  A  Tenet  of  Millennium,  Midtum  in  Parvo ;  or  the  Jubilee  of  Jubilees,  TJie  First  Resur- 
rection, Enoch,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Sec.  Coming,  Das  Tausendjdhrige  Reich,  Christ's  Speedy 
Return  in  Glory,  Abdiel's  Essays,  Second  Advent,  and  others. 

Obs.  18.  Writers  who  are  utterly  opposed  to  the  prevailing  TVhitbyan 
theory,  and  declare  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  the  non-conversion  of  the 
world  before  the  Advent ;  the  renewal  of  the  earth,  etc.,  are  also  to  be 
considered,  because  on  some  salient  points,  essejitiaUy  connected  with  our 
system,  they  manifest  a  decided  leaning  favorable  to  Chiliasm. 

We  instance  e.g.  Richard  Baxter,  Bh.  Bale,  Th.  Watson,  Th.  Vincent,  Jno.  Durant, 
A.  Grosse,  Arch.  Usher,  Arch.  Cranmer,  Bh.  Davenant,  Bh.  Ridley,  Matthew  Henry, 
Sayer  Rudd,  Geo.  Benson,  Jno.  Howe,  Bh.  Latimer,  Archd.  Woodhouse,  Romame,  Bh. 
Riissell,  Hammond,  Alberus,  Nicolai,  Ringwald,  Grotius,  Prideaux,  Bh.  Taylor,  Paul 
Gerhard,  Lee,  Quenstadt,  Hutter,  Jno.  Knox,  Hilnninus,  the  Reformers  (as  quoted),  Jos. 
AUeine,    Aretius,    Bradford,    Toplady,    Tholuck,    Dr.   Scott,   Pareus,  Archb.  Newcome, 


548  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

Knapp,  Dr.  E.  Hitchcock,  Dr.  Hales.  Bh.  Davenant,  Flachis,  Chytrseus,  Sandys,  Keith, 
Gale,  Dodwell,  King,  and  many  others. 

Obs.  19.  The  controversial  works,  essays,  and  articles  against  us  fully 
indicate  the  extent  in  which  our  doctrine  is  held. 

Works  that  are  directly  written  against  Chiliasm  may  also  be  noticed,  both  as  indic- 
ative of  the  extent  of  Millenarianism,  and  that  the  student  may  compare  them  v/ith  our 
line  of  argument.  The  controversial  works  of  importance  on  the  other  side  are  the  fol- 
lowing :  Brown's  Second  Coming;  Gipp's  On  the  First  Res.  ;  Hall's  i?ep/?/  to  Homes; 
Hamilton  On  the  Mill.  ;  Jefferson  On  the  Mill.  ;  an  anon,  work.  The  Kingdom  of  Grace  ; 
Morrison  Chrisfs  Personal  Reign,-  Waldegrave's  Bamp.  Lectures,  1854,  Williamson's  Let. 
iers  to  a  Millenarian  ;  Stuart's  Strictures  on  Dr.  Duffield  ;  Vint's  New  Rlustrations  of  Proph- 
ecy;  Bogue's  Dis.  on  Mill.;  Bush  On  the  Mill.  ;  Pro.  Brigg's  arts,  in  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  1879, 
andrepub.  in  Luth.  Quarterly  ;  numerous  arts,  in  the  reviews,  quarterlies,  relig.  weeklies, 
etc.,  reiterate  the  statements  of  the  above  works  ;  the  brief  statements  found  in  works 
such  as  Barnes'  Notes  on  Rev.,  Shedd's  His.  of  Oh.  Doc,  Hodge's  Sys.  Div.,  etc.  In  our 
argument  we  freely  present  these  and  other  opposing  works,  give  their  objections  (over- 
looking none),  and  meet  them  in  detail.  We  really  are  desirous  for  the  reader  to  know, 
Scrijjturally  and  historically,  the  arguments  o)i  both  sides,  so  that  he  may  intelligently  com- 
pare them,  and  decide  for  liimself.  We  feel  assured  that  in  a  candid  comparison,  our 
doctrine  will  lose  nothing  by  it.  Hence  we  commend  the  preceding  for  perusal,  as  well 
as  the  following  :  Carson's  Personal  Reign  of  Christ  during  the  Millennium  proved  to  be  impos- 
sible; Hopkins'  and  Boyd's  Second  Adventism  in  the  light  of  Jewish  IPistory ;  Warren's 
Parousia ;  Merrill's  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ  ;  Clemens'  Spiritual  Reign,  and  the  writings  of 
Berg,  Hengstenberg,  Davidson,  and  many  others. 

OI)s.  20.   The  greatest  and  most  decided  opposition  to  Chiliasm  is  that 
which  springs  from  the  adoption  of  the  Whitbyan  theory — a  view  that  is 
•incorporated  in  systems  of  theology,  sermons,  etc.,  and  is  the  prevailing 
one. 

Prof.  Briggs,  in  his  series  of  articles  (in  the  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  1878),  states  that  he» 
Dr.  Hatfield,  and  others,  hold  "  that  the  Millennium  began  in  the  past,  and  corresponds 
with  the  period  of  the  church,  or  the  Kingdom  of  God,  on  earth,  in  whole  or  in  part." 
(See  this  view  adverted  to  under  Prop.  158.)  This  he  pronounces  "  the  church  view," 
and  the  Editor  of  the  Evangelist  (Oct.  10th),  flatly  contradicts  him,  saying  that  "  the  com- 
mon doctrine  of  the  church"  is  the  one  that  Whitby  introduced,  viz.  :  that  the  Mill,  is 
still  future  and  that  it  shall  be  ushered  in  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  etc.  Now 
while  neither  are  taught  in  the  leading  confessions  of  the  church  (but  are  contradicted  by 
the  statements  in  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  church  itself,  the  nearness  of  the  Ad- 
vent, etc.),  the  editor  is  correct  when  he  makes  the  Whitbyan  theory  the  present  prevail- 
ing one.  Prof.  Briggs'  view  is  held  by  an  exceeding  small  minority  of  Protestants,  how- 
ever popular  it  has  been  with  the  Papacy  as  "  the  church  view."  A  few  remarks,  indic- 
ative of  the  modern  origin—so  recent  as  to  be  amazing,  when  its  progress  is  considered — 
of  the  Whitbyan  theory  is  in  place.  The  His.  of  Doctrines  informs  us  that  when  the  Au- 
gustinean  view  was  introduced  it  became,  as  opposed  to  Chiliasm,  the  popular  doctrine 
of  the  Roman  Church  ;  and  that  it  was,  more  or  less,  entertained  by  the  Reformers. 
This  continued  until  the  appearance  of  Daniel  Whitby  (comp.  Prop.  175,  Obs.  4,  and 
Prop.  127,  Obs.  on  Rev.  20),  an  English  commentator  (b.  A.D.  1638  and  d.  1726),  who 
in  explaining  Rev.  20  :  1-6,  advocated  what  he  calls  a  "  New  Hypothesis,"  viz.  :  a  spirit- 
ual Millennium  still  future  to  be  introduced  by  existing  Gospel  instrumentalities.  This 
appropriation  by  Whitby  of  a  new,  unheard-of  application  has  been  unquestioned  by  able 
scholars,  such  as  Bh.  Russell,  Archd.  Woodhoase,  Prof.  Bush,  and  others.  Indeed  it 
materially  differs  from  the  Popish  and  Jesuitical  dreams  of  a  subjugation  and  conversion 
of  the  world  under  Papal  supremacy  ;  because  such  dreams  of  conquest  were  allied  with 
the  Augustinean  theory,  and  regarded  as  the  result  of  an  already  existing  Mill,  period" — 
the  latter  being  regarded  as  equivalent  to  the  existing  dispensation,  while  Whitby  located 
his  as  future  and  distinctive  in  time  and  results.  The  nearest  ancient  approach, 
although  differing  from  it,  to  Whitby' s  theory  are  the  prophecies  of  Joachim  (comp.  arts, 
on  in  Cyclops,  and  Von  Dollinger's  Proph.  of  the  Middle  Ages,  VII.),  or  the  declarations  of 
Roger  Bacon,  Dolcino,  and  men  of  that  stamp.     So  the  fanatical  Anabaptist  movement 


PkOP.  78.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDO:\r.  549 

materially  differs  in  the  instrumentality  used,  but  only  symi^athizes  with  it  (Prop.  156, 
Obs.  4)  in  the  effort  to  secure  a  world-wide  dominion  without  the  personal  Advent  pre- 
ceding, and  before  the  res.  of  the  saints.  Hence  Pre-Millenarians,  unwilling  to  associ- 
ate the  Whitbyan  theory  with  such  Popish  and  Anabaptist  vagaries  and  dreams  of  con- 
quest, assert  (as  Bh.  Henshaw,  Bickersteth,  Dr.  Lillie,  Dr.  Duffield,  Dr.  Seiss,  Dr. 
Brookes,  and  others)  that  Whitby  is  the  first  writer  who  systematically  presented  the  opin- 
ion, now  so  prevailing,  that  the  Mill,  age  (1000  years)  is  future  and  will  be  introduced, 
without  any  Advent  of  Christ,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.*  This  theory  denies  the 
Pre-Mill.  Advent  of  Jesus,  the  prior  res.  of  the  saints,  the  jjersonal  reign  of  Jesus  and 
the  saints  on  earth,  and  holds  simply  to  a  conversion  of  the  nations  then  living,  and  to  a 
spiritual  reign  of  the  then  existing  church.  It  has  thousands  of  talented  advocates,  and 
is  held  by  multitudes  of  pious  and  devoted  Christians,  being  found  entrenched  in  Sys. 
Divinities,  religious  works  of  all  kinds,  books  of  worship,  hymnals,  periodicals,  etc.  It 
is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  a  theory  of  such  "  receni  origbi'  (so  Dr.  John  Lillie,  who 
adds,  "it  is  very  questionable  whether  even  so  late  as  two  hundred  years  ago,  it  had  yet 
been  heard  of  among  good  men," — quoted  by  Brookes,  Maranatha,  p.  321-2)  should  have 
such  an  extended  reception,  and  be  so  perseveringly  upheld,  when  bringing  the  church 
into  the  i3redicted  position  of  unbelief  (comp.  Prop.  177).  Bh.  Henshaw  {^An  Inquiry 
concerning  the  Sec.  Advent)  pronounces  it  "  a  novel  doctrine,  unknown  to  the  Church  for 
the  space  of  IGOO  years.  So  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  investigate  its  history,  it  was 
tirst  advanced  by  Rev.  Dr.  Whitby,  the  commentator."  (Comp.  Dr.  Seiss'  Question  in 
Eschatology,  p.  47-50.)  Some  have  questioned  these  statements,  but  no  one  has  been 
able  to  produce  a  single  writer  of  ability  preceding  Dan.  Whitby.  Historically,  the 
modern  view  has  no  foundation  whatever  ;  it  is  "  a  novelty." 

Ohs.  21.  Many,  without  having  a  definite  Mill,  doctrine  (their  notions 
of  Mill,  prophecies  being  vague),  are  influenced  by  the  general  deductions 
of  the  Whitbyan  theory,  and  reject  our  doctrine  chiefly  on  the  ground  of  a 
still  future  conversion  of  the  world  under  present  instrumentalities,  which 
IS  supposed  to  bring  about  an  ample  fulfilment  of  predictions  relating  to 
the  Messianic  Kingdom.  (Comp.  Props.  175  and  176,  where  this  matter 
is  discussed  in  detail.) 

We  have  men,  who  will  in  eccles.  bodies  oppose  our  views,  and  yet  at  the  same 
time  confess  (e.g.  The  Mass.  Gen.  Conference  on  the  Mill.,  Proph.  Times,  vol.  4,  No.  12), 
that  they  have  not  given  the  subject  "  that  critical  study  which  it  demanded,"  and  that 
"  with  all  the  objections  to  Mill.  view""s,  it  is  still  difficult  to  see  how  many  passages  of 
Scriptures  can  be  otherwise  explained."  And,  without  such  study,  and  with  such  a 
confession  of  weakness,  they  are  content  with  their  Modern  Whitbyan  theory.  Indeed, 
many  of  this  class  cannot  be  induced  to  study  the  subject.  The  Examiner  (N.  Y.),  com- 
menting on  the  late  "  Proph.  Conference,"  after  speaking  favorably  of  the  men  conduct- 
ing it,  says  :  "  But  the  great  facts  of  Christ's  personal  Sec.  Coming,  that  it  may  occur  at 
any  time,  that  there  will  be  a  first  res.  of  the  righteous  dead,  and  a  second  res.  of  the 
wicked  dead,  and  that  the  final  general  judgment  will  then  come,  do  not  belong  to  the 
shadowy  and  fanciful  imaginings  of  mere  theorists." 

Ohs.  22.  However  respectable  the  number  of  adherents  to  our  doctrine 
in  whole  or  in  part,  yet  they  form  but  a  syyiall  minority  in  comparison  with 
the  immense  body  that  rejects  the  belief  once  so  prevailing  in  the  church. 


*  Dr.  Craven  in  Lange's  Com.  Rev.  p.  346,  Amer.  Ed.,  introduces  the  following  foot- 
note :  "  Elliott  writes  :  '  Vitringa,  however,  who  alludes  to  Whitby's  as  a  work  just  pub- 
lished, makes  brief  citations  from  two  earlier  writers,  Conrad  of  Mantua,  and  Carolus 
Gallus,  as  expressive  of  the  same  general  view."  Hence,  as  these  writers  had  but  little 
influence  in  moulding  the  sentiment  of  the  Church  (for  they  are  almost  unknown,  and 
our  opponents,  so  hard  pressed  for  authorities,  failed  to  find  them  -for  no  one  quotes 
them  (Dr.  Craven  in  his  "  Excursus"  says  :  "  This  theory  (Post-Millennial),  which  is  the 
one  most  generally  adopted  by  English-speaking  Protestant  theologians,  was  first  fully 
developed  by  Whitby." 


550  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

The  retention  of  the  Augustinian  theory  or  Constantinian  view  by  some  ; 
the  general  adoption  of  a  spiritualizing  interpretation  to  sustain  a  Church- 
Kingdom  view  ;  the  reception  of  the  Whitbyan  hypothesis  ;  the  issuing  of 
works  in  which  oar  doctrine  is  caricatured,  misrepresented,  and  ridiculed  ; 
the  linking  of  our  doctrine  with  the  vagaries  and  fanaticism  of  certain 
parties  to  make  it  odious  ;  the  incorporation  of  some  parts  of  our  system 
by  smaller  organizations  that  exerted  but  little  influence  ;  the  parading  of 
mistakes  made  by  some  rash  writers  both  as  to  time  and  details  ;  the  in- 
fluence of  leading  societies  in  their  publications,  their  endowments,  com- 
mentaries for  popular  use,  periodicals,  etc. ;  in  brief,  the  unfriendliness  of 
worldliness,  sect,  indifference,  unbelief,  prejudice,  etc.,  has  been  exerted 
to  overpower  this  ancient  faith.  Numerous  instances  will  be  cited  as  we 
proceed.  The  fact  that  great  and  good  men— men  eminent  for  piety  and 
ability  in  the  church— have  aided  in  decrying  the  doctrine  has  had  a 
powerful  influence  upon  the  minds  of  many  (comp.  Props.  177-180). 
Doctrinal  belief  is  not,  however,  decided  hy  members  (Matt.  8  :  13,  14,  and 
22  :11;  1  Cor.  1  :  26,  27,  etc.). 

Obs.  23.  Writers  that  are  evidently  unacquainted  with  th«  literature  and 
history  of  our  doctrine  dismiss  it  with  some  contemptuous  allusion  to 
"  the  ignorance  and  fanaticism"  of  its  upholders.  Certainl}^  the  eminent 
and  venerable  names  presented  are  sirfficient  to  redeem  it  from  such 
.charges.  We  are  not  concerned  in  eulogizing  its  advocates  ;  this  is  done 
by  our  opponents  and  others. 

As  indicative  of  the  treatment  received,  we  present  several  illustrations.  Dr.  Mosheim 
{Gh.  His.,  vol.  3,  p.  393).  notwithstanding  the  important  concessions  given  by  him,  ex- 
hibits his  animosity  to  the  doctrine  as  follows  :  "The  expectation  of  the  Millennial  King- 
dom, which  seldom  exists  in  well  informed  minds,  and  which  generally  produces  extrava- 
gant opinions."  The  editor  of  the  N.  Y.  Evangelist  eulogizes  Prof.  Briggs's  one-sided 
articles,  and  then  says  {Edilorial,  Jan.  9,  1879)  of  Chiliasm,  that  it  is  "  a  delusion  explod- 
ed many  times,"  having  a  "a  sporadic  existence"  ;  and  even  designates  ''the  blessed  hope'' 
sneeringly,  "  the  blessed  appearance,  as  they  call  it."  The  slightest  acquaintance  with  the 
history  of  Chiliasm,  and  the  long  line  of  revered  advocates,  should  undoubtedly  prevent 
the  use  of  such  language,  unless  the  parties  employing  it  desire  the  same  to  be  attrib- 
uted to  improper  motives.  Consequently  we  find  scholarly  men,  who  desire  to  act 
honorably  and  justly,  express  themselves,  although  opposing  our  doctrine,  as  reverencing 
the  pious  and  eminent  Chiliastic  advocates  ;  they  know  enough  concerning  their  honored 
lives,  their  labors  of  love,  their  sufferings  for  Christ,  that,  supposing  them  even  to  b«  in 
error  on  this  point,  they  find  sufficient  redeeming  qualities  to  secure  a  high  respect  and 
cordial  esteem.  Prof.  Bush,  whose  eulogy  on  Millenarians  we  quote  in  the  Preface,  is  an 
example  followed  by  others.  The  Princeton  Review,  Ap.,  1851,  p.  187,  concedes,  as  it 
well  may,  that  we  have  in  our  ranks  "minds  too  of  devotedly  pious  men,  who  are  also 
highly  reputable  scholars."  Even  Harris,  in  his  Great  Commission,  where  (pp.  115-117) 
he  grossly  misrepresents  our  doctrine  and  its  advocates  (comp.  for  a  reply,  Prop.  175), 
is  still  forced  in  candor  to  acknowledge:  "We  are  aware,  indeed,  that  among  those 
who,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  are  called  Millenarians,  there  are  to  be  found  divines  of 
considerahle  reputation,  and  Christians  of  the  greatest  sanctity." 

We  leave  a  recent  writer,  an  opponent  (the  author  of  God  is  ioue— 3  vols. — a  work 
specially  devoted  against  our  doctrine),  to  testify  />o//i  respecting  its  adherents  and  extent. 
He  says  (Pref.,  vol.  1)  that  he  is  personally  acquainted  with  "a  very  large  number  of  my 
most  revered  private  friends,  both  among  the  clergy  and  laity,  (who)  are  firm  believers 
in  the  doctrine  of  a  personal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth."  "They  are  alike  eminent 
for  the  greatness  of  their  talents,  for  their  deep  and  sustained  spirituality  of  mind, 
for  their  habitually  close  walk  with  God,  for  their  exemplary  conduct  in  the  society 
and  sight  of  their  fellow  men,  and  for  their  devotedness  to  the  cause  of  Christ 
and  of  souls."  He  refers  "to  the  fact  that  .so  many  oi  my  greatest  Christian  friends, 
equally  remarkable  for  their  gifts  and   graces,    believe   in    the   personal   reign  as    the 


Prop.  78.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  551 

great  central  doctrine,"  etc.  He  refers  to  "  flie  great  extent  to  wliich  that  class  of  views 
are  now  adopted,"  esi^ecially  in  "in  the  Church  of  England,"  "  among  the  Independents, 
the  Baptists,  and  the  Presbyterians,"  and  largely  advocated  by  "the  Plymoxith  Breth- 
ren." He  adds  :  "  Millenarianism  is  spreading  rapidly  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  country 
at  the  time  at  which  I  write."  He  remarks  that  all  converted  Jews  are  Millenarian,  and 
referring  to  the  efforts  of  "  The  Prophecy  Investigating  Society"  in  propagating  the  doc- 
trine, says  :  "  The  clerical  members  of  this  society  are,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  men  of 
eminence  in  the  religions  world  ;  while  the  laymen  are,  in  every  instance,  men  of  ac- 
knoioledged -piety  and  high  social  ijosition."  He  remarks,  "Among  the  vice-presidents 
are  the  Bish.  of  Cashel,  the  Bish.  of  Ripon,  Admiral  Vernon  Harcoiirt,  the  Hon.  A, 
Kinnaird,  M.P.,  and  Captain  John  Trotter."  He  speaks  of  the  preachers,  whose  ser- 
mons are  published  on  the  subject,  as  "most  of  them  men  of  eminence  ;  "  refers  to  the 
ability  of  its  advocates  in  Ireland,  and  then  gives  a  list  of  publications,  interspersed  with 
high  eulogies  of  various  writers,  who  hold  to  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  "  the  Millennial 
delusion."  Pie  declares  that  "  Millenarianism  is  making  such  rapid  progress  among  all 
Evangelical  denominations,"  so  that  he  advocates  the  "adopting  measures  to  arrest  its 
jDrogress"  (his  book  being  one  based  on  the  rejecting  from  Scripture,  as  interpolations, 
all  teaching  that  favors  our  views  !).  This  confirms  Moody's  (the  Evangelist)  statement 
in  a  sermon  on  the  Sec.  Advent :  "  3fany  spiritual  men  in  the  pulpits  of  Great  Britain 
are  firm  in  the  faith.  Spurgeon  preaches  it.  I  have  heard  Newman  Hall  say  that  he 
knew  no  reason  why  Christ  might  not  come  before  he  got  through  with  his  sermon.' ' 
Dr.  Fisher,  Art.  Mill.  (M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  says  that  an  anon,  work.  The 
End  of  All  Things  (which  is  opposed  to  us),  frankly  declares  that  "  more  than  half  of  the 
evangelical  clergy  of  the  Church  of  England  are  at  this  moment  Millenarians."  Dr. 
Moore  writes  from  Wartburg,  Ger.,  to  the  Ccmtral  Presbyterian  (1867),  and  after  delineat- 
ing the  religious  condition,  says  :  "I  find  among  the  Evangelicals  a  great  deal  of  Millena- 
rianism ;  and  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ  is  the  great  feature  of  the  Gospel  that  swallows 
up  all  others  with  them."  This  agrees  with  Nast's  (Com.  Matt.,  6  :  10)  declaration,  who 
speaks  of  "  many  Evangelical  divines  of  Germany,"  and  of  "  the  most  learned  theologi- 
ans of  England  and  America"  as  Millenarian.  Such  testimony  from  opponents  and 
sympathizers  should  certainly  have  sufficient  weight  to  prevent  that  spirit  of  detraction 
so  i^revalent  with  some. 

Ohs.  24.  Ignorance  or  malice,  alone,  can  produce  the  charge  of  "  heresy," 
so  often,  with  evident  relish,  urged  against  Pre-Millenarians. 

We  give  a  few  illustrations  out  of  many  such  charges.  Prof.  Briggs,  in  the  iV.  r. 
Evangelist,  Sept.  12th,  1878,  pronounces  Pre-Millenarianism  a  "heresy,"  and  "the  basis 
of  a  most  pernicious  series  of  doctrines,  ever  rejected  by  the  Church  as  fanatical,  vision- 
ary, and  dangerous."  (This  certainly  comes  with  good  grace  from  one  who  professes 
to  believe  that  the  Church  has  been  in  the  past,  and  now  is,  enjoying  the  predicted 
Millennium.)  Dr.  Berg  in  "  2/ie  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  Pre- Millennial,"  follows 
the  same  tenor,  pronouncing  "the  doctrine  of  the  Pre -Mill.  Advent,  and  the 
so-called  Personal  Reign  of  Christ"  to  be  not  only  "erroneous"  but  "pernicious," 
"yoked  to  the  car  of  fanaticism,"  "the  motive  power  of  the  wildest  vagaries." 
characterized  by  "eccentric  variations";  being  "the  favorite  hobby  upon  which  wild 
delusion  has  careered  with  whip  and  spur  to  perdition,"  "changing  sincere  fanatics  into 
shameless  impostors,"  etc.  (This  reads  remarkable  well  from  the  man  who  strives  to 
make  the  stone  of  Dan.  2  to  represent  the  American  Republic!)  If  the  doctrine  produces 
all  this,  it  is  exceedingly  unfortunate  for  the  wisdom  of  the  Bible,  that  it  contains  so 
much  in  its  plain,  grammatical  sense,  in  its  structure  and  analogy,  as  to  induce  multi- 
tudes in  the  Primitive  Church,  and  since,  to  believe  and  adopt  it.  If  the  doctrine  has 
this  tendency,  and  produces  such  persons,  then  it  follows,  that  the  Church  has  honored, 
and  now  reverences,  men  for  their  piety,  usefulness,  learning,  etc.,  who  are  only  "her- 
etics." If  the  doctrine  is  so  bad,  demoralizing,  and  destructive,  it  is  especially  unfor- 
tunate for  the  Ch.  Church,  that  through  the  first  centuries  of  its  existence,  it  can  only 
trace  its  progress  through  such  successful  martyr,  but  hated  "heretics."  Our  decided 
impression  is,  when  we  look  at  the  men  thus  defamed — men  who  sealed  their  love  for 
Jesus  and  His  truth  by  abundant  labors,  toils,  sufferings,  and  even  death— that  the  time 
will  come— if  it  be  at  the  throne  of  Jesus  Himself— when  such  wholesale,  unchristian  and 
most  unjnst  charges  will  be  deeply,  if  not  bitterly,  regretted  by  the  persons  urging  them. 
The  persons  who  bring  this  charge  ought  to  have  some  consideration  of  their  own 
accountability.     Dr.  West  {Essay  before  the  Proph.  Conference  on  the  His.  of  the  Doc.) 


552  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

remarks  :  "And  equally  powerless  is  tlie  attempt  to  stigmatize  the  holders  of  this  hope 
as  aiders  and  abettors  of  'heresy.'  That  is  a  weajjon  that  cuts  fearfully  in  the  opposite 
direction.  Never  has  there  existed  a  persecutor  of  God's  saints  on  earth,  since  the 
dawn  of  Christianity,  who  was  not  an  Anti-Chiliast.  The  Apostate  Church  of  Rome,  idol- 
atrous corrupter  of  every  truth  of  God,  and  red  with  the  blood  of  God's  saints,  was  built 
and  nurtured  on  an  Anti-Chiliastic  creed.  The  first  perversion  of  this  hope  was  by  a 
heretic,  Cerinthus  or  Montanus.  The  first  assault  upon  it  was  by  the  rationalizing 
Origen,  who  became  a  Universalist.  The  next  was  by  Dionysius,  who  denied  the  Apoc. 
of  John.  The  first  ofiicial  condemnation  of  it  was  by  a  Roman  Pojje.  The  early  mis- 
representator  of  it  was  Eusebius,  an  Arian,  and  let  him  who  can,  defend  Whitby  from  the 
charge  of  becoming  a  Socinian.  I  dismiss  the  imputation  with  the  remark,  that  if,  in 
days  to  come,  a  personal  Antichrist,  more  God-defying  and  blaspheming  than  he  who 
sits  in  Rome,  shall  rise,  one  of  the  marks  that  will  signalize  him  as  the  concentration  of 
Satanic  energy  and  hate,  will  be  that  he  in  a  pronounced  Anti-ChUlafit.  And  just  in  pro- 
portion as  such  time  shall  approach,  will  this  glorious  martyr-truth  revive,  as  all  history 
shows,  and  to  suffering  saints  will  it  be  given  again  to  witness  for  that  same  hope  under 
which  the  first  confessors  of  Jesus,  comforted,  supported  and  strengthened,  sank  singing 
to  their  tombs."  The  absurdity,  the  injustice,  and  the  sinfulness  of  thus  designating  the 
founders,  martyrs,  confessors,  missionaries,  and  ablest  divines  of  the  Church,  is  self- 
evident,  but  it  is  something  that  we  are  led  to  anticipate,  Jsa.  66  :  5.  It  is  the  old  charge 
reproduced  :  Spener  (Dorner's  "  His.  Prot.  Theol.,''  vol.  2,  p.  211)  was  opposed  on  account 
of  his  Millenarianism,  and  those  who  received  his  views  were  denounced  as  heretics — his 
name  lives  in  freshness  of  honor,  while  the  ojiponents  are  almost  forgotten.  So  Auberlen 
(Dis.  Rev.  p.  315)  quotes  Delitzsch  as  saying  in  reference  to  the  wide-spread  influence  of 
Bengel  :  "To  whom  do  we  owe  it,  that  the  orthodox  church  of  the  present  day,  no 
longer  brands  the  Chiliastic  view  of  the  last  times,  as  all  books  of  systematic  doctrine 
do,  as  heterodoxy,  but  has  woven  it  into  her  own  inmost  life  so  deeply,  that  hardly  a  believ- 
ing Christian  can  be  found  who  does  not  hold  it."  (Thus  indicating  its  hold  in  the 
Evangelical  portion  of  believers.) 

Obs.  25.  Pre-Millenarianism  is  frequently,  either  through  lack  of  knowl- 
edge or  animosity,  represented  as  indorsing  the  belief  of  bodies  (e.g.  the 
fanatical  Anabaptists.  Fifth  Monarchy  men,  etc.)  whose  faith  is  directly 
opposite  to  it. 

For  Anabaptists,  etc.,  see  Props.  175,  179,  etc.,  where  their  views  are  given  in  detail.  We, 
however,  present  another  illustration  of  our  meaning.  The  Editor  of  the  N.  Y.  Observer, 
(Sept.  1866)  makes  out  "that  Shakerism  is  composed  of  Millenarianism  and  Spiritualism." 
And  as  the  result  of  his  visit  to  the  Shakers  in  Columbia  Co.,  N.  Y.,  says  :  "The  Shakers 
believe  He  (Jesus)  is  now  present  in  them.,  and  that  it  is  high  noon  of  the  millennium  all 
around  here."  The  truth  is,  that  there  is  not  a  particle  of  affinity  between  Shakerism 
and  Millenarianism.  Their  doctrine  of  the  Second  Coming  of  Jesus  in  the  person  of  Ann 
Lee  and  of  a  present  resulting  Millennium  is  \dterly  opposed  by  our  fundamental  principles. 
No  Chiliast  ever  advocated  such  a  delusion.  Their  doctrine  best  suits  the  Whitbyan  spiritual 
reign  theory,  being  the  result  of  the  spiritual,  mystical  system  of  interpretation  repudiated 
by  us.  As  to  the  Doctrine  of  a  present  Millennium,  that  accords  best  with  Prof.  Briggs' 
theory  of  a  present  existing  Millennium.  The  fundamental  position  which  distinguishes 
Millenarians  from  all  others,  is  this  :  No  Millennium  without  the  personal  coming  and  in- 
tervention of  the  same  identical  Jesus  who  ascended  to  heaven.  To  accommodate  all  this 
covenant  and  prophesies,  to  Ann  Lee,  is  a  complete  perversion  of  the  truth,— a  sad  prosti- 
tution of  the  promises  pertaining  to  the  Christship  and  the  Messianic  kingdom. 

Obs.  26.  Pre-Millenarianism  is  unjustly  held  accountable  for  the  extrav- 
agances of  its  votaries,  and  even  of  its  opposers. 

We  have  referred  to  this,  and  give  instances  of  both.  It  is  only  necessary  to  say,  that 
no  doctrine  of  the  Bible  has  ever  j^et  escaped  being  allied  with  error  and  fanaticism  (but 
on  that  account  ought  not  to  be  discarded),  so  this  doctrine  has  not  escaped  the  usual 
lot.  We  find  it  allied  with  error  and  extravagance  from  the  days  of  Montanus  down  to 
the  present  day,  but  this  should  not  deter  any  one  from  the  reception  of  Biblical  truth 
(which  is  not  responsible  for  the  affiliated  error  and  fanaticism),  especially  when  so 
many  able  and  pious  men  have  received  it  without  incorporating  those  extravagancies, 
etc.   (^Compare  Prop.  179.) 


Prop.  78.]  the  theockatic  kiis^gdom.  55B 

Obs.  27.  Pre-Millenarianism,  being  chiefly  related  to  Eschatology,  is 
adopted  by  persons  in  all  (or  nearly  all)  denominations,  but  our  opponents, 
overlooking  tliis  fact  and  its  historical  status,  eagerly  hold  it  up  as  related 
to  some  sect  or  sects,  who  incorporate  it  with  other  doctrines  that  are  ob- 
jectionable (compare  Prop.  179). 

Ob:^.  28.  The  newspapers  and  periodicals,  partly  or  wholly  devoted  to 
an  exhibit  of  Chiliastic  doctrine,  also  evidence  its  extent. 

The  Theol.  and  Lit.  Journal,  Ed.  by  D.  N.  Lord,  a  Quarterly  Review,  only  13  vols.,  8vo, 
published  m  New  York  ;  The  Jewish  Repository,  changed  to  Expositor  and  Friend  of  Israel, 
London  ;  The  Investigator  of  Prcypliecy,  London  ;  The  Bloomshury  Lent  Lectures,  10  vols., 
London;  The  Xi^em/is^,  5  vols.,  Philad. ;  Purdon's  Last  Vials,  London;  The  Quarterly 
Journal  of  Prophecy,  Ed.  by  Dr.  Bonar,  London  ;  The  Presbyterian  Peview  (Organ  of  the 
Scotch  church,  a  no.  of  articles)  ;  The  Prophetic  Times,  Philad.,— the  old  series  edited  by 
Dr.  Seiss,  the  new  by  Rev.  Wilson  ;  The  Israelite  Indeed,  or  Nathaniel,  New  York,  edited 
by  Lederer  ;  Way-Marks  in  the  Wilderness,  New  Y'^ork,  edited  by  James  Inglis  ;  The 
Truth,  St.  Louis,  edited  by  Rev.  Dr.  Brookes  ;  The  Rainhow,  London,  Ed.  by  Dr.  Leask  ;  (Jld 
Truths  (Eng.),  Ed.  by  Rev.  Cox  ;  The  Watchman  of  Ephraim,  England.  Also  such  papers 
as  "  The  Christian  Herald  "'  (London  and  New  York),  "  The  Christian  Observer,"  "Re- 
vivalist,' etc.,  contain  Chiliastic  articles.  Besides  these  are  the  periodicals  published 
by  the  Second  Adventists,  Christadelphians,  Seventh-day  Adventists,  and  various  other 
bodies,  which,  more  or  less,  largely  teach  Chiliastic  doctrine,  such  as  "The  World's 
Crisis"  (Boston),  "  The  Gospel  Banner  and  Mill.  Advocate  "  (Geneva,  HI.),  ''  The  Proph. 
Watchman"  (Harvard,  HI.)  "  The  Herald  of  Life  and  of  the  Coming  Kingdom"  (New 
York),  "The  True  Herald  "  (Piano,  HI.),  "  Herald  of  the  Kingdom  ' '  (Birmingham,  Eng.), 
"  The  Proph.  Key"  (Versailles,  Ky.),  and  others. 

Obs.  29.  The  survival  of  Chiliasm,  amidst  the  opposition,  ridicule,  per- 
secution, etc.,  of  the  past  centuries,  is  worthy  of  notice.  Dr.  West  {His. 
of  the  Doc.)  has  some  forcible  remarks  on  this  point,  showing  "  that  only 
because  it  is  an  imperishable  trutli  of  God  has  it  been  able  to  survive  the 
ordeal  wliich  it  has  passed."  Considering  the  reproach  attending  it — the 
debasements  and  admixtures  to  which  it  has  been  subject ;  how  offensive  it 
was  to  Gentile  rulers,  to  Gnostic  and  Alexandrian  teachers,  to  Paj^al 
claims  ;  the  persecutions  to  which  it  was  exposed  ;  the  obloquy  heaped  on 
it  as  heresy  to  crush  it ;  the  misrepresentations,  abuse,  hostility,  etc., 
heaped  upon  it,  as  found  in  thousands  of  works  ;  and  considering  the  pious 
and  eminent  men  who  clung  to  it,  taught  it,  and  urged  it  upon  others,  it 
must  be — as  Chiliasts  athrm — a  truth  found  in  the  Divine  Record,  planted 
there  by  God  Himself  to  inspire  faith  and  hope. 

Obs.  30.  The  number  of  missionaries  holding  our  doctrine,  who  have 
gone  to  foreign  lands  and  among  the  heathen,  is  not  only  gratifying,  but 
evidences  how  widespread  must  be  Chiliastic  teaching. 

Compare  our  remarks  on  the  missionaries  and  missionary  spirit,  given  more  in  detail, 
under  Props.  175-178.  In  this  connection  we  only  say  that  a  long  list  of  missionaries, 
extending  from  the  Apostolic  church  down  to  the  present,  who  are  Chiliastic  might  be  given. 
Dr.  West  ("His.  of  the  Doc")  says  of  its  advocates:  "that  devoted  missionaries  like 
Duff  the  opener  of  India,  Gutlaff  the  opener  of  China,  Bettleheim  the  opener  of  Japan, 
Heber,  Bertram,  Wolff,  Herschel,  Poor,  Lowry,  and  many  more,  were  Pre-Millenarians, 
and  are  followed,  if  recent  information  is  con-ect,  by  a  majority  of  missionaries  now  in 
the  foreign  field,  of  the  same  faith."  (Comp.  Brookes,  Maranaiha,  Seiss,  Last  limes,  etc., 
for  similar  statements. ) 

Obs.  31.  The  Evangelists  and  Revivalists  who  are  Chiliastic  is  conclu- 
sive evidence  of  two  facts,  viz.:  that  Chiliasm  is   not  opposed  (as  some 


554  ,         THE  TIIEOCnATIC   KIIS^GDOM.  [PrOP.  78. 

allege)  to  personal  effort  to  bring  men  to  Jesus,  and  that  Chiliasm  is  tauglit 
by  men  who  have  access  to  large  numbers  of  hearers. 

The  Evangelists,  well  known,  who  present  our  hope,  are  the  following  :  D.  L.  Moody, 
Eev.  G.  F.  Pentecost,  G.  C.  Needham,  T.  W.  Bonham,  Halsey  W.  Knapp,  Maj.  D.  W. 
Whittle,  B.  F.  Jacobs,  Rev.  H.  W.  Brown,  F.  M.  Rockwell,  H.  P.  Welton,  —  Harry, 
—  Moorehouse,  P.  P.  Bliss,  (see  testimony  of  chairman  of  the  Proph.  Conf.  held  at  N.  York, 
1878,    Irih.  iSup.,  p.  18),  —  Sankey,  John  G.  Vassar. 

Ohs.  32.  One  remarkable  feature  connected  with  the  history  of  Chiliasm 
must  not  be  overlooked.  It  has  been  held  by  believers  of  all  classes  and 
the  most  opposite  tendencies — men  of  the  strongest  Confessional  tendency 
and  men  the  most  unconfessional  ;  men  hierarchical  in  teaching  and  men 
the  most  determined  against  it ;  persons  who  prided  themselves  in  their 
orthodoxy  and  persons  who  rejoiced  in  their  heterodoxy  ;  persons  highly 
Calvinistic  and  persons  low  Arminian — in  brief,  nearly  all  classes  are  rep- 
resented. This  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  doctrine  is  mainly  confined 
to  Eschatology  (having,  however,  as  we  show,  an  important  bearing  on 
many  related  subjects),  and  coald  readily  be  incorporated  in  the  various 
systems.     Scarcely  any  other  doctrine  is  found  more  widely  diffused. 

Simply  to  illustrate  how  parties  the  most  diverse  in  view  entertain  it  we  point  to  or- 
ganizations of  believers  who  hold  to  it  as  a  prominent  article  of  faith.  The  "  Holy  Apos- 
tolic Church"  is  exceedingly  high-church  and  ritualistic  ;  on  the  other  hand  "  The  Ply- 
mouth Brethren"  are  the  direct  opposite.  On  the  one  hand  the  "  Michaelians"  (following 
Spener's  pietism  and  Oetinger's  theosoi^hy);  on  the  other  the  "  Pregizerians"  (Kurtz,  Ch. 
His.  Vol.  2,  p.  290-1)  who  laid  the  greatest  stress  on  ordinances.  The  names  tliat  we  give 
of  its  Primitive  and  succeeding  advocates,  down  to  the  present  day,  clearly  evidences  this 
feature.  This  fact  evidently  indorses  the  idea  that  the  doctrine  must  be  distinctively 
taught  in  the  Scriptures,  seeing  that  so  many,  who  are  not  united  on  other  doctrine,  find 
here  a  common  scriptural  basis,— some  indeed  more  distinctively  and  systematically 
than  others. 

Obs.  33.  The  Conferences  held  at  London,  Milday,  New  York,  and  other 
places,  in  which  the  most  eminent  ministers  and  laymen  of  the  various 
Protestant  denominations  participated,  evidence  the  extent  of  the  doctrine 
and  its  practical  realization. 

These  Conferences,  in  view  of  the  eminence,  ability,  etc.,  of  their  supporters,  the  various 
denominations  so  largely  represented  by  leading  divines  and  laymen,  have  directed  pub- 
lic attention  to  the  doctrine  and  its  extent.  It  has  alarmed  Post-  and  Ante-Millenarians, 
so  that  Prof.  Briggs  and  others  protest,  under  the  threat  of  Eccles.  action,  against 
their  continuance,  and  call  for  a  disbandonment.  Such  menaces  are  a  <jood  sign,  both  of 
felt  weakness  in  support  of  their  own  theories  and  of  the  strength  manifested  by  Pre- 
Millenarians. 

Ohs.  34.  The  poets  who  have  presented  Chiliastic  views  are  both  numer- 
ous and  eminent. 

The  following  may  be  instanced :  Milton  {Paradise  Lost),  Alex.  Pope  ( TJte  Messiah),  Jno. 
Keble  (  The  Christian  Year),  Charles  Wesley  (  Hymns),  Bh.  R.  Heber  (  Hymns),  M.  F. 
Tupper  (Poems),  Isaac  Watts  (Hymns  and  Psalms),  Wm.  Cowper  (Task),  Ed.  Bicker- 
steth  (Yesterday,  To-day  and  Forever),  H.  Bonar,  (Hymns  of  Faith  and  Hope),  Rev.  L.  Way 
(Palingenesia),  Jno.  G.  Wilson  (Psalms),  S.  B.  Monsell  (Hymns),  Gerard  Moultrie  (Hymns), 
M.  Habershaw  (Hymns),  and  many  others.  Hundreds  of  hymns  and  psalms  in  the 
older  Christian  Psalmody  are  so  opposed  to  the  Whitbyan  and  Augustinian  theories,  so 
full  of  longing  for  the  Sec.  Coming  as  the  "the  Blessed  Hope,"  so  utterly  faithless  of 
the  world's  progress  without  the  Christ,  etc.,  that  they  strongly  express  Chiliastic  views. 


Prop.  78.]  the  theockatic  kiis-gdom.  655 

Ohs.  35.  The  design  that  God  has,  in  thus  greatly  reviving  the  doctrine, 
is  worthy  of  attention.     He  does  not  leave  His  truth  without  testimony. 

Dr.  West  (His.  of  Doc),  pertinently,  after  referring  to  "the  galaxy  of  illustrious  names 
by  which  it  is  adorned,  by  what  piety  it  is  commended,  by  what  unquestioned  orthodoxy 
and  scholarship  supported,  and  how  the  Church  seems  to  be  rallying  around  it,  as  in  the 
martyr  age, ' '  says  :  ' '  What  an  All- Wise  Providence  means  to  intimate,  it  is  well  to  con- 
sider."    (Comp.  Prop.  174.) 

Ods.  3G.  In  conclusion,  a  brief  resume  of  our  historical  argument,  to 
show  its  connection,  is  in  place.  The  evidence  in  support  of  each  step  is 
ample  and  conclusive.  Indeed,  no  other  doctrine  has  a  more  clear  cpid  de- 
cisiveproof  in  its  behalf  drawn  from  historical  ground  than  this  one.  1. 
We  have  shown  that  the  Jews,  before  and  at  the  First  Advent,  held  to  it, 
professing  to  derive  it  from  covenant  and  prophecy.  (Compare  e.g.  Props. 
20,  21,  40,  44,  72,  V4.)  2.  Then  we  prove  that  John  the  Baptist  and  the 
disciples  both  entertained  and  preached  the  doctrine.  (Compare  Props.  38, 
39,  43.)  3.  IN'ext,  that  the  doctrine  was  still  held  after  the  death  of  Jesus. 
(Compare  Props.  69,  70.)  4.  Extended  evidence  is  given  that  the  apostles, 
after  the  ascension  and  after  the  day  of  Pentecost,  still  adhered  to  it. 
(Compare  Props.  71,  72  with  Props.  66-G8.)  5.  It  is  proven  that  our  doc- 
trine was  generally,  if  not  universally,  received  by  the  early  churches,  East 
and  West,  North  and  South.  (Compare  Props.  72,  73,  74,  75.)  G.  This 
doctrine  was  perpetuated  by  the  followers  and  successors  of  the  first  teach- 
ers. (Compare  Prop.  75.)  7.  That  it  was  only  changed  and  opposed  under 
the  Gnostic  and  Alexandrian  influences.  (Comp.  Prop.  7G.)  8.  That  the 
Papacy  materially  aided  in  crushing  the  doctrine,  because  obnoxious  to  her 
teaching,  claims,  etc.  (Comp.  Prop.  77.)  9.  That, thus  almost  exterminated 
under  Papal  influence,  there  was  a  revival  after  the  Reformation,  since 
which  time  it  has  again  been  taught  by  able  and  devout  sons  of  the  church, 
as  shown  in  this  Prop. 


^56  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  79. 


Proposition  79.  The  Kingdom  of  God^  promised  hy  covenant 
and propliets^  is  to  he  distinguished  from  the  general  and  uni- 
versal Sovereignty  of  God. 

This  is,  owing  to  lack  of  discrimination,  a  most  fruitful  source 
of  mistake.  Take  the  Kingdom  in  its  initiatory  form  and  its  cove- 
nanted and  predicted  aspect,  and  it  will  be  found  loidely  different 
from  the  Sovereignty  that  God  exercises  by  virtue  of  His  God- 
headship.  The  latter  indeed  is  the  source  of  the  former,  but  the 
Kingdom  of  covenant  is  a  msible,  outward  Theocratic  Kingdom., 
manifested  here  on  earth,  identified  with  a  certain  x)eople,  promised 
in  a  definite  manner,  and  ruled  over  by  "  the  man  ordained."  As 
we  shall  show  hereafter  (Prop.  81),  it  is  a  Kingdom  specifically 
promised  to  the  "  the  Son  of  Man,^''  who  is  the  Son  of  David. 
These,  and  other  aspects  of  it,  clearly  distinguish  it  from  such  a 
sovereignty. 

Ols.  1.  It  is  but  justice  to  say  that  many  of  our  opponents  (as  e.g. 
Thom^oson,  etc.)  and  others  (as  e.g.  Van  Oosterzee,  etc.)  jnstly  discrimi- 
nate between  this  Kingdom  and  God's  Sovereignty,  telling  us  that  we  must 
not  make  this  Kingdom  denote  the  Supremacy  of  God  as  manifested  in 
Creation  and  Providence,  in  His  "  Universal  Government  over  this  and 
other  worlds."  They  correctly  inform  us  that  the  promised  Kingdom  is  a 
special  divine  organization  with  Christ  as  its  Head,  and  with  believing  sub- 
jects, etc.,  while  the  other  is  the  sustaining,  guiding,  controlling,  directing 
disposition,  mediate  and  immediate,  of  the  Universe  under  the  Divine 
Headshij).  They  teach  us  that  the  one  is  given  by  covenant  j^romise,  and 
that  the  other  ever  existed,  even  before  this  special  Kingdom  was  promised 
to  man.  They  properly  direct  us  to  the  language  of  Christ  and  of  His 
disciples  in  preaching  that  the  Kingdom  "  is  at  hand,"  as  justly  implying 
that  something  which  did  not  then  exist  was  to  be  set  up  in  the  future. 
And  they  happily  direct  us  to  two  passages,  given  by  the  same  writer,  as 
illustrative  of  the  two,  viz. :  Dan.  6  :  26  and  7  :  13-14. 

Indeed,  if  we  were  to  gather  the  fragmentary  evidences  thus  presented  to  us  by  vari- 
ous writers,  we  should  have  an  abundant  array  of  proof,  mucli  of  it  derived  from  those 
who  have  no  sympathy  with  us.  Those  who  constitute  the  Church  a  Kingdom  are 
forced  by  simple  consistency  into  this  attitude.  Hence  Kurtz  {His.  Old  Gov.,  vol.  2,  p. 
97)  remarks  :  "It  is  essentially  necessary  to  make  a  twofold  distinction  in  the  process 
of  divine  revelation  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  preservation  and 
government  of  the  world  in  general,  from  the  more  special  operations  connected  with  the 
introduction  and  working  out  of  the  plan  of  salvation,"  etc.  The  sovereignty  of  "the 
Absolute,"  which  figures  so  largely  in  many  religious  books,  etc.,  and,  upon  which  so 
much  stress  is  laid  as  "  the  Kingdom,"  is  simply  a  decided  removal  from  covenant  and 
l^romise.  The  reader  will  compare  Dr.  Storrs'  excellent  remark,  see  Prop.  37,  Obs.  7,  as 
well  as  Kurtz's,  Prop.  26,  Obs.  3.  Dr.  McCosh  presents  the  Universal  Sovereignty  ably 
in  his  "  Methods  of  the  Divine  Government,  Physical  and  Moral,"  so  also  Butler,  Paley, 


PPvOP.  79.]  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  557 

Chalmers,  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  and  others  ;  but  this  is  only  the  source  or  foundation  of 
this  special  manifestation  of  government.  Dr.  Craven  (Lange's  Com.,  Kev.,  p.  97),  in  his 
"Excursus  on  the  Basileia,"  properly  distinguishes  between  the  two  ;  and  this  is  char- 
acteristic of  numerous  able  Chiliasts. 

Obs.  2.  Others,  however,  do  not  discern  between  things  that  differ,  and 
make  the  very  Sovereignty  which  promises,  overrules,  bestows  the  means 
for  attaining,  and  finally  gives  the  Kingdom  (Prop.  83),  to  David's  Son — 
the  Kingdom  itself.  Illustrations  of  this  looseness  will  abundantly  ap- 
pear as  we  proceed  in  our  argument. 

Many  excellent  men  mistake  this  sovereignty  for  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  so  that  lit- 
erally thousands,  like  that  noble  Christian,  Alfred  Cookman  {Life,  p.  359,  etc.,  in  some  of 
his  most  eloquent  utterances),  locate  the  kingdom  in  the  same,  not  seeing  how  it  strikes 
at  the  root  of  the  most  preckms  promises  given  to  man.  Even  some  Millenarians,  not  fully 
grasping  the  covenanted  truth,  not  consistently  confining  themselves  to  the  Theocratic  idea, 
also,  in  a  measure,  mistake  and  confound  the  Divine  Sovereignty  for,  and  with,  the  King- 
dom of  covenant.  This  is  seen  e.g.  in  the  interpretation  given  to  Christ's  inheriting 
David's  throne,  which,  over  against  the  most  positive  covenanted  declarations  and  predic- 
tions, they  make  the  Father's  throne  in  the  third  heaven,  etc. 

Obs.  3.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  works  of  Sys.  Divinity  this  Sovereignty 
is  placed  under  the  part  pertaining  to  God  and  His  general  government, 
and  is  separated  from  the  promised  Kingdom  of  Christ  by  treating  of  the 
latter  under  the  Part  relating  to  Christ  and  His  work.  A  distinction  is 
observed,  made,  and  taught  in  a  specific  form,  hnt  j^racticaUy  it  is  ignored, 
and  in  definitions  it  is  made  to  disappear,  forgetting  that  thus  a  radical 
(lefec/ is  introduced,  and  a  palpaMe  contradict  mi  is  involved.  For,  unit- 
ing the  two  and  making  them  one,  they  at  once  make  that,  which  they 
tell  us  was  never  (even  for  a  moment),  intermitted,  the  subject  of  recorded 
promises  as  something  to  come,  to  be  inherited,  etc. 

Williamson  {Theol.  and  Moral  Science,  p.  73)  says  :  "The  Kingdom  of  God  !  What 
is  it?  No  more  or  less  than  the  reign  of  God."  This  is  true  of  the  Divine  Sovereignty, 
but  it  is  not  correct  as  he  applies  it,  for  on  p.  311  he  quotes  "  Kepent,  for  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  at  hand,"  and  ignoring  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  imposed  condition 
"repent,"  the  non-intermittence  of  the  Divine  reign,  he  frames  a  new  "  spiritual  king- 
dom, designating  it  as  follows:  "It  is  a  new  and  more  perfect  dispensation."  This 
illustration  out  of  many  is  given  to  show  how  able  writers  confound  source  and  result, 
cause  and  effect,  and  overlook  a  specific  covenanted  and  predicted  kingdom  under  David's 
son,  with  characteristics  which,  down  to  the  present,  have  never  yet  been  realized. 

Obs.  4.  The  line  of  argument  already  presented  (which  forms  but  a 
small  portion  of  the  Scriptural  reasons  to  be  assigned),  is  amply  stifflcient 
to  show,  that  a  specified  Theocratic  Kingdom,  incorporating  the  Davjdic 
throne,  which  once  existed,  which  was  withdrawn,  and  which  is  promised 
to  be  restored  under  David's  Son,  is  something  widely  different  from  the 
general  Sovereignty  of  the  Almighty  over  the  universe.  So  plain,  and 
simple,  and  self-evident  is  this  Proposition,  that  no  more  space  is  required 
in  its  consideration. 

We  can  indorse  Dr.  Moll's  statement  (Lange's  Com.,  Psls.  p.  306)  :  "There  is  a  dis- 
tinction to  be  made  between  God's  general  government  of  the  world,  and  that  special 
one — the  Theocracy — which  He  established  on  earth,  in  and  through  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
Even  in  the  imperfect  and  typical  (?)  form  which  it  assumes  in  Old  Test,  history,  this 
is  described  as  His  descending  to  the  earth  and  His  ascending  to  heaven.  This  theoc- 
racy, insignificant  as  was  its  origin   in  Israel,  has  a  world-embracing   destination.     It 


558  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  79. 

shall  gather  into  itself  all  nations,  who,  as  one  people  of  God,  shall  serve  and  adore  one 
and  the  same  heavenly  King  ;  and  their  princes  shall  accomplish  those  purposes  which 
God  has  ordained  for  them,  viz. :  to  be  the  leaders  of  their  people  to  salvation,  and  their 
protectors  in  the  service  of  God."  Avoiding  the  typical,  and  keeping  logically  to  the 
Theocratic  idea,  we  receive  and  extend  this  language. 


Prop.  80.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  559 


Proposition  80.  Tliis  Kingdom  of  covenant  ]yromise  and  pre- 
diction^  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Sovereignty  which  Jesus 
exercises  by  virtue  of  His  Divine  nature. 

This  is  distinctively  shown  by  a  simple  fact  (overlooked  by  the 
multitude)  that  the  Kingdom  is  nemr  promised  to  Him  as  ""the 
Son  of  GoW^  but  as  (the  covenants  and  predictions  demand  it) 
"  the  Son  of  3£an'^  or  "  the  Son  of  David .'^  The  following  Prop- 
osition will  develop  this  feature  ;  now  it  is  only  necessary  to  say, 
that  (1)  the  Sovereignty  of  God  introduces  this  special  Theocratic 
Kingdom  in  the  incorporated  Davidic  line,  and  (2)  to  constitute 
this  a  pure,  unfailing,  perpetual  Theocracy  (viz.  :  God  riding  as 
earthly  King,  etc.)  the  Divine  is  allied  or  incorporated  with  the 
person  of  this  David's  Son. 

Obs.  1.  It  may  be  premised,  in  order  to  avoid  misconception,  that  Jesus 
now  in  His  Divine  nature,  in  His  Oneness  with  the  Father,  does  exercise 
a  dominion  over  all  things.  According  to  this  nature  He  is  Lord  over  all, 
and  this  is,  in  our  estimation,  most  unequivocally  taught  in  such  passages 
as  John  1:3;  Col.  1  :  15,  19  ;  Phil.  2  :  9,  11;  1  Cor.  8:6;  Rom.  11  :  H6  ; 
Rev.  1:5-6,  etc.  We  fully  admit  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  revere  His 
Divine  attributes,  make  these  essential  to  a  ])roiier  Theocratic  ordering,  and 
acknowledge  the  Sovereignty  that  He  possesses  in  His  Divine  right  and 
possession.  But  nidependently  of  the  actual  realization  of  the  Theocratic 
order  as  covenanted,  and  aside  from  the  latter  (for  let  the  reader  consider 
that  when  God  Himself  was  Israel's  Theocratic  King,  He  did  not  cease  to 
exert  His  general  Sovereignty),  this  exercise  of  Divine  Sovereignty  is  pre- 
cisely the  same  as  that  we  have  been  considering  in  the  previous  Proposi- 
tion, viz.:  God's  Sovereignty,  and  differs  materially  from  this  predicted 
Kingdom  which  \s promised  to  Jesus,  ^^  the  6%rz6'?',"  not  merely  in  virtue 
of  His  relationship  to  God  but  of  that  which  He  sustains  to  David  as  Ms 
Son,  and  to  man  as  the  Man.  The  reign,  the  dominion,  or  Kingdom  that 
we  are  defending,  is,  in  contrast  with  the  other,  that  of  His  humanity  {as 
covenanted),  or,  more  properly  speaking  (embracing  covenant  as  it  relates 
to  man,  and  God's  own  Theocratic  right  which  is  not  the  subject  of  pro- 
mise), that  of  tJie  DivineHuman.  The  Theocracy,  by  incorporating  the 
Davidic  kingship,  embraces,  as  the  grand  instrument ality  for  its  future 
re-establishment  in  sublime  power  and  glory,  the  DivineHuman,  now 
united  in  Jesus,  the  Messiah. 

It  has  been  w«ll  said  by  various  writers  (as  e.  g.  Neander,  K'ls.  Oh.,  vol.  1,  p.  506,  note, 
and  Life  of  Christ,  p.  143)  :  "The  predicates  'the  Son  of  Man'  and  '  the  Son  of  God,'  ap- 
plied by  Christ  to  Himself,  have  a  reciprocal  relation  to  one  another,  and  imply  a  disiinction 
as  well  as  the  conjuyidion  (md ^lnity  ot  the  divine-hiiman  in  Him."  The  careful  student  will 
observe  that  our  argument  receives  additional  force  from  the  independent  concessions 
made  by  able  theologians,  as  e.  g.  Martensen  {Ch.  Dog.,  sec.  174),  when  he  properly  dis- 


560  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  80. 

criminates  between  the  kingly  power  of  Jesus,  and  the  divine  power  belonging  to  Him 
as  Logos,  etc.  Others  distinguish  in  the  same  manner.  Comp.  e.g.  Dorner's  Ferson  of 
Christ  and  kindred  works. 

Ohs.  2.  The  early  Chiliasts  clearly  distinguish  between  the  Kingdom 
belonging  to  Jesus  as  the  Divine-Human,  and  the  Sovereignty  vested  in 
Him  as  God.  Thus  e.g.  Lactantius  ("  Poem  on  Easter"),  while  firmly 
holding  to  the  still  future  Kingdom  of  promise  to  be  given  to  the  Son  of 
David,  expressly  asserts  that  Christ  "  reigns  as  Grod  over  all  tilings,  and 
all  created  objects  offer  prayer  to  their  Creator."  The  idea,  gathered 
from  their  writings,  is  this  :  in  His  Divine  capacity  He  is  represented  as 
reigning,  but  this  reign  is  not  the  reign  of  promise  ; — the  latter  is  confined 
to  a  special  covenanted  outward  visible  manifestation  of  the  human  in  con- 
junction with  the  Divine,  in  an  externally  Theocratic  ordering, 

Ohs.  3.  When  Christ  assumes  the  Kingdom  at  the  time  appointed,  in 
view  of  His  being  the  predicted  seed  of  David,  this  does  not  by  any  means 
cause  Him  to  lay  aside  the  Sovereignty  that  He  has  with  the  Father  over 
the  universe.  As  Divine  He  is  with  the  Father  evermore,  but  as  the 
Divine-human,  He  manifests  Himself  (and  the  Father  through  Him)  on 
earth  i7i  a  s^jecified  form  of  reigning  adapted  to  humanity.  Hence  the 
predicted  Kingdom  is  something  that  pertains  not  merely  to  the  Divine 
but  to  "  the  Christ,^ ^  i.e.  the  Divine-human  united.  Tlie  right  comes  to 
Him  in  the  covenanted  line  through  tlie  human  element  (i.e.  as  the  lawful 
seed  of  David)  delegated  by  the  Divine  Sovereignty  of  the  Father  and 
rendered  efficacious  and  Theocratic  by  the  intimate  and  ever-enduring 
union  of  the  Divine,  thus  constituting  Him  in  the  highest  and  purest 
sense  the  Theocratic  King. 

The  reader  is  again  reminded  that  this  is  fully  illustrated  by  the  Theocracy.  When  God 
condescended  to  reign  as  Theocratic  King  (i.e.  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler) 
over  Israel,  two  things  were  noticeable  :  (1)  that  this  Theocratic  rule  was  something  diverse 
from  the  general  sovereignty  over  all  things  ;  and  (2)  that  when  the  former  was  assumed, 
the  latter  was  not  laid  aside,  but  continued  ever  in  force.  The  one  was  a  .speciai  merciful 
manifestation  in  behalf  of  man,  the  other  lies  inherent  in  the  Godhead  and  pertains  to  the 
universe  at  large. 

Ol)s.  4.  It  is  amazing  that  theologians,  without  observing  the  contradic- 
tion involved,  confound  the  Divine  Sovereignty  with  the  covenanted  King- 
ship of  Jesus,  and  yet  acknowledge  that  Rom.  14  :  9  ;  Phil.  2:9;  Heb. 
12  :2,  etc.,  teach  that  "  the  ground  of  His  dominion  is  to  be  found  in  His 
obedience  unto  death,  the  death  of  the  cross"  (so  Oosterzee's  Dogmatics). 
Now  certainly  the  Divine  Sovereignty  is  not  grounded  in  any  such  con- 
tingency, but  the  Kingship  pertaining  to  Jesus,  as  the  Son  of  David,  is 
based  upon  His  obedience,  etc.  (comp.  Props.  83  and  84). 

Flavel,  in  his  Fountain  of  Life,  represents  Jesus  as  now  reigning  under  two  heads  :  (1) 
"  the  kingly  office  of  Christ,  as  executed  spiritually  upon  the  souls  of  the  Redeemed,  and 
(2)  the  kingly  office  of  Christ  as  providentially  executed  for  the  Redeemed."  The  first  is 
based  on  2  Cor.  10  :  5,  supposed  to  be  especially  confirmed  by  Luke  17  :  20,  21.  He  has, 
over  against  the  express  covenant  that  specifies  with  distinctness  the  throne  to  be  occupied 
by  Jesus,  Christ's  throne  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  The  second  is  derived  from  Eph.  1:  22 
(a  present  realization  being  taken  for  granted),  which  is  supported  by  an  apj)eal  to  the  Di- 
vine Sovereignty.  Two  things  are  noticeable  in  Flavel's  ignoring  of  covenant  and  covenant 
promises  :  (1)  the  means  are  confounded  with  the  end,  and  (2)  without  any  regard  to  the 


Prop.  80.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  561 

context  of  passages,  or  to  their  reference  to  time  (dispensation),  thej'  are  quoted  as  appli- 
cable to  his  spiritualistic  theory.  Many  writers,  of  usefulness  and  piety,  follow  the  same 
illogical  and  unsa-ipiural  view  of  the  kingdom. 

Ohs.  5.  What  Lange  {Com.  p.  268)  observes  in  reference  to  the  miracles 
of  Christ,  that  "  the  distinction  between  the  economy  of  the  Father  and  of 
the  Son  must  ever  be  kept  in  mind,"  is  especially  necessary  in  the  study 
of  this  Kingdom  ;  otherwise  we  will  be  led  to  a  confusion  of  ideas  and  to 
palpable  contradictions.  There  are  some  things  which  essentially  belong 
to  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  as  One  with  God  ;  and  there  are  other  things 
which  appertain  to  Him  as  "  the  Christ,"  the  Divine-human.  Two  ex- 
tremes are  to  be  avoided  :  on  the  one  hand  to  lay  all  stress  on  the  Divine, 
and  making,  in  this  Kingdom,  the  human  too  subordinate  ;  and  on  the 
other  hand  pressing  the  human  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Divine.  Both  are 
firmly  and  eternally  united,  and  the  very  revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man,  as 
David's  Son,  will  necessarily  be  an  attestation  to  His  divinity  in  "the  works 
that  He  will  do,  in  the  power  tliat  He  will  exercise,  and  in  the  relation 
that  He  sustains  to  the  universe.  The  last  feature  is  illustrated  as  given 
in  Jno.  3  :  13  (comp.  6  :  62,  and  17  :  5),  where,  according  to  some  commen- 
tators (as  Barnes,  Lange,  etc.),  Jesus  speaks  of  Himself  as  being  in  heaven 
at  the  very  time  He  was  also  on  earth  speaking  to  Nicodemus  (two  ancient 
MSS.  according  to  Tischendorf's  N.  Test,  the  S.  and  C.  omit  "  which  is  in 
heaven").  Thus  also  when  again  present  on  earth,  taking  the  Kingdom 
as  Son  of  Man,  this  does  not  forbid  His  being,  through  the  all-pervading 
attributes  ascribed  to  Him,  in  heaven  or  in  any  part  of  the  universe. 
These  are  deep  things,  and  we  must  speak  of  them  after  the  manner  of 
man. 

For  we  are  not  of  those  who  think  that  the  Person  of  Christ  can  he  fully  explained.  He 
portrays  Himself  as  a  mystery,  connected  with  the  incomprehensible,  revealed  only  to  a  few, 
and  then  only  in  some  of  His  features.  Much  pertaining  to  Christ  is  still  unknown,  and 
has  been  the  subject  of  controversy  and  impotent  discussion.  Hence  the  author  has  little 
sympathy  with  a  class  of  writers  who,  in  their  exactness  to  define  the  Person  of  Christ 
rush  to  opposite  extremes  :  the  one  party,  while  acknowledging  the  union  of  the  divine- 
human,  laave  the  human  completely  absorbed  in  the  divine  ;  the  other  with  equal  precise- 
ness  making  all  human.  Others  receive,  justly,  all  that  is  recorded,  and  therefore  cleave 
to  Jesus  as  "the  Christ,"  being  constituted  such  by  a  permanent  union  of  the  divine-hu- 
man, hoih  existing  in  ever-enduring  harmony.  Man  is  himself,  in  some  respects,  a  mystery, 
and  so  long  as  it  has  been  found  impracticable  to  explain  man  (as  e.g.  union  of  soul  and 
body)  consistently  and  satisfactorily,  it  would  be  better  (as  indicative  of  modesty)  to 
avoid  attempting  an  accurate  explanation  of  "  the  Christ."  It  is  painful  to  read  the  varied 
and  contradictory  statements  given  in  the  writings  of  fallible  men  concerning  Him,  who, 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  being  man  and  above  man-  man  united  with  the  Divine 
Mystery  (God,  the  Incomprehensible)— is  in  a  higher  sense  beyond  our  comprehension. 
We  must  rest  satisfied  with  the  description  given  of  Him  in  the  Word  (which  some  writers 
portray  with  force  and  depth),  without  attempting  to  explain  what  the  Bible  has  left  in- 
definite and  unknown. 

Ohs.  6.  As  if  purposely  to  guard  us  against  the  error  which  is  so  largely 
prevalent,  the  phrase  "  Son  of  God  "  is  not  employed  in  direct  connection 
with  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  to  be  set  up  on  earth.  Indeed,  our  argument 
thus  far  indicates  that  such  a  declaration,  as  e.g.  that  the  Kingdom  is 
given  to  Jesus  in  view  of  His  being  the  Son  of  God,  would  be  utterly  op- 
jyosed  to  the  Ahrahamic-Davidic  covenant.,  for  it  would  virtually  then  be 
saying  that  God  gives  the  Kingdom  to  God,  phraseology  so  hostile  to  pro- 
priety that  the  Spirit  avoids  it  (comp.  Props.   82,  83,  84).     The  corre- 


^Q2  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  80. 

spondence  thus  happily  maintained  between  the  requirements  of  the  cove- 
nant (and  tliat  which  is  inherent  with  God)  and  the  Lmguage  of  the  New 
Test.,  is  one  of  those  indirect,  but  ?'eaUy  powerful,  proofs  of  the  inspiration 
of  the  Word.  The  student  is  directed  to  a  few  peculiarities  connected  with 
this  phrase.  It  is  used,  for  instance,  to  denote  the  power,  divine  or  mirac- 
ulous, which  was  lodged  in  Ilim  because  of  His  relationship  with  the 
Father,  as  in  Matt.  4  :  3,  and  8  :  29,  and  14  :  33  ;  Mark  3  :  11,  and  5:7; 
Luke  4  :  41  ;  Jno.  10  :  3G,  and  11  :  4,  etc.  Jesus  Himself  clearly  makes  a 
designed  ditference  between  the  two  phrases,  as  in  Matt.  2Q  :  (j3,  64.  The 
High  Priest  uses  the  one,  asking  ''  whether  Thou  be  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  God?"  Jesus,  purposely  to  identify  Himself  SNitli  the  covenants  and 
the  prediction  of  Daniel,  employs  in' His  answer  the  other,  the  "  Sou  of 
Man.''  The  delicate  propriety,  the  beautiful  consistency  underlying  this, 
stamps  the  Record  as  true  and  divine.  The  same  is  the  case  in  John  1  : 
49-51  ;  for  when  Nathanael  "  saith  unto  Him,  Rabbi,  Thou  art  the  Son  of 
God  ;  Thou  art  the  King  of  Israel,"  Jesus,  with  exquisite  tact,  silently 
acceding  to  the  title  thus  given  to  Him,  directs  his  attention  to  the  title 
which  specifically  (see  Prop.  81)  belongs  to  Him  as  the  King  of  Israel  by 
styling  Himself  "  the  Son  of  Man''  in  the  "  hereafter."  Uninspired  men 
could  not  have  kept  up  such  a  considerate  and  wonderful  unity.  This  is 
preserved  even  in  cases  where  a  work  (as  e.g.  the  resurrection)  is  said  to  be 
done  by  Christ,  which  human  power  alone  could  not  perform.  Thus  in 
John  5  :  25,  where  it  is  said  that  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son 
of  God,  He  immediately  adds,  in  order  to  avoid  misapprehension,  "  and 
hath  given  Him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also  ;  lecause  He  is  the  Son 
of  Man.''  Miraculous,  creative,  divine  power  is  lodged  in  Him  because 
He  is  the  Son  of  Ood  ;  but  Judgeship,  the  revelation  of  Kingship — for  He 
judges  as  King — appertains  to  Him  "  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man." 
This  change  of  title,  this  precise  and  giiarded  manner  of  expressing  it,  is 
sustained  by  the  most  weighty  reasons.  The  predicate  "  Son  of  God"  is 
given  to  show  His  ability  to  save,  that  requisite  power  is  united  with  the 
human,  as  in  Rom.  1:1;  Heb.  4  :  14  ;  1  Jno.  3  :  8,  etc.  The  predicate 
''  Son  of  Man"  is  bestowed  to  identify  Him  as  truly  coming  i7i  the  cove- 
nanted and  Theocratic  order. 

The  tendency  of  many  Theologians  is  to  exalt  the  divinity  of  Jesus  to  the  almost  total 
exclusion  of  the  humanity,  just  as  if  the  latter  had  performed  its  function  and  was  not 
destined  to  remain  in  the  future  an  important  and  essential  factor  in  Redemption.  So  much 
is  the  latter  ignored  in  the  absorbing  interest  attached  to  the  former,  that  its  due  rela- 
tionship to  covenants,  to  the  purposes  of  salvation,  to  the  Theocratic  ordering,  and  to 
the  history  of  the  human  race,  is  not  observed.  How  often  do  we  read  expressions  which 
ascribe  the  Kingdom  of  promise  to  "  the  Son  of  God  "  owing  to  the  divine  nature  in 
Him,  and  arguments  are  ijlentifully  adduced  to  prove  that  it  must  be  so  because  of  His 
Omnipotence,  etc.,  while  tJie  real  ground  of  the  Kingdom  being  bestowed  upon  Him  as  "  the 
Christ "  is  very  diif erently  represented  in  the  covenant  and  by  the  prophets,  viz.  :  tJie  rela- 
tionship of  Jesus  to  David  as  the  covenanted  seed;  a  relationship  sustained,  elevated,  made 
rich  in  blessing,  fruitful  in  honor  and  glory  by  the  union  of  the  divine.  It  is  wrong, 
therefore,  to  estimate  the  human  so  lowly  in  tlie  light  of  the  divine,  as  almost  to  set  it 
aside  as  if  no  particular  value  was  to  be  placed  on  tlie  same.  Reuss  (Introd. ,  p.  16,  His. 
Ch.  Jheol.),  after  saying  that  "  God  has  no  history,"  gravely  asserts  :  "Anyone  who  un- 
dertakes seriously,  and  without  playing  on  words,  to  write  a  life  of  Jesus,  by  that  very 
fact,  and  whatever  may  be  the  result  of  his  labors,  steps  out  of  the  strict  enclosure  of 
orthodoxy."  Reuss  forgets  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  David  as  well  as  the  Son  of  God,  and 
that  while  the  divine  element,  abstractly  considered,  cannot  be  limited  by  history,  the 
Divine-human,  the  Christ,  properly  estimated  from  the  Incarnation,  has  a  history  which 
must  comport  icith  the  covenants  and  prophecies  ;  and  that  such  a  history,  now  and 


PeOP.  80.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  563 

when  completed  in  the  age  to  come,  is  a  vindication  of   the  faithfulness  of   God,  etc.     A 
history,  if  now  necessarily  incomplete,  is  a  sequence  of  covenant  and  prophecy. 

Ohs.  7.  The  Divine  has  elevated  the  human,  held  in  conjunction  for  the 
pre-ordained  Theocratic  rule,  to  the  Father's  throne,  i.e.  "  the  Christ," 
the  Divine-Human  united  in  one  Person  is  "  set  down  with  wy  Fatlier  in 
His  tJirone,^'  ^ndi  that  in  virtue  of  His  overcoming.  Hence  all  power  is 
lodged  in  Him  both  in  heaven  and  in  earth  ;  He  is  exalted  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  ;  He  is  made  "  both  Lord  and  Christ.'"  This  insnres  the  ulti- 
mate fulfilment  of  the  Christship — for  the  Divine  Sovereignty  thus  linked 
by  the  union  of  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  with  the  Man  Jesus 
shows  that  through  "  this  Man''  (as  Paul  calls  Him)  the  Theocratic  ar- 
rangement in  the  Davidic  line,  indicated  by  His  being  "  the  Christ,''  will 
be  carried  out,  and  that  thus  God,  in  and  through  Him,  will  reign  in  the 
desired  capacity  of  earthly  Ruler  over  humanity.  The  present  exaltation 
of  Jesus,  the  i^sultant  of  His  being  esteemed  worthy  of  the  covenanted 
Theocratic  position,  is  founded  (I)  on  the  Divine  Sovereignty  pertaining 
to  Him  as  Divine  ;  (2)  on  the  contemplated  and  determined  Theocratic 
rule  ;  (3)  on  the  provisionary  measures  instituted  by  and  through  Him, 
mediatory,  intercessory,  etc. ;  (4)  on  the  honor  and  glory  that  appertains 
to  Him  both  in  virtue  of  what  He  is  now,  and  of  what  He  will  yet  be 
when  manifested  as  "  the  .Christ"  in  the  covenanted  office.  Hence  while 
immeasurably  (Eph.  1  :  21,  22)  exalted,  as  lecoines  a  Theocratic  King  who 
is  to  rule  on  earth  as  God  through  David's  Son,  yet  distinguishing  as  the 
Bible  does  between  His  inherent  Divine  Sovereignty  as  God  and  the  future 
manifestation  of  the  God-Man  as  Theocratic  King,  He  is  represented  in 
the  latter  capacity  as  waiting,  "  exjjecting  till  His  enemies  shall  be  made 
His  footstool,"  etc. 

This  expectant  position  of  "  that  man,  whom  God  hath  ordained  to  judge  the  world" 
(Acts  17  :  31),  will  be  fully  developed  as  the  argument  advances.  Let  it  only  be  said, 
that  believers  rob  themselves  of  much  comfort  and  sustaining  hope  when  only  looking  at 
the  Divine  they  forget  the  exceeding  preciousness  contained  in  the  sublime  fact  that  a  man, 
David's  Son,  is  exalted  above  all  dominion  and  power,  thus  unmistakahly  insuring  the  ful- 
filment of  covenanted  promises.  The  surety  is  thus  given  that  the  oath-bound  covenant 
—  which  contains  the  blessings  that  a  sin-cursed  world  requires — will  inevitably  be  real- 
ized in  every  particular.  The  Davidic  line,  in  which  the  Theocratic  ordering  runs,  thus 
exalted  in  the  Person  of  the  promised  seed,  is  a  pledge  given  that  "  tJie  sure  mercies  of  David" 
will  be  abundantly  verified  at  the  time  appointed  by  the  Father.  It  is  well  too  in  this 
discussion  to  keep  constantly  in  view  that  "the  Christ,"  in  His  exaltation,  at  present 
sustains  to  us  the  relationship  of  Mediator,  Intercessor,  and  Advocate.  Mercy  and  forbear- 
ance are  characteristic  of  His  waiting  and  expecting  position  now  ;  mercy  and  wrath  of  His 
Sec.  Coming. 

In  Rev.  3  :  21,  Jesus  is  represented  as  in  His  Father's  throne.  This  in  "the  Christ  " 
results  from  virtue  of  the  acceptance  of  His  sacrificial  work,  Ifis  dignity  as  the  intended 
Theocratic  King,  and  the  union  of  the  Divine  with  him.  But  while  thus  exalted,  the 
special  manifestation  of  the  humanity  in  its  own  right  as  Tlieocraiic,  is  reserved  (for  rea- 
sons that  will  hereafter  appear)  for  the  future.  This  is  manifest  even  in  the  jDassage 
itself  where  two  thrones  are  spoken  of,  viz. :  His  own  throne — His  bj^  covenanted  legal 
right  as  "the  Man  ordained,"  and  His  Father's  throne.  His  also  because  of  His  Divine  re- 
lationship. Attention  is  directed  to  this,  in  order  that  a  due  discrimination  may  be 
made  between  what  pertains  to  the  general  Sovereignty  of  the  third  heaven,  and  what 
relates  to  the  special  Theocratic  rule  here  on  earth,  and  which  alone  is  exhibited  in  and 
through  "the  Man."  Overlooking  this,  Waggoner  {Bef.  of  Age)  makes  this  reign  of 
Christ  on  the  throne  of  the  Universe  the  one  that  he  resigns,  1  Cor.  15  :  24.  But  this  cannot 
be  so,  seeing  that  God  ruling  as  a  Theocratic  King  does  not  necessitate  the  relinquishment  of 
the  other  (Obs.  3),  that  Jesus  acting  as  Theocratic  King  never  gives  up  the  oneness  with 
the  Father  or  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  that  the  Sovereignty  inherent  to  His  Divinity 


564  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  80. 

ever  remains  unimpaired,  that  no  honor  or  power,  or  exaltation  belonging  to  the  Christ 
shall  ever  be  diminished.  The  mistake  arises  from  two  things  :  (1)  forgetting  that  God, 
without  yielding  other  rights,  etc.,  can  act  in  the  capacity  of  Theocratic  King,  and  (2) 
misapprehending  1  Cor.  15  :  24. 

Ohs.  8.  We  do  not  lessen  or  lower  the  exaltation  or  power,  or  divinity, 
or  glory  of  Christ,  in  thus  referring  the  predictions  and  promises  of  the 
Kingdom  covenanted  to  David's  Son  to  an  outioard  manifestation  still 
future.  {Comp.  Prop.  203).  Instead  of  detracting  from  llim,  we  exalt 
Him  as  high  as  the  Record  honors  Him,  seeing  that  we  accept  of  its  Divine 
utterances  just  as  we  find  them,  feeling  assured  that  the  literal  fulfilment 
of  the  covenant  itself  in  the  Theocratic  ordering  will  only  the  more  clearly 
vindicate  the  foundation  upon  which  it  rests,  viz.:  Divine  Sovereignty  as 
exhibited  in  a  special  Plan  of  Redemption  realized  in  all  its  fulness. 
Therefore  we  gladly  receive  the  declaration  that  "  all  power  in  heaven  and 
on  earth  is  given  to  Me;^'  that  He  is  above  all  earthly  kings  ;  that  all 
things  are  subject  to  Him  ;  that  He  can  do  all  things  ift  behalf  of  His 
people,  etc. ;  but  we  add  to  all  this,  precisely  tvhat  the  Bible  adds,  that, 
aside  from  His  Divine  nature,  we  do  not  yet  see  "  the  ChrisV^  as  *'  the 
Son  of  Man'' ^  openly  exercise  this  power,  outwardly  manifest  this  exaltation, 
visibly  bring  all  things  ii.to  subjection,  and  here  on  the  earth  perform  all 
things  that  are  promised.  So  far  as  the  Kingdom  pertaining  to  the  Son 
of  David  is  concerned,  some  things,  and  those  too  relating  to  the  very  re- 
establishment  of  it,  are  held  in  abeyance  (as  will  be  shown),  until  a  cer- 
tain period  has  arrived.  By  this  faith,  we  honor  "  ^/^e  Christ;^'  for  in 
this  way  our  belief  is  expressed  that  Jle  will  yet  fulfil  the  precious  cove- 
nants and  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  just  as  they  read  ;  we  evince 
our  confidence  that  He  is  ivorthy,  as  David's  Son,  to  receive  what  is 
directly  promised  to  Him,  and  to  which  He  is  entitled,  His  inheritance, 
throne  and  Kingdom  ;  we  express  our  trust  that  He,  thus  reigning  in  a 
special  and  triumphant  Theocratic  manner,  will  perfect  Redemption,  not 
from  a  part  but  from  the  ivhole  of  the  curse  ;  we  glorify  Him  in  exhibiting 
His  own  faithfulness  in  Salvation,  crowned  as  it  will  be  by  His  promised 
Theocratic  rule  as  ^^  the  Christ,''^  showing  forth  the  union  of  the  human 
with  the  divine  in  the  most  conspicuous,  honorable  manner  here  on  earth 
(comp.  ProiJS.  200,  201,  and  204). 


Prop.  81.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  565 


Propositiois^  81.     lids  Kingdom^   tints  covenanted^   belongs   to 
Jesus  as  "  the  Son  of  ManP 

The  Kingdom  is  primarily  and  exclusively  (i.  e.  hy  covenant  and 
prophecy)  promised  to  tlie  Son  of  David^  althougli  intimations  are 
given  (as  e.g.  in  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord,  and  also  in  the 
perfect  Theocracy  instituted,  etc.)  that  the  Divine  shall  be  united 
with  that  Son.  We  have  only  to  refer  to  the  Davidic  Covenant 
where  this  is  distinctly  announced.  Upon  this  Covenant  is  based 
the  promise,  repeated  by  the  prophets,  that  the  descendant  of 
David  should  reign  ;  and  from  the  same,  and  its  relation  to  human- 
ity, arises  the  distinctive  title  "  Son  of  Man!"  The  kingdom, 
therefore,  is  pointedly  in  harmony  with  covenant  and  promise, 
predicted  as  bestowed  upon  "  the  Son  of  Man^^  as  e.g.  Dan.  7  : 
13.  Hence,  too,  when  Peter  preaches  his  first  sermon  (Acts  2  :  30) 
he  in  the  same  strain  declares  ' '  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oatn 
to  him  (i.e.  David),  that  of  the  fruit  of  his  loins,  according  to 
the  fleshy  He  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  tJirone." 

Ohs.  1.  It  is  not  our  purpose  to  enter  into  a  detailed  account  of  the  doc- 
trine pertaining  to  the  divine  and  human  natures  in  Christ.  Able  writers 
(as  jVeander,  Lange,  Dorner,  Hengstenberg,  etc.)  have  done  this,  showing 
that  both  are  necessary  to  constitute  the  Saviour,  "  the  Christ.''^  The  In- 
finite and  the  Finite,  the  God  and  the  Man,  the  Absohite  and  the  Relative, 
are  united  in  this  tlie  most  astonishing  of  all  unions.  We  dare  not  sejxt- 
rate  what  God  has  joined,  and  we  declare,  (1)  that  such  a  union  x^pcrpet- 
ual,  and  (2)  that  its  foundation — overlooked  by  many  writers — is  in  the 
Theocratic  Plan  as  purposed  (comp.  Prop.  199).  But  while  this  is  so,  our 
argument,  in  accord  with  the  expressed  Divine  Purpose,  makes  nnich  of 
the  human  nature  and  the  important  j^art  it  is  yet  to  take  in  Redemption. 

This  union  of  the  divine  and  human  has  been  the  battle-field  between  faith  and 
false  philosophy,  revelation  and  proud  reason.  This  great  truth,  one  of  ihe  most  profound 
and  essential,  has  been,  for  the  last  years,  the  centre  of  strife  between  its  foes  and  its 
friends.  Work  after  work  levelled  against  the  divine  in  Christ  has  been  issued  and 
hailed  with  delight  by  unbelievers,  while  believers  have  sent  forth  an  equal  number  in  de- 
fence of  the  same.  But  in  this  contest,  while  the  divine  and  human  are  both  acknowl- 
edged by  the  Christian  party,  it  must  be  sadly  confessed  that,  in  the  effort  to  exalt  the 
divine,  too  little  stress  has  been  laid  on  the  human.  It  seems  to  be  taken /or  granted,  that 
the  human,  having  accomplished  its  mission  on  the  cross,  is  swallowed  up  in  the  divine ; 
that  its  sole  work  is  finished,  and  that  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  continue  and  carry  out 
the  Plan  of  the  Divine  economy.  Now  contrary  to  all  this,  the  early  church  faith, while 
conjoining  the  divine  with  the  human  and  making  the  former  the  supporter  and  ennobler 
of  the  latter,  insists  upon  the  human  maintaining  its  distinctive  and  enduring  relationship  in 
the  Christship  of  Jesus.  It  is  to  be  lamented  that  able  works  written  in  defence  of  the  Di- 
vinity of  Jesus  entirely  overlook  the  strong  argument  derived  in  favor  of  the  same  by  the  rela- 
tionship that  the  Humanity  of  Jesus  sustains  to  the  Theocratic  order.     A  Theocratic  King, 


503  THE  THEOCRATIC  K:iNGDo:\r.  [Prop.  81. 

if  ruling  as  covenanted,  must  be  both  Man  and  God.  While  we  may  not  run  to  the  ex- 
treme of  Robertson  (Frederick,  as  quoted  by  Cobbe  in  Danclnism  in  Morals),  saying  "only 
a  human  God  and  none  other  must  be  adored  by  man,"  yet  it  is  true  that  the  incorpora- 
tion of  the  Davidic  line  into  the  Theocratic  order  contemplates  tJie  manifestation  of  God 
in  and  through  humanity  as  found  in  the  predicted  Son  of  David,  so  that  he  who  beholds  this 
Son  sees  the  Father  also,  and  this  owing  to  the  Theocratic  position  and  relationship  of 
the  same.  Hence  justice  to  "  the  Christ,"  in  any  life  of  His,  ought  to  show  the  requisite 
union  of  the  Divine  and  Human  in  the  Theocratic  Plan,  and,  therefore,  lay  great  stress 
upon  the  coming  revelation  of  these  essential  factors. 

Obs.  2.  Various  reasons  are  assigned  by  theologians  for  the  use  of  this 
phrase  '*  the  Son  of  Man,^^  a  favorite  with  Jesus,  such  as  its  reference  to 
the  incarnation,  to  His  relationship  with  man,  to  His  being  the  predicted 
man,  to  his  special  peculiarity  of  personality,  to  His  humiliation,  con- 
descension, and  lowliness,  to  His  being  the  ideal  or  representative  man, 
etc.  Now  whatever  of  truth  may  be  attached  to  any  of  these,  the  true 
reason  for  its  usage  appears  to  be  the  following  :  it  is  the  pec?(Iiar,  distinc- 
tive, predicted  name  of  the  Messiah  given  to  Him  in  virtue  of  His  covenanted 
relationship  to  the  Kingdom.  This  is  clearly  seen,(l)  by  the  covenant 
designating  the  Man,  pre-eminently,  of  the  seed  of  David  to  whom  the 
Kingdom  rightfully  belongs  ;  (2)  by  the  fact  that  the  Kingdom  is  prom- 
ised/o  such  a}i  one  in  the  way  of  identification  and  realization  by  David 
and  others,  and  hence  is,  and  properly  must  be,  adopted  by  Jesus  ;  (3)  by 
the  invariable  linking  of  the  name  with  the  reception  of  the  Kingdom  by 
Jpsus  Himself,  as  e.g.  Matt.  25:31-34;  Matt.  16:27,  28,  etc.;  (4)  by 
the  remarkable — but  too  much  overlooked — scriptural  fact,  that  the 
Kingdom,  when  specifically  promised,  is  always  promised  to  the  humanity 
of  Jesus,  i.e.  to  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  Man,^'  and  not  to  His  Divine  nature, 
i.e.  to  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  God.'"  This  naturally  results /ro;/i  the  covenant 
specifying  Him  as  the  Son  of  David  to  whom  alone  the  Kingdom  is  prom- 
ised. Of  course,  as  the  Kingdom  is  also  God's,  being  a  Theocracy,  the 
Divine  is  united  with  this  inheriting,  but  for  the  purpose  of  identification 
and  consistency  with  solemn  covenant  declarations,  Jesus  selects  the  very 
title  which  accordx  witli  both  covenant  and  prophecy,  and  which  most 
directly  indicates  His  covenant  connection  with  the  Kingdom  itself.  The 
reader  is  only  reminded  that  it  is  so  far  sweeping  in  its  range  that  it  also 
embraces,  aside  from  the  distinctive  reference  to  the  seedshij^  of  Abraham 
and  David  (indicative  of  covenanted  relationship  to  the  Kingdom),  a 
second  headship  of  the  human  family  in  the  person  of  a  Second  Adam, 
made  such  by  the  Redemptive  process. 

This  interesting  subject  urges  us  to  say  something  more  respecting  the  opinions  that 
are  usually  entertained  concerning  the  phrase.  These  are  far  from  being  satisfactory, 
seeing  that  they  do  not  meet  the  reauirements  of  its  usage  and  the  connection  it  sus- 
tains to  covenant  and  prediction.  Thus  e.g.  to  say  (1)  as  Gosterzee  iCh.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p. 
528),  that  "  tho  name  Son  of  man"  is  a  "figurative  indication  of  the  Messianic  dignity," 
seeing  that  it  is  a  real  indication  of  the  same,  i.e.  a  real  coming  of  such  an  one,  based 
on  the  covenant  with  David.  (2)  That  the  name  simply  denotes  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  is  not  sufficient,  because  it  was  not  necessary  to  assume  such  a  title  to  prove  that 
He  had  a  human  body,  but  it  was  requisite  to  identify  Him  as  the  specific  Man  intended 
by  the  covenant.  Dr.  Campbell  {Diss,  on  the  Gospels)  remarks,  that  the  phrase  meant 
that  the  Messiah  "  would  be  human,  not  an  angelical,  or  any  other  being  ;  for  in  the 
Oriental  idiom,  Son  of  Man  and  man  are  equivalent."  This  is  only  part  of  the  truth  ; 
He  was  indeed  human,  a  man,  but  He  assumed  the  title  because  the  covenant  demands  a 
man  derived  front  the  lineage  of  David,  and  this  man  jjromised  is  already  designated 
by  David  (Ps.  80  :  17),  and  by  Daniel  (7  :  13),  hence  if  Jesus  is  indeed  the  predicted  prom- 
ised Gne,  it  becomes  Him  to  assume  the  name  previously  given  to  Him  to  distinguish 


Prop.  81.]  the  theocratic  kingdo^v.  567 

Him  as  the  intended  One  from  all  other  men.  (3)  Fairbairn  indorses  Cam])beirs  view, 
but  thinks  that  to  it  should  be  added  the  idea  of  a  Divine  Man,  as  it  was  in  "  the  Son  of 
man"  that  God  was  to  appear  to  raise  up  man  from  his  fallen  condition,  etc.  Now 
while  rejoicing  in  the  divinity, of  the  Man  Jesus,  and  regarding  it  as  a  grand  essenikd  in 
the  work  of  Redemption,  yet  planting  ourselves  firmly  on  the  covenant  and  the  develop- 
ment of  it  as  presented  by  the  prophets,  it  will  be  found  that  the  phrase  is  not  used  to 
designate  the  divine  nature  of  Christ,  but  His  descent  from  David  and  His  being  the  des- 
ignated, pre-ordained  One  to  whom  the  Kingdom,  by  virtue  of  such  descent,  rightfully 
belongs.  It  is  freely  admitted  that  with  it  can  be  associated  other  things,  as  His  rela- 
tionship to  man  and  even  to  God,  but  logically  the  groiind  of  the  title  lies  in  the  covenant. 
(1)  Some  tell  us  that  the  name  is  to  be  taken  in  a  tyjiical  sense  ;  but  that  no  type  is  in- 
tended is  evident  from  the  terms  of  the  covenant,  Ihe  birth  of  Jesus,  the  direct  applica- 
tion of  the  name,  and  the  future  continued  reception  of  the  title.  It  indicates  at  His 
birth,  in  His  life,  at  His  Second  Coming,  a  particular  Man,  i.e.  the  Son  of  David  to  whom 
the  Kingdom  is  promised.  (5)  Others  inform  us  that  the  name  was  ''  a  mere  periphrasis 
of  the  personal  pronoun."  but  this  is  disproved  by  the  use  made  of  it  by  Stephen  (Acts 
7  :  56),  by  Daniel,  David,  and  Jesus  Himself.  (6)  Some  declare  that  the  name  is  only 
applied  to  a  temporary  humiliation,  but  that  this  is  erroneous  follows  from  His  retaining 
the  title  in  connection  with  His  glorified  and  Kingly  state  (as  seen  e.g.  Matt.  25  :  31  ; 
Mark  13  :  26,  etc.).  In  this  connection  the  strange  utterance  of  Oosterzee  (Theol.  JS'. 
Test.,  p.  75)  may  be  quoted  :  "  It  (i.e.  Son  of  Man)  is  nothing  else  than  the  allegorical 
designation  of  the  Messiah  in  His  lowly  appearance  on  earth,  derived  from  the  vision  of 
the  prophet  Daniel  7  :  13,  14."  Having  sufficiently  answered  this  unaidJiorized  interpre- 
tation, it  may  be  well  to  add,  that  Daniel,  in  the  passage  designated,  does  not  speak  of 
humiliation,  but  of  exaltation,  and  with  the  period  of  Christ  s  highest  glory  the  title  is  associ- 
ated as  various  Scriptures  testify-.  (7)  Others  merely  find  that  it  was  assumed  to  iden- 
tify Him  as  the  predicted  One,  regarding  it  as  an  accommodation.  But  it  is  more  than 
this  :  a  permanent  reality,  and  ever  remaining  such,  as  the  Divine  Purpose  indicates  in 
Christ's  greatest  exaltation.  (8)  We  are  gravely  told  by  one  writer  that  the  title  was 
chosen  as  the  lowest  to  manifest  His  humility,  and  to  prevent  His  disciples  from  being 
overawed  by  His  majesty.  This,  in  view  of  the  continued  use  of  the  title  at  the  Sec. 
Advent,  etc.,  presents  an  exceeding  loio  estimate  of  the  name  and  its  preciousness.  (9) 
A  favorite  notion  prevails  that  it  was  significant  of  His  being  "  the  model  man,"  "  the 
representative  man,"  "  the  ideal  of  humanity,"  etc.  Whatever  of  truth  there  may  be  in 
the  abstract  in  such  reiDresentations,  they  are  too  one-sided  to  embrace  its  full  meaning 
and  entirely  overlook  its  covenanted  relationship  to  the  Kingdom.  Various  other  mean- 
ings, differing  but  slightly  from  those  given,  are  j^resented  by  authors,  and  we  may  con- 
clude by  saying,  that  while  the  name  embraces  in  its  comprehensive  meaning  allusions 
to  the  Incarnation,  the  ^Messiahship,  the  covenanted  relationship,  and  an  affinity  to 
humanity  as  the  Second  Adam,  yet,  in  virtue  of  His  being  the  covenanted  Man  or  Son 
of  David,  its  meaning  reaches  far  beyond  the  present  into  the  future,  indicating  the 
future  conjoining  and  manifestation  of  the  covenanted  Son  of  Man  and  His  Kingdom. 
These  two  are  inseparable,  and  the  one  suggests  the  other.  Hence  it  is  incorrect  to 
say,  as  an  eminent  writer  does,  that  we  are  not  to  "  seek  the  explanation  of  this  name 
in  any  views  bearing  on  the  future."  To  confine  the  name  to  His  Pirst  Advent  or  to  this 
dispensation,  is  to  limit  it  within  unauthorized  bounds,  for  Jesus  repeatedly  shows  that  this 
name  stands  allied  with,  and  most  intimately  related  to,  His  final  Adveid  and  the  revelation 
of  His  Kingdom.  Van  Oosterzee,  in  his  Art.  "  The  Son  of  Man"  {Princeton  Beview,  July, 
1878),  accurately  says,  what  we  also  must  not  overlook,  that  the  very  assumption  of  this 
name,  whatever  the  intention,  evidences—  as  no  other  man  assumed  it  as  a  significant 
title— that  "  He  was  conscious  of  being  originally  and  essentially  different  from  man,  and 
infinitely  more."  This  is  true,  but  to  it  we  must  add,  that  Omniscience  gave  Him  this  very^^ 
title  in  the  covenanted  line  and  TJieocratic  Purpose,  seeing  that  in  Him,  as  David's  Son,  God 
—the  Divine— would  thus  draw  nigh  toman  in  man.  Fausset  {Com.  Ezek.  2  :  1  and  Dan. 
7  :  13)  says,  the  "  title,  as  applied  to  the  Messiah,  implies  at  once  His  lowliness  and  His 
exaltation  in  His  manifestations  as  the  Representative  Man  at  His  Pirst  and  Sec.  Comings 
respectively.' '  Whatever  of  truth  in  this,  it  does  not  sufficiently  express  the  covenanted 
and 'predicted  Theocratic  relationship.  (Comp.  Dr.  Schaff's  "  Excursus  on  the  Meaning 
of  the  Title  '  The  Son  of  Man'  "  in  Lange's  Com.  John,  p.  98  ;  much  of  which  we  can  in- 
corporate with  our  view.) 

CJI)8.  3.  The   manner   in  which   Jesns   employs   this  name   is   strongly 
corroborative   and   cnforcive   of   our  line   of    arOTment.     In  the   use   of 


568  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  81. 

it  Jesus  ppeaks  of  Himself  as  of  a  third  person  instead  of  employ- 
ing the  pronominal  or  customary  personal  application.  Writers  say 
that  this  is  a  more  intensive,  dignified,  majestic  form  of  speaking,  but 
Judge  Jones  [Notes  on  Matt.  16  :  27)  comes  the  nearest  to  the  truth 
when  he  writes  :  "  Our  God  uses  this  form  of  designation  as  a  titular  dis- 
ti7iction  to  denote  His  relation  to  this  world  as  its  Sovereign  or  Lord" 
— to  which  is  to  be  added,  in  order  to  bring  out  the  whole  truth,  that  the 
same  is  founded  on  His  covenanted  relationship  as  the  Son  of  David  to 
whom  David's  throne  and  Kingdom  (i.e.  the  Theocracy),  and  through 
the  latter  a  world-dominion,  is  promised.  It  embraces  then  in  its  mean- 
ing tlie  personal  King  to  whom  the  Kingdom  belongs,  the  perfected  Re- 
deemer and  perfected  Redemption  through  Him  in  accordance  with  cove- 
nanted promises,  the  exaltation  of  humanity  and  its  intimate  union  with 
the  Divine  as  intimated  in  the  covenants,  and,  therefore,  is  a  name  that 
will  never  he  laid  aside,  but  continues  forever  perpetuated  as  most  signifi- 
cant, descriptive,  and  real.  For,  in  alliance  with  it  is  derived,  as  God  has 
sworn,  the  salvation  of  mankind,  not  in  prospect  or  in  progress  bat  com- 
pleted, and,  hence  appropriately,  the  name  is  not  merely  applied  to  the 
incarnate  Jesus  hit  to  the  glorified  Christ.  If  this  were  not  so,  a  serious 
defect,  vitiating  our  entire  argument,  would  be  found,  but  with  it  unity 
and  an  essential  factor  is  astonishingly  preserved. 

With  some  surprise,  we  find  even  Kenan  {Life  of  Jesus,  p.  144,  who  notices  that  the 
title  "  Son  of  Man"  occurs  eighty-four  times  in  the  Gospels,  and  always  in  the  dis- 
courses of  Jesus)  saying  :  "  But  He  is  never  thus  addressed,  doubtless  because  the 
name  in  question  could  he  move  fully  accorded  to  Him  only  at  the  period  of  His  Sec.  Coining." 
This  is  true,  for  applicable  as  the  name  was  to  Jesus  at  His  First  Advent,  yet  it  is  pre- 
eminently so  at  His  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  decisive  proof  is,  that  He  Himself  repeatedly 
and  constantly  thus  refers  it,  making  the  future  coming  in  power  and  glory  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom  the  emphatic  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  (as  e.g.  Matt.  16  :  27  ; 
26  :  64  ;  25  :  31  ;  19  :  28  ;  Mark  8  :  38  ;  13  :  26  ;  Luke  9  :  26  ;  21  :  27  ;  John  5  :  27,  etc.). 
The  covenant  promises  demand  this,  and  our  faith  in  the  covenant  is  strengthened  by 
the  significant  phraseology  of  Christ,  As  already  intimated,  the  God  ruling  in  a  Theoc- 
racy is  taken  for  granted  as  fundamental  to  the  idea  of  a  Theocracy  (hence  even  the 
Jews,  as  in  the  case  of  the  high  priest,  looked  for  "the  Son  of  God  "  to  come  and 
reign),  therefore  the  f)hrase  "  the  Son  of  God  "  is  omitted  and  the  phrase  "  the  Son  of 
Man"  is  substituted  for  the  reasons  assigned,  thus  giving  us,  if  we  will  but  receive  it, 
the  idea  of  God  ruling  in  and  through  humanity.  Dr.  Schaff  ( The  Person  of  Christ),  there- 
fore,  correctly  makes  the  title  ''  Son  of  Man"  one  of  elevation,  dignity,  instead  of  one  of 
humiliation  (so  also  Trench  on  The  Parables,  Nevin,  and  many  others).  This  enables 
us  also  to  apiDreciate  the  perversion  of  the  title  by  others,  as  e.g.  that  it  denoted 
(Amner)  the  Roman  Republic,  or  (Grotius)  the  Fifth  Kingdom,  or  (Berg)  the  United 
States,  etc. 

Obs.  4.  The  most  fruitful  source  of  misinterpreting  this  Kingdom  arises 
from  not  discriminating  to  whom  this  Kingdom  is  specially  promised. 
According  to  the  covenant — and  this  must  necessarily  be  the  basis  of  a 
correct  Scriptural  representation — it  is  promised  to  the  Son  of  David,  the 
Son  of  Man.  Not  noticing  this  simple  fact,  leads  to  grave  misapprehen- 
sion. Many  authoni  (as  e.g.  Priest,  in  Introd.  to  Yieiv  of  Mill.)  assert 
that  Jesus  Christ  now  reigns  in  virtue  of  His  Divinity  and  attributes  as 
God,  and,  therefore,  we  are  to  expect  no  other  reign.  But  this  is  a  con- 
founding of  tilings  that  differ  (comp.  Props.  79,  80).  No  one  refuses  to 
believe  in  the  Sovereignty  of  God  as  God,  but  this  is  materially  different 
from  a  reign  wdiich  is  to  be  manifested  in  and  through  a  Son  of  Man  in 
a  purely  Theocratic  manner,  i.e.  God  in  and  through  David's  Son  conde- 


Prop.  81.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  569 

scending  to  act  in  the  capaciti/  of  cm  earthly  Ruler,  whicli  is  the  xjrimary 
and  true  meaning  of  a  Theocratic  ordering  as  once  witnessed  and  as  cove- 
nanted. This  Theocracy  is  given  to  this  Son  of  Man  (Prop.  83),  and  the 
reign  is  manifested  through  the  glorified  Son  of  David.  Let  it  be  re- 
peated :  it  is  not  the  Divine  Sonship  that  constitutes  "  the  ClirisV 
(altliough  an  esseyitial  element),  and  it  is  not  the  Davidic  Sonship  that 
constitutes  Him  "  the  Messiah'^  (althougli  essentially  requisite),  but  it  is 
tlie  two  inseparal)ly  united  that  makes  Him  "  the  Christ.''^  Now  while  this 
is  so,  the  covenant  and  i^rophecies,  in  view  of  the  incorporation  of  the 
Davidic  line  in  the  contemplated  and  purposed  Theocratic  Kingdom,  point 
out  tlie  Man,  in  and  through  whom  this  rule  shall  be  manifested.  Thus 
we  have  (1)  the  Son  of  Man,  as  presented  by  covenant  the  central  figure  ; 
(2)  with  this  Son  of  Man  is  united  the  Divine  to  insure  a  pure  and  perpet- 
ual Theocratic  rule  ;  (3)  this  reign  being  Theocratic,  and  under  a  mani- 
fested Son  of  Man,  is  diverse  from  the  general  Sovereignty  of  God  ;  (4) 
that  to  encourage  our  faith  in  the  covenanted  Theocracy  stress  is  laid  on  the 
future  coming  and  reign  of  '^  the  Son  of  31  an.' ^ 

It  is,  therefore,  a  distinctive  title,  constantly  having  a  fixed,  determined  meaning, 
and  not,  as  our  opponents  assert,  susceptible  of  a  variable  or  indefinite  meaning.  Thus 
e.g.  Alexander  {Com.  on  Matt.  10  :  23)  overlooked  this  personal  title,  and  pronounces  the 
expression"  till  the  Son  of  Man  be  come,"  "  an  indefinite  expression  meaning  some- 
iimes  more  and  sometimes  less,  but  here  equivalent  to  saying,  '  till  the  object  of  your  mis- 
sion is  accomplished.'  "  And  in  the  same  comment,  he  makes  it  equivalent  to  "  the 
Kingdom  (i.e.  the  Church)  of  Messiah  finally  established."  The  simple  tact  is  this  : 
the  phrase  "  Son  of  Man,'  in  its  covenanted  sense,  does  7iot  jit  into  a  spiritualistic  sys- 
tem, and  hence  arises  the  various  and  conflicting  senses  applied  to  it,  making  it  to  de- 
note more  or  less  by  way  of  accommodation.  Tlie  Pre-Mill.  doctrine  alone  gives  it  one 
determined  and  continuous  meaning,  and  consistently  preserves  it  throughout.  One  of 
the  most  repulsive  and  anscriptural  statements,  given  {Introd.)  under  the  plea  of  "  the 
illuminating  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  Swormstedt's  {The  End  of  the  World  is  Xear, 
eh.  6,)  who,  in  his  astounding  interpretation  of  Eev.  12,  makes  (p.  78-9)  the  man-child  to 
be  the  Second  Adam  born  at  the  time  of  the  marriage  of  the  glorified  church,  and  this 
birth  consists  in  the  separation  of  the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures!  We  give  his 
idea  thus  :  "  The  divine  purposes,  for  which  the  two  natures  of  God  and  man  were 
united  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  viz.  :  the  atonement,  and  intercession,  and  the  perfecting 
the  Second  Adam,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  having  been  accomplished  at  the  moment  the 
man-child  is  born,  the  mj^sterious  union  of  the  human  and  divine  natures  existing  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  terminated  then,  and  the  glorified  spiritual 
man,  who  is  the  Second  Adam,  stands  forth  before  the  glorified  church,  separate  and  dis- 
tinct from  the  Godhead."  This  is  monstrous  !  evidencing  but  little  knowledge  of  the  Per- 
son of  a  Messiah,  the  Theocratic  idea,  the  Second  Adamship,  the  perpetuity  of  the 
Christ  and  of  His  Divine  glory,  the  unchangeableness  of  Jesus,  It  is  derogatory  and 
dishonoring. 

Obs.  5.  The  Theocracy  is  promised  to  this  Son  of  Man,  and  this  teaches 
us  to  anticipate  two  things.  (1)  The  Theocracy  is  a  visible,  outward 
Kingdom.  Now  indeed  overthrown,  but  its  restoration  promised  under 
this  "  Son  of  Man,"  and  so  ojjenly,  so  visibly  that  all  flesh  shall  realize  and 
acknowledge  it.  It  is  predicated  of  this  Son  of  Man,  that  at  His.  Sec. 
Coming,  He  shall,  through  the  power  committed  unto  Him,  overthrow 
His  enemies  and  firmly  re-establish  the  clownf alien  Theocratic  Kingdom, 
and  exhibit  iji  an  outward  rule,  an  external  organized  form,  the  full  reali- 
zation of  the  Theocratic  idea.  (2)  The  very  phrase  ""  the  Son  of  Man" 
imjMes  and  necessitates  the  visibility  of  His  Coming  and  reign  ;  to  spirit- 
ualize it  away  destroys  both  its  covenanted  force  and  the  fulfilment  of  cove- 
nant promise.     Luther  on  this  name,  in  his  Dis.  on  Luke  21  :  25-27,  re- 


570  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  81. 

marks  :  ''  Bat,  as  He  says,  it  is  '  The  Son  of  Man  '  whom  they  shall  see, 
it  is  clearly  expressed  that  it  is  a  hodily  coming  and  a  bodily  seeing,  in  a 
hodily  form,  though  it  shall  be  in  great  power,"  etc.  Lnther  is  correct, 
foi*  niiless  the  Son  of  David  comes  thus  to  reign  (glorified  as  to  humanity), 
the  covenant  cannot  he  fulfilled^  and  the  Theocracy  can7iot  ie  established 
(comp.  Props.  121  and  122). 

A  number  of  interesting  features  connected  as  results  from  the  Kingdom  being  that 
of  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  must  be  left  for  future  consideration,  such  as  the  decided  indi- 
cation of  a  personal  reign,  as  the  early  churches  held,  the  suitableness  and  grandeur  of 
the  view  that  the  Son  of  Man  should  in  His  glorified  humanity  exhibit  His  promised 
sovereignty  in  the  very  place  where  He  lived  in  humiliation,  suffered,  and  died,  the  ele- 
vation of  humanity  in  and  through  Him,  etc.  Some  of  the  views  held  on  this  point  pre- 
sent a  sad  commentary  of  human  infirmity,  which  thinks  to  improve  covenanted  and 
oath-bound  language  by  spiritualizing  it,  making  it  to  mean  something  very  different 
from  the  expressed  grammatical  sense. 

Obs.  G.  "  The  Son  of  Man"  is  fully  identified  with  the  re-establishme7it 
of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  by  covenant  and  promise.  In  view  of 
this,  therefore,  it  was  eminently  proper  for  Jesus  to  employ  this  phrase  in 
the  manner  recorded.  If  the  reader  turns  to  Psl.  80,  he  will  find  David 
referring  to  the  elect  Jewish  nation  bronght  out  of  Egypt,  with  whom 
God  is  angry  so  that  it  is  overthrown  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  the 
heathen.  Imploring  the  Divine  interposition  and  recalling  the  cove- 
nanted promises,  he  prays  with  faith  and  hope  in  the  f  utnre  restoration  of 
the  nation  :  "  Let  Thy  hand  be  iq)on  tJie  Man  of  Thy  right  hand,  ^i])on 
the  Son  of  Man  whoniThou  madest  strong  for  Thyself.'' 

To  indicate  how  this  idea  of  "  the  Son  of  man"  was  held  by  the  Jews,  we  quote  the 
following  from  the  "  Parables  of  Enoch,"  c.  46  :  1,  2  :  "  And  then  I  saw  one  who  had  a 
head  of  Awya  (i.e.  was  old,  the  Ancient  of  Days),  and  His  head  was  white  as  wool,  and 
with  Him  was  another  whose  face  was  like  the  appearance  of  a  man  ;  full  of  agreeable- 
ness  was  his  face  like  that  of  the  holy  angels.  And  I  asked  one  of  the  angels  who  went 
with  me,  who  showed  me  all  the  secret  things  ooncerning  the  Son  of  man,  who  He  was, 
and  whence  He  was,  and  why  He  came  with  that  head  of  days.  And  he  answered  and 
said  to  me.  This  is  the  Son  of  man  who  has  righteousness,  with  whom  righteousness 
dwells,  and  who  will  reveal  all  the  treasures  of  secrecy,  because  the  Lord  of  Spirits  (God) 
has  chosen  Him.  .  .  .  And  this  Son  of  man,  whom  thou  hast  seen,  will  arouse  the 
kings  and  the  mighty  from  their  couches  and  the  powerful  from  their  thrones,  and  will 
loosen  the  bonds  of  the  mighty  and  break  the  teeth  of  sinners."  He  is  also  called  "  the 
Chosen  One,"  the  "  Just  One,"  and  the  "  Anointed."  In  ch.  48  :  3,  a  pre-existence  of 
the  Messiah  is  asserted,  and  in  ch.  2  :  7.  it  is  said  :  "  For  x^reviously  the  Son  of  man  was 
hidden,  and  the  Most  High  God  preserved  Him  before  His  power,  and  revealed  Him  to 
the  chosen  ones."  As  to  our  application  to  the  Messiah  of  Ps.  80,  compare  e.g.  Alexan- 
der Com.  loci,  and  Acts  5  :  31. 

Obs.  7.  Hence  at  the  Sec.  Advent  there  must  be,  in  order  to  fulfil  the 
oath-bound  covenant  made  with  David  (viz.:  that  one  "according  to 
the  flesh"  must  be  raised  np  to  sit  on  the  restored  Theocratic  throne),  a 
real,  veritable  8on  of  David.  The  humanity,  glorified  as  it  may  be,  can- 
not be  ignored ;  it  is  an  essential  factor  in  the  Theocratic  ordering. 
Therefore  the  coming  of  "  the  Christ^'  is  represented  as  the  Coming  of 
^'  the  Son  of  Man,''  i.e.  a  coming  in  the  very  humanity  assumed  under 
covenanted  relationship. 

Various  writers  (comp.  e.g.  Alford,  Lillie,  Braune  (Lange's  Com.),  Ger.  Ver.,  etc., 
render  2  John  7  "is  coming  in  the  flesh,"  i.e.  is  coming  in  humanity,  referring  it  to  the 
Sec.  Advent,  while  1  John  4:2"  hath  come  in  the  flesh"  is  interpreted  of  the  First  Ad- 


Prop.  81.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  571 

vent.  However  this  may  be,  the  coming  of  humanity  in  glory  is  a  result  of  the  first 
coming  in  humiliation  ;  and  the  one  is  just  as  reasonable  and  essential  as  the  other.  The 
Divine  Plan  requires  both  to  effect  the  grand  consummation.  Even  some  of  the  apocrj^- 
phal  books  do  not  rid  themselves  of  this  view.  Thus  e.g.  in  ilie  Test,  of  the  Twelve  Patri- 
archs (Sec.  Cent.),  the  reign  is  attached  to  the  humanity  without  discarding  the  Divine  : 
"  The  Lord  God,  the  Mighty  One  of  Israel,  shall  appear  upon  earth  as  man."  The 
book  of  Enoch  also  employs  the  phrase  "  Son  of  Man."  Martensen,  Oosterzee,  and  many 
others  have  properly  insisted  upon  the  fact  that  the  indivldnality  of  Christ  must  be  so  main- 
tained that  "  even  a  glorified  individuality,  a  spiritual  body,  cannot  be  conceived  of, 
without  limitations,"  otherwise  "  we  are  in  danger  of  that  error,  which  has  so  often  ap- 
peared among  mystics  and  Theosophists,  which  loses  sight  of  a  personal  Christ  in  the 
general  life  of  the  Godhead  ;  of  the  Christ  of  grace  and  salvation,  in  a  pantheistic  Christ 
of  nature"  (so  Martensen)..  But  if  we  were  to  assign  a.Jirm  reason  for  such  a  view,  it  is 
found  in  the  simple  fact  that  covenant  and  prophecy,  indicative  of  God's  purpose,  in 
their  still  future  fulfilment  imperatively  demand  it. 

Ols.  8.  The  critical  reader  will  not  fail  to  notice  that  the  Incarnation  is 
a  covenanted  necessity,  and  that  it  forms  a  fundamental  jpart  of  onr  system 
of  faith  ;  for  without  it  the  f alfilment  of  covenant  promises  luoiild  be  im- 
possible. 

This  doctrine,  therefore,  enforces  the  view  of  Dr.  Dorner  and  others,  of  the  neces- 
sity of  the  Incarnation,  even  apart  from  the  fall.  This  we  derive  from  the  Theocratic  or- 
dering, by  which  the  purest  and  firmest  rule,  theocratically,  can  be  inaugurated  and 
permanently  secured.  Again  :  while  many  systems  make  the  Incarnation  a  central  point 
in  Theology,  they  either  apply  it  mystically  (as  e.g.  a  present  assimilating  of  the  man  into 
the  Divine,  as  the  Divine  took  upon  itself  man's  nature  and  transformed  it,  etc.),  or  else 
they  virtually  end  its  career  as  a  still  working  factor  in  the  Plan  of  Redemption  from 
the  death  on  the  cross,  or  have  it  so  overshadowed  and  absorbed  by  Deity  that  in  the 
future  it  presents  no  special  prominence  as  a  leading  characteristic  of  the  Kingdom, 
Firmly  holding  to  the  covenant,  and  the  promises  based  thereuj^on,  many  views,  exten- 
sively prevailing  and  imbedded  in  the  faith  of  multitudes,  must  be  discarded  as  both  de- 
rogatory to  "  the  Christ  "  in  His  future  manifestation  as  "'  the  Son  of  Man,"  and  to  the 
oath-confirmed  covenant  of  God  that  positively  requires  this  revelation  of  the  Humanity  of 
the  King.  It  is  not  only  Schwenkfeld  (Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  155)  that  has  the 
"  human  nature  absorbed  by  the  divine,"  but  many  have  the  same  in  a  kind  of  pious 
mystical  Pantheism,  by  which  they  think  to  exalt  the  Divine  at  the  expense  of  the 
human,  urged  to  it  by  the  old,  old  gnostic  feeling  respecting  matter.  The  Incarnation, 
so  necessaiy  and  exceedingly  precious,  introduces  us  to  the  personality  of  "  the  Christ," 
as  promised  ;  it  is  provisional  for  the  contemplated  end.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
"Turneyites"  (The  Ch.  Lamp)  hold  that  Jesus  is  not  a  true  descendant  of  David's,  not 
truly  of  his  lineage,  being  "  of  the  seed  of  David"  but  not  "the  seed  of  David," 
hence  not  truly  David's  son,  but  only  David's  Lord.  Now  this  is  flatly  opposed  to  the 
Davidic  covenant,  for  he  was  not  merely  a  man,  separate  and  distinct,  but  he  was  to  pro- 
ceed from  the  loins  of  David,  according  to  the  flesh  ( supernaturally  as  Isaac^  and  hence  is 
constantly  and  invariably  recognized  as  David's  Son.  Again,  Fiske  (The  Christ  of  Dogma, 
p.  125  of  the  Unseen  World),  without  a  particle  of  proof,  and  over  against  express  usage 
(John  1  :  51  ;  3  :  13  ;  4  :  27  ;  13  :  31,  etc.),  asserts,  that  in  the  Gospel  of  John,  "  the 
title  Son  of  Man  has  lost  its  original  significance,  and  becomes  synonymous  with  '  Son 
of  God.'  "  He  makes  a  number  of  similar  unfounded  remarks,  indicative  of  a  desire  to 
find  flaws  when  they  do  not  exist.  Unbelief  parades,  with  evident  relish,  the  ideas  of 
incarnation  as  presented  in  some  mythologies,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  weaken  the 
Christian  idea,  but  we  accept  of  the  same  as  expressing  a  need  and  longing  of  human- 
ity, viz.  :  that  God  should  manifest  Himself  to  man  in  a  form  indicative  of  union  and 
accessibility.  Neander  [Life  of  Christ,  2  :  12)  makes  some  remarks  in  this  direction, 
showing  that  these  "  cravings  of  the  spirit"  express  the  "  wish,  even  though  uncon- 
scious, to  secure  that  union  with  God  which  alone  can  renew  human  nature,  and  which 
Christianity  shows  us  is  a  living  reality"  (com.  Dorner  on  ^/le  Pe?'son,  of  Christ).  The 
Ch.  Incarnation  is  not  an  isolated  fact,  but  results  from  a  regular,  revealed  Divine  Plan, 
as  will  hereafter  be  shown. 


572  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIIS^GDOM.  [PkOP.  82. 


Proposition  82.     Tliis  Kingdom  is  a  cornplete  restoration  in  th 
person  of  the  Second  Adam  or  Man^  of  tlie  dominion  lost  by 
the  First  Adam  or  Man. 

The  reign  of  Christ  as  '^  the  Son  of  Man"  points  ns  back  to  the 
fall  in  which  hnmanity  was  so  sadly  involved,  and  then  forward  to 
the  period  when  humanity,  through  this  manifestation  of  this  Son 
of  Man,  is  fully  restored  to  the  blessings  forfeited  by  the  fall. 
Among  these  blessings  a  right  royal  one  is  grounded  in  the  de- 
veloping Plan  of  Redemption,  by  which  man  shall  again  be 
restored  to  the  dignity  of  dominion  through  Him,  who  by  virtue  of 
His  relationship  to  the  human  in  the  covenanted  line,  has  obtained 
the  forfeited  right  originally  granted  to  man,  and  which,  as  King 
on  David's  throne,  will  be  most  gloriously  exerted,  being  sublimely 
and  irresistibly  aided  by  the  Divine  united  with  Him. 

Ols.  1.  What  the  dominion  forfeited  by  sin  was  to  be,  is  clearly  an- 
nounced, e.g.  by  the  Psalmist  and  Paul.  We  leave  others  inform  us  of  its 
meaning  and  extent.  Thus  e.g.  Barnes  [Com.  Heb.  2  :  6)  says  it  consti- 
tuted man  "  Lord  of  all  thiyigs,^^  that  ^^  all  things  were  placed  under  the 
tmitrol  and  jurisdiction  of  mcin,^^  that  '^  all  tilings  were  subject  to  Him  and 
all  obeyed.  Man  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  was  the 
undis2)uted  Lord  of  the  lower  world,"  etc.  Kurtz  (Sac.  His*.,  p.  39), 
states,  that  "  he  (man)  is  appointed  to  have  dominion  over  nature,  as  the 
representative  of  God,  and  to  conduct  it  to  its  highest  development." 
"  The  powers  of  man  were  intended,  agreeably  to  the  divine  appointment, 
to  be  engaged  in  exercising  dominion  over  all  the  earth.^^  So  also  (Sees.  9 
and  11,  "  Bible  and  Astron.,^^  His.  of  Old  Cov.)  he  was  to  be  *'  ruler  of 
all  creation,  of  its  varied  forces  aud  creatures."  "  The  commencement 
was  to  lead  to  the  goal,  inan's  dominion  over  tJie  whole  earth.''  Hodge 
(Sys.  Div.,  vol.  2,  p.  102)  says  :  "  God  constituted  him  (man)  rider  over 
tlie  eartli.  He  placed,  as  the  Psalmist  said,  all  tilings  under  his  feet." 
*'  It  was  therefore  as  a  ruler  that  he  wore  God's  image,  or  represented 
Him  on  earth."  "  It  was  therefore  an  ahsolutely  universal  do7ninion,  so 
far  as  creatures  are  concerned,  with  which  man  was  invested."  (Comp. 
Commentaries  on  Heb.  2  :  6,  7  ;  Psl.  8  : 5-8.)  These  writers  then  tell  us 
that,  as  the  Scriptures  affirm,  this  dominion  was,  in  a  great  measure,  lost, 
and  that  man,  shorn  of  his  power,  could  no  longer  act  as  tlie  representative 
of  God. 

Such  testimony,  as  the  student  well  knows,  could  be  endlessly  multiplied,  seeing  that 
on  this  point  there  is  a  uniform  teaching  running  from  the  Apostolic  Fathers  down, 
through  the  Reformers,  to  the  present  time.  But  alas  !  while  fully  admitting  the  fact, 
thousands  are  utterly  unprej^ared  to  receive  the  logical  result  which  Redemption  in  its  re- 
storative process  introduces  as  the  goal  intended.  Consistency  requires,  that  if  we  believe 
in  perfect  Eedempiion,  then  we  also  must  accept  of  the  legitimate  result  following  as  indicated 


PkOP.  82.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  573 

in  these  pages,  viz.  :  an  actual,  real  restoration  of  the  dominion  forfeited,  through  the  Mes- 
siah, and  not  some  other  dominion  in  the  third  heaven  or  universe  siibstituted  in  its 
place.  The  forfeiture  and  the  restoration  must,  logically  and  Scripturally,  refer  to  the 
same.  We  append  the  pertinent  statements  of  a  recent  writer,  as  illustrative  of  much 
that  might  be  quoted.  Fairbairn  {Typology,  vol.  1,  p.  308-9)  says  :  "  Man's  original  in- 
heritance was  a  lordshij)  or  dominion,  stretching  over  the  whole  earth." 
"  When  he  fell,  he  fell  from  his  dominion,"  .  .  .  "the  inheritance  departed  from 
him  ;  he  was  driven  from  Paradise,  the  throne  and  palace  of  his  Kingdom."  And  then 
follows  a  vivid  portrayal  of  how  "  Satan  was  permitted  to  enter  and  extend  his  usurped 
sway  over  the  domain,  from  which  man  has  been  expelled  as  its  proper  lord,"  etc. 
But  then  he  vitiates  his  own  concessions  by  making,  in  various  places,  the  promises  of 
a  restoration  to  this  forfeited  dominion  typical  of  something  else.  Multitudes  make  it 
equivalent  to  a  reign  in  the  third  heaven,  and  religious  literature  is  full  of  such  erro- 
neous conclusions. 

Ods.  2.  In  the  next  place,  all  Christian  writers  on  the  subject  inform 
us  that  this  dominion  is  restored  to  man  again  through  Jesus  Christ,  the 
second  Adam.  But,  with  the  exception  of  Millenarian  writers,  they  some- 
how confine  it  to  Jesus  in  His  Divine  Sovereignty,  overlooking  what  they 
themselves  assert  respecting  its  being  given  to  the  Man  Jesus,  and  ignoring 
the  fact  taught  that  this  dominion  is  relegated  from  and  through  Him  to 
His  brethren  (the  co-heirs).  Such  spiritualize  the  dominion,  and  do  not 
allow  its  ultimate  realization  in  the  very  place  where  it  was  forfeited,  \.q. 
they  refuse  to  believe  in  man's  restored  dominion  over  tlie  earth,  and  make 
thus  an  imjmfect  Redemption.  We  hold  that,  as  Scripture  plainly  teaches, 
this  dominion  is  restored  through  tlie  Son  of  Man  ;  that  those  who  inherit 
with  Him  share  in  its  exercise  ;  that  it  is  manifested  here  on  earth  (being 
a  forfeited  dominion  pertaining  only  to  the  earth);  and  that  thus  C07n' 
pleted  RedemjDtion  is  experienced. 

To  illustrate  how  writers,  in  no  doctrinal  sympathy  with  us,  insist  upon  the  restora- 
tion of  this  dominion  in  Jesus  as  man,  we  quote  Barnes  ( Com.  Heb.  2  :  6,  comp.  Stuart's 
Com.  on  Heb.  and  Excurs.  IX.)  :  "It  was  not  true  (v.  8)  that  all  things  were  subject  to 
Him,  and  the  complete  truth  of  that  declaration  would  be  found  only  in  the  jurisdiction 
conferred  on  the  Messiah — the  man  by  way  of  eminence — the  incarnate  Son  of  God." 
After  showing  that  Paul's  argument  is  leased  on  man's  losing  the  control  or  power  orig- 
inally given,  which  is  restored  in  Christ,  he  adds  :  "  It  is  found  complete  only  in  the 
second  man,  the  Lord  from  heaven  (1  Cor.  15  :  47),  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  whom  this  control  is 
absolutely  given."  It  is  true  that  some  endeavor  to  weaken  Paul's  reasoning  in  favor 
of  the  restoration  of  this  dominion,  by  making  Ps.  8  refer  to  man  in  general,  and  that 
Paul  employs  the  language  only  by  way  of  illustration  or  accommodation.  But  to  this 
we  reply  :  (1)  Paul  directly  applies  the  Ps.  to  Christ  ;  (2)  the  spirit  and  intent  of  the  Ps. 
contains  more  than  is  applicable  to  man  in  general  ;  (3)  the  apostle  teaches  us  that  the 
Ps.  is  not  3^et  fulfilled  in  the  pre-eminent  man,  saying  :  "  but  now  we  see  not  yet  all 
things  put  under  Him  ;"  (4)  the  abundant  references  in  other  places  of  a  forfeited  do- 
minion and  the  same  restored  under  the  Messiah  sustains  this  interpretation  ;  (5)  the 
incarnation  and  subsequent  exaltation  of  Christ  confirms  the  delineation  thus  given  ;  (6) 
the  dominion  under  the  whole  heaven  given  at  a  future  period  to  this  man  and  His  as- 
sociated saints,  shows  that  Paul,  under  the  Spirit's  guidance,  saw  a  force  and  depth  in 
the  predictions  which  aloyie  can  be  realized  in  and  through  the  Son  of  man.  Hudson 
{Debt,  and  Grace,  p.  6)  correctly  observes  :  "  The  passage  (in  Ps.  8)  can  only  be  explained 
as  a  prophecy  of  Christ.  This  is  required  by  the  true  sense  of  one  important  word,  and 
is  so  understood  by  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrew^s. "  Fairbairn  {Typology, 
vol.  1.  p.  313),  after  advocating  that"  the  renovated  earth"  is  "  the  ultimate  inheritance 
of  the  heirs  of  salvation,"  remarks  :  "  And  of  what  else  can  we  understand  the  represen- 
tation in  the  8th  Ps.,  as  interpreted  by  the  pen  of  inspiration  itself,  in  the  Epis.  to  the 
Hebrews,  2  :  5-9,  and  1  Cor.  15  :  27,  28  ?  These  passages  in  the  N.  T.  put  it  beyond  a 
doubt,  that  the  idea  of  a  perfect  and  universal  dominion,  delineated  in  the  Ps.  is  to  be 
realized  in  the  iicorld  to  come,  over  which  Christ,  as  the  head  of  redeemed  humanity,  is  to 
rule,  in  company  with  His  redeemed  people."  (So  compare  Dr.  Moll,  Lange's  Com. 
Heb.  p.  54-5.) 


574  THE  THEOCEATIC   KIiq-GDOM.  [PrOP.  82. 

OJ)S.  3.  This  dominion,  here  on  earth,  will  be  exerted  by  Jesns,  the  Man, 
through  the  re-establishment  oftlie  Theocratic  ordering.  It  is  the  restored 
Theocratic  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  in  its  organized  and  associated 
capacity,  under  the  leadership  of  the  covenanted  King  that  constitutes  tlie 
leverage  for  the  exertion  of  this  dominion.  The  saints,  made  like  nnto 
Christ  and  associated  with  Him  in  His  power,  largely  participate  in  it,  all 
nature  being  brought  into  subjection  to  them.  Thus  the  Scriptures  will  be 
am^jly  fulfilled. 

Ohs.  4.  Hence,  while  this  dominion  is  even  now  lodged  in  the  Son  of 
Man,  yet  it  is  held'iw  aleyance  until  the  period  of  its  manifestation  in  and 
through  this  Kingdom.  This  has  already  been  shown  by  various  consider- 
ations, and  will  appear  still  more  conclusively  as  we  proceed.  Therefore 
it  is  erroneous  (as  a  multitude  of  writers,  including  Hodge,  Barnes,  etc., 
just  quoted),  to  say  that  this  dominion  was/?^%  attained  and  realized  hy 
the  incarnation  and  the  exaltation  of  the  Son  af  God.  It  certainly  belongs 
to  Him  ;  but  we  must  leave  the  Scriptures  to  decide  respecting  its  actual 
realization.  From  the  Covenant  thus  i'AY  provisionally  fulfilled,  the  most 
glorious  portion  remaining  in  a  state  of  abeyance,  we  can  already  see  that  it 
is  a  icroyiy  inference  to  suppose  an  existing  realization  when  the  same  is 
related  with  the  restored  Theocratic  Kingdom.  So  long  as  the  Davidic 
tabernacle  is  in  ruins,  this  dominion  cannot  and  will  not  be  exerted.  The 
dominion  is  given  to  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  Man^^  (Jno.  5  :  27  ;  Psl.  8:7; 
Heb.  2  :  6,  etc.),  and  this  at  a  pre-ordained  time  (next  Prop.).  He  is  con- 
stituted the  absolute  Lord  over  all  because  He  is  "  the  Son  of  Man  ;"  but 
this  dominion  pertaining  to  Him  as  the  promised  seed,  related  both  to 
God  and  man,  He  did  not  fully  (only  on  some  occasions  to  indicate  His 
power),  exercise  while  on  earth  ;  He  does  not  now  as  *'  the  Son  of  Man" 
put  forth  the  power  with  which  He  is  invested,  for  He  has  not  yet  heen 
revealed  as  the  King,  the  Judge,  the  Maker  of  all  things  new,  the  Kepealer 
of  the  curse — we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  Him,  and  He  is  awaiting 
the  time  when  His  enemies  shall  be  made  His  footstool.  But  the  period 
of  time  is  coming  when  this  will  he  done,  and  the  dominion,  held  in  re- 
straint for  purposes  of  mercy  and  love,  will  be  exhibited  with  God-like 
power  and  glory.  As  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Second  Adam,  He  becomes  the 
Lord  of  the  world,  but  that  Lordship  is  not  yet  manifested,  it  remaining 
veiled  2intil  certain  preparatory  purposes  are  accomplished  and  the  time 
arrives  for  its  blessed  appearance  through  the  covenanted  Theocratic- 
Davidic  throne  ; — for  just  as  at  the  First  Advent  by  the  Incarnation  the 
Christ  is  brought  into  direct  relationship  with  humanity  and  from  thence 
sustains  His  covenanted  position  in  this  particular,  so  also  at  the  Sec. 
Advent  by  the  Incarnation,  as  continued  in  "the  Son  of  Man,"  "the 
Christ,"  in  the  inherited  throne  and  Kingdom,  is  brought  into  direct 
Theocratic  relationship  with  humanity,  and  from  this  revealed  position 
exerts  His  power  in  behalf  of  that  humanity  with  ivhich  He  is  identified. 

Man,  during  tlie  past  ages,  lias  sought  to  recover  this  dominion  unaided  and  through 
his  own  power,  and  the  Word  represents  it  as  a  struggling  of  "  beasts"  for  sovereignty, 
resulting  in  a  mutual  rending  and  destruction.  Is  this  picture  true  ?  Let  history  attest, 
with  its  constant  wars,  overthrow  of  states  and  kingdoms,  man  being  the  "  prey  of 
man,"  bloodshed  and  slaughter,  murder  and  rebellion,  etc.  The  Scriptures  teach  us 
that  this  Jesus,  appointed  for  the  express  purpose,  alone  can,  and  will  ultimately,  re- 
store it.     In  this  connection  the  student  will  observe  that  this  second  headship  in  Christ 


Prop.  82.]  the  theocratic  kiitgdom.  575 

restores  the  human  family  to  its  destined  but  forfeited  Theocratic  rulership  or  domin- 
ion, and,  therefore,  to  confine  this  headship  simply  to  relationship  to  man  and  salvation 
from  sin  (which  it  includes),  is  to  leave  out  a  specijic  and  most  precious  hlessina.  (Comp. 
e.g.  Props.  120,  2U2,  204,  and  207.) 

Obs.  5.  It  is  only  in  the  Millennial  age,  whe7i  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  is 
established,  that  this  forfeited  dominion  is  fully  restored.  This  is  evident 
from  the  vivid  descriptions,  not  only  of  the  universal  and  absolute  rule  of 
Christ,  but  also  of  the  dominion  and  glory  of  the  saints.  Hence  this  era 
77iust  be  preceded  by  tlie  Coming  of  "  the  Son  of  Man"  (Prop.  119-121). 

Such  a  restored  dominion  involves,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  personal  presence  and 
rule  of  the  Second  Adam  here  on  the  earth,  where  the  First  Adam  would  have  exerted  it. 
It  teaches  us  that  it  is  not  a  dominion  exercised  in  the  third  heaven,  for  it  is  one  com- 
mitted to  man  and  joertains  to  this  earth.  It  is  not  to  be  sought  in  this  dispensation, 
for  down  to  the  very  end  wickedness  will  abound.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Church 
as  at  present  existing,  for  down  to  the  Advent  the  believer  himself  is  under  the  pressure 
of  the  curse.  It  is,  therefore,  future,  and  associated  with  "  the  appearing  and  King- 
dom," and  with  "  the  world  to  come." 

Obs.  6.  If  such  an  external,  outward  dominion  is  lacking  in  the  history 
of  the  earth,  the7i  an  important  restitution  is  wanting,  and  we  receive  an 
iiuperfecf  Redemption  ;  with  its  restoration  we  obtain  an  important  ele- 
ment of  perfected  Salvation.  Writers  abundantly  admit  that  this  dominion 
would  have  been  witnessed  here  on  earth  if  Adam  had  not  fallen,  but  some- 
how they  overlook  the  fact,  that  as  the  Redeemer  is  given  to  recover  us 
from  all  the  effects  of  the  fall,  it  must,  under  the  auspices  of  the  restoring 
Second  Adam,  again  be  witnessed  on  eartli  when  Redemption  is  completed. 
Simple  consistency,  the  perfection  of  Redemptive  work,  the  efficiency  and 
honor  of  the  Redeemer,  the  ability  of  God  to  save  and  the  worthiness  of 
the  Saviour — all  require  this  restored  dominion. 

The  prevailing  view,  derived  from  the  Origenistic,  limits  this  dominion  to  a  present 
reign  of  Christ  in  heaven  ;  but  this,  aside  from  other  considerations,  vitiates  even  their 
own  representations  of  its  original  design,  viz.  :  to  be  "  representative  of  God  on  earth," 
"  a  ruling  for  God  over  all  the  earth,"  "  a  dominion  exercised  over  all  things,  bringing 
nature  into  subjection,"  etc.  Taking  their  views  of  the  original  grant,  none  of  these 
tilings  are  witnessed  here  on  the  earth  ;  the  Euler  is  in  heaven,  and  not  on  the  earth,  His 
followers  are  suffering  and  chastened,  His  rights  as  "  the  Christ"  are  unacknowledged 
by  multitudes,  etc. 

Obs.  7.  This  dominion,  promised,  predicted  and  restored,  is  corrobora- 
tive of  the  Biblical  account  of  mafi's  noble  origin  and  high  destiny,  form- 
ing quite  a  contrast  to  the  ignoble  theories  of  recent  scientists.  And  may 
we  not  suggest,  that  as  the  period  of  this  restoration  draws  near,  the 
efforts  that  are  so  persistently  made  by  able  men  to  degrade  the  origin  of 
man  to  the  lowest  scale,  is  not  altogether  one  of  chance  or  fortuitous  cir- 
cumstances, but  to  the  student  and  believer  have  a  deeper  and  more  signiQ- 
cant  meaning — being  in  accordance  with  the  predicted  characteristic  of 
the  times  just  preceding  the  restitution. 

What  the  Roman  Catholic  writer,  Schlegel  [Phil,  of  His.,  s.  1),  sajs,  in  opposition  to 
the  idea  of  man's  low  origin,  we,  in  view  of  the  Divine  unity  of  Purpose  thus  manifested, 
can  repeat  :  "  We  may  boldly  answer,  that  man,  on  the  contrarj",  was  originally,  and  by 
the  very  constitution  of  his  being,  designed  to  be  the  lord  of  creation,  and,  though  in  a 
subordinate  degree,  the  legitimate  ruler  of  the  earth  and  the  world  around  him  ;  the 


5'^^  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  82. 

vicegerent  of  God  in  nature."  God  will  not  allow  sin  to  triumph  in  the  utter  destrue-. 
tion  of  this  grant,  but  will  evince  that  grace  m  Jesus,  the  Christ,  that  will  secure  the 
victory  in  this,  as  well  as  in  all  other,  respects.  Tholuck  {Com.  Rom.  5  :  12)  produces 
a  Jewish  Eabbi,  who  remarks  :  "  The  secret  of  Adam  is  the  secret  of  the  Messiah  " 
As  the  first  man  was  the  one  that  sinned,  so  shall  the  Messiah  be  the  one  to  do  sin 
away."    (Comp.  p.  55,  Lange's  Com.  Heb.) 


Prop.  83.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  677 


Proposition  83.     lliis  Kingdom  is  given  to  the  So?i  of  Man  by 
God^  the  Father. 

This  bestowal  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Son  of  Man  by  the  Father, 
is  clearly  and  explicitly  taught  in  the  covenant.  Hence  in  agree- 
ment with  it,  we  have  the  language  of  Dan.  7  :  13,  14  ;  Isa.  49  ; 
Luke,  22  :  29  and  1  :  32,  etc.  The  Divine  Sovereignty  insures  it 
unto  Him. 

Daniel  (7  :  14)  says  that  ''there  icas  given  unto  Him  {the  Son  of  man)  dominion,  and 
glory,  and  a  Kingdom,  that  all  people,"  etc.  Luke  (1  :  32)  :  ''the  Lor'd  God  shall  give  unto 
Him  the  throne  of  His  father  David,"  etc.  (comp.  Ps.  2  and  110,  etc.).  The  Saviour  Him- 
self seems  to  refer  to  this  fact  in  the  Parable  of  the  Ten  Pounds  (Luke  19  :  15),  "  that 
when  he  was  returned,  having  received  the  Kingdom,''  etc.  It  may  be  added  :  in  view  of  the 
angel  announcing  that  "  the  Lord  God  shall  give, "  we  ha\e  "  the  A^icient  of  Days'  (in 
Dan. )  interpreted  as  the  Father  (for  to  make  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Ancient  of  Days  the 
same  is  both  harsh  and  inconsistent  with  the  analogy  of  the  Word).  Because  of  the 
Theocratic  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  Father  bestowing  this  Kingdom  upon  the 
Son  of  David,  it  is  sometimes  called  (Matt.  26  :  29)  the  ^^ Father's  Kingdom"  (Matt. 
13  :  39-43),  "  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father  ;"  because  in  this  Theocratic  ordering  the  Father  and 
the  Christ  are  one,  both  are  associated  together  as  in  Rev.  11  :  15,  and  22  :  3  ;  because  of 
the  covenanted  relationship  of  Jesus,  it  is  more  frequently  spoken  of  as  His  throne  and 
Kingdom.  The  different  aspects  under  which  this  Kingdom  is  represented  because  of 
its  Theocratic  nature — the  Divine  participating  in  and  enforcing  the  rule  of  the  human- 
ity — already  enforces  the  idea  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Kingdom  (comp.  Prop.  159). 
While  it  is  difficult  to  say,  on  grammatical  grounds  (so  Winer,  Olshausen,  Com.  loci), 
that  in  Tit.  2  :  13  the  great  God  and  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  refer  to  the  same  person, 
yet  it  may  be  said  :  (1)  that  if  it  does  (to  Jesus),  as  many  maintain  (e.g.  Beza,  Clem. 
Alex.,  Mack,  Matthies,  Whitby,  Bull,  Usteri,  Olshausen,  Wiesinger,  Home,  Middleton, 
Barnes,  Bloomfield,  etc. ),  then  is  it  verified  in  the  Theocratic  personage  and  position  of 
Jesus,  in  and  through  whom  the  Father  is  manifested  (see  Prop.  200).  (2)  On  the 
other  hand,  if  it  refers  to  two  persons  or  subjects,  the  Father  and  the  Son  as  many 
others  declare  (as  Ambrose,  Grotius,  Wetstein,  Heinrichs,  De  Wette,  Channing,  etc.), 
then  there  is  an  evident  allusion  either  to  this  period  when  the  Father  gives  this  King- 
dom to  the  Son  of  man,  or  to  the  fact  that  a  pure  Theocratic  ordering  requires  the  in- 
timate and  enduring  association  of  the  Father  with  the  Son  in  such  a  rule,  so  that  the 
Father  is  manifested  in  and  through  the  Son. 

Ods.  1.  This  giving  of  the  Kingdom  by  the  Father  to  the  Son  of  Man, 
shows,  what  has  ah'eady  been  observed,  that  this  Kingdom  is  something 
verg  different  from  the  general  Divine  Sovereignty  exercised  by  God.  The 
Kingdom  is  an  outgrowth  from  it,  and  the  Divine  Sovereignty  will  be  ex- 
hibited throngh  it,  being  constituted  in  tJie  Theocratic  form,  which  in  its 
initiatory  form  was  separated  in  its  Rulership  by  two  persons  (i.e.  God  and 
David)  but  is  now  happilg  conjoined — making  it  thus  efficacious,  irresisti- 
ble, and  ever-enduring — in  one,  i.e.,  ''the  Clirist.''^ 

Ois.  2.  This  Kingdom  is  given  to  the  Son  of  Man  at  a  partictdar, 
definite  time.  Now  without  entering  into  a  discussion  (see  e.g.  Prop.  121) 
concerning  the  period  of  time  designated  by  Daniel,  we  only,  at  present, 


578  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  83. 

remark  :  (1)  that  as  this  Kingdom  is  tmalteraUy  associated  with  David's 
Son  restoring  the  fallen  Theocratic- Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  (so  both 
covenant  and  promise),  and  as  such  a  restoration  has  not  yet  been  experi- 
enced, it  must,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  be  still  in  the  future;  (2) 
that  the  peculiar  phraseology,  corroborated  by  the  prophets  and  applied 
by  Jesus,  unmistakably  refers  it  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  which  we  have  already 
seen  (e.g.  Props.  56-68),  'is  the  designated  time  for  taking  the  Kingdom. 
Down  to  the  present  the  covenant  remains  unfulfilled,  and  the  Kingdom 
continues  2)ost2)oned  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  have  elapsed.  The 
investiture,  visible,  is  delayed  for  wise,  and,  to  us  accounted  worthy  to 
reign,  glorious  purposes.  Hence,  whatever  may  be  alleged  respecting  the 
Divine  nature  of  Christ,  it  is  an  established  and  plainly  seen  fact,  that  the 
8eed  of  David,  as  such,  does  7iot  noio  reign  as  the  covenant  requires  and  the 
prophets  described  (i.e.  a  reign  here  on  earth  in  the  restored  Theocratic 
order),  but  we  are  assured,  both  by  the  oath  of  God  and  the  provisions 
already  made,  that  when  the  jjroper  time  arrives,  this  will  be  verified. 

Obs.  3.  By  simply  keeping  in  the  line  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  which 
the  Father  in  the  appointed  time,  still  future,  will  bestow  upon  the  Son  of 
David,  we  know  how  to  estimate  that  vast  mass  of  mystical  conceptions 
and  spiritualistic  descriptions  given  by  Origen,  Swedenborg,  Eandolp, 
and  a  host  of  others,  of  the  iwedicted  Kingdom  being  now  already  realized 
in  some  form,  or  to  be  experienced  immediately  cfter  death.  The  King- 
dom to  exist  necessitates,  as  a  primary  condition,  the  restoration  of  the 
Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  seeing  that  the  Theocratic  ordering  is  bound 
up  with  the  same.  A  Theocracy,  without  such  a  restoration,  is,  as  cove- 
nant and  promise  teach,  an  idle  dream. 

This  serves  to  throw  light  on  the  rendering  of  Acts  3  :  21,  a  passage  disputed  by  the 
Lutherans  and  Reformed  (Olshausen's  Com.,  yoI.  3,  p.  221,  and  foot-note  of  K.).  The 
English  version,  although  condemned  by  the  Form  of  Concord,  is  evidently  correct,  see- 
ing that  the  Kingdom  is  promised  and  given  to  the  Son  of  Man  as  the  Seed  of  David. 
Hence  Peter,  in  strict  accord  with  the  facts  as  existing,  represents  Jesus  as  one  whom 
the  heavens  receive  until  the  time  when  He  is  manifested  as  King,  and  not  as  one  who 
receives  the  heavens. 

Obs.  4.  Because  we  are  told  (Heb.  10  :  12),  that  "  this  man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  forever  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God," 
it  is  inferred  that  this  exaltation  of  the  human  nature  embraces  the  pre- 
dicted rnlership  of  the  Son  of  Man.  But  in  this  very  connection  (next 
verse),  as  if  to  guard  us  against  such  an  inference,  it  is  added  :  *'  From 
henceforth  expecting^''  (Barnes,  etc.,  ''  loaiting,''  )  '^  till  His  enemies  be 
made  his  footstool.'^  All  commentators  agree  that  this  overthrow  and  sub- 
jection is  still  future,  and  the  Scriptures  teach  in  the  plainest  manner 
that  it  is  connected  with  His  Sec.  Advent.  This,  therefore,  fully  corre- 
sponds with  our  argument,  for  the  passage  must  bo  considered  and  inter- 
preted in  connection  with  many  others. 

Some  press  the  word  "  forever"  to  an  extent  that  would  forbid  a  Second  Advent; 
others,  as  Bloomfield,  Barnes,  etc.,  connect  the  phrase  "  forever"  with  the  sacrifice  (i.e. 
he  never  comes  again  to  make  a  sacrifice)  ;  the  writer  has  his  doubts  whether  the  sense 
of  the  Greek  is  correctly  given,  seeing  that "  forever"  does  not  give  the  force  of  the  prep- 
osition and  of  a  word  understood  with  which  the  adjective  agrees.  It  is  merely  sug- 
gested, that  as  Jews  were  addressed  and  the  subject  was  the  covenant,  the  word  was  not 
supplied,  being  understood.    Might  it  not  be  rendered,  to  keep  up  the  connection,  "  ac- 


Prop.  83.]  the  tiieockatic  kingdom.  579 

cording  to  or  in  conformity  to  the  everlasting  covenant,"  or  in  something  similar,  i.e. 
to  verify  this  covenant  it  became  necessary,  etc.  However  rendered,  one  thing  is  certain  : 
it  cannot  conflict  with  express  covenant  promises, 

Obs.  5.  The  Sovereignty  of  the  Father  is  the  foundation,  the  security, 
that  David's  Son  shall  obtain  this  Kingdom  at  the  allotted  time,  and, 
therefore,  this  Sovereignty  is  also  represented  as  giving  up  into  the  hands 
of  this  Son  of  Man  all  his  enemies.  Hence,  in  view  of  the  Oneness  of  the 
Father  and  Son,  one  class  of  passages  intimate  that  the  enemies  of  Christ 
are  given  into  His  power  by  the  Father,  and  yet  when  the  work  of  sub- 
duing these  enemies  is  specifically  stated  and  in  detail,  it  is  one  assigned 
to  the  Son  (sustained  by  His  relationship  to  the  Father),  because  the 
Father  commits  all  judgment  and  the  Judgeship  to  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
Man,  and  Jesus,  at  His  revelation,  is  described  as  coming  in  vengeance,  etc. 
Therefore  it  becomes  the  student  to  allow  both  classes  of  passages  their  due 
position  and  weight  in  the  order  of  procedure. 

Waggoner  {Ref.  of  Age,  p.  128),  confining  himself  exclusively  to  the  one  class  of  pas- 
sages, lays  down  this  caption  :  "  The  work  of  subduing  His  enemies  is  nevei'  in  the 
Scriptures  ascribed  to  Christ,  but  that  "  the  Father  subdues  the  enemies  of  Christ  and 
puts  them  under  His  feet."  The  simple  fact  is,  that  the  Father  does  this  in  and  throxujh 
Christ  Himself,  Christ  acting  as  the  agent,  and  hence  Christ  is  frequently  represented  in 
the  Scriptures  as  the  One  coming  in  wrath,  in  vengeance  to  perform  this  work.  Wag- 
goner is  induced  to  take  this  position  in  order  to  support  a  singular  and  favorite  theory, 
viz.  :  the  one  thousand  years'  reign  m  heaven.  But  for  the  time  he  overlooks  his  own 
argument,  and  makes  (p.  134)  the  following  concession  :  "  (1)  The  Father  gives  them  (the 
enemies)  to  the  Son.  (2)  The  Son  breaks  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  and  dashes  them  in  pieces  ; 
which  dashing,  as  has  been  shown,  takes  place  at  His  Coming."  But  to  reconcile  this  in- 
congruity, he  resorts  to  a  quibble  unworthy  of  the  subject,  viz.  :  that  "  there  is  a  great 
difference  between  having  His  enemies  put  under  Him,  and  His  destroying  them," 
Indeed,  admitting  a  difference  (in  the  way  we  have  indicated),  how  comes  it  that  those 
very  enemies,  instead  of  being  "  subdued,"  etc.,  are  represented  (Eev.  19,  etc.,  comp. 
Props.  115,  123,  161,  etc.),  as  arrayed  in  ojjen  hostility  to  Christ,  making  war  against  Him, 
and  are  only  brought  into  subjection,  etc.,  by  Christ  ami  His  armies.  We  dare  not  ignore 
the  action  ascribed  to  this  Son  of  man  at  His  coming,  and  what  the  Father  performs 
through  Him. 

Ohs.  6.  The  Kingdom  being  given  by  the  Father  to  the  Son  of  Man,  we 
can,  keej^ing  this  fact  in  view,  appreciate  the  fact  stated  in  1  Cor.  15  :  27, 
28,  viz  :  "  Bnt  when  He  saith.  All  things  are  put  under  Him,  it  is  mani- 
fested that  He  is  excepted,  which  did  put  all  things  under  Him,^''  etc. 
(Comp.  usage  of  present  tense,  Prop.  69,  Obs.  9).  As  this  point  will  be 
brought  up  under  the  perpetuity  (Prop.  159)  of  the  Kingdom,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  add,  that  a  Theocracy — in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  as  seen 
in  the  form  of  the  Kingdom,  in  its  past  history  as  given,  and  in  the 
manner  of  its  future  restoration  under  David's  Son — must  ever  retain  the 
position  of  being  subordinate  to  the  Divine  Will  of  the  Father.  This 
Theocratic  idea  Paul  seeks  to  impress,  and  this  very  subordination  is  es- 
sential to  our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  being  indicative  of  a  Theocracy 
here  on  earth. 

This  subordination  is  manifested  in  the  investiture  as  described  by  Daniel  ch.  7,  and 
will  be  most  strikingly  exhibited  at  "  the  holy  mount."  The  place  of  public  inaugura- 
tion by  "  the  Ancient  of  Days"  will  be  noticed  under  Prop,  166. 

Obs.  7.  Even  if  (which  we  do  not  acknowledge)  we  should  be  mistaken 
in  ascribing  Christ's  present  reign  to  the  Divine  nature  (making  it  identi- 


580  THE   THEOCKATIC    KIT^GDOM.  [PrOP.  88. 

cal  with  God's  Sovereignty)  and  not  to  the  human,  and  which  is  specially 
exercised  over  the  church,  and  yet  not  so  specifically,  outwardly,  visibly 
(as  covenanted),  so  that  the  church  can  now  be  styled  the  Promised 
Kingdom,  it  does  not  by  any  means  follow  that  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
Man  has  not  still  a  future  Kingdom  to  come  here  on  the  earth  over  which 
He  will  reign.  Whatever  view  may  be  taken  of  this  intermediate  state  of 
Jesus,  the  covenant  predictions  relating  to  the  future  are  too  many  and 
decisive  to  he  set  aside.  It  is  proper  to  state  this,  since  even  some  Millen- 
arians,  losing  sight  of  tlw  specific pi'omises  of  the  covenant,  and  overlooking 
to  ivhoin  this  Kingdom  is  given,  viz. :  to  the  Son  of  Man,  also  depart  from 
the  Primitive  Church  view,  in  so  far  as  to  indorse  the  Popish  notion  that 
Jesus,  as  Son  of  Man,  now  reigns  in  the  covenanted  Kingdom  over  the 
church,  without  however  discarding  the  doctrine  of  the  future  visible 
throne  and  Kingdom /or  ivhich  we  contend.  BelicAdng  this  to  be  an  error 
calculated  to  embarrass  and  destroy  a  proper  conception  of  the  Kingdom,  to 
weaken  and  obliterate  the  logical  and  Scriptural  connection  existing 
between  covenant  and  fulfilment,  we  therefore,  distinguishing  between 
things  that  differ,  the  more  strongly  cleave  to  the  oath-hound  covenant, 
and,  until  we  see  a  fulfilment  commensurate  with  God's  most  solemn 
declarations,  reject  all  theories  which  are  presented  in  place  of  the  King- 
dom itself. 

Our  position  simply  is  this  :  that  before  the  Kingdom  pertaining  to  David" fi  Son  can 
possibly  be  inaugurated  there  must  be  a  restoration  of  the  fallen  Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom  ;  that  any  Sovereignty  exercised  by  Divine  right  is  not  the  covenanted  King- 
dom. The  position  of  others  is,  that  in  connection  vi^ith  the  future  reign  of  Jesus  here 
on  earth,  He  has  also  a  Kingdom  now  in  the  Church.  As  this  theory  will  be  examined 
in  detail  (Props.  89-110),  we  leave  it  with  the  remark  :  that  opposers  to  Chiliasm  some- 
times endeavor  to  bring  our  doctrine  into  disrej)ute  by  concealing  or  denjnng  that  all 
Millenarians  concede  to  Christ  a  present  reigning,  the  one  party  as  a  Divine  being  (as 
God,  being  One  with  the  Father)  and  exercising  special  care  over  the  Church  as  its  Head, 
Mediator,  Intercessor,  and  Advocate  ;  the  other  party,  as  the  Son  of  man  over  the 
Church,  the  latter  being  regarded  either  as  a  visible  or  invisible  Kingdom,  to  give  place 
finally  to  a  new  and  higher  stage  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  No  Millenarian  writer  ever  noticed 
by  the  writer  but  ascribes  to  Jesus,  in  some  form,  a  present  reigning— a  present  exercise 
of  exalted  power. 

Ohs.  8.  The  exact  time  when  the  Father  will  give  this  Kingdom  to  "  the 
Son  of  Man"  is  not  revealed.  Signs  are  indeed  given  in  the  fulfilment  of 
predictions,  etc.,  by  which  an  approximative  (comp.  Props.  173  and  174) 
knowledge  may  be  gained,  but  the  precise  time  is  reserved  by  the  Father 
as  something  exclusively  i^ertaining  to  Himself,  Acts  1:7;  Mark  13  :  32  : 
Matt.  24  :  36. 

This  gives  us  a  clue  to  the  perplexing  passage  given  by  Mark  (13  :  32),  that  the  Son 
did  not  know  the  day  or  hour.  Now  let  it  be  noticed  that  this  Kingdom  is  given  by  the 
Father  to  "  the  Son  of  man"  at  the  Sec.  Advent  :  hence  it  follows,  (1)  that  Jesus  speaks 
of  this  future  period  as  "  the  Son  of  man,"  i.e.  as  David's  Son  ;  (2)  that  the  Father  re- 
taining the  prerogative  of  bestowing  the  Kingdom,  the  time  of  the  Advent  connected  with 
the  same  is  also  thus  retained  as  intimately  associated  with  it.  Consequently  the  Divine, 
the  Father  in  Christ,  could  not  reveal  what  exclusively  belonged  to  the  Father — what  per- 
tained to  the  Divine  prerogative— and,  therefore,  while  the  descendant  of  David  is  in- 
separably connected  with  the  Divine,  yet  the  Divine  in  such  a  matter  (for  "  My  Father 
is  greater  than  I  ")  may  deny  to  the  humanity — David's  Son^the  precise  knowledge  of 
the  day  and  hour,  for  the  reason  assigned.  For  David's  Son  takes  the  things  belonging 
to  the  Father,  and  shows  those  that  are  allowed,  the  human  being  subservient  to  the  wiU 
of  the  Father  and  to  the  knowledge  imparted.  Tillotson,  Ser.  on  Mark  13  :  32,  33, 
attributes  this  not  knowing  to  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  refering  to  Luke  2  :  52,  etc., 


Prop.  83.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  581 

showing  that  the  human  nature  did  not  necessarily,  by  virtue  of  its  union  with  the 
Divine,  know  all  things,  or  otherwise  he  could  not,  as  man,  be  said  to  grow  in  wisdom, 
etc. 

01)s.  9.  When  this  Kingdom  is  given  by  the  Father  then  tvill  te  2^erfected 
the  covenanted  arrangement  concerning  "  the  Man,^''  as  indicated  in  2 
Saml.  7  :  19  and  1  Chron.  17  :  17  (comp.  the  Davidic  covenant  under  Prop. 
49).  Then  in  a  completed  sense  can  it  be  said,  taking  Bh.  Horsley's 
rendering  :  "  And  this  is  the  arrangement  about  the  Man,  0  Lord 
Jehovah," — "  And  Thou  hast  regarded  me  (David)  in  the  arrangement 
about  the  Man,  that  is  to  be  from  above,  0  Lord  Jehovah."  Therefore  it 
follows,  taking  covenant  promises  for  our  guide,  that  this  Plan  respecting 
the  Kingdom  is  made  in  virtue  of  the  humanity  of  Christ,  His  relation- 
ship to  Man  in  the  Davidic  line  ;  and  God  the  Father  ivill  not  allow  this 
Plan  to  fail,  but  will  in  due  time  exhibit  His  Theocratic  rule  in  and 
through  "  the  Man  ordainecV^ 


582  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  84. 


Peoposttion  84.  As  this  Kingdom  is  speciallij  given  to  the  Son 
of  Man  as  the  result  of  his  obedience,  sufferings,  cmd  death,  it 
must  he  something  different  from  His  Divine  nature,  or  from 
''piety,'''  "'religion,'''  ''God's  reign  in  the  hearV,''  etc. 

Our  argument  all  along  involves  this,  for  we  liave  (1)  the  Kingdom 
I)romised  to  David's  Son  ;  (2)  this  promise  based  on  the  foretold 
affirmations  that  this  Son  shall  be  spotless,  without  sin  ;  and  (3) 
the  continued  blessedness  and  perpetuity  of  the  Kingdom  asserted 
in  view  of  the  perfect  character  of  this  descendant  of  David. 
Numerous  passages  declare  this  ;  hence,  when  we  come  to  the 
Apostles,  they  plainly  inform  us  that  His  exaltation  and  reception 
of  dominion  is  due  to  His  obedience,  sufferings,  and  death.  Two 
passages  alone  clearly  present  this  to  us,  viz. :  Heb.  12  :  2  ;  Phil. 
2  :  8,  9.  The  latter  part  of  the  Proposition  follows  as  a  natural 
sequence. 

We  now  enter  into  a  detailed  statement  in  following  Props.,  to  show  that  the  Church 
is  noi  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom,  in  any  sense  whatever.  This 
is  the  more  requisite,  seeing  that  able  Pre-Mill.  writers,  forsaking  the  strictly  logical  and 
IScriplural  ground,  also— with  our  opponents — make  a  Kingdom  to  exist  in  the  heart 
(God's  reign),  another  in  the  Church,  and  a  third  still  future  which  is  to  come.  This  is 
misleading,  and  perverts  the  precise  portrayal  of  the  Kingdom  as  given  by  covenant  and 
prophecy.  Hence  the  space  devoted  to  this  subject,  and  the  meeting  of  every  possible 
objection  urged  against  us.  The  Christian  student,  desirous  for  truth  alone,  will  can- 
didly weigh  our  reasons  assigned,  and  give  them  proper  credit  in  so  far  as  they  are  sup- 
ported by  the  Word. 

Obs.  1.  The  6rst  clause  of  the  Proposition  is  fully  adiBitted  by  Com- 
mentators (as  e.g.  Barnes,  etc.),  and  by  Theologians  (as  e.g.  Knapp,  Ch. 
Theol,  p.  351  and  355),  as  "  acquired,''  so  that  in  the  language  of  Knapp, 
"  He  received  it  (the  government)  from  His  Father  as  a  reward  for  His 
sufferings,  and  for  his  faithful  performance  of  the  whole  work,  and  dis- 
charge of  all  the  offices  intrusted  to  Him  by  God  for  the  good  of  man." 
This,  of  course,  corroborates  and  confirms  our  previous  Propositions  re- 
specting the  Divine  Sovereignty  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Kingdom  being  promised  to  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  and  not  merely  to 
the  Divine.  It  is  matter  of  surprise  to  find,  after  the  frank  acknowledg- 
ment of  writers  on  this  point,  that  many  of  them  subsequently  overlook  it, 
and  ascribe  this  Kingdom  solely  to  the  Divine  nature.  Another  thing 
must  also  here  be  noticed,  while  it  is  true  that  the  Kingdom  is  thus  ac- 
quired, it  is  not  correct  to  conclude  as  e.g.  Knapp  does  :  "  this  govern- 
ment which  Jesus  administers,  as  a  man,  is  7iot  natural  to  Him,  or  one 
which  He  attains  hy  Urth,  but  acquired.''  This  is  opposed  to  the  cove- 
nant promises,  for  it  is  distinctly  announced  as  a  prerequisite  that  He 
must  he  of  the  royal  line  of  David\     It  is  the  distinctive  Son  of  David  to 


Prop.  84.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  583 

whom  this  KiDgdom  belongs  hy  covenanted  Divine  rigid.  He  only  confirms 
His  right  and  title  to  it,  as  the  Representative  Ruler  in  such  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  by  the  life  and  death  which  He  manifested.  Hence  by  these 
expressions  we  ought  not  to  be  led  to  reject  the  claims  which  Jesus  has  by 
virtue  of  His  birth.  This,  as  seen  by  previous  Propositions,  would  be  a 
grave  mistake.     The  Father  only  confirms  His  right. 

As  illustrative  of  the  doctrinal  position  of  multitudes,  we  quote  Reuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol. 
of  Apos.  Age,  p.  154),  who  says  :  "  The  Kingdom  of  God,  which  Jesus  desired  to  make  a 
reality,  commences  with  His  personal  appearance  on  the  theatre  of  the  world.  His  Ad- 
vent and  the  setting  up  of  the  Kingdom  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  because  He  is  the 
Head  and  cause  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  cause  cannot  exist  without  the  effect."  Jesus 
is  also  e.g.  the  Head  of  the  firstborn  from  the  dead,  and  the  Agent  of  the  renewal  of  the 
earth,  but  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  and  the  renewal  has  not  yet  transpired.  This 
reasoning  would  be  conclusive,  if  it  could  be  proven  that  there  was  no  postponement  of 
the  Kingdom.  As  it  is,  it  begs  the  whole  question,  for  we  assert  that  there  is  nothing 
that  our  opponents  allege  concerning  Christ's  reign  in  the  heart  and  Headship  over  the 
Church,  which  we  cannot,  and  do  not,  cordially  receive,  claiming,  however,  that  all  this 
does  not  constitute  a  Kingdom,  but  is  purely  a  provisional,  sjnritual,  and  providential  over- 
sight and  rule  tending  toward  the  ultimate  realization  of  the  Kingdom  itself.  We  distin- 
guish between  the  means  and  the  end ;  those  who  oppose  us  either  blend  the  two  to- 
gether, or  assume  the  former  to  be  the  latter.  In  the  extract  just  given,  the  personality 
of  the  Saviour  is  made  equivalent  to  the  Kingdom's  introduction  (ho  many),  and  no  heed 
is  given  to  any  Scriptures  which  restrict  it,  at  least,  to  succeed  an  obedience  rendered. 
Others,  to  save  themselves  from  this  difficulty,  postpone  the  setting  up  of  the  Kingdom 
to  His  resurrection,  or  ascension,  or  to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  but  in  their  efforts  to  avoid 
one  obstacle,  plunge  themselves  even  into  greater  diificulties  (as  e.g.  if  the  Kingdom  is 
"  God's  reign  in  the  heart,"  was  that  postponed  until  then?),  making  it  requisite  to  have 
a  number  of  Kingdoms  to  meet  the  various  contingencies. 

Obs.  2.  Some  of  the  most  eminent  writers  and  commentators  not  know- 
ing hoiu  to  escape  the  dilemmas  incident  to  their  theory  of  a  present  exist- 
ing Kingdom  of  promise,  gravely  tell  us  that  this  Kingdom  is  ^' jyieti/,''  or 
"  religion/^  or  the  most  favorite  phrase  (as  e.g.  Dr.  McCosh,  and  others), 
"  God's  reign  in  the  heart.' ^  We  leave  them  to  reconcile  a  Kingdom  of 
promise,  specially  covenanted  to  the  Son  of  David  in  the  line  of  his 
humanity,  and  for  which  He  rendered  Himself  worthy  on  account  of  obedi- 
ence, with  siich  inte7'pretations  as  these.  It  piety,  religion,  God's  reign  in 
the  heart,  etc.,  is  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  we  may  well  ask  what  need  of 
such  promises  of  the  Kingdom  in  the  Davidic  line  and  why  not  then  date 
the  Kingdom  from  Adam  down  to  the  present,  seeing  that  "  piety"  or 
"  religion,"  or  "  God's  i-eign  in  the  heart,"  has  existed  continuously?  A 
host  of  questions  suggested  by  our  various  Propositions  indicate  the  utter 
absurdity  of  such  a  definition.  Piety,  religion,  etc.,  are  ptrerequisitcs  to 
attain  to  this  Kingdom,  and  are  to  exist  in  the  Kingdom  itself,  but  are  far 
from  constituting  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  3.  The  tender  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Jewish  nation,  its  rejection, 
postponement,  the  peculiar  style  of  preaching  of  the  first  preachers — all  go 
to  show  that  "  piety,"  etc.  existed  with  a  certain  portion  of  the  Jews, 
without  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom.  Yet  even  those  who  advocate 
that  Christ's  Kingdom  was  only  inaugurated  after  His  death  take  this  un- 
guarded position,  just  as  if  these  things  were  not  previously  exhibited. 
Their  definition  is  i7iconsistent  with  their  own  admissions,  and  fatal  to  a 
distinctive  Kingdom  given  to  the  Son  of  Man.  It  is  not  necessary  to  press 
this  point. 


584  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  84. 

An  illustration,  however,  showing  the  inconsistency  may  be  in  place.  Many  eminent 
writers  enforce  this  heart-reigning  Kingdom  theory  (comjD.  Prop.  110),  but  when  they 
come  to  explain  the  predictions  (e.g.  Dan.,  chs.  2  and  7)  relating  to  this  Kingdom  they 
forget  their  own  theory  of  a  heart-kingdom,  and  affirm  that  the  prophecies  are  realized 
in  a  visible,  external  manner  through  the  establishment  of  the  Ch.  Church. 

Obs.  4.  It  may,  however,  be  well  to  give  an  illustration  of  the  inconsis- 
tency of  writers  who  insist  on  this  Kingship  of  Christ's  being  exercised 
before  He  showed  Himself  thus  worthy  to  receive  it.  Aside  from  many 
found  in  this  work  which  declare  that  the  Kingdom  was  manifested  when 
Jesus  appeared,  lived,  etc.,  (and  mainly  derived  from  this  "  piety," 
"  God's  reign  in  the  heart"  theory),  we  refer  to,  in  many  respects  an  ad- 
mirable writer,  Pressense.  In  his  Sermon  "  On  Jesus  Christ  as  King,"  he 
has  (1)  Jesus  King  even  in  His  humiliation  ;  (this  we  admit,  but  the 
Kingship  was  held  in  abeyance);  (2)  Jesus  King  on  the  Cross  (this  we 
admit,  but  hold  that  His  royalty  was  not  manifested);  (3)  Jesus  King  in  a 
signal  manner  after  the  resurrection  ;  and  all  this  to  show  that  His  King- 
dom was  established  and  manifested  continuously /rom  His  birtli.  To  all 
this,  in  connection  with  previous  arguments  against  such  a  view,  we  only 
now  say,  how  can  such  a  Kingdom  ruled  over  by  Jesus  during  His  life  and 
at  the  time  of  His  death  be  reconciled  with  the  Scriptures  which  speak 
of,  and  the  countless  admissions  of  our  opponents  which  advocate,  an  ac- 
quisition of  a  Kingdom  of  promise  in  virtue  of  His  obedient  life  and 
death?  Our  theory  is  consistent  and  requires  just  such  a  position  in  the 
Son  of  David.  The  Divine  Sovereignty  only  bestows  this  acquisition, 
and,  when  given,  enforces  it,  but  only  in  the  covenanted  Davidic  line. 
Hence,  to  refer  to  the  Divine  attributes  lodged  with  Jesus  (such  as  His 
power  over  the  angels,  etc.),  and  from  thence  infer  that  He  then  exerted 
regal  power,  is  evidence  that  the  party  making  such  an  inference  has  no 
idea  of  the  Scriptural  diiTerence  existing  between  the  Divine  Sovereignty 
and  the  Kingdom  (through  which  that  Sovereignty  will  be  gloriously  dis- 
played) distinctively  jnwnised  to  David's  Son. 

Obs.  5.  This  evinces  what  the  covenant,  etc.,  demands,  viz.:  a  Euler, 
who  is  such  in  virtue  also  of  His  humanity  ;  and  includes,  that  this  Ruler 
has  shown  what  no  other  Theocratic  Ruler  can  do,  His  perfect  adaptability 
for  the  position,  i.e.  to  carry  out  the  Divine  Will  in  government.  Keep- 
ing in  view  the  goal  of  Theocratic  government  and  its  requirements,  we 
find  in  the  honorable  obedience  of  Christ  the  most  ample  and  satisfactory 
assurance  that  in  His  occupancy  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  He 
will  indeed  be  a  truthful  and  stable  Representative  of  God.  Therefore 
Peter  says,  1  Pet.  1  :  21,  etc. 

In  conversation  with  Rev.  Dr.  Rodgers  on  this  point,  he  suggested  that  one  reason 
why  the  sinfulness  of  the  ablest  and  most  highly  honored  of  the  Theocratic  Kings  (as 
e.g.  David  and  Solomon)  is  so  plainly  recorded  in  Scriptiire,  arises  from  the  fact  that 
thus  is  shown  (1)  the  failure  of  mere  mortals,  through  infirmity,  to  sustain  the  posi- 
tion perfectly,  and  (2)  to  evidence,  by  way  of  contrast  through  trial,  the  perfection  of 
Jesus  as  Theocratic  King. 


Prop.  85.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  585 


Proposition  85.  Neither  Abraham.,  nor  his  engrafted  seed  have 
as  yet  inherited  the  Kingdom :  hence  the  Kingdom  must  he 
something  different  from  '^  piety  ^^  "  religion^^^  and  ^^God^s  reign 
in  the  hearth 

We  have  shown  that  Abraham  is  to  inherit  the  promises  in  this 
Kingdom  (Prop.  49,  etc.),  and  that  saints  inherit  with  him  (Prop. 
62,  68,  etc.).  The  time  of  inheriting  the  Kingdom  is  specified,  in 
accordance  with  onr  argument,  e.  g.,  in  Matt.  25  :  34.  Therefore 
to  make  "  piety,"  etc.,  the  kingdom  is  an  incongruity. 

To  say  that  the  Patriarchs  were  in  this  Kingdom,  before  the  Advent  of  "  the  Christ," 
is  a  palpable  absurdity  ;  to  infer  that  they  and  others  are  now  in  it,  when  it  has  not  ap- 
peared in  its  covenanted  form,  and  wlmi  it  has  been  postponed  to  the  ISec.  Advent,  is 
equally  unworthy  of  credence. 

01^.  1.  This  is  virtually  to  make  "  piety"  inherit  "  piety."  This  is  a 
suhstiiution  of  the  means  by  which  the  Kingdom  is  obtained /or  the  King- 
dom itself.  The  saints  with  Abraham,  the  Father  of  the  Faithful,  inherit 
the  Kingdom  because  they  are  pious,  religious,  and  acknowledge  obedience 
to  God.  The  ancient  and  the  Christian  beheyers  receive  their  inheritance 
on  the  same  conditions. 

Consequently  the  "  Plymouth  Brethren"  position,  which  would  limit  "  the  heirs  of 
the  Kingdom"  to  members  of  the  Ch.  Church,  must  be  rejected  as  untenable.  The 
positive  statements  of  inheriting  wilh  the  Patriarchs,  the  necessity  of  being  engrafted 
and  becoming  the  children  of  Abraham  in  order  to  inherit,  etc.,  forbid  such  a  limitation. 
Besides,  such  a  view  perverts  the  Scriptural  idea  of  the  election  and  its  continuation  (as  pre- 
viously presented  in  detail  by  us).  It  must  never  be  overlooked,  in  order  to  avoid  both 
extremes,  that  "  heirs"  are  "  heirs"  of  the  same  promise  given  to  the  Patriarchs,  and  that 
so  long  as  simply  "  heirs"  of  the  salvation  and  Kingdom  included  in  that  promise,  they 
have  not  yet  inherited.  The  time  of  inheritance  is  specific  ;  it  is  determinately  located 
at  the  Sec.  Advent.  To  antedate  it,  or  to  substitute  something  else,  or  to  fritter  it  away 
by  a  process  of  spiritualizing,  or  to  limit  it  to  modern  believers,  is  to  ignore  the  express, 
plain  language  relating  to  "  the  inheritance,  not  of  law,  hut  of  promise." 

Ois.  2.  With  the  idea  that  behevers  now  enjoy  the  Kingdom  in  the  pres- 
ent dispensation,  the  most  unjust  reflections  and  comparisons  are  institu- 
ted derogatory  to  the  ancient  worthies.  Some  of  these  we  have  noticed, 
but  to  impress  the  matter  another  illustration  is  given  from  Reuss  {His.  of 
the  Ch.  Theol.,  p.  150),  who  seems  to  take  it  for  granted  that  saints  already 
have  inherited,  or  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  to  the 
disparagement  of  ancient  worthies,  thus  : — ''  Before  time  the  Kingdom  of 
God  presented  itself  to  the  imagination  (!),  now  it  reveals  itself  in  the  heart. 
Formerly  knowledge,  reflection,  factitious  duty  conferred  the  privileges  of 
the  Kingdom  ;  now  it  is  the  heritage  of  children  and  the  childlike,"  etc. 
A  mass  of  just  such  invidious  representations  might  readily  be  presented. 


586  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  85. 

drawn  from  various  writers  utterly  iinscriptural  and  dangei^ous  in  tendency. 
The  simple  truth  is,  that  they  are  destructive  of  the  covenant  promises,  of 
the  true  hope,  and  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  itself. 

We  give  another:  Beecher,  Sermon  on  "The  Future  Life"  {Ch.  Union.  Sept.  5th, 
1877),  after  referring  to  the  apostles  being  mistaken  (comp.  Prop.  74)  in  their  notion  of 
the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  then  adds  :  "  The  best  Jews  had  a  mistaken  notion  of  the  King- 
dom of  God  founded  on  the  old  prophets  ;  but  when  you  look  at  what  was  the  scope  and 
teaching  of  the  apostles,  I  think  that  you  will  find  that  it  amounts  simply  to  a  knowl- 
edge addressed  to  men' s  hearts  by  the  understanding,  the  intellect,  acting  through  the 
ministry  of  the  imagination  —if  you  can  get  that  sentence  into  your  mind.  It  is  an  in- 
tellectual teaching  ;  but  it  is  expressed  through  the  imagination, "  etc.  All  that  we  novo 
say  is  this  :  if  Beecher  is  correct  in  his  degradation  of  ancient  believers,  who  trusted  in 
the  plain  and  indubitable  gram,  sense  of  the  Scriptures,  then  how  miserably  (as  our  his- 
tory of  the  doctrine  conclusively  proves)  those  who  sat  under  this  intellectual  preaching 
of  the  apostles  failed  to  have  their  "  imaginations"  impressed  and  exercised.  It  re- 
quired the  "  imagination"  of  Origen  or  Whitby  to  bring  forth  this  intended  "  intellectual 
teaching,' '  which  tramples  on  covenant  and  prediction,  and  makes  men — even  school 
children — of  to-day  wiser  respecting  the  Kingdom  than  John  the  Baptist  and  the  in- 
spired apostles,  owing  to  a  continuous  inspiration.     Alas  !  what  new  paths  ! 


Prop.  86.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  587 


Proposition  86.  The  object  or  design  of  this  dis^yensation  is  to 
gather  out  these  elect,  to  whom,  as  heirs  ivith  Abraham  and 
his  seed^  Christ-^  this  Kingdom  is  to  be  given. 

This  Proposition  is  thus  presented  to  recall,  at  this  point  of  our 
discussion,  some  conclusions  previously  arrived  at.  We  have 
shown  (1)  Prop.  57,  how  the  kingdom  was  rejected,  (2)  Prop.  58, 
why  it  was  postponed,  (3)  Prop.  59,  that  during  this  postponement 
a  seed  is  raised  up  unto  Abraham,  (4)  Proj^.  63,  that  this  seed, 
composing  the  elect  nation,  is  the  one  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is 
given.  Therefore,  wdienever  the  design  of  this  dispensation  is  dis- 
tinctively referred  to,  it  is  to  save  them  that  believe,  to  proclaim 
the  terms  of  salvation  by  which,  if  observed,  men  may  become 
inheritors  of  Christ's  Kingdom,  to  gather  out  such  a  body  of 
elect  ones. 

Ohs.  1.  It  is  not  necessary,  under  this  heading,  to  notice  two  mistakes 
by  which^tbe  affirmation  of  the  Proposition  is  obscured  by  error,  viz.:  (1) 
the  regarding  tliis  dispensation  as  the  final  one,  and  (2)  the  behef  in  the 
conversion  of  the  world  before  the  Sec.  Advent.  These  will  be  made,  here- 
after, the  subjects  of  special  remark  (as  e.g.  the  first,  under  Props.  140, 
138,  139,  137,  etc.,  and  the  second,  under  Props.  175,  121,  122,  152, 
153,  etc.). 

Ohs.  2.  If  our  argument  has  any  logical  force,  based  on  the  plain  gram- 
matical sense  of  covenant,  and  prophecy,  and  fact, — if  it  has  any  Script- 
ural weight  in  insisting  upon  a  restored  Theocratic  order  under  David's 
Son  here  on  the  earth  where  the  previous  Theocratic  rule  was  inaugurated, 
— tlien  the  absence  of  such  a  Theocracy  in  the  form  covenanted,  itself  is 
sufficient  to  indicate  that  a  dispensation  or  ordering  under  the  personal 
reign  of  David's  Son  is  still  future,  and  that  the  Millennial  glory  in  the 
blessedness  of  nations  will  only  then  be  realized. 

Obs.  3.  Our  Proposition  is,  consequently,  ondy  formulating,  or  recall- 
ing, the  conclusions  arrived  at  under  previous  ones  pertaining  to  the  elec- 
tion. It  has  been  shown  (I)  that  there  is  an  elect-people,  Proj).  24,  etc.; 
(2)  this  elect-people  for  a  certain  and  fixed  time,  is  discarded,  Prop.  59, 
etc.;  (3)  another  elect-people  is  gathered  out,  Prop.  61,  etc.;  (4)  the  former 
election,  now  held  in  abeyance,  is  fully  restored,  re-engrafted  in  order  to  ful- 
fil the  covenant,  Prop.  66,  etc. ;  (5)  hence  the  design  of  this  dispensation, 
or  "  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  in  which  this  continuation  of  elected  ones, 
grafted  in,  is  going  on,  is  not  to  establish  the  Kingdom  but  to  prepare  the 
way  for  the  final  restoration  of  that  Kingdom  to  the  covenanted  people. 
Prop.   65,  etc.;  (6)  and  that  it  is  by  our  identification  with  that  people 


588  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIN^GDOM.  [PrOP.  86. 

that  we  also  inherit  with  them.  Prop.  G4,  etc.  In  the  very  nature  of  the 
case,  this  dispensation,  as  its  progressive  work  indicates,  can  do  no  more 
than  lireiKire  the  heirs  for  the  Kingdom. 

We  see  in  this  dispensation  only  that  which  unmistakably  proves  that  the  covenant  will 
he  fulfilled  ;  to  say  that  in  it  the  covenant  is  already  realized,  is  either  to  ignore  or  mis- 
represent (if  not  to  degrade)  the  most  precious  of  its  i^romises.  As  preparative,  it  is 
exceedingly  precious  ;  as  bringing  present  blessings  and  the  prospect  of  the  highest 
honor  and  glory  in  the  future,  it  is  indispensable  ;  as  a  link  in  the  chain  of  Divine  pro- 
cedure, it  is  necessary  to  preserve  and  perfect  a  unity  of  Purpose. 

0^-s\  4.  Our  argument  regards  this  dispensation  (1)  ii^ preparative  to  the 
Kingdom  ;  (2)  as  introduced,  because  of  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  nation,  to 
raise  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham  ;  (3)  as  elective  and  not  national  in  the  sense 
that  it  gathers  out  of  all  nations  a  iK02ile  for  God  ;  (4)  as  extending  to  all 
nations  in  its  offers  of  mercy,  but  resulting  in  no  conversion  of  nations  but 
of  individuals  only  ;  (5)  as  spiritual  in  its  designs  and  operations,  so  that 
iio  introduction  of  an  outward  exhibition  of  God's  Kingdom  is  to  be  ex- 
pected in  it  ;  (6)  as  one  that  will  end  in  unbelief  and  Apostasy,  just  like 
previous  dispensations,  proving  both  the  continued  inherent  depravity  of 
man  and  the  non-erection  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  ;  (7)  as  one  that  is, 
therefore,  an  extraordinary  manifestation  of  Divine  grace  and  forbearance 
in  Him  who  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning  ;  (8)  as  one  connected  with 
probation,  trial,  suffering,  cliastening^  bereavement,  etc.,  and  to  exalt  which 
into  the  position  of  the  Coming  one  (freed  from  these  evils),  is  to  do  vio- 
lence to  the  Word  ;  (9)  as  one  which,  in  the  establishment  and  perpetuation 
of  the  Christian  Church,  stands  forth  as  a  constant  sign  or  witness  that 
God's  purposes  do  not  fail  ;  (10)  and  hence,  as  a  standing  j^r oof  ih^i,  how- 
ever long  delayed,  the  oath-l>ound  Davidic  covenant  will  be  most  amply 
realized. 

Ohs,  5.  The  covenanted  relationship  is  recalled  by  the  phrase,  "  heirs 
tuith  Abraham.^'  Having  fully  shown  the  necessity  of  this  (Prop.  61, 
etc.),  the  reader  may  again  be  reminded  how  eminent  writers,  viewing 
this  dispensation  as  final,  take  the  position,  demanded  by  their  theory, 
that  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  this  Kingdom  have  7io  relation  to  Israel 
as  a  nation.  This  is  productive  of  discordant  interpretation,  unduly  ex- 
alting the  present  divine  arrangement  to  the  pn^'udice  of  the  truth.  We 
are  gravely  told  (e.g.  Alexayider  on  Isa.  vol.  2,  p.  31)  that  it  is  not  only 
an  "  error^^  but  an  "  {irrational  extreme  of  making  Israel  as  a  race  the 
object  of  the pro7nises.''  Leaving  former  Propositions  (such  as  Props.  24, 
3i,  33,  49,  51,  52,  63,  68,  etc.),  to  speak  for  themselves,  it  may  well  be 
asked  :  how  comes  it  that  the  Theocratic  ordering  is  inseparably  connected 
with  the  Jeioish  nation  as  such  ?  How  comes  it  then  that  all  the  promises 
and  threatenings  revolve  around  that  Jeivish  race  as  a  central  pivot,  which 
is  still  recognized  in  the  N.  Test,  as  indispenscd>le,  since  into  that  race  we 
must  be  grafted,  and  to  inherit  we  must  be  adopted  as  Abraham'' s  chil- 
dren'^ Why  must  we  become  Jews  (i.e.  of  the  seed  of  Abraham)  in  order 
to  enter  this  Kingdom,  if  the  promises  are  not  given  to  that  nation,  and 
still  pertain  to  them  ?  Wiy  even  in  the  time  of  rejection  are  they  so 
wonderfully  preserved,  and  ivhy  is  their  restoration  so  plainly  predicted, 
unless  the  promises  remain  linked  with  them  ?  Wliy  should  the  threaten- 
ings be  carefully  given  to  them  and  the  blessings  pertaining  to  the  very 


PeOP.  86.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  589 

same  people,  be  taken  from  them  ?  Surely  it  is  illogical,  if  not  worse,  to 
appropriate  the  covenant  promises  to  ourselves,  and  leave  the  curses  to 
the  Jews.  God  has  united  them  and  bound  them  together  in  an  insejxi- 
rahle  manner  with  that  people,  and  seeing  the  latter  so  fearfully  verified, 
enjoins  upon  us  the  belief  that  the  former  will  also  yet  be  realized.  The 
'^hojje  of  Israel''  is  our  hope  ;  and  such  hope  is  greatly  increased  by  an 
intelligent  and  consistent  Scriptural  interpretation  of  the  design  of  this 
dispensation. 

Ohs.  6.  Noticing  the  design  of  this  dispensation  and  not  overloading  it 
with  things  that  belong  to  a  coming  one,  Christianity  itself,  as  it  exists,  is 
susceptible  of  rt  ?/?ore  easy  defence  against  the  attacks  of  infidelity.  Thus 
e.g.  we  can  more  readily  account  for  its  want  of  success  in  some  ages,  its 
retrogressions  where  once  predominant,  its  declines  and  revivals,  its  union 
Avith  much  that  must  be  discarded,  etc.,  for  these  and  other  events  do  not 
affect  its  object,  or  prevent  the  carrying  out  of  the  design  originally  in- 
tended. Humanly  speaking,  these  may  cause  a  delay,  but  the  delay  itself 
is  an  experience  of  continued  mercy  and  forbearance  so  that  the  design 
may  be  completed.  On  the  other  hand,  bind  upon  this  dispensation  ideas 
and  notions  which  really  belong  to  the  future  coming  age,  and  at  once — 
in  view  of  the  Church's  mixed  character,  the  comparative  meagre  exten- 
sion of  real  piety  after  eighteen  centuries  of  preaching,  the  losses  Chris- 
tianity has  sustained  in  countries  where  once  it  existed  in  all  its  vigor,  the 
corruption  of  doctrine  and  practice,  the  virulent  controversies  and  spirit 
often  exhibited,  etc. — a  resort  must  be  had  to  apologetic  shifts,  mystical 
subterfuges,  and  philosophical  glosses  utterly  unworthy  of  a  candid  and 
noble  defence.  Is  there  a  student  who  has  not  been  saddened  by  the 
apologies  of  eminent  believers  in  behalf  of  the  gospel,  who,  hampered  by 
a  Church-Kingdom  theory,  feel  themselves  compelled  to  excuse  and  justify 
a  want  of  success,  etc.,  when  no  such  specicd  pleading  is  demanded  hj  the 
design  God  has  in  view,  or  by  the  real  facts  in  the  case?  God's  plan,  and 
the  time  employed  by  Him,  in  gathering  the  elect,  requires  on  our  part  no 
abject  vindication. 

Additional  evidence  iD  behalf  of  the  Proposition  will  be  found  under  Props.  87,  88,  89, 
etc.  The  reasons  (additional)  for  the  design  are  given  under  Props.  124,  142,  118,  120, 
etc.  Others  again  are  found  under  Props.  131-139,  140,  169,  154,  158,  etc.  We  have  al- 
ready laid  sufficient  stress  on  Acts  15  :  14-16,  so  that  we  need  not  repeat,  only  sajing 
that  Dr.  Brown,  in  his  recent  Com.  on  Acts,  eutirelj'  omits  to  recognize  the  eclecticism  in- 
dicated by  the  phrase  "taking  out  of  them."  As  illustrative  of  doctrinal  jiosition,  we 
append  the  views  of  two  men.  Pressense  {The  Early  Years  of  Chrisiianity,  p.  25)  makes 
the  "  vocation"  of  the  Church  to  be  that  of  "  illuminating  and  vivifying  the  world" — 
"  to  purify  itself  within,  and  to  extend  itself  without,  such  is  the  twofold  task  of  the 
Church,  and  the  ages  are  given  for  its  fulfilment."  Here  the  preconceived  idea  of  the 
conversion  of  the  world  through  the  Church  suggests  the  vocation  (comp  Prop.  175). 
Now  in  contrast,  we  give  Dr.  Fausset's  (Com.  Dan.  7  :  11)  brief  comment:  "  The  New 
Test,  views  the  present  geon  or  age  of  the  world  as  essentially  heathenish,  which  we 
cannot  love  without  forsaking  Christ  (Kom,  12  :  2  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  20,  and  2  :  6,  8,  and  3  :  18, 
and  7  :  31  ;  2  Cur.  4:4;  Gal.  1:4;  Eph.  2  :  2  ;  2  Tim.  4  :  10  ;  cf.  1  John  2  :  15,  17). 
The  object  of  Christianity  is  not  so  much  to  Christianize  the  present  world  as  to  save 
souls  out  of  it,  so  as  not  to  be  condemned  with  the  world  (1  Cor.  11  :  32),  but  to  rule 
with  Him  in  His  Millennium  (Matt.  5:5;  Luke  12  :  32,  and  22  :  28-30  ;  Kom.  5  :  17  ;  1 
Cor.  6:2:  Rev.  1  :  6,  and  2  :  26-28,  and  3  :  21  and  20  :  4).  This  is  our  hope  ;  not  to 
reign  in  the  present  world  course  (1  Cor.  4  :  8  ;  2  Cor.  4  :  18  ;  Phil.  3  :  20  ;  Heb. 
13  :  14)."     Pressense's  view  is  inferential  ;  Fausset's  is  directly  Scriptural. 


590  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  87. 


Proposition  87.     The  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  hey  to 
the  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  this  dispensation. 

So  important  is  this  fact  that  before  entering  into  a  direct  descrip- 
tion of  the  relation  that  the  church  sustains  to  this  dispensation 
and  to  the  Kingdom,  we  take  the  liberty  of  referring  the  reader  to 
what  has  been  proven  concerning  this  postponement,  Props.  58-68. 
If  our  position  is  correct  (and  we  deem  it,  as  the  early  church  did, 
impregnable)  then  it  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  many 
things  now  applied  by  divines  to  this  dispensation  have  no  rela- 
tion lohatever  to  it. 

The  great  point  overlooked  by  many  theologians  is  this  :  that  there  was  a  time  in 
the  history  of  Christ  when  the  proclamation  of  a  Kingdom  near  at  hand  totally  ceased,  as 
we  have  already  shown  ;  yea,  not  only  ceased  bnt  gave  place  to  an  entirely  different  tone 
of  preaching,  viz.  :  the  poslponement  of  that  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  This,  of  course, 
materially  aids,  as  our  entire  argument  indicates,  in  showing  lohy  the  present  ordering  is 
established  and  continued  to  the  Sec.  Coming.  Another  feature  forgotten  is  the  follow- 
ing :  that  it  is  impossible  to  comprehend  the  Kingdom  without  going  back  to  the  Old 
Test,  idea  of  it,  which  conception  once  received  and  entertained  prevents  an  improper 
view  of  the  present  dispensation.  While  the  Old  Test,  idea  is  plain,  having  been  car- 
ried out  partially  in  an  outward,  external  Theocratic  manifestation,  yet  men,  to  evade  its 
force,  contend  that  it  has  proven  a  failure,  not  keeping  in  mind  (1)  that  the  failure  was 
not  in  God's  plan  but  in  man's  depravity,  and  (2)  that  God  is  providing  the  means,  as 
predicted,  for  the  xdtimate  realization  of  His  Purpose,  so  that  there  shall  be  no  failure  in 
the  future  (comp.  e.g.  ProjD.  201  and  202).  If,  as  Neander  and  others,  it  is  insisted  that 
God  originally  desired  such  an  outward  Theocratic  Kingdom,  but,  owing  to  man's  per- 
versitj',  gave  up  its  prosecution  in  that  form,  and  so  modified  His  Plan  that  the  present 
dispensation  alone  gives  us  a  kind  of  spiritual  Theocratic  Kingdom  in  the  Church,  then 
it  follows— (1)  that  God,  starting  out  with  the  intention  of  instituting  such  a  Kingdom, 
has  been  foiled  in  His  own  Plan  ;  (2)  that  the  perverseness  of  man  can  change  God's 
jiurposes,  although  announced  under  oath  (as  to  certainty)  in  the  Davidic  covenant  ;  (3) 
that  this  dispensation,  instituted  to  overrule  that  very  depravity  and  insure  the  future 
realization  of  God's  original  Plan,  which  in  no  shape  or  form  exhibits  the  previous  The- 
ocratic idea  (as  presented  in  its  initiatory  form  and  as  given  by  covenant),  must  be 
viewed  as  an  evidence  of  God's  changeableness  and  inability  to  carry  out  His  own  Pur- 
pose of  government. 

Oi^.  1.  It  is  a  rule,  more  frequently  violated  than  observed,  that  for  a 
correct  understanding  of  Scripture  we  should  pay  attention  to  tlie  particu- 
lar dispensation  to  which  portions  of  it  are  intended  to  apply.  Volumes, 
otherwise  containing  valuable  matter,  are  vitiated  by  bringing  nearly  all 
Scripture  to  be  applicable  to  the  present  time,  or  dispensation.  The  dis- 
tinctions made  in  Holy  Writ  respecting  the  promises  and  blessings  are 
broken  down,  and  the  blessings,  en  masse,  are  heaped  upon  the  Gentile 
believers.  The  "dispensation  of  grace  to  the  Gentiles"  (Eph.  3  : 2)  is 
fully  and  completely  identified  with  "  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of 
times"  (Eph.  1  :  10),  and  the  result  is  an  interpretation  which  mingles  and 
interweaves  that  which  God's  Purpose  separates.     The  definite  postpone- 


Prop.  87.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  591 

ment  of  the  Kingdom,  once  entertained,  preserves  us  from  this  free  and 
plastic  moulding  of  Scripture  to  suit  our  own  ideas  of  the  fitness  of 
things. 

Just  as  the  Old  Test,  points  us  to  a  future  coming  Messiah,  so  also  does  the  New  ; 
just  as  the  Old  directs  us  to  a  still  future  incoming  age  of  Messianic  blessedness,  so  also 
does  the  New.  Properly  to  discriminate  is  to  understand.  As  God  has  fully  evidenced 
the  literal  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  Jesus  in  the  past,  and—instead  of 
abrogating  such  a  continued  fulfilment  in  the  future  by  substituting  a  spiritual  one— 
thus  urges  us  to  Abrahamic  faith  respecting  the  unfulfilled,  we  receive,  with  gladness, 
this  distinctive  feature  of  the  New  Test,  (corroborated  by  the  Old),  and  unhesitatingly 
cleave  to  it  in  hope.  Men  too  often  interpret  Scripture  to  suit  their  own  ideas  of  what 
is  suitable.  When  the  Duke  of  Somerset  {Ch.  Tlieol.  and  Mod.  ^^kep.)  sarcastically  refers 
to  Paul's  allegory  :  "After  all  this  confusion  of  types  the  allegory  fails,  as  commentators 
remark,  in  the  very  point  which  it  was  adduced  to  illustrate  ;  since,  according  to  Script- 
ure, the  Son  of  the  bondwoman  and  his  posterity  were  free  of  the  law,  whereas  Isaac's 
descendants — the  children  of  promise — became  the  slaves  of  the  law  ;"  and  then  in  ap- 
parent triumphant  triumph  asks,  "  Are  Protestants  expected  to  receive  Paul's  allegories 
as  the  Word  of  God  ?" — we  answer,  Yes,  by  receiving  Paul's  own  statement  as  to  the  time 
of  fulfilment  ;  not  locating  it  in  the  past  or  present,  but  in  th'fe  glorious  future,  when  all 
the  children  of  promise  are  gathered  and  inherit. 

Obs.  2.  Among  the  things  which  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom 
effectually  removes,  is  the  prevailing  opinion  that  f/ie  Church  is  the  pi'oin- 
ised  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Admit  the  postponement,  and  it  will  be  un- 
possibJe  to  make  the  church,  as  present  constituted,  said  Kingdom.  For, 
if  postponed,  how  could  it  be  in  existence  ?  This  prevents  us  from  giving 
the  church  in  its  present  fighting  and  struggling  condition  those  exaggera- 
ted eulogistic  praises  which  only  pertain  to  it  m  the  dispensation  still 
future.  This  leads  us  carefully  to  discriminate  what  things  appertain  to 
past  dispensations,  what  to  the  present  dispensation,  what  to  the  church 
as  now  constituted,  what  to  the  church  as  she  shall  finally  be  manifested  in 
glory  with  the  King,  what  to  the  Kingdom  itself,  what  to  the  future  dis- 
l)ensation,  and  what  to  the  eternal  ages.  The  importance  of  such  a  posi- 
tion cannot  be  too  highly  urged,  since  upon  it  largely  depend  the  views 
Ave  take  of  numerous  prophecies  and  promises. 

This  position  also  forbids  many  extravagances,  as  e.g.  the  Shakers  (Nordhoff's  Com- 
mvjustic  Soc,  p.  133),  dating  the  last  dispensation  from  the  establishment  of  their  church 
under  Mother  Lee,  calling  themselves  the"  Church  of  the  Last  Dispensation,"  or  that  of  the 
Swedenborgians,  Mormons,  etc.,  applying  to  their  rise,  society,  etc.,  promises  that  be- 
long to  a  still  future  dispensation.  These  utterly  ignore  both  covenant  and  postpone- 
ment, and  overlook  the  continued  design  of  this  dispensation  (comp.  Prop.  140,  etc.). 
These  extremes  are  only  an  outgrowth  of  conceptions,  with  which  the  Church  is  largely 
leavened,  as  will  be  hereafter  shown. 


592  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  88. 


Proposttio]^  88.     Tlie  Churcliis  then  a  preparatory  stage  for 
this  Kingdom. 

This  follows  from  the  preceding,  for  the  church  then  resolves 
itself  into  an  association  of  believers  by  which  its  growth,  per- 
petuation, etc.,  is  insured  by  the  use  of  means  of  grace  connected 
with  such  an  organization,  and  by  the  care  and  oversight  extended 
to  it  by  its  living  Head.  It  is  preparatory^  because  its  office  is, 
under  divine  assistance,  to  gather  out  of  the  nations  the  elect,  i.e. 
those  who  are  grafted  into  the  Jewish  Commonwealth,  who  shall, 
by  virtue  of  adoption  as  Abraham's  seed,  be  accounted  heirs  and 
inheritors  of  the  Kingdom  with  Abraham.  It  is  simply  calling  and 
preparing  "  ^Z*.^  heirs  of  promise,'^  the  ''heirs  of  that  kingdom 
which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him." 

In  this  gathering  out  of  believers  to  form  this  elect  people— the  inheritors — is  found 
the  ground  for  a  firm  belief  in  the  perpetuity  of  the  Church.  God's  purpose,  no  matter 
how  adverse  at  times  the  Church's  circumstances,  how  hostile  the  world,  how  corrupt 
her  mixed  condition,  etc.,  will  and  must  be  inevitably  carried  out.  The  number  that 
God  has  predetermined  will  be  secured,  so  that  His  Theocratic  Plan  may  be  realized  in 
power  and  glory. 

Ohs.  1.  Discarding  the  simple  truth  of  the  Proposition,  eminent  men  of 
ability  have  arrayed  themselves  against  each  other,  contending  for  some 
favorite  church  theory,  manifesting  an  amazing  variety  of  definitions, 
subtle  divisions,  imaginary  distinctions,  and  irrelevant  display  of  learning. 
This  has  resulted  mainly  from  elevating  the  church  into  a  Kingdom  under 
the  mistake  that  this  dispensation  being  final,  and  the  prophecies  locating 
the  Messiah's  Kingdom  here  on  earth,  the  church  must  of  necessity  be  the 
predicted  Kingdom.  This  has  borne  its  fruit  in  the  way  indicated,  and 
also,  what  is  more  sad,  m  covering  up  the  covenant  promises  pertaining  to 
the  Kingdom,  in  spiritualizing  them  to  make  them  consistent  with  human 
opinions,  and  in  arraying  themselves  as  hostile  toward  the  preaching  of  the 
disciples  and  apostles,  until  at  the  present  dav,  with  here  and  there  a  few 
exceptions  in  all  denominations,  but  little  faith  is  exercised  (as  predicted), 
either  in  the  Pre- Millennial  Advent  of  the  King,  or  in  the  fntnre  establish- 
ment of  His  Kingdom,  as  covenanted,  here  on  earth. 

Ods.  2.  If  we  are  wrong  in  this,  and  other  Propositions  linked  with  it, 
it  can  be  easily  decided  against  us  by  producing  a  passage  where  the  church 
is  directly  called  a  Kingdom.  A  due  examination  will  reveal  the  fact  that 
710  such  Scripture  can  be  found.  Such  a  vital,  foundation  doctrine  is  in- 
ferred ;  and  the  influence  comes  the  more  naturally,  since,  overlooking 
the  postponement,  and  regarding  the  preparatory  stage  of  the  church  in  a 
light  different  from  that  which  the  covenant  throws  upon  it,  it  was  taken 
for  gra7ited  that  a  Kingdom  being  preached  as  once  nigh,  must  have  come. 


Prop.  88.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  593 

And,  as  a  literal  Kingdom,  such  as  covenant  and  prophecy  describe,  did 
not  come,  it  was  supposed  that  the  church  then  must  be  it.  The  Origenis- 
tic  interpretation,  so  destructive  to  early  Millenarianism,  appeared  as  ilie 
patron  and  cliampion  of  this  inference,  until  under  its  wide-spread  influ- 
ence, the  inference  was  changed  into  a  supposed  axiomatic  truth.  Being 
also  in  the  line  of  ambition,  etc.,  it  was  tenaciously  held  by  all  who  were 
favorable  to  hierarchical  tendencies,  and  any  who  rejected  it  as  inference 
and  assumption  were  regarded  as  heretics.  Indeed  even  now,  it  is  so  decjjly 
imheddcd  in  religious  belief  and  system,  that  to  call  it  by  its  true  name,  a 
mere  inferoice,  is  to  excite  prejudice,  bitterness  and  wrath  in  the  hearts  of 
some  "fiho  prof  ess  to  love  the  truth  for  the  truth's  sake. 

Ois.  3.  We  are  not  surprised  that  the  result  just  mentioned  should 
follow,  for  if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  covenanted  Kingdom  is  something 
different  from  the  church  ;  that  the  Kingdom  is  held  in  postponement 
until  a  certain  predetermined  number  of  elect  are  gathered  ;  that  the 
church  is  appointed  to  gather  and  cherish  these  elect,  and  hence  is  prepar- 
atory m  its  action,  then  this  view  of  the  Kingdom,  showing  that  the 
church's  relation  to  this  Kingdom  is  a  subordinate  and. 'preparatory  one, 
prepares  us  to  appreciate  the  claims  of  Popery,  Puseyism,  hierarchical 
tendencies,  nationalizing  churches,  and  a  host  of  similar  exclusive  demands 
put  on  faith  and  practice,  all  of  which  are  founded  on  the  assum2)tion  that 
the  church  is  not  preparatory  to  the  predicted  Kingdom,  but  is  in  truth  the 
covenanted  Kingdom  itself.  Our  doctrine  is  too  humiliating  for  such,  and 
therefore  fails  oi  acceptance. 

The  Church-Kingdom  idea  is  deeply  rooted  in  prevailing  Theology  and  Literature.  It 
is  a  notion  long  held  m  veneration,  embellished  by  eloquence  and  poetry,  supported  by 
philosophy,  strengthened  by  policy,  power,  and  age,  enriched  by  the  cumulative  reason 
of  many  centuries,  and  the  mistaken  concessions  of  piety.  Ideas  consecrated  and 
cemented  by  the  expressed  opinions,  attachments,  and  submission  of  men  of  ability  and 
learning  are  not  to  to  be  eradicated,  saving  by  a  higher  hand,  when  fulfilling  His  own 
counsels  and  covenanted  promises.  It  will  require  the  secret  stage  of  the  Sec,  Advent 
with  its  momentous  results,  and  the  incoming  Antichrist  with  his  persecution  of  the 
Church,  before  this  notion^so  fruitful  in  causing  unbelief— will  be  discarded  by  the 
Church. 

Ohs.  4.  As  stated,  it  is  owing  to  the  view  taken  of  this  Kingdom,  that 
such  ividely  antagonistic  notions  are  published  respecting  the  church.  One 
writer,  e.g.  accepting  of  the  prophecies  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  and 
applying  them  to  the  church  as  now  constituted,  emphatically  declares 
that  the  Mission  of  the  church  is  a  failure.  This  is  announced  by  a  host 
of  writers,  and  is  hailed  with  delight  by  multitudes  with  the  addition,  that 
hence  prophecy  (inspiration)  is  found  unreliable.  Another  writer,  receiv- 
ing the  same  predictions  as  also  declarative  of  the  church's  2)resent  posi- 
tion, endeavors  to  meet  the  requirements  of  prophecy  by  exaggerating  the 
church's  progress,  etc.  One  author,  seeing  a  non-fulfilment  of  prophecy, 
places  Christianity  on  a  level  with  other  religions,  predicting  its  mergence 
into  a  universal  religion  adapted  to  meet  the  longings  of  the  prophets. 
Still  another  writer  receives  the  same  predictions  as  illustrative  of  the 
church's  Kingdom  state,  and  to  establish  this  point,  proceeds  to  fasten  on 
the  obvious  grammatical  sense  another  and  widely  differing  one  to  make 
prophecy  and  history  correspond.  While  another  accepts  of  the  predic- 
tions in  their  plain  grammatical  sense,  finds  in  them  the  true  Mission  of 


594  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIISTGDOM.  [PrOP.  88. 

the  church  which  is  no  failure,  locates  their  fulfilment  as  a  comparison  of 
Scripture  indicates,  needs  no  immoderate  exaltation  to  make  church  and 
prophecy  tally,  sees  in  their  non-fulfilment  no  reason  for  invidious  com- 
parisons, and  forces  upon  them  no  sense  that  would  be  discarded  by  the 
universal  laws  of  grammar  and  rhetoric.  This,  to  the  student,  indicates 
what  influence  is  exerted  upon  our  theological  opinions  by  our  views  of  the 
church.  This  only  points  out  a  few  diverging  lines,  others  will  be  pre- 
sented as  we  proceed. 

Ohs.  5.  The  Romanist  and  the  Protestant  have  made  the  question  of  the 
church  a  battle-field,  in  which  many  a  past  strife  is  noted  by  history. 
The  Romanist  making  the  church  the  Kingdom  of  God  (called  in  the  Dog. 
Decrees  of  the  recent  Council  "  the  Kingdom  of  Christ")  set  up  here  under 
a  s]}ecijic  form  of  government,  held  that  by  becoming  obedient  to  that 
church  the  soul  alone  was  brought  to  Christ,  so  that  the  Kingdom  was  the 
power  that  led  to  Christ,  etc.  The  Protestant,  who  accepted  of  the 
Romanist  idea  of  such  a  Kingdom,  held  that  by  faith,  in  and  obedience  to, 
Christ  the  soul  was  made  to  enter  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  The  former 
made  the  church  as  a  Kingdom  a  condition  of  salvation,  the  latter,  a 
means  of  preservation  and  development  to  the  saved.  But  both  in  one 
form  or  other, /orc'et/  both  by  S(3riptare  and  the  actual  condition  of  the 
church,  made  this  church  or  Kingdom  a  iweparatory  stage  for  another 
and  higher  Kingdom  still  in  the  future.  A  singular  feature  in  the  contro- 
versy is  this  :  that  both  parties  agreed  in  making  this  Cliurcli  the  King- 
dom of  Christ  either  as  Son  of  Man,  or  as  Son  of  God,  or  both  united,  and 
the  higher  Kingdom  in  the  future  at  the  end  of  the  age,  they  made, 
against  express  Scriptures,  to  be  exclusively  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father  or 
of  the  Divine.  To  the  latter  view,  the  student  will  find  but  few  excep- 
tions. 

Obs.  6.  Many,  impelled  by  the  idea  that  if  the  church  is  a  Kingdom 
there  ought,  of  necessity,  to  be  a  unity,  have  sought  for  this  in  various  ways 
— in  an  outward  union  of  believers,  in  an  exact  agreement  of  doctrine,  in 
some  form  of  church  government,  etc.  Whereas,  if  they  had  retained 
the  belief  of  the  earliest  age  respecting  the  church,  they  would  have  seen 
that  the  uniformity  they  sought  after  is  not  a  prerequisite.  Diversity,  as 
seen  in  the  Apostolic  Churches  by  contrasting  the  Jewish  and  Gentile,  is 
not  opposed  to  the  Scriptural  idea  of  the  church.  For,  not  being  regard- 
ed as  a  Kingdom  but  as  a  preparatory  stage  for  the  Kingdom,  some  lati- 
tude was  allowed  in  its  external  manifestation  and  even  in  non-essential 
doctrine  and  practice  (see  e.g.  decision  of  Council  at  Jerusalem,  Acts  15  :  19, 
28)  while  unity  was  leased  on  felloivshi])  ivitli  Christ  and  consequent  adop- 
Hon  as  Abraham's  seed. 

Obs.  7.  It  is  our  deep  conviction  that  the  word  eJcl'lesia,  translated 
church,  was  designedly  chosen  to  express  what  the  church  really  means. 
Let  the  reader  notice  how  we  have  shown  that  to  raise  up  a  seed  unto 
Abraham  certain  elect,  those  of  like  faith  unto  Abraham,  are  choseii  out  of 
the  nations.  The  word  therefore,  ek  out  of,  and  kaleo  I  call,  denotes  to 
call  out  of,  and  hence  means  precisely  what  the  Apostles  in  Council,  Acts 
15  :  14,  denominated  its  object  to  be,   viz.  :    to  call  out  from  among  the 


Prop.  88.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  595 

nations  a  people,  etc.  Why  was  the  word  rendered  church  chosen  in 
place  of  the  more  familiar  one  synagogue,  unless  it  be  that  the  former  more 
explicitly  expresses  the  idea  intended?  (Vide  Prop.  175,  and  Comp. 
Hagenbach's  Bis.  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  194.) 


THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  89. 


Proposition  89.     Christ  in  view  of  this  future  Kingdom^  sus- 
tains a  peculiar  relationship  to  the  Church. 

Christ,  now,  in  virtue  of  His  divine  nature,  has  absolute  control 
over  all  nations,  over  the  church,  etc.,  but  He  only  exerts  that 
Sovereignty  (Props.  79  and  80)  as  God  in  Providence,  etc.,  not  as 
the  Son  of  Man  (e.g.  Props.  81-83),  David's  Son,  in  His  human 
nature.  That  nature  is  also  highly,  immeasurably  exalted  because 
of  its  union  with  the  Divine,  and  of  its  being  intended  for  the 
coming  visible  Theocratic  Government  to  be  (Prop.  200)  the  Repre- 
sentative Euler  of  God.  This  Rulership  now  belongs  to  David's 
Son,  is  His  both  by  right  of  covenanted  birth  and  obedience,  but  is 
not  yet  realized  and  will  not  be  until  the  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom.  For,  we  have  no  distinctive  announcement  of  its  actual 
participation  in  reigning  as  covenanted  until  the  Second  Advent^  at 
which  time  it  is  j^lainly  and  specifically  stated  that  He  reigns  not 
merely  as  the  Son  of  God,  but  really  and  truly  as  the  Son  of  Man. 

Ohs.  1.  Indeed,  if  we  refer  to  the  covenant,  this  must  he  the  case,  for  the 
Kingdom  directly  covenanted  to  David's  Son  is  not  a  reign  over  other 
worlds,  over  the  universe,  or  over  the  church  as  a  church — is  not  even  a 
reign  in  the  third  heaven,  or  some  place  outside  of  this  earth — but  is 
pointedly  stated  to  be  a  reign  over  David's  Kingdom,  which  is  extended 
to  embrace  the  whole  earth.  To  say  then,  whatever  may  be  the  honored 
position  of  Jesus  in  heaven,  that  He  now  is  reigning  in  the  covenanted, 
predicted  Kingdom  of  promise,  is  directly  opposed  to  God's  oath-bound  cove- 
nant. This  gives  us  then  the  proper  idea  of  Christ's  relationship  to  the 
church.  As  Divine,  One  with  the  Father,  the  church  is  under  His  care 
and  protection  ;  as  Son  of  Man  He  sustains  a  Headship  over  the  church  ; 
as  the  future  revealed  King,  His  interest  in  the  church  is  deep  and  abiding. 

Ohs.  2.  To  avoid  misconception,  and  the  charge  of  lowering  Christ's 
dignity  or  position,  it  may  be  in  place  to  repeat  that  we  most  cordially 
receive  and  hold  to  what  is  said  concerning  Christ  in  Eph.  1  :  20-23,  and 
other  passages.  But  with  the  aid  of  a  comparison  of  Scripture,  we  avoid 
the  conclusion  that  many  arrive  at,  as  e.g.  in  Eph.  1  :  20-23,  that  the 
authority  vested  in  Him  is  now  in  all  respects  exercised.  We  hold,  that 
so  far  as  its  actual  exercise  and  realization  is  concerned,  part  of  it  must  be 
TQgdbV^Qdi prospectively,  as  seen  e.g.  by  verse  22  compared  with  Heb.  2  :  8, 
i.e.  that  part  referring  to  the  Davidic  covenanted  Kingdom.,  in  the  world  to 
come.     (Comp.  Alford,  Steir,  Meyer,  etc.) 

Ohs.  3.  The  Headship  of  Christ  over  the  church  refers  not  so  much,  as 
is  supposed,  to  Ruler  ship  over  the  church  as  to  His  being  the  Chief  or  Head 


Prop.  89.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  597 

of  Rulers,  i.e.  tliat  the  church  is  in  some  peculiar  and  distinctive  manner 
associated  loith  Him.  What  this  is,  will  appear  under  the  Props.  (154  and 
156)  relating  to  the  reign  and  priesthood  of  the  saints.  Christ  Himself 
intimates  this  distinction  when  He  calls  faithful  believers  "  brethren'^  and 
not  '^servants/'  The  church  is  represented  as  ChrisVs  body,  simply 
because  that  body  are  "  co-heirs,"  joint  inheritors  with  Him  in  the  King- 
dom, and  therefore  they  are  purposely  never  called  "  the  subjects  of  the 
Kingdom'' — a  phrase  coined  by  man  and  contradictory  to  both  the  honor 
and  position  of  the  body,  which  takes  a  much  higher  ranh.  It  is  incon- 
sistent, to  say  the  least,  to  call  "  inheritors"  of  a  Kingdom,  the  subjects 
of  it.'  Individual  subjection  or  allegiance  does  not  constitute  a  Kingdom, 
lacking  as  it  does  the  cssenticds  of  a  Kingdom,  such  as  are  promised. 
Jesus  is  called,  and  by  right,  and  in  the  covenanted  manner,  is,  "  the 
King  of  the  Jeivs,'"  "  King  of  Nations,''  "  King  of  the  World,''  but  \s7iever 
called  ••  the  King  of  the  Church.''  The  nearest  "approach  to  the  latter  is 
found  in  our  English  version  Eev.  15  : 3,  where  He  is  called  "  King  of  the 
Saints,"  but  this  is  opposed  by  some  of  the  earliest  of  the  MSS.  (as  e.g.  the 
Sinaitic  and  Alexandrine)  and  various  versions,  so  that  it  is  rendered 
"  King  of  the  Kations,"  "  King  of  the  Worlds,"  "  King  of  the  Ages,"  and 
in  the  Greek  texts  in  general  use,  it  is  given  "  King  of  the  Nations"  (comp. 
Lange,  Alford,  etc.,  loci  Tischendorf's  N.  T.  etc.),  which  is  more  in 
accord  with  the  general  tenor  and  spirit  of  the  Word.  The  saints,  elected 
to  be  associated  with  Christ  in  Rulership,  are  indeed  subordinated  to  Christ. 
He  is  the  Head,  the  Chief,  and  they  being  also  kings  with  Him,  it  is  right- 
fully His  title  to  be  styled  "  King  of  Kings,"  seeing  that  the  latter  are 
inferior  to  Him,  but  while  subordinate,  their  rank,  etc.,  elevates  them  as 
brethren  and  joint  rulers  above  that  of  mere  subjects  in  the  ordinary  use  of 
the  Word.  They  are  truly  subjects'  in  one  sense  only,  viz.  :  in  the  one 
given,  e.g.  1  Cor.  11  :  3. 

'  The  reader  will  of  course  discriminate  here  :  the  Church  is  subject  (Eph.  5  :  24,  etc.) 
to  Christ,  and  this,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  is  indispensable,  but  this  subjection 
is  pre'paratory  to  the  future  glorification  and  exaltation  of  the  Church,  for  when  allied 
with  Him  in  glory,  this  subjection  is  swallowed  up  in  joint  rulership,  etc.  with  Christ, 
though  still  subordinate,  as  David's  Son  is  to  the  Father  ;  and  hence  our  argument  merely 
is,  that  believers,  in  view  of  their  future  position,  are  never  called  "  the  subjects  of  the 
Kingdom,"  which  is  opposed  to  their  being  "  kings  and  priests  reigning  with  Christ"  in  the 
Kingdom.  Believers  are  "  heirs,"  and  not  the  subjects  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom.  Ori- 
gen  {A(j.  Celsus,  B.  4,  ch.  10)  refers  "  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  as  "  reserved  for  those  who 
are  worthy  of  becoming  Us  subjects  /'  we  prefer  the  Scriptural  phraseology,  if  it  were 
only  to  remind  us  of  future  exultation  and  glory, 

Obs.  4.  The  Kingship  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  David's  Son,  the  Theocratic 
Ruler,  is  to  be  manifested  in  a  period  of  time,  called  by  way  of  pre-emi- 
nence "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,"  etc.  This  will, 
under  Prop.  138,' be  shown  to  be  still  future,  dating  from  the  time  of  His 
Second  Advent.  The  covenant  promises,  if  actually  fulfilled,  require  this  ; 
and  hence  until  their  realization,  the  church  occupies  the  position  of 
waiting  (e.g.  1  Pet.  1  :  7,  13)  for  this  Revelation  of  Jesus  as  King.  Dur- 
ing this  expectation  all  things  are  working  in  behalf  of  the  election,  the 
contemplated  gathering,  the  manifestation  of  the  8ons  of  God.  The  Head 
is  preparing  the  members,  by  the  bestowal  of  blessed  privileges,  sacred 
ordinances,  rich  experience,  and  His  own  ever-abiding  Presence,  for  the 
coming  exaltation  of  the  I^ingdom.     Communion  with   Christ  and  with 


598  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  89. 

each  other  necessitates  a  cluirclily  arrangement,  so  that  the  requisite  elect 
may  be  taken  out  from  among  the  nations  to  place  the  future  Theocratic 
Kingdom  on  an  immovable  basis. 

As  simply  illustrative  of  the  conclusions  adopted  against  us,  we  refer  to  a  writer  in 
the  Princeton  Review  (Ap.,  1851,  p.  196),  who  endeavors  to  prove  that  "  the  Church  is 
the  Kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,"  in  view  of  a  spiritual  reign  in  the  heart  and  the 
Headship  of  Jesus.  But  aside  from  the  numerous  considerations  hereafter  presented  by 
us  against  the  theory,  we  may  well  ask,  whether  such  an  alleged  Kingdom  is  a  restoratio)i 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God  withdrawn  from  the  Jewish  nation  on  account  of  their  sinful- 
ness. Is  there  a  single  mark  by  which  an  identification  can  be  made  out,  when  we  are 
assured  by  God  Himself  that  the  same  Kingdom  (Theocracy)  overthrown  is  the  identical 
Kingdom  re-established?  To  resort,  by  way  of  apology  and  exi^lanations,  to  types  and 
spiritualizing,  is  to  declare  that  God's  words,  sworn  to,  mean  one  thing  in  the  plain 
grammatical  sense,  but  are  to  be  understood  in  a  sense  which  men  add  to  it  to  accommo- 
date their  respective  Kingdom  theories. 

Ohs.  5.  In  this  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  specifically  promised  to 
the  Son  of  Man,  we  do  not.  by  any  means,  detract  from  that  power  which 
is  given  to  Jesus,  or  deny  that  to  His  will  all  things  are  subject.  The 
question  to  be  answered  is,  does  He  now  exercise  that  power  and  make 
manifest  that  subjection  in  the  covenanted  Kingdom.^  The  reply  comes 
unhesitatingly,  that  we  see  no  snch  Kingdom  yet  established  which  meets 
the  requirements  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  if  the  latter  are  received  in 
their  plain  grammatical  sense.  Indeed,  our  opponents  concede  to  us  that 
so  far  as  the  church  itself  is  concerned,  that  power  is  held  in  abeyance  and 
its  manifestation  delayed,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  existence  of  tares  mingled 
with  the  wheat,  of  different  forms  of  evil,  of  kingdoms  opposed  to  His  will, 
etc.  This  conception,  in  the  light  of  the  covenant,  the  preaching  of  Jesus, 
the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  we  apply  to  the  church  so  far  as 
the  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  are  concerned,  showing  that 
the  former  cannot  tuith  any  consistency  be  substituted  for  the  latter. 

Obs.  6.  Overlooking  the  design  of  the  establishment  of  the  Christian 
Church,  viz.  :  to  raise  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham  by  gathering  out  of  the 
nations  a  people  for  His  name,  until  the  throne  and  Kingdom,  now  deso- 
late, shall  be  restored  to  its  covenanted  position,  has  led  to  some  remarkable 
features  in  philosophizing.  Deeming  the  church  a  Kingdom,  and  seeing 
how  little  in  its  external  history  it  exhibited  the  ideas  we  attach  to  a  King- 
dom, some  eminent  writers  have  presented  us  with  a  kind  of  Christianized 
pantheism,  which  endeavors  to  make  out  a  systematic  organic  development 
by  asserting  a  continuation  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  of  Jesus 
Christ  in  believers  through  the  church,  thus  elevating  the  latter  into  a 
Kingdom.  To  make  out  such  an  organic  history,  the  Papacy  and  a  host 
of  outgrowths  are  embraced,  as  in  the  main  legitimate  results  of  Chris- 
tianity itself,  etc.  If  a  spiritual  interpretation  does  not  suffice,  a  mystical 
is  added  to  exalt  the  church  into  the  proj)ortions  of  a  kingdom  ;  and 
when  stripped  of  its  persuasive  generalities,  it  resolves  itself  into  "  a  per- 
petually growing  incarnation  of  God  and  deification  of  man,"  or  "  the  de- 
velopment of  the  Divine  essence  in  man."  The  trouble  is,  that  this  drag- 
net draws  too  much  weight  for  the  strength  of  its  meshes.  When  com- 
pared with  the  simplicity  of  the  covenant,  with  the  history  of  believers  and 
of  the  church,  with  the  union  and  fellowship  as  presented  by  the  Word, 
it  is  merely  m.a,n's  hypothesis.    Its  refutation  has  preceded,  and  will  follow. 


Prop.  89.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  599 

Thus  e.g.  Rev.  S.  Miller,  advocating  Dr.  Nevin's  theory,  in  his  Mercershurg  and  Mod. 
Theology,  p.  41,  etc.,  forms  a  Kingdom,  embracing  the  divine-human  life,  drawn  from 
Christ,  which  he  designates  a  "  new  Kingdom,''  not  in  the  sense  of  renewed,  but  entirely 
new.  This  Kingdom,  according  to  his  view,  was  only  inaugurated  hy  the  divine-human 
life  of  Jesus,  and  is  entered  by  the  person  who  partakes  of  the  divine-human  nature  of 
the  Christ.  This  mystical  conception  is,  as  our  line  of  argument  conclusively  shows, 
utterly  opposed  by  covenant,  prophecy,  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  the  discijiles,  and 
apostles,  etc.  The  Word  always  speaks  of  this  Kingdom  as  something  visibly,  externally 
manifested  in  the  form  covenanted.  Even  if  we  were  to  adopt  Miller's  notion  that  the 
Church  is  an  organism  starting  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  being  "  a  continuation  of  the 
Incarnation' '  by  the  imparting  of  the  humanity  or  life  in  Jesus,  it  would  not  follow  that 
it  is  the  covenanted,  predicted  Kingdom.  In  a  conversation  with  him  (for  he  w^as  an 
honored  uncle  of  mine)  on  this  point,  he  said  he  might  receive  Chiliasm  and  still  retain 
his  view,  on  the  ground  that  this  was  preparatory,  or  as  a  stage  in  his  development 
theory.  Shortly  before  his  death,  he  made  Chiliasm  a  study  (with  what  result  the 
writer  does  not  know),  being  deeply  impressed  by  the  historical  argument  in  its  favor. 
One  remark  of  his  deeply  impressed  the  writer,  viz.  :  that  Eschatology  had  not  received 
the  attention  that  it  deserved,  in  view  of  the  end  contemplated  by  Redemption,  for,  evi- 
dently, the  prevailing  views  were  defective,  lacking  Scriptural  unity. 


600  THE   THEOCKATIC   KIJS^GDOM.  [PkOP.  90. 


Pkoposition  90.     Members  of  the  Churchy  lolio  are  faithful^  are 
jyromised  this  Kingdom. 

There  is  only  one  kingdom,  Prop.  35,  etc.  Saints  who  become 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  are  to  receive,  inJierit  this  kingdom  of 
promise,  1  Thess.  2  :  12  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  11  ;  Matt.  25  : 
34,  etc.  The  Kingdom  preached  by  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  and  the 
disciples  continues  to  be  proclaimed,  Acts  8  :  12  ;  14  :  22  ;  20  :  25  ; 
28  :  31,  etc.,  and  believers  become  "  heirs''^  of  it.  Jam.  2  :  5.  The 
wicked  shall  not  inherit  it,  1  Cor.  6  :  9.  The  apostles  represent 
themselves  and  co-laborers  as  working  for  it  still  future.  Col. 
4  :  11  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5  ;   2  Tim.  4  :  18  ;   Heb.  12  :  28,  etc. 

Ohs.  1.  This  Proposition  is  only  intended  to  specify  one  of  the  results 
arising  from  preceding  Propositions  ;  and  it  is  decidedly  corroborative  of 
our  argument  that  the  Scriptures  employ  language  to  indicate  tJie  futurity 
of  the  Kingdom.  If  the  church  is  the  Kingdom,  and  believers  are  now 
in  it,  why  designate  them  "  lieirSj'  etc.,  of  a  Kingdom?  If  the  future 
Kingdom,  as  Theologians  so  confidently  assert,  is  only  a  continuation  of 
such  a  Kingdom,  why  employ  then  the  specific  language  of  inheriting  a 
Kingdom  still  future,  if  that  is  only  a  prolongation,  etc.,  of  this  one,  and 
the  inheriting  has  already  commenced^  If  believers  already  by  entering 
the  church,  enter  into  the  promised  Kingdom  of  God,  and  if  this  Kingdom 
is  merged  into  a  future  one,  it  would  be  somewhat  inconsistent  to  urge 
them  to  strive  for  that  which  they  already  possess  ;  or,  at  least,  the  lan- 
guage ought  to  be  so  changed  that  they  are  urged  to  retain  their  hold  upon 
2i  present  Kingdom  lest  they  forfeit  the  future  prolonged  oiie. 

The  early  Church  view  is  content,  and  so  are  we,  to  receive  the  language  unchanged 
as  confirmatory  of  our  doctrine,  so  that,  as  Clement  (sec.  Epis.),  it  exhorts  all  that  "  all 
may  attain  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  asserting  that  in  the  future  "  ice  shall  enter  into  His 
Kingdom,  and  shall  receive  the  promises."  But  such  is  not  the  teaching  of  monkish  the- 
ology, Roman  Catholic,  and  even  in  much  of  Protestant,  Divinity,  which  declares  that 
being  already  in  the  Kingdom  you  shall  obtain  the  continued  Kingdom.  The  incon- 
gruity, to  say  the  least,  of  representing  "  heirs"  as  already  -posaensing  the  Kingdom  is 
scarcely  noticed,  and  even  the  appointed  time  of  inheriting,  specifically  located  at  the  Sec. 
Advent,  is  ignored.  This  only  shows  how  prejudice  can  refuse  to  receive  the  plainest  state- 
ments of  the  Word.  Believers  are  not  in  this  Kingdom,  but  "  crf/ZerZ  i(?(/o"  it  (1  Thess. 
2  :  12  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5,  etc.)  ;  the  passages  which  are  supposed  to  teach  the  contrary  will 
be  noticed  in  detail  under  following  Propositions,  For  the  present,  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  Bible  is  not  contradictory,  and  the  few  places  which  are  alleged  to  be  con- 
tradictory must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  explained  by  the  general  analogy  on  the 
subject.  Oosterzee  {Ch.  Dogmatics,  vol.  1,  p.  67,  and  vol.  2,  p.  696)  introduces  a  division, 
*'  Of  the  Church,  or  the  Training  School  of  the  Kingdom. "  The  idea  of  a  training  school 
is  excellent,  suggested  both  by  Scripture  and  experience,  but  to  make  the  notion  still 
more  distinctive  and  Scriptural,  we  suggest  "  the  Training  School /or  the  Kingdom," 
which  is  one  of  the  objects  intended  by  the  Church. 


PllOP.  90.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  601 

Ohs.  2.  Making  the  church  the  promised  Kingdom,  and  believers  in  the 
enjoyment  of  it,  has  logically  led  some  of  our  opponents  (not  all,  for  many 
recoil  from  it  in  yievv  both  of  experience  and  the  sad  history  of  the 
church),  to  proclaim,  that  the  promises  relating  to  the  reign  of  the  saints 
are  7ioio  also  fulfilling.  We  leave  one  of  the  earliest  give  his  view.  Thus, 
e.g.  Augustine  (City  of  God,  B.  20.  s.  9)  says  :  "  The  church  could  not 
now  be  called  His  Kingdom,  or  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  unless  His  saints 
were  even  now  reigning  with  Him  ;"  and  endeavors  to  make  out  such  an 
existing  Kingdom  by  showing  that  the  saints  now  reign,  summing  up  : 
"  in  fine,  they  reign  with  Him  who  are  so  in  His  Kingdom  that  they  them- 
selves are  His  Kingdom.''^  Leaving  the  reign  of  the  saints  for  a  distinct 
Proposition  (154)  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  earlier  Blathers  distinctly 
op23ose  Augustine  in  his  wholesale  and  mixed  interpretation.  Thus  e.g. 
Barnabas  {Ejjis.  ch.  6)  declares,  that  saints  do  not  rule  now  ;  and 
speaking  of  the  promised  dominion  adds  :  "  We  ought  to  perceive  tliat  to 
govern  itnplies  authority,  so  that  one  should  command  and  rule.  If  there- 
fore, this  does  not  exist  at  p7'esent,  yet  still  He  has  promised  it  to  us. 
When  ?  When  we  ourselves  also  have  heen  made  perfect  {so  as)  to  lecome 
heirs  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.'' 

This  notion  that  saints  now  possess  the  Kingdom,  now  have  dominion,  etc.,  has 
wrought  great  mischief,  as  Eccl.  History  attests,  not  only  in  hierarchical  tendencies,  in 
perverted  and  extravagant  claims  of  authority,  but  also  in  fanaticism,  as  e.g.  Anabap- 
tists, Mormons,  Hackett,  the  Prophet  who  was  proclaimed  (July  16th,  1592)  "  the  sole 
Monarch  of  Europe,"  and  many  others.  Our  doctrine  closes  the  door  against  all  such 
claims  and  vagaries.  The  reign  of  the  saints,  as  delineated  in  the  outlines  of  the  Divine 
Purpose,  confirms  our  position. 

Ohs.  3.  Only  believers  are  promised  this  Kingdom.  Faith  and  its  fruits 
are  essential  to  its  inheritance.  This  is  pointedly  declared  in  Scripture,  as 
e.g.  Gal.  5  :  21  ;  Eph.  5  :  5,  etc.  H  the  Jews  were  accounted  unworthy 
because  of  lack  of  faith,  etc.,  to  receive  this  Kingdom — if  they  were  re- 
jected and  a  seed  must  be  raised  up  unto  Abraham,  we  may  rest  assured 
that  it  will  be,  it  must  be,  ''a  righteous  seed.''  This  becomes  the  more 
necessary  in  view  of  the  position  that  this  seed  is  to  occupy  in  the  Coming 
Kingdom,  viz.  :  that  of  co-rulers  with  Jesus  Christ.  Therefore  the  Word 
assures  us  that  even  out  of  "  the  many"  but  '^  fe2D"  will  be  chosen,  and 
those  only  because  they  are  believing  and  faithful. 

In  opposition  to  Holy  Writ  we  have  the  theories  of  man.  Thus  e.g.  Kingsley  {Hers,  on 
Nut.  Subjects,  1  Ser.,  p.  14)  makes  man  by  nature  a  member  of  Christ  and  inheritor  of  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven.  He  so  secularizes  the  Church,  calling  it  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  of 
heaven,  etc.,  that  the  world  is  the  Church  and  the  Church  the^orld,  including  all  men, 
but  sj)ecially  manifested  as  a  Kingdom  when  recognizing  its  relation  to  God.  Some 
Amer.  Universalists  entertain  very  much  the  same  view,  so  that  all  men  belong  to  it  by 
right,  and  will  ultimately  be  identified  with  it  ;  now  the  Kingdom,  however,  is  only  ex- 
hibited in  and  through  those  who  acknowledge  the  truth,  etc.  The  same  idea  is  given 
to  us  by  Prof.  Seeley,  author  of  Ecce  Homo  (p.  339)  when  making  the  Church  a  Kingdom, 
he  says  that  it  is  such  because  ' '  based  upon  a  hlood-relaiionshij),  the  most  comprehensive 
of  all,  the  kindred  of  every  human  being  to  every  other."*    This  notion  is  paraded  by 

*  This  idea  of  blood -relationship  reminds  one  of  what  Bungener  (The  Preacher  and  the 
King,  p.  205)  states  of  a  certain  La  Tremouville,  who,  in  his  pride  of  birth,  his  aiTogant 
dependence  on  blood-relationship,  declared  :  "  God  would  look  twice  before  He  damned 
me."  Many,  who  make  no  such  claim,  still  feel  themselves  good  enough  for  God's  King- 
dom, without  any  heart  and  life  preparation,  not  realizing  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  per- 


602  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PrOP.  90. 

the  Free  Religionists,  Humanitarians,  etc.,  and  is  covertly  stated  by  some  who  desire  to 
be  regarded  as  orthodox.  Such  opinions,  however,  are  flatly  contradicted  by  the  Word  of 
God,  not  only  in  the  distinction  made  between  the  righteous  and  wicked,  but  by  that 
feature  which  our  entire  argument  enforces,  viz.  :  that  "'Salvation  is  of  the  Jews,"  not 
because  it  originated  or  was  at  one  time  identified  with  them,  but  because  it  pertains,  hy 
covenant  relation,  to  them.  To  them  the  promises  were  given,  not  to  all  men  ;  and  the 
only  way  to  obtain  the  jjromises  with  them  is  to  be  engrafted  into  the  true  olive  tree.  Now 
all  are  invited  to  become  the  seed  of  Abraham,  but  comparatively /eio  accept  of  the  terms 
of  adoption.  Instead  of  being  related  to  the  Kingdom  of  God  by  nature,  by  a  common 
humanity,  by  the  assumption  of  our  nature  by  Christ,  we  must  by  the  obedience  of  faith 
present  ourselves  in  the  line  of  the  covenanted,  chosen  people  ;  and  when,  in  the  pre- 
dicted time,  God  shall  restore  that  chosen  people  to  its  forfeited  position,  the  engrafted 
ones  inherit  the  Kingdom  with  the  Son  of  man. 

Ois.  4.  In  Matt.  16  :  18,  19  Jesus  seems  to  distinguish  between  the 
church  and  the  Kingdom  by  placing  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  in  opposition 
to  it,  enforcing  the  idea  that  the  church  leads  to,  or  is  appointed  as  a 
means  to  attain  unto,  the  Kingdom.  The  church  is  founded  and,  in  addi- 
tion, the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  are  (Prop.  64)  committed  to  it,  so  that 
through  its  instrumentality  believing  members  may  finally  inherit  the 
Kingdom.  It  would  be  an  easy  matter  to  select  from  our  opponents  a 
multitude  of  writers  who  indorse  this  view,  that  in  this  passage  the  church 
leads  to  the  Kingdom,  but  in  correspondence  with  their  theory  make  the 
Kingdom  one  in  the  third  heaven  and  not  one  on  the  earth.  Others 
include  in  the  expression  both  the  church  and  the  third  heaven,  while 
others  confine  it  exclusively  to  the  church.  Its  true  meaning  must  be 
sought  for  in  other  passages,  as  in  the  covenant  and  specific  announce- 
ments of  the  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  5.  The  passage  Matt.  8  :  11,  12,  when  ^^  many  shall  come  from  the 
east  and  west,  and  shall  sit  down  with  Ahraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacoh,  in 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  but  the  children  of  the  Kingdom  shall  he  cast  out,^^ 
etc.,  not  only  confirms  (1)  the  Proposition  ;  (2)  the  election  of  the  Jewish 
nation  ;  (8)  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  covenanted  people,  but  it  also 
establishes  (4)  the  fact,  that  the  church  is  not  the  Kingdom  here  men- 
tioned, seeing  that  this  Kingdom  is  related  in  the  covenanted  manner  with 
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob.  Hence  commentators  generally  apply  this 
Kingdom  either  to  the  third  heaven  or  to  the  one  still  future. 

Ols.  6.  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  (i.e.  to  become  a  ruler  in  it)  this 
Kingdom,  1  Cor.  15  :  50.  Just  as  it  is  with  the  Head,  the  Mighty  One, 
that  the  covenant  and  promises  demanded  an  immortal  Ruler,  so  it  is  2vith 
His  members,  the  body.  As  King  He  is  to  be  manifested  in  His  glorified 
form — a  David's  Son  possessing  all  that  is  requisite  to  fulfil  the  Word  ; 
so  also  the  saints,  as  co-heirs,  kings  and  priests  must  be  in  their  glorified 
condition  before  they  receive  the  Kingdom.  Hence,  while  in  the  church, 
in  fiesh  and  blood,  they  only  await  the  promises — hope  and  pray  for 
their  realization.  The  church,  then,  instead  of  possessing  a  Kingdom,  as 
actually  existing  according  to  promise,  only  possesses  it  in  anticipation,  in 
looking  for  and  expecting  its  arrival. 

Obs.  7.  Prophecy  does  not  predict  a  Kingdom  to  exist  between  the  First 
and  Second  Advents  of  Christ  as  a  prelude  to  the  Kingdom  of  the  Eternal 
Ages.     To  make  out  such  a  prediction,  Prophecy  must  be  wrested  from  its 


Prop.  90.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  608 

connection,  or  else  it  must  be  spiritualized  to  make  it  sufficiently  accom- 
modating. 

The  extravagances  in  this  direction  culminate  when  men  of  learning  and  ability  make 
themselves  out  to  be  already  in  "  the  New  Jerusalem  state,"  m  "  the  enjoyment  of  Millen- 
nial glory,"  in  possession  of  "  the  latter  day  glory,"  etc.  The  Church  in  its  present  im- 
perfect state  is  eulogized  until  it  assumes  the  portraiture  of  the  predicted  Kingdom,  but 
such  eulogies  are  at  the  expense  of  a  consistent  interpretation  and  of  the  real  history  of 
the  Church.  As  this  infatuation,  derived  from  Origenistic  sources,  is  so  general,  it  may 
be  proper  to  pass  over  some  views  in  detail,  although  our  argument,  based  on  the  cove- 
nant, scarcely  needs  the  addition. 


604  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  91. 


Proposition"    91.       TJie   Kingdom   of   God  is   not   the   Jewish 
Church. 

This  is  evident  from  the  Theocratic  government  by  wliich  State 
and  Churcli  were  nnited  ;  from  tlie  same  as  administered  under 
the  Theocratic-Davidic  arrangement ;  from  the  overthrow  of  the 
throne  and  kingdom  while  a  chnrchly  arrangement  remained  ; 
from  the  23reaching  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  discij^les,  saying  "  the 
kingdom  of  God  Is  at  hand,"  showing  that  it  did  not  then  exist 
but  was  promised  to  be  ''  at  hand"  or  "  near"  on  condition  of  re- 
pentance ;  and  finally  from  the  rejection  of  the  Kingdom  and  its 
postponement  nntil  after  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles."  Whatever 
churchly  or  religious  organization  existed  among  the  Jews  after 
the  overthrow  of  the  Kingdom,  they  themselves,  as  we  have  shown, 
did  not  regard  the  Kingdom  of  God  as  existing  just  prior  to  the 
First  Advent. 

01)8.  1.  This  Proposition  in  this  form  is  the  more  necessary,  since  many 
writers  spiritualizing  this  reign  into  "  God's  reign  in  the  heart,"  '*'  piety," 
etc.,  endeavor  to  make  out  that  the  Kingdom  was  actually  realized  witli- 
out  the  cognizance  of  the  Jews,  and  in  oj^ijosifion  to  the  first  preaching. 
We  would  rather  accept  of  the  expectations  of  the  pious  Jews,  of  the  direct 
preaching  of  the  disciples,  etc.,  than  of  such  a  theory,  simply  because  the 
former  is  in  accord  with  the  most  solemnly  pledged  covenant  of  the  Word, 
while  the  latter  totally  ignores  the  oath-boiind promises. 

Ohs.  2.  This  Proposition  is  yielded  to  us  by  many  of  our  opponents, 
some  already  quoted,  who  make  the  Christian  Church  something  new,  and 
hence  a  Kingdom  in  a  form  in  which  it  did  not  previously  exist,  although 
a  continuation  of  the  Jewish  Church.  But  if  the  Christian  Church  is  a 
jrrolongation  of  the  Jewish  in  another  form  with  increased  light,  privileges, 
etc.,  it  goes  far  toward  establishing  the  Propositions  that  follow  concern- 
ing the  church.  If  the  one  was  no  Kingdom  as  admitted,  then  the  other 
following  is  none,  for  these  writers  to  make  out  a  union  between  them, 
tell  us  that  members  of  both  are  justified  by  faith,  saved  by  grace,  adopted 
by  God,  and  participate  finally  in  the  same  promises  and  redemption. 
Eeal  consistency  requires  both  to  be  elevated  to  the  position  of  a  Kingdom, 
which  some  do,  although  hostile  to  covenants  and  promises.  Logically 
there  is  no  escape  here,  and  those  writers  are  really  tlie  most  consistent 
(although  opposed  to  the  facts  as  they  existed),  who  make  no  discrimina- 
tion between  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Churches,  pronouncing  both  to  be 
the  Kingdom  of  God  for  the  reason  that  the  characteristics  of  believers  at 
the  present  day  in  the  church  are  precisely  the  same  (as  e.g.  faith,  obedi- 
ence, love,  hope,  etc.),  that  they  were  in  the  Jewish  Congregation.    Hence, 


PkOP.  91.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  605 

if  certain  traits,  qualifications,  characteristics,  as  many  assert,  denote  the 
Kingdom,  then  the  Kingdom  existed  in  both  churches.  The  latter,  how- 
ever, remains  unj)roven. 

Ois.  3.  We  find  on  this  point  the  most  contradictory  statements. 
Writers  who  fully  admit  that  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  established  only  under 
Christ,  and  who  even  tell  us  that  this  dispensation  is  thus  distinguished, 
are  forced  by  the  interpretations  given  to  the  Kingdom  itself  to  locate  it 
back  of  this  dispensation  in  the  Jewish  Church  ;  and  then  to  reconcile 
their  theory  inform  us  that  the  Kingdom  existed  in  one  form  in  the  Jewish 
Church  and  now  it  is  exhibited  in  another  in  the  present  Church.  But  all 
this  is  antagonistic  to  the  most  prevalent  and  confidently  given  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Kingdom.  If  the  Kingdom  is  what  Dr.  McCosh,  and  others, 
inform  us,  "  GocVs  rule  iti  the  hearts  of  men,''  then  no  difference  should  be 
made  between  the  churches,  for  such  a  rule  has  ever  been  manifested. 
Such  a  Kingdom  has  ever  existed  even  before  the  Theocracy  was  set  up  ; 
such  an  experience  is  compatible  without  the  establishment  of  a  Kingdom 
here  on  earth,  as  we  see  in  Adam,  Abel,  Enoch,  etc.  Gratefully  accepting 
of  God's  Sovereignty,  of  the  duty  of  obedience  to  Him,  etc.,  it  does  not 
follow,  as  shown  by  preceding  Propositions,  that  this  constitutes  the  pre- 
dicted Kingdom.  If  it  does,  then  covenant  language  has  no  definite  mean- 
ing ;  then  the  Prophets  and  the  early  Preachers  miseraUy  niistooh  this 
Kingdom,  promising  as  in  the  future  what  learned  men  tell  us  ever 
existed.  No  !  that  class  of  writers,  equally  learned  and  more  scriptural, 
are  correct  when  they  assert  that  the  predicted  Kingdom  is  one  that  had 
no  existence  at  the  time  of  the  Advent,  and  that  it  is  one  which  Christ 
Himself  is  to  establish. 

Ohs.  4.  Any  definition  of  the  Kingdom  under  Christ,  which  affirms 
nothing  more  than  was  experienced  by  the  pious  Jews  at  the  First  Advent, 
is  most  certainly  defective.  Such  are  "  God's  reign  in  the  heart,"  "  re- 
ligion," etc.  Such  definitions  should,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  ex- 
cite a  mistrust  that  there  must  be  error  somewhere,  because  opposed  in 
spirit  to  express  prediction  and  promise.  The  Jews,  such  as  Simon  and 
others,  were  utterly  ignorant  of  the  honor  they  possessed  of  being  already 
incorporated  with  a  Kingdom  they  waited,  looked,  and  iwayed  for.  Such 
definitions,  however  well  meaning,  are  virtually  a  lowering  of  Scripture 
promise  and  of  the  intelligence  of  ancient  Avorthies.  Peeling  this  deeply, 
sadly,  we  write  plainly  for  the  sake  of  the  truth. 

Ohs.  5.  The  reader's  attention  is  recalled  to  our  argument  which  clearly 
shows,  under  Propositions  pertaining  to  the  covenants,  etc.,  that  the 
Church  itself  as  it  existed  before  the  formation  of  the  Theocracy  was  no 
Kingdom  here  on  earth  ;  that  such  a  Kingdom  was  first  presented  when  the 
Theocratic  form  of  government  was  instituted,  God  Himself  condescend- 
ing to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler  over  the  nation,  and  State 
and  Church  were  firmly  united  in  mutual  support.  After  this  government 
was  overthrown  or  temporarily  set  aside,  owing  to  the  unworthiness  of  the 
nation,  tlie  Church  remained  as  previous  to  the  Theocracy  ;  but  it  is  never 
recognized  by  the  Prophets  as  the  Kingdom — the  believer  being  directed  to 
look  for  and  await  its  coming.  This  posture  of  waiting  the  pious  portion 
of  the  nation  occupied. 


606  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  91. 

Ohs.  6.  Ifc  is  riglit,  therefore,  to  say,  that  the  Church  has  always  existed  ; 
and  even,  as  some  do,  to  declare,  that  the  Christian  is  a  continuation  of 
the  previous  Church  in  another  form  and  with  added  privileges  ;  but  it  is 
lurong  to  assert  that  the  Church,  without  the  previously  ordained  visible 
Theocratic  order  in  actual  union  with  it,  is  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the 
sense  given  by  covenant  and  "Prophet.  It  laclcs  the  God-given  distinguish- 
ing Theocratic  arrangement  which  can  aIo7ie  elevate  it  to  the  position  of  a 
Kingdom  here  on  earth,  viz.  :  God  througli  man  acting  in  the  manifested 
real  capacity  of  earthly  Ruler. 

Ohs.  7.  To  illustrate  how  the  Jewish  Church  is  elevated,  in  a  circumlo- 
cutory way,  to  the  position  of  a  Kingdom,  we  select  an  example.  Thus, 
Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  Go)  affirms  (quoting  Owen's  Pre/.  Diss,  to  He- 
brews to  sustain  his  point),  that  the  Church  has  always  existed  ;  that  Christ 
did  not  take  one  away  to  set  up  another  ;  that  the  Christian  Church  is  the 
same  as  that  before  the  Advent  ;  and  afterward  in  his  work  calls  this 
Church,  which  he  has  made  identical,  the  Kingdom  of  God.  The  truth  is, 
that  all  who  take  Fairbairn's  position  respecting  the  Church,  and  then 
designate  it  "  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  cannot  avoid  logically  making  (not- 
withstanding their  disclaimers  to  the  contrary  that  Christ's  Kingdom  was 
only  established  at  His  Advent,  and  is  the  only  Kingdom  of  promise),  the 
Jewish  Church  the  same  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  8.  This  last  is  attempted  in  another  quarter,  judging  from  the 
book  notices  in  the  Evang.  Review  (Oct.  1873),  and  IScribner's  Monthly 
(Dec.  1872).  Abbey,  in  a  work  called  "  The  City  of  God  and  the  Cliurch 
Makers,''  takes  the  ground  that  the  Christian  Church  and  the  Jewish  are 
not  only  the  same,  but  that  they  are  one,  beginning  in  Eden,  basing  their 
essential  likeness  as  the  same  Christian  Church,  City  of  God,  or  Kingdom 
of  heaven  in  Christ,  He  being  an  eternal  person,  etc.  While  there  is  pro- 
priety in  the  efforts  to  rebut  the  antagonism  which  some  erect  between 
the  Old  Test,  and  New  Test,  churches,  yet  there  is  the  same  old  mistake 
of  recognizing  the  Sovereignty  of  God  or  of  Christ  as  constituting  the 
Kingdom,  and  an  ignoring  of  the  plain  covenanted  fact  that  the  Kingdom 
is  promised  to  Jesus  Christ,  not  merely  in  virtue  of  His  divinity,  but  as 
vSon  of  David,  the  predicted  Son  of  Man.  This  simple  and  undeniable 
truth,  in  connection  with  the  history  of  the  covenanted  development,  over- 
turns all  such  theorizing.  All  notions  of  the  Kingdom  that  do  not  stand 
the  test  of  the  Covenant  must  be  discarded. 

Those  who  affirm  that  the  Church  is  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  claim  that  John  the 
Baptist  was  in  the  Kingdom,  are  met  and  confounded  by  even  a  single  passage.  Matt. 
11  :  11,  where  the  least  in  the  Kingdom  is  represented  as  greater  than  John,  showing  that 
by  the  Kingdom  something  else  than  the  Church  is  denoted.  Some,  such  are  the  con- 
tradictions involved,  forgetting  their  own  definitions  of  the  Church  as  a  continuous 
Kingdom,  apjDly  this  passage,  for  fulfilment,  to  believers  after  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
(Comp.  Prop.  39).  The  least  reflection  will  show  that  the  Jewish  Church  had  not  the, 
covenanted  characteristics  of  the  Kingdom,  for  as  Daniel  (7  :  22)  says,  the  time  had  not  yet 
come  that  the  saints  possessed  the  Kingdom,  etc. 


PllOP.  92.1  THE   TIIEOCEATIC    KIIS^GDOM.  607 


Proposition  92.     This   Kingdom   is   not   what  some  call   "  the 
Gospel  Kingdomr 

Having  met  with  the  phrase  '^  Gospel  Kingdom"  in  writings,  and 
having  heard  it  from  the  j)ulpit,  this  favorite  expression  of  some 
may  require  a  few  remarks.  By  the  j^hrase  is  evidently  meant 
either  this  dispensation  or  the  church  or  religion,  or  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  phrase  of  human  coinage,  nowhere 
found  in  the  Bible,  and  is  incorrect  when  applied  to  the  present 
time.  The  gospel  is  good  news,  glad  tidings  concerning  the 
Kingdom.  Hence  the  phrase  is  never  found  in  the  writings  of 
careful  authors. 

Ohs.  1.  It  is  strongly  corroborative  that  the  language  of  the  Bible  falls 
in  so  accurately  with  our  line  of  argument.  We  read  of  "  the  Gospel  of 
ilie  Kingdom,"  seeing  that  the  Gospel  itself  has  no  power  to  produce  the 
Kingdom,  but  is  simply  preliminary  "to  it,  designed  to  call  the  elect,  who 
become  "  heirs'^  of  the  Kingdom. 

A  writer  {Proph.  Times,  1873,  j).  105)  makes  a  distinction  between  "the  Gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God  "  and  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  which  appears,  in  some 
respects,  to  be  well  founded.  The  favorite  terms  of  some  theologians,  such  as  "  the 
Kingdom  of  grace,"  "  the  Kingdom  of  the  cross,"  "  the  mediatorial  Kingdom,"  are  not 
found  in  Scrijiture,  and  whiJe  freely  acknowledging  the  astonishing  and  unmerited  grace 
existing  in  the  Church,  and  that  the  future  Theocracy  is  one  of  grace,  yet  the  titles,  how- 
ever well  intentioned,  are  not  applicable,  being  misleading  in  their  nature.  When 
Jesus  directly  predicts  the  results  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  it  is 
never  intimated  that  any  one  of  them  is  to  form  out  of  the  Church,  or  believers  of  the 
Gospel,  a  Kingdom.  The  passages  which  are  wrongfully  inferred  to  teach  the  contrary 
will  hereafter  be  examined  in  detail.  The  means  are  by  multitudes  mistaken  for  the  end, 
as  e.g.  by  the  Ilomlllst  (quoted  by  Nast,  Com.  on  Matt.,  p.  323),  which  makes  the  Gospel  to 
be  "the  Kingdom  of  God,"  because  it  produces  "  the  reign  of  God  over  all  the  powers  of 
the  soul."  To  "  preach  the  Gospel,"  or  to  "  preach  the  Kingdom"  (e.g.  Luke  9  :  2,  6),  is 
to  present  motives,  etc.,  urging  and  inviting  persons  to  become  worthy  of  it  when  it,  the 
Kingdom,  comes  in  power  and  glory. 

Obs.  2.  Aside  from  other  considerations,  we  have  shown  (Prop.  59, 
Obs.  5),  that  the  Kingdom  was  tendered  to  the  Jews  but  owing  to  their 
sinfulness  was  to  be  taken  from  them  (i.e.  could  not  inherit  or  receive  it), 
and  was  to  be  given  to  another  chosen,  gathered  people.  The  Kingdom 
was  taken  from  the  Jewish  nation,  but  the  nation,  as  all  admit,  retained 
the  Gospel — the  privileges  of  this  dispensation,  of  the  church,  of  religion, 
m  brief,  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  Gospel.  It  follows,  therefore,  as  a 
national  sequence  that  if  the  Kingdom  was  taken  from  them,  that  King- 
dom did  7iot  consist  in  "  the  Gospel  Kingdom,"  whatever  meaning  may  be 
attached  to  it,  for  to  this,  if  it  denotes  the  present  dispensation  of  the  Gos- 
pel, the  nation  was  made  ^/\*^•/  accessible,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  com- 
mencing at  Jerusalem.     Other  objections  will  be  noticed  in  what  follows. 


THE   THEOCEATIC   KIl^GDOM.  [PeOP.  92. 

We  append  Dr.  Brown's  (Com.)  comment  on  Matt.  21  :  43  :  "  Therefore  I  say  unto 
you,  '  The  Kingdom  of  God ' — God's  visible  Kingdom  or  Church,  upon  earth,  which  up  to 
this  time  stood  in  the  seed  of  Abraham — '  shall  be  taken  from  you  and  given  to  a  nation 
bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof,'  i.e.  the  great  evangelical  community  of  the  faithful, 
which,  after  the  extension  of  the  Jewish  nation,  would  consist  chiefly  of  Gentiles,  until 
'  all  Israel  should  be  saved.'  "  But  (1)  the  Church  was  7iot  taken  from  them  ;  (2)  this 
ver}'  "  nation"  thus  called  is  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  natiiral  and  engrafted  ;  {S)  that  the 
bestowal  of  this  Kingdom  is  future,  when  the  "  nation"  is  gathered  (comp.  Props. 
57-66).  Some  commentators,  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  the  passage,  owing  to  their 
Church-Kingdom  theory,  conveniently  pass  it  by.  Those  especially  who  take  the  ground 
(induced  by  Heb.  ch.  11,  Gal.  3:8;  Heb.  4  :  2  ;  1  Cor.  10  :  2-4  ;  Eph.  2  :  19,  20  ;  1  Pet. 
1  :  10,  11  ;  Jude  14,  15  ;  Dan.  ch,  7,  etc.)  that  the  Ch.  Church  is  only  a  continuation  of 
the  more  ancient  Church,  are  pressed  by  the  passage.  Imagination  is  the  basis  of  nu- 
merous interpretations  and  applications. 


Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  609 


Propositiojs"  93.     Tlie  Covenanted  Kingdom  is  not  tlie  Christian 
Church. 

Desirous  to  respect  and  honor  that  overwhelming  majority  of 
able  and  learned  men,  who  hold  and  teach  that  the  Christian  church 
is  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  predicted  by  the  prophets  and  so 
solemnly  covenanted  to  Him^  yet  truth  and  justice  demand  an 
■unequivoccd  denial  of  this  doctrine.  The  reason  for  such  denial 
is  found  in  the  terms  of  the  covenant  itself.  The  church  possesses 
none  of  the  characteristics  of  the  kingdom  promised  to  David's 
Son.  The  Theocratic  relationship,  the  throne  and  kingdom  of 
David,  are  lacking. 

Ols.  1.  The  Christian  Church  is  an  association  of  believers  in  Christ, 
who,  led  by  the  same  consciousness  of  God,  truth  and  spirit,  accept  of  the 
terms  of  salvation,  repentance  and  faith,  and  continue  in  the  use  of  the 
means  of  grace  appointed  by  the  Redeemer.  Ifc  is  an  association  exclusively 
for  religious  purposes,  separate  and  distinct  from  civil  or  secular  interests. 
It  is  different  from  the  Kingdom  once  established  in  that  State  and  relig- 
ion are  separated,  hence  involving  no  civil  or  State  relationship,  for  mem- 
bers of  all  nations  and  States,  without  absolving  their  allegiance  due  as 
citizens  to  their  respective  civil  powers,  can  become  members  of  this  ex- 
clusive religious  organization.  It  is  different  from  the  Jewish  Church,  be- 
fore and  after  theTheocratic  rule,  in  that  it  embraces  new  ordinances, 
discarding  the  Mosaic,  and  is  open  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile  by  an  expres- 
sion and  experience  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  formed  solely  on  ac- 
count of  the  rejection  of  the  Kingdom  by  the  Jews,  in  order  that  through, 
it  a  body  of  believers  might  be  raised,  through  whom  finally,  when  all  gath- 
ered, the  Kingdom  might  be  reorganized  in  the  most  effective  and  tri- 
umphant manner.  Originated  for  this  special  purpose  it  was  designed,  as 
its  commencement  proves,  to  be  separate  and  distinct  not  only  from  the 
Jewish  State  but  all  other  States.  Union  with  secular  powers  was  not  con- 
templated, because  it  was  not  in  accordance  with  tlie  design  of  its  estab- 
lishment, viz.  :  to  call  and  gather  out  of  the  nations  and  kingdoms  a 
believing  people.  If  the  object  had  been  to  organize  a  Kingdom,  w^e  then 
undoubtedly  would  have  had  a  specific  form  of  government  given  to  us, 
and  direct  declarations  concerning  the  union  of  State  and  Church,  and  the 
exercise  of  civil  and  political  power.  The  absence  of  such  directions 
abundantly  confirms  our  argument.  It  is  necessarily  outward  so  far  as  the 
persons,  ordinances,  assemblies,  expansion,  form  of  worship,  etc.,  is  con- 
cerned ;  and  inward,  so  far  as  individual  experience,  adoption,  union  with 
Christ,  etc.,  relates.  It  is  a  community  of  saints,  who,  while  occupying 
various  positions  in  life,  are  not  deprived  by  it  of  civil,  social,  or  family 
relations,  but  rather  by  the  formation  of  such  a  community  find  their  con- 


610  THE   TIIEOCIIATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  93. 

duct  in  all  these  relations  regulated  and  controlled.  Having  no  eccle- 
siastical constitution  for  government  (such  as  were  afterward  produced  by 
human  invention),  given  by  divine  authority,  it  rests  in  a  few  indispensable 
commands  respecting  its  organization  and  perpetuity,  acknowledging  in 
these  the  Sovereignty  of  God  and  the  Headship  of  Clirist,  and  constantly 
realizing  by  obedience  to  the  religious  and  moral  precepts,  of  which  it  is 
the  gua^-dian,  that  it  is  under  Divine  guidance,  and  in  reality  the  product 
of  Divine  power  and  grace. 

This  interpretation  of  the  Church,  with  the  exception  of  the  excessive  High  Church 
view,  which,  against  the  testimony  of  both  Scripture  and  History,  insists  upon  the  im- 
mediate establishment  of  a  Hierarchy,  and  with  the  exception  of  that  of  Erastianism, 
which,  against  the  Apostolic  order,  prescribes  a  union  of  State  and  Church,  is  substan- 
tially that  adopted  by  many  of  our  opponents,  who,  however,  are  forced  by  their  theories 
io  acid  to  it  the  notion  of  an  existing  predicted  Kingdom.  Aside  from  the  latter  idea, 
when  we  read  the  interpretations  given  by  various  writers  directly  of  the  Church,  we 
find  but  little  difference  from  the  one  presented,  and  none  io  necessitate  the  view  that  it  is 
a  Kingdom.  Neander  tells  us  that  the  Church  is  "  a  union  of  men  arising  from  the  fel- 
lowship (communion)  of  religious  life  ;  a  union  essentially  independent  of,  and  different 
from,  all  other  forms  of  human  association."  Then  what  he  adds  enforces  our  position 
instead  of  his  own  :  "  It  was  a  fundamental  element  of  the  formation  of  this  union,  that 
religion  was  no  longer  to  be  inseparably  bovmd  up,  either  as  principal  or  subordinate, 
with  the  political  and  national  relations  of  men,"  etc.  (See  Ch.  His.,  sec.  81,  ch.  4, 
and  then  compare  sec.  52  where  he  contradicts  this  by  giving  the  Church  such  relations 
and  a  world  dominion.)  'We  might  well  ask,  Why  not  so  bound?  There  must  be  some 
substantial  reason.  Mosheim  {Inst,  of  Eccl.  His.),  in  his  preface,  is  guarded  not  to  call 
the  Church  a  Kingdom,  whether  intentional  or  not.  Admitting  that  as  an  association  it 
is  governed  by  certain  laws  and  institutions,  and  has  its  officers,  he  calls  it  "  a  society  or 
community"  formed  by  the  body  of  Christians.  Dr.  Hagenbach,  in  his  Acad.  Address  on 
Neander' s" services  as  a  Church  historian  {Bih.  Sacra,  Oct.,  1851),  shows  that  according 
to  Planck  in  his  His.  of  the  Origin  and  Formation  of  the  Christ.  Eccl.  Constitutions,  the 
Church  is  no  Kingdom,  but  a  union  of  individuals  voluntarily  coming  together,  bound 
by  the  same  religious  belief,  etc.  Da  Costa  attributed,  according  to  Hurst  {His.  of  Ration- 
alism, p.  360),  only  "  a  relative  value  to  the  Church  of  the  Gentiles,  the  Church  before  the 
Millennium,"  refering  us  to  the  Millennial  era  for  a  proper  and  developed  Kingdom. 
This  is  the  position  of  many  Millenarians  (Da  Costa  being  regarded  one),  and  seems 
partly  also  to  be  the  idea  of  some  of  our  opponents,  especially  of  Neander,  in  his  view  of 
the  linal  world-dominion.  These  few  quotations  are  amply  sufficient  to  illustrate  our 
own  view,  that  in  the  definition  of  the  Church  there  is  nothing  that  requires  us  to  enter- 
tain the  idea  that  it  is  a  Kingdom. 

The  reader  can  find  numerous  illustrations  in  various  Confessions,  His.  of  Doc- 
trines, Sys.  Divinities,  Theological  writers,  Works  on  the  Church,  Controversial  Essays, 
etc.  In  this  wide  field  the  student  will  find  every  shade  of  opinion,  from  that  of  an 
association  of  believers  to  Schleiermacher's  "living  organism,  i.e.  the  body  of  Christ" 
(or  Lange's  ''  the  planting  and  develoiDment  of  the  salvation  and  life  of  Christ  in  the 
social  sphere,"  and  "  the  typical  commencement  of  the  world's  transfiguration"); 
from  that  of  a  simple  congregation  of  receptive  men  and  women  to  Schlegel's  "great 
and  divine  corporation,"  "free,  peculiar,  and  independent  corporation,"  or  to  the 
most  extravagant  idealistic  and  mystical  conceptions,  or  to  the  sterner  idea  of  an  ex- 
isting, conquering  Kingdom  in  a  visible  form  (as  e.g.  Papacy),  destined  to  a  world- 
dominion.  High-Churciiism,  Low-Churchism,  Broad-Churchism,  Spiritualism,  Mys- 
ticism, etc.,  have  here  a  favorite  topic,  but  always,  with  few  exceptions,  considered 
isolated  from  the  covenanted  relationship.  Many  of  the  definitions  could  be  adopted, 
provided  the  assumed  transformation  into  a  Kingdom  were  set  aside.  The  most  simple 
definition  is  that  of  the  Apostles'  Creed  adopted  in  an  art.  in  the  Princeton  Review,  Ap.  1853, 
entitled  "  The  Idea  of  the  Church,"  viz.:  that  the  Church  is  "the  communion  of  the 
saints, "  in  which,  leaving  out  the  notion  of  "  a  monarchy,  an  aristocracy,  or  a  democracy, " 
two  affirmations  are  presented:  (1)  "the  Church  consists  of  saints,  and  (2)  of  saints 
in  communion — that  is,  so  united  as  to  form  one  body." 

Obs.  2.  The  first  churches  and  the  apostolic  Fathers  and  their  immediate 
successors,  as  already  shown  had  no  concejition  of  the  Church  being  the 


Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  IvIis-gdom.  611 

promised  Kingdom  of  the  Covenant  and  Prophets.  They  looked  and 
prayed  for  its  speedy  cominc^  at  the  Second  Advent.  Origen  was  the  first 
one  who  made  the  Church  the  mystic  Kingdom  of  God  (see  p.  112,  Voice 
of  fJio  Chjirch,  by  Taylor).  Others  followed  in  his  interpretation  ;  and  if 
we  narrowly  examine  history  it  will  be  found  that  two  things  materially 
aided  in  entrenching  and  extending  this  notion  of  Origen's.  The  first  was 
the  Hierarchical  encroachments  which  such  an  oj)inion  sustained  and  flat- 
tered. The  second  was  the  fact  that  religions  everywhere,  among  the  Ro- 
mans, Greeks,  Egyptians,  Asiatics,  etc.,  were  firmly  united  with  the  State, 
thus  paving  the  way  for  a  similar  union  and  the  exhibition  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion  in  a  sphere  not  inferior  to  Pagan. 

The  student  will  be  amjoly  repaid  in  tracing  these  influences  in  confirming  the  Origen- 
istic  notion,  and  thus  giving  power  into  the  hands  of  designing,  and  even  of  conscien- 
tious men.  Against  this  conversion  of  the  Church  into  a  Kingdom  there  was  a  protest, 
which  was  ultimately  silenced  as  the  PajDacy  increased  in  jDower,  until  finally  it  was 
only  held  by  the  Paulicians  and  Waldenses  (see  p.  126,  Voice  of  the  Church,  by  Taylor). 
Coming  down  to  the  Reformers,  great  allowance  must  be  made  for  them,  seeing  that  the 
magnitude  of  the  work  before  them  scarcely  allowed  it  to  be  consummated  within  the 
period  of  their  lives.  They  could  not  readily  rid  themselves  of  all  the  prejudices  en- 
grafted by  former  Church  relationship,  and  resulting  from  the  growth  of  centuries. 
Their  immediate  successors,  as  all  Church  historians  sadly  acknowledge,  instead  of  prose- 
cuting the  work  of  Reformation,  engrossed  themselves  in  disputes,  and  pressed  each  other 
on  points  of  differences — many  non-essential — until  as  a  measure  of  advancement  they 
seized  the  former  Church  idea,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  Kingdom  notion  as  a  source 
of  protection  and  strength,  they  granted  fatal  concessions  (which  the  Reformers  refused), 
even  to  Royalty  and  the  civil  magistrate,  vesting  to  a  certain  extent  ecclesiastical 
power  in  their  hands,  uniting  Church  and  State,  elevating  the  civil  head  to  a  religious 
l^osition  over  the  Church,  which  speedily  brought  forth  Us  hitter  fruit  in  proscrij^tions, 
disallowance  of  freedom  to  individual  conscience,  heresy-hunting,  the  imposition  of  ex- 
tended sjmibols  and  formulas,  depositions,  imprisonments,  banishments,  and  even  in 
some  cases,  death  itself.  The  leverage  underlying  all  this  was  the  mfounded  doctrine, 
that  the  Church  being  a  Kingdom  here  on  eartli,  a  real  power  in  actual  sway  over  men, 
such  power  was  to  be  manifested  and  exerted  in  an  external  authority  felt  and  acknowl- 
edged bj"-  all.  For  the  exertion  of  such  authority,  civil  and  ecclesiastical  power  were, 
more  or  less,  combined.  While  history  abundantly  attests  this  to  be  the  case  with  their 
followers,  the  Reformers  themselves  held  views  which  it  is  difficult  to  explain  as  consis- 
tent with  the  notion  that  the  Church  is  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  Christ.  They  speak 
of  the  Church  as  a  voluntary  association  for  strictly  religious  jDurposes,  and  with  all  their 
concessions  to  the  civil  magistrate,  they  still  emphatically  declared  that  Church  and 
State  were  separate  in  their  existence,  and  they  could  not  merge  the  one  into  the  other, 
(Neander's  Gh.  His.,  Mosheim"s  Eccl.  His.,  Fisher's  His.  of  Bef,  etc.).  Their  language  is 
sometimes  contradictory,  but  that  they  opposed,  on  the  one  hand,  a  secular  rule  of  be- 
lievers, and,  on  the  other,  an  absorption  of  religious  power  by  the  civil  head  is  positively 
stated.  The  contradictions  that  we  find  noticed  by  historians  clearly  indicate  that  they 
had  710  well-defined  and  authoritative  conception  of  the  Church  as  a  Kingdom.  Indeed,  we 
find  them  using  language  respecting  the  future  manifestation,  and  even  speedy,  of 
Christ's  Kingdom  at  the  Second  Advent,  the  very  spirit  of  which  is  oj^iDosed  to  the 
Church's  now  exerting  a  predicted  kinglj^  authority,  and  which  fully  accords  with  our 
own  doctrine.  The  reader  will  find  extracts  given  from  Luther,  Calvin,  and  others,  by 
Taylor  (  V^oice  of  the  Church),  by  a  Congregationalist  (  Time  of  the  End),  by  Brooke's  {El.  of 
Proph.  Inter.),  by  Elliott  (Horoe  Apoc),  and  others,  which  are  difficult  to  reconcile  with 
any  other  theory  than  that  of  the  doctrinal  position  of  the  early  Church,  viz.  :  anticipat- 
ing the  Kingdom  of  Christ  to  be  set  up  at  His  Second  Coming.  With  all  the  honor  that 
is  due  to  these  noble  men,  with  respectful  consideration  of  their  vast  and  splendid  ser- 
vices, yet  the  student  feels  that  on  some  important  points  they  are  indecisive,  indistinct, 
and  somewhat  contradictory.  Hence  their  opinions,  whatever  they  are,  must  be  sub- 
jected, as  they  themselves  desired  and  expressed,  to  the  test  of  Scripture  (Prop.  10). 

Obs.  3.  One  class  of  our  opponents  who  contend  that  the  Jewish  Church 
which  existed  at    the  First  Advent  was  no  Kingdom,  certainly  cannot 


Q12  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  93. 


make  the  Christian  Church  such,  if  the  Kingdom  as  they  inform  us  only 
denotes  "  God's  reign"  for  that  was  characteristic  of  the  Jevvish  Church. 
Another  chiss,  too  circumspect  to  fall  into  so  palpable  an  inconsistency, 
insist  upon  the  points  of  identity  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
Church,  and  pronounce  them  to  be  one  and  the  same  Kingdom  of  God. 
That  this  is  erroneous  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations  (1) 
The  announcemoits  of  the  Kingdom  with  which  the  New  Test,  begins  is  op- 
posed to  it.  Prop.  19  ;  (2)  the  expectations  of  the  pious  Jews,  Props.  20,  47, 
40,  41,  and  43  ;  (3)  the  condition  of  the  Church  does  not  accord  with  pre- 
dictions of  the  Prophets  respecting  the  Kingdom,  Prop.  21  ;  (4)  the 
Church  does  not  correspond  with  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus  and  the  dis- 
ciples. Props.  22,  23,  38,  39,  54,  42,  44  ;  (5)  the  Church  is  not  like  the 
Kingdom  of  God  once  established,  tacking  the  Theocratic  arrangement 
once  instituted.  Props.  25,  27,  28,  29  ;  ((3)  the  Church  is  not  like  the 
Kingdom  once  established,  overthrown  and  ])romised  a  restoration,  Props. 
31,  32,  33  ;  (7)  the  Church  is  not  the  Kingdom,  otherwise  the  disciples 
were  ignorant  of  what  they  preached,  Prop.  43  ;  (8)  that  the  Church  is  the 
promised  Kingdom  is  opposed  by  the  covenants,  Props.  46,  47,  48,  49,  50, 
52  ;  (9)  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  as  nigh  and  then  its  postimnement 
is  against  making  the  Church  a  Kingdom,  Props.  55,  56,  57,  h'^,  59,  60, 
61,  62,  etc.  ;  (10)  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  after  Christ's  death  con- 
firms our  doctrine.  Props.  70,  71,  72,  73,  etc.  ;  (11)  the  Church  was  not 
taken  from  the  Jews  bat  the  Kingdom  was,  Prop,  preceding,  etc.  ;  (12) 
the  Church  is  not  the  Kingdom  because  it  will  not  be  given  until  the  elect 
are  gathered.  Props.  62,  63,  65,  ^^,  etc.  ;  (13)  Tlie  Second  Advent  is  the 
period  Avhen  the  Kingdom  is  established.  Prop.  51,  52.  In  brief  the  Pro- 
positions preceding  all  contain  so  many  reasons  for  not  making  the  Church 
the  promised  K.mg&om.  of  David's  Son.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  if  we  once 
take  the  covenanted  promises  in  their  plain  sense,  and  view  the  testimony 
of  Scripture  sustaining  such  a  sense,  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  convert  the 
Church  into  the  promised  Kingdom  without  a  violation  of  propriety  and 
unity  of  Divine  Purpose.  The  remaining  Propositions  that  follow,  nearly 
all,  are  additional  proofs  sustaining  our  doctrine. 

Incidental  proof  corroborative  of  our  position,  can  also  be  alleged.  Thus  e.g.  the 
conduct  of  the  apostles,  after  the  Christian  Church  was  established,  to  conciliate  the 
Jews  in  attending  the  sacrifices  and  services  in  the  temple,  and  adhering  in  many  re- 
spects to  the  laws  and  customs  of  Moses,  can  only  be  satisfactorily  reconciled  with 
our  view,  that  the  Christian  Church  (just  as  the  preceding  Jewish)  is  preparatory  to  the 
Kingdom.  If  a  Kingdom  was  estal)lished,  as  Fairbairn  and  others  assert,  then  the 
charge  of  unbelievers,  that  they  had  but  an  imperfect  notion  of  the  Kingdom  and  its 
proprieties,  remains  in  force  (and  crushing,  because  if  imperfect  in  knowledge  on  so 
important  a  matter  as  the  goal,  how  can  we  trust  them  in  other  matters  ?)  But  from 
our  standpoint  we  see  only  a  matter  of  prudence,  a  manifested  desire  to  avoid  difii- 
culty,  etc.,  which,  connected  with  things  non-essential,  was  far  from  being  inconsis- 
tent with  a  correct  view  of  the  church,  its  meaning  and  design.  In  the  controversy  be- 
tween Paul  and  Peter,  our  opponents  forget  what  they  previously  asserted  respecting 
Peter's  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom  in  Acts,  ch.  2  and  3  (excepting  some,  who  tell  us 
that  even  in  those  sermons  he  manifested  great  ignorance,  possessed  only  "the  husk," 
etc) — for  they  inform  us  that  Peter  had  low  ideas  respecting  the  Kingdom.  They 
forget  also  that  Paul's  objections  to  Peter  were  based  (1)  on  the  rites  and  ceremonies 
being  non-essential  ;  (2)  non-essential,  but  yet  burdensome  and  leading  to  bondage  ; 
(3)  non-essential,  but  yet  calculated,  if  pressed  too  far,  to  obscure  repentance  and  faith 
in  Christ ;  (4)  non-essential,  so  that  even  he  (Paul),  for  the  sake  of  conciliation,  at- 
tended to  some  rites,  but  without  sacrificing  Christian  truth.  Nowhere  does  Paul  base 
his  rejection  of  Mosaic  rites,  etc.,  upon  the  fact  of  a  Kingdom  being  established,  but  upon 
the  fact  of  the  provision  made  through  Jesus  for  salvation,  and  tlie  call  of  the  Gentiles 


Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  613 

tlirougli  repentance  and  faith.  The  Chnrch-Kingdom  theory  feathers  the  shaft  which 
intidelity  (so  e.g.  Duke  of  Somerset,  Ch.  Theol,  p.  76)  sends  against  inspiration,  see- 
ing that  Paul  is  pressed  as  the  exponent  of  a  Kingdom,  over  against  Peter,  James, 
etc.  Our  attitude  and  belief  indicate  no  such  antagonism.  If  one  is  overtaken  in 
weakness  by  the  effort  to  conciliate  the  prejudices  of  the  Jews,  this  only  intimates  the 
nature  and  design  of  the  church,  and  is  no  reason  for  the  rejection  of  fundamental 
truth,  because  it  is  a  mere  matter  of  conduct,  probationary  discipline,  test  of  character, 
etc.,  to  which  the  apostles,  having  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  were,  like  all  other 
men,  subject — the  very  church  relationship  evidencing  the  same. 

Ohs.  4.  Some  occupying  higher  ground,  take  the  view  that  the  Kingdom 
of  God  existed  continuously  before  and  in  the  Christian  Church,  asserting 
that  the  form  of  the  Theocracy  was  changeable  and  temporary  (so  Kurtz, 
His.  of  the  Old  Covenant,  p.  110),  but  that  the  essence  was  retained  and 
transferred  to  the  Christian  Church,  thus  forming  an  unbroken  Kingdom 
of  God.  To  this  we  observe  :  (1)  That  the  Theocratic  arrangement  as  spec- 
ified in  the  Davidic  covenant  is  not  changeat)le  or  temporary.  It  is  pro- 
mised ly  oath  that  His  tlirone  and  Kingdom  as  established  in  His  Son  is 
eternal  ;  (2)  to  make  it  temporary  is  equivalent  to  saying  tliat  God's  effort 
to  act  as  an  earthly  Ruler  was  a  failure  ;  (3)  the  only  change  that  was 
made  in  the  form  was  that  caused  by  the  Jews  seeking  a  visible  King  and 
in  this  God  acquiesced,  and  incorjmrated  the  jjrinciple,  as  we  have  shown, 
m  His  purpose  of  Kedemption  ;  (1)  admitting  the  change  of  form,  then 
the  Church  has  less  honor  than  the  past  Theocracy,  in  that  it  has  not  God 
for  its  earthly  Ruler.,  and  that,  therefore,  in  this  respect,  there  is  a  retro- 
gression from  the  higher  Kingdom  to  the  lower  ;  (5)  it  overrides  with  in- 
conclusive proof  the  reasons  we  have  already  presented  for  the  contrary 
view. 

To  avoid  reiDetition,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  reader  has  passed  over  the 
previous  Propositions,  and  hence  a  mere  reference  to  the  line  of  argument  is  deemed 
sufficient.  The  answer  to  Kurtz  is  found  in  ihe  Davidic  Covenant,  the  prophecies  based 
on  it,  and  the  first  preaching  derived  from  it.  It  is  a  most  solemnly  2:>ledgecl  truth,  con- 
firmed by  the  oath  of  the  Almightj',  that  the  Theorcratic  order,  as  under  David,  iciU  he 
restored  and  most  gloriously  perpetuated  at  the  appointed  time  under  his  Son,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Hence  it  is  impossible  to  allow  to  the  church  the  features  of  a  restored 
Theocratic  Kingdom  as  covenanted  ;  for  there  is  no  restored  Jewish  nation,  no  restored 
tabernacle  of  David,  no  restored  earthly  rule  of  God,  no  Theocratic  rule  manifested 
through  David's  Son,  etc.  Men  maj^  claim  that  this  or  that  church  is  "  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom"  (so  Papacy),  or  "  the  Kingdom  of  God"  (so  many  Protestants),  or  "  Christ's 
Kingdom  on  earth"  (so  Shakers),  or  even  "  the  New  Jerusalem  state"  (so  Sweden- 
borgians),  etc.,  but  all,  without  exception,  lack  the  covenanted  and  prophetic  marks, 
so  that  a  firm  believer  in  the  Word  cannot  allow  any  of  them  this  coveted  honor. 

Obs.  5.  It  may  be  well  in  this  place  to  illustrate  the  arguments  that  are 
employed  by  others  to  elevate  the  Church  into  a  Kingdom,  and  we  there- 
fore select  a  work  which  has  been  specially  written  to  2)erform  this  ser- 
vice. 

In  The  Kingdom  of  Grace,  ch.  2,  the  author  gives  us  his  Scriptural,  and  other  author- 
ity. The  Church  is  a  Kingdom,  (1)  because  "the  Kingdom  of  God  is  within  you," 
forgetting  that  this  was  addressed  to  the  wicked  Pharisees  who  Aveie  so  unconscious  of 
a  Kingdom  loithin  them  that  they  inquired  concerning  it,  see  Prop.  110  ;  (2)  "  My  King- 
dom is  not  of  this  world,"  which  we  also  teach,  as  will  be  shown  pnder  its  appropriate 
heading,  see  Prop.  109  ;  (3)  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  King,  which  claim  we  admit  to  be 
just,  but  is  far  from  proving  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  ;  (4)  Jesus  did  not  set 
up  any  direct  claim  to  occupy  David's  throne  while  living,  which  we  admit  and  clearly 
point  out  the  reason  for  not  so  doing,  viz.  :  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  see  Prop. 
58,  etc.  ;  (5)  that  David's  Kingdom  was  not  of  heavenly  origin  as  the  church  :— this  is 


614  TnE  THEOCEATic  Kiis^GDor.i.  [Pkop.  93. 

incorrect,  as  the  reader  will  see  by  referring  to  Props.  28,  31,  etc.,  and  the  covenant. 
Prop.  49,  all  proving  that  it  was  God's  own  ordering,  the  throne  and  Kingdom  claimed  as 
His  own,  and  the  King  himself  being  divinely  consecrated  or  anointed  to  his  position  ; 
(6)  that  Christ  has  not  yet  raised  up  David's  throne,  and  therefore  it  is  argued,  that  He 
never  will, — this  argument  is  j)resuming  to  point  out  what  is  right  and  proper  for  Deity 
to  perform,  and  has  been  already  answered  ;  (7)  the  preaching  of  John,  "  Repent,  for 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,'  is  *'  evidently  the  gospel  dispensation,"  for  nothing 
else  appeared  near  at  hand  but  this,  etc. — the  reasoning  is  this  :  the  Kingdom  was 
predicted  as  near,  the  church  was  established,  and  hence  the  church  is  the  Kingdom, 
wliich  overlooks  the  change  in  the  style  of  preaching,  Proj).  58,  and  the  postponement. 
Prop.  68.  He  continues  (8)  quoting  Isa.  9  :  6,  7,  and  bases  the  alleged  fact  of  the 
church  being  the  Kingdom  on,  "of  the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there 
shall  be  no  end,"  saying  :  "  This  expression  is,  in  my  view,  fatal  to  the  theory  of  Mil- 
lenarians  ;  for,  according  to  the  principles  of  that  theory,  the  government  of  Christ  is 
to  have  no  increase  after  the  Second  Advent.  The  elect  will  all  have  been  gathered  in 
against  that  great  day,  when  the  Son  is  to  be  revealed  in  glory  from  heaven."  It  is 
surprising  to  charge  our  theory  with  a  doctrine  which  it  pointedly  repudiates,  as  can  be 
seen  by  the  early  church  view  and  the  history  of  our  doctrine  down  to  the  present, 
which  insists  on  the  reign  of  Jesus  on  the  restored  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  over 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  spared  Gentiles,  etc.  (9)  Eefers  us  to  Rev.  3  :  21,  claiming 
from  the  passage  that  Christ  is  on  His  throne,  and  now  reigns  in  the  predicted  manner, 
but  («)  the  Word  says  that  He  is  "  set  down  with  my  Father  on  His  throne,"  indicating 
great  exaltation,  but  contrasted  still  with  the  "  my  throne,'''  which  in  a  special  manner 
belongs  to  Him  as  Son  of  man  ;  {h)  he  makes  in  this  theory,  as  a  present  result,  all  the 
saints  now  rewarded,  crowned,  associated  with  Christ  in  His  rule,  against  the  most  direct 
teaching  to  the  contrary  ;  (c)  and  following  His  theory,  as  given  in  another  place,  he 
makes  these  same  rewarded  and  crowned  saints  lay  aside  their  received  honor  to  appear 
at  the  judgment-bar  and  receive  their  sentences  ;  (10)  He  asks  what  advantage  would  it 
be  to  have  Christ's  visible  throne  on  earth,  for  He  could  only  be  seen  by  a  few  ;  those 
in  foreign  countries,  as  China  and  America,  could  not  see  Him,  unless  "  they  should 
have  new  organs  of  vision  given  to  them,"  etc.  This  is  altogether  unworthy  of  notice, 
and  is  onl}'-  reproduced  to  introduce  the  remark  :  supj^ose  after  all  that  the  apostolic 
Fathers  and  that  long  line  of  noble  witnesses  to  the  Kingdom  as  covenanted,  and  as 
held  by  Millenarians,  are  correct,  would  not  such  writers,  who  speak  so  disresjyectjully  of 
the  Saviour's  throne,  its  lowness  and  degradation  if  planted  here  on  the  earth,  appear 
before  that  King  with  the  deepest  confusion  ?  Brethren,  who  think  that  they  do  God's 
service  by  opposing  us,  should  at  least  exhibit  the  respect  due  to  discussions  in  which 
the  Saviour's  glory  is  involved.  This  observation  is  the  more  necessary  in  view  of  what 
follows.  (11)  For,  he  makes  sport  of  the  dominion  attributed  to  Jesus  by  Millenarians, 
taking  oyily  as  much  of  it  as  happens  to  suit  his  style  of  witticism.  Thus  (a)  he  refers  to 
"Winthrop  (Lectures),  arguing  that  the  original  grant  of  dominion  (Gen.  1  :  26-28),  lost  by 
the  fall,  is  restored  by  the  Second  Adam,  giving  as  proof  Ps.  8,  comp.  with  Heb.  2  :  5-9. 
(b)  He  examines  this  with  the  following  result  :  (1)  Adam  reigned  personally  over  fish, 
fowl,  cattle,  creeping  things,  etc.,  so  the  Second  Adam  must  do  the  same,  and  "  what  a 
glorious  Kingdom  this  will  be  of  our  blessed  Saviour  !  But  we  did  not  know  that  this 
was  the  Kingdom  which  He  bought  with  His  precious  blood."  Comment  is  unneces- 
sary, for  argumentation  that  can  stoop  to  such  absurdity,  disallowing  the  dominion  we 
give  to  Jesus,  is  luiworthy  of  a  serious  reply  (comp.  Prop.  203).  (2)  He  informs  us  that 
the  i^hrase  "  Son  of  Man,"  in  the  8th  Ps.,  has  not  "  the  remotest  allusion  whatever  to 
the  man  Christ  Jesus," — that  it  denotes  man  only,  and  sarcastically  inquires  whether  the 
animals,  etc.,  are  to  be  also  resurrected  over  whom  He  is  to  reign.  (3)  He  says  that  Heb. 
2  :  etc.,  only  applies  to  man  so  far  as  dominion  over  animals,  etc.,  is  concerned,  and  not 
to  Christ  ;  objects  to  Winthrop's  making  "  the  world  to  come"  to  mean  "  the  inhabit- 
able earth  to  come,"  on  the  ground  that  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  add  a  woyd  as  under- 
stood ; — that  we  make  by  such  application  to  Christ  verses  8  and  9  contradictory  ; — that 
Son  of  man  when  it  has  a  reference  to  Christ  begins  with  a  capital  letter  ;  that  our  theory 
makes  David's  language  unmeaning,  which  only  indicates  humility,  for  David  could  not 
say,  "  Who  is  Jesus  Christ  that  thou  visitest  him,"  etc.  Against  this  argument  based  on 
the  dominion  promised  to  "  the  Son  of  man,"  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  (1)  that  it  is  opposed 
to  the  views  of  multitudes  who  are  hostile  to  Millenarianism.  The  commentators,  as 
e.g.  Barnes,  Stuart,  etc.,  decide  in  our  favor — Mobile  theologians  of  all  classes  almost 
universally  contend  that  Winthrop's  argument  is  correct.  (2)  That  it  is  in  opjDosition  to 
the  early  church  view,  and  in  direct  conflict  with  the  promises  given  to  Christ  ;  that  as 
the  Second  Adam,    the  Son  of  man,   all  things  shall  be  in  subjection  to  Him.      (12) 


Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  615 

Lastly  he  refers  to  Ezek.  36  :  23-28  (admitting  the  literal  restoration  of  the  Jews),  Ezek. 
37  :  11-14,  and  Dan.  2  :  biit  as  these  passages  will  be  discussed  under  Propositions,  we 
leave  them  with  this  conclusion  :  Such  is  the  line  of  argument  which  a  work  devoted  to 
make  out  the  church  a  Kingdom,  a  visible  and  spiritual  one,  is  only  able  to  produce.  From 
It  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  see  that  it  infers  such  a  Kingdom,  being  utterly  unable  to 
produce  a  decisive  passage  which  declares  either  that  the  ISon  of  man  now  reigns  as 
predicted  or  that  the  church  is  at  present  His  Kingdom, 

The  reasons  given  by  Brown  {Sec.  Coming)  are  of  a  similar  nature  (only  not  so  dis- 
respectful in  tone),  and  the  Scriptures  relied  upon  to  sustain  a  present  Messianic  cove- 
nanted Kingdom  are  the  following  :  Acts  2  :  29-36,  Zech.  6  :  12,  Rev.  5  :  6,  and  3  :  7,  8, 
12,  Isa.  9  :  6,  7,  Acts  3  :  13-15,  and  3  :  19-21,  and  4  :  26,  28,  with  Ps.  2,  Acts  5  :  29,  31. 
As  all  these  passages  are  frequently  referred  to  and  explained, — as  they  have  no  reference 
to  a  present  existing  Kingdom  as  covenanted  (that  being  inferred), — as  they  must  be 
considered  in  the  light  of  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word, — it  is  sufficient,  for  the 
present,  to  allude  to  them,  so  that  the  student  may  observe  the  exceeding  slight  founda- 
tion upon  which  the  prevailing  view  rests.  A  direct  passage  in  favor  of  the  Augustinian 
view  cannot  be  j^roduced  ;  it  is  supported  entirely  by  inference,  as  e.g.  Fairbairn  {On 
Proph.)  infers  it  from  the  two  discourses  of  Peter  in  Acts  ;  and  Mason  {Essays  on  the 
Church,  No.  1),  after  correctly  defining  the  church,  suiDposes  it  to  be  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  because  he  infers  that  such  passages  as  Isa.  66  :  12,  Isa.  49  :  23,  Isa.  6  :  3,  5,  and 
especially  "  He  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles,"  must  apply  to  the  present 
existing  church.  Now,  we  cannot,  for  a  moment,  allow  that  a  Kingdom  the  subject  of 
covenant  and  prophecy,  the  object  of  faith,  hope,  and  jo}^  can  be  left,  if  really  estab- 
lished, to  mere  inference.  And  more,  we  cannot  believe,  that  if  set  up  as  many  the- 
ologians tell  us,  the  early  church  for  several  centuries  would  be  unconscious  of  the 
same. 

Ohs.  6.  A  main  leading  feature  in  this  effort  to  make  out  of  the  Church 
the  predicted  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  is  found  in  apjilying  to  the  pres- 
ent, things  relating  to  the  Church  which  are  spoken  of  as  prospectively 
(the  present  used  as  the  future,  Prop.  65,  Obs.  9),  as  e.g.  Heb.  12  :  22, 
23.  Promises  are  given  which  can  only,  as  we  shall  hereafter  show,  be 
realized  by  the  Church  as  a  completed  hody.  This  principle  must  not  be 
overlooked,  as  e.g.  the  marriage  of  the  Church,  which  (1)  one  party  con- 
fines to  the  Church  now  on  earth  as  married  to  Jesus  ;  (2)  another  asserts 
is  done  as  every  believer  enters  the  third  heaven,  so  that  recently  a  pro- 
minent theologian  delivered  a  funeral  discourse  in  which  he  made  a  dis- 
tinguished minister,  deceased,  sitting  down  and  already  enjoying  the  mar- 
riage supper,  etc.  ;  (3)  while  still  another  declares  the  same  to  be  still 
future  as  the  Scriptures  and  the  early  Church  locate  it,  viz.  :  to  occur  only 
at  the  Second  Advent.  It  will  be  satisfactorily  seen,  as  we  proceed,  that 
many  promises,  that  are  only  to  be  realized  in  the  future  Kingdom,  are 
seized  and  appropriated  to  the  Church  ;  and  this  is  not  only  done  by  the 
Popes  quoting  and  applying  to  themselves,  as  earthly  Heads  of  the 
Church,  Millennial  predictions,  but  by  Protestants  in  their  laudation  of 
Churches.  This  is  done  not  only  from  motives  of  self-interest  and  am- 
bition, but  with  a  sincere  desire  to  indicate  the  honor,  stabilit}^  and  per- 
petuity of  Christ's  Kingdom.  Well  may  the  former  be  attributed  to  some 
of  the  representatives  of  the  Papacy  who  even  appropriated  descriptions 
applicable  to  Jesus  unto  themselves,  while  the  latter  is  seen  in  the  w^ell-in- 
tentioned  denomination  of  the  Church  by  the  phrase  ^'  the  City  of  God,'''' 
given  by  Augustine,  followed  by  the  multitude,  and  recently  re-introduced 
by  Mansel,  Abbey,  and  others.  It  is  notorious  that  the  names  Israel, 
Judah,  and  Jerusalem  are  regarded  by  a  host  of  writers  as  synonymous 
with  the  Church,  without  any  regard  to  the  connectionoi  the  prophecy  that 
the  same  Israel,  Judah  and  Jerusalem  acted  and  overthrown  for  its  sinful- 
ness, is  to  be  restored  to  favor,  and  is  thus  meant.    The  curses  pronounced. 


616  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  93. 

are  all  carefully  heaped  upon  them  severally  and  shown  in  their  case  to  be 
sadly  realized,  while  the  blessings  promised  to  the  identically  same  nation 
and  city  are  taken  from  them  and  carefully  bestowed  upon  the  Gentile 
churches.     Is  this  holiest  to  the  Record  ? 

Gds.  v.  This  view  of  the  Church,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Prop.  78),  is 
not  inconsistent  with  the  earliest  creeds.  Those  modern  phrases  and  de- 
finitions so  current  are  unhnoiun  to  them.  They  embody  a  Scriptural  idea 
of  the  Church,  and  are  consistent  with  the  doctrine  received  by  the  first 
churches  (Props.  72-76).  The  later  confessions  of  various  denominations, 
generally,  when  speaking  of  the  Kingly  office  of  Christ  and  His  Kingdom 
either  deal  in  general  expressions  susceptible  of  different  interpretations, 
and  therefore  indecisive  ;  or  else  pissages  are  quoted  which  teach  both 
the  Kingship  of  Christ  and  His  Kingdom,  but  are  practically  misapplied 
by  not  more  explicitly  asking  when  the  same  shall  be  manifested.  Thus 
in  looking  over  several,  Isa.  9  :  G,  7  is  the  favorite  passage  with  them  in 
making  the  Church  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Instead  of  asking  lolien 
this  is  to  be  verified,  leaving  parallel  passages  and  the  preceding  context  of 
Isa.  9,  which  predicts  this  to  occur  in  union  witli  the  Jewish  nation  at  a 
time  of  mighty  national  deliverance  (see  verses  3,  4,  5,  Barnes,  Hengsten- 
berg,  Gesenius,  etc.,  loci),  they  appropriate  the  Y)iissiige  isolated  a7id  torn 
from  its  connection.  In  one  confession,  more  plain  than  others,  it  is  as- 
serted that  "Jesus  Christ  hath  here  on  earth  a  spiritual  Kingdom  which 
is  His  Church,"  etc.,  and  the  proof  texts  given  are  Matt.  11  :  11  and 
18  :  19,  20.  Neither  of  these  texts  have  a  direct  bearing  and  are  inferred 
(wrongfully)  to  teach  it. 

Obs.  8.  The  same  is  true  of  works  on  Systematic  Divinity.  Thus,  e.g. 
Dr.  Hodge  m  his  recent  work  gives  as  proof  texts  Isa.  9  :  6,  7  ;  Ps.  2, 
etc.,  which  only  assert  that  Christ  shall  be  king  ;  also  Dan.  7  :  13,  14  ; 
Ps.  45,  72,  and  110  ;  Luke  1  :  31-33,  without  attempting  to  show  that 
they  are  correctly  applied,  but  in  a  manner,  as  if  such  an  interpretation 
was  never  questioned  by  the  early  church  and  many  witnesses  m  the 
church.  This  is  characteristic  of  many  of  them,  and  is  especially  weak 
when  the  design  is  to  give  a  systematic  view  of  Christian  doctrine 
thoroughly  founded  on  the  Word  in  a  clear  and  decisive  form.  Theo- 
logians of  eminence  take  singular  and  contradictory  views  of  the  church 
as  a  Kingdom.  One  of  the  latest.  Dr.  Thompson  [Theol.  of  Christ,  ch. 
10),  endeavors  to  define  the  Kingdom  of  God.  He  opposes  the  view  of 
Dr.  Oosterzee,  who  makes  the  Kingdom  of  God  a  new  thing  not  formerly 
in  existence  ;  he  tells  us,  "  To  the  men  whom  Christ  addressed,  the  King- 
dom of  God  was  no  new  idea,  or  rather,  it  was  no  new  phase  ;  but  it  can 
hardly  be  said  to  have  represented  any  definite  idea  to  a  generation  that 
had  so  far  lost  the  meaning  of  their  own  law  and  history"— this  against 
the  preaching  of  John  and  the  disciples,  see  Props.  39,  43,  etc.  After 
correctly  and  forcibly  stating  that  this  Kingdom  is  based  on  a  Deliverer 
and  redeemed  people,  although  probably  in  a  sense  different  from  ours, 
he  then  informs  us  that  the  Kingdom  is  "  not  simply  his  providential 
government  over  the  world  at  large,  nor  his  universal  government  over- 
this  and  all  worlds"  (thus  sustaining  our  Propositions  on  the  Sovereignty 
of  God  the  Father  and  the  Son)  ;  "  nor  the  king  and  high  priest  set  up  in 
His  name  ;  but  the  presence  and  power  of  God  felt  and  acknowledged  in 


Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  617 

the  hearts  of  those  that  trusted  in  Him  and  did  His  commandments" 
(comp.  Props.  84,  85,  110,  etc.).  Subsequently  he  represents  it  as  "the 
idea  of  a  living  present  God  who  dwelt  iii  the  hearts  of  all  true  worship- 
pers, as  a  vwnarch  living  among  his  subjects."  Such  a  Kingdom  he  says 
Jesus  preached,  meaning  "  the  presence  of  God  as  a  Saviour  realized  to  the 
sotd/'  and  gives  utterance,  under  what  he  calls  "  a  s^nritual  conception  of 
the  Kingdom,^ ^  to  a  number  of  things  as  embraced  in  the  preaching  of 
Jesus  that,  so  far  as  the  Record  goes,  Jesus  Christ  never  proclaimed.  In 
reply,  see  the  Props,  on  the  preaching  of  Jesus  and  disciples. 

If  Jesus  really  did  preach  such  a  Kingdom  as  Thompson  claims,  it  ought  to  be  decided 
and  established  by  the  Gospels,  but  these  unmistakably  prove  the  contrary  by  the  stubborn 
fact  that  neither  the  Seventy  nor  the  Twelve  comprehended  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom 
to  be  such  as  he  teaches.  Another  proof  will  be  found  below  in  next  Prop.,  Obs.  2.  We 
are  indeed  told  that  the  more  devout  and  spiritual,  such  as  Zacharias,  Simeon,  Joseph  of 
Arimathea,  expected  just  such  a  Kingdom,  but  this  is  not  only  unproven,  but  contrary  to 
the  general,  universal  expectation  of  the  Jews,  ProjDS.  20,  21,  40,  44,  etc.  Again,  he  de- 
clares that  "  the  Kingdom  consists  in  doing  the  will  of  the  Father  ;"  that  "  coming  to  the 
realization  of  God  in  His  sujjreme  Lordship  over  the  soul,  is  the  Kingdom  ;"  that  the 
Church,  "  held  together  by  a  personal  faith  in  Him,  did  not  constitiite  the  Kingdom  of 
God  in  the  most  pure  and  absolute  sense;"  that  "  the  external,  visible  Church  may 
shadow  forth  that  Kingdom,"  while  "the  true  Church  of  Christ"  (i.e.  as  we  understand 
him,  true  believers  in  union  with  Christ,  hence  the  invisible  Church)  "  is  identical  with 
the  true  Kingdom  of  God."  All  these  definitions  are  of  human  origin  ;  not  one  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Bible  (those  expressions  from  which  it  might  be  inferred  will  be  subse- 
quently examined  m  Props.  108,  109,  and  110),  and  every  one  of  them  mistakes  the  requi- 
site qualification  for  entrance  into  the  Kingdom,  for  the  Kingdom  itself.  Repentance, 
faith,  obedience,  union  with  Christ,  etc.,  are  essential  for  inheriting,  but  do  not  constitute 
the  Kingdom  itself.     The  covenant  forbids  it. 

Obs.  9.  The  church,  as  we  have  shown,  being  designed  to  gather  out  and 
raise  up  those  who  should  be  rulers  in,  inheritors  of  the  Kingdom,  it  is 
necessary  for  them  to  possess  certain  qualifications.  Those  just  mentioned 
are  specified,  and  therefore  true  believers,  instead  of  being  in  the  King- 
dom, are  represented  as  being  in  a  state  of  probation,  of  trial  and  testing. 
The  very  nature  of  probation  is  opposed  to  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  as 
given  by  the  Prophets,  and  hence  m  the  Epistles  believers  are  exhorted  to 
hold  fast  to  faith  and  obedience  that  they  might  attain  unto  the  Kingdom, 
1  Pet.  1  :  7  ;  2  Thess.  1  : 5-11,  etc. 

Obs.  10.  The  church,  instead  of  being  represented  as  a  Kingdom,  is  held 
up  to  us  as  a  struggling,  suffering  people.  Col.  1  :  24  ;  2  Tim.  1  :  8  ;»2 
Cor.  1  : 5  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  4  ;  2  Pet.  4  :  12, 13,  etc.  The  founders,  the  apos- 
tles, themselves  suffered.  Acts  14  :  20  and  9  :  16  ;  Eph.  3  :  13,  etc.  Saints 
are  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  Christ's  sufferings.  Acts  14  :  20  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5, 
etc.  Saints  have  endured  martyrdom,  and  as  such  are  still  waiting  until 
the  body  is  completed.  Take  the  descriptions  given  of  Christians  still 
groaning  (Rom.  8  :  23),  as  given  by  Delitzsch  {Ser.  Ap.  to  Sys.  Bib. 
Psyc),  in  their  trials,  temptations,  struggles  against  sin,  etc.,  and  how 
can  this  possibly  be  reconciled  with  the  idea  of  a  Kingdom  such  as  tlie 
Prophets  predicted  under  the  Messiah,  e.g.  Isa.  25,  etc.?  "  Pilgrims  and 
strangers"  in  the  Kingdom  as  promised,  is  something  incredible.  Tertul- 
lian  {Treat,  on  Prayer,  ch.  5),  teaching  that  the  Kingdom  in  the  Lord's 
prayer  is  not  the  church,  whilst  admitting,  as  we  do,  that  "  God  reigns  in 
whose  hand  is  the  heart  of  all  kings,"  locates  the  Kingdom,  petitioned 
for,  in  the  future  at  the  end  of  the  age,  and  in  view  of  t1ie  present  condl- 


618  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  93. 

Hon  of  believers  rebukes  those  who  pray  that  this  a|2^e  may  be  protracted, 
on  the  ground  that  such  a  petition  is  virtually  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  and  virtually  asks  for  a  delayment  or  detention  of  the 
Kingdom,  saying,  "  Our  wish  is  that  our  reign  be  hastened,  not  our  servi- 
tude protracted^''  etc.  Such  should  be  our  spirit  and  prayer.  For  "  the 
disciple  is  not  above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  Lord,"  and  if 
Christ,  whilst  on  earth,  instead  of  reigning  as  Son  of  Man,  suffered  for  us, 
etc.,  we  should,  in  our  pilgrimage,  anticipate  reproach  and  suffering  and 
not  reigning  or  the  enjoyment  of  a  Kingdom.  The  sad  history  of  the 
church  teaches  us  that  there  is  a  deej)  and  abiding  meaning  in  Luke  12  :  49, 
and  that  she  has  indeed  had  a  time  of  fire,  and  her  trials  indicate  that 
this  is  not  yet  the  Kingdom  of  peace  under  the  benign  reign  of  the  Messiah 
as  delineated  by  the  Prophets.  Individuals  truly  have  peace  with  God  in 
believing,  but  if  faithful  do  not  find  it  with  their  fellow-man,  the  world, 
or  even  in  a  great  extent  in  the  church  itself. 

Ohs.  11.  Those  modern  phrases  of  ministers  and  people,  "  of  extending, 
enlarging,  building  up,  etc.,  Christ's  Kingdom  "  are  not  to  he  found  in  the 
!N"ew.  Test.  They  are  the  result  of  viewing  the  church  as  the  Kingdom. 
The  absence  of  such  phraseology  and  eulogies  of  the  church  derived  from 
Millennial  descriptions  must  also  have  some  weight  with  the  student. 
For,  if  the  church  is  what  the  many  tell  us,  then  surely  we  ought  to  find 
the  portrayals  of  it  as  a  glorious  Kingdom  to  be  extended  by  believers  given 
by  inspired  men.  But  our  argument  logically  and  scripturally  shows  that 
such  language  from  them  would  be  fatal  to  the  covenant  itself.  Christ 
Himself  personally,  and  not  men,  can  build  up  this  Kingdom  at  the  ap- 
pointed time. 

Much  is  said  in  books,  sermons,  hymns^  prayers,  etc.,  under  the  impulse  of  misguided 
zeal,  respecting  the  Church's  building  up  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.  This  is  a  remnant 
derived  from  Popish  sources,  and  reminds  one  of  the  Spiritual  Exercises  of  Loyola  (Lit- 
tell's  Liv.  Age,  vol.  122,  p.  646),  commending  to  the  Order  "  the  contemplation  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ  Jesus  under  the  similitude  of  a  terrestrial  king,  calling  out  his  sub- 
jects to  the  strife."  The  believer  certainly  carries  on  a  warfare,  constantly  and  unremit- 
tinglj^  if  faithful,  against  temptation  and  evil,  and  in  behalf  of  the  truth  and  God's  ap- 
pointments, but  never  in  behalf  of  an  existing  Kingdom.  The  latter  is  never  asserted, 
and  is,  therefore,  of  human  origin.  What  must  we  say,  then,  when  bodies  of  Christians 
send  forth  circulars  and  proclamations  urging  believers  to  pray  for  the  upbuilding,  etc. 
of  a  present  existing  Kingdom,  when  in  fact  none  exists  in  the  sense  they  suppose,  or, 
when  an  official  oath  is  required  of  ministers  (as  in  Prussia,  established  in  1815,  and  re- 
newed  in  1835),  in  which  they  swear  that  they  will  "extend  in  my  congregation  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  and  of  my  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ,"  when  such  a  Kingdom  is 
given  by  the  Father  (Prop.  83)  to  Jesus  at  (Prop.  66)  His  Sec.  Advent?  Strange  where 
man's  wisdom,  if  the  covenants  are  forsaken,  leads  him  !  Such  a  mode  of  procedure  is 
unbecoming  the  eminent  divines  who  have,  unreflectingly,  indorsed  it,  and  may  safely 
be  left  to  others,  as  e.g.  Mormons  ;  for  so  Miss  Eliza  R.  Snow,  the  Mormon  Prophetess 
in  the  poem  "  Our  Prophet,  Brigham  Young  :' ' 

"  Help  him  to  found  thy  Kingdom 
In  majesty  and  power,"  etc. 

Ohs.  12.  The  church  is  not  this  Kingdom  of  prophecy,  because  the 
establishment  of  the  church  does  7iot  meet  the  conditions  of  the  prophecy 
respecting  the  period  of  suffering,  etc.,  preceding  the  Kingdom.  Notice 
(1)  the  views  of  the  Jews  (Van  Oosterzee,  Theol.  of  N.  T.,  p.  53),  that 
they  expected  the  Messiah  to  come  in  a  time  of  great  trial  ;  (2)  this 
derived  from  the  declaration  of  the  Prophets,  as  e.g.  Zech.   14  ;  Dan.  7 


•Prop.  93.]  the  theocratic  kiin^gdom.  619 

and  12  ;  this  the  language  also  of  Jesus  to  the  Pharisees^  Luke  17,  Matt. 
24  ;  (3)  but  instead  of  war,  etc.,  as  portrayed  by  Zech.  and  others,  the 
Christian  Church  was  established  in  a  time  of  peace.  The  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  was  afterward  witnessed.  This  period  of  general  peace  is  much 
admired  and  lauded  by  writers,  and  justly  so,  but  their  inquiries  in  this 
direction  only  proves  the  more  conclusively  that  the  church  cannot  he  sub- 
stituted for  the  J) r edict ed  Kingdom,  inasmuch  as  the  very  commencement 
of  the  former  is  not  in  accord  with  what  is  prophesied  of  the  latter. 

If  the  student  refers  to  Props.  115,  123,  133,  147,  160,  161,  162,  163,  etc.,  he  will  find 
the  Scriptures  relating  to  the  period  of  war,  suffering,  etc.,  just  preceding  the  establish- 
ment of  the  covenant  Messianic  Kingdom,  showing  that  there  is  a  wide  and  material 
difference  between  the  First  and  Second  Advents.  And  may  it  be  most  reverently  said, 
that  this  very  distinction  of  the  condition  of  things  as  witnessed  at  the  First  Advent,  and 
as  shall  be  observed  at  the  Second,  is  one  of  those  incidental  but  forcible  proofs  of  an 
all-pervading  Plan  which  God  purposes  to  complete. 

Ols.  13.  That  such  a  Kingdom  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  Christian 
Church  appears  also  from  the  views  entertained  by  our  opponents  of  the 
general  judgment.  If  the  judgment  exists  in  the  form  and  manner  given 
hij  them,  and  the  believers,  as  well  as  unbelievers,  are  to  be  judicially 
tried  at  the  end  of  the  world,  etc.,  then  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  such  a 
judgment  Avith  present  admittance  into  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  the  Scriptures  assure  us  that  entrance  into  by  inherit- 
ing the  Kingdom  \s  inconsistent  icith  a  future  judging  of  such  persons. 
For  such  admittance  is  represented  as  a  reivard  for  previous  well-doing 
and  results  from  an  investigation  and  approval  of  character  (Matt.  25  :  34  ; 
Luke  22  :  29,  30  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5,  etc.). 

Ohs.  14.  Those  who  believe  that  the  church  is  the  Kingdom,  differ  widely 
among  themselves  as  to  ivhen  it  was  established  and  in  ivhat  it  consists. 
As  we  have  repeatedly  seen,  the  time  of  its  commencement  varies,  and  a 
copious  variety  of  definitions  exist.  This  in  itself  would  be  undecisive,  as 
differences  in  opinion  may  exist,  and  yet  the  truth  may  be  in  some  one  of 
them,  but  such,  when  they  are  found  in  tlie  same  party,  clearly  show  that 
with  tliem  the  subject  is  more  or  less  involved  in  obscurity,  giving  rise  to 
numerous  conceptions  of  it.  One  theory  steadfastly  adhered  to  indicates 
at  least  ttnity,  whilst  several  feebly  conjoined,  or  antagonistic,  manifests 
Aveakness.  If  we  take  the  descriptions  of  the  prophets  and  covenant 
promises,  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  should 
possess  such  cliaracteristics  that  its  commencement  cannot  be  definitely  and 
decisively  fixed,  and  that  its  meaning  cannot  be  precisely  given.  If  we 
look  at  the  prophetic  announcements  of  the  conspicuous  nature,  etc., 
of  the  Kingdom,  it  seems  incredible  that  it  should  occupy  the  indefinite 
position  assigned  to  the  church. 

As  soon  as  spiritualizing  is  applied  to  the  Kingdom,  then  antagonistic  interpretations 
and  opposite  definitions  are  given,  until  we  have  in  the  s^me  person  two,  five,  ten,  and 
even  twenty  different  ones  (see  Prop.  3).  This  is  the  case  with  even  the  most  recent 
writers,  so  that  e.g.  one  (Van  Oosterzee)  makes  Christ  the  Founder  of  this  Kingdom  at 
His  First  Advent,  and  another  (Thompson)  has  Christ  only  reviving  what  previously  al- 
ways existed.  The  utmost  latitude  is  given  to  generalities,  which  mean  nothing,  and 
qualifications  for  the  Kingdom  (and  even  the  Gospel,  preaching,  etc.)  are  elevated  into 
the  Kingdom  itself.  Surely  all  this — in  the  light  of  positive  prediction  that  the  King- 
dom when  established  is  something  recognizable  by  all  men,  something  that  all  will 


620  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  93. 

acknowledge  as  indisputable  in  its  manifestation — should  prevent  us  from  accepting  this 
Origenistic  view  of  the  Church). 

OI?s.  15.  Making  the  church  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  a  plain  violation  of 
some  important  rules  of  interpretation.  Thus,  e.g.  take  those  given  by 
Home  (Introd.,  voL  1,  p.  393)  on  the  doctrinal  interpretation  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  we  have  a  constant  disregard  paid  to  rules  1,  3,  5,  6,  10, 
and  11,  and  (p.  407)  to  rules  1,  2,  and  3.  For,  as  already  repeatedly 
intimated,  the  view  so  generally  entertained  respecting  the  church  is  one 
of  pure  inference,  whilst  the  general  tenor  concerning  the  Kingdom,  the 
covenant  and  predictions  in  which  it  is  specially  discussed  are  practically 
ignored,  preference  being  given  to  a  few  isolated  passages  (easily  recon- 
cilable with  the  general  analogy),  or  to  parabolic  captions,  which,  in  the 
nature  of  the  case,  must  only  be  explained  in  the  light  of  the  more  ex- 
tended and  detailed  accounts  given  of  the  Kingdom.  Besides  this,  our 
doctrine  is  the  only  one  which  preserves  a  consistency  in  the  Old  Test,  idea 
of  the  Kingdom  as  held  by  the  pious  Jews,  as  preached  by  John  and  the 
Disciples,  as  covenanted,  and  which  does  not  degrade  the  ancient  worthies 
into  an  ignorant  or  mistaken  people  ;  interpreting  as  it  does  the  Biblical 
Yiew  of  the  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  ancient  language,  expecta- 
tions, covenant,  preaching,  etc.,  and  not  with  the  Origenistic  ideas  and 
more  modern  modes  of  thought  and  spiritualizing. 

Consequently  we  must  logically  and  Scripturally  reject  any  theory,  no  matter  by 
whom  advocated,  which  would  make  the  Church,  or  religion,  or  piety,  or  the  GosiDel,  or 
the  dispensation,  or  the  qualifications  for  eternal  blessedness,  equivalent  to  the  Mes- 
sianic Kingdom.  Covenant,  i^roi^hecy,  provisionary  measures,  fulfilment,  ancient  faith, 
all  forbid  it.  The  Church,  however  exceedingly  precious  and  necessary,  is  in  no  sense 
the  Kingdom,  being  simply  preparatory  for  the  Kingdom.  Sustained  as  it  is  by  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  ;  upheld  as  it  is  by  the  presence  and  authority  of  the  Head,  it  has 
not  the  characteristics  of  the  promised  Kingdom.  It  is  sad  to  find  that  men  who  exert  a 
wide  influence  upon  theological  teaching  do  not  discriminate  in  this  matter,  as  e.g.  illus- 
trated in  Kobinson's  Greek  N.  T.  Die,  which  makes  the  Kingdom  to  be  the  Cliristian 
dispensation,  and  then  a  principle  in  the  heart,  and  then  a  people  under  the  influence  of 
holiness,  and  then  to  be  perfected  at  Christ's  Kingdom.  (Comp.  e.g.  for  reply  to  such 
places  as  Prop.  59,  Obs.  8  ;  Prop.  65,  Obs.  2  ;  Prop.  68,  Obs.  1  ;  Prop.  66,  Obs.  i  ;  Props. 
67  and  70,  etc.)  Such  definitions  overlook  the  most  simple  statements  in  reference  to 
this  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  that  this  Kingdom  is  allied  with  a  Coming  of  the  Messiah— not  in 
humiliation,  but  in  glory  ;  with  a  restoration — not  dispersion — of  the  Jewish  nation  ; 
with  a  completed  gathering  of  the  saints,  etc. 


Prop.  94.]  the  theocratic  kijs-gdom.  621 


PnoposiTioisr  94.  The  overlooking  of  the  postponement  of  this 
Kingdom  is  a  fundamental  mistake^  and  a  fruitful  source 
of  error  in  many  systems  of  Theology. 

One  of  the  most  important  events  connected  with  the  history  of 
Jesus  (Props.  58,  QQ,  etc.)  is  entirely  ignored,  by  the  multitude  ;  an 
event,  too,  plainly  stated^  and  upon  which  result  fearful  (to  the 
Jews)  and  merciful  (to  the  Gentiles)  consequences.  This  remark- 
able event,  interwoven  into  the  very  life  of  Jesus  as  a  controlling 
force,  is  the  postponement  of  the  once  tendered  Kingdom  to  the 
Sec.  Advent. 

Ols.  1.  This  doctrine,  noticed  by,  and  influencing  the  faith  and  hope 
of  the  Primitive  Church,  is  now,  under  spiritualizing  and  mystical  ascend- 
ency, passed  by  in  numerous  Commentaries,  Lives  of  Christ,  Systems  of 
Divinity,  Introductions  to  Theology,  Histories  of  Doctrine,  Practical  The- 
ology, and  Exegetical  Works,  y?^6'/  as  if  it  had  no  existe?ice.  The  fact  is, 
that  many  writers,  with  their  minds  prejudiced  and  blinded  by  a  previous 
training,  never  even  suspected  its  existence  ;  for,  following  the  lead  of 
others,  swayed  by  previously  given  systems  of  belief  and  exegetical  indorse- 
ments by  favorite  authors,  they  receive  their  guidance  without  mistrust  as 
in  accordance  with  the  truth. 

The  leaders  themselves  proceed  thus  :  overlooking  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  assuming  that  a  Kingdom  was  somehow  established,  they  proceed,  one  in  this  fash- 
ion and  another  in  that,  to  find  this  Kingdom  somewhere,  if  not  visibly  at  least  invisi- 
bly, associated  with  the  Church  or  the  Divine  Sovereignty.  In  their  estimation,  and  as- 
sumption of  an  unproven  theory,  a  Kingdom  must  be  erected,  if  it  takes  four,  six,  eight 
or  more  Kingdoms  in  different  stages  and  places,  with  various  meanings  attached 
(comp.  Prop.  3),  to  make  it  out,  and  this  moulds  tlie  interpretation  of  Scripture,  for 
every  passage  not  in  harmony  with  it  must  be  spiritualized  until  it  is  forced  into  an  agree- 
ment. And  this  creature  of  pure  fancy,  so  antagonistic  to  the  covenanted  Kingdom, 
which  they  are  pleased  to  give  the  title  of  "  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  some  even,  like  the 
author  of  Ecce  Homo  (p.  23),  consider  "  greater  than  prophecy  had  ever  attributed  to  the 
Messiah  Himself."  In  brief  :  the  Prophets  and  the  Covenants  are  "  too  materialistic," 
"  too  Jewish"  for  this  re/?ned  spiritually  conceived  Kingdom.  Alas!  men,  eminent  for 
piety,  ability,  and  usefulness,  materially  aid  in  this  wide  departure  from  the  primitive 
truth.  While  some  of  those  theories  form  pleasant  pictures,  and  are  finely  portrayed, 
still,  like  some  of  the  imaginary  paintings  of  the  old  masters,  they  have  no  reality  upon 
which  they  are  based — they,  however  widely  sjjread  and  deejoly  rooted,  are  only  the  re- 
sults of  human  suppositions.  The  writer  has  often  been  saddened  to  find  believers, 
from  whom  he  has  derived  much  valuable  information  on  various  subjects  w^hen  enter- 
ing into  the  discussion  of  the  progress  of  doctrine,  entirety  discard  the  Primitive  Church 
view  as  if  it  had  never  been  so  generally  and  publicly  entertained,  although  the  post- 
ponement forms  the  basis  of  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  the  establishment  of  the  Ch. 
Church,  and  the  distinctive  Chiliastic  views  of  the  early  Church  (referring  the  Kingdom, 
etc.,  to  the  Sec.  Advent).  Some  writers  even  suppose  that  the  preaching  of  Jesus  as  the 
Christ  is  the  present  realization  of  the  Kingdom  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  They  illogically 
make  the  "  preaching  of  the  things  concerning  the  Kingdom"  the  equivalent  of  the  King- 
dom itself. 


622  THE  THEOCRATIC  KINGDOM.  [Prop.  94, 

Ols.  2.  A  truth  so  fundame^ital  to  a  correct  understanding  of  the  Doc- 
trine of  the  Kingdom,  is  buried  under  a  load  of  prejudice,  preconceived 
opinion,  mysticism,  etc.  Infidel  and  Orthodox,  unbelievers  and  believers, 
alike  maintain  on  this  point  a  friendly  relation.  Thus  e.g.  Renan  {Life 
of  Jes2is)  makes  Jesus  set  up  an  ideal  Kingdom,  which  is  to  appear  im- 
mediately, and  which,  he  tells  us,  is  established.  Dr.  McCosh,  in  replying 
to  Renan  {Christ  and  Fositiv.,  p.  243),  admits  the  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  designates  it  a  spiritual  one.  Rejecting  the  early  church 
view  (founded  on  the  plain,  unmistakable,  grammatical  sense  of  Scripture, 
and  received  directly  from  inspired  men),  which  found  a  profound  meaning 
in  this  postponement,  and  heartily  embracing  the  Origenistic  interpreta- 
tion, which  sadly  mars  the  covenants  and  recognizes  no  postponement, 
this  must  necessarily  have  a  moulding  influence,  a  coloring  power  over  all 
related  subjects.  One  of  the  most  radical  defects  in  modern  theology  is 
found  on  this  point,  and,  so  long  as  persevered  in,  certain  avenues  of 
knowledge  are  closed  ;  mystical  interpretation  ;  vain  attempts  to  conciliate 
the  Divine  utterances  with  prevailing  theories  of  church  and  state ; 
labored,  unavailing  efforts  to  trace  a  methodical  progress  in  the  teaching  of 
the  Saviour  and  disciples ;  spiritualistic  applications  which  effectually 
degrade  the  ancient  faith  of  the  church  ;  the  overshadowing  and  ignor- 
ing of  highly  important  truth — these  and  other  evils  attend  such  a  posi- 
tion. Thousands  of  volumes  attest  to  the  fact  that,  with  tliis  link  missing, 
it  is  in  vain  to  form  a  complete,  perfect  chain  in  the  Divine  Purpose,  and 
at  the  same  time  preserve  the  integrity  of  the  preaching  of  John,  Jesus, 
and  the  disciples. 

The  sad  consequences  of  overlooking  this  postponement  is  e.g.  duly  exemplified  in 
the  work  {John  on  the  Apoc.  of  the  N.  Test.)  of  liev.  Desprez  (commended  by  Drs.  Noyes, 
Williams,  and  Stanley).  This  writer,  no  doubt  urged  on  by  the  critical  attacks  of  unbe- 
lief in  this  direction,  fully  and  frankly  acknowledges  all  that  we  have  stated  concerning 
the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  and  its  expectation  by  the  apostles  and  their  immediate 
successors  ;  but  overlooking  the  plain  and  distinctive  Scriptures  which  portray  its  post- 
ponement, he  arrives  precisely  at  the  same  conclusion  with  the  destructive  critics,  viz.  : 
that  all  this  matter  referring  to  a  Jewish  Kingdom,  to  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ,  and 
to  the  final  re-establishment,  must  be  ruled  out  as  no  part  of  the  Word  of  God  (being  the 
result  of  Jewish  prejudice,  misapprehension,  etc.),  because  the  lapse  of  time  has  fully 
demonstrated  that  nothing  of  the  kind  occurred  as  they  expected.  Alas  !  when  accred- 
ited ministers  of  the  Gospel  give  themselves  up  to  such  fearful  destructive  and  delusive 
criticism  to  the  delight  of  unbelievers  !  Of  course,  such  an  attitude  at  once  eliminates 
a  large  proportion  of  the  teaching  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  utterly  rejects  the  Apoca- 
lypse as  revolving  around  a  chimera,  sets  aside  the  covenants  and  God's  oath  as  untrust- 
worthy, and  overshadows  all  the  remainder  with  a  heavy  pall  of  doubt.  If  Desprez  is 
correct,  what  confidence  can  we  possibly  have  in  the  apostles,  or  in  the  utterances  of  any 
of  the  inspired  writers  ;  for  if  in  error  on  the  leading  important  subject  of  the  King- 
dom, why  not^also  in  error  on  the  resurrection,  the  atonement,  and,  in  brief,  all  other 
doctrines?  No  !  never  can  such  outrageous,  dishonoring  interpretation  be  received,  al- 
though Desprez  boasts  of  a  phalanx  of  interlaced  shields  (of  proof),  for  it  lacks  coherency 
in  that  it  totally  ignores  the  proof  given  by  these  writers  themselves  respecting  the  post- 
ponement of  the  Kingdom.  The  past  is  no  criterion  in  the  sense  alleged  by  Desprez  (al- 
though it  proves  the  correctness  of  the  postponement),  and  he  had  better  wait  until 
"  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  "  are  fulfilled  before  he  thus  decides.  If  Gentile  domination 
ceases,  if  the  Jewish  nation  is  restored,  and  Jerusalem  is  no  longer  downtrodden,  etc., 
and  then  the  Kingdom  does  not  come,  it  will  be  in  place  to  receive  his  criticism  ;  until 
then  it  amounts  to  nothing. 

Ohs.  3.  The  rejection  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  is  a  rejec- 
tion of  the  only  hey  that  can  unlock  the  singular  and  otherwise  mysterious 


Prop.  94.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  623 

sayino-s  of  Jesns.  The  consistency  of  the  Divine  narration  of  Christ's 
Life,1ind  of  the  faith  and  conduct  of  His  disciples  before  and  after  His 
death,  is  alone  preserved  by  its  adoption.  We  have  learned  and  able 
treatises  on  this  life  of  Jesus,  which  give  varied  and  subtle  theories  in 
order  to  reconcile  events  and  sayings,  and  to  preserve  the  unity  of  Purpose, 
but  every  one  of  them,  even  those  written  by  believers  (as  Neander's, 
Lano-e's  Cave's,  Fleetwood's,  Milner's,  Pressense's,  Taylor's,  Farrar's, 
Beeclier's,  etc.),  must,  more  or  less,  resort  to  the  favorite  "  germ"  theory, 
to  "  a  hidden  leaven  development,"  by  which  is  understood  that  the  truth 
is  at  first  concealed  or  enveloped  in  language  which— if  understood  as  it 
reads,  according  to  the  letter,  is  error— the  ''  growing  consciousness  of 
the  church,  by  a  spiritualizing  process  through  such  men  as  Origen, 
Augustine,  Jerome,  etc.,  is  to  bring  forth  m  its  developed  form,  having 
discarded  "  the  husk."  * 

Volumes  some  from  most  gifted,  learned,  find  pious  writers,  are  filled  with  just  such 
mvstical  aid  philosophical  reasoning,  and  all  arising  from  a  misconcerAion  of  the  cove- 
nanted Kingdom  and  an  ignorlnq  of  its  postponement.  Another  class  of  learned  writers, 
reiecting  in  part  the  Origenistic  principle  of  finding  a  concealed  meaning  or  '™ther 
sense,  subjecting  the  New  Test,  to  a  searching  grammatical  interpretation  hnd  that  such 
a  Kingdom,  as  we  argue  for,  was  promised,  preached,  and  fondly  expected,  but,  overlook- 
Lgthis  postponement  so  explicitly  declared,  tell  us  that  Jesus,  failing  m  the  designed 
restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  (expecting  but  not  receiving  aid  through 
angelic  interference-so  Renan),  He  then  contented  Himself,  under  the  pressure  of  cir- 
cumstances, to  sacrifice  His  life  and  found  a  spiritual  Kingdom.  ^^"^^  f'^^l^l^fT'- 
huttel  Bnaments  pub.  by  Lessing,  etc.)  declare  that  Jesus  m  His  efforts  to  establish  a 
Kgdom!  fau£  the  popula^  support,  miserably  perished,  the  victim  o    ambition 

Becker  aA  his  Univ   His.  for  the    Young,  quoted  by  Hurst,  His.  Bat,  p.  190   thinks  that 
Jels  received  the  idea  of  putting  forth  Hii  claims  from  John  and  John's  father,  and  that 
an  arrangement  was  made  between  them  to  take  advantage  of  the  predictions  relating  to 
the  Messiah  in  the  Old  Test.,  with  the  same  result.     Bahrdt,  and  many  others  recently, 
exult  and  triumph  over  this  fancied  interpretation,  without  in  the  least  noticing  how  .he 
txpressive  language  and  predictions  of  Jesus,  in  postponing  this  Kingdom,  refutes  their 
scandalous  and  imdictive  assertions.     What  must  we  think  of.  men  who  only  take  as 
much  of  the  Record  suitable  for  the  purpose  of  condemnation,  and  carefully  lea%e  unno- 
ticed the  very  testimony  included  in  the  same?  1      ,    il     •  4.U^ 
It  may  be  su-estive,  if  not  instructive,  to  contrast  two  classes,  who  both  ignore  the 
reasons^assign?d  for  and  the  predictions  of  Jesus  relating  to   this  postponement.     In 
Ice  Homo,  the  writer  informs  us  :  "  He  (Jesus)  conceived  the  Theocracy  restored  as  i^ 
had  been  in  the  time  of  David,  with  a  visible  monarch  at  its  head,  and  that  monaich 
mmself""  Christ  announced  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic  Monarchy,  and  presented 
Himself'  to  the  nation  as  their  King  ;  yet,  when  we  compare  the  P^f^^i^n  He  assumed 
with  that  of  an  ancient  Jewish  king,  roefail  fo^.d  anypomt  ^^  ^es^,^]'-^^^^  ...  ^^^^^^^ 
consider  the  reply  of  Ecce  Deus  (p.  333)  to  Ecre  Homo,  viz.  :  that  the  Davidic  Kingdom 
was  on?y  -  %S            as  if  the  covenant  included  a  type)  "  of  government  and  purpose 
which  ife  b^^nd  the  merely  political  horizon."     And  the  writer  argues    rom  the  tact 
rhatLcLse\t?cha  Restoration  was  not  effected  at  the  First  Advent  and  since,  Jesus 
ne'r  annrnceS^^^^^                             the  Davidic  Monarchy  (i.e.  the  language  descriptiye 
ofTt  is  '^?ypical  "  of  something  else),  and  then,  satisfied  with  his  i//o.^;c«i  reason  ng   in 
his  own  fancy  triumphantly  concludes  :  ^^  It  the  facts  contradict  the  theory,  what  confi- 
d'cecanbeikcediS  the  theorist ?"     Precisely  so  :  &o//.  ^f  ^  ^f^^^^P  ^^^^^ 
eiven  by  Jestis  and  the  apostles  respecting  the  Kingdom,  and  not  content  ™  leav  ng 
theseoutof  the  question,  confess  that  their  unbelief  is  grounded  on  a  nonfulnlmentoi 
prophecy  and  prediction,  )nst  as  if  God  is  bound  to  fulfil  them,  not  -<^«.°^:^^^^°g    °  ^'^^^^^^ 
Purmseand  Time  but,  to  accommodate  Himself  to  their  mode  of  exercising  faith      Such 
wXs  had  be  to  wai    until  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  have  ended,  until  t^he  ekct  are 
™red  out   until  the  Sec.  Advent  arrives,  until  Christ's  intermediate  predic  ions  are 
fulfilled   before  rashly  -i^ing  us  those  conclusions.     We  see  from  this  what  estimate  to 
pt^e  onratnaH^ticL^ticism   which  concludes,  because  the  f^^^^^l^^^^Zt 
nanted,  predicted,  and  preached  was  not  at  once  reahzed  ;  that,  ^fter  all.  On  ists  relation, 
ship  to  the  Old  Test,  was  one  of  7nere  accommodation  to  circumstances;   and  this  is 


624  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  94. 

arrived  at  by  persistently  turning  away  from  Scripture,  which  tells  ns  why  it  has  not  yet 
been  realized  and  when  it  is  to  be  witnessed.  The  same  is  true  of  that  class,  who,  be- 
cause the  Kingdom  did  not  appear  in  the  form  grammatically  exj^ressed,  declare  that  the 
language  applicable  to  it  must  either  be  understood  spiritually  or  as  pertaining  to  the 
Church — i.e.  a  Kingdom,  in  some  form,  visible  or  invisible,  must  be  recognized  to  suit 
preconceived  views. 

Obs.  4.  Let  the  student  reflect  over  the  singular  attitude  of  the  Primitive 
Church,  viz.  :  in  view  of  this  very  postponement  hiying  the  greatest  st7'ess 
upon  Eschatology  or  doctrine  of  the  last  things,  looking  forward  with  hope 
and  joy  to  a  speedy  Advent,  the  re-establishment  of  the  glorious  Theocratic 
Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  etc.,  and  can  such  a  state  of  things  be  satis- 
factorily exjjlained  to  take  phice  under  inspired  teachers  and  their  imme- 
diate successors  without  condemning  tlie  doctrinal  j^osition  of  the  early 
cliurch  and  refleeting  upon  the  founders  of  the  church,  unless  the  same 
doctrinal  teaching  is  accepted  ak  Scriptural?  Leaving  the  history  of  the 
doctrine  for  future  reference,  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present  to  say  that  the 
idea  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  had  a  most  powerful  influence, 
for  at  least  three  centuries,  in  moulding  the  doctrinal  views  of  the  church. 
Hagenbach  (His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  74),  in  summing  up  the  general  doctri- 
nal character  of  the  early  church  period,  indicates  tliis  feature,  when  he 
says  :  ''The  doctrine  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ruled  the  first  j^eriod. 
This  turned  upon  the  point  that  the  Lord  was  tivice  to  come:  once  in  His 
manifestation  in  the  flesh,  and  in  His  future  coming  in  judgment." 

It  has  been  remarked  by  many  (as  e.g.  Ecce  Homo,  p.  22),  that  at  the  First  Advent 
there  was  a  general  expectation  that  the  Messiah  would,  by  an  irresistible  and  super- 
natural exertion  of  power,  crush  His  enemies  and  establish  His  Kingdom,  and  that 
"  this  appeared  legibly  written  in  the  prophetical  books  ;"  that  He  was  rejected  by  His 
countrymen  because  He  refused  to  put  forth  such  power,  etc.  We  have  seen,  under  vari- 
ous Propositions,  why  He  refused  to  exhibit  such  power.  The  time  had  not  yet  arrived, 
for  the  moral  conditions  imposed  were  not  observed  by  the  nation.  But  notice  :  the 
Primitive  Church,  instead  of  spiritualizing  those  prophecies,  only  postponed  the  fulfilment 
to  the  ISec.  Advent^  the  traditional  doctrine,  the  general  expectation  derived  from  the 
prophets,  still  continued  in  the  Church,  only  allied  loith  the  Second  Coming  of  Jesus. 
The  apostles,  instead  of  correcting  this  opinion,  favor  it  by  speaking  of  Him  as  one  who, 
in  strict  accord  with  the  i^rophets,  shall  come  with  supernatural  power  to  destroy  His 
enemies,  etc.,  while  the  last  revelation  (the  Apoc.)  informs  us  that  He  will  come  "  to 
make  war,"  etc.  The  student,  if  judicious,  will  carefully  consider  this  correspondence, 
and  seek  for  its  basis  where  alone  it  is  to  be  found,  viz.- :  in  the  Scriptures  themselves. 
This  meets  the  objections  urged  in  various  works,  as  e.g.  Hengstenberg's  The  Jews  and 
the  Ch.  Church. 

Obs,  5.  Writers  commenting  on  the  passage,  "  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the 
truth,  it  is  good  for  you  that  I  go  away  ;  for  if  I  go  not  away  tlie  Comforter 
will  not  come  unto  you,-\  etc.  (John  16  :*?),  have  much  to  say  concerning 
the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  an  advance  doctrinally,  etc.,  but  fail  to 
tell  us  luhy  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  special  (for  He  had  been  previously 
present),  manifestation  is  thus  announced,  could  not  come  unless  Jesus  went 
away.  This  was  necessary,  because  the  sinfulness  of  the  nation  had  post- 
poned the  predicted  promised  Coming  of  the  Spirit  with  the  Kingdom 
(comp.  Prop.  170),  hence  a  special  interposition  of  the  Saviour  was  requi- 
site both  to  prepare  tlie  way  for  the  gathering  out  of  the  elect  and  to  give  an 
assurance  of  a  future  fulfilment  by  an  inchoate  fulfilment  secured  through 
the  obedience  and  exaltation  of  Christ. 

This  also  enables  us  to  answer  the  question  proposed  by  unbelief,  why  Jesus  Christ 
does  not  personally  manifest  Himself,  at  least  now  and  then,  to  remove  the  unbelief  of 


PkOP.  94.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  625 

the  world.  The  reply  is,  that  having  been  rejected  by  the  covenanted  elect  nation,  and 
that  nation  suffering  the  consequences  of  such  rejection,  the  Kingdom  itself  being  post- 
poned until  the  time  arrives  for  the  removal  of  the  inflictions  imposed,  the  withdrawal 
of  the  Messiah  is  part  of  that  punishment  entailed.  Until  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are 
ended,  an  open,  visible  manifestation  cannot  be  reasonably  expected.  Besides  this,  the 
engrafting  of  Gentiles  is,  as  we  have  shown,  done  on  the  principle  of  faith  and  not  of 
sight.  It  ill  becomes  the  dignity  of  the  King  to  appear  before  the  time  fixed  for  the  ces- 
sation of  punishment  and  the  gathering  out  of  an  incorporated  people  by  faith.  Killen 
( The  Anc.  Church,  p.  46)  asks  the  question,  why  so  little  notice  is  taken  of  the  seventy  in 
the  New  Test.,  and  answers,  because  it  was  typical  or  symbolical  of  the  future  transmis- 
sion of  the  Gospel.  They  could,  however,  be  no  type  of  the  future,  owing  to  their  exclu- 
sive mission  and  message.  The  answer  is  found  in  the  speedy  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom  ending  their  mission  to  the  nation,  and  a  sufficient  amount  of  evidence  being 
produced  to  show  both  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  and  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah, 

Ohs.  6.  The  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  (with  the  events  connected 
therewith),  being  the  truth  itself  joining  other  truths  in  an  intelligent  and 
satisfactory  manner, — is  admirably  adapted  to  meet  and  remove  the  objec- 
tions of  the  Jews.  The  Jews,  abiding  by  the  plain  statements  of  the  Old 
Test.,  survey  the  various  prevailing  theories,  advanced  respecting  a  j^resent 
existing  Messianic  Kingdom,  and  finding  them  one  and  all  antagonistic  to 
the  covenanted  and  predicted  promises,  reject  Christianity  itself, — as  if 
this  humanly  inteiyolated  view  was  a  part  of  Christianity  (which  it  was  not 
tor  the  first  three  centuries).     Compare  Prop.  193. 

Thus  e.g.  the  objection  urged  by  Eabbi  Crool  {Restoration  of  Israel),  against  Jesus  as 
the  Messiah,  is,  that  He  did  not  sit  on  David's  throne  or  set  up  the  Davidic  Kingdom  as 
it  was  predicted  by  the  prophets  and  as  covenanted  ;  and  also,  that  the  Jews,  instead  of  the 
promised  peace,  joy,  exaltation,  etc.,  under  the  Messianic  Kingdom  (if  it  really  com- 
menced at  or  immediately  after  the  First  Advent),  found  trouble,  suffering,  dispersion, 
etc.  Now  to  such  objections,  the  postponement,  with  the  Scripturally  given  reasons  for  its 
occurrence,  affords  the  only  satisfactory  reply,  seeing  that  we  leave  the  covenanted  King- 
dom intact,  the  covenants  and  predictions  just  as  they  are  written,  and  the  promises  to 
the  Jewish  nation,  in  its  covenanted  relationship,  to  he  yet  fulfilled  in  all  their  greatness 
and  glory. 

Obs.  7.  This  acceptation  of  the  taught  postponement  effectually  removes 
the  chief  argument  against,  what  some  are  pleased  to  call,  "  prophetical 
literalism."  Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  495,  Ap.  F.)  attempts  to  make  the 
charge  preferred  against  his  system  (viz.:  that  it  is  calculated  to  repel 
Jews),  to  recoil  upon  us  by  boldly  asserting  that  '*'  prophetical  literalism, 
essentially  Jewish,"  aids  the  Jews  in  rejecting  Christ,  because  we  claim 
that  many  things  referring  to  Christ  still  remain  unfulfilled.  (Comp.  pre- 
ceding Obs.)  This  IS  unfounded  :  for  we  show  «  sufficiency,  already  ful- 
filled, literally,  in  Jesus  to  justify  His  being  received  as  the  Messiah,  while 
the  main  leading  objections  relating  to  the  covenants,  the  Kingdom,  the 
covenanted  position  of  the  nation,  its  supremacy  as  predicted,  etc.,  are 
answered  by  us  without  a7iy  perversion  of  Scripture  under  the  plea  of  spirit- 
ualizing, accommodation,  a  better  sense,  etc.  The  proof  is  found  in  the 
conversions  effected  by  the  relative  systems. 

We  hold  to  the  covenants  as  given  to  the  Jews  ;  accept  of  the  predictions  received 
by  them  ;  indorse  as  they  did  the  literal  fulfilment  respecting  the  Kingdom,  so  that  w© 
are  not  guilty  of  that  spiritualizing  of  promises  into  a  vague  and  invisible  fulfilment  sa 
exceedingly  unsatisfactory  to  a  Jewish  mind.  We  do  not  take  the  promises  expressly 
given  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  heap  them,  without  regard  to  their  connection,  upon  the 
Gentiles.  Our  position,  and  the  proving  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  promise  in  the 
future  ;  our  showing  a  postponement  to  the  Second  Advent  of  predictions  especially  near 


626  THE   THEOCPwATIC    KINGDOM.  [PPwOP.  94. 

and  dear  to  the  Jewisli  heart,  must  necessarily  be  more  acceptable  to  Jewish  faith  than 
the  wholesale  disclaimers  of  popular  systems.  The  Jew  finds  in  our  system  of  belief  a 
harmony  with  the  language  of  Scripture  that  he  sees  in  no  other  ;  and  so  much  is  this 
the  case  that  many  Jews  have  accepted  of  the  Messiah  under  its  influence,  as  witnessed 
in  the  numerous  Jews  who  have  been  MUlenaricms,  publishing  Millenarian  works  and  edit- 
ing Millenarian  periodicals.  Indeed  Fairbairn  breaks  the  force  of  his  own  objection,  for 
if  our  "  prophetical  literalism  is  essentially  Jewish"  it  cannot  be  hostile  to,  but  must  be 
favorable  to,  the  Jews.  Besides  this,  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  when  once  the  principles  of 
interpretation  of  the  Alexandrian  school  ^indorsed  by  Fairbairn)  predominated,  conver- 
sion among  the  Jews  became  fewer  and  fewer,  until  finally,  under  the  spiritualizing  sys- 
tem, they  for  centuries  almost  entirely  ceased.  And  it  was  only  after  a  more  literal  in- 
terpretation of  the  Bible  was  revived,  that  conversions  among  them  increased.  (Comp. 
works  of  McNeil,  Margoliouth,  Brooks,  Bicheno,  etc.,  and  sermons  before  the  London 
Soc.  for  the  Conv.  of  Jews  by  Cooper,  etc.,  etc.) 

Obs.  8.  The  most  amiable  piety,  as  well  as  the  grossest  unbelief,  is  alike 
arrayed  against  an  acknowledgment  of  this  postponement,  owing  to  the 
pervading  influence  of  the  church-Kingdom  theories.  It  is  observable  that 
the  former  even  in  its  comments  on  things  which  are  utterly  inconsistent 
with  the  state  of  the  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom  (which  the  prophets 
make  one  of  peace,  release  from  suffering,  deliverance  from  enemies,  etc.), 
endeavors,  by  the  force  of  the  sheerest  inference,  to  conciliate  such  a  state 
of  things  now  existing  with  the  prophetic  delineation  of  a  Kingdom  in  a 
peaceful  and  flourishing  existence. 

Thus,  to  illustrate  :  Steir  (Lange's  Com.  Mait.,  vpl.  p.  199,  Doc.  1)  attributes  the  in- 
timations of  Jesus  that  His  discij^les  must  endure  persecution,  tribulation,  etc.,  to  the 
fact  that  a  Kingdom  very  different  to  the  one  expected  must  intervene.  But  where  is  this 
intervening  Kingdom,  combined  with  suffering,  etc.,  covenanted  or  predicted  ?  Jesus,  too, 
nowhere  says  that  His  followers  must  endure  tribulation  in  His  Kingdom ;  more  than 
this,  in  view  of  the  covenanted  and  predicted  blessings,  He  could  not  truthfully  say  it,  for 
one  single  utterance  of  this  kind  would  raise  up  an  irreconcilable  antagonism.  The  New 
Test,  perfectly  agrees  with  the  Old,  fully  sustains  the  gladdening  consistency,  by  attrib- 
uting to  and  associating  with  the  Messianic  Kingdom  only  happiness,  blessing,  honor, 
and  glory.  Once  to  be  in  the  Kingdom  is  freedom,  from  all  evil  and  deliverance  from  the 
curse.  The  peculiarity  has  already  been  noticed,  that  in  the  Old  Test.,  so  far  as  the 
Kingdom  is  concerned,  there  is  no  discrimination  between  the  First  and  Second  Advents. 
So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  if  we  had  only  the  Old  Test,  and  knew  nothing  of  the 
First  Advent,  as  separate  and  distinct  from  another,  we  also,  like  the  Jews,  would  be- 
lieve this  Kingdom  to  be  subsequent  to  His  First  Coming.  (We  have  shown  why  this 
feature  became  necessary,  because  of  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  at  the  First  Advent.) 
While  this  is  tr^^e,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  in  view  of  the  refusal  of  the 
nation  to  comply  with  the  required  moral  conditions,  indicates  what  coming  is  meant, 
not  the  coming  to  humiliation,  rejection,  and  death,  but  the  coming  in  glory.  We  are, 
therefore,  not  at  liberty  to  change  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  in  order  to  accommodate  it 
to  the  state  of  things  existing  during  this  period  of  postponement. 

Ohs.  9.  The  Kingdom  being  thus  postponed,  and  the  process  of  the 
gathering  out  of  the  elect  now  going  on,  is  sufficient  reason  why  no  addi- 
tional Revelation  is  necessary.  The  Apocalypse  of  John,  to  encourage  our 
faith  and  hope,  includes  all  that  is  additionally  required  to  be  known,  ap- 
propriately closing  the  direct  Divine  communications,  and  confirming  the 
voices  of  the  Prophets.  Jesus  Himself  refrained  from  penning  down  any- 
thing, contenting  Himself  with  the  testimony  of  chosen  witnesses,  because 
He  foresaw  that  such  writing,  if  given,  would  have  been  perverted  by  His 
enemies  and  employed  against  Himself  in  accusation  to  tlie  Eoman  power 
(as  was  even  done  through  His  reported  words). 

For  the  same  reason,  in  part,  the  Apocalypse  is  given  in  symbolical  language,  and  the 
apostles  (as  Paul  in  Thess.)  are  guarded  in  their  expressions.     After  the  reader  has 


PkOP.  94.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  627 

passed  over  our  entire  argument,  the  reader  will  find  abundant  reason  ichy  the  Kingdom 
is  mentioned  in  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  without  entering  into  the  si^ecific  details  given 
by  the  prophets,  and  ivhy  the  same  is  represented  under  symbolic  forms  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse. Taking  into  consideration  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  the  restored  Theocratic- 
Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  which  necessarily  embraces  a  restored  Jewish  nation,  etc., 
a  more  extended  and  detailed  notice  would  unnecessarily  (owing  to  this  postponement) 
have  excited  the  jealousy,  hostilitj',  and  persecution  of  the  Roman  Emi^ire. 

Obs.  10.  Jesiis  having  come  to  fulfil  the  Prophets,  and  that  fulfilment 
being  in  large  part  postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  statements  of  the 
Prophets  remain  and  include  in  them  a  sufficiency  of  information  needed. 
To  fully  know  what  His  mission  was,  and  how  it  will  be  eventually  real- 
ized, we  must  refer  not  merely  to  His  life,  to  the  preaching  and  testimony 
of  His  disciples,  but  also  to  what  the  Prophets  have  written,  ever  remem- 
bering that  the  covenants  form  the  basis  of  all  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom. 
From  these  united,  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  can  be  clearly  adduced. 

We  strongly  suspect  (giving  it  as  a  suggestion)  that  in  view  of  the  postponement, 
and  this  being  merely  a  preliminary  stage  to  the  final  ushering  in  of  His  Kingdom,  He, 
foreseeing  (as  has  happened)  how  the  words  of  the  Prophets  descriptive  of  this  Kingdom 
would  be  perverted  from  their  literal  meaning  and  torn  from  their  connection  to  sustain 
Church  and  hierarchical  claims — He,  foreknowing  how  His  own  words  as  reported  would 
be  changed  in  their  meaning  for  the  same  purpose,  left  as  little  as  possible  on  record 
indorsing  the  preliminary  nature  of  this  dispensation,  in  order  to  avoid  additional  per- 
version and  spiritualizing  of  language  ;  and  in  order,  above  all,  to  make  the  covenants, 
and  predictions  pertaining  thereto,  the  objects  of  continued  humble  faith  and  hope. 
The  prophecies  that  He  has  fulfilled,  the  testimony  of  Himself  and  disciples,  the  incorpo- 
ration of  all  this  in  a  regular  Divine  Plan  possessing  unity  of  Purpose,  and  which  is  only 
sustained  and  manifested  when  the  prophecies  which  He  is  to  fulfil  at  His  Sec.  Coming 
are  included,  evince  that  we  possess  a  sufficient  guide. 

Obs.  11.  By  this  postponement  the  special  Davidic  covenant  remains 
unfulfilled  (excepting  that  David's  Son  and  Lord  is  born,  and  qualified  for 
the  immortal  reign),  and  ^^  tlie  tabernacle  of  David  ^^  continues  ''' fallen 
down'''  and  *'  in  ruins,''' — "  The  house"  remains  "  desolate.'"  It  demands 
the  harshest  interpretation  to  deny  or  spiritualize  away  existing  facts. 
Yet  men,  involved  in  a  system  which,  of  necessity,  must  have  the  predicted 
Kingdom  in  actual  establishment,  endeavor  to  get  rid  of  all  this  in  the 
most  sninmary  way.  Thus  e.g.  take  any  prediction  relating  to  the  Messiah 
reigning  on  David's  throne  (as  e.g.  Isa.  9  :  7,  etc.),  and  see  hoiu  it  is  con- 
nected with  (1)  a  fearful  overthrow  of  the  nation,  preceding,  and  (2)  a 
deliverance  of  the  same  nation,  co7itemporaneoi(sly  with  the  reign.  Take 
prophecy  after  prophecy,  and  notice  hoiv  the  rule  of  David's  Son  is  insepa- 
rably edited  by  the  Prophets  with  the  Jews  nationcdly,  and  well  may  we 
stand  surprised  at  the  bold  presumption  which  rudely  severs  this  connec- 
tion made  by  inspired  men,  giving  the  curses  to  the  Jews  and  the  bless- 
ings (promised  to  the  same  nation),  to  Gentile  nations.  Why  such  an 
unjust  and  arbitrary  interpretation  ?  Simply  because  the  Alexandrian- 
monkish  theory,  having  the  predicted  Kingdom  unpostponed,  must  in 
some  way  bend  these  prophecies  to  suit  its  pre-determined  condition. 
Alas  !  great  and  good  men  have  been  engaged  in  tliis  destructive  work, 
forcibly  reminding  us  that  "  the  wisdom  of  man  is  foolishness  ivith  God" 
and  that  "  tlie  things  of  God"  can  only  be  obtained  by  observing  what  the 
Spirit  has  recorded  and  retaining  ivhat  is  ivritten  unaltered. 

We  give  numerous  illustrations  from  eminent  men,  who,  with  an  honest  dej^l^^^^'^ 
honor  Jesus,  deliberately  change  the  divine  record  of  facts.     Unbelievers  take  -'^  Renan 


628  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  94. 

shorter  method  to  get  rid  of  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  Tuttle  (77?e 
Career  of  the  Christ  Idea  in  History),  who  reiterates  and  compresses  an  old  view  :  "  He 
(Jesns)  was  actuated  by  a  grand  political  motive,  which  met  with  a  sad  defeat  ;  then  we 
observe  the  sorrow  of  disapioointment.  The  temporal  scheme  is  laid  in  the  dust."  Both 
parties,  the  one  believing  and  the  other  unbelieving,  do  not  allow  the  Scriptures  to  pre- 
sent their  own  testimony  on  the  subject  ;  both  come  to  the  Word  with  preconceived 
views  of  its  teachings,  and  under  a  pious  prejudice  or  a  hostile  feeling,  explain  the 
same  so  as  to  make  it  harmonize  with  their  respective  opinions.  Both  do  injury  to  the 
truth  as  revealed  :  the  one,  by  so  dressing  it  up  that  its  natural  appearance  disappears  ; 
the  other,  by  attempts  to  destroy  it.  The  one  party  may,  indeed,  plead  a  sincerity  of 
purpose,  and  the  other  may  give  as  its  motive  the  claim  of  reason,  etc.  ;  but  the  truth, 
God's  truth,  as  written,  is  dependent  for  its  realization  upon  neither  of  them,  and  will 
find  its  ultimate  verification  notwithstanding  the  misconception  of  its  friends  or  the 
cavils  of  its  enemies.  Some  few,  however,  properly  discriminate,  and  realize  the  im- 
portance of  this  postponement.  One  of  the  best  articles  on  the  subject  is  from  the  pen 
of  Dr.  Craven  (Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  95),  which  fell  under  the  writer's  notice  after  these 
Propositions  had  been  worked  out.  It  was  a  gratification  to  find  the  same  so  strongly 
corroborated  by  such  a  scholar  ;  and  the  student  will  be  amply  repaid  by  a  perusal  of 
his  "  Excursus  on  the  Basileia." 

Obs.  12.  The  evidence  in  behalf  of  this  postponement  has  already  been 
given  (e.g.  Prop  58,  65,  (j6,  07,  70,  etc.),  but  it  may  be  instructive  to 
notice  how  the  passages  affording  it  are  treated  by  many.  Thus  e.g.  con- 
sider what  Jesus  said  to  the  Jews  (Matt.  23  :  37-39  ;  Luke  13  :  34,  35), 
respecting  His  leaving  their  house  desolate  until  a  certain  period  elapsed, 
viz.:  until  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  were  fulfilled,  and  until  the  pre- 
dicted time  (as  e.  g.  Zech.  12  :  9-14  ;  Joel  3  :  etc.),  of  their  repentance  and 
willingness  to  receive  the  Messiah.  This  "  house''  receives  singular  treat- 
ment at  the  hands  of  those  who  overlook  the  postponement  of  the  King- 
dom. Forgetting  how  this  word  is  used  i)i  the  Davidic  covenant  and  by 
the  Prophets,  we  have  a  variety  of  significations  given,  which  are  not  in 
accordance  with  the  covenant,  or  the  Prophets,  or  the  facts  as  they  existed 
when  Jesus  spoke.  Grotius,  Meyer,  and  others  make  "  the  house"  to  be 
the  city  of  Jerusalem  ;  De  Wette  and  others,  the  city  and  temple  ;  Theo- 
phylact,  Calvin,  Ewald,  Barnes,  and  others,  the  temple  :  Lange,  and 
others,  the  temple,  city,  and  land.  But  how  could  those  be  "  left  deso- 
late," i.e.  remain  in  continued  desolation  ;  for  history  shows  that  the 
temple  (as  indicated  Mark  13  : 1,  2,  etc.),  by  the  additions  made  by  Herod, 
was  a  splendid  edifice,  while  the  city  and  land  were  far  from  being  deso- 
late. The  same  history,  however,  informs  ns  what  was  desolate  and  re- 
mained desolate,  viz.:  the  Davidic  Kingdom  which  was  overthrown, — the 
Davidic  tahernacle  which  was  fallen  doion^ — for  the  Jewish  nation,  instead 
of  having  their  former  covenanted  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  were 
under  the  rulership  of  the  Roman  Emperors.  This  corresponds  precisely 
with  what  David  himself  predicted,  Psl.  89  :  38-45.  Let  the  careful 
student  but  reflect  :  if  Jesus  came  to  fulfil  the  Prophets,  He  will  use  the 
word  "  house' ^  as  they  employed  it,  and  especially  as  it  was  given  in  the 
covenant.  This  He  did,  taking  the  word  to  denote  the  faUen  Davidic  house 
or  Kingdom,  which  was  indeed  "  desolate"  for  a  long  time,  and,  being  left 
by  Him  in  that  state,  continues  so  to  the  present  day.  Let  the  reader  but 
notice  how  the  word  is  employed  in  the  covenant  itself,  how  it  is  used  by 
the  Prophets,  (as  e.g.  Jer.  22  :  5,  "  this  house  [Davidic]  shall  hecome  a  deso- 
W'''>n''),  that  neither  temple,  nor  city,  nor  land  v^ere  desolate  at  the  time 
i'or  tirQi-dg  ^ffQYQ  spoken,  and  he  will  see  that  consistency  requires  the  inter- 
apostles  JQj^  ^^^^  ^Q  j^^yg  given.     This  might  be  abundantly  confirmed  by 


Prop.  94.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  629 

quotations  taken  from  the  Prophets,  but  one  or  two  references  will  be 
amply  sufficient.  Thus  Amos  9  :  11  explicitly  states  that  the  tcibernade  of 
David  itself,  fallen  and  made  desolate,  shall  he  restored,  and  no  ingenuity 
can  make  th]s  fallen  throne  and  Kingdom  or  house  the  throne  of  the 
Father  in  the  third  heaven  (to  which  the  Davidic  throne  is  likened  by 
many  writers).  So  likewise  Hos.  3  :  4,  5.  Christ,  as  our  argument 
evinces,  could  not,  owing  to  the  nation's  disobedience,  restore  this  fallen, 
desolate  tabernacle  of  David,  and  therefore  tells  the  nation  that  this  deso- 
late "  house"  shall  be  left  thus  nntil  another  era,  when  the  words  of  the 
Prophets  shall  viost  assuredly  be  verified. 

The  careful  student  will  observe  that,  owing  to  this  foreknown  postponement,  certain 
prophecies  are  framed  to  meet  its  foreseen  condition,  and  others  to  correspond  with  it  as 
an  already  determined  fact.  Thus  e.g.  Dan.  2  and  7,  as  connected  with  the  ultimate  re- 
establishment  of  Israel,  does  not  refer  in  the  slightest  manner  to  the  first  Coming  of  the 
Christ.  The  subject-matter  is  Gentile  domination,  and  as  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  which 
is  to  supersede  the  same,  was  not  then  set  up  but  postponed,  the  prophecies  only,  and  in 
strict  accordance  with  what  has  taken  place,  direct  our  attention  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
when  this  will  be  accomplished.  Thus  also  Jesus,  after  He  announced  the  postpone- 
ment, gives  an  epitome  of  Jewish  destiny  (Matt.  24,  Mark  13,  Luke  21),  and  only  when 
the  Sec.  Advent  arrives  does  Jewish  tribulation  cease.  Thus  again  the  Apoc.  is  so 
framed,  that  from  beginning  to  end  it  directs  the  eye  of  faith  to  a  Sec.  Advent  in  power 
and  glory,  which  shall  overcome  all  enemies  and  bring  in  a  realization  of  covenant  prom- 
ises. In  none  of  these,  extended  as  they  are,  is  the  slightest  hint  of  a  Messianic  King- 
dom already  existing  (as  many  teach),  but  the  postponement  being  assumed  as  an  accom- 
plished fact,  believers  are  spoken  of  as  suffering,  tried,  tempted,  persecuted,  etc. — en- 
during things  which  never,  never  can  be — as  the  prophets  predict— associated  with  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Christ. 

Ohs.  13.  To  Millenarians  it  may  be  observed,  that  a  remarkable  an- 
nouncement of  the  postponement  of  this  Kingdom,  its  ultimate  establish- 
ment in  the  restoration  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  with  the  glory  that  shall 
follow,  is  found  in  Isa.  49  : 1-23  (Comp.  Alexander's  version),  in  Micah 
5  : 2,  3,  4  ('^  give  them  up  until,^^  etc.),  in  Zech.  13  :  7-9,  etc.  This  feat- 
ure, the  postponement,  will  be  corroborated  by  many  succeeding  Proposi- 
tions,— forming  a  regular  series  of  connected  reasons  confirmatory  of  this 
important  characteristic  of  the  Divine  Plan. 

Ols.  14.  Neander  {^Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  36)  sees  clearly  that  to  preserve 
unity,  it  is  requisite  to  advocate  a  restoration  of  the  Theocracy,  but, 
unfortunately,  overlooking  this  postponement  and  wedded  to  a  church- 
Kingdom  theory,  he  connects  such  a  restoration  with  the  First  Advent 
instead  of  placing  it,  inhere  the  Scriptures  do,  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  No 
Theocracy  has  been  established,  as  covenanted,  from  the  First  Advent 
down  to  the  present,  for  that  which  is  the  kernel  or  life  of  the  Theocratic 
idea  is  lacking,  viz. :  God  condescending  to  rule  over  man  in  the  capacity 
of  an  earthly  Ruler. 

Ols.  15.  This  doctrine  of  the  postponement  rebuts  the  unbelieving  at- 
tacks against  the  Messianic  Kingdom  and  the  attempted  explanations  con- 
cerning it. 

As  e.g.  that  Jesus  having  failed  to  realize  the  Kingdom  "by  political  means,"  and 
seeing  "  the  folly  of  military  Messianism, "  He  then  "  relied  implicitly  on  the  establish- 
ment of  His  Messianic  throne  by  the  miraculous  display  of  the  divine  power  ;"  but  this 
finally  gave  place  to  "  the  idea  of  spiritual  supremacy,  through  the  religious  reformation 
of  His  people."     (So  Abbot,  p.  243,  Freedom  and  Fellowship,  being  a  reiteration  of  Eenan 


630  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  94. 

and  others.)  This  is  a  complete  ignoring  of  the  Record,  and  a  reversing  of  that  which  is 
plainly  written,  being  pure  assumption  without  a  particle  of  historical  proof  to  sustain  it. 
Where  e.g.  is  the  least  evidence  that  Jesus  changed  the  popular  idea  (admitted  to  have 
been  at  one  time  entertained  by  Himself),  of  the  Messiah  into  "  the  sublime  idea  of  a 
spiritual  Christ  ruling  by  love, ' '  etc.  ?  Aside  from  no  such  a  change  being  expressed  in 
the  New  Test.,  it  is  also  refuted  by  the  Primitive  Church  being  utterly  unacquainted 
with  such  an  alleged  transmutation. 

Obs.  16.  The  postponement  indicates  that  a  very  large  Judaistio  ele- 
ment remains  yet  to  be  realized  in  fulfilment. 

Neander  {Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  339)  and  others  assert  that  Christianity  is  "the  fulfil- 
ment of  Judaism."  This  is  true,  but  only  in  a  limited  sense  (as  e.g.  relating  to  the  sac- 
rificial and  ceremonial  law)  for  in  the  higher  sense  (viz.  :  the  Theocratic)  there  is  still 
lacking  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  with  all  that  pertains  to  it.  In  the 
very  nature  of  the  case,  if  God's  promises  are  ever  fulfilled  in  their  plain,  unmistakable 
grammatical  sense,  much  that  is  "Jewish"  must  eventually  be  incorporated.  Our  argu- 
ment will  necessarily  develop  this  feature  as  we  proceed. 

Obs.  17.  This  view  also  shows  how  ungrounded  is  the  insidious  (and 
to  the  philosophic  mind,  fascinating)  theory,  so  prevalent,  of  distinguish- 
ing between  the  Gospels,  making  them  different  types  or  stages  of  expres- 
sion.' The  simple  fact  is  (comp.  Prop.  9  and  10),  that  the  Gospels  are  a 
unit  in  representing  the  leading  subject  of  the  Kingdom  and  of  the  King, 
and  all  of  them  have  the  same  Jewish  covenanted  position  presented. 

'  As  e.g.  Bernard  (Bampton  Lectures,  Lee.  2,  TTie  Progress  of  Doctrine),  making  Matthew 
a  Gospel  from  the  Hebrew  standpoint  ;  Mark,  a  Gospel  more  disengaged  from  the  Jewish 
connection,  adapted  to  Gentiles,  with  a  "  habit  of  mind  colored  by  contact  with  Juda- 
ism ;"  Luke,  a  Gospel  passing  from  Jewish  associations  to  those  "  adapted  to  a  Greek 
mind,  then,  in  some  sense,  the  mind  of  the  world  ;"  John,  a  Gosjjel  still  more  removed 
from  Judaism,  and  planted  upon  universal  principles,  etc.  The  objectionable  feature 
(admitting  characteristics  and  peculiarities  belonging  to  each  Gospel)  in  such  unwar- 
ranted distinctions,  is  the  total  ignoring  of  "  the  Jewish  conceptions"  (necessarily)  of 
each,  the  fundamental  Jewish  covenanted  position  of  each,  and  that  none  of  them  show 
any  progress  in  the  direction  of  Gentilism,  but  the  reverse,  viz.  :  striving  to  bring  Gen- 
tiles to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Jewish  covenanted  Seed  as  the  Messiah  (which  is 
sustained  by  the  Acts  and  Epistles,  showing  that  Gentiles  are  urged  by  the  acceptance 
of  this  Messiah  to  become  "  the  seed  of  Abraham,"  etc.). 

Obs.  18.  Unbelief, — rejecting  the  Messianic  position,  its  rejection  by 
the  nation  and  the  resultant  postponement, — endeavors  to  deteriorate  the 
actions  of  Jesus  by  ascribing  to  mere  human  passion  what  evidently  was 
caused  by  the  legitimacy  of  His  station  and  His  treatment  by  the  nation. 

Thus  e.g.  unbelievers  assert  that  at  the  beginning  of  His  ministry,  Jesus  was  most 
amiable  and  mild,  but  that  a  change  of  disposition  took  place,  owing  to  opposition  and 
His  expectations  not  being  realized,  so  that  He  sternly  rebuked  and  denounced  His  oppo- 
nents. This  is  artfully  represented  as  a  deterioration  of  character— an  indication  of 
human  frailty.  The  reader  will  observe,  however,  that  the  unity  of  character  was  pre- 
served to  the  end,  as  witnessed  e.g.  in  His  weeping  over  Jerusalem  and  lamenting  its 
doom,  and  in  the  utterances  at  His  apprehension,  trial,  and  crucifixion,  when  grossly  in- 
sulted and  deeply  suffering.  The  alleged  sternness  and  reproof  was  based  on  the  rejec- 
tion of  the  Kingdom  by  the  representative  men  of  the  nation,  who  refused  the  condition 
of  repentance  and  delighted  in  their  sins.  He,  therefore,  as  was  requisite  to  His  position 
and  tender,  portrays  their  corruption  and  unfitness  for  the  Kingdom.  The  Theocratic 
ordering  perversely  refused  by  non-repentance,  exposed  their  own  King— seeing  their 
secret  machinations  for  His  death— to  a  righteous  indignation,  mingled  with  bursts  of 
compassion.  In  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  such  an  indignation  is  not  only  just,  but  it 
is  the  very  thing  needed  to  complete  the  chain  of  evidence,  since  it  is  not  merely  enforc- 


Prop.  94.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  631 

ing  holiness  as  a  prerequisite,  but  it  harmonizes  with  His  claims  of  Messiahship.  It  is 
the  rejected  King  speaking  to  His  despisers,  and  His  language,  denunciatory  and  stern, 
adds  force  to  the  validity  of  His  claims  upon  them,  when  He  points  out  to  them  their 
moral  unfitness  for  entrance  into  His  Kingdom.  He  speaks  as  the  Messiah,  with  au- 
thority, and  His  enemies  felt  the  same.  This  whole  subject  of  the  postponement,  also, 
proves  how  untenable  are  the  theories  of  a  late  origin  of  the  Gospels,  for  such  a  delicate 
and  consistent  presentation  of  the  same  could  not  have  been  the  result  of  the  periods 
alleged. 


632  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  95. 


Proposition  95.     If  the  cliurcli  is  the  Kingdom^  then  the  terms 
" church''  and  " MngdoiVb''  should  be  synonymous. 

Those  terms  ought,  if  such  is  the  fact,  to  be  convertible  or  inter- 
changeable without  mtiating  the  sense.  That  they  are  not  synony- 
mous can  be  readily  tested  by  every  one.  The  numerous  definitions 
and  conflicting  opinions  of  those  who  entertain  this  view  already 
sufficiently  indicates  that  they  are  not  to  be  substituted,  the  one 
for  the  other. 

Ohs.  1.  It  may  be  proper  to  illustrate  the  application  of  the  test.  A 
few  examples  will  suffice,  as  the  subject  is  too  momentous  to  be  triflingly 
touched,  being  forced  to  it  by  the  argumentation  of  our  opponents.  The 
word  church  is  used  for  (1)  an  individual  congregation.  This  usage  of 
the  word,  of  course,  will  not  bear  the  test,  for  then  there  would  be  as 
many  kingdoms  as  there  are  congregations.  (2)  For  the  general  body  of 
believers.  Passing  by  the  passages  which  would  then  make  believers  to 
inherit  the  church,  and  which  would  teach  that  the  church  itself  shall  in- 
herit the  church,  we  select  such  as  Eph.  5  :  23-30,  in  which  the  church 
(i.e.  Kingdom)  was  once  so  lost  that  Christ  "  gave  Himself  for  it"  (comp. 
Eph.  1:7;  Gal.  2  :  20,  etc.),  that  it  needed  special  sanctifying  and  cleans- 
ing "with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,"  etc.  Or,  x\cts  20  :  28, 
where  the  church  (i.e.  Kingdom)  is  to  be  fed,  "  which  He  has  purchased 
with  His  own  blood,"  phraseology  applicable  to  believers  and  not  to  the 
predicted  Kingdom.  Take  everyplace  where  the  word  church  occurs,  and. 
either  in  the  passage  itself,  or  in  the  context,  or  by  a  parallel  passage,  the 
notion  of  believers  in  their  associated  capacity  is  understood.  But  let  us 
take  the  word  kingdom  and  substitute  for  it  that  of  church,  and  the  result 
is  seen  e.g.  in  Mark  11  :  10  ;  Luke  12  :  32  ;  22  :  29  ;  21  :  43  ;  Mark  9  :  47; 
Acts  14  :  22,  etc. 

If  the  Church  is  synonymous  with  the  Kingdom,  then  what  becomes  of  the  notion 
held  by  many  that  the  Kingdom  is  invisible,  seeing  that  the  Church  is  spoken  of  as 
something  visible,  externally  manifested,  as  e.g.  Matt.  18  :  16,  17  ;  Acts  8  :  1,  etc.,  being 
used  in  the  same  sense  so  far  as  visibility  is  concerned,  as  that  in  Acts  19  :  32  (Greek  : 
where  it  is  employed  in  a  secular  sense). 

Ohs.  2.  But  the  absurdity  of  making  such  terms  synonymous  will  be 
more  clearly  seen  if  we  take  the  definitions  given  of  this  Kingdom,  and 
observing  their  intimate  connection  with  this  church  notion.  Selecting 
the  example  afforded  by  Dr.  Thompson  (see  preceding  Prop.,  Obs.  8),  we 
are  told  that  this  Kingdom  consists  in  "  the  presence  and  power  of  God 
felt  and  acknowledged  in  the  hearts  of  those  that  trusted  in  Him  and  did 
His  commandments,"  etc.  Put  this  "spiritual  conception"  in  place  of 
the  Kingdom  or  church,  and  sad  work  will  be  made  of  God's  oath-hound 
covenanted  promises.     If  this  is  all  that  is  meant,  tlien  the  most  solemn 


Prop.  95.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  638 

pledges  given  by  God  will  be  set  aside  and  remain  unfulfilled.  It  is 
strange  that  men  of  ability  are  so  wedded  to  this  mystical  conception  of 
the  Kingdom  that  they  cannot  see  how,  with  their  own  theory  of  Christ's 
delivering  up  the  Kingdom  (1  Cor.  15  :  24),  if  the  Kingdom  be  such  as 
above,  or  "  God's  reign  in  the  heart,"  etc.,  tlien  such  "  a  presence,"  etc.,  or 
*'  reign"  once  "felt  and  acknowledged"  will  also  he  givenuj).  Or,  select 
any  one  of  those  definitions,  and  substitute  them  for  *'  Kingdom,"  in 
Matt.  8  :  12  ;  16  :  19  ;  Mark  11  :  12,  etc.,  and  it  will  be  found  that  they 
directly  introduce  a  confusion  of  ideas,  making  the  Scriptures  inconsistent 
and  contradictory. 

Take  for  examiDle  Dr.  Neander's  (given  in  detail  under  Prop.  106)  definition  and  apply 
it  to  the  first  New  Test,  text  where  the  Kingdom  is  mentioned  (Matt.  3  :  2),  and  it  then 
reads  as  follows  :  "  Repent  ye  :  for  the  whole  of  a  series  of  historical  develoiDments,  or 
a  great  assemblage  of  coexistent  spiritual  creations  is  at  hand."  Or,  take  Dr.  M'Cosh's 
favorite,  and  then  we  have  :  "  Repent  ye  :  for  God's  reign  in  the  heart  is  at  hand." 
Comp.  Prof.  Lummis's  Essay  "  The  Kingdom  and  the  Church"  (read  before  "  The  Proph, 
Confer."  at  N.  York),  in  which  the  inconsistency  of  making  Church  and  Kingdom  synony- 
mous, the  absurdity  of  men  talking  of  advancing  and  building  up  ^his  Kingdom,  the  in- 
ability of  making  a  Methodist  Kingdom,  Lutheran  Kingdom,  etc.,  and  of  saying  that  the 
Church  (if  Kingdom)  is  "  within  you,"  is  shown.  This  synonymous  nature  is  so 
much  taken  far  granted,  and  so  confidently  held,  that  the  titles  of  books  indicate  it,  as 
e.g.  Maurice's  "  Kingdom  of  Christ,"  Jarvis's  "  His.  of  the  Mediatorial  Kingdom," 
Gray's  "Mediatorial  Reign,"  Symington's  "Mediatorial  Dominion  of  Jesus  Christ," 
Uhden's  "  New  England  Theocracy,"  Wilson's  "Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
an  Anon,  work,  "  The  Inner  Kingdom." 

Ohs.  8.  Such  substitutions  are  unwarranted  and  dangerous,  although 
presented  by  most  able  men.  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  S.  82)  informs  us 
that  while  the  name  kingdom  is  "  borrowed  from  an  earthly  kingdom," 
"  was  immediately  taken  from  the  form  in  which  the  idea  of  the  Divine 
community  was  represented  by  the  Jewish  nation,"  yet  this  idea  is  to  be 
discarded  and  a  "  symholical  "  one  is  to  be  substituted.  This  exchange  of 
ideas  is,  however,  nnproven,  and  merely  assumed  to  sustain  the  theory  that 
the  church,  in  some  aspect,  is  the  Kingdom.  If  this  is  so,  that  the  first 
preachers  of  the  Kingdom  presented  the  leading  subject  (i.e.  Kingdom)  of 
their  discourses  in  symbolical  language,  we  may  well  ask.  If  the  Kingdom 
was  symbolical,  why  not  then  repentance,  faith,  and  everything  else  con- 
nected with  this  Kingdom  ?  For,  if  the  main  subject  is  such,  zvhy  not  the 
subsidiary  ?  This  leads  us  where  some  have,  from  a  false  premise,  logically 
landed,  making  the  whole  teaching  of  Jesus  and  the  apostles  a  symbolical 
or  typical  one  of  that  religion  of  humanity  which  is  now  arising. 


634  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  96. 


Proposition  96.  Uie  differences  visible  hi  the    Church  are  evi- 
dences that  it  is  not  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah. 

Having  alluded  to  this,  it  may  be  well  to  particularize.  The 
Kingdom,  as  promised  from  the  details  of  prophecy,  is  to  exhibit  a 
Tilsible  outioard  unity.  So  much  is  this  admitted  by  our  oppo- 
nents, that  they  are  seeking  for  and  advocating  such  a  unity.  The 
feeling  is  almost  universal  that  prediction  demands  it ;  and  hence 
all,  not  finding  it  yet  existing,  anticipate  it  in  the  future.  Isaiah, 
chs.  60,  61,  62,  Qo^  etc.,  are  conclusive.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
such  a  state  or  condition  has  never  been  realized  in  the  church 
after  eighteen  hundred  years  of  trial,  and  therefore  we  conclude 
that  the  church,  not  exhibiting  the  characteristics  predicted  of  the 
Kingdom  and  connected  with  its  establishment,  is  something 
different  from  that  Kingdom. 

Ois.  1.  Let  the  unbiassed  student  contemplate  how  schisms,  etc.,  are 
foretold  in  the  church  (Acts  20  :  29,  30  ;  1  Cor.  11  :  19  ;  2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4  ; 
Rom.  16  :  17,  etc.)  ;  how  it  was  organized  amidst  dissensions  and  antag- 
onism even  among  its  leaders  (on  the  subject  of  circumcision  and  observ- 
ance of  the  law);  how  it  affected  comijvomises  concerning  the  law  and  the 
ritual  ;  how  it  arose  without  a  direct  verbal  abrogation  of  Mosaic  institu- 
tions, so  that  some  followed  the  latter  and  others  annoyed  the  Gentiles  who 
refused  the  same.  Christ  Himself,  Paul  tells  us,  was  preached  a  conten- 
Hon.  These  and  other  marks  of  weakness,  infirmity,  etc.,  certainly  pre- 
vent us  from  accepting  the  church  as  tlie  'predicted  Kingdom,  seeing  that 
the  latter  is  to  come  in  a  very  different  manner.  Its  beginning  (i.e. 
church's)  is  not  that  assigned  by  the  Prophets  to  the  Kingdom  of  promise. 

Even  the  Apostolic  Church  evidenced  great  infirmities,  as  noticed  in  Ch.  Histories  by 
Schaff,  Kurtz,  Neander,  etc.  As  illustrative,  we  only  quote  Conybeare  and  Howson's  (1  c. 
1,  p.  488)  statement  :  "  It  is  painful  to  be  compelled  to  acknowledge  among  the  Chris- 
tians of  the  Apostolic  Age,  the  existence  of  so  many  forms  of  error  and  sin.  It  was  a 
pleasing  dream  which  presented  the  Primitive  Church  as  a  society  of  angels  ;  it  is  not 
without  a  struggle  that  we  bring  ourselves  to  of)en  our  ej^es  and  behold  the  reality. 
But  yet  it  is  a  higher  feeling  which  bids  us  thankfully  to  recognize  the  truth,  that  '  there 
is  no  partiality  with  God,'  that  He  has  never  super  naturally  coerced  any  generation  of 
mankind  into  virtue,  nor  rendered  schism  and  heresy  impossible  in  any  age  of  the 
Church."  This  feature  has  never  been  lessened,  but  has  increased  until  e.g.  in  England 
alone,  according  to  "  Whitaker's  Almanack"  (1879),  there  are  174  distinct  denominations 
and  sects.  The  notion  of  a  Kingdom  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  predictions  relating  to 
the  Church,  viz.  :  its  militant  nature,  a  fighting  and  struggling  Church,  which  shall  ulti- 
mately, by  apostatizing  (2  Thess.  2)  and  by  lack  of  faith  (Luke  18  :  1-8),  fall  under  the 
power,  as  a  punishment,  of  a  culminated  Antichrist,  and  endure  a  fearful  persecution  (e.g. 
Rev.  14,  Dan.  7,  etc.). 

Ols.  2.  The  progress  of  the  church  teaches  the  same.  Surely  a  King- 
dom established  by  Jesus  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  could  not  possibly 


Prop.  96.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  635 

liave  the  confiiding  elements  that  the  church  has  so  layishly  shown.  Antag- 
onism in  belief,  compulsion  in  requirements,  dogmatism  in  teaching,  relig- 
ious warring,  persecution,  error,  false  doctrine,  etc.,  are  incorporated  with 
her  history.  (Corruption  not  merely  external,  but  imbedded  in  the  very 
framework  of  her  organization,  and  transmitted  for  centuries  (diversity  of 
Ch.  government,  belief,  and  practice)  ;  antagonism  even  in  relation  to  the 
most  important  things  (sacerdotalism,  baptism,  Lord's  supper,  etc.)  ;  ex- 
hibition of  a  spirit  hostile  to  Messiah's  Kingdom,  even  in  the  most  noble 
of  Christian  men  [as  e.g.  Luther's  treatment  of  Zwingli,  Zwingli's 
resort  to  the  sword,  Calvin's  treatment  of  Servetus  (Mosheim's  His.  of 
Servetus),  Melanchthon's  epistle  to  Calvin,  Oct.  14,  1544,  commending 
Servetus's  execution  (Calv.  Epis.  Xo.  187,  p.  341,)  etc.] — these  are  land- 
marks, not  of  Christ's  Kingdom  but  of  a  iweimratorij  stage  subject  to  in- 
firmity, characteristic  of  all,  even  of  true  and  noble  believers.  While  here 
and  there  enlightened  piety  exists,  willing  to  fellowship  with  and  acknowl- 
edge as  brethren  in  Christ  all  who  repent  and  believe  in  Him,  yet  mul- 
titudes, organized  bodies,  counting  their  ministry  by  hundreds  and  their 
laity  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  stand  forth  in  doctrinal  exclusiveness, 
even  in  the  same  denomination  (as  e.g.  some  of  the  symbolical  Lutherans, 
High-Church  Episcopalians,  Close  Com.  Baptists,  etc.),  condemning  all 
others,  denouncing  all  others,  sitting  in  Christ's  seat  and  claiming  Christ's 
prerogatives  of  judging,  excluding  all  others  of  a  diverse  faith  from  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven,  here  and  hereafter. 

This  is  done  too  by  those  whom,  in  spite  of  their  weakness  and  dogmatism,  we  must 
recognize  as  conscientious  brethren  in  Christ.  While  the  absurdity  of  such  a  position, 
claiming  that  outside  of  its  own  special  communion  there  is  no  true  Church,  but  only  rep- 
robation and  damnation,  has  been  ably  set  forth  by  numerous  writers,  yet  it  is  a  sad 
fact  that  multitudes  still  slavishly  cling  to  it  with  tenacity  and  zeal.  Does  such  a 
Church,  thus  divided,  etc.,  bear  ihe  imprint  of  Messiah's  Kingdom?  No  !  never  ought 
such  a  portraiture  as  history  but  too  faithfully  gives,  be  mistaken  for  the  divine  one  pre- 
sented by  the  inspired  prophets.  Blindness  voluntarily  assumed  alone  can  make  such 
a  mistake.  The  divisions  and  controversies  are  not  merely  between  different  denomina- 
tions, but  between  branches  of  the  same  Church,  as  e.g.  between  EiDiscojDalians,  Presby- 
teriaDs,  Moravians,  Baptists,  Methodists,  Lutherans,  Keformed,  etc.  The  lack  of  union 
and  intercommunion  is  sometimes  most  painfully  manifested,  as  e.g.  in  an  exclusive 
spirit  of  clericalism  or  sacramentarianism,  which  refuses  acknowledgment  and  fellow- 
ship with  others,  and  even  with  each  other.  All  Churches  are,  more  or  less,  thus 
leavened.  The  Koman  Catholics,  complacently  overlooking  their  past  bitter  divisions 
and  contests,  point  to  the  dilierences,  etc.,  of  Protestantism  ;  Protestantism,  overlooking 
the  design  intended  by  the  Church,  meets  the  charge  by  endeavoring  to  make  out  an  in- 
visible unity,  which  is  truly  so  "  invisible"  that  no  one  has  yet  been  able  to  discern  it. 
Two  extremes  are  to  be  avoided,  both  suggested  by  the  Church-Kingdom  theoiy,  in  con- 
templating the  strange  and  painful  pages  of  Ecclesiastical  History  ;  on  the  one  hand 
Goethe's  declaration  :  "  Mischmash  von  Irithum  und  von  Gewalt,"  which  looks  only  at  the 
evidences  of  infirmity  and  wickedness  ;  and  on  the  other,  Chateaubriand's  painting  a 
beautiful  ideal  of  the  past  and  present,  which  ignores  the  corruptions,  errors,  and  sinful- 
ness manifested.  Truth  suffers  by  either  method  ;  and  the  Church  cannot  be  utterly 
condemned  or  unduly  exalted  without  doing  violence  to  it.  Neither  blackening  nor 
whitewashing,  neither  defaming  nor  extravagantly  praising,  meets  the  divine  portraiture  as 
given  in  the  Scriptures. 

Ols.  3.  These  differences,  division  into  sects,  etc.  are  not  given  under 
the  impression  that  the  church  has  not,  in  a  measure,  carried  on  the  de- 
sign intended  by  its  organization.  When  the  object  for  which  the  church 
has  been  established  is  duly  estimated,  we  find  that  amidst  all  its  weakness 
and  imperfection,  prosperity  and  adversity,  fightings  within  and  without. 


636  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  96. 

it  has  heen  for loar ding  and  accompUslmig  the  same.  Hence,  we  give  place 
to  no  one  in  a  high  appreciation  of  the  church  ;  and  yet,  in  relation  to  her 
the  truth  must  be  told — indeed  has  already  been  recorded — lest  Ave  ex- 
aggerate her  position,  and  dishonor  the  truth  itself.  Ecclesiastical  His- 
tory, Dogmatics,  such  works  as  Dorner's  His.  of  P rot.  Theology,  etc.,  give 
painful  evidence  that  controversies,  bitter  and  unrelenting,  have  been 
w\aged  between  portions  of  the  church,  between  good  and  great  men. 
Passing  by  the  lack  of  charity,  the  self-exaltation,  the  narrowness  and 
bigotry,  the  confessionalistic  zeal,  the  personal  contentions,  defamations, 
etc.,  we  find  that  in  important  points,  both  theoretical  and  practical,  de- 
voted men  of  God  were  in  direct  o])i)osition  to  each  other.  Were  it  not  for 
a  feii^  things  held  in  common,  such  as  faith  in  Christ,  the  antagonism 
would  be  complete.  Such  a  state  of  things,  deplorable  as  it  is,  does  not 
vitiate  the  design  to  be  accomplislied  by  the  church,  which  is,  as  James  as- 
serted in  the  Apostle's  Council,  to  gather  out  a  people  for  His  name. 
This,  notwithstanding  the  hindrances  and  obstacles  mentioned,  has  been 
carried  on  down  to  the  present  day.  These  evils  may  to  some  extent  have 
retarded  and  hindered  the  work,  but  still  it  has  been  going  on  toward 
completion.  No  age,  no  century,  no  year,  with  its  encompassing  infirmi- 
ties, but  has  brought  forth,  through  the  church,  the  called  and  adopted. 
But  to  convert  this  design  into  the  Kingdom  itself  requires  an  imagination 
and  a  faith  strong  enough  to  plant — against  the  direct  testimony  of  holy 
men  of  old — these  evils,  these  conflicting  elements  into  the  Kingdom  of 
the  Son  of  Man.  Whilst  this  diversity,  etc.,  cannot  be  charged  to  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  and  the  Apostles  (for  they  warned  us  against  it)  ;  whilst 
it  is  evidence  of  the  probationary  and  not  kingly  condition  of  the  church 
"which  could  not  be  avoided  without  destroying  man's  free  moral  agency, 
yet  they  have  come  to  pass,  and  the  church  grievously  erred  in  giving 
jilace  to  them.  Explanations  and  apologies  do  not  lessen  the  naked  facts, 
and  cannot  break  their  force.  Unbelief  may  foolishly  level  them  against 
Christianity,  when  Christianity  itself  in  the  New  Test,  pointedly  condemns 
it ;  piety,  on  the  other  hand,  just  as  foolishly  endeavors  to  palliate  the  same 
by  claiming  it  as  a  necessity,  a  requisite  historical  growth,  etc. ;  still  the 
facts  remain,  and  can  only  be  explained  by  placing  them  where  the  Bible 
does,  viz. :  in  the  depravity  and  weakness  of  man. 

To  a  considerate  mind,  the  very  condition  of  tiie  Church,  instead  of  reflecting  in  the 
slightest  degree  upon  the  Divine  Truth,  most  abundantly  confirms  it  ;  for,  without  unduly 
exalting  the  Church  into  a  Kingdom  bearing  on  its  bosom  a  mass  of  corruption,  he  sees 
that  amidst  all  this  diversity,  error,  hostility,  etc.,  the  one  great,  grand  design  has  never  been 
lost  sight  of,  i.  e.  to  save  them  that  believe.  If  it  be  said  that  these  evils  are  not  inherent, 
but  foreign  outgrowths,  we  may  even  admit  this  without  weakening  our  argument,  see- 
ing that  we  proceed  on  the  ground  that  such  a  picture  as  the  Church  has  presented  is 
not  the  one  drawn  by  the  prophets.  Whether  produced  legitimately  or  not,  whether 
necessary  developments  or  not,  they  resulted  in  the  Church,  and  as  firm  believers  in 
divine  inspiration,  we  cannot,  dare  not  receive  the  Church  as  the  Kingdom  predicted  by 
inspired  men  ;  for  if  we  do,  to  that  extent  do  we  make  those  men  untruthful  and  their 
record  of  the  Kingdom  an  impossibility  to  be  realized  as  presented  by  them  (i.e.  in  the 
grammatical  sense).  We  cannot  e.g.  reconcile  with  the  prophetic  record  of  the  increased 
and  constantly  expanding  power  of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  the  losses  which  the  Church 
has  sustained  in  the  past  in  Asia,  Africa,  Greece,  etc.  The  prophets,  instead  of  losses, 
give  us  glorious  permanent  and  eternal  retention.  Hence,  while  discarding  the 
notion  of  the  Kingdom,  we  cling  to  the  observable  gracious  design  of  the  Church  as 
promised  and  developed  in  her  history.  This  gives  the  proper  antidote  to  a  class  of 
books  ably  written,  wliich  artfully,  and  in  many  respects  most  truthfully,  represent  the 
weakness,  positive  evil,  incorporated  with  and  extended  by  the  Church,  and  from  this 


PPwOP.  96.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOlVr.  637 

deduce  that  the  prophecies,  being  unfulfilled,  the  predictions  are  merely  human  opin- 
ions We  believe  with  Lord  Bacon,  who  long  ago  observed,  m  answer  to  the  Fapai  argu- 
ment of  unity,  "  that  the  Church  of  God  hath  been  in  all  ages  subject  to  contentions 
and  schisms  •  the  tares  were  not  sown  but  when  the  wheat  was  sown  before.  Our  Sav- 
iour Christ  delivered  it  for  an  ill-note  to  have  outward  peace.  And  reason  teacheth  us 
that  in  ic^norance  and  implied  belief  it  is  easy  to  agree,  as  colors  agree  in  the  dark  ;  or  it 
any  country  decline  into  Atheism,  the  controversies  wax  damty,  because  men  do  not 
think  religion  scarce  worth  falling  out  for  ;  so  as  it  is  weak  divinity  to  account  contro- 
versies an^ill  sign  in  the  Church."  So  long  as  tares  and  wheat  continue  mixed— which 
is  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent— so  long  will  this  state  continue. 

Ohs   4    This  leads  to  a  brief  consideration  of  the  unity  of  the  church. 
The  notion  of  a  Kingdom  attached  to  it,  involves  that  of  nnity.     To  carry 
out  the  design  of  the  church  does  not  necessarilij  require  unity  ;  unity  in- 
deed would  facilitate  its  execution,  and  for  various  reasons  it  is  desirable, 
and  hence  is  enjoined,  but  really  is  not  essential,  as  the  history  of  the 
church  conclusively  proves.     ''  Them  that  believe"  are  found  in  all  denom- 
inatious  :  those  that  are  savingly  united  to  Christ  are  found   m  Roman 
Catholic  and  Protestant  churches  ;  admixture  of   error,  difference  m  Ch. 
o-overnment,  etc.,  has  not  iyrevented,   in  the  opposing  camps,  persons  to 
become  iustified  by  faith,  adopted  by  grace,  and  engrafted  as  the  elect. 
The  prayer  of  Christ,  so  often  quoted,  for  union  has  specal  reference  to 
the  nltimate  end  of  the  church,  and  is  identified  with  the  manifestation  of 
Ilis  dory  (see  Prop.  184).     Manv  contend  that  union  now  is  essential,  or  at 
least  necessary.     Keeping  in  vielv  the  object  intended  by  this  dispensation 
we  may  concede  its  desirableness  to  expedite  the  gathering  of  the  elect, 
but  it  is  not  absolutely  requisite  for  this  purpose.     At  the  very  commence- 
ment of  the  Christian  Church,  as  every  historian  concedes,  even  in  the 
Apostolic  age,  there  was  a  tendency  (even  among  the  Apostles),  to  diver- 
sity which  has  continued  down  to  our  day,  and  we  are  assured  by  the  Word 
will  continue  until  Christ  ushers  in  the  Mill.  Kingdom.     Just  as  God  has 
used  the  peculiar  temperament,  disposition,  style,  etc.,  of  men  m  giving 
Ilis    Word    so   He  also  employs  the  various  temperaments,  dispositions, 
talents,  etc'.,  of  men  in  gathering  out  ;  but  whilst  in  the  former  diversity 
exists  without  breaking  the  unity  of  that  Word  being  under  the  restram- 
inq  influence  of  inspiration,  the  "latter  amidst  its  diversity  has  no  such  re- 
stniining  medium,  saving  that  Word  which  is  already  given      Therefore, 
the  unity  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  utterances  of  the  church  as  such   not 
in  its  outward  external  form,  not  even  in  its  inward  experience  and  feel- 
ing, but  only  in  three  things  :  (1)  in  working  out,  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously, a  common  design,  i.e.  the  salvation  of  believers  ;  (2)  that  every 
member  savingly   united  to  Christ,  whether  recognized  or  not,  whether 
aa-reeing  in  all  things  with  us  or  not,  sustains  the  relation  of  brother  and 
ilint  heir  with  those  who  also  thus  believe  ;  (8)  the  common  relation  that 
all  believers  sustain  to  Christ  even  now,  and  which  is  finally  to  be  openly 
manifested.     Therefore,  the  efforts  of  those  who  urge    for  unity  among 
brethren,  without  the  exclusion  of  a  diversity  which  is  inseparable  trom  a 
probationary  state,  are  to  be  commended. 

Such  as  the  labors  of  Dr.  Schmucker,  the  Christian  Alliance,  and  others.  The  Augs- 
bui-  Confession  Art  7,  pointedly  says  :  "  That  subordinate  differences  do  not  abolish 
^l^^smUy  of  the  thurcii.^'  This  unity,  as  the  reader  sees,  does  not  bear  the  marks  of 
the  covenanted  and  predicted  Kingdom,  being  more  of  a  spiritual  and  invisible  nature, 
an^pie^Z  We  to  the  unity  that  shall  be  manifested  when  the  Christ  and  His  members 


are  revealed. 


638  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  97. 


Proposition  97.    The  various  forms  of  Church  goverimient  in- 
dicate that  the  Church  is  not  the  jproniised  Kingdom, 

Taking  the  prophetic  record,  which  gives  the  Messianic  Kingdom 
a  uniform  government  with  a  uniform  faith,  it  is  impossible  to 
accept  of  the  church,  with  its  diversified  forms  of  government,  as 
an  intended  exhibit  of  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  1.  While  men  differ  in  their  interpretation  of  the  church,  yet  it  is 
generally  admitted,  excepting  by  the  Roman  Catholics  and  a  High-Church 
party,  that  Christ  did  not  found  His  church  with  an  accurately  defined  and 
fixed  form  of  government  for  its  associated  capacity,  but  left  the  forms  it 
should  assume  in  society,  and  among  nations,  to  the  development  made  by 
Providence  and  human  agency.  This  view,  perhaps  slightly  but  not 
materially  modified,  is  the  belief  of  multitudes.  If  we  accept  of  it,  then 
it  refutes  the  notion  of  the  church  being  a  Kingdom,  for  it  admits  at  once 
that  the  church  at  its  commencement  lacked  one  of  the  essentials  of  a 
Kingdom,  viz. :  a  regularly  constituted  form  of  government.  AVith  our  doc- 
trine of  the  church  and  Kingdom  this  omission  remarkably  harmonizes  ; 
so  much,  indeed,  that  it  is  requisite.  If  the  Roman  Catholic  doctrine  is 
correct,  that  such  a  Kingdom  under  a  regularly  constituted  government  is 
found  in  the  church,  then  an  important  and  serious  objection  would  be 
raised  up  against  us.  Millenarianism  has  ever  resisted  her  doctrine  as  an 
invasion  of  the  Messiah's  rights  and  privileges,  and  as  hostile  to  the  early 
church  view  ;  for  her  doctrine  cannot  be  maintained,  being  merely  the 
result  of  the  hierarchical  growth  of  centuries,  and  lacks  a  Scriptural  foun- 
dation. The  very  design  of  the  church  does  not  require  such  a  govern- 
ment, it  being  fully  met  by  the  simple  organization,  few  rites,  sacraments, 
worship,  and  rules  which  are  given. 

It  is  remarkable  how  guarded  prophecy  is,  not  to  allow  the  Church-Kingdom  theory  to 
find  encouragement  in  its  portrayals  of  the  future.  Thus  e.g.  Dan.  2  and  7  (comp.  Props. 
104,  121,  and  160),  in  which  we  find  that  the  nominal  conversion  of  the  Eoman  Empire 
under  Constantine  and  the  resultant  form  of  church  government  patterned  after  the  civil, 
is  unacknowledged.  The  transformation  formed  no  Kingdom  of  God  (as  multitudes  vain- 
ly dream)  for  the  Empire  still  remains  sj^mbolized  as  a  heast  down  to  the  end.  Its 
Christianity,  nominal  and  hierarchical,  pregnant  with  bitter  evils  and  future  persecu- 
tions, properly  remains  iinrecognized.  The  simple  fact,  Scripturally  attested,  is  this, 
that  during  these  "  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  believers,  instead  of  inheriting  a  Kingdom, 
are  members  of  civil  government,  and  are  taught  to  render  civil  obedience,  acknowledg- 
ing earthly  kings  and  rulers  to  be  such  over  them.  Let  the  student  refer  to  Props.  3, 
58,  etc.,  and  see  the  diversity  existing  respecting  the  time  when  this  alleged  Kingdom 
was  inaugurated,  and  he  will  find  additional  reason  for  rejecting  the  jjrevailing  view, 
because  a  Kingdom,  to  be  siTch,  must,  of  necessity,  have  some  form  of  government 
allied  with  it,  but  this  vagueness,  indistinctness,  lack  of  form,  is  opposed  to  the  notion 
of  such  having  been  founded. 

Obs.  2.  Some  hold  that  by  virtue  of  the  church  being  a  Kingdom, 
Christ  rules  over  it  by  a  vicegerent  (i.e.  the  Pope)  ;  others,  by  a  divinely 
appointed  and  regularly  descended  Episcopacy  ;  some,  by  the  rules  of  the 


Prop.  97.]  the  theocratic  kitstgdom.  639 

State,  forming  State  religions  ;  others,  by  the  ministry  and  officers  of  the 
congregation  ;  some,  by  individual  congregations  who  in  the  aggregate 
form  the  Kingdom  ;  others,  by  General  Councils,  Conferences,  Assem- 
blies, or  Synods  ;  and  others,  by  the  associated  union  of  the  civil  power 
with  the  church  either  as  primary  or  subordinate.  There  is  a  variety  to 
suit  all  inclinations.  Again,  some  tell  us  that  the  church  is  a  Kingdom, 
but  that  no  one  form  of  government  is  prescribed,  it  being  left  optional 
with  the  church  to  organize  that  form  best  adapted  to  contingencies  ; 
others,  that  the  government  of  the  church  mnst  be  so  shaped  as  to  ac- 
commodate itself  to  the  civil  ;  others,  that  the  New  Test,  leaves  the  whole 
matter  discretionary  with  every  individual  congregation  to  assume  one  ; 
and  still  others  inform  us  that  the  church,  whilst  a  Kingdom,  is  not  one  in 
the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  only  symbolically,  but  is  a  society  of  believers 
governed  by  the  moral  law  and  the  institutions  of  the  New  Test.,  its 
members  being  still  subject  to  the  civil  power,  etc.  History  is  filled  with 
the  bitter  contests  arising  between  the  advocates  of  these  opinions,  and 
every  party  nearly  can  enroll  its  martyrs  who  fell  in  defence  of  its  peculiar 
tenet  of  church  government.  Is  such  a  sad  diversity  consistent  with  the 
idea  of  Clirist's  covenanted  Kingdom  ?  The  idea  of  a  stable,  well-ordered, 
acknowledged,  and  duly  enforced  government  is  connected  ly  all  the 
froijliets  with  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  but  if  the  church  is  it,  what  party 
can  rightfully  claim  it  ?  So  little  is  this  the  predicted  Kingdom  that  there 
is  no  one  here  (excepting  we  take  the  infallible  Pope,  or  Young,  or  others, 
who  claim  to  speak  by  inspiration)  to  decide  when  believers  differ  among 
themselves  respecting  the  government  itself.  Is  it  not  strange  that  in- 
telligent men  continue  to  insist  upon  having  sucli  a  Kingdom  jDresent,  when 
they  differ  so  essentially  among  themselves  concerning  such  a  weighty 
matter  as  the  form  of  the  Kingdom  ?  Can  we  imagine  that  when  Christ's 
Kingdom  as  covenanted  and  j^redicted  is  once  truly  set  up,  that  it  will  be 
in  a  shape  so  undecisive  and  peculiar,  that  men  will  contend  with  each  other 
as  to  its  nature  and  form  ?  No  !  never  I  In  the  day  that  the  Lord  is  King 
over  all  the  eartli  (Zech.  14),  and  His  majesty  and  power  is  seen  in  giving 
and  enforcing  law,  in  restoring  and  upbuilding  with  Godlike  energy  and 
force  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  men  will  not  find  it  so  insignifi- 
cantly or  enigmatically  expressed  that  its  organization,  etc.,  can  become  a 
ciuestion  like  the  preceding. 

Singular  episodes  are  to  be  found  in  this  diversity.  "VVe  mention  a  few  as  illustrations 
of  the  inability  of  man  to  preserve  a  consistency  when  violating  the  Divine  order  relat- 
ing to  the  Church.  Some  German  divines,  thinking  that  the  Church  as  a  Kingdom,  to 
be  truly  such,  must  have  some  point  of  external  unity,  insist  (as  e.g.  Rothe  and 
Thierschs— see  Pressense's  review  of  them.  Early  Years  of  Christianity,  p.  411-412),  that 
the  apostles  must  have  held  a  second  Council  at  Jerusalem,  in  which  they  instituted  the 
Episcopate  !  Savonarola,  under  the  influence  of  this  Kingdom  notion,  claimed  that 
Christ  had  condescended  to  become  the  peculiar  Monarch  of  the  Florentines  (Roscoe's 
Life  of  Lorenzo  de  Medicis,  p.  345).  The  Anabaj^tists,  Fifth  Monarchy  men,  Mormons, 
etc.,  with  this  Church  idea  have  claimed  a  special  Kingdom  of  God  as  existing  among 
themselves.  Fanatics  have  duly  taken  advantage  of  the  notion,  and  carefully  incorpo- 
rated it  into  their  schemes.  Eccl.  History  (especially  English  and  Scotch)  contains  nu- 
merous instances  where  national  establishments  of  religion  were  discarded  on  the 
ground  that  they  were  opposed  to  the  nature  of  Christ's  Kingdom,  while  the  very  men 
who  made  such  an  objection  made  themselves  liable,  on  the  same  ground  precisely,  of 
rejection,  because  they  too  set  up  the  Church  separated  from  the  State  as  the  Kingdom. 
Edward  Irving,  in  his  work  Church  and  State,  overlooking,  even  while  expounding  proph- 
ecy, the  design  of  this  dispensation  in  gathering  out  a  people  for  a  future  divinely  con- 
stituted Church  and  State,  makes  in  his  argument  a  divinely  constituted  State  practical. 


640  THE  THEOCRATIC   KmCDOM.  [PrOP.  97. 

and  as,  in  a  measure  at  least,  existing.  This  plunged  him  into  opinions  intolerant,  etc. 
The  notion  of  "  The  Divine  Right"  is  indeed  ideally  correct,  but  we  must  not  forget 
the  period  when  God  Himself  shall  practically  and  really  manifest  it  in  a  chosen  King 
and  His  associated  selected  kings.  This  view  of  the  Church  and  the  State  was  one  cause 
of  Irving's  troubles,  leading  him  to  endeavor  to  realize  the  iynpossible,  that  which  was  in 
the  future  and  in  God's  own  performance.  Such  alhasions  as  these  could  be  multiplied, 
which  are  given  not  for  the  sake  of  showing  an  abuse  (for  the  abuse  of  a  doctrine  does 
not  disjjrove  the  doctrine  itself),  but  rather  how  variously  men  are  influenced  by  the 
notion  that  in  some  way  or  other  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  be  now  witnessed. 

While  thus  employing  the  diversity  existing  as  evidence  that  the  Church  is  not  the 
Kingdom,  we  must  not  be  understood  as  opposed  to  a  form  of  Church  government  as  a 
necessity  for  its  growth,  etc.  Hence  we  are  compelled  to  dissent  from  the  exceeding 
lax  views  of  the  "  Plymouth  Brethren"  respecting  Church  government.  It  has  been  the 
universal  opinion  of  the  Church,  following  the  Apostolic  age,  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  in 
and  through  the  Church,  called  the  Ministry,  such  a  call  being  confirmed  by  a  mediate 
act  of  the  Church.  The  Church,  in  its  official  capacity,  is  the  instrument  to  determine, 
by  examination,  the  validity  of  the  call,  in  order  to  avoid  imposition,  etc.  This  has  been 
the  universal  rule,  founded  on  Scripture,  however  disputes,  etc.,  arose  respecting  the 
grades  of  the  ministry.  We  cannot,  therefore,  sympathize  with  the  "Brethren's"  tirade 
against  "  Clericism,"  simply  because,  if  followecl,  it  would  result  in  disintegration  and 
perversion.  Hence,  to  make  baptism  an  ordinance  not  in,  but  outside  of  the  Church  de- 
pendent on  the  individual  and  the  teacher,  is  unscriptural  (leaving  out  an  ordinance  of 
the  Church)  ;  and  to  make  the  ministiy  dependent  on  the  will,  or  vagaries,  or  supposed 
inspired  influence,  of  individuals,  is  also  unscriptural  (making  the  Church  virtually  de- 
pendent upon  influences  outside  of  it,  and  over  which  it  has  no  control).  The  autbor- 
it}'' — if  any  is  claimed — depends  not  upon  any  official  voice  of  the  Church,  but  upon  the 
i})se  dixit  of  this  or  that  one  claiming  to  be  directed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  door  is 
thus  opened  to  claims  and  pretensions  that  pride,  love  of  notoriety,  etc.,  will  speedily 
avail  themselves  of,  owing  to  human  depravity.  Alas  !  extremes  in  the  Church  have 
already  borne  a  mass  of  deadl}'  fruit  ;  even  with  the  g^atest  care  and  utmost  watchful- 
ness, unqualified  and  uncalled  men  have  been  foisted  on  the  Church,  but  human  weak- 
ness, with  no  proper  checks,  untrammelled,  and  with  power  to  claim  a  ministerial 
position,  will  be  sure  to  manifest  itself.  Studying  such  passages  as  2  Tim.  2  :  2,  and 
those  referring  to  the  appointment  of  Elders,  as  well  as  the  intimations  of  a  continued 
ministry  in  the  Church,  and  then  linking  with  these  the  universal  custom  of  the  early 
Church,  as  testified  to  by  history,  that  a  ministry,  no  matter  in  what  forms  (for  that  is 
another  question,  touching  the  Hierarchy,  etc.),  wrh  perpetuated  in  and  mediately  by 
the  Church,  it  seems  to  us  strange  that  men,  evidently  sincere  and  pious,  will  set  them- 
selves up  at  this  late  day  as  alone  right  in  discarding  all  "  Clericalism,"  and  the  whole 
Church  from  the  days  of  the  apostles  in  the  wrong.  The  result  is,  that  however  honest 
in  their  views,  they  are  only  injuring  the  truth  by  associating  such  demoralizing  opin- 
ions, unnecessarily  disquieting  others  in  their  Church  relationships,  and  increasing  the 
number  of  sects  by  forming,  with  special  and  extraordinary  high  spiritual  claims, 
another.  The  effort  to  make  the  eldership  an  exceptional  and  mere  introductory  office 
is  unsuccessful  and  unhistorical.  So  the  effort  to  overthrow  the  view,  that  men  in  the 
Church,  and  by  virtue  of  their  position  in  the  Church  as  teachers,  are  not  to  perpetuate  a 
ministry  (as  exemplified  in  Timothy,  Titus,  and  Barnabas)  by  some  act  of  setting  them 
apart  (thus  giving  them  an  official  recognition),  is  both  unscriptural  and  unhistorical. 
To  leave  the  distribution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  a  direct  intimation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  fanatical  and  substituting  human  imaginings  for  divine  inspiration.  To  leave  the 
Holy  Ghost,  on  an  occasion  of  disciijline,  to  designate  who  shall  be,  for  the  occasion, 
the  Elders  or  rulers,  is,  to  say  the  least,  dangerous,  and  may  cause  personal  feeling  or 
l^rejudice  to  triumph.  To  allow  special  and  specific  claims  to  eldership  or  rulership, 
etc.,  under  the  specious  plea  of  being  directed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  visionary 
notion  of  a  mystical  enthusiasm,  and  tends  to  bring  us  under  the  subjection  of  false 
claims  and  pretenses.  The  entire  theory  (as  illustrated  e.g.  Holden's  Ministry  of  the 
Wo7xI,  and  Corinth  and  Sects)  is  calculated  to  lead  astray  and  impair  the  usefulness  of  its 
upholder.  For  it  raises  up  an  antagonism  to  other  Churches,  which,  to  say  the  least,  is 
uncharitable  and  unchristian.  Thus  Holden  ( Corinth  and  Sects)  declares  emphatically 
that  a  man  who  has  the  truth,  and  is  conscientious,  cannot  go  to  any.  of  the  Churches 
(saving  that  of  the  "  Believers")  to  worship,  for  in  doing  so  he  virtually  connives  at 
schism,  sectarianism,  etc.  It  will  be  well  indeed  for  these  "  Brethren"  if  they  have  the 
piety,  usefulness,  etc.  that  many  in  these  Churches  manifest.  This  intense  bigotry  (and 
there  are  others  who  just  as  freely  condemn  the  "  Brethren")  is  the  natural,  logical 
outgrowth  of  their  system,  and  evidences  that  it  is  based  on  error. 


Pi:OP.  98.]  TJIE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  641 


Proposition  98.     That  the  church  is  not  the  Kingdom  promised 
to  David'' s  Son  ivas  the  belief  of  the  early  church. 

This  has  already  been  distinctly  shown  under  Props.  69-75,  but 
some  additional  remarks  to  enforce  the  same  can  be  readily  given. 

0^9.  1.  If  the  church  is  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  God,  we  certainly 
ought  to  find  some  direct  passage  teaching  this,  either  in  the  writings  of 
the  Apostles  or  their  immediate  successors.  But  such  an  one  cannot  he 
f(mnd.  For  two  reasons  it  ought  to  be  contained  in  the  Epistles.  (1)  If 
the  Apostles  at  one  time  in  their  ministry  misapprehended  (as  learned 
men  tell  us  on  Acts  1  :  6,  but  which  we  deny),  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom, 
then  surely  at  a  later  period  when,  as  we  are  again  told,  they  understood 
that  the  church  was  meant,  we  should  reasonably  expect  that  on  so  vital  a 
matter  some  decisive  utterance  should  be  given,  explanatory  of  the  mistake 
made  in  their  previous  preaching  and  confirmatory  of  a  clia7ige  of  vieiu. 
Simple  justice  to  the  truth  and  to  themselves  required  this  at  their  hands, 
m  view  of  their  peculiar  position.  (2)  The  Jews  held  that  the  predicted, 
covenanted  Kingdom  was  an  external,  visible  reign  of  the  Messiah  on  the 
restored  Davidic  throne,  etc.  Now  in  consequence  of  having  continually 
to  meet  such  prejudices,  it  is  peculiarly  significant  that  they  employ  no 
reasoning  so  prevalent  at  the  present  day,  viz.:  that  the  church  is  the 
Kingdom,  etc.,  when  such  would  have  been  \n  ])lace  and  eminently proijer 
if  the  Jews  were  in  error.  If  the  reader  says  that  other  errors  of  the  Jews 
were  not  noticed,  we  reply,  that  all  that  were  of  importance  in  their  rela- 
tion to  the  Christian  dispensation  the  Apostles  met  and  refuted.  And  this 
one,  if  really  an  error,  is  of  such  magnitude  and  weight,  had  such  a  direct 
influence,  sustained  such  a  relation  to  the  very  thing  they  were  taught  to 
proclaim,  viz.:  "the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,"  that  it  is  impossible  to 
believe  that  they  would  have  passed  it  by  without  a  distinct  rejection  and 
a  substitution  of  the  truth.  A  whole  nation  under  a  mistake  respecting 
the  Messiah's  Kingdom  which  the  Apostles  were  specially  commissioned  to 
preach  ;  and  yet  an  error  so  fundamental  is  not  directly  corrected,  but  must 
be  inferred  or  implied!  Is  it  reasonable  or  credible'^  The  truth  is,  that  no 
such  repiidiation  of  error  was  needed. 

Obs.  2.  At  the  risk  of  repetition,  it  may  again  be  said,  that  the  declara- 
tions of  the  Apostles  concerning  the  nearness  of  the  Advent  (Prop.  74)  pre- 
vented them  from  entertaining  the  view  that  the  church  is  the  promised 
Kingdom  of  Christ.  Hoia  could  they  believe  the  church  to  be  such  as  the 
glorious  Kingdom  predicted,  e.g.  by  Daniel,  whose  dominion  was  to  be 
world-wide  and  everlasting,  when  they  were  constantly  looking /or  the  con- 
snmmation  f  We  confess  no  sympathy  with  Dr.  Meander's  method  of  rec- 
onciliation when,  referring  to  this  point,  he  exonerates  the  Apostles  by 
showing  that  they  were  still  uiider  Jcioish  forms  of  thought,  but  that  the 
seeds  of  truth  then  sown  by  them  would,  by  a  foreordained  development. 


(342  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  98. 

finally  be  stripped  from  this  apostolic  shell  or  husk.  We  dare  not  take 
such  liberties  with  apostolic  men,  and  admit  that  they  were  mistaken  in  so 
C07isequential  a  matter  ;  for  if  we  do,  what  assurance  have  we  that  they  did 
not  also  misconceive  other  truths,  enshrouding  them  also  in  "  husks"  ?  Did 
the  Spirit  which  promised  to  lead  them  into  truth,  which  was  specially 
given  to  them  to  impart,  conduct  them  to  a  lower  plane  of  knowledge,  and 
contradict  the  inspiration  given  to  Daniel  ?  Were  the  Apostles,  claiming 
inspiration,  more  fallible  than,  say,  Origen  or  Augustine,  or  Jerome,  or 
Eusebius,  etc.  Receiving  the  admissions  of  a  host  of  writers  (as  e.g.  Watts, 
Essay  prefixed  to  World  to  Come)  that  ''  the  Christians  of  the  first  age  did 
generally  expect  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  to  judgment  and  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead  in  that  very  age  wherein  it  was  foretold  ;"  that  ''  the 
primitive  Christians  imagined  the  day  of  resurrection  and  judgment  was 
near,"  etc.,  it  follows  that  they  could  not  possibly  admit  the  Origenistic 
view  of  the  Kingdom.     (Comp.  Keander,  Mosheim,  Kurtz,  etc.) 

Ohs.  3.  The  strongest  possible  argument  that  the  Apostle  Paul  could 
have  used  to  convince  the  Thessalonians  that  they  were  mistaken  as  to  the 
imminency  of  the  Advent,  would  have  been  the  modern  one  concerning  the 
church,  i.e.  that  Christ's  Kingdom  was  established  in  the  church,  and  that 
according  to  Daniel  and  the  prophets  a  long  career  of  honor  and  dominion 
was  before  it,  for  it  would  be  folly  to  suppose  that  a  Kingdom  just  newly 
set  up  should  so  speedily  come  to  an  end  without  fulfilling  the  prophecies. 
Let  the  student  reflect  on  the  situation,  on  the  abundant  predictions  con- 
cerning the  Kingdom,  and  then  let  him  consider  that  if  the  church  was 
really  intended  to  meet  the  prophecies  of  the  Kingdom,  surely  such  an  ap- 
peal, so  simple,  consistent,  and  convincing,  would  have  been  spoken.  In- 
spiration, however,  to  be  consonant  witli  itself,  could  not  thus  give  it. 
Instead  of  designating  the  church  a  Kingdom  they  (the  Apostles)  teach 
that  it  \s  a  probationary  and  preparatory  stage  to  the  Kingdom.  In  the 
very  Epistle  (Hebrews)  that  above  all  others  was  designed  for  the  Jews, 
and  where,  if  anywliere,  the  church  should  be  specifically  (if  such)  elevated 
to  the  position  of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  we  have,  instead  of  this,  language 
employed  which  is  eminently  calculated  to  confirm  the  Jews  in  their  idea 
of  a  Kingdom  still  future.  Taking  e.g.  the  phrase  "  the  world  to  come,^' 
knowing  the  notions  that  the  Jews  (Prop.  137)  attributed  to  it,  and  rep- 
resenting Jesus  as  the  One  to  whom  it  would  be  subject  ;  speaking  of 
*'  the  rest"  as  future  and  that  it  is  "a  keeping  of  the  Sabbath"  without 
explaining  that  it  was  very  different  from  that  anticipated  by  the  Jews 
(Prop.  143)  under  David's  Son  ;  declaring  that  the  covenant  promises  are 
realized  only  in  Christ  when  He  "  should  come  the  second  time  unto  sal- 
vation,"— these,  and  the  whole  drift  of  the  Epistle,  are  to  the  effect  that  the 
church  must  wait  for  "  the  appearing  and  Kingdom.''^ 

Obs.  4.  N'eander  {His.  of  Plant.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  2,  p.  176)  thus  gives 
Paul's  view  :  "  Such  an  universal  sovereignty  in  reserve  for  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  Paul  certainly  acknowledged  ;  but  the  thought  was  then,  and  must 
have  continued  to  be,  not  familiar  to  his  mind,  that  such  a  supremacy  of 
the  Kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  formed  by  that  developing  process  which 
Christ  compares  to  the  leaven,  through  the  natural  connection  of  causes 
and  effects  under  the  Divine  guidance."  Neander  argues  that  by  this  de- 
veloping process  the  Kingdom  of  God  would  by  degrees  assume  a  suprem- 


Prop.  98.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  643 

acy  "  brought  about  under  other  conditions  than  those  of  earthly  existence 
by  the  Second  Advent  of  Christ."  It  is  Mt  too  true,  that  such  a  theory 
built  upon  the  parable  of  the  leaven,  iims  unfamiliar  to  Paul  ;  it  cannot  be 
found  in  his  writings,  and  yet  he  was  also  (more  so  than  Neander)  familiar 
with  the  parable.  This  theory,  which  its  advocates  so  learnedly  prefer, 
and  which  is  claimed  to  have  been  developed  through  "the  life  of  the 
church"  (rather  through  Hegelian  philosophy),  was  unknown  to  the  early 
church.  For  the  sake  of  the  truth,  "  the  simplicity  and  ignorance"  of  Paul 
is  vastly  to  be  preferred  to  the  philosophical  "  leaven  theory,"  which  over- 
rides the  most  solemnly  given  promises,  and  oath-confirmed  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom, — and  which  assumes  that  Apostles,  to  whom  the  parables 
were  explained  by  Christ,  who  conversed  much  with  Jesus  respecting  the 
Kingdom,  and  who  were  specially  guided  by  the  Spirit,  knew  less  about 
the  parables  than  uninspired  men  following  centuries  after. 

Obs.  5.  So  little,  indeed,  did  the  first  Christians  hold  the  notion  that 
the  church  is  the  Kingdom,  that  they  refused  even  to  allow  the  saints  after 
death  to  have  ascended  into  the  third  heaven  (see  Brooks'  El.  Proph. 
Inter.,  Bickersteth's  Guide,  etc.),  and  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  it,  placing 
them  in  an  intermediate  stale,  awaiting  in  Hades  the  coming  of  the  King- 
dom (so,  e.g.,  Justin  Martyr  explicitly  declares).  And  even  down  to  Ter- 
tullian,  who  is  willing  to  make  an  exception  in  behalf  of  the  Patriarchs, 
Prophets,  and  Martyrs,  this  intermediate  state  or  Paradise  "  is  not,  prop- 
erly speaking,  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,  into  which  they  will  not  enter 
until  after  Christ's  Advent."  (So  Neander,  His.  of  Dogmas,  p.  252,  vol. 
1.)  Hoio  then  if  even  unwilling  to  admit  this,  as  Justin  informs  us,  could 
they  constitute  the  church  a  Kingdom  ?  Hence,  in  the  earliest  writings, 
there  is  not  a  decisive  passage  which  teaches  the  prevailing  modern  view. 
While  the  Fathers  insisted  on  the  universal  government  of  God,  the  Head- 
ship of  Christ  over  the  church,  yet  they  do  not  designate  the  church  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  or  profess  to  be  in  the  Kingdom,  but  represent  them- 
selves as  looking  for  it  still  future.  Barnabas,  Iren^us,  Justin,  and 
others  freely  give  us  their  opinions,  and  they  fully  correspond  with  our 
doctrinal  position.     This  fact  alone  is  strongly  corroborative  of  our  belief. 

Let  the  reader  refer  e.g.  to  Prop.  93,  Obs.  10,  and  observe  how  Tertullian  explains 
the  Lord's  Prayer.  "  Thy  Kingdom  come  "  cannot  be  prayed  for  by  those  who  already 
possess  it.  Tiie  disciples  (as  we  have  shown,  Proj^s.  43,  44,  54,  55,  68,  70,  etc.),  who 
prayed  it,  had  no  idea  of  the  modern  notion  engrafted  on  the  prayer.  They  prayed  it, 
looking  for  a  Kingdom  to  come  visibly  in  the  future  under  David's  Son.  We  may  well 
ask.  How  could  the  Divine  Master  give  them  such  a  prayer,  with  such  a  clause  in  it, 
which,  as  the  facts  evidence,  was  eminently  calculated  to  confirm  them  in  expecting  the 
covenant  to  be  realized  in  its  plain  grammatical  sense  ?  "Would  Jesus  give  them  that  in 
prayer  which  He  foreknew  would  be  (if  the  modern  notion  is  correct)  grossly  misun- 
derstood and  perverted  ?  No  !  consistency,  the  covenants  and  prophecy,  reqiiire  us  to 
understand  the  Kingdom  prayed  for  as  not  then  in  existence,  but  as  future  and  certain  to 
come.  The  prayer  is  given,  without  explanation,  in  view  of  a  well-known  covenanted 
Kingdom,  generally  anticipated.  (The  delicacy,  exquisite,  expressed  in  the  word 
"  Thy,"  in  its  Theocratic  ordering,  relating  to  David's  Son,  is  seen  e.g.  under  Props. 
83,  200,  etc.)  The  clause  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,"  etc.,  is  not  now  verified  even 
in  the  Church  (e.g.  Props.  96  and  97),  and,  so  long  as  it  remains  in  its  present  mixed 
character,  cannot  be.  The  "  will  "  of  God  respecting  the  earth  is  easily  seen  if  the  eye. 
of  faith  is  directed  either  to  the  past  or  to  the  future  ;  in  the  past,  it  is  reflected  before 
the  fall,  and  in  the  future  it  shines  forth  in  the  renewed  earth.  To  make  it  manifested 
now  as  originally  intended,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  is  to  cover  it  over  with  the 
passions,  frailties,  etc.,  of  poor  humanity.     (Comp.  Prop.  105.) 


644  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  99. 


Propositiois-  99.  The  opinion  that  the  church  is  the  predicted 
Kingdom  of  Christ  was  of  later  origin  than  the  first  and 
second  centuries. 

In  the  first  centuries  Millenarianism  was  prevalent  and  generally 
held,  Props.  72-76.  It  was  entertained  in  the  form  that  we  now 
advocate,  and,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  could  not  receive  the 
opinion  stated  in  the  Proposition.  The  Fathers  all  looked  and 
longed  for  a  speedy  api^earance  of  the  Kingdom  under  the  per- 
sonal reign  of  Jesus.  The  opposers  of  Chiliasni  in  the  third  cen- 
tury first  gave  a  different  interpretation  to  the  church,  by  which  it 
was  transformed  into  the  Kino-dom  of  Christ. 


*■&' 


Obs.  1.  The  opposers  mentioned  designed  such  an  exchange  to  offset 
the  idea  of  a  coming  Kingdom  of  Christ  here  on  earth.  If  they  could 
point  to  an  ah-eady  existing  Kingdom  over  Avhich  Christ  then  reigned  as 
predicted,  it  would  go  far  to  demolish  the  Chiliastic  doctrine  of  the  future 
Kingdom.  The  Origenistic  interpretation  was  admirably  adapted  to  bring 
about  so  desirable  a  substitution,  and  through  its  flexible  and  mystical 
manipulations  the  work  was  accomplished.  Origen  was  about,  if  not,  the 
first  one  who  introduced  "  the  novelty." 

Obs,  2.  In  justice,  however,  to  Origen  himself,  we  must  add,  that  while 
paving  the  way  for  others,  and  expressing  himself  somewhat  like  many 
moderns,  yet  even  he  frequently  writes  guardedly,  perhaps  undecidedly. 
Thus  e.g.  in  his  "  De  Principiis^^  when  making  a  Kingdom  to  exist  here 
on  earth  in  the  church,  he  speaks  of  the  church  (B.  1,  ch.  6)  "  luhicli  is 
the  form  of  that  Kingdom  avhich  is  to  come,"  and  (in  B.  3,  ch.  6),  he  goes 
on  to  show  that  "  theform^^  of  a  Kingdom  does  not  include  the  reign  of 
Christ,  but  only  that  of  Christ's  agents,  for  speaking  of  "  the  consumma- 
tion and  restoration  of  all  tilings"  when  "  those  better  institutions"  will 
be  introduced,  he  adds  :  "  For,  after  his  Agents  and  servants,  the  Lord 
Christ,  who  is  King  of  all,  will  Himself  assume  the  Kingdom."  x\s  we 
cannot  tell  whether  Rufinus  added  to  this  or  not,  we  are  content  to  receive 
it  as  also  Origenistic,  and  proof  that  he  himself  could  not  entirely  rid  him- 
self of  the  early  church  doctrine  of  a  Kingdom  still  future  belonging 
pre-eminently  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Obs.  3.  After  the  Roman  Empire  nominally  became  Christian,  then, 
indeed,  a  host  of  writers  sprang  up,  who  lavished  the  Kingdom  upon  the 
church  with  so  liberal  a  hand,  that  the  union  of  state  and  church  under 
Constantino  and  his  successors  was  pronounced  to  be  not  only  the  Kingdom 
of  Christ,  but  the  Kingdom  in  Millennial  bloom,  even  to  a  New  Jerusalem 
condition.     (See  Eusebius  and  Jerome.)     "When  the  Papacy  was  unfolded 


Prop.  99.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  645 

and  in  power,  it  was  impossible,  with  its  idea  of  vicegerency,  etc.,  to  ex- 
pect any  other  than  an  anti-chiliastic  view  of  the  church.  This  brief 
synopsis,  with  Props.  76,  77,  78,  and  what  follows,  is  amply  sufficient  for 
the  present. 

The  Popish  Church  is  called  "  the  Kingdom  of  Christ"  in  the  Dogmatic  Decrees  of  the 
recent  Vatican  Council,  thus  only  confirming  the  ten  thousand  previous  utterances. 
Out  of  a  multitude  of  illustrations,  it  is  sufficient  to  give  Bh.  Vaughan  (Gladstone's  Vat- 
icanism, p.  55),  who  says  that  the  Church  has  been  created  "  a  perfect  Society  or  King- 
dom," "  with  full  authority  in  the  triple  order,  as  needful  for  a  perfect  Kingdom,  legisla- 
tive, judicial,  and  coercive."  (Comp.  Arch.  Manning's  Vaticayi  Decrees,  p. 'id,  and  as 
illustrative  of  this  "  perfect  Kingdoja"  read  the  lives  of  the  Popes.) 

Obs.  4.  The  history  of  the  doctrine  of  the  church  should  not  influence 
any  one  to  reject  the  truth  itself.  The  Scriptures,  in  the  cautions  and 
warnings  given,  teach  us  to  cmiici2Mte  the  result  witnessed.  No  doctrine 
of  the  Bible,  however  important,  but  has  been  perverted  and  abused  by 
men,  and  has  been  allied  with  error  and  even  extravagance.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Kingdom  has  not  escaped  the  withering  touch  of  depravity  ;  and  as 
we  read,  again  and  again  the  testimony  comes  how  enthusiasm,  mysti- 
cism, fanaticism  have  sought  to  engraft  upon  it  the  most  outrageous  and 
blasphemous  assumptions,  even  to  the  extent  that  persons  have  given  them- 
selves out  to  be  the  king  of  such  a  Kingdom.  Eeflection,  however,  enables 
us  to  perceive  that  such  abuse  and  perversion  are  only,  in  the  light  of 
prophecy,  corroborative  evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of  Scripture. 

This  notion  of  the  church  being  the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  Christ  (instead  of  being, 
what  it  really  is,  a  preparatory  stage  for  the  future  introduction  of  the  Kingdom)  is 
deeply  rooted  in  jirevailing  Theology,  and  even  in  literature.  It  is  an  idea  long  held  in 
veneration,  fortified  by  great  names,  embellished  by  eloquence,  supported  by  philos- 
oi:)hy,  strengthened  by  policy,  power,  and  age,  enriched  by  the  cumulative  reasoning  of 
many  centuries  and  the  concessions  of  piety,  so  that,  in  view  of  its  position,  dimen- 
sions, and  intrenchments,  the  person  who  ventures  to  meet  it  is  almost  placed  like  one 
in  "  a  forlorn  hope."  Ideas,  consecrated  and  cemented  by  the  expressed  opinions,  attach- 
ment, and  submission  of  multitudes,  embracing  men  of  the  highest  ability,  piety,  and 
learning,  are  not  to  be  eradicated,  saving  by  a  higher  hand,  when  fulfilling  His  own 
counsels  and  covenanted  promise.  The  notion,  as  we  have  abundantly  shown,  is 
variously  presented,  and  is  so  general  that  it  is  even  adopted  in  the  titles  of  books, 
as  e.g.  a  history  of  Congregationalism  in  New  England  is  designated  by  its  author, 
H.  F.  Uhden,  "  The  New  England  Theocracy"  ;  a  history  of  the  church  is  called  by 
the  writer,  Dr.  Jarvis,  "  The  History  of  the  Mediatorial  Kingdom,"  etc.  Under  its 
influence  the  most  extravagant  claims  have  been  enforced,  not  only  by  the  Papacy  but 
by  Proteslanism.  Sects  have  taken  advantage  of  the  opening,  and  pretended  that  their 
several  organizations  were  the  predicted  Kingdom.  The  Mormons  (Seward's  Travels,  p. 
19)  declare,  "  that,  according  to  divine  promise,  the  Kingdom  of  God  came  upon  the 
earth  immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  Saviour  ;  that  this  Kingdom  has  a  key  ; 
that  the  church  early  lost  it,  and  that  the  Latter  Day  Saints  have  found  it,"  etc.,  being 
the  Kingdom,     Enthusiasts  have  pressed  it  to  an  extreme. 

Ohs.  5.  With  infidel  writers  no  view  of  the  church  is  satisfactory. 
Thus  e.g.  the  Duke  of  Somerset  boldly  informs  us,  that  the  early  church 
doctrine,  once  entertained,  but  properly  rejected  by  the  church,  does  not 
satisfy  modern  thought  and  wants,  being  too  "  deeply  colored  hy  the  popular 
traditions  and  poetical  imagery  of  the  Hebrew  race.^''  On  the  other  hand, 
the  doctrine  substituted  by  the  church  in  the  place  of  the  one  rejected  is 
contrasted  with  the  early  one,  and  being  found  so  diverse,  the  deduction  is 
drawn,  that  the  Word  itself  is  unreliable,  erroneous,  etc.     Or,  contrasting 


646  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  99. 

the  modern  clmrcli  views  with  the  prophecies,  they  claim  that  one  or  the 
other  is  incorrect,  etc.  The  Kingdom  not  existing,  as  predicted,  in  the 
church  at  present,  causes  them  to  refuse  the  Biblical  account ;  the  King- 
dom professedly  in  the  church  is  obnoxious  to  them,  and  leads  to  the  same 
refusal  on  the  ground  that  it  does  not  correspond  either  with  the  early 
church  or  the  record. 


Prop.  100.]  the  theocratic  kiin^gdom.  647 


Proposition  100.     Tlie  visible  church  is  not  the  i^redicted  King- 
dom of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  covenant  forbids  the  idea  to  be  entertained,  for  the  Davidic 
covenant  and  the  promises  based  on  it,  as  v^^e  have  shown,  remain 
unfulfilled^  unrealized  in  the  church.  This  Proposition  is  ad- 
vanced in  this  form  only  to  direct  attention  to  the  fact,  that  many 
writers  atfirm  that  the  visible  church  itself  is  the  kingdom.  The 
arguments  already  advanced  refute  this  notion,  but  leaving  these  to 
speak  for  themselves,  we  give  some  additional  observations. 

Ohs.  1.  Aside  from  Roman  Catholic  and  Protestant  divines,  who  declare 
in  the  most  positive  manner  (as  e.g.  Bellarmine — Fisher's  His.  of  Refor., 
p.  4G5 — Romanist,  says  that  the  church-Kingdom  is  as  tangible  as  the  Re- 
public of  Venice,  and  Gresley — in  his  True  Churcliman — a  Protestant, 
who  takes  the  same  ground),  that  the  visible  church  is  the  Kingdom,  it  is 
painful  to  follow  the  inconsistent  and  half-way  utterances  of  a  large  class 
of  writers,  who  on  one  page  affirm  the  same'^and  on  another  page,  con- 
fronted by  its  mixed  state,  conclude  the  contrary,  or  else  concede  a  kind 
(lower)  of  Kingdom  to  the  external  ("a  shadowing  forth")  but  the 
true  notion  to  the  internal  or  invisible  church.  In  the  latter,  a  distinct 
and  uniform  theory  is  lacking  ;  whilst  in  the  former,  claim  can  be  made, 
at  least,  to  a  unity,  etc.,  for  it  contains  a  form  of  government,  having  its 
rulers,  subjects,  etc. 

An  illustration  of  these  two  opinions  may  be  in  place.  Thus  e.g.  whatever  may  be 
the  Scriptural  and  historical  value  of  presbytery  itself,  under  the  idea,  taken  for  granted, 
that  the  visible  church  is  the  Kingdom,  Rev.  Porteus  gives  us  a  Frhe,  Essay  with  preface 
by  Dr.  Bonar,  bearing  the  significant  and  far-reaching  title.  "  Tlie  Goveryimeni  of  the 
Kingdom  of  thrist :  An  Inquiry  as  to  the  Scriptural,  Invincible,  and  Historical  Position 
of  Presbj'tery."  Again,  e.g.  Schmid  {Bib.  Theol.  of  the  Xew  Test.,  p.  250)  clearly  sees 
the  difticulty  of  making  the  visible  church  in  its  present  state  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and 
yet  forced  by  this  theory  to  find  an  outward  development  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  here 
on  earth,  and  such  a  church  being  tbe  only  thing  present  to  which  it  can  be  attached, 
he  gives  us  this  paradoxical  assertion  :  "  It  may  be  said  that  the  church  is  not  in  any 
respect  identical  with  the  Kingdom,  of  God  ;  hid  yet  the  actual  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth  coincides 
with  the  church  "  To  prove  this  we  are  led  into  mystical  and  philosophical  reasoning, 
based  solely  on  assumption,  and  which  is  afterward  contradicted  by  his  own  showing, 
that  the  church  is  the  Kingdom  because  baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  Christ's  Word,  are 
"  the  groundwork  of  God's  Kingdom  on  earth,"  etc.  The  efforts  to  soften  and  tone 
this  down  to  a  spiritual  nature  does  not  deliver  him  from  palpable  contradictions,  as 
e.g.  in  one  place  telling  us  that  these  ordinances  thus  related  to  the  Kingdom  are 
external  and  outward,  tlien  in  another  that  the  Kingdom  upon  which  these  external 
ordinances  are  based  is  inward,  and  then  still  in  another  that  the  Kingdom  is  also 
outward,  working  from  external  ordinances,  and  from  within  outwardly.  A  theory  that 
needs  such  a  coif  used  bolstering  requires  no  special  comment,  although  some  of  the  most 
able  men,  forced  by  a  preconceived  notion,  tenaciously  cling  to  it.  And  it  is  a  matter  of 
amazement:  that  many  men,  like  Neander,  who  insist  so  strongl}^  that  the  invisible  church 
is  the  Kingdom  predicted,  finally,  by  a  series  of  mystical  transfusions,  have  this  same 
invisible  Church-Kingdom  made  an  outward  visible  Church-Kingdom  here  on  earth,  thus 


648  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  100. 

violating  the  f  andamental  principles  of  the  very  theorj'  which  causes  them  in  the  first 
place  to  adopt  the  invisible  ;  for,  if  correct,  the  church  should  always  in  this  dispensa- 
tion possess  the  same  characteristics,  undergoing  as  it  does  the  same  leavening  process 
described  by  him.  Fuller  {Strictures  on  Robinson's  Sentiments,  Let.  3),  to  indicate  that  the 
church  is  a  Kingdom,  says  :  "  The  church  of  God  is  represented  as  a  city,"  etc.,  and 
quotes  as  coniirmatory  Isa.  26  :  1,  2.  But  this  passage  does  not  refer  to  the  church  as 
now  constituted,  as  is  apj)arent  from  the  context,  following  as  it  does  the  resurrection  of 
the  saints,  the  complete  overthrow  of  all  enemies,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish 
nation.  Passages  which  refer  exclusively  to  a  still  future  dispensation  are  thus  con- 
stantly applied  to  this  one,  without  the  least  attemjjt  to  show  that  they  are  properly 
used.  This  is  only  a  continuation  of  the  Papal  view.  Thus  e.g.  a  recent  Komanist,  Dr. 
Alzog  (Univ.  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  153),  says  :  "  Christ,  therefore,  recognized  the  necessity 
of  such  an  institution,  founded  a  visible  church,  which  He  calls  indifferently  the  King- 
dom of  God,  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  the  Kingdom  of  Christ."  It  is  this  idea  that 
infused  such  a  spirit  (see  Spiritual  Exercises)  into  Loyola  and  others,  and  is  the  basis  of 
the  infallibility  doctrine  (as  also  exemplified  in  the  Metropolitan,  Arch.,  Macariur, 
teaching  the  infallibility  of  the  Czar — the  Greek  Church  being  leavened  with  the  Church- 
Kingdom  idea),  as  brought  out  in  the  recent  Se^-mons,  Lectures,  etc.  of  Kev.  Burke  and 
others. 

Obs.  2.  The  reader  will  notice,  that  tJie  visiiilify  of  the  Kingdom  in  the 
church  is  a  matter  fully  admitted  by  a  host  of  our  opponents.  Even  those 
who  cleave  to  the  invisibility  of  it  (i.e.  under  the  invisible  churcli),  as  at 
first  and  now  constructed,  in  some  way  bring  iiUimatclij  out  of  this  invis- 
ible a  visible  Kingdom.  They,  notwithstanding  the  inconsistency  in- 
volved, are  simply  compelled  to  this  by  the  testimony  of  prophecy,  which 
(as  e.g.  Dan.,  chs.  2  and  7),  unmistakably  predicts  such  an  outward,  visible 
dominion.  Tlie  singular  feature  in  this  is  tlie  following  :  in  the  construc- 
tion of  such  a  visible  Kingdom  either  as  now  existing  or  as  it  shall  ulti- 
mately in  the  future,  they  find  no  difficult ij  in  the  dechiration  "  my  King- 
dom is  not  of  this  world, '^  in  making  out  the  church  to  possess  a  world 
dominion,  having  church  and  state  united,  etc.,  but  the  same  passage  is 
persistently  paraded,  and  false  inferences  drawn  from  it,  against  the  visible 
Kingdom,  the  world  dominion  tvlien  presented  by  Millenarians.  Another 
fact  is  to  be  observed  in  this  controversy,  that  all  divines,  who  oppose  our 
view,  agree  tliat  either  now  or  at  some  future  time  when  the  church  has 
this  external  development  predicted  by  the  prophets,  the  phrases  Kingdom 
of  heaven  and  Kingdom  of  God  are  applicable  to  a  visible  state  here  on  the 
earth.  This  feature  is  then  yielded  to  us  by  the  large  majority  of  our  op- 
ponents ;  if  not  universal,  it  is  generally  held.  If  so,  it  should  certainly 
aid  in  remoYing prejudice  against  us. 

The  works  on  the  Church,  Church  and  State,  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  Church  Govern- 
ment, etc.,  evidence  this  widespread  notion,  derived  from  the  prophecies.  Many  of  the 
ideas  advanced  are  fundamentally  correct,  but  the  mistake  which  vitiates  the  whole  is 
the  transference  of  the  fulfilment  from  the  period  after  the  Sec.  Advent  to  the  "  times  of 
the  Gentiles,"  between  the  First  and  Second  Advent.  A  multitude  of  able  writers 
advocate  a  present  visibility  of  the  Kingdom,  a  present  realization  of  the  prophecies, 
and  a  Theocracy  already  established,  as  can  be  seen  e.g.  in  Jewell's  Apol.  for  the  Church 
of  England,  Hooker's  Eccl.  Polity,  Buckle's  His.  of  Civ.,  vol.  2,  p.  271,  Gladstone's  State 
in  Relation  to  tlie  Church,  and  Macaulay's  Essay  on  same,  Warburton's  Alliance,  of  Church 
and  State,  Paley's  Defence  of  the  Church,  etc.,  etc. 

Obs.  3.  The  prophecies  so  decisive  of  a  visible  manifestation  of  Christ's 
Kingdom,  it  being  something  that  all  men  can  see  and  realize  in  its  organ- 
ized and  exerted  power,  drives  some  to  a  singular  classification  and  division 
of  the  church,  such  as  that  the  Kingdom  is  (1)  the  church,  (:3)  the  church 


PnOP.   100.]  THE   TIIEOCPwATIC    KINGDOM,  649 

in  the  Millennial  age,  and  (3)  the  church  in  lieaven  ;  or,  as  a  commentator 
has  it,  (1)  the  church  an  internal  Kingdom,  (2)  the  church  an  external 
Kingdom,  (3)  the  church  as  a  future  Kingdom,  and  (4)  the  church  in. 
lieaven.  A  Kingdom  is  often  formed  (as  e.g.  Olshausen,  Com.,  Yol.  2,  p. 
172)  at  the  will  of  the  writer  to  suit  the  occasion.  The  Kingdom  instead 
of  being  one  (Prop.  35),  is  really  made  into  several.  And  in  some 
instances,  if  we  understand  the  authors  correctly,  one  within  the  other. 
This,  in  the  light  of  prophecy,  is  evidently  incorrect.  Dr.  Neander  {Life 
of  Christ,  Sec.  52)  feels  that  there  is  a  difficulty  in  making  the  church  a 
Kingdom  to  accord  with  prophecy  without  an  external,  outward  manifesta- 
tion of  governing  power  ;  therefore,  he  mystically  distinguishes  two  stages 
of  the  Kingdom  ;  first,  a  hidden  or  inward  condition,  and  then  the  second 
stage  was  by  means  of  the  first  "  to  establish  His  (Christ's)  Kingdom  as  a 
real  one,  more  and  more  widely  among  men,  and  subdue  the  world  to  his 
dominion."  And  this  reality  is  to  be  witnessed  in  "  «  real  world  domi?i- 
ion,'^  "  a  j)crfect  world  dominion,'^  an  "  universal  em2)ire.^'  Now  aside  from 
this  theory  being  flatly  contradicted  by  the  parable  of  the  tares  and  wheat, 
etc.,  it  certainly  looks,  with  his  "  leaven  theory"  to  alone  accomplish  it, 
suspicious  and  accommodating  to  make  the  Kingdom  (1)  unreal  or  ideal, 
and  then  (2)  real  or  the  ideal  realized.  Multitudes  embrace  the  notion, 
that  in  some  way  the  church  must  be  the  Kingdom,  because  they  suppose 
that  it  will  ultimately  in  this  dispensation  become  universal  and  exhibit 
outwardly,  more  and  more,  the  form  essential  to  a  Kingdom,  \^'e  request 
the  reader  to  notice  tiie  important  concession  made  by  it,  viz. :  it  admits  an 
outward,  visible  form  requisite  to  fulfil  prophecy,  and  that  the  church  has 
not  yet  attained  to  the  period  when  this  is  to  be  manifested.  Such  admis- 
sions, as  far  as  they  go,  materially  confirm  our  own  doctrinal  position. 

Probably  one  of  the  most  vigorous  efforts  to  make  the  church  the  promised  King- 
dom of  Christ  is  that  found  in  the  Scottish  Church  in  its  struggles  with  Popery  and 
Prelacy.  (See  the  Epitome  given  by  D'Aubigne  in  his  Germany,  England,  and  Scotland, 
chs.  4,  5,  and  6.)  Opposing  the  pretensions  of  others,  the  assumption  is  taken  that  such 
a  Kingdom  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  headshii^  and  kingship  of  Christ.  During  the 
entire  discussion  there  is  no  discrimination  made  between  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and 
the  Kingdom  promised  to  the  Son  of  David  ;  the  covenants,  which  underlie  tlie  whole 
subject,  are  totally  ignored  (in  grammatical  sense),  and  issue  is  made  on  isolated  pas- 
sages of  Scripture  torn  from  their  connection  and  unity.  It  is  supposed  that  the  church 
is  the  Davidic  Kingdom  (spiritualized)  ;  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  Jesus  now  sits  on 
David's  throne  ibuthow  the  Father's  throne  is  thus  substituted  does  not  appear)  ;  and 
Luke  1  :  32,  33  is  often  quoted,  without  anj'  attempt  at  explanation,  as  if  apj)licable  to 
the  present.  The  holding  of  His  Kingdom  in  abeyance  for  purposes  of  mercy  and  love 
(to  gather  out  a  people)  ;  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent  (clearly 
taught)  ;  in  brief,  those  characteristics  which  evidence  the  2:)reparatory  nature  of  the 
church  and  its  non-identity  with  the  Kingdom— are  left  out  of  sight,  and  the  greatest 
stress  is  laid  on  visible  sacraments,  a  visible  ministry,  a  visible  government,  etc.,  with- 
out excluding  the  invisible.  A  writer  (anon.,  but  withal  Protestant)  builds  his  entire 
argument  that  the  church  is  the  Kingdom  upon  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock," 
etc.,  laying  special  stress  on  the  words  "  And  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven"  (for  which  comp.  Prop.  G4,  etc.).  Indeed,  the  Jiefcrrmed  Pres- 
hi/terian  Church,  or  Covenanters  (see  an  Art.  on,  by  Kev.  Hutcheson,  in  M'Chntock  and 
Strong's  Cyclop.),  makes  not  only  the  church  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom,  but 
even  includes  the  State  :  "  They  consider  the  church  and  the  State  as  the  two  leading 
departments  of  Christ's  visible  Kingdom  on  earth."  This  is  done  by  ignoring  the 
grammatical  sense  of  the  covenants,  spiritualizing  the  predictions,  apj^lying  to  the 
present  what  belongs  to  the  future,  and  misapprehending  the  "  times  of  the  Gentiles" 
and  the  design  of  this  dispensation.  But  it  is  a  legitimate  following  out  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  Calvin  (from  which  others  swerve),  for  Calvin's  rule  in  Geneva  resulted  from 
the  misconception  that  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  "  was  to  be  realized  in  the  lives  and 


650  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  100. 

society  of  tlae  people  (comp.  Fisher's  His.  Eefor.,  p.  217,  etc.  ;  D'Aubigne's  Ills,  of 
Befor.,  etc.).  He  so  framed  the  State  that  the  Church  through  a  consistory  had  the 
controlling  influence,  and  the  State  was  only  co-operative  in  enforcing  a  code,  which 
was  the  resultant  of  the  opinion  that  God's  Kingdom  was  established  in  the  Church, 
and  that  a  sort  of  Mosaic  legislation  under  an  alleged  existing  Theocratic  organization 
was  in  place,  by  which  all— even  such  as  were  not  predestined  unto  salvation— were 
forced,  by  penalties,  upon  their  good  behavior  and  obedience.  History  records  the 
sad  conflict,  and  infidelity,  overlooking  the  conscientiousness  (however  mistaken)  of 
"  the  venerable  comj)any,"  makes  itself  merry  at  the  expense  of  the  trivial  and  bloody 
stringency  (repeated  again  in  Puritanism)  of  its  laws,  without  considering  that  men  who 
sincerely  entertained  such  views  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  could  not,  if  really  honest  in 
their  convictions,  act  otherwise.  This  mistaken  doctrine  affords  an  apology  for  a  code 
which  advocated  coercion  in  matters  of  religion,  and  made  the  State,  as  in  the  Papacy, 
the  executioner.  Neal  {His.  of  the  Puritans),  when  summing  up  the  differences  between 
the  Puritans  and  the  High-Church  party,  adds  finally  that  both  insisted  upon  a  uniform- 
ity of  worship  and  of  "  calling  in  the  sword  of  the  magistrate  for  the  support  and  the 
defence  of  their  several  principles. ' '  The  spirit  of  the  Papacy  is  by  some  most  strenu- 
ously enforced,  as  e.g.  illustrated  in  Cartwright  (Disraeli's  Cat.  of  Authors,  vol.  1,  p.  365, 
note),  who  made  out  a  Republic  of  Presbyters  to  be  superior  to  all  sovereigns,  for  the 
latter  "were  to  be  as  subjects;  they  were  to  vail  their  sceptres,  and  to  offer  their 
crowns  as  the  prophet  speaketh,  to  lick  the  dust  off  the  feet  of  the  church"  (misapplying 
the  prophet).  He  says  :  "The  monarchs  of  the  world  should  give  np  their  sceptres 
and  crowns  unto  Him  (Jesus  Christ),  who  is  represented  by  the  officers  of  the  church." 
Alas  !  by  a  perversion  of  Scripture,  honestly  and  most  tenaciously  held,  what  disastrous 
results,  what  crimes,  what  persecution  and  death,  have  resulted.  Those  who  desire  this 
Church-Kingdom  theory  "run  to  seed"  may  refer  to  the  dying  testimony  of  Alex. 
Campbell,  as  given  in  the  London  (Quarterly  Review,  1851,  p.  165. 

Ohs.  4.  A  number  of  authors,  who  declare  that  "  the  church  on  the 
earth,  or  the  body  of  the  faithful,  is  a  true  and  visible  representation  of 
Christ's  Kingdom,  the  Kingdom  of  Grace,  the  mediatorial  Kingdom," 
also  say,  "  the  Patriarchal  Church,  the  Jewish  Church,  and  the  Christian 
Church  are  but  different  names  for  the  same  church — they  are  all  the 
Church  of  Christ."  Identifying  the  two,  making  one  and  all  the  same 
Kingdom,  i.e.  Christ's,  they  involve  themselves  in  the  absurdity  that  the 
Kingdom  specially  promised  to  David's  JSon,  said  David's  Son  held  in  pos- 
session before  David's  Son  was  ever  horn  I  The  most  fatal  objections,  as  pre- 
ceding Propositions  show,  beset  this  theory  on  all  sides.  Even  the  simple 
matter  of  John's  preaching  sets  it  aside  ;  for,  if  correct,  then  John's 
preaching  of  the  Kingdom  was  equivalent  to  his  saying,  "  Repent,  for  the 
church  is  at  hand."  But  how  could  such  a  declaration  be  made,  if  the 
church,  as  Christ's  Kingdom,  existed  previously  and  at  that  time  ?  One 
writer,  however,  thinks  that  he  finds  the  solution  in  saying  that  the  church 
had  previously  to  John's  time  existed  ''  under  types,  in  a  typical  state." 
This  only  involves  the  subject  in  still  greater  absurdity.  For,  while  all 
admit  that  types  existed  that  were  to  be  superseded,  nearly  all  also  retam 
the  reality  of  the  church  itself ;  but  this  theory  makes  the  church  itself 
unreal,  simply  "  a  shadoiu  of  good  things  to  come,'''  thus  constituting  it  in 
itself  a  mere  typical  establishment  or  Kingdom,  instead  of  its  being,  what 
it  really  was,  a  real,  organized,  visible  establishment  having  and  observing 
some  typical  ordinances. 

Obs.  5.  Men  of  the  greatest  reflection,  such  as  Rothe,  Coleridge,  Arnold, 
and  others,  seeing  the  past  and  present  condition  of  the  church,  and 
frankly  acknowledging  that  it  does  not  in  its  visible  aspect  correspond  with 
the  conditions  imposed   by  prophecy,  and  yet  hampered  by  a  theory  which 


Prop.  100.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  651 

requires  them  to  regard  tlie  church  as  a  sort  of  embryotic  Kingdom  or 
state,  they  contend  that  the  church  will  not  be  complete,  i.e.  assume  the 
predicted  aspect,  until  it  is  absorbed  in  the  state,  or  the  state  is  identified 
with  the  church — ecclesiastical  perfection  being  civil  perfection,  the  state 
constituting  the  church — the  present  separate  condition  of  the  church 
being  oiihj  provisional.  Thus  deep  thinkers  have  of  their  own  accord 
adopted  the  early  church  view,  that  the  present  state  of  the  church  is  07ili/ 
provisional,  but  they  certainly  mistake  when  they  (i.e.  some  of  them)  at- 
tribute the  ultimate  result,  i.e.  the  development  into  a  visible  Kingdom 
such  as  prophecy  demands,  to  the  progress  of  the  human  race  through 
religious,  moral,  mental,  social,  scientific,  etc.,  influences,  instead  of, 
where  prophecy  places  it,  to  the  i^ersonal  intervention  and  power  of  Christ. 
This  will  be  examined  in  detail  hereafter,  and  it  is  sufficient  now  to  say, 
that  the  covenant  itself,  descriptive  of  the  Kingdom,  forlids  our  accept- 
ance of  such  a  theory.  The  line  of  argument  adopted  by  them  makes, 
however,  valuable  concessions,  equivalent  to  what  we  contend  for  in  this 
future  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  the  perfect  union  of  church  and 
state.  The  Millenarian  view  is  not  specially  concerned  in  adopting  any 
of  their  ideas  ;  only  it  insists,  that  with  such  opinions  certainly  no 
serious  ohjedion  can  be  alleged  against  the  visibility,  etc.  of  the  cove- 
nanted Kingdom  as  entertained  by  us.  Their  statements  even  go  farther 
than  we  have  seen  in  Millenarian  writings.  Thus  e.g.  according  to  Rothe, 
the  state  is  finally  to  absorb  the  church,  taking  up  Christianity  in  itself 
and  becoming  the  Kingdom  of  God  (consummated,  Dr.  Lange  adds)  ;  and 
according  to  Bluntschli  the  church  will  yield  up  its  specifically  Christian 
character,  thus  paving  the  way  for  the  culture  of  Mohammedans,  Japanese, 
etc.  In  all  this,  the  admission  is  constantly  made  that  the  visible 
church,  as  now  constituted,  does  not  yet  present  the  predicted  appearance 
of  the  Kingdom.  In  pressing  their  theory  to  make  it  correspond  with 
prophetic  announcements,  they,  without  the  guidance  of  the  descrij^tion  of 
the  Kingdom  already  solemnly  covenanted,  go  to  unnecessary  lengths  ;  on 
the  one  hand,  making  an  enslavement  or  subjugation  of  the  church  under 
the  state  ;  or,  on  the  other,  such  a  radical  change  of  the  church  that  in 
this  dispensation  it  loses  its  specific  character.  We,  however,  show  that  in 
the  future  Kingdom  there  is  a  perfect  union  of  church  and  state  under  one 
Head  without  absorption  or  prejudice  to  either  one  or  the  other. 

Again,  we  caution  the  student  that  able  Pre-Millenarians  hold  to  the  idea  that  the 
Church  is  a  provisional  or  introductory  Kingdom,  or  as  some  call  it,  "an  embryotic 
Kingdom"  or  "  a  Kingdom  in  mystery."  But  not  one  holds  that //i^s  is  the  proper 
covenanted  and  jDredicted  Kingdom,  for  they  all  teach  that  the  Sec.  Advent  can  alone, 
introduce  it.  The  few  passages  which  cause  such  Pre-Millenarians  to  retain  this  view, 
will  come  up  hereafter  for  detailed  examination.  We  vastly  prefer  the  simple,  plain 
grammatical  sense  to  guide  us  in  connection  with  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word,  which, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  reveals  to  us  only  one  distinctive  Messianic  Kingdom.  To 
such  who  may  read  this,  the  writer  simply  points  to  Luke  17  :  22,  and  reminds  them 
that  this  period  of  time,  during  the  absence  of  the  Son  of  man,  cannot  possibly — aside 
from  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and  the  headship  of  Jesus  over  the  church — bring  us  into 
the  enjoyment  of  a  Kingdom,  although  it  brings  us  the  faith,  hope,  and  joy  of  "  heirs." 
Taking  the  view  advocated  by  us,  it  introduces  a  consistent  logical  position.  As 
illustrative  of  the  vagiie  and  inconsistent  interpretations  which  the  other  involves,  we 
select  an  esteemed  writer.  Dr.  Nast  (Com.  on  Matt.  16  :  19)  makes  the  church  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven,  but  not  satisfied,  and  evidently  realizing  a  discrepancy,  he  adds  :  "  Yet  the 
visible  church  and  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  are  not,  in  every  respect,  identical."  But 
he  fails  to  tell  us  in  what  respect  they  are  identical — a  task  which  no  one  has  yet 
undertaken.     Such  a  statement  at  once  vitiates  his  own  application.     But  in  an  Art.  in 


(352  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  100. 

The  West.  Cli.  Advocate,  Aug.  6,  1879,  opposing  Bh.  Merrill's  view  that  the  sending  of 
the  Comforter  was  the  coming  of  "  the  Son  of  man,"  he  justly  adds  :  "  The  '  ecclesia  ' 
(church)  is  not  the  '  basileia  '  (Kingdom)  in  the  Biblical  sense  of  the  term,  and  therefore 
the  establishment  of  the  Ch.  Church  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  not  the  coming  of  the 
Kingdom  Christ  had  referred  to  in  the  promise,  Matt.  16  :  28." 

Ohs.  6.  The  unsatisfactory  correspondence  of  the  present  condition  of 
the  church  with  the  condition  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  as  delineated  hy 
prophecy,  has  led  sincere  and  ardent  Christians,  with  most  honorable 
motives,  to  agitate  and  press  for  constitutional  amendments,  by  which 
states  and  nations,  civil  governments,  are  to  become  identified  with  the 
church  as  a  sort  of  allies  or  guardians  of  Christianity.  This  is  done  under 
the  supposition  tliat  in  this  way  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  will  be  established 
and  extended  to  meet  the  requirements  of  prophecy  ;  and  much  laudation 
is  expended  in  this  direction.  As  our  entire  argument  in  all  its  phases  is 
opposed  to  such  a  theory,  we  may  very  briefly  say,  that  this  is  to  be  rejected, 
(1)  as  opposed  to  tlie  covenanted  Kingdom  ;  (2)  to  the  design  of  this  dis- 
pensation and  of  the  church  itself  ;  (3)  to  the  time  wlien  (under  last 
trumpet),  and  tlie  order  under  which  (Second  Advent)  this  is  to  be  ac- 
complished ;  (4)  to  the  representations  of  the  church  in  this  dispensation 
as  separate  and  distinct  ;  (5)  to  the  ^predicted  overthroiv  and  destruction  of 
states  and  kingdoms  at  the  end  of  this  dispensation.  Indeed,  we  have  no 
prediction  that  the  church  in  this  age  can  accomplish  it  ;  for  a  comparison 
of  prophecy  teaches  us  that  down  to  the  very  Advent  of  Jesus  the  church, 
instead  of  being  in  the  condition  represented  by  such  writers,  is  more  or 
less  oppressed  by  the  state,  and  at  the  very  ending  of  the  age  endures  a 
terrible  persecution.  Moreover,  the  Bible,  when  alhiding  to  such  unions, 
represents  them  as  unsatisfactory  and  oppressive,  even  going  so  far  as  to 
represent  states  and  governments  identified  with  such  a  union  (e.g. 
Roman  Empire)  as  beasts,  a  whore,  and  mother  of  harlots.  Whatever  may 
Ije  thought  of  the  last  assertion,  whether  conclusive  or  not,  one  fact  con- 
firms such  a  Biblical  representation,  viz. :  that  history  teaches  that  the 
union  of  church  and  state  has  almost  always  resulted  in  «7;os///ye  injury 
to  the  church — the  state  imposing  its  confessions,  fettering  by  its  symboli- 
cal deductions,  lording  it  over  believers,  and  frequently  wielding  the  sword 
of  persecution.  Experience  has  shown  that  it  is  impolitic  and  dangerous  to 
lodge  a  controlling  power  over  the  church  in  the  state,  and  any  movement 
in  this  direction  ought  to  be  avoided.  Let  us  be  content  with  our 
"  stranger  and  pilgrim"  allotted  condition  until  the  time  comes  ^ulien  God 
and  His  Son  shall  unite  church  and  state,  not  under  rulers  liable  to  cor- 
ruption, etc.,  h(t  laider  tried  and  immortal  ones. 

Obs.  7.  Many  of  the  last  class  also  profess  to  guard  their  view  against 
some  objections  by  upholding  the  unchanged  condition  and  supremacy  of 
the  church,  making  the  state  a  very  subordinate  j^art  in  the  future  pro- 
gramme. But  in  doing  this  they  sacrifice  in  a  great  measure  the  pro- 
l^hetic  announcements  of  the  greatness  and  extent  of  the  world-dominion 
of  the  Kingdom.  It  conduces  to  a  vagueness  which  proves  very  unsat- 
isfactory, and  it  produces  in  abundance  glittering  generalities,  which  in 
themselves  establish  nothing. 

Ohs.  8.  It  is  a  truth,  that  a  vast  number  of  works  are  published  in  the 
interest  of  controversy  and  of  doctrine  respecting  the  church,  in  which  the 


i .. 


Prop.  100.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  653 

most  important  of  all  the  questions  concerning  the  church  is  either  taken 
for  granted  or  else  entirely  ignored.  The  leading,  fundamental  question, 
whether  the  church  is  truly  the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  God,  is,  in  many 
instances,  entirely  untouched.  Under  tUo  assiiviptiou  that  it  is  such,  we 
are  treated  to  an  immense  array  of  learning  and  disquisition  entirely  based 
on  an  alleged  and  arrogated  doctrine.  JVo  p7^oof  is  even  attempted  ;  jiist 
as  if  the  assumption  had  never  been  questioned.  This  itself  is  evidence  of 
great  weakness. 

Ohs.  9.  Just  in  proportion  as  the  notion  that  the  visible  church  is  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  entertained  and  extended,  in  the  same  proportion  will 
there  also  be  an  extravagant  idea  of  superiority  and  supremacy  over  others. 
This  is  true  from  the  earliest  period  when  this  was  asserted,  down  to  the 
recent  establishment  of  Mormonism,  which  also  claims  "  a  visible  Kingdom 
of  God,"  "  the  Latter  Day  Kingdom,"  the  stone  of  Dan.,  ch.  2,  which  is 
to  be  converted  into  the  mountain  (so  Elder  Pratt,  etc.).  This  opinion, 
arbitrarily  received,  has  had  a  most  j)Owerful  injitience  among  the  nations, 
and  it  has  proven  a  most  fruitful  source  of  aggrandizement,  contention, 
and  oppression.  Out  of  it  has  sprung  those  hierarchical  tendencies  ac- 
cepted by  Roman  Catholics  and  Protestants,  and  to  it  even  the  most 
liberal  of  Reformers  have  made  sundry  concessions  which  has  hampered 
Reformation  itself. 

Arrogance,  animosity,  and  even  bloodshed  have  been  some  of  its  bitter  fruits  as 
"witnessed  in  the  Latin,  Greek,  English,  and  other  churches  ;  and  down  to  the  present 
day  its  claims  are  characteristic  of  various  antagonistic  parties.  It  has  urged  popes, 
kings,  queens,  bishojis,  etc.,  to  enact  and  enforce  arbitrary  and  cruel  j^enal  laws  ; 
and  it  has  proven  the  root  from  which  has  proceeded  a  growth  of  misery,  persecution, 
and  martyrdom.  It  is  a  sad  truth,  that  if  we  once  admit  that  the  visible  church,  in  any 
one  of  its  forms,  is  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth,  we  close  the  doors  to  the  exclusion 
of  freedom  of  investigation  and  of  private  judgment,  elevating  said  church  into  the 
position  of  a  dispenser  and  arbiter  of  God's  Word  in  the  form  (confession)  it  then  may 
possess.  This  is  abundantly  made  manifest  by  the  pleas  of  Poperj'  and  of  national 
establishments  in  the  past.  And  we  do  not  blame  these  for  i3ressing  very  logical  claims  ; 
for,  if  the  i^remise  be  once  conceded,  i.e.  that  the  visible  church  is  such  a  Kingdom, 
then  the  rest  legitimately  follows.  Consistencj^  then  demands  an  outward  unity,  and,  in 
the  efforts  to  secure  such  unit}",  force  must  be  employed,  and  as  a  result,  violence  is 
done  both  to  religion  and  man.  The  edicts  of  the  first  Christian  Emperors  become  a  model 
of  church  authority  ;  the  fulminations  of  certain  Councils  are  cherished  as  the  lawful 
exhibitions  of  authorized  dominion  ;  the  canons  and  work  of  fallible  man  are  elevated 
to  tests  of  allegiance,  resulting  in  crimination,  excommunication,  and  anathema.  The 
fountain  itself  being  impure,  the  stream  flowing  from  it,  whatever  pure  and  refreshing 
sjDrings  alongside  of  it  may  commingle  with  it,  will  carry  on  this  impurity. 

Obs.  10.  This  claim  of  making  the  visible  church  the  Kingdom  of  God 
has  been  conducive  to  infidelity.  Arrogating  to  itself  such  pre-eminence, 
the  imperfection  so  palpably  existing  (e.g.  its  contentions,  retrogressions, 
lapses,  diversity  of  faith,  conflicting  creeds,  various  systems  of  interpreta- 
tion, church  government,  etc.)  has  vitiated  in  the  eyes  of  such  not  only 
the  claim  itself,  but  unfortunately  Christianity  along  with  it.  The  device 
of  making  an  invisible  Kingdom  to  meet  their  objection  did  not  materi- 
ally alter  the  case  ;  for  they  observed  that  even  the  purest  and  truest  of 
believers  retained  imperfection  and  antagonism  in  belief  even  as  to  the 
nature  of  this  Kingdom,  etc. 

The  Encyclopsedists  rejected,  and  in  more  recent  times  numbers  have  arisen  who 
repudiate  the  church  because  of  its  attempting  to  occupy  such  a  position.     Sneeringly 


654  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIT^TGDOM.  [PkOP.  100. 

but  truthfully  they  point  to  the  prophecies  and  then  to  history,  telling  ns  that  the 
church,  if  a  Kingdom,  does  not  correspond  with  the  description  given  by  prophecy  ; 
sarcastically  but  fairly  they  refer  to  the  early  preaching  and  faith  of  the  church  in  this 
Kingdom,  and  laughingly  contrast  it  with  the  preaching  and  faith  now  extant  on  the 
same  point  ;  and  from  these  infer  that  either  the  prophets,  or  the  disciples  or  the 
apostles,  or  the  church,  or  all  together,  were  mistaken.  Others,  however,  pretending 
great  friendshiji  for  the  church,  more  soberly  point  out  the  same,  and  discard  divine 
revelation,  retaining  a  belief  in  a  religion  of  humanity.  These  endeavor  to  show  that 
such  claims  that  the  church  put  forth  were  probably  necessary  in  the  march  of  human 
development,  but  that  now  they  must  give  place  to  another  new  Kingdom  of  heaven, 
predicted  by  themselves,  as  a  result  of  a  new  develoiDment  of  progressive  humanity.  If 
you  reply  to  these  also,  that  the  Kingdom  must  be  conceived  of  as  purely  spiritual  and 
invisible,  they  answer  that  what  pertains  to  humanity,  its  amelioration,  and  elevation, 
must,  if  it  professes  organization,  form,  etc.,  be  also  exhibited  externally,  and  that  growth, 
extension,  etc.,  as  predicted,  can  only  be  predicated  of  such.  In  looking  over  this  con- 
troversy, the  fact  remains  that  the  church  has  set  its  claim  so  high  that  it  cannot  be  suc- 
cessfully sustained.  Even  the  efforts  of  Neander  and  others  to  set  this  claim  in  a  phil- 
osophical light  has  by  no  means  retarded  the  progress  of  infidelity,  for  it  is  widening  and 
extending  in  all  countries,  probably  in  many  cases,  with  this  change,  that  it  now,  under 
the  garb  of  professed  regard,  accepts  of  the  church  as  a  Kingdom,  not  in  the  light,  however, 
of  Eoman  Catholicism,  or  Protestantism,  but  of  a  part  of  the  natural,  inevitable  develop- 
ment of  the  races  of  men,  i:»lacing  this  church  and  Kingdom,  with  ill-disguised  contempt 
and  a  flourish  of  learning,  among  the  Oriental  and  other  religions  of  the  world.  Without 
pretending  that  our  doctrine  would  have  met  with  a  better  fate  at  their  hands  (for  the 
root  of  infidelity  is  in  the  heart  and  not  in  the  head),  yet  it  is  true  that  the  simple 
design  which  we  hold  that  the  church  was  to  accomplish,  and  the  position  which  she 
was  to  occupy  while  carrying  it  out,  being  so  widely  different  from  this  jDomjious  claim, 
and  being  more  consonant  with  history  and  Scripture,  if  entertained  in  place  of  the 
other,  would  have  rendered  many  of  the  arguments  now  arrayed  against  the  church  so 
irrelevant  and  worthless  that  they  never  would  have  been  broached.  In  the  first  cen- 
turies of  the  church  infidelity  could  and  did  not,  in  view  of  the  faith  generally  enter- 
tained, employ  them. 

Obs.  11,  The  simple  predicted  facts,  that  the  visible  church  is  to  he  over- 
come by  the  Antichrist  (comp.  Props.  123,  162,  IGO,  IGl^  etc.),  and  that 
the  church  is  saved  hij  tlie  personcd  Advent  of  Jesus  when  under  the  most 
terrible  of  persecutions  in  the  future — are  sufficient  in  themselves  to 
show  that  the  nature  of  a  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  does  not 
appertain  to  the  church.  For,  when  the  Kingdom  is  once  established,  all 
prophecy  declares  that,  instead  of  being  overwhelmed  by  its  foes,  it  obtains 
dominion  over  the  nations  and  ever  afterward  retains  the  same.  No  Anti- 
christ can  then  give  the  option  of  worship  or  death. 

If  it  be  alleged  that  "  the  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail"  against  the  church,  we 
fully  agree  by  saying  that  while  the  saints  are  persecuted  and  under  its  death-dealing 
blows  enter  Hades,  Jesus,  who  has  the  keys  of  Hades,  will  deliver  them  at  the  first 
resurrection  (Prop.  125-129).  The  church,  however  persecuted,  is  safe  ;  our  argument 
only  insists  upon  it  that  persecution  and  a  low,  opjoressed  condition  of  the  church  is 
incompatible  with  the  predictions  relating  to  Christ's  Kingdom,  and  that,  in  con- 
sequence, the  church  is  only  a  f»rei)arative  stage  for  the  incoming  Kingdom, 


PkOP.   101.]  THE   THEOCEATIC    KIITGDOM.  6^5 


Pkopositiok  101.     The  invisible   Church  is  not  the  covenanted 
Kingdom  of  (Jlirist 

Whatever  of  truth  we  may  concede  to  the  theological  division  of 
the  church  into  the  invisible  and  visible,  neither  of  them  meets  the 
conditions  imposed  by  the  covenant.  Instead  of  an  invisible  King- 
dom, the  covenant  and  the  prophecies  relating  to  it  unmistcikaMy 
'point  out  a  msible  Kingdom^  outward  and  universal  in  a  world 
dominion.  So  plainly  is  this  stated,  that  even  those  who  advocate 
that  the  invisible  church  is  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  Jesus,  in 
some  way,  either  by  development  or  by  copious  outpourings  of 
the  Spirit,  etc.,  make  this  invisible  Kingdom  assume  ultiviately 
the  form  of  a  visible  one. 

Let  the  student  but  consider  the  Kingdom  covenanted  to  David's  Son,  a  real,  visible, 
external  Theocracy  here  on  the  earth,  and  he  will  see  at  once  that  to  transmute  this  into 
an  invisible,  indefinite  Kingdom  is  to  take  undue  liberty  with  the  Divine  Kecord,  and 
to  introduce  an  element  perverting  the  proper  application  of  much  Scripture. 

OI)s.  1.  This  division  of  the  church  into  the  visible  and  invisible  is  of 
comparative  recent  origin.  Dr.  Knapp  {Ch.  Theol.,  p.  471)  traces  the 
use  oi'  these  terms,  saying  :  "  These  are,  indeed,  neiv,  and  have  come  into 
use  since  the  Eeformation. "  Many  able  Divines  have  since  then  em- 
ployed them,  whilst  others  reject  them.  So  far  as  our  argument  is  con- 
cerned, it  is  immaterial  whether  they  be  received  or  not  ;  for  the  church 
may  indeed  be  invisible,  if  by  that  is  only  meant  the  body  of  real  and  true 
believers  who  are  saved,  and  also  visible,  if  by  this  is  denoted  a  mixed 
body  containing  believers  and  professing  believers,  without,  however,  con- 
stituting either  of  them  a  Kingdom.  Eeference  is  therefore  only  made  to 
the  use  of  the  terms  to  indicate  that  they  were  never  thus  employed  in  the 
early  history  of  the  Christian  Church. 

Oosterzee's  {Ch.  Dogm.,  vol.  2,  p.  700,  etc.)  reasoning  is  unsatisfactorj",  inconclusive, 
and  contradictory.  The  key-note  of  his  argument  is  found  in  the  sentence  :  "  As  Christ 
was  the  fulfilling  of  prophecy,  so  in  a  certain  sense  is  the  church  the  fulfilling  of  the 
Theocracy,  though  under  an  entirely  different  form."  But  Christ  fulfilled  prophecy 
only  to  a  certain  extent  ;  much  remains  yet  to  be  fulfilled  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  The 
reference  to  "  the  Church"  being  "a  fulfilling  of  the  Theocracy  in  a  different  form"  is 
pure  conjecture  to  help  out  a  preconceived  Church-Kingdom  theory  ;  and  the  whole  finds 
its  proof  in  the  parable  of  the  leaven  applied  to  the  church  and  the  world,  instead  of  to 
the  individual  believer.  The  contradictory  part  is  found  (p.  702)  when,  speaking  of  the 
church  as  "an  independent  society  of  a  moral,  religious  natiire,'"  he  says:  "Its 
members  are,  as  such,  not  yet  citizens  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  but  must  be  regenerated 
and  trained  up  within  its  bosom,"  and  yet  insists  that,  as  a  siairitual,  mystical  body,  its 
members  are  citizens  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  which  spiritual,  invisible  Kingdom  will 
finally  be  visibly  realized.  That  is,  he  seeks  refuge  for  his  theory  in  the  invisible 
church  for  the  present,  and  ultimately  in  the  visible.  He  admits  that  this  distinction  of 
visible  and  invisible  church  "  was  not  made,  or  was  scarcely  made,  by  the  oldest  teachers 
and  fathers  of  the  church,"  but  that  it  "slowly  reached  the  desired  development." 


656  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIISTGDOM.  [PrOP.  101. 

Strange  that  believers  for  centuries  lived  in  the  church  utterly  unaware,  unconscious, 
that  they  were  in  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  God.  Admitting  the  spirituality  of  the 
church,  its  iinion  by  faith  with  the  Head,  the  interest  and  power  of  Christ  exerted  in 
behalf  of  the  church,  its  preciousness  in  its  means  of  grace,  etc.,  yet  all  this  by  no 
means  elevates  it  to  the  position  of  a  Messianic  Kingdom.  Covenant  and  promise, 
entirely  unrealized  in  it,  forbids  the  idea,  and  forces  us  to  receive  the  Word,  which 
teaches  that  it  is  introductory,  preparatory  in  its  nature — the  means  introduced  to  secure 
a  desired  end.  Simple  consistency  demands  this  view  of  the  church  and  Kingdom. 
Litton  {The  Church  of  Christ)  quotes  the  Romanist  theologian  Moehler  as  defining, 
"  that  the  difference  laetween  the  Protestant  and  the  Romanist  view  of  the  church  may 
be  briefly  stated  as  follows  :  The  Romanist  teaches  that  the  visible  church  is  lirst  in  the 
order  of  time,  afterward  the  invisible  ;  the  relation  of  the  former  to  the  latter  being  that 
of  cause  and  effect.  The  Lutherans  (Protestants),  on  the  contrary',  affirm  that  the 
visible  church  owes  its  existence  to  the  invisible,  the  latter  being  the  triie  basis  of  the 
former."  The  student  will  appreciate  Litton' s  remark:  "He  adds,  very  justly,  that 
this  apparent  unimportant  difference  of  view  is  pregnant  with  important  results."  Our 
line  of  reasoning  does  not  require  a  consideration  of  these,  and  we  only  add  that  many 
eminent  Protestant  divines  have  rejected  the  view  of  an  invisible  church,  as  a  theory 
introduced  to  combat  the  Romanist  objection  of  a  succession,  etc.  Thus  e.g.  we  in- 
stance Rothe  {Beginnings  of  the  Ch.  Church  and  its  Constitution,  p.  109),  who  expressly 
declares  that  the  church  is  alone  visible,  and  tracing  the  rise  of  the  idea  of  "  the 
invisible  church,"  jDronounces  it  "a  mere  hypothesis,  a  pure  fiction,  a  notion  involving 
a  contradiction,"  and  presents  (Introd.)  a  series  of  reasons  why  it  should  be  rejected. 
It  is  very  sad  to  find  in  many,  otherwise  excellent,  writers  the  two  ideas  combined  and 
appropriated  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,  for  the  invisible  Kingdom  offers  an  easy  applica- 
tion of  passages  which  cannot  be  made  to  fit  a  visible  Kingdom,  although  both  do 
violence  to  covenant  and  prophecy.  Of  course,  such  writers  as  Bunsen  (comp.  Art. 
Bunsen  s  Church  of  the  Future,  in  North  Brit.  Review,  Nov.,  1847),  in  their  ideal  of  a 
national  church,  are,  as  a  logical  sequence,  hostile  to  an  invisible  church  (comp.  Litton's 
Church  of  Christ,  in  its  Idea,  Attributes,  and  Ministry). 

Obs.  2.  To  illustrate  how  men  write  on  this  point,  we  select  several  ex- 
amples, which,  whilst  confirming  our  previous  Proposition,  also  affirm  the 
contrary  to  our  present  one.  Van  Oosterzee  {Theol.  of  j\^.  T.,  Sec.  41), 
explicitly  says  :  "  The  church  or  congregation  of  the  Lord  is  by  no  means 
the  same  as  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  of  Christ.  This  latter  is  a  perfect I^/ 
spiritual  society  whose  ideal  will  be  fully  realized  in  the  future  ;  the  former 
is  the  union  of  those  who  are  alreadij  here  on  earth,  through  faith  and 
love,  members  of  the  Kingdom."  Again,  Dr.  Luthardt,  {Apol.  Lee. — see 
Quarterly  Review,  Jan.,  1873)  makes  ''  the  church  now  in  the  form  of  a 
servant  over  against  the  Romish  view,  which  makes  the  church  in  '  her 
outward  reality  the  Kingdom  of  God,'  whilst  in  the  Reformed  view  '  the 
eternal  Kingdom  of  God  has  its  home  in  that  inyier  nature  of  the  church  ; 
this  temporal  form  of  the  church,  on  the  contrary,  is  only  the  external 
covering  in  which  the  treasure  of  the  Kingdom  is  deposited.'  These  are 
very  mystical  conceptions  of  the  Kingdom,  and  they  originate  from  an 
effort  to  observe  a  consistency  which  the  mixed  condition  of  the  church 
does  not  outwardly  allow.  Thinking  that  from  the  captions  attached  to  the 
parables,  the  phrase  '  the  Kingdom  of  God  within  you,'  etc.,  that  a  King- 
dom must  in  some  way  be  found,  this  one  that  cannot  he  seen,  being  spirit- 
ual, beyond  our  perception,  is  thus  presented  for  our  acceptance.  The 
simple  truth  is,  that  it  is  even  more  inconsistent  than  the  opinion  enter- 
tained that  the  visible  church  is  the  Kingdom,  for  the  latter,  at  least,  cor- 
responds with  tlie  visiMlity  and  external  manifestation  insisted  on  ly  the 
covenant  and  'prophets.  But  its  inconsistency  is  still  more  apparent  by  its 
hQmg  flatly  contradicted  by — adopting  tlieir  mode  of  interpretation — the 
parables,  upon  which  they  rely.  Thus,  e.g.  if  the  church  is  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven  in  some  form,  then  the  parable  of  the  A^irgins  includes  the 


PllOP.  101.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  657 

■whole  ten,  not  merely  the  five  wise  (i.e.  spiritual),  but  the  five  foolish 
(i.e.  not  spiritual).  So  also  the  parable  of  the  tares  and  wheat,  on  the 
same  principle,  being  prefaced  by  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven,"  includes  in 
the  same  church  the  tares  (i.e.  those  not  possessed  of  "  the  inner  nature") 
and  the  vdieat  (i.  e.  those  having  "  the  inner  nature").  Admit  the  church 
as  the  Kingdom,  and  there  is  no  escape  from  this  dilemma,  provided  the 
parables  are  {on  their  own  theory)  consistently  applied  (comp.  Prop.  108). 
This  application  of  the  Kingdom  to  an  invisible  church  to  avoid  one  difii- 
culty  is  too  one-sided ;  audit  only  plunges  them  into  a  still  greater  one. 
Such  a  refined  view  of  the  Kingdom  ignores  and  disbelieves  tJie  oath  that 
God  made  to  David,  that  in  and  through  his  Son  a  Kingdom,  even 
David's  then  visible  and  outward,  should  be  set  up,  that  all  men  would  rec- 
ognize and  obey,  owing  to  its  distinguished  external  exertion  and  mani- 
festation of  power.  It  is  strange  and  sad,  that  some  of  the  most  eminent 
and  talented  men  of  the  church,  blinded  hy  a  subtle  theory,  cannot  and 
will  not  see  how  antagonistic  such  a  theory  is  to  God's  faithful  promises. 
No  wonder  that  we  are  so  carefully  cautioned  to  beware  of  mere  human 
wisdom. 

We  again  refer  to  some  eminent  Pre-Millenarians,  who  hold,  evidently,  to  some  kind 
of  a  Kingdom  connected  with  this  invisible  theory,  for  they  designate  a  present  existing 
Kingdom  as  "  the  Kingdom  in  mystery."  Unable  to  comprehend  exactly  their  meaning, 
I  will  quote  the  definition  given  to  this  "  Kingdom  in  mystery"  by  Eev.  Dr.  Brookes,  in 
The  Truth,  vol.  4,  No.  3,  p.  101  :  "  It  is  7iot  equivalent  to  the  Church,  but  it  indicates 
the  peculiar  sphere  here  below  in  which  the  ascended  Christ  is  carrying  on  His  work, 
or,  in  other  words,  it  refers  to  what  is  called  Clirisiendom.  '  This  is  entirely  too  vague 
and  indefinite  to  meet  with  acceiDtance,  and  really  is  not  needed  in  the  interpretation 
and  application  of  Scripture.  Such  a  view,  however,  is  not  in  conflict  with  Pre-Mille- 
narianism,  because  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom  is  not  placed  in 
this  dispensation,  hut  in  the  one  following  the  Sec,  Advent  ;  but  we  object  to  it,  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  not  required  by  the  Word,  and  that  it  only  burdens  the  doctrine  with  a 
Kingdom-theory  which  tends  to  confuse  the  student  and  mars  the  simplicity  of  inspired 
statements.  Others  introduce  a  confusion  of  ideas,  evincing  an  imperfect  knowledge  of 
the  covenanted  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  Swormstedt  {The  End  of  the  World  I^ear,  p.  114)  makes 
"  Christ's  Kingdom  rei^resented  in  the  world  by  the  visible  church  ;"  then  he  has  "  the 
gospel  net  or  invisible  Kingdom"  drawn  up  to  heaven,  and  when  this  earth  is  j)urified, 
"  then  this  invisible  Kingdom  is  to  be  let  down  again  in  the  midst  of  this  new  Eden," 
and  with  Christ  becomes  "  a  visible  and  temporal  power."  Such  representations  re- 
quire no  reply.  Some  Pre-Millenarians  mistake  the  Divine  Sovereignty  (comp.  Props, 
79  and  80)  for  this  present  Kingdom.  Even  Lange  {Bremen  Lectures,  sec.  8)  falls  into 
this  error,  and,  therefore,  speaks  (p.  221)  of  "  the  still  conceded  Kingdom  of  God, 
which  is  finally  to  be  openly  manifested  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  Fausset  {Com.  Rev.  20  :  6) 
more  guardedly  says  :  "As  the  church  began  at  Christ's  ascension,  so  the  Kingdom 
shall  begin  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  Auberlen  in  his  Biblical  Doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  of  God 
(a  brief  epitome  is  given  by  Nast  in  his  Com.  on  Matt.  G  :  10)  maintains  our  doctrinal 
position,  but  in  connection  has  the  church  also  a  Kingdom,  for  in  The  Prophet  Daniel 
(p.  372)  he  correctly  portrays  the  future  Kingdom  as  not  merely  internal  but  also 
external,  outward,  "  Israelitish,  but  by  no  means  carnal,  a  Kingdom  of  glory,  jDrecisely 
as  the  prophets  have  pictured  it,  and  whom  Jesus  contradicts  in  no  j^art,"  etc.,  but 
confuses  the  whole  subject  and  ignores  the  covenanted  conditions  requisite  for  a  Mes- 
sianic Kingdom,  when  in  the  connection  he  says  :  "  Thus  the  Kingdom  of  God  has 
different  periods.  It  has  appeared  in  Christ,  Matt.  12  :  28  ;  it  spreads  in  the  world  by 
inward,  hidden  spiritual  x)rocesses.  Matt,  13  :  33  ;  but  properly  as  a  Kingdom  in  royal 
qIoxj,  it  comes  only  at  the  Parousia,  Luke  19  :  11,  12,  15,  even  as  the  Lord  Himself  has 
taught  us  to  pray,  day  by  day,  'Thy  Kingdom  come,'  Matt.  6  :  10."  (The  i^assages 
referred  to  we  examine  in  another  place.)  So  Schmid  in  Bibl.  Tlieol.  of  the  New  Test. 
advocates  Chiliasm,  but  holds  to  a  number  of  Kingdoms,  or  stages,  or  developments,  as 
e.g.  "  As  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  it  is,  in  the  first  place,  in  fellowship  of  men.  It 
also  embraces  humanity  as  a  whole,  without  limitation  to  any  particular  part  thereof,  in 
contrast  to  the  choi3e  of  the  Jewish  people.     The  Gospel  will  be  preached  to  the  whole 


658  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PPwOP.  101. 

world.  It  also  comprises  heaven  and  earth,  and  likewise  the  coming  periods  of  the 
world,  both  before  and  after  the  judgment."  The  reader  can  see  from  this  brief  extract 
that  the  writer  has  no  distinct  conception  of  the  one  covenanted  Kingdom,  but  mixes  the 
Divine  Sovereignty,  church,  person  of  the  king,  dispensations,  etc.,  all  together  in  a 
bewildering  manner.  So  Theurer  {Das  Belch  Gottes,  p.  36-9)  affirms  the  Millenarian 
doctrine  as  held  by  us,  but  has  a  present  existing  Kingdom  which  finally  gives  place  to 
a  higher.  Thus  compare  Ebrard  {Ch.  Dogm.,  p.  747-9,  vol.  2),  Shenkel  {Cli.  Dogm.,  2 
Ab.,  p.  1195-6),  and  many  others  whom  we  esteem  as  able  defenders  of  Chiliasm.  One 
of  the  most  consistent  articles  on  "  the  Kingdom  of  God"  is  that  given  by  a  writer 
with  initials  "  M.  A.,"  in  the  Froph.  Times,  July,  1873.  A  proper  conception  of  the 
Kingdom  is  also  presented  by  "  Senex"  in  some  articles  in  the  Luth.  Observer  of  1880. 
The  same  is  true  of  others,  a  tendency  being  observable  to  return  to  the  Prindtive 
Church  view.  This  is  especially  observable  in  the  Excursus  on  the  Kingdom  by  Dr. 
Craven,  p.  93,  etc.,  Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  a  perusal  of  which  will  amply  repay  the  reader. 

Obs.  3.  The  doctrine  that  the  invisible  church  is  the  Kingdom  of  God 
was  unknown  to  the  early  church.  Even  amidst  the  controversies  which 
shortly  raged  between  antagonistic  parties  respecting  the  church,  no  one, 
— although  in  churches  planted  shortly  before  by  inspired  men  who  ought 
to  have  known  it — broached  such  an  idea.  Neander  {His.  of  Dogmas) 
acknowledges  this,  and  says  that  they  overloohed  this  distinction.  Such 
an  acknowledgment,  coming  from  such  a  source,  is  the  more  valuable, 
since  it  is  a  favorite  theory  of  Neander's  that  the  invisible  church  is  the 
Kingdom  (although  he  has  it  finally  merged  into  a  visible  Kingdom). 
But  the  manner  in  which  he  accounts  for  this  distinction  being  over- 
looked is  liiglilij  objectionable.  His  theory,  as  shov/n  in  his  different 
works,  is  the  progressive  development,  one  by  which  the  truths  given  by 
the  Apostles  were  only  "  germs"  to  be  developed  by  the  future  growth  of 
the  church.  We  have  already  protested  against  this  germ  principle  when 
applied  to  doctrine.  Props.  4,  9,  10. 

For  while  we  freely  admit  growth  in  numbers  and  even  in  knowledge,  etc.,  we  admit 
none  in  Biblical  doctrine.  The  doctrinal  truths  enunciated  by  the  apostles  were  not 
merely  germinal  truths  leading  to  engrafting  of  others  or  enlargement  to  another  form, 
as  from  the  seed  to  the  stalk,  and  then  to  the  flower  and  fruit.  No  !  it  was,  as  a  dis- 
tinctly announced  doctrine,  the  ithole  doctrine.  By  this  we  do  not  mean  that  it  would 
not  be  suggestive  of  thought  and  even,  by  comparison,  lead  to  other  truths,  but  we 
mean  that,  as  far  as  the  apostles  revealed  doctrine  or  truth,  it  is  so  complete  in  itself — 
i.e.  no  seed  to  sprout  into  something  unlike  itself — that  no  part  of  it  can  be  safely 
omitted  or  transmuted  without  making  it  in  so  far  imjjerfect.  Hence  to  say  that  the 
invisible  Kingdom  doctrine  is  the  result  of  a  growth  of  knowledge  in  the  church  is  to 
do  it  at  the  expense  of  the  truth  itself  (that  is  to  say,  the  Kingdom  idea  was  imperfect), 
and  at  the  risk  of  the  reputation  and  veracity  of  the  first  teachers  of  Christianity. 
Neander  even,  in  some  places  (as  e.g.  p.  5,  His.  of  Dogmas),  throws  a  guard  around  this 
developing  process  conformable  to  our  jjosition  and  hostile  to  some  of  his  own  deductions, 
viz.  :  "not  that  we  obtain  anything  absolutely  new,  but  we  have  a  deeper  insight  of  its 
contents."  Such  a  deeper  insight  is  obtainable,  however,  not  by  a  growth  of  the 
doctrine  itself,  but  by  a  comparison  and  study  of  the  Scriptures  containing  it.  In  order 
that  the  critical  reader  may  see  how  an  able  writer  transmutes  the  Church-Kingdom 
theory,  we  refer  again  to  Dr.  Neander  {Plant,  and  Train.  Ch.  Ch.,  p.  499,  etc.).  The 
Church  is  "  the  particular  idea,"  related  to  the  Kingdom  or  God  "  as  the  more  general 
and  comprehensive  one."  Hence  :  "  The  idea  of  the  church  is  subordinate  to  that  of  the 
Kingdom  ot  God,  because  by  the  latter  is  denoted  either  ' '  the  whole  of  a  series  of  his- 
torical developments,  or  a  great  assemblage  of  coexistent  .spiritual  creations.''  (The  student 
•can  readily  test  this  mystical  conception — that  overrides  covenant  and  amalgamates  the 
Divine  Sovereignty — by  employing  it  as  synonymous  for  the  Kingdom.)  He  then  makes 
the  Jewish  Theocracy  a  type  of  this  Kingdom.  (We  have  proven,  in  detail,  that  it  was 
no  type,  and  the  predictions  of  its  ultimate  restoration  prove  it  be  none.)  Then,  in 
opposition  to  some  of  our  opponents,  he  says  :  "  The  Kingdom  of  God  was  not  first 
founded  by  Christianity  as  something  entirely  new,"  but  was  grafted  on  to  the  old, 


Prop.  101.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  659 

extended  to  all  people,  transformed,  and  made  "  spiritual  and  internal."  And  the  proof 
of  such  transformation  is,  Eph.  2  :  19,  20,  Rom.  11  :  18,  the  unity  of  God's  people  founded 
on  the  apostles  and  Jesus  Christ.  (A  unity  that  we  most  heartily  adopt,  but  which  says 
nothing  of  the  Kingdom.)  Then  he  admits  that  Christianity  at  first  allied  itself  with 
the  Jewish  view  of  the  restoration  of  the  Theocracy  (thus  confirming  our  past  proposi- 
tions) in  a  glorious  outward  form  under  the  Messiah,  and  placed  this  in  the  future  "  as 
the  i^erfected  form  of  the  Theocracy  ;"  "  but  in  accordance  with  a  change  in  the  idea  of 
the  Kingdom  of  God,  a  different  construction  was  put  on  this  opposition  of  Chris- 
tianity ;  it  was  transformed  from  the  external  to  the  internal,  and  withdrawn  from  the 
future  to  the  present."  (This  change,  he  informs  us  in  various  places,  was  brought  out 
in  "  the  consciousness  of  the  church" — whatever  this  may  mean — but  we  have  traced  it 
directly  to  the  Origenistic  and  Alexandrian  influence,  and  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the 
Word.)  He  then  defines  the  change  thus  :  "By  faith  in  the  Redeemer,  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  or  of  the  Messiah,  is  already  founded  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  thence  developing 
outward,  is  destined  to  bring  under  its  control  all  that  belongs  to  man,"  so  that  "  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ  coincides  with  the  idea  of  the  Church  existing  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
the  invisible  church,  the  totality  of  the  operations  of  Christianity  on  mankind."  (Thus 
a  principle  actuating  men  is  elevated  into  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  lacking  every 
covenanted  characteristic.  For  the  heart-Kingdom,  see  e.g.  Props.  110,  84,  85  ;  and  for 
the  unscriptural  statement  of  its  working  outward  until  it  conquers  all,  see  e.g.  Prop. 
175.)  But  then  to  reconcile  the  passages  which  locate  a  Kingdom  of  Christ  in  the 
future,  he  admits  that  this  Kingdom  now  present  is  only  the  germ  of  the  future,  and 
that  this  future  Kingdom  "  Paul  represents  not  as  somethiog  which  will  spontaneously 
arise  from  the  natural  development  of  the  church,  but  as  produced,  like  the  founding  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  by  an  immediate  intervention  of  Christ."  Hence  he  divides 
the  Kingdom  into  an  inward  (1  Cor.  4  :  20),  an  inward  in  connection  with  the  future 
(1  Thess.  2  :  12),  and  a  consummated  Kingdom  (2  Thess.  1  :  5).  Mistaking  the  Divine 
Sovereignty  for  the  Kingdom,  he  appeals  to  it  as  confirmatory,  and  also  to  the  head- 
ship of  Jesus,  the  victory  of  the  church,  etc.  (This  mixture  and  floundering  under 
several  Kingdoms  are  fully  met  in  our  Propositions.) 

Ohs.  4.  It  is  remarkable  to  notice  how,  in  the  advocacy  of  the  invisible 
church  as  a  Kingdom,  its  advocates  involve  themselves  in  a  sophistry  in- 
consistent  with  their  own  development  theory  of  a  growth  of  this  invisible 
Kingdom  until  finally  at  some  time  in  the  future  it  shall  become  visible  as 
a  world  dominion,  etc.  Taking  the  same  able  writer  as  an  exponent  of 
this  view,  we  find  him  {Life  of  Clii^ist,  sec.  213)  explaining  the  phrase  "  the 
Kingdom  cometh  not  with  outward  show"  to  mean  "  cannot  te  outzvardly 
seen  hy  human  eyes,''^  and  in  a  foot-note  adds  :  "  The  antithesis  is,  that  it 
reveals  itself  invisiMy,  so  as  to  be  seen  only  by  the  eye  of  faith."  Now  if 
it  is  only  the  object  of  faith,  something  not  tangible,  how  comes  it  that 
its  nature  is  so  changed  by  growth  that  it  is  co7iverted  from  the  unseen,  ex- 
cepting as  viewed  by  faith,  into  the  real,  tangible,  visible  Empire  here  on 
earth  ?  If  in  the  region  of  invisibility,  it  ought  in  consistency  remain 
therein  according  to  its  mode  of  propagation.  No  wonder  that  we  find  so 
many  contradictions  in  its  advocates,  even  so  gross  as  the  following  :  in 
sec.  52,  at  the  consummation,  Neander  has  this  world  renewed  and  all  con- 
verted, "«  real  world  domi?iion,^^  and  then  again,  sec.  214,  at  the  same 
time  it  is  "a  corrupt  world  ;"  in  one  place  it  is  invisible  and  in  another 
visible,  etc.  The  theory  is  not  sufficiently  plastic  to  cover  every  Scriptural 
passage  and  description,  and  hence  refuge  is  taken  in  what  another  of  its 
adherents  calls  "  varied  forms. '^ 

A  more  systematic  effort  is  found  in  Rev.  Miller's  Mercersburg  and  Mod.  Theol.  (p. 
41),  in  which  a  "new  Kingdom"  is  advocated  as  arising  from  a  partaking  of  the  divine- 
human  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  a  new  Organism  is  constituted.  This  mystical 
conception,  however  plausibly  presented,  ignores  the  covenanted  position  of  the  human- 
ity of  Jesus,  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  and  is 


THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  101. 

based  on  the  development  tlieory  (incorporating  the  continued  development  of  Christ's 
humanity  in  believers),  already  sufficiently  noticed.  Like  all  other  theories  of  the  kind, 
it  largely  rejects  the  grammatical  sense,  and  is  addicted  to  spiritualizing.  Its  positions 
are  amply  met  in  various  Propositions. 

Ohs.  5.  This  adhesion  to  an  invisible  Kingdom  is  based  on  the  supposed 
ground,  that  according  to  some  passages  we  are  taught  that  Christ  will  not 
have  an  earthly  Kingdom.  These  passages  we  will  examine  hereafter,  and 
now  only  allude  to  the  fact,  that  when  these  same  writers  come  to  describe 
the  MilJemiial  era  of  the  church,  this  ground  of  objection  no  longer  exists, 
and  they  have  to  all  intents  and  jnuyoses  an  earthly  Kingdom,  i.e.  a  King- 
dom visible  and  extending  over  all  the  earth.  The  Kingdom  then,  once 
held  to  be  "  hidden'^  or  "  concealed  "  in  the  church,  "  to  be  in  but  not  of 
the  church,''  is  manifested  openly  to  all  the  world,  holding  all  under  its 
direct  influence  and  dominion.  Surely  the  advocates  of  such  a  system 
should  not  object  to  our  doctrine,  which  observes  a  consistency  in  the 
manifestation  of  the  Kingdom  by  fully  explaining  limu  and  when  this 
occurs,  without  resorting  to  cm  iinexplained  and  mystical  growth,  which, 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  cannot  produce  the  transformation  claimed. 
If  the  Kingdom  is  unseen  and  at  the  same  time  unchangeable  as  claimed  ; 
if  it  is  as  a  writer  {Proph.  Times,  vol.  2,  p.  97)  declares,  "  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  simply  where  God  reigns — this  Kingdom  is  within — it  is 
spiritual,"  and  ever  remains,  as  contended  for,  the  same,  we  ask,  Hoiv  can 
it  then  become  the  seen,  the  outward  Kingdom  of  the  Prophets  ?  Here 
among  these  writers  we  find  the  most  hopeless  floundering,  and  every  reader 
can  for  himself  see  the  utter  antagonism  of  their  spiritual  theories  by  com- 
l^aring  their  utterances  on  the  texts  "  my  Kingdom  is  not  of  this  world" 
(John  18  :  36),  ''  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  within  you"  (Luke  17  :  21),  witli 
those  derived  from  Dan.  2  :  34,  35,  44,  45  ;  Dan.  7  :  14,  27,  and  Rev. 
11  :  15.  In  the  former  we  have  an  invisible  Kingdom  in  the  church,  and 
in  the  latter  the  same  church  becomes  a  visible  Kingdom,  It  is  scarcely 
necessary  to  refer  to  even  a  greater  diversity  existing  among  such  writers  : 
e.g.  extending  this  covenanted  Kingdom  from  the  heart  of  the  believer  to 
an  extent  commensurate  with  the  universe  itself,  etc. 

Obs.  6.  To  indicate  the  vagueness  of  argument  employed  in  this  direc- 
tion, reference  is  made  to  a  leading  and  excellent  writer.  Olshausen 
{Com.,  vol.  1,  p.  2G4),  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  spiritual  Kingdom  in 
opposition  to  tlie  Jewish  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  says  :  "  As  the  carnal  man 
makes  his  God  for  himself,  so  he  makes  the  Kingdom  of  God  for  himself. 
The  spiritual  man  has  a  spiritual  God  and  a  spiritual  Kingdom  of  God." 
This,  however,  proves  too  much,  for  on  the  same  principle  we  can  prove 
that  the  Saviour  is  wholly  spiritual  and  is  not  the  Son  of  Man  ;  we  can 
deny  the  bodily  resurrection,  the  renovation  of  the  earth,  or  anything 
that  is  outward  or  external.  Just  sucli  unfou7ided pre7nises  lay  the  founda- 
tion for  an  immense  amount  of  deduced  reasoning  on  this  subject. 

Eeuss  {His.  Ch.  Theol,  p.  150),  in  order  to  prove  the  spirituality  or  invisibility  of 
the  Kingdom,  quotes  John  18  :  36,  Matt.  22  :  21,  Luke  12  :  13,  and  the  temptation  of 
Christ.  Such  is  the  slender  foundation  upon  which  to  rest  so  important  a  doctrine. 
Literally,  multitudes  follow  such  guidance,  excepting  those  who  have  it  already  out- 
wardly manifested,  or  such  who  deny  any  future  visible  revelation  (comp.  for  such 
proof,  Props.  108,  109,  and  110). 


Prop.  101.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  661 

Ohs.  7.  It  is  certainly  curious  to  notice  how  even  unbelievers  avail  them- 
selves of  this  invisible  Kingdom  theory.  Thus  e.g.  Eenan,  with  great 
complacency,  and  perhaps  lurking  sarcasm,  claims  that  if  the  church 
repels  him,  and  others  of  like  faith,  "  let  us  console  ourselves  by  reflecting 
on  that  invisible  churchy  which  includes  excommunicated  saints  and  the 
noblest  souls  of  every  age." 

Perhaps  the  earliest  advocates  who  carried  the  invisible  church  or  Kingdom  theory 
to  an  extreme  were  the  Petrobrusians  (Kurtz,  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  456),  who  rejected  an 
outward  or  visible  church,  and  only  received  one  as  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  Some 
recent  sects  are  largely  reproducing  the  same  features. 


663  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  102. 


Proposition  102.  Neither  the  visible   nor   the  inmsible   church 
is  the  covenanted  Kingdom, 

This  lias  been  shown  by  preceding  Propositions,  as  e.  g.  Props. 

75,  90,  91,  93,  68,  94,  96,  98-100. 

Ohs.  1.  Some  make  the  visible  church  the  Kingdom,  others  the  invisible  ; 
some  unite  ~botli  in  the  same  Kingdom,  and  others  that  lotli  are  the  same 
Kingdom,  but  in  two  different,  a  higher  and  a  lower,  aspects.  Having 
shown  that  neither  one  nor  the  other  is  the  predicted  Kingdom,  it  follows, 
from  the  reasons  given,  that  a  combination  of  both  cannot  transform  them 
into  such  a  Kingdom. 

Ols.  2.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  Papacy  should  so  tenaciously  hold 
to  the  doctrine  that  the  church  is  the  Kingdom,  since  everything  so  dis- 
tinctively Popish,  as  Bellarmine  (quoted  by  Bowers,  Pref.  to  His.  of  Pojjes) 
assures  us,  depends  upon  it.  For  out  of  it  proceeds  the  Pope's  supremacy, 
the  vicegerent  rule,  the  entire  papal  governmental  machinery.  It  is  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  superstructural  pretensions  are  built.  If  this 
is  removed,  the  whole  falls.  It  is  also  consistent  for  those  who  hold  to 
what  the  Germans  call  CcBsero-iminsmus,  or  for  those  who  advocate  liier- 
archical  tendencies  in  any  form,  to  adhere  to  such  a  doctrine.  But  it  is 
not  necessary  for  pure  Protestantism,  as  is  evinced  in  the  history  of  the 
early  church,  for  which  see  the  candid  confession  of  Neander  under 
Props.  49  and  101.  Our  view  admits  of  nearly  all  that  is  said  by  a  host  of 
esteemed  writers  concerning  the  church,  excepting  that  of  its  being  already 
constituted  a  Kingdom.  The  latter  theory  is  not  only  of  no  practical  use 
in  the  working  of  the  church,  but  is  really  dangerous  in  its  tendencies,  as 
is  seen  from  the  use  made  of  it  by  various  parties.  Thus,  e.g.  on  the  one 
hand,  by  those  just  alluded  to  ;  and  on  the  other  by  Free  Religionists, 
Humanitarians,  etc.,  who  build  the  most  extensive  of  Kingdoms  on  the 
foundations  laid  by  the  orthodox,  expressing  the  same  in  the  most  eloquent 
terms.  Here  and  there,  indeed,  we  find  a  writer  who  holds  to  the  early 
church  doctrine  of  the  church,  that  it  is  no  Kingdom,  and  occasionally 
attention  is  called  to  it  in  church  papers  (as  e.g.  Ltith.  Ohserver,  April 
25th,  1873),  but  thus  far  with  so  little  logical  connection  and  argument 
that  it  has  scarcely  aroused  attention.  Then  we  also  find  many  writers 
(Millenarians),  who,  conceding  that  the  church  is  a  Kingdom  in  some  way, 
yet  distinctly  announce  that  it  is  not  the  covenanted  and  predicted  King- 
dom of  Jesus,  which  they  assert  is  still  in  the  future.  Then,  again,  we 
have  another  class  (as  e.g.  Prof.  Seelye,  Bib.  Sacra,  Ap.,  18G6,  pp.  228- 
234),  which,  whilst  indorsing  the  prevailing  view  of  the  church  being  the 
predicted  Kingdom,  confesses  that  the  doctrine  of  the  church — i.e.  what 
the  church  really  is  and  its  relations — is  not  yet  understood,  having  hither- 
to been  considered  only  as  involved  in  other  doctrines  and  not  as  a  promi- 


PeOP.  102.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIIS^GDOM.  663 

nent  theme  standing  alone — vital,  it  is  true,  but  yet  imperfectly  compre- 
liended,  and  which  they  regard  as  the  great  question  of  our  time,  etc. 

Sucli  confessions  indicate  that  tlie  prevailing  doctrine  is  far  from  being  satisfactory, 
and  accords  with  one  ma(^e  to  the  author  by  a  professor  in  one  of  our  colleges,  who 
acknowledged  that  he  preached  on  the  subject  until  he  himself  felt  that  his  deductions, 
drawn  from  the  general  view,  were  inconsistent.  Indeed,  is  it  not  time  to  discard  a 
doctrine  which  causes  some  of  the  ablest  defenders  of  Christianity  to  fall  into  palpable 
contradictions'?  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  McCosh  {Christ,  and  P(Ksitiv.,i).  245)  makes  the  Kingdom 
*' a  mixed  Kingdom,"  admitting  both  good  and  bad,  and  on  the  same  page  he  has  it, 
"the  reign  of  God  in  men's  hearts,"  which  can  only  apply  to  the  good.  In  one  place 
he  asserts  from  Christ's  language  to  Nicodemus  that  only  those  who  have  realized  "  the 
new  birth"  are  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  then  in  another  place  he  deduces  from"  the 
parables  of  tares  and  v;heat,  and  drag  net,  that  "  the  tares"  and  "  bad  fish,"  who,  of 
course,  have  not  experienced  such  a  birth,  are  also  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  The 
only  way  to  rid  themselves  of  such  contradictions  is  to  erect  several  Kingdoms,  one 
within  the  other,  or  to  establish  several  existing  phases  of  the  same  Kingdom,  but  such 
]3rocedures  do  not  logically  help  the  matter,  seeing  that  they  are  in  opjoosition  to  cove- 
nant  and  prophecy.  Again,  an  excellent  writer  who  attempts  to  avoid  Dr.  McCosh 's 
"  mixed  Kingdom,"  gives  us  the  following  arrangement.  "Van  Oosterzee  {Theol.  of  New 
Test.,  p.  70)  says  :  "  Even  with  the  idea  of  the  Christian  Church,  that  of  the  Kingdom 
of  God  must  not  be  confounded.  The  church  is  only  the  inadequate  outward  form  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God — the  Kingdom  of  God  itself  is  a  sjnritual  communion."  In  a  foot-note 
he  adds  :  "  the  Kingdom  of  God,  on  the  other  hand,  until  its  glorious  manifestation 
includes  the  outward  church,  which  is  in  but  not  necessai-ily  rf  it,  comp.  Matt.  13  :  41." 
Here  we  have  :  it  is,  and  it  is  not ;  it  is  in,  but  not  of  it  ;  it  includes  it,  and  it  does  not 
include  it  as  part  of  it,  etc.  Alas  for  the  Kingdom,  if  such  nice  mystical  distinctions 
are  needed  to  ascertain  what  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  as  proclai7ned  by  covenant  and  prophet. 
Why  not  discard  a  theory  which  produces  from  the  same  fountain  both  sweet  and  bitter 
waters,  from  the  same  tree  sweet  and  sour  fruit  ? 

Ois.  3.  The  very  idea  of  the  Christian  Church,  as  given  by  these  same 
writers,  forbids  the  notion  of  a  Kingdom,  viz. :  that  "  it  is  a  religious, 
moral  institution,"  or  "  a  society  of  exclusively  religious  interest,  in- 
dependent of  and  distinct  from  political  relations  and  duties  ;"  or  as 
some  have  it,  the  same  "  disconnected  from  the  state  or  civil  comj^act  ;" 
or  "  an  organization  of  believers  for  religious  purjDoses,  which  does  not  in- 
terfere with  their  civil  and  other  rights  ;"  or  even  Schlegel's  opinion,  that 
it  is  "  a  free,  peculiar,  independent  corporation.''  Such,  and  many  other 
definitions  of  like  spirit,  might  be  adopted  without  bringing  in  the  idea 
of  a  Kingdom.  They  do  more,  they  preveiii  its  adoption.  Let  the  reader 
turn  back  to  our  argument,  by  which,  under  the  Theocracy  and  the  Tiieo- 
cratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  God  Himself  gives  us  His  idea  of  ivhat  consti- 
tutes the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  we  find  this  distinctive  element  of  a  King- 
dom, lacking  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  in  these  definitions  of  the 
same.  In  the  Theocracy,  which  gave  Outward  form  and  prominency  to 
the  Kingdom,  the  religious  and  political  commonwealth,  the  church  and 
the  state  were,  by  Divine  constitution,  identical,  one.  A  separation  was 
never  made  which  allowed  a  distinction  between  citizen  and  worshipper. 
It  was  this  feature  which  gave  force  and  validity  to  the  idea  of  a  King- 
dom, and  just  so  soon  as  the  separation  was  effected  by  the  overthrow  of 
the  Jewish  state,  the  distinctive  idea  of  a  Kingdom  then  existing,  also,  as 
the  nature  of  the  case  demanded  in  consistency,  vanished.  This  arrange- 
ment, t\\\&  fundamental  union  we  have  already  proven  was  God's  own  ex- 
pressed  definition  of  a  Kingdom,  and  when  this  was  lacking  all  the  holy 
men  deplored  the  overthroiv  of  the  Kingdom  and  predicted  its  restoration. 
This  feature,    without  which   the   Kingdom   is  impracticatjle  as  God  has 


664  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  102. 

covenanted,  was  tendered  to  the  Jews  at  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  conditional 
on  repentance.  It  was  rejected.  The  Christian  Church  followed,  but 
this  church  also  lacks  tlie  Theocratic  peculiarity  which  exalts  to  the  position 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  The  question  is,  Will  it  ahvays  be  lacking?  Will 
God's  efforts  at  restoration  always  ]}ro\e  a  failure?  Is  God's  Kingdom, 
"which  requires,  as  essential  to  its  very  existence,  the  union  of  church  and 
state,  never  to  be  re-established  ?  Multitudes  assert  this,  and  cling  to  an 
organization  wanting  God's  requisite  order  to  constitute  it  His  Kingdom, 
and  pronounce  it  against  ])recedent,  covenant,  and  promise,  the  Kingdom. 
God's  promises  will  be  verified  in  their  appointed  time;  present  failure 
does  not  imply  continued  ;  the  Divine  Purpose,  delayed  by  depravity,  is 
even  merciful  in  this  period  of  detention,  manifesting  grace  toward  us 
Gentiles.  When  the  time  of  "  the  appearing  and  Kingdom"  comes,  then 
will  the  appointed  Son  of  Man,  the  covenanted  David's  Son,  restore  that 
Theocratic  feature  ivhich  elevates  to  the  position  and  dignity  of  the  King- 
dom of  God,  a  Kingdom  in  which,  as  formerly,  worshipper  and  citizen, 
church  and  state,  are  one.  Since,  then,  no  such  union  as  precedent  makes 
necessary  to  God's  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  called  and  appropriated  as  His,  is 
to  be  found  in  those  definitions,  or  in  the  church  itself  as  organized  by 
the  Apostles,  we  ask.  Is  it  proper  to  give  it  this  designation? 

Can  it  be  possible  that  David's  Son  has  a  real  Kingdom  here  on  earth,  when  David's 
throne  and  Kingdom  are,  overthrown  ?  When  Jerusalem  is  downtrodden  ?  When  Jesus 
declared  (Matt.  23  :  39,  Luke  13  :  34)  that  He  would  be  absent  from  it,  leaving  it  des- 
olate, until  a  certain  return?  Alas!  men  by  ignoring  the  express  language  of  the 
covenant,  and  by  an  unwarranted  substitution,  set  up  another  as  the  Messianic  King- 
dom, overlooking  the  simj^le  fact  that  no  Kingdom  (so  called)  can  possibly  be  acknowl- 
edged unless  it  restores  (as  e.g.  Isa.  1  :  26,  27,  etc.)  the  identical  Theocracy  withdrawn.  It 
is  self-evident—Siii  we  have  shown  in  detail— that  the  twelve  and  the  seventy,  who  were 
preachers  of  the  Kingdom,  had  not  the  remotest  idea  of  such  extraordinary  transmuta- 
tions as  have  ap2:)eared  engrafted,  by  human  reason,  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  4.  If  the  church  is  the  Kingdom  of  God,  then  the  student,  if  can- 
did, and  allowing  the  prophecies  their  plain  grammatical  sense,  must  see 
that  the  condition  of  the  one  is  not  like  the  predicted  condition  of  the 
other.  Hence  the  result  follows,  as  in  Schleiermacher,  Arnold  (see  Fair- 
bairn  On  Froph.,  p.  96),  and  others,  that  the  prophecies  must  be  regarded 
in  another  light  than  that  of  a  piredictive  one.  Then  the  prophecies  as 
given  remain  unrealized,  and  they  must  be  received  only  as  the  longings 
of  humanity,  the  expressed  desires  of  man  respecting  the  destinies  of  the 
■world.  An  important  and  fundamental  element  of  prophecy  is  frittered 
away,  until  an  unreliable  human  one  alone  remains.  The  God-derived, 
power  is  left  out,  and  a  man-derived  substituted.  Why  this  result  in  the 
minds  of  so  many  scholars?  Simply  because  of  the  attempt  to  fit,  by  the 
wholesale,  prophecy  concerning  the  Kingdom  into  something  which  it  is 
not  designed  to  embrace  ;  these  men,  finding  no  just  and  reliable  fulfilment, 
are  driven  to  the  opposite  extreme  so  injurious  to  the  Word  itself. 

If  the  prophecies  are  taken  in  their  plain  connection  and  meaning  (and  not  simply 
a  verse  here  and  a  verse  there),  it  is  simply  impossible  to  predicate  a  fulfilment  in  the 
church.  Thus  e.g.  take  Daniel's  four  monarchies  (Props.  104,  121,  160),  and  we  find  that 
the  church  existed  at  the  side  of  them  without  being  recognized  as  a  Kingdom,  that  the 
church  was  oppressed  by  them  until  the  Kingdom  came,  and  that  the  Kingdom  was 
given  after  them  in  a  regular  succession,  at  which  time  and  afterward  the  dominion  of 
the  saints  is  represented  as  supreme,  etc.  This  feature  will  be  urged  under  several  Prop- 
ositions. 


PkOP.  102.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  (565 

Ohs.  5.  The  question  back  of  that  of  the  Kingdom  itself,  which  must  be 
decided,  is  that  referring  to  the  literal,  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word, 
Prop.  4.  If  it  is  assumed  tliat  a  higher  and  more  spiritual  meaning  is 
attached  to  the  recognized  grammatical  one,  then  the  Kingdom  is  at  the 
pleasure  of  the  interpreter  ;  if  the  grammatical  sense  is  alone  firmly  re- 
tained, then  it  is  imjjossible  to  construct  out  of  the  church  the  predicted 
Kingdom.  Awarding  to  the  church  her  just  position  and  mission,  we  are 
forced  logically  to  accept  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  in  the  form  delineated 
by  covenant  and  prophecy. 

This  objection  to  the  plain  grammatical  sense  as  held  by  the  early  church  is  common 
ground  for  the  infidel  and  the  spiritualizing  believer.  Kenan  emjDloys  it  as  a  reason  to 
set  aside  the  literal  notion  of  a  Kingdom,  and  thus  to  show  that  the  first  teachers  were 
mistaken  (in  this  wa}"  attacking  their  credibility  and  inspiration)  ;  Neander  argues  from 
it  that  they  only  presented  "  the  husk,"  which  contained  "  the  kernel  "  that  uninspired 
men  afterward  developed.  The  author  of  Ecce  Homo  on  the  one  side,  and  the  writer  of 
Ecce  iJeus  on  the  other,  are  both  agreed  to  relinquish  the  idea  of  a  Kingdom  as  found 
in  the  i^lain,  unvarnished  grammatical  sense  of  covenant  and  prophecj'.  Thus,  un- 
believer and  believer  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder,  mutually  supporting  each  other,  in 
attacking  the  Kingdom  as  originally  preached  and  believed.  Having  assumed  that  some 
ideal,  or  the  Church,  is  intended,  they  either  assume  that  the  language  itself  is  a  mis- 
take, or  that  in  and  under  it  is  concealed  a  conception  which,  in  some  way,  must  fit 
the  estimate  they  have  formed.  The  more  ultra,  indeed,  seeing  the  Church,  and  believing 
it  to  be  the  only  result  that  shall  ever  be  witnessed  in  confirmation  of  covenant  and 
prophecy,  declare  that  Christ  and  the  apostles  misapprehended  its  nature,  and  hence 
reject  both  the  Church  and  the  Kingdom.  One  eminent  writer  in  his  apologetics  and 
eagerness  to  vindicate  the  Church  as  a  Kingdom,  even  ventures  to  the  unwarranted 
length  to  assert  that  if  the  Kingdom  had  been  established  as  preached  by  John  the 
Baptist  and  the  discijiles  (Acts  1  :  6),  it  would  have  been  "  a  sivfid  measure."  What  lack 
of  knowledge  this  evinces  of  God's  oaih-hound  Davidic  covenant  and  the  precious,  en- 
nobling Theocratic  ordering  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  81,  82,  200,  203).  And  what  sinfulness  to 
sneer  at  and  ridicule  a  Kingdom  postponed  to  the  Second  Advent,  when  such  is  God's 
own  arrangement.     Ignorance  can  alone  tender  an  apology  for  suchi  conduct. 

Obs.  6.  Take  any  history  of  dogmas,  and  if  impartial,  it  will  enable  us 
readily  to  trace  in  the  doctrine  of  the  church  that  the  present  mixed  inter- 
pretation and  confounding  of  it  with  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  the  growth 
of  centuries.  In  the  first  and  second  centuries  the  church  was  simply  a  com- 
munity of  believers,  who,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  action  of  the  Apostles  in 
reference  to  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians,  were  united  by  a  common 
faith  in  Christ,  without  basing  unity  in  a  complete  outward  uniformity. 
Fellowship  with  Christ  in  the  use  of  the  ordinances  appointed,  and  in  obe- 
dience to  the  Word,  was  the  test  of  union,  and  no  one  arrogated  to  himself 
precedence  in  the  way  of  authority.  The  church  was  nowhere  called  the 
Kingdom  ;  for  the  church,  instead  of  admitting  itself  to  be  the  Kingdom, 
2'MS  looking  for  the  speedy  coming  of  the  Kingdom.  Admit  that  it  was, 
as  one  remarks,  "  a  sensuous  interpretation,"  it  is  sufficient  for  our  pur- 
pose to  receive  the  admission  that  the  Apostolic  Fathers  had  7io  other  than 
this  "  sensuous"  conception  of  the  church.  It  may  indicate  weakness,  but 
we  confess  that  "a  sensuous  interpretation"  of  so  important  a  doctrine, 
having  the  advantage  of  nearness  to  apostolic  times,  and  remaining  for  so 
long  uncontradicted,  is  far  more  credible  than  the  later  refined  and  spirit- 
ualized ones,  because  of  its  accord  zvith  Holy  Writ. 

Carefully  tracing  the  doctrine,  we  soon  see  the  entering  wedge  which  mars  the 
simplicity  of  the  early  church  view.  Dr.  Neander  has  well  and  candidly  pointed  this 
out,  in  his  various  writings,  as  taking  place  in  the  history  of  the  Gnostics.     The  notion, 


666  THE  THEOCEATIC   KIIS'GDOM.  [PrOP.  102. 

founded  on  that  of  a  Kingdom,  of  an  outward  unity  gradually  obtained  the  possession 
of  men's  minds  and  resolved  itself  in  endeavors  to  manifest  the  idea  by  definite  form  in 
the  visible  Church.  Antagonism  to  Millenarianism  also  contributed^  to  the  entertain- 
ment of  such  views.  It  exhibited  itself  in  claims  of  authority  ia  sacred  things,  in 
planting  the  germs  and  fostering  the  growth  of  a  hierarchy,  until  finally  the  suggested 
and  fostered  ideal  presented  itself,  practically  exemplified  in  the  Papacy.  Here  was 
indeed  a  Kingdom,  with  subjects,  laws,  rulers,  and  a  central  power,  visible,  and  exerting 
extensive  dominions.  It  was  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  heaven  !  It  would  surjDass  our 
limits  to  show  how  the  unguarded  language  of  really  sincere  and  good  men  were  made 
subservient  to  this  development,  or  to  indicate  how  during  this  growth  protests  here 
and  there  were  pronounced  against  this  theory  and  its  resultant  efiiects.  For  centuries 
it  remained  the  controlling  and  enforced  view  ;  taught  by  a  Church  in  which  both  laity  and 
clergy  were  compelled  to  follow  its  teaching  with  unquestioning  obedience.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  the  meaning  of  the  Kingdom  should  be  almost  eradicated,  when  for  ages 
the  Bible  was  scarcely  read,  and  was  only  interpreted  by  persons  wedded  and  sub- 
servient to  the  Hierarchy  itself.  To  evince  how  imbedded  this  notion,  that  the  Church 
was  the  Kingdom,  had  become,  it  is  only  necessary  to  refer  to  Chancellor  Gerson.  In 
the  fifteenth  century,  when  the  reaction  took  place  in  the  University  of  Paris  respecting 
the  relation  of  the  Papacy  to  church  and  state,  Chancellor  Gerson,  the  leader  in  the 
controversy,  hampered  by  the  i^rominently  retained  idea  that  the  Church  was  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  and  that  as  such  it  needed  an  outward  expression  of  unity  and  power, 
conceded  "  the  whole  Hierarchical  Order  as  necessary  for  the  organism  of  the  Church." 
Conceding  the  premise  from  whence  the  conclusions  naturally  flowed,  retaining  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  system  is  built,  his  opposition  was  consequently  very  one- 
sided and  lacked  in  radical  force. 

Coming  to  the  Reformation,  two  antagonistic  Churches  are  arrayed  the  one  against 
the  other.  The  Roman  Catholic  vested  all  authority  in  the  Church  simply  because  it 
was,  per  se,  the  Kingdom  of  God,  as  tangible,  Bellarmine  informs  us,  as  the  Republic  of 
Venice.  The  Reformation,  unable  altogether  to  rid  itself  of  the  insidious  and  life- 
interwoven  notion  of  the  Church-Kingdom,  endeavors  to  check  the  hierarchical  Church 
jDosition  by  advocating  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God,  the  universal  priesthood  of 
believers,  etc.,  and  by  turning  to  the  early  Church  view  respecting  the  Church.  The 
latter  was  in  a  great  measure  attained  ;  the  fundamental  maxim  was  laid  down  that  the 
Church  is  a  community  of  believers  in  Christ,  and  embraces  all  such  ;  the  utterances 
were  almost  entirely  scriptural,  and  were  only  marred  in  the  efforts  to  conciliate  the 
Roman  Catholics,  or  to  favor  civil  government.  To  some  extent  there  was  a  departure 
from  the  primitive  simplicity,  which  need  nut  be  wondered  at,  considering  the  age  and 
the  influences  surrounding  the  Reformers.  Indeed,  at  times,  as  Neander,  Mosheim,  and 
recently  Fisher,  in  his  His.  of  the  Reformation,  show,  Luther  advocated  precisely  the 
government  adopted  and  practised  by  the  early  churches,  but  regarded  it,  in  view  of 
the  condition  and  training  of  the  Germans,  impracticable  in  his  time.  It  would  be 
interesting  to  note  how  on  various  occasions  the  entire  truth  seemed  on  the  point  of 
enunciation.  We  have  only  place  for  the  following  exhibit  of  doctrine  in  remarkable 
corresi^ondence  with  the  early  one.  In  the  Augsburg  Confession  (Art.  7)  "  the  Church  is 
the  congregation  of  the  saints,  in  which  the  gospel  is  correctly  taught  and  the  sacra- 
ments are  properly  administered."  Provision  is  made  against  the  Catholic  external 
unity  by  asserting  that  "  for  the  true  unity  of  the  Church  nothing  more  is  required  than 
agreement  concerning  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the  administration  of  the  sacra- 
ments." But  lest  this  Article  be  misconstrued  to  mean  that  all  in  the  Church  are  saints, 
and  thus  pave  the  way  for  the  shafts  of  the  enemy,  Art.  8  is  added  :  "  Although  the 
Church  is  properly  a  congregation  of  believers,  yet  in  the  present  life,  many  hyj^ocrites 
and  wicked  men  are  mingled  with  them."  The  Reformers  advocated  an  outward 
Church,  embracing  good  and  bad,  although  admitting  also,  that  to  the  pious  alone,  in 
view  of  the  demarkation  in  the  future  life,  the  name  properly  belonged.  So  that  while, 
as  Dr.  Knapp  and  others  state,  Luther  first  employed  the  term  "  invisible"  in  his  reply 
to  the  Roman  Catholic  party  in  answer  to  the  question,  "Where,  then,  was  the  true 
Church  before  him,"  yet  Neander  {His.  of  Dogmas,  p.  687)  shows  that  "  the  idea  of  the 
invisible  Church  was  for  a  time  held  to  be  doubtful"  by  both  Melanchthon  and  Luther. 
"  Melanchthon  himself  says  :  '  These  passages  treat  not  of  a  Platonic  idea,  bid  of  a  visible 
Church.'"  '' And  Luther  says  :  '  They  say  the  Spirit  must  do  it.  The  merciful  God 
preserve  us  from  that  Christian  Church  in  which  there  are  only  saints.'  "  From  these 
and  other  expressions,  and  from  the  Confession  itself,  it  seems  that  in  all  probability 
they  used  the  term  invisible  to  denote  true  believers  in  a  sense  very  different  from  the 
later  engrafted  ideas.     They  endeavored  to  avoid,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Donatist  idea 


Prop.  102.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  667 

that  the  Church  ceased  to  exist  when  unworthy  members  were  attached  to  it,  and,  on 
the  other,  that  it  can  exist  exchisively  of  wicked,  unregenerated  men.  Hence  Neander 
(p.  685,  vol.  2)  remarks  :  "  The  distinction  was  therefore  made  between  the  proper  and 
improper  Ghuxch."  This,  in  response  to  attacks  of  Romish  theologians,  was  taken  up 
and  enlarged  by  their  successors,  until  an  inner  and  outward  Church,  the  inner  ex- 
clusively confined  to  the  good,  was  advocated,  the  inner  esj^ecially  forming  "  the  King- 
dom of  Christ,"  "a  spiritual  Kingdom,"  also  in  a  manner  outwardly  manifested. 
Zwingli  (Neander,  His.  of  Dogmas,  p.  686,  vol.  2)  has  two  churches,  one  of  all  who 
profess  Christ,  embracing  good  and  evil  ;  the  other,  in  the  true  sense,  composed  of  all 
believers.  Calvin  also  {InsiL,  B.  4)  has  the  external  composed  of  professors  ;  the 
internal  or  true  Church  of  the  elect  of  God.  The  same  division  characterizes  nearly  all 
Reformers  and  divines  ;  and  with  it  nearly  all  included  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  either 
related  to  the  one  or  to  the  other,  or  to  both  ;  and  in  this  last  respect  dei)arting  from 
the  original  simplicity  of  the  doctrinal  jDosition  of  the  Church.  Among  these,  however, 
as  we  have  already  stated,  there  were  many  who  professed  the  belief  that  the  present 
Kingdom  appertaining  to  the  Church  was  only  a  prelude  to  a  future  and  still  more 
magnificent  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom,  such  as  the  prophets  describe,  and  which 
was  in  a  higher  and  more  significant  sense  the  promised  Kingdom.  The  history  of  the 
doctrine,  regarded  in  its  connection  with  apostolic  times,  has  nothing  in  it  of  sufficient 
weight  to  deteriorate  our  view  ;  rather  the  indications  of  departure  from  the  early  one, 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  produced,  the  fruit  that  it  bore,  the  varied  definitions  it 
gave  rise  to,  etc.,  are  decidedly  favorable  to  our  line  of  argument.  The  fact  is,  that  in 
view  of  the  predicted  blindness  and  lack  of  faith  in  Christ's  coming  and  Kingdom, 
characteristic  of  the  world  and  the  Church  before  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  prevailing  view 
so  deeply  intrenched  in  the  Church — the  departure  from  the  Primitive  belief  so  widely 
extended — is  open  to  the  gravest  suspicion  (comp.  Prop.  174).  The  Augustinian  view 
of  the  Church  is  the  one  largely  adopted,  and  the  influence  of  The  City  of  God  is  widely 
felt.  Comparatively  few  theologians  but  feel  the  preponderating  tendency,  and  give 
way  to  it.     This  is  the  position  of  the  multitude— just  as  the  Word  predicts. 


QQ8  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  103. 


Proposition  103.  T/iis  Kingdom  is  not  a  Kingdom  in  the   third 
heaven. 

Some  writers,  especially  in  answering  Millenarians,  inform  us 
that  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  of  God,  or  of  heaven,  is  now  in  heaven., 
where  the  redeemed  now  dwell,  and  that  it  will  continue  to  remain 
there  after  the  resurrection.  Aside  from  its  direct  conflict  with 
covenant  and  promise,  it  is  easily  rebutted  by  Dan.  2  and  7,  Rev. 
14,  etc. ,  which  describe  the  Kingdom  as  one  existing  here  on  earth 
over  the  whole  world. 

Ohs.  1.  Whatever  the  authority  and  power  of  Christ  in  the  third  heaven 
in  His  Divine  and  human  natures  (Props.  80,  79,  83,  etc.),  the  same  does 
not  meet  the  conditions  either  of  prophecy  (Prop.  35,  etc.),  or,  especiahy, 
of  covenant.  Prop.  49. 

Simply  to  illustrate  the  conflicting  views,  we  give  Gregory  (Four  Gospels),  who, 
hampered  by  a  preconceived  notion,  finds  a  difliculty  to  define  the  Kingdom  ;  for  on 
p.  126  he  makes  it,  God  reigning  in  the  hearts  of  men  ;  on  p.  146,  influenced  by  the  expres- 
sion "  Kingdom  of  heaven,"  he  makes  it  a  Kingdom  in  heaven  above  ;  and  on  the 
following  page  he  makes  the  Church  a  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.  Many 
writers  have  two  co-existing  Kingdoms,  one  on  earth  and  the  other  in  heaven,  and  some 
call  the  one  "  the  militant  Kingdom,"  and  the  other  "  the  triumphant  Kingdom."  Any 
absurdity,  under  the  sijecious  language  of  pious  phraseology,  is  eagerly  received,  and, 
without  examination,  reiterated.  To  indicate  how  men  flatly  contradict  themselves 
when  leaving  the  scriptural  basis  of  the  early  Church,  we  give  another  illustration 
from  Lange's  Com.  Acts  14  :  22.  In  the  doctrinal  part  (1)  Lechler  declares  that  "  the 
Kingdom  of  God,"  here  mentioned,  is  "  something  that  lies  beyond  the  bounds  of  this 
world,"  etc.  He  affirms  that  believers,  "  as  long  as  -they  are  passing  through  tribulations 
or  afflictions,  have  not  yet  entered  into  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  and  concludes  :  "  '  The 
Church  '  and  '  The  Kingdom  of  God '  are  not  equivalent  terms  :  the  former  is  the  court  ; 
the  latter,  the  sanctuary,  or  rather  the  holiest  of  all  (Heb.  9  :  2,  3)."  Now  let  the  reader 
turn  e.g.  in  the  same  Com.  to  Acts  3  :  19-21,  Doctrinal  (6),  and  here  on  earth  after  the 
Sec.  Advent  a  complete  restoration  to  blessedness,  etc.,  is  presented  in  accord  with  our 
views  (comp.  Prop.  144,  where  the  language  is  quoted). 

Ot)s.  2.  The  Kingdom  is  not,  as  held  by  some,  e.g.  Dr.  Langeand  others, 
the  church  in  heaven  before  the  Second  Advent  in  a  triumphant  state 
called  "  the  Kingdom  of  glory."  This  theory  is  derived  from  mistaking 
the  Divine  Sovereignty  for  the  specially  pro7msed  Kbigdom  to  the  Son  of 
man,  and  probably  from  a  desire  to  cover  up  what  defects  may  exist  in 
several  lower  grades  or  phases  of  Kingdoms  simultaneously  in  operation. 
But  this  is  exceedingly^  iinscriptural  j  and  the  theory  can  be  traced 
directly  to  the  Origenistic  interpretation.  It  is  utterly  unreliable,  from 
the  simple  fact,  already  abundantly  proven,  that  this  Messianic  Kingdom 
is  based  exchisively  on  the  covenant  and  the  prophecies  elucidative  of  the 
covenant,  and  neither  of  these  promise  a  Kingdom  in  the  third  heaven,  or  . 
any  other  part  of  the  universe  ;  but  explicitly  predict  its  establishment 


Prop.  103.]  the  theocratic  kingdom. 

liere  on  the  earth,  with  a  world-wide  dominion,  etc.  If  believers  are  to  be 
heirs  with  Abraham,  according  to  promise,  then  to  behold  our  inheritance 
with  faith  it  becomes  us  to  confine  ourselves  to  these  promises.  If  so,  then 
it  is  hnpossible  to  find  any  one  given  to  Abraham  that  has  not  a  direct 
reference  to  this  earth,  or  to  his  seed  here  on  earth.  Not  one  refers  to  the 
third  heaven,  or  to  any  place  outside  of  the  earth  itself.  What  we  are  to 
understand  by  tbe  words  "  heaven,"  "  heavenly,"  etc.,  will  be  duly  con- 
sidered under  Prop.  107,  and  what  relationship  the  earth  under  Messiah's 
rule  will  sustain  to  the  third  heaven  has  already  been  intimated  and  will 
again  receive  consideration.  Having  also  shown  that  the  saints  have  not 
yet  received  the  promises,  not  yet  inherited,  etc.  (Prop.  85,  90,  91,  etc.),  it 
follows,  that  they  have  not  received  the  Kingdom.  This  Eomish  view, 
which  has  a  leaning  toward  Paganism,  is  indeed  popular  and  deeply  rooted, 
so  that  the  poet  writes,  and  many  devoutly  sing  : 

"  With  thee  we'll  reign,  with  thee  we'll  rise, 
And  kingdoms  gain  beyond  the  skies  ;" 

but  it  ism  direct  cmtagonisni  to  the  Kingdom  promised  to  David's  Son 
and  to  His  brethren. 

Lindsay's  Art.  Millennium  in  Encyclop.  Brli.,  by  exalting  and  pressing  the  inter- 
mediate state  beyond  its  scriptural  representation,  forms  an  objection  against  us.  Thus  : 
saints  are  happy  in  heaven  ;  it  is  inconsistent  to  bring  them  to  this  earth  from  a  higher 
io  a  lower  stage  of  enjoyment.  But  this  is  begging  the  question,  for  (1)  it  takes  for  granted 
what  remains  unproven,  viz.  :  a  present  inheriting  of  the  Kingdom  and  forfeited 
blessings  ;  and  (2)  that  our  doctrine  brings  the  saints  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  stage, 
seeing  that  we  exjjressly  teach  the  contrary.  Lindsay  then  adds  something,  which  we 
have  seen  advocated  by  no  Milienarian  author,  viz.  :  that  the  saints  "  then  return  to 
heaven  to  permit  their  enemies /or  a  season  to  reign  in  their  stead."  He  may  have  found 
some  crude  writer  to  express  this  view,  but  it  is  ojDposed  to  the  universally  expressed 
views  of  ancient  and  modern  Millenarians,  and  cannot,  therefore,  without  injustice,  be 
charged  to  us. 

Obs.  3.  Another  theory  concerning  this  Kingdom  being  in  the  third 
heaven  during  tbe  thousand  years  or  Millennial  age,  will  be  noticed  under 
a  following  Proposition. 

"  The  Perfectionists"  (Nordhoff's  Com.  Societies,  p.  268)  also  say  that  at  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  70,  "  the  final  Kingdom  of  God  then  began  in  the  heavens  ;  that  the 
manifestation  of  that  Kingdom  in  the  visible  world  is  now  approaching  ;  that  its 
approach  is  ushering  in  the  second  and  final  resurrection  and  judgment  ;  that  a  Church 
on  earth  is  now  rising  to  meet  the  approaching  Kingdom  in  the  heavens,  and  to  become 
its  duplicate  and  representative,"  etc.  This  theory  ignores  the  covenant,  etc.,  and  sub- 
stitutes the  Divine  [Sovereignty  for  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  spiritualizing  the 
Theocratic  idea. 

Obs.  4.  The  early  church  had  no  idea  that  this  Kingdom  was  received 
at  or  after  death  (see  Prop.  98,  136).  Whatever  the  view  concerning  the 
intermediate  state,  whatever  the  condition  allotted  to  the  pious,  one  thing 
is  certainly  affirmed,  that  they  looked  for  the  Kingdom,  the  inheriting, 
crowning  at  the  Second  Advent  of  Christ  and  7iot  at  death.  The  departed 
were  also  represented  as  waiting  for  the  Kingdom,  and  the  whole  period 
during  which  the  bodies  of  the  saints  were  not  restored  was  characterized 
as  one  of  expectation,  waiting  for  redemption,  Rom.  8:23.  The  non- 
crowning  of  Paul,  during  the  intermediate  period,  the  reception  of  the 


670  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  103. 

Kingdom  at  the  time   of    "  regeneration"  or  "  restitution,"  etc.,    was 
decisive. 

This  most  conclusively  rebuts  the  amazing  declaration  of  Archb.  Whately  (Corrup- 
tions of  Christianity,  p.  131),  when  he  actually  makes,  after  the  ascension  of  Jesus,  the 
apostles  to  "  establish  the  Kingdom  of  God,  over  which  He  had  placed  them,  saying  :  '  I 
appoint  unto  you  a  Kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me,'  "  and  this  in 
fulfilment  of  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  Surprising  that  he  did  not  notice 
the  period  of  fulfilment  at  the  restitution  of  all  things,  the  disclaimer  that  Paul  made  of 
now  reigning,  the  period  of  crowning,  inheriting,  etc.,  at  the  Sec.  Advent. 


PPwOr.  104.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  671 


Proposition-  104.   Tlie  Christian  Chiircli  is  not  denoted  hy  tlte 
jjredlcted  Kingdom  of  the  Prophets, 

Having  already  sliown  what  tlie  Kingdom  is  according  to  the 
covenants,  it  may  be  well  to  briefly  direct  attention  to  the  i)rophets. 
In  the  nature  of  the  case,  both  (i.  e.  covenanted  and  j^rophetic) 
announcements  coining  from  the  same  source,  they  must  cor- 
resi^ond,  or  else  unity,,  and  Avith  it  credlhility^  is  destroyed.  The 
Proposition  is  amply  sustained,  as  the  observations  following 
indicate,  and  also  the  various  corroborating  i^roofs  taken  from  the 
Prophets  under  a  large  number  of  Propositions  (comx3.  e.  g.  Proi:)S. 
121,  132,  133,  and  159). 

Obs.  1.  Taking  the  ostablishmcnt  of  tlie  Kingdom  for  granted,  and  over- 
looking the  postponement,  has  led  to  a  wholesale  appropriation  by  the 
church  of  predictions  relating  exclusivehj  to  the  Kingdom  still  future.  "We 
select  of  those  thus  applied,  Dan.  2  :  31-45  ;  Dan.  7  : 1-28  ;  Isa.  25  :  G-9  ; 
Isa.  2  : 1-5  ;  comp.  with  Micah  4:  1-8,  and  then  one  or  two  that,  while  also 
]">artiallv  arrogated,  our  opponents  would  rather  not  quote  very  liberally, 
viz.:  Zech.  14  : 1-21  ;  Isa.  G3  :  1-G. 

We  remind  the  reader  of  one  fact  as  fulh'  presented  in  past  Propositions,  and  demon- 
strated hoih  historically  and  scripturally,  viz.  :  That  the  view  v^e  take  of  the  prophecies 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  accords  in  every  respect  with  those  entertained  by  the 
Chnrch  in  the  first  centuries.  It  is  passing  strange,  to  say  the  least,  that  the  early 
believers,  east  and  west,  north  and  south,  should,  under  the  leadership  of  men  who 
organized  and  perpetuated  the  Cburch,  place,  as  we  do,  the  fulfilment  of  those  predic- 
tions (li  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  and  not,  as  many  now  do,  at  the  founding  of  the  Ch. 
Church.  These  prophecies,  too,  are  so  prominent,  so  magnificent  in  proportions,  such 
landmarks  in  the  Divine  lledemptive  plan,  that  they  must  have  largely  occupied  the 
attention  of  the  apostolic  and  succeeding  age, 

0/vN\  2.  Taking  Dan.  2  :  31-45  and  7  : 1-28  as  descriptive  of  the  same 
Kingdom  (so  admitted  by  all  onr  opposers,  as  e.g.  Barnes,  Brown,  fStuart, 
etc.\  Ave  save  space  by  considering  them  together,  seeing  that  the  one  is 
an  am]ilification  of  the  other.  For  the  same  reason  we  avoid  a  description 
of  the  IJabylonian,  Medo-Persian,  Grecian,  and  Eoman  Empires,  denoted  by 
the  image  and  the  beasts,  for  this  has  been  done  by  many  able  writers,  as 
e.g.  Uede,  Bh.  Xewton,  Sir  Isaac  Xewton,  Faber,  etc.,  and  recently  by 
Auberlen,  Delitzsch,  etc. ;  and  the  same  is  fully  accepted  by  leading  writers 
opposed  to  our  doctrine,  as  e.g.  Barnes  Co))i.,  Pres.  Edwards  Bis.  Re- 
dcinpt..  Brown  Cli.  Sec.  Coriiing,  etc.  The  student  will  tindby  a  fair  com- 
2-)arison  of  these  Scriptures  with  each  other,  and  then  with  history,  that  no 
other  position  in  reference  to  them  can  be  maintained.  Hence  the  alniost 
general  agreement  existing  between  Millenarians  and  Anti-Millenarians 
thus  far  concerning  them.     But  as  soon  as  we  come  to  the  Kingdom  set 


672  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

up  by  God  and  given  to  the  Son  of  Man,  tlie  Churcli-Kingdom  theory  ap- 
plies the  same  to  the  Christian  Church,  affirming,  as  e.g.  Barnes,  that  it 
was  set  up  at  the  First  Advent  or  day  of  Pentecost,  or  as  e.g.  Bush,  at  a 
sujjposed  Second  Coming  of  Christ  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or,  as 
others,  at  some  intermediate  period,  at  the  birth,  baptism,  death,  resurrec- 
tion, or  ascension  of  Christ.  At  least,  whether  the  establishment  be  as 
notable  for  its  conspicuity  as  the  prophecy  intimates  or  not,  the  Kingdom 
is  represented  to  be  equivalent  to  the  Christian  Church.  Now  in  opposi- 
tion to  this  view,  the  following  reasons,  drawn  from  the  predictions,  ap- 
pear conclusive.^ 

1.  The  Kingdom  is  set  up  "  m  tlie  days  of  these  kings y  It  is  supposed 
that  this  means  in  the  days  or  time  when  one  of  these  empires  exists,  and 
the  inference  is  drawn  that  the  church,  being  established  under  the  fourth 
Kingdom,  it  is  certainly  the  undivided  Empire  that  is  meant.  But  against 
such  an  inference  we  allege  (a)  the  simple  fact  that  the  phrase  "  these 
kings,''  following  the  description  of  the  divided  form  of  the  Roman  Em- 
pire, most  naturally  refers  to  the  kings  or  kingdoms  existing  m  such  a 
divided  state,  and  which  fact  is  corroborated  by  other  prophecies  ;  that 
this  Kingdom  is  setup  after  the  ten  horns  (Dan.  7  ;  Rev.  18  :  12-17,  comp. 
with  Rev.  19  :  11-21,  etc.),  or  ten  kingdoms  are  in  existence.  The  ex- 
pression in  Dan.  2  thus  accurately  corresponds  with  other  predictions,  and 
forbids  our  receiving  the  Christian  Church  as  denoted,  because  it  was  es- 
tablished long  before  the  Roman  Empire  was  thus  divided,  (b)  One  King- 
dom follows  the  next  chronologically,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  make  a 
change  to  the  contrary  unless  expressly  specified.  Accepting  of  this, 
"  these  kings"  refer  to  the  later  ones,  those  in  the  divided  form,  or  else 
we  have  the  fourth  and  fifth  Kingdoms  contemporaneous.^ 

2.  The  smiting,  whatever  it  may  mean,  does  not  occur  in  the  undivided 
form  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  yet  the  smiting  is  contemporaneous  with 
the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom.  In  Dan.  2  :  34  it  is  explicitly  stated 
that  "  the  stone^'  '^  smote  tlie  image  upon  thefeet.^^  Therefore  not  only  the 
legs  (Eastern  and  Western  divisions),  but  the  feet  and  toes  appear  before 
the  smiting  process.  This  is  significant  of  the  period,  and  the  reference 
cannot  be  made  to  the  church,  because  that  appeared  long  beforeihQ  division 
into  legs  and  feet.  The  church  came  during  the  consolidated  period  of  the 
Empire,  and  therefore  it  is  not  intended,  seeing  that  the  entire  image  is 
presented  before  the  stone  enters  upon  its  work  of  demolition.^ 

3.  Taking  for  granted  their  own  theory  respecting  Dan.  7,  they  have  the 
Son  of  man  receiving  this  Kingdom,  as  the  prophecy  plainly  contradicts, 
before  the  ten  horns  have  arisen.  The  church  was  for  several  centuries  in 
existence,  according  to  their  own  interpretation,  before  they  arose.  Hence, 
the  church  cannot  be  meant  by  the  Kingdom,  for  the  prophecy  locates  the 
appearance  of  the  Ancient  of  Days  and  the  bestowment  of  the  Kingdom 
after  the  horns  have  appeared.'' 

4.  Not  only  this,  but  the  location  of  the  Kingdom  is  placed  not  only 
after  the  appearance  of  the  ten  horns,  but  after  three  have  fallen,  aw^l  after 
the  rise  and  extended  progress  of  another  horn  called  the  "  little  horn," 
which  is  in  correspondence  with  what  precedes  the  Advent  in  Rev.  19.  The 
church,  therefore,  cannot  possibly  be  this  Kingdom,  as  the  time  of  its  es- 
tablishment so  ividely  differs  from  that  of  the  prophecy.^ 

5.  The  smiting  of  the  stone,  the  overthrow  of  the  image  and  beast,  the 
entire  action  of  setting  up  the  Kingdom,  is  in  such  accord  with  what  John 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  673 

states  in  the  Apocalypse,  that  the  outlines  are  conceded  by  nearly  all  of  our 
opponents  to  be  the  same.  If  so,  the  whole  matter  still  appertains  to  the 
future,  and  again  is  indicative  that  the  chnrch  is  not  meant.  This  argu- 
ment is  only  available  with  those  who  concede,  as  e.g.  Barnes  Com  loci, 
that  the  Beasts  of  Dan.  and  John  are  identical,  etc." 

6.  The  stone  comes,  the  Son  of  man  comes,  at  the  time  when  the  King- 
doms are  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  prophecy  proclaims  this  to  be  07ig  of  the 
objects  contemplated  by  the  Coming.  The  fact  that  the  church,  instead 
of  destroying  earthly  Kingdoms,  has  herself  been  in  danger,  been  persecuted 
and  terribly  smitten  by  such  Kingdoms,  again  shows  that  the  church  is  not 
intended.' 

7.  The  testimony  of  Jesus  Himself,  when  at  His  First  Advent  He  refers 
to  or  quotes  these  prophecies,  is  in  favor  of  locating  them  still  in  the 
future,  at  least  so  Barnes  and  others.  Thus,  e.g.  Matt.  21  :  44  has  refer- 
ence, according  to  Barnes,  to  the  judgment-day,  and  Matt.  26  :  G4  relates 
also  to  the  future  Advent  and  not  to  the  First.  The  latter  passage  is  fully 
ai)propriated  by  Jesus  as  Messianic,  just  as  the  Jews  understood  it,  from 
whence  the  charge  of  blasphemy.  This  Kingdom  is  only  given  to  the  Son 
of  man  at  this  Coming,  referred  by  Jesus  not  to  the  first  hut  a  future  one, 
and  therefore  it  is  not  the  church.     (Comp.  Prop.  121).^ 

8.  The  horns  and  the  little  horn  are  represented  as  existing  down  to  this 
Coming,  and  during  their  presence  and  exertion  of  power,  the  saints,  just 
as  has  occurred  in  the  church  but  will  not  in  the  Kingdom,  have  been  op- 
pressed and  persecuted.  Such  a  condition  of  the  saints  is  not  m  accord 
with  their  condition  in  the  Kingdom,  and  hence  the  church  and  the 
Kingdom  are  not  the  same.** 

9.  At  the  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  etc.,  as  here  predicted,  there  can 
be  no  reference  to  His  First  Advent,  because  that  was  a  Coming  in  humili- 
ation to  suffer  and  die,  whilst  this  is  a  Coming  in  triumph  to  rescue  saints 
after  they  have  endured  a  period  of  trial,  etc.  Hence  this  is  not  the  Com- 
ing whicii  preceded  the  Ch.  Church,  but  must  be  the  same  alluded  to  in 
Rev.  as  preceding  the  Mill.  age.  From  this  Paul  evidently  obtains  "  His 
appearing  and  Kingdom,^''  admitted  by  all  to  be  future.'" 

10.  The  declaration  of  the  prophecy  is,  that  the  church  was  in  a  strug- 
gling condition  "  until  "  "  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the  King- 
dom,^^  This  language  clearly  implies  that  during  the  period  when  this  op- 
pressing hostile  power  existed,  the  saints  did  not  possess  the  Kingdom.'^ 

11.  The  setting  up  (as  Tregelles,  Fairbairn,  etc.)  of  thrones  (not  cast- 
ing down),  "  the  judgment  set  and  the  hooks  opened,''^  etc.,  locates  the  com- 
ing of  the  Ancient  of  Days  and  that  of  the  Son  of  man,  just  where  eJohn 
locates  the  judgment  under  the  last  trumpet — Rev.  11  :  15-19  ;  Rev.  15  :  15 
-19  ;  Rev.  20  :  4 — still  in  the  future.  Therefore,  these  are  not  descriptions 
of  events  preceding  the  establishment  of  the  Christian  Church.  (Comp. 
Props.  121,  132,  133,  134,  etc.) 

12.  The  giving  of  the  Kingdom,  dominion,  etc.,  implies  at  once  a  ruler- 
ship,  power,  exaltation,  etc.,  a  fulfilment  of  which  is  thus  far  contradicted 
by  the  history  of  the  church.  It  embraces  actual  dominion  over  nations, 
their  subjection,  etc.,  which  has  never  been  realized.'^ 

13.  Wiien  the  power  of  this  Kingdom  is  once  exerted,  it  includes  a  con- 
tinued, unremitted  exertion  and  manifestation  of  the  same,  which  does  not 
correspond  with  the  wavering,  often  weakened  condition,  relapses,  losses, 
etc.,  of  the  church.     (Comp.  Prop.  159.) 


674  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

14.  This  judgment,  bestowment  of  a  Kingdom,  possessing  a  Kingdom, 
all  imply  in  the  saints  actual  personal  rulership,  something  which  is  prom- 
ised in  inheriting  a  Kingdom  still  future,  and  in  a  reign  of  the  saints  also 
still  future.  Seeing  such  a  correspondence,  and  knowing  that  instead  of 
reigning  the  saints  have  been  suffering  more  or  less,  we  cannot  apply  this 
to  the  Christian  Church  past  or  present.     (Comp.  Prop.  154.) 

15.  The  time  when  this  Kingdom  is  set  up  is  a  time  of  dire  vengeance,  as 
the  slaying  of  the  beast,  giving  his  body  to  the  burning  flame  indicates  ; 
this  agrees  with  the  vengeance  to  be  inflicted  at  a  future  coming  recorded 
in  Rev.  19,  etc.  Hence,  a  Kingdom  before  this  period  of  retribution  is 
not  described.     (Comp.  Props.  115,  123,  147,  161,  etc.)'^ 

16.  The  smiting  of  the  stone  is  also  a  representation  of  vengeance.  It 
demolishes,  breaks  into  pieces,  makes  like  chaff  or  dust,  and  utterly  roots 
out.  This  teaches  violence,  not  conversion,  etc.,  as  some  contend  to  sup- 
port a  theory,  but  the  utter  removal  of  hostile  powers,  as  our  argument 
demands,  and  as  illustrated  in  the  closing  portions  of  the  Apocalypse. 
Kingdoms  antagonistic  to  the  truth,  wars  resultant  from  them,  etc.,  exist 
down  to  the  Second  Advent  ;  but  that  period,  as  Paul  tells  the  Thessaloni- 
ans,  is  a  time  of  terrible  smiting  or  vengeance.  The  church  has  exhibited 
no  such  poiuer,  and  therefore  is  not  denoted.'^ 

17.  The  entire  narration  of  the  prophecy  makes  the  natural  impres- 
sion that  this  Kingdom  is  not  set  up  beside  the  image  or  beasts  to  be  con- 
temporaneous with  them,  and  to  be  engaged  in  a  continued  series  of  smit- 
ing processes,  but  that  at  a  certain  period  (as  Rev.  11  :  15)  it  will  be  mani- 
fested, and  that  in  connection  with  their  removal.'" 

18.  That  the  operation  of  the  church  is  not  meant  is  evident  from  the 
predictions  relating  to  the  same,  which  do  not  correspond  with  the  proph- 
ecy. Thus,  e.g.  instead  of  these  Kingdoms  being  spiritually  consumed  or 
absorbed,  as  men  confidently  tell  us,  we  find  (Rev.  19,  etc.)  them  arrayed 
against  Christ  and  making  war.  The  condition  of  the  world  at  the  Sec. 
Advent  does  not  coincide  with  the  proposed  conquest  of  the  world  attributed 
by  interpreters  to  the  church.'® 

19.  The  Coming  of  the  Son  of  man  is  personal,  seeing  that  symbolical 
representation  is  laid  aside,  and  it  is  characterized  as  a  Coming  of  the  Son 
of  man.  Leaving  the  discussion  of  the  personal  Advent  to  another  Prop. 
(131),  we  now  adhere  to  the  view  of  the  Jews  of  such  an  Advent  (i.e.  per- 
sonal) here  delineated,  and  which  Neander  and  others  concede  the  in- 
spired Apostles  and  early  church  held  to,  in  looking  for  the  Advent  itself 
as  not  very  remote.  All  that  we  now  suggest  is,  that  the  very  structure  of 
the  prophecy  is  calculated  to  make  such  an  impression,  viz. :  that  the  Mes- 
siah would  personally  come,  and  a  Kingdom,  etc.,  would  be  given  to  Him. 
Inspired  men  and  their  immediate  successors  could  not  see  a  fulfilment  of 
the  prophecy  in  the  First  Advent,  and  have  located  its  realization  at  the 
Second.  We  are  content  to  accept  of  their  opinion,  if  it  is  "  Jewish,"  etc., 
in  its  cast." 

20.  The  Kingdom,  dominion,  etc.,  is  to  be  in  the  territorial  limits,  the 
very  place  occupied  by  the  image  and  beasts,  but  if  the  church  is  meant, 
liow  comes  it,  unless  we  indorse  the  assumptions  of  the  Romish  and  Greek 
Churches,  which  do  not  meet  the  conditions  of  the  prophecy,  that  the 
church  after  so  long  a  trial  has  never  exercised  such  dominion  within  those 
limits?  In  place  of  it,  those  Kingdoms  have  existed  often  to  the  detriment 
and  persecution  of  the  church,  and  instead  of  being  subdued  or  absorbed 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  675 

are  either  independent  of,  or  exercise  a  lordship  over,  the  church.  If  it 
be  said,  that  this  will  yet  occur,  the  reply  is,  that  according  to  the  predic- 
tion (if  the  church  is  meant),  something  of  the  kind  ought  to  have  already 
taken  place  and  to  have  manifested  its  continuance.  For,  as  our  oppo- 
nents admit  (Barnes, /067"  Com.,  p.  155),  the  language  affirms  that  power, 
etc.,  once  ohtained  shall  never  diminish  or  decrease.^^ 

21.  K  real,  visible,  oiitioard  Kingdom  is  to  be  witnessed.  This  is  the 
clear  announcement  of  the  prophecy,  if  it  has  any  meaning  whatever,  seeing 
that  it  is  to  occupy  the  very  position,  place,  territory,  etc.,  previously 
taken  by  the  image  and  beasts.  It  is  a  mere  quibble  to  pronounce  against 
this  on  account  of  the  prophecy  being  symbolical.  Let  it  be  such,  yet  the 
image  and  the  beasts  symbolize  real,  literal,  visible  Kingdoms,  and  the  last 
Kingdom,  being  portrayed  with  symbol  and  then  without,  must,  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  be  the  same,  unless  we  violate  the  propriety  of  language. 
Hence,  the  language  cannot  be  spiritualized  away  into  an  invisible  or 
spiritual  Kingdom.  So  decided  is  the  language,  that  many  who  oppose 
us  concede  that  at  some  time  still  future,  the  church  will  assume  this  very 
characteristic.'^ 

22.  The  i^rophecy  implies  forcibly  that  when  this  Kingdom  is  set  up  it 
will  be  done  so  conspicuously  that  all  will  knoiu  definitely  the  period  of  its 
setting  up.  The  action  of  the  stone  and  of  the  Ancient  of  Days,  the  judg- 
ment set,  the  vengeance  inflicted,  etc.,  all  indicate  such  stupendous  events, 
that,  taken  in  connection  with  the  description  of  the  Kingdom  itself,  it 
forbids  that  hesitancy,  vacillation,  etc.,  characteristic  of  the  theories  of 
the  Church-Kingdom  already  examined.  The  latter  cannot  even  precisely 
define  its  commencement,  sometimes  having  several. 

23.  When  this  Kingdom  is  established,  it  is  not  only  continuously,  with 
triumphant  power,  perpetuated,  but  is  in  itself,  just  as  established,  pro- 
nounced a  perpet2ial  or  everlasting  Kingdom.  It  is  not  susceptible  of 
change  in  form.  This  is  clearly  taught.  But  the  Church-Kingdom 
theory,  according  to  its  idea  of  1  Cor.  lo  :  24  (see  Prop.  159)  merges  this 
Kingdom  into  quite  another  one,  changes  it  into  one  that  materially 
difl'ers,  some  even  removing  it,  transformed,  from  earth  to  heaven,  mak- 
ing this  dispensation,  called  the  Kingdom,  to  end,  etc. 

From  these  considerations,  and  especially  from  that  arising  in  a  p)reser- 
vation  of  covenanted  promise,  of  Divine  Unity  of  Purpose,  of  consistency 
between  earlier  and  later  prediction,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  church  by  no  means  meets  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  prophecy. 
Keeping  constantly  before  us  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  we  fail  to  see  any 
of  the  distinctive  marks  of  the  same  in  the  church,  and  we  dare  not  substi- 
tute another  in  its  place.  Prophecy  does  not  contradict  covenant  promise. 
Therefore  the  assumptions  of  Popish  doctors,  who  make  the  Papal  domin- 
ion the  Fifth  Monarchy  down  to  the  more  recent  ones  of  Swedenborg  and 
the  Mormons,  who  specially  claim  (as  Anabaptists,  Fifth  Monarchy  men. 
Shakers,  etc.),  in  their  respective  cases  a  fulfilment  of  Dan.  2  and  7,  etc., 
are  to  he  rejected  as  not  only  extravagant  but  arrogant,  because  in  direct 
conflict  with  covenant,  j^'^^  edict  ion,  and  fact.  At  the  same  time  it  may  be 
proper  to  notice,  in  the  briefest  manner,  the  objections  that  are  presented 
against  our  view.  They  are  given  by  a  writer  {Kingd.  of  Grace)  as  follows  : 
(1)  "  The  stone  cut  out  of  a  mountain"  indicates  that  the  Kingdom  "  has 
a  small  beginning,"  etc.,  equivalent  to  the  church's.  Much  depends  on 
what  is  meant  by  the  Stone.     Writers  dilfer  regarding  its  meaning.     Our 


676  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIN^GDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

opponents  generally  explain  it;  to  mean  tlie  clinrcli,  and  some  have  ingeni- 
ously raised  up  a  Kingdom  of  the  Stone  (Regnum  lapidis),  and  a  King- 
dom of  the  mountain  (Regnum  montis),  as  if  two  Kingdoms  or  stages  were 
predicted.^"  Amidst  the  diversity  of  meaning  attached,  we  must  keep  in 
view  the  parallel  passages  which  aid  to  explain  it  ;  and  thus  we  find,  that 
hy  the  Stone  is  symbolized  Christ  Himself.  The  reasons  for  this  opinion 
are  these  :  («)  Christ  is  predicted  as  the  Stone,  Gen.  49  :  24  ;  Ps.  118  :  22, 
23,  etc.;  (b)  Christ  applies  the  image  of  the  Stone  to  Himself,  Matt. 
21  :  44  ;  (c)  the  term  referred  to  Christ  by  tlie  Apostles,  Rom.  9  :  33  ;  1 
Pet.  2  :  Q-'^,  etc. ;  {d)  the  action  performed  by  Christ  at  His  Second  Advent, 
as  delineated  in  various  prophecies,  fully  corresponds  with  that  of  the 
Stone  ;  (e)  the  Stone,  Son  of  Man  and  King  of  Kings,  are  identical  in  their 
relationship  to  the  Kingdom  ;  (/)  the  primitive  Fathers,  who  had  the 
advantage  of  nearness  to  the  apostolic  age,  apply  the  Stone  to  Christ. 
Taking  this  for  its  meaning,  we  And  that  this  Son  of  man,  David's  Son, 
the  Stone,  did  come  in  humility,  and  that  its  smiting,  grinding  power 
(Matt.  21  :  44  ;  Rev.  11  and  19,  etc.)  is  held  m  abeyance  until  the  end  of 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  The  prophecy  says  nothing  of  growth  while  in 
action  ;  the  representation  is  that  of  demolition,  and  the  result,  i.e.  the 
Kingdom,  is  stated  a^  following,  not  as  accomjKuiying  the  same.^'  (2)  The 
expression  "  without  hands''  signifies  "  nothing  else  than  that  it  was  to  be 
a  spiritual  and  not  a  temporal  Kingdom."  But  to  this  we  reply  :  («)  The 
reference  to  the  church  is  presumed  not  proven,  whilst  this  supernatural 
characteristic  is  confirmatory  of  Christ  being  the  Stone.  According  to  the 
prevailing  view,  "  cut  out  of  a  mountain"  is  not  even  symbolic  ;  it  is  only 
added  as  an  expressive  figure.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  ''  moun- 
tain" is  a  symbolical  equivalent  for  "  Kingdom  ;"  we  find  Christ  directly 
sprung  from  the  royal  line  of  David,  and  recognized,  not  merely  from  the 
l^ast  but  the  certainty  of  the  future,  as  "  cut  out  of  a  mountain,"  i.e. 
descended  from  the  Kingdom  or  mountain  belonging  to  God,  and  this  too 
"  ivithout  hands,''"'  i.e.  by  Divine  agency,  supernaturally,  as  the  miraculous 
co7iception  of  Jesus  in  tlie  roycd  line  of  David  through  God's  Spirit  con- 
firms, {b)  ''  Without  hands,"  denoting  such  agency  of  God's  is  also  to  be 
exerted  at  the  Second  Advent,  as  e.g.  Rev.  11,  etc.  Divine,  supernatural 
power  is  to  be  manifested  at  Christ's  "  appearing  and  Kingdom. "  (c) 
Making  this  Kingdom  only  spiritual,  and  therefore  invisible,  violates  the 
plain  statement  of  the  prophecy.  •  (3)  Becoming  a  "  great  mountain" 
means  that,  insignificant  at  first,  it  will  spread  until  co-extensive  with  the 
whole  earth,  which  can  only  be  predicted  of  the  church.  To  this  we  an- 
swer :  The  Stone  appears,  but  we  are  taught  is  rejected  by  the  very  nation  to 
whom  the  Kingdom  appertains  ;  but  this  same  Stone  thus  rejected  is  the 
chosen  one,  held  in  abeyance  until  the  period  of  its  manifestation.  The 
imagery  of  figurative  language  is  preserved  under  what  is  related  of  the 
Stone,  i.e.  its  becoming  a  great  mountain  ;  and  the  time  when  this  is  to 
be  done  must  be  obtained  from  other  predictions.  Christ  being  the 
representative  of  the  Kingdom,  the  figure  is  appropriate,  seeing  that  in 
the  image  the  first  kingdom  is  represented  by  Nebuchadnezzar  person- 
all}^,  "Thou  art  this  head  of  gold,"  in  view  of  the  sovereign  power  in- 
vested in  him  ;  so  also  with  Christ,  now  indeed  the  rejected  one.  He  is 
the  Stone  which  at  the  period  of  its  future  manifestation  will  break  in 
pieces  and  convert  into  chaff  the  Kingdoms  opposed  to  Him.  (4)  But 
"  this  Kingdom  was  to  be  set  up  in  the  days  of  the  four  preceding  kings, 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  677 

or  in  the  days  of  the  Roman  Monarchy,"  and  "  this  can  only  be  said  of  the 
church."  Leaving  the  fact  that  this  proves  too  mnch — for  the  same 
author  has  the  church  or  this  Kingdom  existing  long  before  the  head  of 
the  image  arose — and  passing  also  the  fact  that  we  have  already  shown  that 
the  Kingdom  is  set  up  in  the  divided  form  of  the  Koman  Empire,  we  con- 
cede that  at  some  time  during  the  divided  existence  of  the  beast  or  toes 
of  the  image,  it  must  be  set  up.  This  implies,  then,  their  present  and  fut- 
ure existence.  Now  the  weakened  and  divided  condition  of  the  once  united 
and  formidable  Empire  is  evident.  Faber  and  otliers  have  conclusively 
proven  from  historical  documents  that  there  has  been  a  continuous  Roman 
power  existing  down  to  Francis  II.,  reinstated  by  Napoleon  I.,  claimed 
by  others,  and  efforts  made  for  its  revival  in  Italy  and  elsewhere.  The 
non-existence  and  revival  are  clearly  taught  in  Revelation,  and  the  identity 
of  the  beasts  of  Daniel  and  of  John  are  fully  admitted  by  many  writers. 
(Comp.  Prop.  IGO).  We  say  nothing  now  of  the  admissions  even  of  many, 
that  the  Roman  power  was  perpetuated  in  the  Papal  power,  which  exists 
down  to  the  present.  But  Avhatever  opinion  may  be  formed  concerning 
these  explanations,  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  is  to 
be  erected  after  the  Roman  Empire  has  been  disrupted,  and  from  the  de- 
scription of  the  disruption  itself,  a  long  time  after  it  has  occurred.  The 
time  we  are  living  in  still  proclaims  that  such  is  its  condition,  for  the 
limits  once  occupied  by  the  Empire  are  now  the  territory  of  a  number  of 
Kingdoms.  Such,  and  such  only,  is  the  predicted  posture  of  affairs  when 
this  Stone,  this  Son  of  man,  shall  come.  Daniel,  therefore,  confirms  our 
doctrinal  position,  which  will  be  more  decisive  when  we  come  to  speak  of 
the  promise  made  to  him  personally  under  the  Prop,  of  the  resurrection," 

^  The  student  will  observe  that  we  enter  upon  the  consideration  of  these  prophecies 
prepared  by  the  powerful  scrijDtural  evidence  afforded  by  the  past  history  of  ihe  Theocracy, 
its  fall  and  promised  restoration,  the  Davidic  covenant  attested  to  by  oath,  the  j)ost- 
ponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  and  that  no  interpretation  which  destroys  the  unity 
laetween  these  can  be  received  as  correct.  Prophecy  only  j^redicts  one  Kingdom  of  God, 
in  the  Theocratic  form,  to  exist  here  on  earth,  and  we  may  rest  assured  that,  if  the  Word 
is  truly  inspired,  there  will  be  no  conflict  between  one  and  another  portion  of  Holy 
Writ.  In  addition  :  several  opinions,  entertained  by  a  few,  resj)ecting  a  portion  of 
Daniel,  are  so  utterly  untenable  and  have  been  so  ably  answered  by  other  writers  and 
commentators,  that  they  require  no  special  attention.  Such  e.g.  is  the  view  of  Amner 
and  Grotius,  that  by  the  Fifth  Kingdom  is  to  be  understood  the  Roman  Empire  having 
become  Christian,  which  is  to  endure  many  ages,  and  the  Son  of  man  (which  Jesus 
appropriates  to  Himself  personally)  symbolizes  the  Roman  Republic  contrasted  with  the 
monarchies,  etc.  (Lord's  Lit.  Journal,  Jan.,  1857,  p.  499,  note).  Or,  Prof.  Stuart's  {Com. 
on  Dan.)  idea,  that  the  Fourth  Kingdom  refers  to  the  dynasties  of  Syria  and  Egypt 
immediately  succeeding  the  reign  of  Alexander  the  Great  (comp.  the  reply  of  Barnes, 
Com.,  and  others).  Black,  in  Messiahs  and  Anti-Messiahs,  departing  entirely  from  the 
ancient  and  continued  interpretation,  regards  the  four  parts  of  the  image  as  descriptive 
rather  of  races  than  of  nations  i.e.  to  the  descendants  of  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  under 
the  sway  of  Satan  as  Antichrist.  The  "  Antiochus  Epiphanes  theory"  is  (Auberlen  on 
Dan.)  a  favorite  one  with  modern  Rationalistic  interjiretation.  Destructive  criticism 
endeavors  to  revive  and  enforce  the  objections  of  Celsus  and  Porphj'ry,  and,  not  satisfied 
with  this,  endeavors  to  break  the  continuity  and  force  of  the  predictions  by  making  the 
Medes  and  Persians  two  of  the  four  Kingdoms,  and  urging  that  Alexander  and  his 
successors  form  two  (comp.  Birks's  Mod.  Thought,  p.  192,  etc.).  Extravagances  are 
fastened  on  these  predictions  on  all  sides.  Thus  e.g.  a  Pope  can  approvingly  quote 
them  (Littell's  Liv.  Age,  Aug.  10th,  1872)  as  a  threat  against  the  German  Empire,  "  that  by 
and  by  there  will  fall  from  the  Mountain  a  little  stone  which  shall  break  the  head  of  the 
Colossus  ;"  the  Jesuit  Vieiri  (Von  Dollinger's  Essay  on  Proph.  Spirit)  can  interpret  : 
*'  God  will  again  raise  up  your  King,  and  elevate  his  Portugal  to  be  the  heart  and  the 
centre  of  a  new  universal  empire,  the  Fifth  according  to  the  proj^het  Daniel,  since  the 


678  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

Fourth,  tlie  Eoman-German,  is  already  falling  in  pieces,  and  will  be  dissolved  at  the 
coming  of  Sebastian.  In  the  time  of  this  Fifth  Empire  all  Jews  and  heathen  will  be  con- 
verted ;  and  thus  the  proiDhecy  about  one  Shepherd  and  one  fold  will  be  fulfilled.'' 
Dr.  Berg  makes  America  the  Fifth  Empire,  reproducing  the  opinion  of  Sir.  Th.  Browne 
(  Works,  Tr.  12),  and  which,  as  stated  by  Dr.  Johnson,  is  in  accordance  with  the  inter- 
pretation and  expectation  of  Dr.  Berkeley,  viz.  :  "  that  America  will  be  the  seat  of  the 
Fifth  Empire'"'  (comp.  Prop.  168)  ;  Davis  {Seven  Thunders)  insists  that  the  stone  is  the 
American  Eei)ublic,  which  is  destined  to  demolish  European  despotism,  and  overthrow 
thrones,  etc.,  commingling  Christ  and  the  Republic,  and  applying  the  army  (Rev.  19) 
to  the  Repuljlic  ;  others  confidently  and  exclusively  refer  the  Fifth  Kingdom  to  their 
pecaliar  and  distinctive  church  or  sect.  Such  vagaries  can  be  dismissed  ;  for  as  Fair- 
bairn  (On  Froph.)  says  :  the  efforts  to  make  the  succession  of  Kingdoms  dift'erent  from 
that  anciently,  ordinarily,  and  generally  entertained,  have  "  palpably  failed.  They 
have  been  thoroughly  refuted  by  Hofmann,  Hengstenberg,  and  latterly  by  Auberlen"  (to 
which  may  be  added.  Lord,  Birks,  Barnes,  Newton,  Mede,  Elliott,  Gumming,  Frere, 
Bonar,  Bickersteth,  Brooks,  and  many  others).  The  natural  legitimate  interpretation, 
according  as  it  does  with  the  plain  language  and  the  facts  of  history,  cannot  be  set  aside 
by  those  mentioned.  Bh.  Newton  {On  Proph.,  vol.  1,  p.  217)  well  remarks  :  "  All 
ancient  writers,  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  agree  with  Jerome  in  explaining  the  Fourth 
Kingdom  to  be  the  Roman."  The  learned  Mede  (  Works,  quoted  %  Newton,  p.  217) 
says  :  "  The  Roman  Empire  to  be  the  Fourth  Kingdom  of  Daniel,  was  believed  by 
the  Church  of  Israel,  both  before  and  in  our  Saviour's  time  ;  received  by  the  disciples 
of  the  apostles  and  the  whole  Christian  Church  for  the  first  three  hundred  years  without 
any  known  contradiction.  And  I  confess,  having  so  good  ground  in  Scripture,  it  is, 
with  me /a;i^«;u  non  artlculus  Jidei,  Utile  less  than  cm  article  of  faith.'"  The  interpretation 
therefore,  really  worthy  of  consideration,  is  that  which  consecutively  leads  down  to  the 
Roman  as  the  Fourth  Kingdom,  and  this  we  thus  notice  pi'eparatory  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  Fifth.  The  only  point  in  the  adverse  criticisms  and  speculations  deserving 
the  least  attention,  is  that  of  making  it  a  question  whether  the  divided  portion  of 
Alexander's  Empire  after  his  death  is  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the  Third  Kingdom,  or 
whether  they  (for  it  was  divided  into  four  parts)  are  to  be  regarded  as  separate  and 
distinct  Kingdoms  (so  Davidson,  etc.).  That  they  are  the  former  is  evident  :  (1)  that  a 
portion  of  the  body  or  a  beast  symbolizes  as  well  a  succession  as  an  individual  ;  (2) 
that  the  same  symbolizes  a  succession,  even  when  divided  or  undergoing  changes  ;  (3) 
that  such  a  change  is  indicated  inch.  7,  by  the  horns  springing  out  of  the  same  beast  ;  (4) 
that  the  successors  were  Macedonians  or  Grecians  ;  (5 )  that  all  ancient  authors  speak  of 
Alexander's  Kingdom  and  that  of  his  successors  as  being  the  same  ;  (6)  the  Empire  was 
simply  divided  among  successors,  and  each  one  acknowledged  his  portion  to  be  a 
part  of  the  same  ;  (7)  the  Jews  always  spoke  of  these  several  portions  as  pertaining  to 
one  characteristic  rule,  calling  them  by  one  name,  the  Kingdom  of  the  Grecians  ;  (8) 
the  next  Empire  was  stronger  than  the  brazen,  which  is  not  true  of  the  divided  Grecian 
Kingdom  ;  (9)  the  Fourth  reaches  down  to  the  end  (comp.  Prop.  160),  whereas  the 
divided  form  of  the  Grecian  has  long  since  disappeared;  (K))  that  to  make  such  a 
radical  change  destroys  the  unity  of  the  prophecy  and  prevents  a  jDroper  incorporation 
of  the  subject-matter  that  follows  in  its  natural  order. 

2  It  is  noticeable  what  influence  a  preconceived  opinion  will  have  in  guiding  writers 
in  their  interpretation  of  this  passage.  A  recent  one  (Fairbairn,  On  Proph.,  p.  295),  who 
comes  to  Daniel  with  the  determination  to  find  the  Christian  Church,  as  now  existing, 
delineated  by  the  Fifth  Kingdom,  gravely  tells  us  :  "  It  (the  vision)  does  not  indicate  at 
what  particular  time,  or  even  under  which  worldly  dominion  the  Kingdom  rejoresented 
by  the  Stone  should  begin  to  develop  itself  on  the  theatre  of  the  world,"  although  he 
admits  that  it  must  be  referred  to  the  period  of  the  last  power  as  "  the  natural  inference 
obviously.'"  So  others  evince  a  lack  of  candor,  seeing  that  the  action  of  the  Stone  (aside 
from  its  being  the  last  in  the  order  of  time  and  place)  is  represented  as  taking  place  on 
the  feet  of  the  image,  whereas  Fairbairn  and  others,  in  plain  contradiction  of  the  language, 
will  have  the  smiting  process,  or  action  of  the  Stone,  to  begin,  not  on  the  feet,  but  on  the 
body,  even  before  the  legs  and  feet  are  in  existence.  They  also  forget  that  in  ch.  7,  the 
bestowal  of  the  Kingdom  (corresjoonding  with  ch.  2)  is  after  the  Fourth  Kingdom  has 
run  its  career,  and  is  to  be  brought  to  its  end.  Where  is  the  consistency  of  a  criticism, 
so  forced  that  it  does  violence  to  the  express  delineation  given  by  the  Spirit?  It  will 
not  avail  to  say,  as  some  do,  that  the  Stone  was  in  existence  and  "  taking  form,"  etc., 
before  smiting  the  feet,  for  that  is  begging  the  point  at  issue  by  adding  to  the  vision 
mere  assumi^tion.  The  latter  proves  too  much,  for  if,  as  Fairbairn  states,  it  took  some 
time  for  the  Stone  to  be  organized  and  to  put  on  "  a  form  in  which  it  could  act  extrane- 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  679 

ously  upon  the  affairs  and  destinies  of  the  world,"  ^ye  are  therefore  to  understand  that 
for  several  centimes  previous  to  the  formation  of  the  feet,  it  did  not  "  act  extraneously 
upon  the  affairs  and  destinies  of  the  world  "  (for  the  distinctive  stated  work  of  the  Stone 
begins  when  the  feet  are  planted,  and  not  before),  which  notion,  pressed  out  by  a 
Church-Kingdom  theory,  by  no  means  agrees  with  his  own  presented  idea  of  a  King- 
dom. In  addition,  a  number  of  particulars  that  will  be  enumerated,  as  well  as  the 
general  analogy  of  prediction  on  the  subject,  compels  us  to  this  location  of  "  these 
kings."  Tregelles  {On  Ban.,  p.  19)  justly  says  :  "  '  These  kings,  cannot  mean  the  four 
successional  monarchies,  because  in  that  case  the  plural  form  could  not  be  used,  seeing 
that  they  do  not  co-exist  as  the  holders  of  power,"  and  therefore  he  refers  the  i:)hrase  to 
the  divided  form  of  the  Roman  Empire,  when  (as  we  shall  show,  Proj^.  IGO)  a  number 
of  kings  exist  contemporaneously,  according  with  the  fuller  details  of  Rev.  This  is 
ccr.-oborated  by  the  time  of  smiting.  Hence  Fausset  {Com.  Dan.  loci)  gives  this  note  : 
"  Rather  '  in  the  days  of  these  kings'  answers  to  '  upon  his  feet'  (v.  34)  i.e.  the  ten  toes 
(v.  42)  or  ten  kings,  the  final  state  of  the  Roman  Empire.  For'  these  kings'  cannot 
mean  the  four  successional  monarchies,  as  they  do  not  co-exist  as  the  holders  of  power  : 
if  the  fourth  had  been  meant,  the  singular  and  not  the  plural  would  be  used."  Many 
other  writers  of  ability  take  the  same  view,  locating  "  these  kings"  in  the  future, 
because  Gentile  domination  continues  and  the  action  of  the  Stone,  as  predicted,  has  not 
been  witnessed.  They  are  made  to  relate  (as  Dan.  7,  Rev.  13  and  17,  etc.)  to  the 
divided  form  of  the  Fourth  Empire. 

2  Arguments  might  be  derived  from  the  admissions  of  our  opponents,  who,  when 
commenting  on  the  ten  horns,  Kingdom,  etc.,  in  Revelation,  forgetting  their  own  inter- 
l^retations  of  Daniel  as  relating  to  the  Church,  make  the  divided  form  the  period  of  smit- 
ing, etc.  (Comp.  e.  g.  Barnes  Dan.  and  Bev.)  The  toes  are  by  man}'  supposed  to  designate 
exactly  ten  divisions  or  ten  Kingdoms,  and  accordingly  many  Protestant  and  Roman 
Catholic  writers  have  designated  exactly  ten  Kingdoms,  but  they  differ  among  them- 
selves in  producing  the  same  Kingdoms.  It  seems  more  correct  to  suppose  that  the 
toes  simply  represent  such  divisions  without  being  pressed  to  the  exact  number  of  ten. 
Division  is  intended,  but  whether  the  number  is  more  or  less  than  ten  is  of  no  material 
consequence.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  such  divisions  took  place,  that  is  sufficient, 
otherwise,  to  be  very  exact,  it  miist  be  shown  (1)  that  one  leg  of  the  image  is  longer  than 
the  other,  seeing  that  one  portion  of  the  Empire  lasted  longer  than  the  other  ;  and  (2) 
that  five  divisions  occurred  in  the  eastern  and  five  in  the  western  portion,  as  five  toes 
are  on  one  foot,  and  five  on  the  other  ;  the  legs,  according  to  commentators,  etc., 
rejjresented  the  divided  form  of  the  Empire.  This,  like  making  a  parable  to  have  a 
definite  meaning  in  the  particulars  required  for  filling  up  to  comj^lete  the  representation, 
would  be  pressing  a  symbol  so  closely  as  to  endanger  its  unity.  If  it  is,  however, 
expressive  of  the  ten  horns  of  Dan.  7  (which  may  be  the  case),  then  we  are  not  to  seek 
for  these  divisions  in  the  past,  but  in  the  future  (comp.  Prop.  160).  In  Dan.  2,  a  general 
chronological  epitome  of  historj^  is  given  without  entering  into  details  ;  in  Dan.  7  more 
of  the  latter  are  given,  and  in  view  of  the  "  little  horn,"  the  ten  horns  are  specifically 
given  as  existing,  but  (just  as  in  Revelation)  existing  previous  to  and  at  the  Sec.  Advent. 
But  our  line  of  argument  does  not  require  us  to  enter  into  particulars,  or  to  discuss  the 
divisions,  the  proof  necessary  for  our  purpose  being  indejDendent  of  the  same. 

■*  This  is  so  plain,  and  the  chronological  order  of  the  proj^hecy  so  regular  and  con- 
sistent, that  even  Augustine,  the  great  leader  of  the  modern  Church-Kingdom  theory, 
dare  not  ajDply  this  Kingdom  of  Daniel  to  the  Church,  but  to  a  period  after  the  Second 
Advent.  Thus  {City  of  God,  B.  20,  c.  23)  he  locates  this  Kingdom  after  ihe  still  future 
Antichrist,  cfter  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  places  it  in  the  third  heaven  (comp.  for  rejaly  to 
last.  Prop.  103).  But  this  reference  to  the  third  heaven  is  a  j^alpable  violation  of  the 
prophecy,  which  speaks  of  a  Kingdom  here  on  the  earth,  "under  the  ichole  heaven," 
where  these  previous  Kingdoms  existed.  He  enforces  one  feature  thus  :  "  He  who  reads 
this  passage,  even  half  asleep,  cannot  fail  to  see  that  the  Kingdom  of  Antichrist  shall 
fiercely,  though  for  a  short  time,  assail  the  Church  before  the  last  judgment  of  God 
shall  introduce  the  eternal  reign  of  the  saints."  He  makes  the  number  "ten"  an 
indefinite  number,  and  the  times,  three  and  a  half  years. 

^  This  is  even  felt  by  the  spiritualizing  Jerome  so  forcibly  that  he,  with  Augustine, 
locates  the  fulfilment  in  the  future.  Thus  (On  Daniel  7)  he  remarks  :  "  Therefore  let 
us  say  what  all  the  ecclesiastical  loriters  have  delivered,  that  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when 
the  Kingdom  of  the  Romans  is  to  be  destroyed,  there  will  be  ten  kings,  who  will  divide 
the  Roman  world  among  themselves,  and  an  eleventh  will  arise,  a  little  king,  who  will 
overcome  three  kings  of  the  ten  kings,"  etc.  He  makes  Dan.  7  :  13  refer  to  the  personal 
coming  of  Christ,  and  applies  the  whole,  not  to  the  present  existing  Church,  but  to  the 


680  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

future.  The  words  *'  king"  and  "kingdom"  he  regards  as  convertible,  as  seen  by  com- 
paring verse  17  with  verse  23  in  Dan.  7  (comp.  Storrs's  Diss,  on  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven, 
who  says  :  "The  Hebrew  term  which  commonly  signifies  king  properly  means  king- 
dom," and  refers  to  Dan.  8  :  21  and  7  :  17).  The  student  will  see  at  once  that  persons 
who'  lived  before  the  division  and  breaking  up  of  Roman  unity  could  not  possibly 
apply  such  prophecies— as  now  done— to  an  existing  Church,  because  they  were  linked 
with  events  that  had  not  transpired. 

6  Without  indorsing  the  opinions  or  position  of  every  writer,  attention  is  directed  to 
the  following,  who  give  much  illustrative  of  our  meaning  :  Auberlen's  Prophecies  of 
Daniel  and  the  Rev.  of  St.  John,  Frere's  Combined  View  of  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel,  Esdras, 
and  St.  John,  liioos's  Exposition  of  Daniel,  and  Comparison  of  them  with  the  Rev.  of  St.  John, 
Eaber's  Diss,  on  the  Projjhecies  and  Sacred  Calendar  of  Prophecy,  besides  various  works 
either  on  Daniel  or  on  the  Apocalypse  which  illustrate  and  enforce  the  one  by  reference 
to  the  other,  such  as  Elliott's,  Lord's,  Schmucker's,  Daubuz,  Ebrard,  Brightman, 
Bengel,  and  others. 

'  Writers  who  endeavor  to  soften  the  prophetic  language  and  make  it  representative 
of  moral  and  spiritual  influences,  still  are  forced  to  admit  (as  e.g.  Barnes,  Com.  loci)  : 
*'  The  language  here  would  seem  to  imiDly  some  violent  action,  some  positive  crushing 
force,  something  like  that  which  occurs  in  conquests  when  nations  are  subdued." 
Comp.  the  concessions  of  Fairbairn  {On  Prop/i.,  pp.  449,  447,  465,  etc.,  where  he  admits 
that  the  language  embraces  more  than  mere  conversion,  etc.  Our  position  is  corroborated 
(1)  by  the  fact  that  the  Primitive  Church,  instead  of  smiting,  was  so  smitten  that  many 
churches  were  finally  exterminated  ;  (2)  that  the  prophecy  (Dan.  7  :  21)  indicates  the 
persecution  of  the  saints  ;  (3)  that,  as  will  be  shown,  at  the  Sec.  Advent  the  powers 
arrayed  against  God's  people  will  be  terribly  smitten,  with  which  this  prophecy  accords. 

8  This  indicates  how  erroneous  is  the  view  of  Mede,  Cotton  Mather,  and  others,  that 
Daniel  describes  a  "twofold  state  of  the  Kingdom,  viz.  :  a  Kingdom  of  the  Stone  and  a 
Kingdom  of  the  Mountain— the  Kingdom  of  the  Stone  from  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  to 
His  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Mountain  from  the  revelation  of  Jesus  when 
He  comes  to  destroy  His  enemies.  Dan.  2  and  7  describe  the  same  order,  and  as  Jesus 
referred  the  same  to  Himself  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  as  the  action  of  the  Stone  is  identical 
with  what  takes  place  at  His  Sec.  Coming,  and  as  the  time  of  the  display  of  the  Stone's 
power,  etc.,  is  still  in  the  future  (cannot  be  attributed  to  the  undivided  form  of  the 
Koman  Empire,  etc.),  it  is  impossible  to  receive  the  theory.  To  do  so  vitiates  the 
regular  order,  and  introduces  an  antagonism.  The  same  is  true  of  Lange's  (and  others) 
engrafting  upon  Matt.  26  :  64  a  reference  to  the  present  as  well  as  to  future  Advent. 
The  express  order  enumerated  of  fulfilment  forbids  it,  and  it  would  not  be  attempted  if 
there  were  no  Church-Kingdom  to  be  supported. 

9  Such  considerations,  besides  those  derived  from  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  covenant, 
largely  influenced  the  early  Church.  In  their  oppressed,  persecuted  state  under  the 
Fourth  Empire,  it  was  simply  impossible  for  believers  to  imagine  themselves  in  that 
Kingdom  of  God  which  all  the  prophets  predicted  would  afford  an  immediate  and 
enduring  release  from  Gentile  domination  and  oppression.  They  never  supposed  them- 
selves to  be  in  a  Kingdom  which  was  to  overcome  those  around,  and  then  boasted  as 
e.g.  Romanists  afterward.  (Thus  e.g.  in  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century— Ranke's 
Bis.  of  the  Popes,  vol.  1,  p.  22— the  Provost  Gerohus  said  :  "  It  will  at  last  come  to  this, 
that  the  golden  image  of  the  Empire  shall  be  shaken  to  dust,  every  great  monarchy  shall 
be  divided  into  tetrarchates,  and  then  only  will  the  Church  stand  free  and  untrammelled 
beneath  the  j)rotection  of  her  crowned  high  priest.")  Their  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of 
Daniel  related  to  the  future— to  the  personal  Coming  of  the  Messiah.  They  never 
could  advocate  (with  their  view  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Theocracy,  the  postponement  of 
restoration  to  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  preparatory  nature  of  the  Church)  the  notions  enter- 
tained e.g.  by  Jewel  (Apol.  for  Church  of  Engkmd),  or  Hooker  (Eccl.  Polity)  that  a  The- 
ocracy was  thus  restored  and  must  be  exercised,  or  even  by  the  Scottish  Kirk  Sessions 
(Buckle's  His.  Civ.,  vol.  2,  p.  271),  or  the  Genevan  Church  Council  (D'Aubigne's  7/is. 
Ref),  enforcing  government  on  the  plea  of  a  revived  Theocratic  order,  giving  the  power 
Into  the  hands  of  the  saints.  Ten  thousand  arrogant  and  unscriptural  claims,  offensively 
and  one-sidely  paraded  by  Buckle  (His.  Civ.),  Lecky  (His.  Morals),  and  others,  are  set 
aside  by  retaining  the  simple,  rational,  logical  interpretation  of  Daniel  in  reference  to 
the  Kingdom. 

^'^  Justin  Martyr  (Dial,  rcith  Trypho)  quotes  Dan.  7,  and  refers  its  fulfilment  to  the 
future.  In  ch.  32  the  Jew  Trypho'is  represented  as  objecting  to  its  applicability  to  Jesus 
Christ  because  His  coming  was  in  humiliation,  and  that  He  was  crucified.  If  Daniel's 
j)rediction  were  to  be  confined  to  the  First  Advent  and  to  the  Church,  then  the  exception 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  681 

stated  ■would  be  well  taken,  seeing  that  nothing  commensurate  with  Daniel's  prediction 
took  place.  Justin  correctly  meets  the  objection  by  showing  that  the  prophecj'  will  be 
fulfilled  at  the  tiec.  Advent.  Now,  this  alone,  aside  from  numerous  other  considerations, 
effectually  disposes  of  Reuss's(i/*s.  Chris.  TheoL,  p.  349)  theory,  that  "  the  fact  of  the  veri- 
table appearance  of  Christ  implies  the  immediate  setting  up  of  His  Kingdom,"  or 
Oosterzee's  {Ch.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  528),  that  "  the  effect  of  His  appearing  plainly  shows  that 
He  has  in  reality  founded  that  Kingdom  of  God  which  was  looked  for  by  kings  and 
prophets."  We  confess  our  utter  inability,  with  the  early  Chiu'ch,  to  see  such  a 
"  reality"  (comp.  Props.  42-68),  finding  it  opposed  by  covenant,  prophecy,  postpone- 
ment, and  history.  So  Ueberweg  (//is.  Fhilos.,  vol.  1,  p.  266)  wrongfully  applies  Dan. 
7  :  13,  14,  to  the  First  Advent,  and  against  the  order  of  prediction  and  the  plain  facts 
of  history,  says  that  Jesus  then  "  had  the  courage  to  found  a  Kingdom  of  God," 
Thompson  {Theol.  of  Christ)  quotes  e.g.  Dan.  7  :  27  as  now  fulfilled,  because  a  believer 
with  prayer  becomes  "  a  spiritual  power,"  or  "  a  co-worker  with  God  in  the  realm  of 
spiritual  agencies,"  thus  placing  him  among  the  "  providential  forces  that  rule  the 
world."  This  only  shows  how  hard  pressed  our  opponents  are  to  find  a  support  for 
their  theory. 

11  Several  objects  are  evidently  designed  by  the  prophecies  (1)  to  indicate  the  ambition 
of  these  four  Kingdoms,  to  obtain,  if  possible,  a  universal  lordship  or  dominion  over  the 
earth  ;  (2)  the  fearful  threatenings  of  God,  given  b}^  Moses,  etc.,  were  to  be  realized 
under  this  Gentile  domination  ;  (3)  the  prosperous  and  triumphant  career  of  these 
Kingdoms  in  contrast  with  the  depressed  condition  of  God's  people  ;  (4)  the  ample 
deliverance  that  would  yet  be  brought  through  the  Messiah  after  the  predetermined 
course  of  these  Kingdoms  ;  (5)  the  full  bestowal  of  the  dominion  that  these  sought  but 
failed  to  realize  but  only  in  the  covenanted  line  and  manner  ;  (6)  and,  hence,  are 
designed  to  sustain  the  faith  of  believers  under  such  trials,  assuring  them  that  such 
powers  would  come  to  a  final  end  (comp.  Prop.  164),  and  that  God's  promises  would  be 
verified.  Lord  {Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal,  1860,  p.  305)  well  suggests  that  in  this  Gentile 
ordering  God  allows  an  exemplification  to  take  place,  on  a  decisive  scale,  '"of  what 
fallen  man  is  as  a  ruler  of  his  fellow-men,"  as  essential  to  show  what  is  in  man,  what  he 
will  do  when  in  power,  and  to  demonstrate  the  necessity — in  order  to  have  a  perfect 
government— of  Christ's  assuming  the  Theocratic  rule. 

'■^  The  sway  of  the  Romish  Church  is  no  fulfilment  of  the  prediction,  lacking  the 
extent,  unity,  continuance,  etc.,  given  by  the  prophecy.  It  is  only  a  caricature  of  the 
promised  Messianic  Kingdom,  a  self- appropriation  of  the  work  of  Jesus. 

13  The  reader  will  observe  that  this  vengeance  is  jooured  out  upon  these  because  (Dan. 
7  :  9-11,  Rev.  17  :  12-14,  and  19  :  19,  etc.)  they  are  directly  hostile  to  and  make  war 
against  Christ.  Prophecy  corresponds  as  to  the  time  of  and  reason  for  infliction.  To 
see  the  difference  between  prophecy  and  some  writers  :  Schlegel  {Phil,  of  His.,  Lect.  10) 
makes  the  Jewish  Covenant  and  the  old  Revelation  of  the  Hebrews  the  first  corner  stone, 
the  Greek  language  the  second  foundation  stone,  and  the  Roman  Empire  the  third 
foundation  stone  of  the  Christian  religion  or  Church.  The  Church  is  not  founded  on 
that  that  perishes. 

1^  Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  297,  see  preceding  ^  7,  note  1),  although  admitting  that 
such  monarchies  are  "  doomed  to  perpetual  destruction,"  strives  hard  to  make  this 
smiting  and  destroying  the  work  of  the  Church,  as  now  existing,  by  means  of  moral  and 
spiritual  influences  (so  Barnes,  Edwards,  Brown,  etc.).  But  where  is  the  historical 
proof  (aside  from  the  tenor  of  the  prophecy  and  the  analogy  of  the  Word),  when  all 
history  asserts  that  the  Church  has  been  the  best  ally  that  earthly  kingdoms  have  pos- 
sessed in  supporting  their  claims,  pretensions,  divine  right  of  kings,  etc.  Take  the 
Roman  Kingdom,  and  is  it  not  abundantly  confirmed  that  when  divided  and  weakened, 
it  was  upheld  by  the  Church  through  its  nominal  conversion  and  ecclesiastical  connec- 
tion with  the  same?  Gibbon  and  others  plainly  teach  us  how  the  Church,  in  many  an 
emergency,  supported  and  revived  the  sinking  civil  power.  Even  Grotius,  with  his 
singular  view  of  the  Fifth  Kingdom,  must  acknowledge  that  the  sublime  sense  is  that 
Christ  Himself,  according  to  1  Cor.  15  :  24,  will  put  an  end  to  all  earthly  empires.  The 
question  to  be  answered  is,  When?  Tregelles  {On  Ban.,  p.  20)  properly  discards,  as 
untenable,  the  action  of  the  Stone  as  representing  the  results  of  grace  or  the  gospel,  and 
indorses  the  view  "  that  destroying  judgment  on  Gentile  power  is  here  spoken  of  ;"  which 
power  Jesus  ascribes  to  himself  personally.  Matt,  21  :  42,  44.  Fausset  {Com.  Dan.  2  :  4) 
says  :  *'  The  falling  of  the  Stone  on  the  image  must  mean  destroying  judgment  on  the 
fourth  Gentile  power,  not  gradual  evangelization  of  it  b}'  grace  ;  and  the  destroying 
judgment  cannot  be  dealt  by  Christians,  for  they  are  taught  to  submit  to  the  powers 
that  be,  so  that  it  must  be  dealt  by  Christ  Himself  at  His  coming  again."     The  contrast 


682  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  104. 

in  the  utter  removal  of  these  Kingdoms,  and  the  substitution  of  this  fifth  dominion, 
fully  sustains  such  a  yiew.  The  fact  that  this  Stone  is  not  presented  as  a  foundation  stone 
(i.e.  preservative),  but  as  a  judgment  stone  (i.e.  destructive),  confirms  the  same.  So 
also  the  image  is  not  presented  as  something  transformed  or  changed  by  the  action  of 
the  Stone,  but  a  complete  demolition  of  it  is  expressed.  The  regular  succession  of 
downfalls,  and  the  Stone  apj)earing  (not  when  the  Church  was  established  and  the 
Human  Empire  was  in  its  strength,  but)  when  the  image  is  completed  (i.e.  in  the  days  of 
the  feet)  corroborates  our  position.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  the  following  :  The 
"  breaking  to  pieces"  in  Dan.  2  :  40  (comp.  Dan,  7  :  7,  19,  23)  is  admitted  by  all  to 
indicate  violence,  but  the  same  phraseology  is  applied  to  the  action  of  the  Stone,  and 
consistency  demands  a  like  interj^retation.  Therefore  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  Fair- 
bairn's  concessions  {On  Proph.,  pp.  449,  447,  465,  etc.)  that  the  language  denotes  more 
than  simple  conversion. 

'5  This  was  the  uniform  opinion  of  the  ancients,  and  is  remarkably  exhibited  in  the 
delicacy  of  Josephus  (i.e.  not  to  offend  the  Roman  power,  as  noticed  by  Bh.  Newton, 
On  Proph.,  p.  195 — taken  from  Bh.  Chandler's  Defence)  in  refusing  to  exjjlain  the  King- 
dom of  the  Stone  {Antlq.,  B.  10,  ch.  10,  s,  4),  the  apology  of  Jerome  (as  presented  by 
Newton,  p.  192),  the  dread  expressed  by  Tertullian  and  others.  Sulpicius  Severus 
{Sacred  His.,  B.  2)  gives  the  general  view  previously  held  (but  in  his  day  beginning  to 
be  questioned),  when  he  makes  the  Fourth  Kingdom  the  Roman,  and  insists  upon 
Christ's  coming  to  reduce  the  same  and  "  establish  another  everlasting  Kingdom."  If 
the  reader  desires  to  know  how  generally  this  was  entertained,* he  need  only  notice  how 
the  previously  prevailing  Millenarian  views  (comp.  Props.  73-78)  necessarily  embraced 
it  as  a  distinguishing  feature.  This  old  interpretation  was  not  flattering  to  Roman 
power  nor  to  Papal  pretensions,  and  it  was  coldly  treated,  as  evidenced  e.g.  by  Calmet 
(see  Newton  On  Proph.,  p.  206). 

's  For  decisive  proof  the  reader  is  referred  to  Props.  123,  147,  175,  160,  161,  162,  163, 
164,  171.  While  God's  purpose  in  reference  to  the  establishment  of  the  Church  is  fully 
carried  out  (viz.  ;  to  gather  out  the  elect),  it  is  also  true  that  down  to  the  very  Advent 
organizations  hostile  to  the  truth  shall  exist  and  yet  fearfully  oppress  the  Church. 
Instead  of  being  absorbed,  conciliated,  they  shall  persecute  the  saints.  The  culminated 
Antichrist  must  yet  arise  in  his  dreaded  career  of  supposed  triumph  over  the  Church. 
What  Iren?eus  (B.  5,  c.  25,  26),  Cyril  {Hier.  Cat.  15,  c.  6),  even  Jerome  {Hier.  Com.  loci) 
and  Augustine  {City  oj  God,  B.  10,  c.  23 — see  these  and  others  given  by  Newton,  in  Diss. 
13  and  14)  said  respecting  the  then  future  Antichrist  and  the  oppression  of  the  Church 
can  still  be  repeated,  for  these  predictions  relating  to  the  great  final  catastrophe  are 
far,  very  far  from  being  exhausted.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  then,  it  is  misleading 
and  dangerous  to  attach  to  the  Church  a  work  which  she  is  utterly  unable  to  perform, 
and  which  will  only  be  done  in  her  behalf  when  overwhelmed  in  the  depths  of  an  awful 
persecution.  The  delineation  given  of  the  future  of  the  Church  by  Paul,  John,  and 
others  is  directly  opposed  to  the  prosperous  and  triumi)hant  state  of  this  Kingdom,  when 
established  by  Jesus. 

"  Compare  Luther's  opinion  (D'Aubigne's  His.  Ref.,  v.  2,  p.  166,  and  Elliott's  HorcR 
Apoc,  V.  2,  p.  133,  etc.)  on  th3  personal  coming  of  "  the  Son  of  man,"  as  well  as  that  of 
many  others  given  by  Taylor  (  I'oice  of  the  Church),  Brooks  {HI.  Proph.  Inierp,),  A  Con- 
gregationalist  {Time  of  the  End),  etc.  D'Aubigne  (vol.  4,  p.  123)  also  says  :  "  The  Re- 
former, dreading  lest  the  end  of  the  world  should  arrive  before  he  had  translated  all  the 
Bible,  published  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  separately—"  a  work,"  said  he,  "  for  these 
latter  times."  "Historians  relate,"  added  he,  "that  Alexander  the  Great  always 
placed  Homer  under  his  pillow  :  the  prophet  Daniel  is  worthy  not  only  that  kings  and 
princes  should  wear  him  under  their  heads,  but  in  their  hearts  ;  for  he  will  teach  them 
that  the  government  of  nations  proceeds  from  the  power  of  God,"  etc.  This  indicates 
Luther's  esteem  (and  what  a  rebuke  to  modern  neglect  !)  for  Daniel. 

*^  Take  the  territorial  limits,  and  see  the  fearful  inroads  that  Gentile  domination  has 
made  upon  the  Church.  Thus  e.g.  take  a  map  of  the  Roman  Empire  as  it  existed  for 
some  time  after  the  Church  was  established,  and  to-day  we  find  immense  portions  of 
the  territory  loithoui  a  Christian  Church,  and  large  portions  of  it,  which  once  boasted 
of  such  a  Church  in  a  flourishing  condition,  have  fallen  back  into  a  state  of  unbelief 
and  degradation.  The  facts  of  history  are  thus  antagonistic  to  the  prophetic  jDor- 
traiture. 

'^  Out  of  a  multitude  of  testimony  on  this  point,  we  select  Dr.  J.  G.  Schmucker's  {Exp. 
of  Rev.,  notes  on  ch.  20  :  6):  "  We  are  assured  by  Daniel  that  after  the  four  universal 
Empires,  the  Babylonian,  the  Medo-Persian,  the  Macedonian,  and  the  Roman,  which 
are  there  symbolized  by  the  parts  of  a  human  image  and  by  four  beasts  (ch.  2  and  7), 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  683 

the  God  of  heaven  shall  set  up  a  Kingdom,  the  dominion  whereof  shall  be  given  to  the 
Hon  of  man,  and  all  people,  nations,  and  languages  shall  serve  and  obey  Him.  Now,  as 
the  preceding  four  are  tem]Doral  monarchies,  homogeneity  compels  us"^  to  consider  the 
Fifth  Empire  one  of  the  same  nature  ;  or  otherwise  these  prophecies  would  ajjpear  an 
impenetrable  riddle,  and  the  words  without  a  certain  signitication,  of  no  use  to  the 
Church."  He  therefore  advocates  the  visibility  of  the  Kingdom,  in  the  establishment 
of  "  a  Theocracy  among  His  people,"  etc.,  calling  it  "  such  a  government  as  the  per- 
sonal Kingdom  of  Christ"  wall  introduce. 

'•^"  Reference  has  been  made  (Obs.  2,  7,  note)  to  this  twofold  theory.  Fausset  even 
{Com.  Dan.  2),  hampered  by  the  Church-Kingdom  theorj-,  makes  "  a  Stone-Kingdom" 
now  existing  in  this  dispensation  as  preliminary  to  "  the  Mountain-Kingdom  ;"  the  one 
he  designates  "  the  Kingdom  of  the  cross,"  and  the  other  "  the  Kingdom  of  glory." 
But  this  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  prophetic  time  given  in  the  prediction  when  the  Stone 
enters  upon  its  mission,  as  evidenced  e.g.  in  the  simple  announcement  :  "  Thou  saicest  " 
(i.e.  as  the  context  shows,  until  the  complete  formation  of  the  image  down  to  his  feet) 
^^  till  that  a  Stone  was  cutout  loithout  hands."  This  locates  the  period  of  manifestation 
precisely  with  that  of  "  the  Son  of  man"  in  ch.  7,  long  after  the  Church  has  been  estab- 
lished, as  already  shown.  So  Brown  {Chrisfs  Sec.  Coming,  p.  2,  ch.  3)  labors  to  make  the 
Stone  the  Church  developing  itself  ultimately  into  the  mountain  stage.  (The  proof 
derived  from  the  mustard  seed  and  leaven  will  be  examined  under  Prop.  108.)  Our 
reasoning  fully  meets  his  view.  We  only  add  :  the  action  of  the  Stone,  instead  of 
indicating  a  feebleness  in  beginning,  etc.,  presents  us  with  the  exact  reverse,  viz.  :  that 
of  a  mighty  power,  which  successfully  overthrows  earthly  Kingdoms,  it  being  the 
exerted  power  of  Him  who  is  the  head  of  this  "  mountain"  ("  mountain"  symbolizing 
the  Kingdom  and  the  "  stone"  the  destructive  agency).  The  action  of  the  Stone  and 
the  work  of  Jesus  at  His  Sec.  Coming  are  identical,  as  the  jirophets  describe,  and  we 
cannot  be  mistaken  in  the  application.  It  is  absurd  to  assert  in  behalf  of  the  Church- 
Kingdom  theory  (as  Brown,  p.  344),  that  "  this  heavenly  Kingdom  appears  in  the  first 
instance,  simply  as  '  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,'  worn  out  and  given  into  the  hands  of 
the  little  horn  of  the  fourth  beast,"  etc.,  for  this  is  to  locate  the  Kingdom,  against  the 
prediction,  before  and  not  after  the  tribulation  of  the  saints. 

2'  Lord  [Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal,  Jan.,  1854,  and  Oct.,  1860)  makes  the  Stone  the  symbol 
of  risen  and  glorified  saints — the  kings  who  reign  in  the  Fifth  Empire  and  extend  it 
over  the  earth— who  obtain  the  government  of  the  world,  etc.  Now,  wdiile  this  would 
correspond  with  the  promises  (Prop.  154),  while  believers  are  designated  "stones" 
(1  Pet.  2  :  5,  Eph.  2  :  21,  etc.),  yet  as  this  work  is  specifically  applied  to  Christ  Himself 
(the  co-operation  of  the  saints  being  implied  or  taught  in  other  j)assages),  and  the 
singular  is  employed,  expressive  by  way  of  pre-eminence  of  "  the  Stone,"  we  vastly 
IDrefer  the  early  Church  interpretation,  which  is  exj)ressed  by  Severus  {Sac.  His.,  B.  2, 
p.  67),  "  But  in  the  Stone,  cut  out  without  hands,  which  broke  in  i:)ieces  the  gold,  the 
silver,  the  brass,  the  iron,  and  the  clay,  ice  have  a  figure  of  C  hrist.  For  He  shall  reduce 
this  world,  in  which  are  the  Kingdoms  of  the  earth,  to  nothing,  and  shall  establish 
another  everlasting  Kingdom."  Thus  many  others,  some  referring  to  1  Cor.  15  :  24,  Ps. 
2  :  12,  Isa.  63  :  1-6,  etc.  The  only  objection  of  force  made  against  this  view  is  the 
following  :  that  the  change  from  a  Stone  to  a  Moimtain  is  unsuitable  to  Christ.  But 
there  is  a  beautiful  application  in  this  very  change  to  David's  Son,  as  the  Son  of  man. 
For  when  He  comes.  He  comes,  according  to  covenant  promise,  to  claim  His  right  and 
heirship  to  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  which,  when  restored,  is  necessarily — as 
infidels  have  ridiculed  it  in  contrast  with  these  four  Empires  —a  small  Kingdom  (and 
mark — in  the  prophecy,  as  king  and  Kingdom  are  convertible,  the  figure  of  the  Stone 
is  dropped,  v.  44,  and  that  of  a  Kingdom  substituted,  as  Christ  is  the  Head,  which 
performs  this  work  and  extends  and  perpetuates  itself),  but  which  under  His  auspices 
immediately  advances  to  a  world-wide  dominion,  overcoming  all  opposition.  There  is 
propriety  in  directing  attention  to  the  central  figure,  the  great  Agent  and  King,  who, 
from  His  covenanted  position  on  the  weak  (compared  with  earthl^y  powers)  Davidic 
throne,  waxes  great  and  mighty  over  all  the  earth.  The  work  that  He  accomplishes 
requires  time,  and  prophecy  indicates  this  feature.  The  figure  of  the  Stone  (and  not  of 
another  metal)  may  have  reference  to  the  weighing  (judgment)  of  nations  in  God's  scale 
of  justice,  a  Stone  being  used  as  the  medium  (as  e.g.  Deut.  25  :  13  marg.,  Prov.  16  :  11 
marg.).  Gill  {Com.  loci)  mentions  Rab.  Simeon  Ben  Jochai,  Saadiah  Gaon,  Rab. 
Abraham  Seba,  and  one  of  the  ancient  Midrashes  or  Expositions,  as  applying  this  Stone 
to  the  Messiah.  This  was  a  Jewish  opinion,  so  that  our  opponent,  Dr.  Brown  (('//.  Sec. 
Com.,  p.  352),  remarks  :  "  Prebendary  Lowth  says,  '  The  Jews  agree  that  by  this  Stone 
is  here  (Dan.  2)  meant  the  Messiah.'  "    And  (p.  352)  he  adds,  to  show  how  it  was  per- 


684  THE  THEOCEATIC   KIT^GDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

petuated  :  "  The  fathers  were  fond  of  illustrating  the  miraculous  generation  of  Christ 
by  the  Stone's  being  '  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,'  and  thus  the  application 
of  the  word  to  Christ  seemed  to  have  gained  a  footing."  The  early  Church  view  is  well 
illustrated  by  a  brief  sentence  from  Hippolytus  {Treat,  on  Christ  and  Antichrist)  :  "After 
a  little  siaace,  the  Stone  will  come  from  heaven,  which  smites  the  image,"  etc.  While 
able  to  incorporate  much  that  Wilson  (Proph.  Times,  N.  S.,  1876,  p.  166)  says  in 
relation  to  the  Kingdom  (it  being  inseparably  associated  with  the  Stone,  which  is  its 
Head),  yet  we  cannot  make  the  Stone  itself  to  be  "  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  because  of  its 
being  expressly  appropriated,  pre-eminently,  to  the  Christ  personally.  It  is  true, 
however,  that  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  dissociated  from  Him,  for  the  one  embraces  the 
other  ;  still  in  the  prediction  special  attention  is  directed  to  the  Head  as  the  powerful 
source  of  these  judgments.  Hence  some^  as  Fausset  {Dan.  loci),  unite  the  two  together. 
Berg's  theory  (T;^e  Stone  «nd  the  Image)  that  the  Stone  is  the  American  Republic,  destined 
to  overthrow  desiDotism,  or  that  of  some  Spiritualists,  of  its  being  spiritualism  extending 
itself,  may  be  dismissed  without  comment.  So  also  Wild's  notion  of  England  and 
America's  supremacy.  The  Luth.  Obs.,  Oct.  26th,  1877,  reports  that  a  missionary  of  the 
American  Sunday-School  Union  states  that  a  zealous  sectarian  preacher  "  asserted  his 
belief  that  David's  Stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  is  the  Methodist  Episcojjal  Church." 
Indeed,  those  who  hold  that  this  Kingdom  is  the  Church,  and  who  are  at  the  same 
time  exclusive,  may  in  their  self-complacency  think  that  their  own  exclusive  Church  is 
thus  favored.  But  sober-minded  men  of  all  churches  despise  such  a  sectarian  exclusive 
api^ropriation. 

'^  The  idea  of  forming  a  Fifth  universal  Empire,  to  be  nominally  Christian,  was  a 
favorite  idea  of  Constantine,  Charlemagne,  Charles  V.,  Napoleon  I.,  and  others,  but 
according  to  Scripture  it  can  never  be  realized  under  human  auspices.  It  will  only  be 
fulfilled  under  the  supernatural  agency  of  "  the  Christ"  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  This  same 
dream  of  conquest  and  a  universal  Kingdom  excited  the  imagination  and  fired  the 
ambition  of  various  Popes,  It  also  is  a  favorite  with  a  class  of  Protestants,  as  e.g.  I'he 
tiermonizer  (vol.  1,  No.  2,  p.  22)  on  "  The  Messiah's  Kingdom,"  says,  "This  will  only  be 
brought  about  by  human  co-operation"— thus  entirely  overlooking  the  predicted  con- 
dition of  the  Church,  under  Gentile  domination,  at  the  Sec,  Advent. 

Ods.  3.  If  we  turn  to  Isa.  25  : 6-10,  the  reasons  are  convincing  why  this 
noble  prophecy  should  not  be  applied  to  the  church  m  this  dispensation. 
(1)  If  we  take  the  prediction  to  describe  one  period  of  time  here  on  earth  ; 
if  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  separate  the  prophecy,  and  apply  part  of  a  sen- 
tence to  the  church  here  and  another  to  the  church  in  heaven,  part  of  it  to 
the  church  now  and  part  of  it  to  the  church  in  the  distant  future,  etc., 
then  the  condition  of  the  church  has  never  been  that  described  by  the 
prophet  ;  for  instead  of  the  grand  deliverance  and  glorious  blessings  prom- 
ised, the  church's  condition  has  been  the  reverse,  and  shall  continue  thus 
down  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  (2)  The  church,  v.  9,  is  represented  as  ^vaiting 
/or  this  period.  (3)  The  context  shows  that  this  "mountain"  or  King- 
dom is  preceded  by  terrible  judgments  upon  the  nations  of  the  earth,  cor- 
responding  with  the  concluding  portions  of  the  Apoc.  and  the  portrayals 
of  the  Sec.  Advent.  (4)  The  context  shows  that  it  is  connected  with  the 
deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation  and  with  "  the  land  of  Judah."  (5)  The 
time  agrees  with  the  gathering  of  the  nations  (ch.  24  :  22  ;  ch.  25  :  10-12  ; 
ch.  26  : 5-8  and  20,  21),  and  vengeance  inflicted.  Rev.  19,  15,  and  11,  etc. 
(6)  The  figurative  language  of  context  (Rev.  and  Matt.  24,  comp.  e.g. 
with  verse  23,  ch.  24)  ;  the  reigning  after  the  judgments  in  Jerusalem  ac- 
cording to  covenant  promise  ;  the  destruction  of  a  city  (chs.  25  and  26), 
corresponding  with  that  of  Babylon  in  the  Apoc;  the  sparing  of  some 
people,  after  these  judgments,  who  shall  glorify  God  ;  the  appearance  of 
God  in  a  critical,  distressful  period  of  time  ;  the  triumphant  song  sung  at 
that  day  "  in  the  land  of  Judah  ;"  the  obtaining  at  that  time  of  a  strong 
city  ;  the  removal  of  the  wicked  ;  the  non-resurrection  of  the  wicked  dead 


Prop.  104.]  the  theocratic  kingdom. 

(ch.  26  :  14,  comp.  with  Rev.  20  :  5) — these  things  so  accurately  correspond 
with  what  is  to  occur,  still  in  the  future  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  that  we  cannot 
appropriate  these  to  the  church.  (7)  This  Kingdom  is  established  on  the 
earth  (not  in  heaven),  and  embraces  tlie  removal  of  the  curse,  of  events  that 
are  only  linked  with  the  Sec.  Coming.  Thus  the  resurrection  of  tlie  saints, 
which  Paul  in  1  Cor.  15  :  54  expressly  quotes  and  applies  to  such  a  resur- 
rection, and  which  must  occur  before  the  Kingdom  comes,  and  the  removal 
of  tears,  of  rebuke,  etc.,  which  exactly  agrees  with  what  John  and  others 
apply  to  the  future  Kingdom.  Indeed,  if  we  leave  the  text  and  context 
speak,  and  be  contrasted  with  the  facts  of  history  and  with  what  is  pre- 
dicted in  the  future,  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  fulfilment  of  them  in  the 
church  or  world.  This  feast  undoubtedly  corresponds  with  the  predicted 
future  one  in  the  Apoc. 

Obs.  4.  The  favorite  prediction  seems  to  be  Isa.  2  : 1-5  and  Micah  4  : 1, 
which,  as  all  admit,  describe  the  same  Kingdom.  But  that  these  do  not 
refer  to  the  church  as  now  constituted  is  evident  from  the  context.  The  im- 
mediate connection,  as  in  Micah,  chs.  3  and  4  and  in  Isa.  2,  demands  a  res- 
toration of  the  identical  Zion  that  was  jjloughed,  the  same  Jerusalem  that 
was  made  heaps,  and  the  same  mountain  of  the  house  that  was  overtlirown. 
The  downfall  was  literally  accomj^lished,  and  the  Prophet  not  only,  with- 
out a  change,  necessarily  advocates  a  complete  and  triumphant  restoration 
(just  as  the  covenant  demands),  but  to  avoid  any  mistake  in  the  matter, 
conjoins  the  one  ivitli  the  other,  specifies  a  supremacy  (Mic.  2  :  8)  to  Jeru- 
salem, and  (11,  12,  13)  points  out  the  gathering  of  nations  and  their  com- 
plete overthrow.  Besides  this,  the  blessings  of  this  Kingdom,  as  in  the 
cessation  of  war  and  the  perfect  safety  of  the  citizen,  has  never  been  real- 
ized, and  we  are  assured  ivill  not  (for  express  passages  teach  war  down  to 
the  Advent  itself)  until  Christ  comes  again.  The  terrible  overthrow  of 
Isa.  2  :  10-22,  etc.  is  in  such  agreement  with  the  closing  chapters  of  the 
Apocalypse,  that  we  must  locate  them  both  at  the  saine period. 

So  plain  and  decisive  are  these  predictions  that  it  is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  the 
Church  has  ever  departed  from  the  early  Church  belief,  sustained  as  it  is  by  the  lair 
grammatical  sense  and  analogy  of  the  Word.  Justin  Martyr  [Dial,  with  Trypho),  refer- 
ring to  Micah  4  :  1,  etc.,  declares  those  as  "  destitute  of  just  reason  \fh.o  did  not  under- 
stand that  which  is  dear  from  all  the  Scriptures,  that  two  comings  of  Christ  are 
announced— one  in  which  a  suffering,  inglorious,  dishonored,  and  crucified  Saviour 
is  preached  ;  but  another  in  which  He  shall  come  with  glory  from  the  heavens,"  etc. 
To  show  the  contrast  and  evidence  how  the  prophecies  are  appropriated  in  behalf  of 
the  Church,  ivithout  any  regard  to  their  connection,  etc.,  we  quote  from  the  father  of  the 
modern  prevailing  theory  and  mode  of  application.  Origen  {Ag.  Celsus)  thiis  interprets 
Isa.  2  :  "  Each  one  of  us,  then,  is  come'  in  the  last  days'  where  one  Jesus  has  invited  us, 
to  the  '  visible  mountain  of  the  Lord, '  the  Word  that  is  above  every  Word,  and  to  the 
'  house  of  God,'  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  the  ground  of  the 
truth.  And  we  notice  how  it  is  built  uj)on  '  the  tops  of  the  mountains'  i.e.  the  pre- 
dictions of  all  the  prophets,  which  are  its  foundations.  And  this  house  is  exalted  above 
the  hills,  i.e.  those  individuals  among  men  who  make  a  prof ession  of  superior  attainments 
in  wisdom  and  triith,"  etc.  Alas  !  that  such  a  method  of  interpretation  should  even  yet 
obscure  most  precious  portions  of  Holy  Writ  !  For  some  ruthlessly  divide  what  God 
has  joined  together,  applying  part  to  the  earth  and  part  to  heaven,  part  to  the  present 
and  part  to  the  future,  etc. 

Obs.  5.  If  we  turn  to  Zech.  14,  we  have,  as  predicted  in  other  places, 
the  Jewish  nation  in  a  fearful  position  (not  the  one  at  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  in  the  first  century,  but  a  still  future  one),  by  a  gathering  of 


686  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  104. 

nations  against  it,  a  Divine  interposition  in  its  behalf,  the  Advent  of  Christ 
and  of  His  saints,  the  triumph  of  the  Jews,  tJie  Kingship  of  the  Lord 
then  over  tlie  earth  manifested,  the  safety  and  peace  of  Jerusalem,  the 
plague  poured  out  on  the  enemies,  the  sparing  of  some  people,  the  worship 
tendered  to  God,  the  service  and  holiness — all  these  things  are  e)itireJy 
co7isistent  with  our  argument  concerning  the  Kingdom  as  covenanted  and 
identified  with  the  Jewish  nation,  as  exhibiting  a  theocratic  manifestation 
in  tlie  appointed  manner  hereafter,  while  they  cannot  be  applied  to  the 
past  history  of  the  Jews  or  of  the  Church  without  gross  violation  of  text. 
This  chapter  of  Zech.  gives  such  a  remarkable  order  of  the  events,  and  in- 
sists so  pointedly  on  the  exaltation  of  the  Jews,  that  our  opponents  find  it 
the  most  difficult  of  all  passages  to  spiritualize. 

Obs.  6.  In  order  to  apply  "  the  year  of  my  redeemed  "  (the  Jubilee), 
and  the  "  salvation"  (forgetting  that  Christ  also  comes  the  second  time 
unto  salvation)  of  Isa.  63  :  1-6  to  the  Church,  the  exact  reverse  of  the 
prophecy  is  advocated.  The  coming  of  the  King  in  vengeance,  treading 
the  people  in  anger  and  fury,  is  transposed  into  a  gracious  coming  and 
converting  power  ;  and  the  blood  of  the  enemies  staining  His  raiment  is 
changed  into  Christ's  own  blood  on'  the  cross  !  Surely  when  s^ich  liberties 
are  required  by  a  theory  to  j^reserve  its  consistency,  is  it  not  time  to  con- 
sider its  validity  ? 

It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  so  clear  a  thinker  as  Dr.  Schaff  (Lange's  Com.  Matt. 
p.  489)  should  apply  this  to  the  passion  of  Christ  (comp.  Props.  162  and  166).  Numer- 
ous sermons  by  eminent  men  pervert  this  Scripture,  and  as  Dr.  Moore  (Lange's  Com. 
Isa.,  J).  673,  after  such  a  given  sijecimen)  well  says  :  "  It  is  strange  that  an  eminent 
modern  preacher  (Ziethe)  should  so  misrepresent  the  teaching  of  this  passage.  If  we 
wish  to  lead  men  to  contemplate  Christ  as  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  by  whose  blood  we  are 
redeemed,  we  should  choose  a  passage  of  Scripture  that  exhibits  Him  in  this  character. 
But  it  is  either  culpable  ignorance  or  something  worse  to  affirm  that  the  Scripture 
before  us  contains  the  lessons  set  forth  in  the  above-mentioned  heads  of  a  sermon." 
This  rebuke  is  merited  by  many  who  utterly  pervert  and  misapjjly  its  meaning.  Calvin 
justly  calls  this  "  a  perversion  of  Scripture."  No  one,  however,  follows  the  extreme  of 
Jerome,  to  make  the  bloodshed  to  be  that  of  demons.  Comp.  the  judicious  remarks  of 
Weber,  quoted  Lange's  Com.  Isa.,  p.  673,  who  correctly  locates  its  fulfilment  to  "the 
judgment  that  will  befall  the  ahtichristian  persecuting  world  in  the  last  days." 

Obs.  7.  Thus  we  might  present  one  prediction  after  the  other,  and  in 
each  case  show,  either  by  the  context,  text,  or  parallel  passages,  that  the 
Kingdom  described  by  them  is  still  future.  For,  notwithstanding  the  as- 
surances given  and  the  eulogies  passed  on  the  Church,  it  is  a  plain  fact 
that  no  such  predictions,  having  a  direct  reference  to  the  condition  of  this 
Kingdom,  have  ever  been  realized  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  And  if  it 
were  not  for  this  Church-Kingdom  theory,  no  one  would  make  the  attempt 
to  wrest  and  pervert  them  in  this  direction.  Take,  e.g.  Isa.  65  :  17-25 
(comp,  with  V.  9),  and  the  ablest  of  writers,  as  Pres.  Edwards,  Alexander, 
etc.,  apply  this  to  the  Church  even  to  the  extent  that  "  the  new  heavens 
and  new  earth"  have  appeared  (although  some  admit  also  that  it  has  a 
future  reference).  But  if  we  leave  inspired  men  give  tlieir  testimong,  we 
find  that  the  location  of  this  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth"  is  indeed  still 
future,  2  Pet.  3  :  13  ;  Rev.  21  : 1.  Moreover,  if  we  concede  that  they  have 
been  already  created,  then  surely  the  results  of  such  a  new  creation  should 
be  fully  exhibited  in  the  Church.  Is  it  true,  however,  that  the  voice  of 
weeping  lias  ceased  in  her,  that  the  longevity  has  been  realized,  that  the 


PkOP.  104.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KIN^GDOM.  687 

safety,  peace,  and  happiness  predicted  lias  been  attained  ?  No  !  the  sad 
experience  of  individual  believers  and  of  the  Church /or/^/c/s  such  an  appro- 
priation. 

But  many  of  our  opponents  (even  Alexander,  e.g.  Com.  Isa.,  vol.  1,  p.  226),  as  we  shall 
show  under  Props.  148-151,  make  numerous  concessions  which  are  antagonistic  to  their 
own  Church-Kingdom  theor3\  Many  predictions  are  appropriated  by  setting  aside  the 
grammatical  connection,  or  by  making  that  which  might  interfere  with  the  Church 
theory  emblematic  and  figurative.  Thus,  to  illustrate  :  few  commentators  do  justice  to 
Acts  15  :  13-17.  They  have  much  to  say  about  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  enforced  by  the 
passage,  but  make  the  restoration  of  the  fallen  tabernacle  "  an  emblem  (so  Barnes,  etc.) 
of  the  favor  of  God,"  etc.,  violating  the  order  laid  down,  and  substituting  a  sense  not 
found  in  the  text.  To  understand  the  connection  of  James's  reasoning,  it  is  absolutely 
requisite  to  notice  the  covenanted  aspect  of  this  Davidic  tabernacle  (with  which  the 
ajiostles  were  familiar),  the  context  and  text  of  Amos,  and  the  facts  stated  by  Peter,  Paul, 
and  Barnabas,  suggesting  James's  reference.  If  this  is  done,  then  we  have  :  (1)  the 
rejection  and  overthrow  of  the  Davidic  Kingdom  ;  (2)  the  j^reservation  of  some  of  the 
nation  (in  order  to  make  a  future  restoration  possible)  ;  (3)  a  fearful  slaughter  of  the 
Jews  ;  (4)  a  call  extended  to  and  accepted  by  the  Gejitiles  to  become  also  God's  j^eople  ; 
(5)  this  work  of  grace,  including  Jews  and  Gentiles,  then  going  on  ;  (6)  this  to  be  fol- 
lowed by  a  rebuilding  or  restoration  of  the  Kingdom,  now  fallen  and  in  ruins  ;  (7)  the 
result  following. 

Obs.  8.  Many  of  the  j)redictionsare  so  exalted  in  their  nature,  and  prom- 
ise such  a  continued  and  ev^er-abidino^  blessedness,  that  it  is  adsurd  to 
predicate  them  of  the  Church  in  this  age.  Besides  this,  the  identical  lan- 
guage, ideas,  and  blessings  are  incorporated  by  John  with  the  crowning 
period  of  restitution  here  on  earth,  so  that  it  is  a  violation  of  all  irropriety 
to  extend  them  to  any  other  time  of  manifestation.  The  reader  will  per- 
ceive this  by  comparing,  e.g.  Isa.  60,  with  Rev.  21  and  22.  Again,  a  fair 
interpretation  must,  as  the  connection  requires,  alwajs  link  such  predic- 
tions with  a  future  restoration  of  the  elect  nation  in  its  favored  Theocratic 
jDosition  under  the  sublime  reign  of  the  predicted  David's  Son.  These  are 
imeparaUe,  as  the  covenant  teaches,  and  these  the  Prophets  always  unite. 

The  student  can  readily  see,  by  a  reference  e.g.  to  Art.  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  in  M'Clin- 
tock  &  Strong's  Cyclop.,  how  the  Church  is  transmuted  into  a  Kingdom.  The  process 
is  plainly  stated,  as  drawn  from  Knobel,  "  On  the  Prophets. "  Thus,  when  the  prophets 
describe  a  deliverance  from  "  political  calamities,"  we  must  attribute  "  a  higher  sense," 
viz.  :  deliverance  from  "  error  and  sin  ;"  when  they  describe  a  restored  people,  God 
again  dwelling  among  them  in  a  restored  and  perpetuated  Theocracy,  Ave  must  again 
apply  this  "  higher  sense,"  viz.  :  it  means  reconciliation  to  God,  access  to  Him,  union 
of  His  people  in  faith,  etc.  ;  when  the}^  portray  special  j^rovision  for  temporal  wants, 
the  blessings  of  life,  civil  duties,  health,  offspring,  harvests,  etc.,  the  "higher  sense"  is 
again  applied,  viz.  :  it  denotes  spiritual  good,  the  graces  of  the  spirit  enjoyed,  etc.  ; 
when  they  delineate  God's  people,  "  supremely  blessed  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  earthly 
pleasures,"  this  "  higher  sense"  elevates  the  meaning  into  spiritual  pleasures,  "  eternal 
life,"  etc.  ;  when  they  predict  "the  re-establishment  of  their  people  into  a  mighty 
state,  which  should  endure  upon  the  earth  in  imperishable  splendor  as  an  outward 
communit3%"  then  the  "higher  sense"  duly  applied  makes  this  "a  religious  invisible 
community."  The  student  will  observe  (1)  the  admissions  made  that  the  prophets 
really  predict  these  things  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense,  but  (2)  that  this  must  be 
changed  by  "  a  higher  and  spiritual  sense,"  Alas!  what  absurdities  are  engrafted  on 
God's  Word  by  the  assumed  superior  reason  of  man.  According  to  this  principle, 
the  inter]3retation,  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures,  is  left  at  the  mercy  of  this  assumed 
"  higher  sense,"  which  in  one  is  this,  and  in  another  that,  as  fancy,  or  imagination,  or 
alleged  influence  of  the  spirit,  or  some  favorite  opinion  suggests.  In  the  Art.  "  Bap- 
tists" {Ency.  Bellg.  Knowl.),  in  the  Introd.,  it  is  asserted  that  the  visible  organized 
Church  is  "the  Kingdom  of  God  foretold  by  the  prophet  Daniel,  and  announced  by 
John  the  Baptist  as  at  hand,  Dan.  2  :  44,  Matt.  3  :  2."  (What  a  departure  from  John 
Bunyan's  position.)    Dr.   Mason  {Essays  on  the  Church,  No.   1)  correctly  defines  the 


688  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  104. 

Church,  and  then  designates  it  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  for  the  support  of  such  an 
affirmation  quotes  such  j^assages  as  Isa.  66  :  12,  Isa.  49  :  23,  Isa.  6  :  3,  5,  and  especially 
"  He  that  shall  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles."  Schmucker  (Evang.  Lidh.  Cat,  p.  66) 
gives,  in  order  to  transform  the  Church  into  a  Kingdom,  Acts  5  :  31.  These  and  other 
writers  do  not  consider  that  their  representations  are  utterly  opposed  by  the  general 
analogy  of  Scripture,  as  shown  ;  by  the  epitomes  of  history,  as  given  in  Matt.,  chs.  24 
and  25  (comp.  Mark  and  Luke),  and  2  Thess.,  ch.  2  ;  by  such  statements  as  Matt.  9  :  15, 
Matt.  23  :  39,  Luke  17  :  22,  Luke  21  :  31,  etc.  ;  by  the  numerous  reasons  logically 
united  as  already  given.  The  disposition  is  general  to  take  the  whole  matter  for 
granted,  and  then  to  quote  Scripture  without  the  least  regard  to  its  connection  or  order 
of  fulfilment.  It  is  even  a  sad  fact  that  Apologists  (e.g.  Row,  "  Ch.  Evidences,''  Bampton 
Lectures,  1877,  p.  211,  etc.\  taking  for  granted  as  a  fact  that  the  Church  is  the  cove- 
nanted and  predicted  Kingdom,  present  it  as  evidence  why  the  Scriptures  should  be 
received  as  a  Divine  Revelation,  viz.  :  through  the  fulfilment  of  projjhecy  exhibited  in 
a  matter  of  fact.  Alas  !  the  fact  does  not  exist  ;  it  is  wholly  imaginary,  as  the  least 
comparison  between  covenant  and  the  Church  abundantly  proves.  Such  statements  are 
misleading  and  injurious  to  the  truth.  A  strong  and  reliable  argument  can  be  built 
upon  the  existence  and  mission  of  the  Church,  without  introducing  material  that 
weakens  the  whole  structure.  A  simi)le  statement  of  the  design  of  the  Church  and  this 
disj)ensation  has  far  more  weight  with  infidelity  than  all  the  high-flown  and  exaggerated 
eulogies  so  lavishly  employed  ;  for  the  former  is  seen  to  be  actually  in  progress  and 
realized,  while  the  latter  exists  only  in  the  imagination  of  the  eulogizers,  being  opposed 
both  by  Scriptures  and  history. 


Prop.  105.]  the  theocratic  kingdo3I.  689 


Proposition  105.   The  Lorcfs  Prayer  is  indicative  of  tJie  fact 
that  the  Church  is  not  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom. 

Jesus,  in  teaching  His  disciples  to  x^^ay  for  a  future,  coming 
Kingdom,  undoubtedly  taught  them  to  pray  for  the  same  Kingdom 
covenanted,  predicted,  and  which  tliey  preached.  He  certainly 
desired  them  to  pray  understandingly,  and,  therefore,  the  views 
entertained  by  them  respecting  the  Kingdom  remaining  uncontra- 
dicted to  the  end  (Acts  1  :  6),  and  which  must  have  insfjired  the 
use  of  the  petition,  are  certainly  correct  (comp.  Props.  37-45,  and 
54-68). 

We  call  the  student's  attention  to  the  fact  that  we  have  already  quoted  numerous 
able  opponents,  who  frankly  admit  that  down  at  least  to  the  ascension  the  disciples  of 
Jesus  fully  entertained  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  expressed  by  us.  A  multitude  more 
might  be  thus  qiioted,  as  evidenced  by  their  enforced  and  fatal  concessions  when 
commenting  e.g.  on  Acts  1  :  6.  We  refer  to  this  in  order  to  say  :  Is  it  reasonable  to 
suj^pose  that  Jesus  would  give  His  disciples  a  prayer  in  behalf  of  the  Kingdom,  knowing 
as  He  must  what  construction  they  would  place  uj)on  it,  unless,  if  mistaken  in  their 
apprehension  of  it,  He  would  also  enlighten  them  as  to  its  meaning,  so  that  they  could 
offer  it  up  intelligently  and  with  a  proper  hope  ?  The  fact  that  we  do  know  with  what 
sentiments  these  preachers  of  the  same  Kingdom  prayed  this  prayer — specially  in- 
structed, too,  as  we  are  told,  in  private— goes  far  to  sustain  our  position.  If  candid, 
those  who  oppose  us  will  find  this  prayer,  as  understood  and  used  by  the  disciples,  a 
blow  to  their  excessive  spiritualizing  of  the  promises. 

Ols.  1.  The  petition  "  Thy  Kingdom  come"  (Matt  6  :  10,  Luke  11  :  2) 
cannot  appropriately  be  prayed  by  one  who  is  already  in  the  Kingdom,  for 
the  sentiment  expressed  looks  to  futurity.  The  disciples  to  whom  it  was 
given,  and  evidently  used  it,  had  no  idea  whatever  of  the  modern  notions 
engrafted  on  the  prayer.  They  prayed  it  looking,  as  we  have  in  detail 
proven  (as  many  of  our  opponents  frankly  admit),  for  a  Kingdom  to  come 
visibly  in  the  future,  and  this  Kingdom  was  the  Theocratic-David ic  re- 
stored under  the  Messiah.  We  may  well  ask.  How  could  the  Divine  Master 
give  them  a  prayer  with  such  a  clause  in,  which,  as  all  the  facts  show,  they 
— if  the  modern  view  is  correct — grossly  misunderstood,  without  some  ex- 
planation? Our  line  of  argument  conclusively  proves  that  such  an  expla- 
nation was  unnecessary  (and  hence  was  not  given)  because  they  had  the  true 
idea  of  the  Kingdom,  when  they  prayed  for  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  to 
come.  Jesus,  knowing  the  view  of  the  Kingdom  held,  by  giving  this 
petition  in  its  present  form,  indorses  the  disciples'  opinion  as  a  correct 
one.  The  integrity  of  the  Divine  Teacher,  and  His  express  assurance  that 
He  gave  them  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  (Prop.  11),  forbid  any  other 
position. 

There  is  an  exquisite  delicacy  (which  man  could  not  have  conceived)  in  the  praj^er,"  Thy 
(i.e.  the  Father's)  Kingdom  come."  The  delicacy  and  propriety  arises  from  Christ's 
position  in  the  performance  of  an  allotted  mission,  and  in  thus  avoiding  the  word  "  My" 


690  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  105. 

(whicli,  as  He  and  the  Father  are  one,  He  might  truthfully  have  employed),  and  in 
expressing  the  Theocratic  relationship  that  the  Kingdom  sustains  to  the  Father,  and 
implying  that  the  Kingdom  is  given  (Prop.  83)  by  the  Father,  because  of  the  obedience 
of  Jesus  (Prop.  84).  Again,  foreknowing  His  ultimate  rejection  by  the  nation  and  the 
consequent  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  the  petition  is  purposely  couched  in  language 
indefinite  as  to  the  time  when  it  should  come.  Again,  the  clause  annexed  to  this 
petition,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,"  etc.,  is  indicative  of  the  result  of  this  Kingdom 
coming,  as  stated  by  the  prophets.  But  we  add  :  The  simple  fact  is  evident  that  God's 
will  is  not  verified  in  the  Church,  as  her  checkered  history  attests,  and  so  long  as  she 
remains  in  her  mixed  condition,  cannot  be.  The  "  will  "  of  God  respecting  the  earth 
is  easily  read  if  we  but  direct  the  eye  of  faith  either  to  the  past  or  to  the  future,  as  given 
in  the  Word  ;  in  the  past  it  is  reflected  before  the  fall,  and  in  the  future,  it  shines  forth 
in  the  renewed  earth.  It  is,  therefore,  readily  perceived,  and  any  view  that  fails  to 
grasjj  these  two  marks  of  the  "  will"  falls  immeasurably  below  the  reality.  To  make 
it  manifested  now  is  to  cover  it  over  with  the  weakness,  frailties,  passions,  etc.,  of  poor 
humanity,  and  is  to  ignore  the  plainest  statements  in  the  predictions  (e.g.  2  Thess.  2) 
relating  to  the  Church. 

Obs.  2.  The  petition  "  TJiy  Kingdom  come,^''  is  a  prayer  that  one  distinc- 
tive Kingdom  should  come,  not  two  or  more  ;  not  that  one  should  be 
within  the  other,  not  that  one  should  be  a  prelude  to  the  other.  The  dis- 
ciples only  recognized  in  the  petition  one  Kingdom  ;  the  early  Church 
adopted  the  same  belief,  and  we  see  no  reason  for  a  change  of  faith,  seeing 
that  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom,  as  expressed  in  the 
plain  grammatical  sense,  is  the  one  evidently  denoted. 

It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  able  and  eminent  men  pervert  this  prayer  by  making 
out  a  variety  of  Kingdoms  prayed  for,  as  e.g.  one  writer  (Bernard)  has  three  Kingdoms 
petitioned  for,  viz.  :  "  The  Kingdom  of  Providence,  the  Kingdom  of  Grace,  the  Kingdom 
of  Glory."  (Comp.  Prop.  3,  and  observe  that  all  the  meanings  there  noticed  are,  more 
or  less,  incorporated  with  this  prayer.)  Others  have  a  visible  and  an  invisible,  a 
present  and  a  future  Kingdom  in  it.  Some  make  it  "  piety,"  or  "  religion,"  or  "  God's 
reign  in  the  heart,"  or  "  the  spread  of  Christianity,"  or  "  the  victorious  development  of 
the  Christian  Church,"  or  "  grace,"  or  "  power,"  or  "  the  gospel,"  etc.  Even  Pre- 
Millenarians,  forgetful  of  the  logical  covenanted  meaning  that  the  phrase  undoubtedly 
possesses,  while  carefully  insisting  that  it  necessaril}'  includes  the  still  future  Kingdom 
here  on  earth  after  the  Sec.  Advent,  tell  us  (as  e.g.  Alford)  that  it  embraces  "  the  fulness 
of  the  accomplishment  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  so  often  spoken  of  in  prophetic  Scriptures, 
and  by  implication  all  that  process  of  events  which  lead  to  that  accomplishment,"  and 
so  another  (Lange)  says  it  means,  "  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  spiritual  reality, 
including  both  time  and  eternity."  Hampered  by  a  Church- Kingdom  theory,  the  inter- 
pretation and  application  must  be  such  that  the  prayer  includes  a  petition  for  the 
Church,  bringing  out  a  prayer  for  Lange' s  "  threefold  Kingdom  of  grace,  of  power,  and 
of  glory."  The  absurdity  of  many  of  these  interpretations  appears  if  we  but  substitute 
them  in  the  petition  for  the  word  "  Kingdom,"  especially  when  contemplating  the 
disciples  as  uttering  them  with  their  Jewish  views.  Meyer  {Com.  loci)  is  logically  and 
scrip turally  correct  when  he  asserts  that  the  "  Kingdom"  simply  denotes  "  the  Messianic 
Kingdom."  Dr.  Schaff  (Lange's  Com.  loci,  Amer.  ed.)  objects  to  Meyer's  rejecting  all 
ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  meanings  attached  to  the  petition,  saying  that  he  "  forgets 
that  the  one  for  which  he  contends  exclusively,  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  does  in  fact 
include  or  imply  them  all."  But  this  reply  to  Meyer  is  suggested  by  the  idea  that  the 
Church  in  some  way  must  be  included  or  implied,  which  view  was  certainly  not  enter- 
tained by  the  disciples  and  the  early  Church.  Meyer's  position  is  the  correct  one, 
historically  and  scripturally,  and  this  opinion  is  steadily  gaining  ground  with  students. 
Nast  {Com.  loci)  says  that  the  view  that  this  Kingdom  "is  not  to  be  applied  to  the 
Church  of  God  before  the  second  visible  Coming  of  Christ,"  "  is  held  by  many  Evan- 
gelical divines  of  Germany  at  the  present  time,  and  has  gained  of  late  also  the  assent  of 
some  of  the  most  learned  theologians  of  England  and  America."  (He  adds  :  "  Yet  the 
Pre-Mill.  theory  has  not  yet  been  fully  met,  and  is  certainly  entitled  to  far  more  atten- 
tion and  examination  than  it  generally  receives.")  Yet  Dr.  Schaff  is  correct  in  so  far, 
that  when  we  pray  for  the  Kingdom  to  come,  the  petition  includes  the  prejjarative  work  of 
the  Church  that  it  may  be  hastened,  but  this  preparatory  stage  is  not  the  Kingdom  itself. 


PeOP.  105.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  691 

Ols.  3.  Attention  is  directed  to  the  fact  that  critics  (like  Lightfoot, 
Schoetgen,  Gregory,  etc.),  indorsed  by  various  commentators,  assert  that 
Jesus  collected  this  prayer  out  of  Jewish  Eschatologies,  and  prove  the  as- 
sertion by  giving  every  sentiment  expressed  in  full  as  drawn  from  them. 
If  this  be  allowed,  and  Jesus  did  this  purposely,  it  is  only  another  proof  of 
the  correctness  of  our  interpretation  and  application,  seeing  that  Jesus 
thus,  in  the  highest  possible  manner,  indorses  the  Jewish  views  (comp. 
Props.  40,  44,  47,  20,  21,  etc.)  of  the  Kingdom  by  taking  their  oivn  ex- 
pressions, and  framing  them  into  a  petition  to  heaven.  Every  Jew  who 
employed  it  would,  of  course,  use  it  in  the  sense  indicated,  and  it  is  a 
mere  begging  of  the  question  to  declare  that  Jesus  placed  one  sense  on  it 
and  the  Jews  quite  another ;  for  if  this  were  true,  which  it  is  not,  it 
■would  invalidate  the  integrity  of  the  Teacher,  making  Him  to  conceal  the 
truth  and  leave  His  hearers  under  a  wrong  impression  and  in  error. 

We  refer,  as  illustrative  of  the  Observation,  to  what  Barnes,  Com.  Matt.,  p.  83,  foot- 
note, says  of  the  usage  or  language  of  the  Jews,  and  which  "  were  doubtless  familiar  in 
the  time  of  Christ."  Thus,  he  says,  that  the  Rabbins  declared,  "  That  prayer  in  which 
there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  a  prayer." 

Ohs.  4.  The  quite  early  Church  entertained  our  view  of  this  petition,  as 
is  apparent  from  the  Eschatology  affirmed  by  them,  seeing  that  they  looked 
for  the  speedy  Advent,  etc.  The  modern  engrafted  views  were  foreign  to 
their  simple  faith.  The  extracts  that  we  have  already  given  from  them,  ex- 
hibiting their  belief  in  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  forbids  any  other 
view,  and  so  imbedded  was  this  in  the  Church  that  even  Augustine  (Cum- 
ming,  Lecfs.  on  Ro^nmiism,  p.  207)  could  not  transmute  this  Kingdom  into 
"  the  Kingdom  of  Grace"  (as  was  done  by  Ambrose  and  others),  but  held 
that  it  meant  "  the  Kingdom  of  glory." 

Tertullian  {De  Oratione)  makes  this  prayer  to  be  one  for  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom 
at  the  Advent  still  future,  and  thus  urges  this  petition  to  be  used  :  "  Wherefore,  if  the 
appearing  of  God's  Kingdom  belongs  to  the  will  of  God  and  to  our  earnest  expectation, 
how  can  some  pray  for  a  lengthening  out  of  the  age,  when  the  Kingdom  of  God,  for 
which  we  pray  that  it  may  come,  tends  to  the  consummation  of  the  age  ?  We  icish  to 
reign  earlier,  and  not  to  serve  longer.  Even  if  it  were  not  prescribed  in  the  prayer,  about 
praying  for  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom,  we  should,  of  our  own  accord,  offer  that  peti- 
tion, hastening  to  the  fruition  of  our  hope.  .  .  .  Yes,  Lord,  let  Thy  Kingdom  come 
with  the  idmost  speed  !  The  wish  of  Christians,  the  confusion  of  the  heathen,  the  joy  of 
angBls,  for  which  we  struggle  ;  yea,  more,  for  which  we  pray."  Cyprian  and  others 
refer  the  petition  to  the  Kingdom  still  future,  Cyprian  e.g.  saying  :  "  That  we  who  first 
are  His  subjects  in  the  world  maj^  hereafter  reign  with  Christ,  when  He  reigns."  The 
early  Church  linking,  as  Paul  does,  "  the  appearing  and  Kingdom"  together,  virtually- 
made  this  petition  a  prayer  for  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  and  the  petition  of  Rev. 
22  :  20  one  including  the  Kingdom,  In  unity  with  this  early  view  of  the  petition  the 
student  will  find  many  utterances  since  the  Reformation,  e.g.  Luther's  (Meurer's  "  Life 
of,"  p.  33),  Bish.  Latimer  (Investigator,  vol.  1,  p.  170),  Archb.  Cranraer  (Brooks's  Essays, 
p.  12),  Bish.  Newton  (Diss,  on  Proph.,  p.  587),  Baxter  (  Works,  vol.  2,  p.  555),  Increase 
Mather  {Discourse  on  Faith),  Spaulding  (Lectures,  p.  123),  and  hundreds  of  others  for 
every  Pre-Millenarian  writer  strenously  holds  that,  if  it  does  embrace  more  in  its 
meaning,  its  main,  great  reference  is  to  this  Kingdom  on  earth  after  the  Sec.  Advent." 

Ois.  5.  The  petition  "  Thy  Kingdom  come^^  assumes,  by  its  allusion  to 
futurity,  that  the  Kingdom  did  not  then  exist.  This  forms  corroborative 
proof  of  the  position  taken  by  us  in  previous  Propositions,  over  against  the 
utterances  that  it  was  present  when  Christ  gave  the  prayer. 


692  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  105. 

We  have  already  presented  numerous  testimonies  respecting  the  assertion  that  the 
Kingdom  was  already '  actually  in  existence.  Others,  as  illustrative,  may  be  added. 
Prof.  Lummis  {The  Kingdom  and  the  Church)  quotes  Dr.  Warren,  Pres.  of  Boston  Uni- 
versity, as  saying  :  "  The  Christian  Church  is  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth  viewed  in 
its  objective  or  institutional  form.  God's  Kingdom  among  men  is  as  old  as  human 
history."  Beecher  {Christian  Union,  Dec.  29th,  1875)  defines  the  Kingdom  to  be  "  a  state 
of  mind,"  or  "  a  Kingdom  of  character,  and  not  a  Kingdom  of  place  or  of  organization," 
or  "  the  development  of  human  nature  into  spiritual  manhood,"  and  being  thus  allied 
to  piety  or  religious  growth,  it  is  something  that  has  always  existed.  Hence,  when  we 
pray  "  Thy  Kingdom  come,"  we  only  pray  for  spiritual  things,  spiritual  growth,  etc.  If 
Jesus  really  intended  such  a  meaning  to  be  foisted  on  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  He  cer- 
tainly used  the  most  extraordinary  language  by  which  to  convey  it,  owing  to  the  pre- 
cise, definite  meaning  attributed  to  it  by  the  Jews  and  discij)les. 

Obs.  6.  The  expression  '^  Thy  Kingdom  come^'  expresses  faith  in  the 
realization  of  the  covenant,  and  the  predictions  based  upon  it.  What 
Kingdom  is  the  proper  subject  of  prayer,  if  not  the  Theocratic- Davidic  f 
Faith,  in  its  usage,  is  manifested  that  God's  oath  to  David  will  bo  re- 
spected, that  it  is  His  determinate  purpose  to  have  it  restored,  and  that 
God  will  institute  the  means  and  arrangements  for  its  recovery.  The 
Theocracy  is,  as  we  have  proven,  God's  own  Kingdom ;  He  being  the  Ruler 
in  it,  gives  force  to  the  "  Thy.'^ 

John  Ruskin,  in  The  Lord^s  Prayer  and  The  Church  {Contemp.  Review,  repub.  in  The 
Library  Mag.,  Jan.,  1880),  observes  :  "  I  believe  very  few,  even  of  the  most  earnest, 
using  that  petition  (viz.  :  Thy  Kingdom  come),  realize  that  it  is  the  Father's — not  the  Son's — 
Kingdom,  that-  they  pray  may  come,  although  the  whole  prayer  is  fundamental  on  that 
fact  :  '  For  Thine  is  the  Kingdom,  the  power,  and  the  glory.'  And  I  fancy  that  the  mind 
of  the  most  faithful  Christians  is  quite  led  astray  from  its  proper  hojDe,  by  dwelling  on 
the  reign — or  the  Coming  again — of  Christ ;  which,  indeed,  they  are  to  look  for  and  watch 
for,  but  not  to  pray  for.  Their  prayer  is  to  be  for  the  greater  Kingdom  to  which  He, 
risen  and  having  all  His  enemies  under  His  feet,  is  to  surrender  His,  '  that  God  may  be 
All  in  All.'  "  Here  are  quite  a  number  of  mistakes,  resulting  from  a  total  misapprelien- 
sion  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom.  1.  The  Divine  Sovereignty  is  not  the  Kingdom, 
Proj)s.  79  and  80.  2.  The  Kingdom  is  both  the  Father's  and  the  Son's;  being  The- 
ocratic, Jesus  is  the  representative  of  God,  e.g.  Prop.  200.  3.  Admitting  the  doxology 
(comp.  Lange's  Com.  loci,  New  Version  of  New  Test,  Variorum  of  New.  Test.),  the 
*'  Thine"  refers  to  this  Kingdom  being  given  to  David's  Son  (Prop.  81),  and  that  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  sustains  it.  4.  The  oneness  of  the  Father  and  Son  cannot  be 
thus  ignored.  5.  The  perpetuity  of  Messiah's  Kingdom  is  thus  flatly  denied  (comp. 
Prop.  159).  6.  The  ignoring  and  denial  of  prayer  for  the  coming  and  reign  of  Jesus,  in 
the  light,  e.g.  of  Rev.  22  :  20,  Tit.  2  :  13,  1  Pet.  4  :  7,  etc.,  is  surprising. 

Obs.  7.  ^'  Thy  Kingdom  come''^  embraces  the  idea  of  a  conspicuous,  visi- 
ble, external  coming,  so  that  every  one  would  he  cognizant  of  its  coming. 
The  adoption  of  the  Jewish  language  itself,  which  included  this,  is  evi- 
dence sufficient  to  inculcate  it.  But  aside  from  the  reasons  already  as- 
signed, and  others  that  will  appear  under  appropriate  headings,  it  amply 
subserves  our  present  purpose  to  say,  that  the  elewish  view  (which  is  emi- 
nently Scriptural),  that  an  extraordinary  exhibition  of  the  Supernatural 
would  be  manifested  (as  e.g.  in  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous)  with  the 
re-establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  alone  enforces  this  idea. 

The  establishment  of  the  Church  did  not  introduce  the  supernatural  results  con- 
fidently anticipated  in  the  resurrection  of  the  saints,  the  removal  of  evil,  etc.,  but, 
while  preparatory  in  its  nature  and  imparting  inestimable  blessings,  it  left  the  righteous 
still  under  the  curse,  oppressed,  burdened,  chastened,  etc.  The  visible  consequences,  as 
delineated  by  the  prophets  to  be  the  immediate  issue  of  the  restored  Theocracy,  were  all 
lacking.     Hence  no  coming  of  a  Kingdom  was  witnessed  as  covenanted  and  predicted, 


PkOP.  105.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  693 

for  instead  of  a  visible  organized  Theocracy,  uniting  Church  and  state,  all-powerful  and 
all-conquering,  the  Church  exhibited  an  organization  persecuted  by  the  state,  sustained 
by  the  blood  of  martyrdom,  struggling  and  fighting  to  maintain  an  existence  against 
encroachments  from  within  and  without.  If  we  are  to  follow  the  teaching  of  the  AVord, 
we  must  conclude  that  the  Jewish  view,  held  by  the  disciples,  is  the  correct  one,  viz.  : 
that  so  marked  are  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  reintroduction  of  this 
coming  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah  that  no  one  can  possibly  mistake  its  time  of  com- 
mencement. Now,  over  against  this,  observe,  as  we  have  largely  quoted,  the  conflicting 
views  of  our  opponents,  who  select  various  beginnings,  several  of  them  united,  etc.  We 
give  another  illustration  :  "  An  Inquirer,"  in  the  Ch.  Union,  Jan.  16th,  1878,  makes  the 
Christian  Church  to  be  organized  at  the  time  of  the  Translation.  The  Editor  (evi- 
dently recalling  how  eminent  men  fixed  the  same  at  the  birth  of  Jesus,  His  baptism,  the 
confession  of  Peter,  His  public  entry,  His  death,  His  resurrection,  His  ascension,  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem),  in  reply,  says  :  "  It  seems  to  us  to 
be  impossible  to  fix  the  date  of  its  beginning  as  it  is  to  fix  the  hour  when  the  oak  tree 
first  begins." 

Ohs.  8.  Prophecy,  if  the  Church  is  the  Kingdom  prayed  for,  should,  by 
way  of  encouragement,  and  in  answer  to  faith,  show  that  the  prayer  is 
realized  in  its  delineation  of  events.  But  the  reverse  of  this  is  true,  as 
e.g.  seen  in  Dan.  2  and  7.  Auberlen  {The  Proph.  Daniel)  remarked  the 
absence  of  any  portraiture  of  the  Church  (and  its  sham  imitation  of  a 
Theocracy  when  Church  and  State  were  united  under  Constantine)  when 
God  unfolds  the  history  of  the  Fourth  Monarchy,  the  Eoman  world-power 
excepting  only  as  it  suffers  under  the  persecution  of  earthly  Kingdoms. 
(Tlie  same  absence  is  noticeable  in  the  epitomes  of  Matt.  24,  Mark  13, 
Luke  21,  2  Thess.  2.)  Now  if  our  opponents  are  correct  with  their 
theory,  it  seems  reasonable  that  when  an  Empire  is  leavened  and  trans- 
formed into  a  nominal  Christian  power  by  the  Church,  such  a  change 
ought  to  be  recognized,  if  it  is  a  legitimate  answer  to  such  a  petition.  On 
the  contrary,  down  to  the  end  "  the  beast"  remains  "  a  beast.' ^ 

Auberlen,  thoroughly  Chiliastic  as  he  is,  and  able  in  his  prophetical  studies,  em- 
barrassed by  an  existing,  invisible  Church-Kingdom,  explains  the  omission  by  saying, 
that  as  the  prophet  only  describes  "  the  course  of  the  toor/J-powers,  hence  the  King- 
dom of  God  enters  the  horizon  at  that  point  where  it  begins  to  be  a  real  and  external 
power  of  the  world— that  is,  at  the  Second  Advent  of  Christ."  This  explanation,  while 
unsatisfactory  to  those  who  hold  the  visible  Church  to  be  a  Kingdom,  is  eqiially  so  on 
any  hj'pothesis  that  it  is  a  Kingdom,  seeing  that  the  distinctive  characteristics  belongr 
ing  to  a  Kingdom  are  only  manifested  at  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man,  when  the  fourth 
beast  and  his  brood  are  to  be  destroyed.  The  existence  of  such  a  Kingdom  must  first 
be  proven,  before  its  omission  is  thus  accounted  for  in  a  prophecy.  The  omission 
itself,  as  conceded,  decidedly  favors  our  view.  We  insist  that  (as  Prop.  35)  the  prophets 
and  covenants  describe  only  one  Kingdom  ;  they  know  absolutely  nothing  of  those 
additional  assigned  by  human  reason,  prejudice,  and  ambition. 

Obs.  9.  This  petition  must  be,  if  Scripture  is  to  give  in  its  whole  testi- 
mony, viewed  in  the  light  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  (comp. 
Props.  58,  66,  67,  etc.).  The  simple  fact  that  the  Kingdom  believed  in  by 
the  disciples,  and  for  which  they  prayed  when  using  this  phrase  (and  for 
which  Jesus  gave  it  to  them),  was  postponed  to  the  Second  Advent,  for- 
bids our  incorporating  with  or  substituting  for  it  any  other  Kingdom, 
alleged  to  be  visible  or  invisible.  If  we  do  this,  we  take  an  unwarranted 
liberty  with  the  same. 

In  addition  to  our  reasons  previously  assigned  in  detail  for  the  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom,  the  attention  of  the  advanced  student  is  directed  to  an  exceedingly  interesting 
Scripture,  which,  if  we  are  to  take  the  general  analogy,  teaches  the  postponement,  and 
shows  us  how  to  understand  this  petition.     We  refer  to  Dan.  9  :  26,  to  the  clause  "  shall 


694  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  105. 

Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  not  for  Himself."  It  is  admitted  by  able  commentators  that  the 
rendering  "  but  not  for  Himself"  was  adopted  (so  Barnes,  etc.)"  from  the  common  view 
of  the  atonement— that  the  Messiah  did  not  die  for  Himself,  but  that  His  life  was  given 
as  a  ransom  for  others."  Barnes,  however,  asserts  that  the  marginal  reading  is  the 
correct  rendering  :  "  And  shall  have  nothing."  So  Hengstenberg  insists  upon  translat- 
ing, "  and  is  not  to  him,"  i.e.  "  there  was  nothing  to  him,"  that  is,  the  authority, 
dominion  over  the  covenanted  people  would  cease.  Tregelles'  rendering  is,  "  and 
there  shall  be  nothing  to  Him,"  i.e.  no  Kingdom.  He  says  {On  Dan.,  p.  102)  that  the 
common  application  to  Christ's  sacrifice  must  be  rejected  as  "  placing  a  most  true  and 
important  doctrine  upon  an  insufficient  basis,"  and  adds  :  "I  believe  that  the  w^ords 
simplj'  imply  '  and  there  shall  be  nothing  for  Him  ;'  He  will  be  rejected,  and  His  earthly 
Kingdom  will  be  a  thing  on  which  He  will  not  enter."  Now  this  j)osition  is  amply 
sustained  by  the  facts  in  the  history  and  the  declarations  of  Jesus,  viz.  :  that  when  thus 
cut  off,  rejected  and  crucified.  He  did  not  establish  a  Kingdom,  but  it  was  postponed  to 
the  Second  Advent,  when,  according  to  promise.  He  will  come  again  and  erect  it.  This 
reference  to  not  having,  as  Messiah,  a  Kingdom  by  the  expressive  "nothing"  (comp. 
Barnes,  Lange,  etc.),  should  certainly  prevent  us  from  attributing  to  Him,  in  this 
direction,  something  of  a  Messianic  Kingdom.  The  unity  of  the  Word  forbids  it,  for  as 
e.g.  in  the  parable  of  the  nobleman,  the  Kingdom  is  distant  and  the  position  of  the 
servants  in  this  dispensation  is  assigned.  Even  the  admissions  of  our  opponents 
strengthen  our  position,  as  e.g.  Dr.  Brown  {Chrisfs  Sec.  Coming,  ch.  3),  quoting  Dr. 
Urwick,  and  conceding  that  Luke  19  :  11-27,  Matt.  25  :  19,  shows  that  the  Kingdom  to 
be  set  up  was  to  be  long  delayed. 

Obs.  10.  Eminent  divines  take  this  petition,  and  in  dedication  and  mis- 
sionary sermons,  employ  it  to  denote  the  present  existing  Church,  and 
yigorously  and  eloquently  exhort  their  hearers  or  readers  to  help,  by  spe- 
cial labor  and  efforts,  to  make  the  Kingdom  come.  That  which  is  the 
special  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Prop.  129,  etc.),  under  the  Divine  bestow- 
ment  of  the  Father  (Proj).  83),  men,  by  a  perversion  and  misapprehension, 
undertake  to  perform  themselves  (Prop.  175). 

This  widespread  notion  is  found  in  thousands  of  published  works  and  appeals.  Simply 
to  illustrate  :  The  official  oath  required  of  ministers  in  Prussia,  established  in  1815  and 
renewed  in  1835,  was  one  in  which  thej^  swear  that  they  will  "  extend  in  my  congrega- 
tion the  Kingdom  of  God  and  of  my  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ. "  They  may  have 
succeeded,  by  God's  grace,  in  urging  pietj',  spiritual  growth,  etc.,  upon  some,  but  as  to 
a  Kingdom,  judging  from  thehistpry  of  the  Church  in  Prussia  and  the  bitter  struggles 
since  then,  no  trace  of  one  can  be  found.  Waldegrave  (Neic  Test.  3IiUenarianism,  Sec.  2) 
assumes  the  Church  to  be  the  veritable  Kingdom  of  Christ,  and  referring  to  the  usual 
passages  adduced  iTi  its  behalf  (which  we  shall  notice),  declares  very  emphatically,  that, 
whatever  this  Kingdom  is,  our  Lord  taught  that  it  was  gradually  and  widely  to  extend 
its  bounds  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  (but  fails  to  give  one  passage  which  asserts  this 
idea,  he  transforming  "  the  gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  into  the  Kingdom  itself),  and  then 
triumphantly  adds:  "Is  it  possible  that,  after  all,  Christ  did  not  intend  His  people  to 
recognize  in  that  Kingdom,  when  it  should  be  set  up,  the  very  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  ? 
Is  it  possible  that,  after  all,  that  Kingdom  was  not  to  come  for  eighteen  centuries,  at 
least?"  The  only  reply  that  need  now  be  given  is  this  :  Can  Waldegrave  point  out 
the  time  when  the  Church  first  recognized  herself  to  be  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ?  If  so 
easily  recognizable,  why  do  he,  and  others  who  believe  with  him,  make  so  many  different 
Kingdoms,  and  differ  so  materially  as  to  the  beginnings  ?  Wliy  did  the  early  Church 
employ  this  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  without  the  least  idesi  of  the  Messianic  King- 
dom having  come,  and  why  do  they  locate  it  at  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Jesus  ?  What  are 
we  to  do  with  the  Scriptures  that  expressly  teach  a  postponement  ?  Such  questions  can 
be  multiplied,  all  of  which  he,  however,  completely  ignores,  complacent!}"  satisfied  with 
the  merest  inferences  drawn  from  Christ's  present  exaltation,  the  Divine  Sovereignty,  etc. 
Such  affirmations  like  these  are  abundantly  supported  by  assertions,  but  direct  ScriiDtural 
piroof  is  lacking  in  every  one  of  them. 

OI)s.  11.  "  Thy  Kingdom  come"  is  the  prayer  of  those  who  are 
"  lieirSy^^  for  they  have  an  interest  in  it.     It  is  the  prayer  of  those  who  are 


Prop.  105.]  the  theocratic  kijS^gdom.  695 

called,"  and  the  usage  of  this  petition  indicates  an  appreciation  of  their 
"  high  calling."  It  is  a  prayer  designed  to  stimulate  faith  and  hope,  to 
wean  from  the  world,  to  qualify  us  for  a  future  "  abundant  entrance." 
It  is  a  prayer  which  honors  the  Father  who  bestows  it,  honors  the  Christ 
who  receives  its  glory,  and  honors  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  wonder-working 
power  will  be  exerted  in  its  behalf.  It  is  a  prayer  that  fell  from  the  lips 
and  heart  of  David's  Son,  expressive  of  His  own  desire,  and  it  has  encour- 
aged, consoled,  and  strengthened  the  hearts  and  lives  of  multitudes  of  be- 
lievers. To  appreciate  it  properly,  we  must  study  its  distinctive  meaning, 
denoting  as  it  does  a  well-defined  ("Thy")  Kingdom,  which  the  Father 
has  promised  most  solemnly  under  oath,  and  which  David's  Son  receives 
from  the  Ancient  of  Days  at  the  allotted  period— a  Kingdom  bringing 
completed  Eedemption  and  the  most  precious  blessings. 

"We  only  add  :  The  Kingdom  that  we  pray  for  is  not  one  that  shall  fall  terribly 
oppressed  under  the  Antichrist  ;  it  is  not  one  whose  members  shed  their  blood  in 
betialf  of  the  truth,  reaping  the  vengeance  of  earthly  powers,  but  it  is  a  Kingdom  which 
the  Word,  truthful  and  consistent,  always  represents  as  exalting  its  rulers  in  honor  and 
glory,  and  in  extending  peace  and  happiness  to  its  subjects.  To  this  divine  portraiture 
we  cling  ;  for  it  we  long  and  pray.  In  reference  to  the  ardent  praying  and  longing  for 
this  Kingdom,  compare  e.g.  Olshausen,  Com.  loci.,  Nast,  Com.  loci.,  Alford,  etc.  Nast 
remarks  :  "  According  to  Olshausen  the  one  leading  idea  is  the  ardent  longing  after  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  which  constitutes  the  burden  of  all  the  prayers  of  God's  children," 
But,  it  may  be  added,  we  should  pray  intelligently  as  the  disciples— to  whom  the  prayer 
was  given  and  who  preached  this  Kingdom— prayed.  Much  prayer  m  this  direction  is 
confused,  and  mingled  with  human  opinions.  In  sadness,  too,  we  must  say  that 
multitudes,  if  they  really  apprehended  that  the  coming  of  this  Kingdom  is  inseparably 
linked  with  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  that  to  pray  for  the  one  is  really  to  pray  for  the  other, 
would  feel  no  interest  in  the  prayer — yea,  would  dread  its  use — although  identified 
with  "  the  blessed  hope"  and  perfected  redemption.  So  long  as  they  can  apply  it  to 
the  Church,  or  to  the  third  heaven,  or  to  a  very  distant  future,  they  can  employ  it,  but 
to  give  it  the  ancient  Chiliastic  interpretation  and  application,  although  amply  sup- 
ported by  the  analogy  of  the  Word,  is  beyond  their  personal  desires,  for  the  speedy 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  although  it  be  "unto  salvation,"  is  unwelcome  or  visionary  to 
them. 

Ohs.  12.  Pre-Millenarians  are  a  unit  in  the  application  of  this  petition  to 
a  future  Messianic  Kingdom  at  the  Sec,  Advent.  Some,  indeed,  as  we  have 
pointed  out,  being  under  the  influence,  more  or  less,  of  the  prevailing  views 
respecting  the  Church-Kingdom  theory,  think  that  the  Church  is  also  em- 
braced in  the  petition  (which  we  deem  illogical  and  inferential),  but  such 
an  application  is  expressly  affirmed  to  be  secondary  or  a  lower  sense.  And 
it  must,  moreover,  be  borne  in  mind  that  even  then,  not  one  of  these  con- 
tends that  the  Church  is,  in  any  sense,  the  covenanted  and  ])red\cted  Mes- 
sianic Kingdom.  They  unite  in  regarding  it  as  ^\vi\'^\^  'preiiaratory  to  the 
Kingdom  of  covenant  and  of  Dan.  2,  7,  etc.,  which  is  to  be  manifested 
at  the  Second  Coming  of  Jesus.  Therefore  all  Pre-Millenarians  unite  in 
regarding  the  petition  as  embracing  that  still  future  Kingdom. 

We  thus  again  call  attention  to  this  uniformity  of  belief,  as  some  of  our  opponents 
have  called  it  into  question,  as  if  we  prayed,  longed,  and  hoped  for  different  Kingdoms 
at  different  times.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Brown  (Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  ch.  7)  professes  himself 
to  have  gotten  "  entangled  and  nearly  despairing,"  at  the  variance  and  confusion  of  Pre- 
Millenanans  respecting  "  the  period  and  the  nature"  of  Christ's  Kingdom.  This  is  hardly 
complimentary  to  himself,  seeing  that  they  are  easily  classified  :  (1)  Those  who  make 
the  Church  simply  preparatory,  and  have  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  restored  at  the  Sec. 
Advent.  (2)  Those  who  make  the  Church  an  initiatory  Kingdom,  but  locate  the  proper 
covenanted,  outward  Kingdom  at  the  Sec,  Advent,     (^3)  Both  of  these  locate  the  cove- 


696  .THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  105. 

nanted  and  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Jesus— some  correctly- 
extending  it  beyond  the  one  thousand  years,  others  limiting  it  to  the  Mill,  period. 
(4)  As  to  details,  a  diversity  exists,  as  is  natural  on  such  a  subject  (mainly  arising  from 
interpreters  being  still  influenced  by  some  of  Dr.  Brown's  principles),  but  the  points  of 
union  are  clear  and  distinctive  :  (a)  the  covenanted  Kingdom  is  at  the  8ec.  Advent  ;  {b) 
this  Kingdom  is  Theocratic  in  its  nature  ;  (c)  this  Kingdom  is  visibly  under  the  rulership 
of  Jesus  and  the  saints  (some  making  the  visibility  of  the  rulers  constant,  others  occa- 
sional) ;  (d)  the  Church  is  only  provisional  ;  (e)  this  Kingdom  introduces  the  promised 
blessings,  restitution,  etc.  Dr.  Brown  increases  the  supposed  diversity  by  quoting 
persons  who  are  strictly  Pre-Millenarian,  agreeing  with  us  only  in  a  few  points.  Now 
one  should  suppose  that  Dr.  Brown's  side  must  have  perfect  unanimity,  seeing  that  he 
employs  such  a  course  of  reasoning  against  us,  which,  if  it  proves  anything,  only  shows 
that  men,  on  important  subjects,  make  mistakes.  Instead  of  going  to  the  numerous 
meanings,  beginnings,  etc.,  given  to  the  Kingdom  by  others  of  our  opponents  (with 
whom  Dr.  Brown  agrees),  we  will  but  briefly  refer  to  Dr.  Brown's  own  statements  re- 
specting the  Kingdom  to  exhibit  the  wonderful  unity  of  doctrine  that  his  sj^stem  presents, 
and  this  is  the  more  satisfactory  since  it  comes  from  the  alleged  champion  against  us, 
and  forms,  from  his  own  writings,  a  strong  answer  to  his  charge  of  variance  and  con- 
fusion. On  p.  106  of  "  Christ's  Sec.  Coming"  he  quotes  the  commission  (Matt.  28  : 
18-20)  which  is  designed  "to  establish  His  (Christ's)  Kingdom  upon  earth  ;"  on  p.  130 
he  maintains  that  Christ's  Kingdom  was  "  in  being  before  His  ascension,"  but,  on  p. 
136,  was  "  formally  recognized  "  and  newly  commenced  at  His  ascension  (for  p.  138,  etc., 
he  asserts  that  Jesus  is  on  David's  throne  in  the  third  heaven,  and  p.  136,  this  is  "  a 
Kingdom  of  salvation  or  grace,"  preached  by  the  apostles,  and  denoted  by  "  Repent  ye, 
for  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand").  In  his  Com.  on  Matt.  4  :  17,  he  informs  us, 
*'  Our  Lord  sometimes  speaks  of  the  new  Kingdom  as  already  come — in  His  j^erson  and 
ministry  ;  but  the  economy  of  it  was  only  '  at  hand,'  until  the  blood  of  the  cross  was 
shed  and  the  spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  opened  the  fountain  for  sin  and  for  un- 
cleanness  to  the  world  at  large."  Com.  Matt,  on  the  i^etition,  "  Thy  Kingdom  come," 
he  remarks,  that  this  Kingdom  is  "  a  moral  and  spiritual  Kingdom,  which  the  God  of 
grace  is  setting  xip  in  this  fallen  world,  whose  subjects  consist  of  as  many  as  have  been 
brought  into  hearty  subjection  to  His  gracious  sceptre,  and  of  which  His  Son  Jesus  is 
the  glorious  Head.  In  its  inward  reality  of  it,  this  Kingdom  has  existed  ever  since  there 
were  men  who  '  walked  with  God,'  "  etc.  "When  Messiah  Himself  appeared,  it  was,  as  a 
visible  Kingdom,  '  at  hand.'  "  "  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  a  '  glorious  coming'  of  this 
Kingdom,"  i.e.  of  this  visible.  Com.  Matt.  21  :  43,  "the  Kingdom  of  God— God's 
visible  Kingdom,  or  Church  upon  earth."  Com.  Rom.  14  :  17,  the  Kingdom  of  God  is 
"  Religion. "  This  is  a  fair  specimen  of  that  system  which  he  adopts  as  so  clear  and  self- 
evident,  built,  as  the  student  can  see,  upon  a  total  perversion  of  covenant  language  and 
prediction.  While  guarding  himself  from  many  of  the  absurd  meanings  engrafted  by 
Barnes  and  others,  on  the  Kingdom,  a  sufificiency  remains  to  show  that  the  plain  gram- 
matical sense  of  covenant  and  prophecj^  must  be  completely  set  aside  before  such  a 
belief  can  be  entertained.  Alas  !  how  such  men  of  ability  lead  the  Church  into  blind- 
ness and  unbelief. 

We  turn  from  such  an  interpretation  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  to  those  given  by 
Pre-Millenarians  with  thankfulness,  as  evidence  that  the  early  faith  is  expressed  in 
hope.  Bh.  'N  evf  ton  {Diss,  on  Proph.,  p.  587)  observes:  "In  the  general,  that  there 
shall  be  such  a  happy  period  as  the  Millennium  ;  that  'the  Kingdom  and  dominion,  and 
the  greatness  of  the  Kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the  people 
of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  '  (Dan.  7:  27);  that  Christ  shall  have  'the  heathen  for 
His  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His  possession  (Ps.  2:8); 
that  *  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea'  (Isa.  11  :  9) ;  '  that  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  in,  and  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved  '  (Rom.  11  :  25  26)  ;  m  a  word,  that  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be  established 
upon  earth,  is  the  plain  and  express  doctrine  of  Daniel  and  all  the  jDrophets,  as  well  as 
of  St.  John  ;  and  we  daily  pray  for  the  accomplishment  of  it,  in  praying  '  Thy  Kingdom 
Come.'"  Hon.  Gerard  T.  Noel  {Prospects  of  the  Church  of  Christ, -p.  10)  says:  "It  may 
confirm  the  view  here  given  of  the  future  (Pre-Millennial),  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of 
that  felicity  which  our  Lord  Himself  has  taught  us  in  our  prayers  to  expect.  It  would  be 
natiiral  to  suppose,  that  in  the  selection  of  blessings  which  He  condescended  to  make 
the  subject  of  our  prayers  to  God,  the  consummation  of  His  own  work  of  mercy  would 
find  a  marked  place.  The  supposition  is  consistent  with  fact.  He  has  concentrated  a 
prayer  for  the  completion  of  His  own  work,  in  the  two  remarkable  expressions  :  '  Thy 
Kingdom,  come,'  'thy  wdll  be  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven.'      Can  we  refuse  to   admit   that 


PeOP.  105.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  697 

our  Lord  here  hounds  our  view  to  this  scene  on  earth  ?  In  heaven,  that  is,  in  the  other 
regions  of  the  universe  of  God,  His  will  is  already  done  ;  but  here  we  are  surrounded 
with  a  scene  of  rebellion,  anarchy,  and  sorrow.  Does  He  then  teach  us  to  pray  for  a 
translation fi-om  this  unquiet  land  to  QXioiher  &T1&  d\BiQ.nt  orb?  He  puts  no  such  request 
within  our  lips  ;  He  directs  us  to  pray  for  the  establishment  of  His  Kingdom,  and  this 
Kingdom  apftears  to  belong  exclusively  to  this  material  earth.  '  Thy  will  be  done  in 
earth,  as  in  heaven.'  Is  not  the  inference  twofold  :  first,  that  the  earth  is  the  theatre  of 
Bis  Kingdom ;  and  secondly,  that  conformity  to  His  will  is  the  absolute  enjoyment  of 
heaven  ?  and  that  no  loftier  supplication  can  be  associated  with  our  thoughts  than 
that  the  hallowed  sceptre  should  be  replaced  in  human  hands,  even  in  the  hands  of  the 
mighty  Antitype,  'the  second  Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven.'"  Such  testimonies  could  be 
reproduced  from  many  able  and  eminent  Chiliasts,  and  eloquently  expressed  (as  e.g.  by 
Bonar,  Seiss,  Bickersteth,  Brooks,  etc.).  In  addition  to  this,  we  might  readily  bring 
forth  a  mass  of  evidence  to  show  that  many  writers  of  ability,  cannot,  and  do  not, 
limit  this  petition  to  the  church  as  now  constituted,  but  refer  it  to  the  future,  after  the 
Second  Advent.  Thus  e.g.  Baxter  {SainVs  Everlasting  Best,  p.  438),  in  the  peroration  of 
his  work,  after  expressing  his  most  fervid  desires  for  the  speedy  coming  of  Jesus  and 
the  resurrection  of  believers  bursts  forth  :  '  Return,  O  Lord,  how  long  ?  O  let  Thy 
Kingdom  come.'  Thy  desolate  'bride  saith,  Come  !  '  for  Thy  Sj^irit  within  her  saith. 
Come  ;  and  teacheth  her  thus  to  '  pray  with  groanings,  which  cannot  be  uttered  ;  yea, 
'  the  whole  creation  saith.  Come,  waiting  to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption 
into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. '  "  We  conclude  with  the  utterance  of 
one  of  the  Reformers.  Archb.  Cranmer  wrote  (so  Burnet's  His.  vol.  3,  B.  4),  the  Cate- 
chism drawn  up  by  the  English  Prelates,  and  authorized  by  Edward  VI.  in  1553,  and 
the  following  question  and  answer  will  be  of  interest,  as  indicative  of  the  views  then 
entertained.     "Q.  How  is  that  petition,  Thy  Kingdom  come,  to  be  understood  ?" 

^'Ans.  We  ask  that  His  Kingdom  may  come,  for  that  as  yet  we  see  not  all  things  subject 
to  Christ  :  we  see  not  yet  how  the  Stone  is  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  human 
help,  which  breaks  into  pieces  and  reduceth  to  nothing  the  image  described  by  Daniel  ; 
or,  how  the  only  rock,  which  is  Christ,  doth  possess  and  obtain  the  empire  of  the  whole 
world  given  Him  of  the  Father.  As  yet  Antichrist  is  not  slain  ;  whence  it  is  that  we 
desire  and  pray  that  at  length  it  may  come  to  pass  and  be  fulfilled  ;  and  that  Christ 
alone  may  reign  with  His  saints,  according  to  the  divine  promises  ;  and  that  He  maj^ 
live  and  have  dominion  in  the  world,  according  to  the  decrees  of  the  holy  Gospel,  and 
not  according  to  the  traditions  and  laws  of  men,  and  the  wills  of  the  tjTants  of  the 
world. ' ' 


THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PrOP.  106. 


Proposition  106,     Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  sustained  hy 
the  temptation  of  Christ. 

The  Clmrch-Kingdoin  view  endeavors  to  sustain  itself  by  re- 
ferring to  the  temptation  of  Jesus,  informing  us  that  He  was 
tempted  by  Satan  "  to  adopt  the  worldly  idea  of  Messiah's  King- 
dom," i.e.  to  receive  just  such  a  literal  Kingdom  as  covenant  and 
prophecy  describe,  but  which  we  are  to  discard,  as  it  is  alleged 
Jesus  did,  as  "  sinful,"  and  substitute  a  "  spiritual  Kingdom." 

Ols.  1.  This,  however,  is  far  from  being  sober,  sound  exegesis,  being 
wrongfully  inferred.  The  Kingdom  offered  to  Jesus,  as  our  opponents  ad- 
mit when  they  explain  Rev.  11  :  15  or  Dan.  7  :  14,  27,  etc.,  is,  taking  tlieir 
own  explanations  (as  we  have  already  seen),  tlie  very  Kingdom  and  world- 
dominion  tendered  by  Satan.  And  in  this  consists  the  force  of  the  tempta- 
tion :  the  first  temptation  is  based  on  the  actual  existence  of  hunger  and 
of  real  power  lodged  in  the  Christ  ;  the  second  on  the  protection  promised 
to  servants  of  God  and  God's  ability  to  protect  ;  and  so  the  third  is  also 
based  on  facts,  viz.  :  the  promised  Kingship  of  the  Messiah  on  David's 
throne  and  Kingdom,  and  the  consequent  attainment  of  Supreme  Rulership 
over  the  world.  Each  temptation  depends  upon  the  reality  of  the  thing 
proposed,  and  hence  none  of  the  things  around  which  it  entwines  for  sup- 
port are  to  be  removed,  but  only  the  manner  of  presentation  and  the  design 
intended  by  the  tempter  are  to  be  controverted.  (For  temptation,  see 
Matt.  4  :  1-11  ;  Luke  4  :  1-13  ;  Mark  1  :  12,  13.) 

Ohs.  2.  Hence,  it  is  iiicoyisi stent  to  withdraw  that  from  the  temptation, 
which  these  same  writers  in  their  comments  on  Rev.  11  :  15  admit  will 
ultimately  be  realized,  viz.  :  "  a  real  world-dominion."  The  far-fetched 
and  one-sided  comments  of  some  who  find  in  the  third  temptation  "  a  nega- 
tion of  all  the  Chiliastic  schemes  of  the  synagogue"  are  refuted  (1)  by  the 
third  temptation,  having  no  point  or  force  if  it  had  not,  like  the  others, 
been  based  on  the  promises  of  God  m  that  direction,  and  (2)  by  Jesus  not 
denying  that  this  honor  would  indeed  be  His,  but,  as  in  other  cases,  em- 
phatically objecting  to  the  mamier  in  which  it  was  to  be  obtained. 

TJhlman  {The  Sinlessness  of  Jesus)  has  well  observed  that  Jesus  was  tempted  hoik  as 
man  and  as  the  Messiah.  Two  of  the  temptations  appeal  to  Jesus  "if  He  be  the  Son  of 
God,"  but  one  significantly  omits  this  phrase,  thus  tacitly  assuming  the  covenanted  Mes- 
siahship  to  David's  Son—"  the  Son  of  man."  A  friend,  Eev.  Kowe,  suggests  that  as 
there  is  a  declaration  of  "  being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil,"  we  may  have,  in  the 
narrative,  only  the  more  salient  or  significant  temptations  selected  and  reproduced. 

Obs.  3.  So  unguardedly  do  able  men  express  themselves  on  this  subject 
that  we  find  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  cli.  2  s.  27)  declaring,  "  He  re- 
garded the  establishment  of  a  worldly  Kingdom  as  inseparable  from  the 


Prop.  106.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  699 

worship  of  the  devil  ;"  and  argues  from  this  that  Christ's  yielding  to  the 
establishment  of  such  a  Kingdom  would  have  been  "  sinful."  It  is  ad- 
mitted that  the  ma7iner  suggested  by  the  devil  would  have  been  sinful,  and 
to  this  Qhr'i^t  projyerly  objected,  but  Neander  travels  heyond  the  record  and 
confounds  things  that  are  different  when  he  asserts  that  the  possession  of 
"  all  the  Kingdoms  of  this  world  "  would  have  been  in  itself  sinful.  If 
this  is  necessarily  sinful,  then  the  promises  which  bespeak  tliis  very  thing 
are  sinful  ;  then  the  Kingdom  under  the  Theocracy  uniting  State  and 
Church,  then  the  literal  language  of  the  prophecies  which  describe  it,  then 
the  visible  outward  world-dominion  embracing  in  its  rule  all  earthly  King- 
doms, as  Neander  advocates  in  his  Gh,  His.,  etc. — all  these  too  are  sinfuh 
It  is  true,  that  under  the  Messiah's  reign  such  earthly  Kingdoms  would 
>undergo  a  change  to  fit  them  for  that  delightful  union  of  Theocratic  union 
of  Church  and  State,  but  the  very  tender  of  the  devil  is  such  that  nothing 
is  reserved  of  them,  but  given  for  any  purpose  or  transformation  tliat  might, 
suit  the  Saviour.  Therefore  we  firmly  and  consistently  abide  by  the  record 
which  teaches  that  Christ  rejected  the  ivorship  of  Satan  hy  which  the  tender 
was  bound,  and  not  that  He  refused  because  He  would  not  have  "  a  world- 
dominion"  here  on  the  earth.  Besides  this,  as  we  have  seen.  Prop.  83-9, 
the  Kingdom  is  given  to  the  Son  by  the  Father,  and  the  acceptance  of  the 
offer  of  Satan  would  have  been  a  direct  insult  to  the  Father. 

Out  of  a  multitude  of  assertions  that  Satan  presented  the  Jewish  and  cove- 
nanted idea  of  the  Messiahship,  which  tempted  Jesus,  and  which  He  rejected  owing  to 
its  "falseness  and  carnalitj',"  we  give  the  following  illustrations  :  Shenkel  (Hurst's  Life 
and  Lit.,  p.  122)  says  :  "  He  was  tempted  to  believe  that  the  Messianic  Kingdom  was 
merely  to  take  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Test,  in  their  literal  signification.  The  Jews 
were  full  of  the  Old  Test.  Messianic  idea,  and  Christ  was  inwardly  tempted  to  accord 
with  it.  His  whole  triumph  over  these  inward  stirrings  was  His  great  preparatory 
work  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  design."  Alas  !  what  a  Saviour  this  presents  ! 
"Woolsey  {The  Relig.  of  the  Present  and  of  the  Future,  p.  35,  remarks  of  the  temptation  :  "  It 
was  an  endeavor  to  divert  Jesus  from  the  aim  of  setting  up  a  spiritual  Kingdom,  and  to 
induce  Him  to  establish  such  an  one  as  His  countrymen  were  wishing  for  and  expect- 
ing." (Why,  then,  e.g.  leave  the  preachers  of  the  Kingdom — if  thus  spiritual  —  in 
ignorance  down  to  His  ascension,  Acts  1:6?)  Woolsey  (p.  29,  etc.)  correctly  lays  stress 
on  the  point  that  the  temptation  was  specially  intended  *'  for  Jesus  in  His  official 
station  as  the  Messiah,"  but  he  utterly  misapprehends  the  meaning  of  Messiahship 
when  he  says  that  it  was  designed  to  test  Him  "  whether  He  would  remain  true  to  the 
spiritual  idea  of  the  Messiah."  The  temptation  is  accounted  for  from  Woolsey' s  stand- 
point, viz.  :  that  the  official  title  and  office  is  wholly  spiritual,  a  jjosition  which  cannot 
be  proven  from  covenant,  prophecy,  or  promise.  Much  is  written  on  this  point  ir- 
relevant, imaginary,  and  derogatory  of  covenant  and  prophecy. 

Obs.  4.  The  temptation  would  have  failed  m  cogency  and  adherence,  if 
such  power  had  not,  in  some  way,  been  the  object  or  design  of  Christ's 
mission.  It  was  derived  from  the  covenant  itself,  and  its  allied  predic- 
tions, and  promises  of  supreme  authority  and  acknowledged  Eulership 
over  the  earth.  It  pertained  to  the  humanity  of  Christ,  and  not  merely  to 
His  divine  nature  :  to  the  former  was  the  rulership  covenanted,  the 
former  was  tempted  and  tried,  and  the  former  came  forth  out  of  the 
temptation  pure  and  sinless,  just  such  a  King  as  the  predicted  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom  restored  needs  in  order  to  secure  the  solidity,  stabil- 
ity, etc.  connected  with  it.  Even  such  writers  as  the  author  of  Ecce 
Homo,  who  endeavor  to  make  the  temptation  of  Jesus  a  mental  oper- 
ation, still  insist  that  the  Saviour  must  have  had  in  view  the  Messianic 
predictions   which  represented  the  Messiah  enthroned  in   Jerusalem   on 


700  THE  TiiEOCKATic  KixGDo:\r.  [Prop.  106. 

David's  tlirone,  swaying  the  world  in  triumph  and  glory.  If  the  founda- 
tion of  the  temptation  be  sought  in  the  promises  of  the  Word  of  God,  then 
we  find  it  firmly  laid.  Satan  did  not  mistake  in  the  Messiah's  power  of 
making  bread,  of  His  being  under  the  special  providence  of  the  Almighty, 
and  thus  he  made  no  Uunder  concerning  the  authority  to  be  vested  in  Him. 
Satan's  mistake  was  in  not  fully  apprehending  that  this  Kingdom,  owing 
to  the  unrepentant  state  of  Jews  and  for  gracious  purposes  of  mercy,  was 
to  le  xtostponed  for  a  definite  period,  and  that  when  the  time  arrived  it  was 
to  be  given  to  David's  Son  by  God  Himself,  and  could  7iot,  in  the  nature  of 
the  case,  be  obtained  by  an  act  of  worship  to  himself.  The  temi^tation 
does  not  vitiate  the  power  of  creating,  the  Divine  oversight  and  protection 
of  God,  and  the  final  subjection  of  "  all  the  Kingdoms  of  the  world  "  to 
Christ. 

As  this  temptation  is  unjustly  urged  against  us,  men  forgetting  that  Jesus,  while 
rejecting  the  manner  of  Satan's  proposals,  did  not  deny  either  the  miraculous  power,  the 
tender  of  Divine  protection,  or  the  ultimate  world-dominion  belonging  to  Himself — it 
may  be  well  to  add  a  few  words,  Kurtz  {Sac.  His.,  s.  130)  remarks  :  "  The  three  forms 
of  his  temptation  were  governed  by  one  design — to  induce  Him  to  adopt  the  carnal 
Messianic  expectations  of  the  Jews  ;  these  converted  the  Kingdom  of  God  into  a  King- 
dom of  the  world."  Neander  {Life  of  Christ,  ch.  1,  s.  45),  on  the  third  temptation,  says  : 
*'  We  consider  it  as  involving  the  two  following  points,  which  must  be  taken  together, 
viz.  :  (1)  the  establishment  of  Messiah's  dominion  as  an  outward  Kingdom,  with  worldly 
splendors  ;  and  (2)  the  worship  of  Satan  in  connection  with  it,  which,  though  not  fully 
expressed,  is  implied  in  the  act  which  he  demands,  and  which  Christ  treats  as  equivalent 
to  worshipping  liim."  Such  interpretations  abound,  all  admitting  that  a  visible  King- 
dom with  the  Messiah  as  King  was  embraced  in  it,  but  all,  with  few  exceptions,  declare 
that  the  temptation  was  based  on  a  mistaken  notion.  They— overlooking  their  own 
concessions  of  a  future  visible  Kingdom— gravely  tell  us  that  the  Jews  were  mistaken 
in  their  interpretation  of  the  covenant  and  prophets,  and  that  Satan  also  likewise 
misapprehended  the  Scriptures,  for  no  s^^ch  outward  Kingdom  was  designed  for  the 
Messiah.  But  this  is  a  wrong  inference,  founded  on  the  supposition  that  Satan  pro- 
posed something  which  could  not  be  realized,  and  which  did  not  appertain  to  the 
Messiah.  In  the  first  temi^tation  Jesus  does  not  deny  that  He  is  hungry  and  able  to  make 
bread  ;  in  the  second,  He  does  7iot  deny  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  under  sjjecial 
protection  ;  and  in  the  third,  He  does  not  deny  the  Kingdom  or  dominion  which  is  to  be 
given  to  Him,  but  only  rejects  the  mode  by  which  it  is  to  be  obtained.  As  observed,  if 
such  a  Kingdom  is  not  covenanted,  predicted,  and  intended,  the  temptation  would  not 
have  any  force.  Therefore,  it  is  mere  assumption  to  say,  that  the  temptation  is  intended 
to  teach  that  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  would  not  be  visibly  established  here  on  the  earth, 
and  that  the  invisible  Church  is  to  be  substituted  for  such  a  Kingdom,  The  exact 
reverse  is  the  truth.  Satan's  temptation  embraced  a  condition  that  was  derogatory  to 
God's  honor  ;  it  embraced  a  right  in  bestowal  which  only  belongs  to  God  ;  and  it  over- 
looked the  time  and  manner  when  the  predicted  Theocracy  should  be  restored. 

Obs.  5.  In  this  connection,  the  conjecture  of  ^cce  Homo  is  very  deroga- 
tory to  the  character  of  Jesus.  The  supposition  that  Christ  was  tempted 
to  employ  force  in  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  and  that  tbis  is  the 
key  to  the  Avhole  matter,  is  utterly  unfounded,  and,  notwithstanding  the 
faint  praise  and  professed  laudation  of  Christ,  stabs  vitally.  Is  it  true  that 
the  Messiah  was  so  influenced  by  the  prophecies  that  He  was  Himself 
tempted  to  grasp  the  Kingdom  by  violence,  but  milder  thoughts  prevailed  ; 
what,  then,  becomes  of  the  character  attributed  to  Him,  and  which  He  justly 
claimed  ?  The  theory  is  umvorthy  of  Christ,  and  borders  on  the  blas- 
phemous ;  it  destroys  the  clear  conception  of  His  mission  and  removes  His 
oneness  with  the  Father.  The  theory  is  broached  under  the  idea  that,  mis- 
taken in  one  Kingdom,  an  outward  dominion,  as  the  prophets  predict, 
another,  inner  and  spiritual,  is  substituted.     Proposition  after  Proposition, 


Prop.  106.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  701 

in  reference  to  preacliing,  covenant,  postponement  of  Kingdom,  etc.,  re- 
futes such  a  notion  so  unworthy  of  Jesus. 

The  conjectures,  that  it  is  mythical,  added  afterward  to  exalt  the  character  of  Jesus  ; 
that  He  was  tempted  perhaps  by  one  of  the  Sanhedrim  to  entrap  him  ;  that  it  was 
merely  suggested  to  Him,  or  a  dream,  are  not  worthy  ot  a  reply,  because  we  see  ample 
reason  for  this  temjDtation  as  a  test  or  trial  of  One  who  was  to  occupy  the  covenanted 
Davidic  Sonsliip  and  the  Second  Adamic  position.  It  vindicated  His  complete  fitness  for 
the  Theocratic  glory — being  One  who  was  in  perfect  union  with  the  Father. 

Obs.  6.  The  reality  of  the  world's  possession  by  Satan  is  claimed  by 
him  :  "  All  this  power  will  I  give  Thee,  and  the  glory  of  them  ;  for  that 
is  delivered  unto  me  :  and  to  whomsoever  I  will,  I  give  it"  (Luke  4  :  6). 
This  reality  is  abundantly  sustained  by  the  titles  given  to  him,  "the 
Prince  of  this  world,"  "  the  god  of  this  age."  He  endeavors  to  assume 
the  lordship  and  dominion  forfeited  by  Adam,  and  how  he  succeeds  is  viv- 
idly portrayed  in  the  Apocalypse,  etc.,  especially  exhibited  just  before  the 
open  revelation  of  Jesus,  in  the  person  and  confederation  of  the  Antichrist. 
Therefore  it  is  that  Eevelation  represents  Satan  as  bound,  so  that  the 
Sovereignty  of  this  world  is  securely  in  the  hands  of  the  once  tempted 
Jesus. 

Jesus,  to  whom  "all  power  is  given,"  now  leaves  Satan,  "Prince  of  this  world,"  but 
will,  as  promised,  eventually  "  take  to  Himself  His  great  power  and  reign."  The  reason 
for  this  delay  is  involved  in  the  merciful  provision  made  to  gather  out  a  people  who, 
like  the  Master,  shall  be  made  perfect  under  temptation  and  trial.  We  refer  to  this 
under  several  Propositions. 

Ohs.  7.  Ebrard  on  the  temptation  of  Jesus  {Gospel  His.,  p.  207)  re- 
marks :  "  But  when  Satan  offers  the  whole  world  to  Jesus,  he  reminds 
Him  of  the  power  which  he  exercises  over  this  world  of  sinners.  The  prom- 
ise which  he  makes,  if  He  will  but  worship  him,  involves,  therefore,  the 
tacit  threat,  that  he  will  let  loose  the  whole  terrible  force  of  sin  to  resist 
His  progress,  if  i\\\^  proskunesis  is  refused.  This  threat  on  the  one  hand, 
and  on  the  other  the  possibility  of  ruling  over  the  whole  of  this  glorious 
earth  in  carnal  security  and  ease,  were  calculated  to  render  the  choice  so 
difficult,  that  only  one  in  whom  the  fulness  of  absolute  holiness  put  forth 
fresh  energy  from  moment  to  moment,  could  have  been  in  a  condition  to 
resist  the  temptation."  How  soon,  terribly,  and  extendedly  the  powers  of 
sin  were  let  loose,  history,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  and  the  progress  of  the 
Church,  painfully  attests.  But  this  threat,  tacitly  implied,  culminates  in 
the  final  great  struggle,  when  all  the  forces  of  Satan  are  marshalled 
against  Jesus  and  His  army,  to  prevent  Him,  if  possible,  from  securing 
this  world-wide  dominion  (comp.  Props.  161,  162,  163). 

Krummacher,  in  a  sermon  (quoted  by  Nast,  Com.  Matt.  4  :  1-11),  remarks  that  Satan 
"makes  with  his  offer  the  covert  insinuation  that,  by  virtue  of  his  dominion  in  heathen, 
dom,  he  has  the  power  to  turn  the  whole  world  against  Jesus  if  He  rejects  the  pro- 
posal." Many  writers  declare  that  this  was  a  falsehood  of  Satan's — an  assumption  of 
power  beyond  his  ability.  Fully  admitting  and  joyfully  receiving  the  fact  that  Jesus 
eventually,  because  of  His  resistance  of  temptation  and  obedience,  becomes  the  victor, 
yet  Satan  is  truthful  also  in  this  claim  of  power  as  frequently  partially  manifested  in  the 
past,  and  ultimately  completely  exhibited  in  the  culminated  Antichrist  with  the  kings 
of  the  earth  and  their  armies,  prostrating  the  Church  in  dire  persecution,  and  arraying 
themselves  against  Jesus  (comp.  Props,  enumerated,  and  likewise  161,  165,  115). 


CATALOGUE  OF 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS' 


Young's  Analytical  Bible  Coneordanee. 

On  an  entirely  new  plan.  Containing  every  word  in 
Alphabetical  Order,  arranged  under  its  Hebrew  or  Greek  original, 
with  the  Literal  meaning  of  Each,  and  its  Pronunciation.  Exhibiting 
about  311,000  References,  marking  30,000  various  readings  in  the 
New  Testament.  With  the  latest  information  on  Biblical  Geogra- 
phy and  Antiquities.  Designed  for  the  simplest  reader  of  the  English 
Bible.  By  Robert  Young,  LL.D.,  author  of  <*  A  New  Literal 
Translation  of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  Scriptures,"  etc.,  etc.  Fottrth 
Revised^  Authorized  Edition.  Printed  on  heavy  paper.  One  large 
volume,  4to,  cloth  ^5.00;  sheep  ^6.00;  Fr.  im.  morocco,  jgy.oo;  half 
morocco,  ^9.00.  full  morocco,  $12.00.  Every  copy  of  this,  the  author- 
ized and  correct,  edition  has  on  the  title-page  *'  Authorized  Edition," 
and  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  our  imprint. 

Analytical  Bible  Treasury. 

Designed  for  the  use  of  Teachers  and  Divinity  Students. 
By  Robert  Young,  LL.D.,  author  of  the  Analytical  Concordance* 
etc.,  4to,  cloth,  $2.00.  Contents:  (i)  Analytical  Survey  of  all 
the  Books,  (2)  Of  all  the  Facts,  (3)  Of  all  the  Idioms  of  the  Bible. 
(4)  Bible  Themes,  Questions,  Canonicity,  Rationalism,  etc.  (5)  A 
complete  Hebrew  and  English  Lexicon  to  the  Old  Testament.  (0) 
Idiomatic  use  of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  Tenses.  (7)  A  complete 
Greek  and  English  Lexicon  to  the  New  Testament. 

Coneordanee  to  the  Revised  New  Testament. 

An  Analytical  Concordance  to  Eight  Thousand  Changes 
of  the  Revised  New  Testament.  By  Robert  Young,  D.D.,  LL.D. 
author  of  Young's  Concordance  to  the  Bible,  etc.  8vo,  25  pp.,  price 
40  cents.     i2mo,  72  pp.,  price,  paper,  40  cents. 

Apostolic  Life. 

Apostolic  Life  as  revealed  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  from 
the  Ascension  of  Christ  to  the  Withdrawal  of  Peter.  By  Joseph 
Parker,  D.  D.  Author  of  *«Ecce  Deus,"  "Inner  Life  of  Christ," 
etc.     8 vo,  cloth.     Price,  ^1.50. 


4®="  Tht  above  works  vxill  &e  sent,  post  paid,  on  receipt  qfpric^ 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  &  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 

Biblical  Lights  and  Side  Lights;  or. 

Ten  Thousand  Biblical  Illustrations,  with  Thirty  Thousand 
Cross  References,  consisting  of  Facts,  Incidents,  and  Remarkable 
Statements  for  the  use  of  Public  Speakers  and  Teachers ;  and  also 
for  those  in  every  kind  of  Profession,  who  for  illustrative  purposes 
desire  ready  access  to  the  numerous  and  interesting  narratives  con- 
tained in  the  Bible.  By  Rev.  Charles  E.  Little.  8vo,  cloth. 
Price,  $4.00. 

Biblical  Notes  and  Queries. 

A  general  medium  of  communication  regarding  Biblical 
Criticism  and  Biblical  Interpretation,  Ecclesiastical  History,  An- 
tiquities, Biography  and  Theological  Science,  Revievirs,  etc.  It 
answers  thousands  of  questions  constantly  presented  to  the  minds  of 
clergymen  and  Sunday-school  teachers.  By  Robert  Young,  LL.D., 
author  of  the  Analytical  Concordance  to  the  Bible.  Royal  8vo,  cloth, 
400pp.     Price,  ^1.75. 

Bible  Work;  or, 

Bible    Readers'    Commentary  on    the    New  Testament. 

The  text  arranged  in  Sections ;  with  Readings  and  Comments  select, 
ed  from  the  Choicest,  most  Illuminating  and  Helpful  Thought  of 
the  Christian  Centuries.  In  two  volumes.  Vol.  I.  The  Fourfold 
Gospel.  Vol.11.  The  Acts,  Epistles  and  Revelation.  With  Maps, 
Illustrations  and  Diagrams.  By  J.  Glentworth  Butli:,r,  D.D. 
Royal  8vo,  cloth,  800  pp., per  vol.,  j^S.oo;  sheep,  ;^6.oo;  half  Anorocco, 
1^7.50;  full  morocco,  gilt,  ^10.00. 

Blood  of  Jesus. 

By  Rev.  Wm.  Reid,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction  by  Rev. 
E.  P.  Hammond.     Paper,  10  cents  j  cloth,  40  cents. 

Burial  of  the  Dead. 

A  Pastor's  Complete  Hand-Book  for  Funeral  Services  and 
for  the  Consolation  and  Comfort  of  the  Afflicted.  By  Rev.  George 
DUFFIELD,  D.D.,  and  Rev.  Samuel  W.  Duffield.  Entirely  prac- 
tical, wholly  unsectarian,  and  far  in  advance  of  all  other  Manuals  of 
the  kind.  Cloth,  75  cents;  limp  leather,  ^i.oo.  Arranged,  for  ease 
of  reference,  in  four  parts:  I,  Scriptural  Forms  of  Funeral  Service. 
II.  An  exhaustive  Biblical  Study  on  the  subject  of  Death.  III.  A 
short  treatise  on  the  Funeral  itself,  as  it  is  found  in  the  Bible.  IV. 
Texts,  Topics  and  Hints  for  Funeral  Sermons  and  Addresses. 

Christian  Sociology 

By  J.  H.  W.  Stuckenberg,  D.D.,  Professor  in  the  Theo- 
logical Department  of  Wittenberg  College.  A  new  book  in  a  fresh 
field.  Exceedingly  suggestive  and  practical.  i2mo,  cloth,  382  pp., 
^i.oo. 

4®"  TTie  dpove  works  will  be  sent,  ^o5t-4>aid,  on  receipt  of  pries. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  (&  WAGNALLS,  NEW  TORR. 

Commentary  on  Exodus. 

A  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary  on  the  Book  of 
Exodus,  with  a  new  translation  by  James  G.  Murphy,  D.D.  New 
Unabridged  Edition,  with  Preface  and  Notes  by  John  Hall,  D.D. 
2  vols.,  papei,  233  pp.,  ^i.oo;  I  vol.,  cloth,  ^1.50. 

Commentary  on  Mark. 

Studies  in  the  Book  of  Mark,  for  Teachers,  Pastors  and 
Parents.  By  Rev.  D.  C.  Hughes.  Critical,  Exegetical,  and  Hom- 
iletical.     8vo,  cloth,  $1.50. 

Commentary  on  Luke. 

A  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.  By  F.  Godet, 
D.D.,  Professor  of  Theology,  Neufchatel.  Translated  from  the 
Second  French  Edition.  \Vith  Preface  and  Notes  by  John  Hall, 
D.D.  New  Edition,  printed  on  heavy  paper.  2  vols.,  8vo,  584  pp. 
paper,  ^2.00;  i  vol.,  8vo,  cloth,  ^2.50. 

Commentary  on  Luke. 

A  Suggestive  Commentary  on  Luke,  with  Critical  and 
Homiletical  Notes.  By  W.  H.  Van  Doren,  D.D.  Edited  by  Prof. 
James  Kernahan:  London.  4  vols.,  8vo,  1104  pp.,  paper  ^3.00  ;  2 
vols.,  8vo,  cloth,  $3.75. 

Commentary  on  Acts. 

A  Critical  and  Exegetical  Hand-book  to  the  Acts  of  the 

Apostles.  By  Heinrich  A.  W.  Meyer,  Th.D.  With  Preface,  In- 
dex, and  Supplementary  Notes  to  the  American  Edition.  By  Williaru 
Ormiston,  D.D.,  LL.D.  I  vol.,  Svo,  cloth,  ^3.00. 
An  American  Edition  of  Meyer's  valuable,  critical  and  exegetical  com- 
mentaries by  Heinrich  A.  W.  Meyer,  with  Preface,  Notes  and  In- 
troduction, by  several  eminent  American  scholars,  will  be  issued 
during  the  year  at  the  very  low  price  of  ^3.00  per  volume.  Uniform 
with  Meyer's  Commentary  on  Acts. 

Commentary  on  Romans.   (Meyer's  ) 

Edited  by  Timothy  Dwight,  LL.D.,  of  Yale.     {Ready.) 
Commentary  on  I.  and  II.  Corinthians.  (Meyer's) 

Edited  by  Talbot  W.    Chambers,   D.D.,   New  York. 

{In  Press.) 

Commentary  on  St.  John.    (Meyer's.) 

Edited  by  Prof.  A.  C.  Kendrick,  D.D.,  Rochester.     (In 

Press). 

Commentary  on  St.  Matthei^.    (Meyer's.) 

Edited  by  Geo.  R.  Crooks,  D.D.,  Drew  Seminary.     {In 
Press.) 

JS^The  above  works  will  be  sent, post-paid,  on  receipt  of  pries. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  (&  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 

Commentary  on  Mark  and  Luke.   (Meyer's.^ 

Edited  by  M.  B.  Riddle,  Rochester.     {In  Press.) 

Commentary    on    Galatians,   Ephesians   and 
Philemon.    (Meyer's.) 

Edited  by  .     (In  Press), 

Commentary  on  Romans. 

Commentary  on  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  By  F. 
GODET,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Theology,  Neuchatel.  Translated  from 
the  French  by  Rev.  A.  Cusin,  M.A.,  Edinburgh.  The  Translation 
Revised  and  Edited,  with  an  Introduction  and  Appendix  by  TaL- 
BOT  W.  Chambers,  D.D.  i  vol.,  8vo,  544  pp.,  cloth,  ^3.00.  Uni- 
form with  Meyer's  Commentary  on  Acts. 

Commentary  on  the  Catholic  Epistles. 

Commentary  on  the  Catholic  Epistles.  By  John  T.  Dem- 
AREST,  D.D.     A  thorough  work.     8vo,  650  pp„  ^2.00. 

Godet  on  John. 

An  entirely  new  American  Edition,  translated  de  novo,  and 
edited  by  Timothy  Dwight,  LL.D.,  will  appear  in  a  few  weeks. 
Those  who  purchased  Godet  on  Luke  and  Romans  need  no  com- 
mendation on  this  work.     I  vol.,  8vo,  cloth,  $3.00. 

Companion  to  the  Revised  New  Testament, 

Explaining  the  reason  for  the  changes  made  on  the  Au- 
thorized Version.  By  Alex.  Roberts,  D.D. ,  member  of  the  Eng- 
lish Revision  Committee,  with  Supplement  by  a  member  of  the 
American  Committee.  Also,  a  full  Textual  Index.  Authorized Edi' 
Hon.     8vo,  117  pp.,  paper,  25  cents;   i6mo,  213  pp.,  oloth,  75  cents. 

Companion  to  the  Revised  New  Testament. 

Contributions  to  a  New  Revision  ;  or,  a  Critical  Compan- 
ion to  the  New  Testament.  By  ROBERT  Young,  D.D.,  LL.D. 
i2mo,  392  pp.,  cloth,  75  cents. 

*^*0ne-half  of  each  page  is  left  blank  for  notes.  Prominent  words  in 
the  text  are  numbered. 

Compend  of  Baptism. 

The  cream  of  the  literature  on  the  Baptism  Controversy. 

Its  aim  is,  by  brief  but  exhaustive  exegesis,  to  elucidate  and  establish 
the  fact  clearly  that  affusion  is  at  least  as  classical  and  scriptural  a 
mode  of  Baptism  as  immersion,  and  that  infants  are  entitled  to  it  as 
their  biblical  right.  By  WILLIAM  HAMILTON,  D.D.  i2mo,  390 
pp.,  cloth,  price,  75  cents. 

Complete  Preacher. 

A  Sermonic  Magazine.     Containing  nearly  one  hundred 

sermons  in  full,  by  many  of  the  greatest  preachers  in  this  and  other 
countries  in   the  various  denominations.     3  vols.,  8vo,  cloth,  each 

^i.50j  the  set,  ^4.00. ^_^ 

JS^.  The  (jbore  worlcs  will  be  sent,  jw^t^jpaid,  en  receipt  of  price. 


FUBLIGATIONS  OF  FVNK  &  WA6NALLS,  NEW  YORK. 

Conversion  of  Children. 

Can  it  be  Effected?  How  Young?  Will  they  Remain 
Steadfast?  What  Means  to  be  Used?  When  to  be  Received  and 
how  Trained  in  the  Church?  By  Rev.  E.  P.  Hammond,  the  Chil- 
dren's Evangelist.  Should  be  studied  by  all  lovers  and  teachers  of 
children.     Paper,  30  cents ;   cloth,  75  cents. 

Early  Days  of  Christianity. 

By  Canon  Farrar,  D.D.,  F.R.S.  This  standard  work 
needs  no  commendation.  Printed  from  imported  plates  without 
abridgment.  Paper  and  press-work  excellent.  Substantially  bound 
in  brown  or  green  cloth.  Authorized  Edition.  8vo,  cloth,  75  cents; 
paper,  40  cents. 

From  Gloom  to  Gladness. 

Illustrations  of  Life  from  the  Biography  of  Esther.  By 
Rev.  Jt)SEPH  S.  Van  Dyke.  A  companion  book  to  ''Through  the 
Prison  to  the  Throne."  Rich  in  suggestive  and  practical  thoughts. 
i6mo,  254  pp.,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

Fulton's  Replies. 

Punishment  of  Sin  Eternal.  Three  Sermons  in  reply  to 
Beecher,  Farrar,  and  Ingersoll.  By  Justin  D.  Fulton,  D.D.  8vo, 
paper,  lo  cents. 

Gilead :  An  Allegory. 

Gilead;  or,  the  Vision  of  All  Souls'  Hospital.  An  Allegory, 
By  Rev.  J,  Hyatt  Smith,  Congressman  from  New  York.  Revised 
Edition,     i2mo,  cloth,  350pp.,  ^i.oo. 

Gospel  of  Mark. 

From  the  Teacher's  Edition  of  the  Revised  New  Testament, 
with  Harmony  of  the  Gospels,  List  of  Lessons,  Maps,  etc.  Paper, 
15  cents,  cloth,  50  cents. 

History  of  the  Cross. 

The  Lamb  in  the  Midst  of  the  Throne ;  or,  the  History  of 

the  Cross.  A  theological  work,  treating  the  condition  and  tenden- 
cies of  modern  religious  thought  as  related  to  the  pulpit,  and  some  of 
the  grave  questions  oi  the  day.  The  author  has  sought  to  bring  out 
the  universality  of  the  relations  of  Christ's  death  as  an  expiation 
for  sin,  and  as  a  moral  reconciling  force.  The  style  is  fresh  and  vig- 
orous. By  James  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.,  editor  for  many  years  of 
The  Presbyterian  Review.     8vo,  525  pp.,  cloth,  ^2.00. 

History  of  English  Bible  Translation. 

Revised  and  Brought  down  to  the  Present  Time  by  Thomas 
J.  Conant,  D.D. ,  Member  of  the  Old  Testament  Revision  Commit- 
tee, and  Translator  for  the  American  Bible  Union  Edition  of  the 
Scriptures,  A  Complete  History  of  Bible  Revision  from  the  Wickliffe 
Bible  to  the  Revised  Version.  2  vols.,  paper,  8vo,  284  pp,,  50  cents; 
I  vol.,  8vo,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

H^The  above  will  be  sent,  post  paid,  on  receipt  of  price* 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  &  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 

Holy  Bible. 

The  "  Perfect ''  Edition  of  the  Holy  Bible,  containing  the 

Old  and  New  Testaments,  together  with  Cruden's  Concordance  ;  the 
Psalms  in  Meter ;  A.  Comprehensive  Bible  Dictionary  fully  illustrat- 
ed ;  a  Pictorial  History  of  each  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible  ;  Biograph- 
ical Sketches  of  the  Translators  and  Reformers;  the  Lives  and  Mar- 
tyrdom of  the  Holy  Apostles  and  Evangelists;  Egyptian,  Jewish  and 
Biblical  Antiquities;  Cities  of  the  Bible,  with  descriptive  Scenes  and 
Events  in  Palestine  ;  Biblical  Scenery,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the 
Ancients  ;  Natural  History,  Religious  Denominations,  Science  and 
Revelation;  Temple  of  Solomon;  History  of  Jewish  Worship,  etc., 
etc.  Profusely  illustrated,  elegantly  bound.  Royal  4to,  1663  pp. 
A,  American  morocco,  raised  panel,  gilt  back,  ^9.00.;  /?,  fine 
French  morocco,  antique  panel,  full  gilt,  ^11.00;  C,  fine  German 
morocco,  massive  panel,  full  gilt,  ^13.50;  X>,  genuine  turkey 
morocco,  elegant  panel,  full  gilt,  ^16.50. 

Home  Altar. 

An  Appeal  in  Behalf  of  Family  Worship.  With  Prayers 
and  Hymns  for  Family  Use.  By  Rev.  Charles  F.  Deeivis,  LL.D., 
Pastor  of  the  Church  of  the  Strangers.  Third  Edition.  i2mo,  cloth, 
281  pp.,  75  cents. 

Homileties. 

A  Standard  Work,  invaluable  to  Clergymen.  By  James  M. 
HoPPiN,  D.D.,  Professor  in  Yale  College.  New  Edition.  8vo,  809 
pp.,  cloth,  price,  $3.00. 

Homiletie  Eneyelopedia. 

A  Homiletie  Encyclopedia  of  Illustrations  in  Theology 
and  Morals.  Selected  and  arranged  by  Rev.  R.  A.  Bertram.  Roy- 
al 8vo,  cloth,  892  pp.,  ^2.50;  sheep,  ^3.50;  half  morocco,  $4.50. 

Homiletie  Monthly. 

Devoted  to  Homileties,  Biblical  Literature,  Discussion  of 
Living  Issues,  and  Applied  Christianity.  I.  K.  Funk,  D.D.,  Editor. 
Subscription  price,  ^2.50  per  year;  single  numbers,  25  cents.  Vol- 
umes III.,  IV.,  v.,  VI.,  each  8vo,  cloth,  724  pp.,  ^3.00. 

The  Homilist. 

By  David  Thomas,  D.D.,  author  of  "  The  Practical  Philos- 
opher," "  The  Philosophy  of  Happiness,"  etc.,  etc.  Editor's  Series. 
l2mo,  cloth,  368  pp.,  tinted  paper,  ^1.25. 

HoM^  to  Pay  Church  Debts 

And  How  to  Keep  Churches  out  of  Debt.  By  Rev.  Sylva- 
Nus  Stall.     i2mo,  cloth,  280  pp.,  $\.^o. 


The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  prict. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 


Inner  Life  of  Christ. 

These  Sayings  of  Mine.  Sermons  on  St.  Matthew's  Gos- 
pel, Chaps.  I.- VII.  By  Joseph  Parker,  D.D.  Wiih  Introduction 
by  Dr.  Deems.     8vo,  cloth,  ^1.50. 

Servant  of  All.  Sermons  on  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  Chaps. 
VIII-XV.  By  Joseph  Parker,  D.D.  A  sequel  to  the  above  vol- 
ume.    8vo,  cloth,  $1.50. 

Things  Concerning  Himself.  Sermons  on  St.  Matthev/'s 
Gospel,  Chaps.  XVl-XVIII.  A  sequel  to  the  above  volumes.  By 
Joseph  Parker,  D.D.     8vo,  cloth,  $i,$o. 

Manual  of  Revivals. 

Practical  Hints  and  Suggestions  from  the  Histories  of  Re- 
vivals, and  Biographies  of  Revivalists,  with  Themes  for  the  use  of 
Pastors,  before,  during,  and  after  special  services,  including  the  Texts, 
Subjects,  and  Outlines  of  the  Sermons  of  many  distinguished  Evan- 
gelists.   By  G.  W.  Hervey,  A.M.     i2mo,  cloth,  ^1.25. 

Metropolitan  Pulpit. 

The    Metropolitan   Pulpit,  containing  carefully  prepared 

Condensations  of  Leading  Sermons,  preached  in  New  York  and 
Brooklyn,  Outlines  of  Sermons  preached  elsewhere,  and  much  other 
homiletic  matter.  Vol.  I.  Royal  8vo,  cloth,  206  pp.,  ^1.50.  Vol. 
II.,  cloth,  enlarged.  (Metropolitan  Pulpit  and  Homiletic  Monthly.) 
388  pp.,  ^2.75.  The  set   ^4,00. 

Preacher's  Cabinet. 

A   Handbook    of    Illustrations.      By   Rev.    Edward    P. 

Thwing,  author  of  "Drill-Book  in  Vocal  Culture."  Fourth  Edition^ 
2  vols.,  i2mo,  paper,  50  cents. 

Popery. 

Popery  the  Foe  of  the  Church  and  of  the  Republic.  By 
Rev.  Jos.  S.  Van  Dyke,  author  of  "Through  the  Prison  to  the 
Throne,"  etc.     8vo, cloth,  304  pp.,  ^i.oo. 

Pulpit  and  Grave. 

A  volume  of  Funeral  Sermons  and  Addresses,  from  leading 

Pulpits  in  America,  England,  Germany  and  France;  Sketches  o^ 
Sermons,  Obituary  Addresses,  Classified  Texts,  Scripture  Readings* 
Death-bed  Testimonies,  Point  on  Funeral  Etiquette,  etc.  Edited  by 
E.  J.  Wheeler,  A.  M.    8vo,  365  pp.,  cloth,  ^1.50. 

Pulpit  Talks 

On  Topics  of  the  Time,  including  "Religion  and  Science," 

**  Religion  and  Social  Organization,"  "Religion  and  Popular  Lit- 
erature," "Religion  and  Popular  Amusements."  By  Rev.  J.  H, 
Rylance,  D.  D.     i2mo,  46  pp.,  paper,  25  cents. 


The  above  works  will  be  sent,poit-paid,  on  receipt  0/  price. 


PUBLICATION'S  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGNALLB,  NEW  YORK. 

Revised  Ne^r  Testament 

With  New  Index  and  Concordance,  Harmony  of  the  Gos- 
pels, Maps,  Parallel  Passages  in  full,  and  many  other  Indispensable 
Helps.  All  most  carefully  prepared.  Cloth,  ^1.50.  Other  bind- 
ings, from  #2.50  to  $10.00. 

Revisers'  English. 

A  Spicy  Criticism  on  the  English  of  the  Revisers  of  the 
New  'Jestament.  By  Rev.  Geo.  Washington  Moon.  i2mo, 
cloth,  75  cents. 

Sehaf  f  -  Herzog     Eneyelopedia     of     Religious 
KnoTvledge. 

A   Religious    Encyclopedia;    or,   Dictionary  of  Biblical, 

Historical,  Doctrinal  and  Practical  Theology.  Based  on  the  Real- 
Encyklopadie  of  Herzog,  Pitt  and  Hauck.  Edited  by  Philip  SchafF, 
D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  in  the  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New 
York,  assisted  by  Rev.  Samuel  M.  Jackson,  M.  A.,  and  Rev.  D.  S. 
Schaft.  Complete  in  three  large  volumes.  Royal  Zvo^  per  volume ^ 
cloth,  ^6.00;  sheep,  ^7.50;  half  morocco,  ^9.00  ;  full  morocco,  gilt, 
^12.00.  Sold  only  by  Subscription.  ^^Ftdl  descriptive  circulars 
with  Testif?ionials  sent,  gratis,  to  any  address. 

The  Theocratic  Kingdom. 

The  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ,  as 

covenanted  in  the  Old,  and  presented  in  the  New  Testament.  An 
exhaustive  work  on  Eschatology  from  the  pre-millenarian  stand- 
point. By  Rev.  G.  N.  H.  Peters,  A.M.  In  three  large  vols., 
8vo,  cloth,  ^3.00  each.  (In  press.)  Send  for  an  exhaustive  pros- 
pectus and  specimen  pages.  , 

Theology  of  the  Old  Testament. 

By  Dr.  Gust.  Fr.  Oehler,  late  Professor  Ordinarius  of 

Theology  in  Tubingen,  Leipzig.  This  American  edition  is  edited  by 
Prof.  Geo.  E.  Day,  D.  D.,of  Yale  College,  and  compared  with  the 
latest  German  Edition  (1882).  A  very  great  work.  It  has  been  in- 
troduced as  a  text  book  in  Yale,  Princeton,  New  Brunswick,  Lane 
(Cincin.),  and  other  Seminaries.  Royal  Svo,  cloth,  ^3.00.  I^^^Send 
for  prospectus. 

Thirty  Thousand  Thoughts. 

This  great  work  contains  the  best  thoughts,  Illustrations 

and  Literary  Gems  of  the  world's  ablest  books  on  almost  every  sub- 
ject, homiletically  arranged.  It  is  the  result  of  researches  made  by 
a  score  of  contributors.  Edited  by  Rev.  CANON  Spence,  M.  A., 
Rev.  J.  S.  ExELL  M.  A.,  Rev.  C.  Neil,  M.  A.,  Rev.  I.  Stephen- 
son, M.  A.  A  niost  valuable,  and  carefully  arranged  work.  To 
be  completed  in  six  or  seven  volumes,  large  Svo,  cloth,  per  volume, 
$3.50.     To  be  issued  every  three  months. 


S^-Th^  above  works  will  he  sent,  postpaid,  on  receijii  cf  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGNALLS,  KEW  YORK. 

Thoughts  of  John  Foster. 

John  Foster  ranks  among  the  most  original  and  suggestive 
writers  of  this  century.  His  style  equals  the  terseness  and  strength 
of  that  of  Butler,  Clark  or  Barrow  ;  his  imagination  is  more  ardent 
and  powerful  than  that  of  Taylor  or  Coleridge,  and  his  conceptions 
dazzle  with  their  splendor,  and  awe  with  their  majesty.  By  W.  W. 
Everts,  D.D.     Cloth,  i2mo,  ^i.oo. 

Through  the  Prison  to  the  Throne. 

Illustrations  of  Life  from  the  Biography  of  Joseph.  By 
Rev.  J.  S.Van  Dyke,  author  of  "  Popery  the  Foe  of  the  Church  and 
of  the  Republic."     i6mo,  cloth,  254  pp.,  ^1.00. 

Treasury  of  David. 

Containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  : 

A  Collection  of  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  range  of  litera- 
ture ;  a  series  of  homiletical  hints  upon  almost  every  verse,  and  lists 
of  writers  upon  each  verse.  By  Rev.  Charles  H.  Spurgeon.  8vo, 
cloth,  per  volume,  $2.00;  sheep  $2.75.  Complete  in  Seven  Volumes, 
Six  now  ready.  ^^^  Sold  separately  or  in  the  Set. 
Vol.  L,  Psalms  1-26  (iuclusive)  Vol,  II.  Psalms  27-52;  Vol.  III., 
Psalms  53-68;  Vol.  IV.,  Psalms  69-103;  Vol.  V.,  Psalms  1 04-1 18; 
Vol.  VI.,  Psalms  1 19-124;  Vol.  VII.,  Psalms  125-150. 

Bulw^er's  Novels. 

Leila;  or,  the  Siege  of  Granada:  and,  The  Coming  Race  ; 
or,  The  New  Utopia.  By  Edward  Bulwer,  Lord  Lytton.  1 211.0, 
284  pp.,  leatherette,  50  cents  ;  cloth,  75  cents. 

Child's  Guide  to  Heaven. 

By  Rev.  E.  P.  Hammond.    Paper,  10  cts.,  leatherette,  25015. 

Christmas  Books. 

Containing  A  Christmas  Carol,  the  Chimes,  the  Cricket  on 
the  Hearth,  The  Battle  of  Life,  The  Haunted  Man.  By  Charles 
DiCKSNS.  2  vols.,  paper,  270  pp.,  8vo,  50  cents;  i  vol.,  ^so, 
cloth,  75  cents. 

Calvin. 

John  Calvin.     By  M.  GuizoT,  Member  of  the  Institute  of 

of  France.     4to,  paper,  15  cents;  i2mo,  160  pp.,  cloth,  50  cents. 

Cyclopedia  of  Quotations. 

The  Cyclopedia  of  Practical  Quotations,  English  and  Latin, 
with  an  Appendix,  containing  Proverbs  from  the  Latin  and  Modern 
Languages;  Law  and  Ecclesiastical  Terms  and  Significations; 
Names,  Dates  and  Nationality  of  Quoted  Authors,  etc.,  with  Copious 
Indices.  Contains  17,000  classified  quotations  and  50,000  lines  of 
Concordance.  By  J.  K.  Hoyt  and  Anna  L.  Ward.  Royal  8vo,  900 
pp.,  cloth,  ^5.00;  sheep,  $6.50  ;  half  mor.,  $8.00  ;  full  mor.,  ^lo.oo. 

je®="   The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


rUBLICATIOyS  OF  FUNK  £  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 

Deems  Birthday  Book. 

Selections  from  the  Writings  of  Rev.  Charles  F.  Deems, 

D.D.5  LL.D.,  Pastor  of  the  Church  of  Strangers,  New  York.  Ar- 
ranged by  Sarah  Keables  Hunt.  The  book  has  for  a  frontispiece 
a  very  fine  vignette  portrait  of  Dr.  Deems.  Cloth,  ^l.oo;  gilt 
edges,  ^1.25. 

Diary  ol  a  Minister's  V7ife. 

By  Almedia   M.Brown.     {Complete  Editioji,)     8  vo,  paper, 

30  Cents;  cloth,  handsomely  bound,  ;^l5o. 

Drill  Book  in  Voeal  Culture. 

Drill  Book  in  Vocal   Culture  and   Gesture.     Rev.  Prof. 

Edward  P.  Thwing.   [Sixth  Edition.)    i2mo,  paper,  1 15  pp.,  25  cts. 

Eastern  Proverbs  and  Emblems 

Illustrating  Old  Truths.  Selected  from  over  1,000  volumes, 
some  very  rare,  and  to  be  consulted  only  in  libraries  in  India,  Russia, 
and  other  parts  of  the  Continent,  or  in  the  British  Museum.  All  are 
classified  under  subjects.  This  book  is  a  rich  storehouse  of  emblems 
and  proverbs.  By  Rev.  A.  Long,  member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic 
Society.     8vo,  280  pp.,  cloth,  ^I.OO. 

Gathered  Lambs; 

Showing  how  Jesus  "  the  Good  Shepherd  "  laid  down  His 
life  ior  us,  and  how  many  little  Lambs  have  been  gathered  into 
His  fold.  By  Rev.  Edward  Payson  Hammond,  author  of 
"Child's  Guide,"  etc.  A  book  for  children,  l2mo,  176  pp., 
paper,  10  cents  ;   cloth,  40  cents. 

Gems  of  Illustration. 

From  the  writings  of  Dr.  Thomas  Guthrie,  classified  and 
arranged.  A  priceless  book  for  clergymen  and  all  public  teachers. 
Second  Edition.     8vo,  196  pp.,  cloth,  ^1.50. 

Giving  or  Entertainment ;  Which? 

A  Clear,  Concise  Discussion  on  Church  Entertainments  in 
Contrast  to  Giving.  By  Rev.  Joseph  S.  Van  Dyke,  author  ol 
"Through  the  Prison  to  the  Throne,"  etc.  i2mo,  32  pp.,  paper, 
a5  cents. 

Gospel  by  Mark,  in  Phonetic  Spelling. 

The  Gospel  by  Mark,  in  Phonetic  Spelling.  By  C.  W.  K. 
Issued  to  illustrate  the  reform  in  spelling  as  suggested  by  an  able 
advocate  of  this  movement.     Paper,  15  cents;   cloth,  40  cents. 

Henry  W^ard  Beeeher. 

A  Sketch  of  his  Career,  with  analysis  of  his  power  as  a 
Preacher,  Lecturer,  Orator,  and  Journalist,  and  incidents  and 
reminiscences  of  his  Life.  By  Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.  Finely 
illustrated,  8vo,  600  pp.,  cloth,  $3.00;  sheep,  $4.50;  half  moroccoj 
,^6,00  ;  full  morocco,  gilt,  $7.00;  memorial  copy,  extra  fine,  ^lO.oQ 
~    >end  for  illustrated cij'cular. 


The  above  works  ivill  be  sent,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGy^ALLS,   NEW  YORK. 

Statement  of  his  Doctrinal  Beliefs  and  Unbeliefs  before 
the  Congregational  Association  of  Nev/  York  and  Brooklyn,  Oc- 
tober lO,  1882.     Paper  10  cents. 

Heroes  and  Holidays. 

Talks  and  Stories  about  Heroes  and  Holidays.  Short 
illustrated  lectures  to  Boys  and  Girls  by  twenty-one  preachers  in 
United  States  and  Great  Britain.  Edited  by  Rev.  W.  F.  Crafts, 
A.M.     i2mo,  265  pp.,  cloth,  $1.25. 

History  of  England. 

A  Popular  History  of  Society  and  Government  in  England 
from  the  Earliest  period  to  the  Present  Times.  By  Charles 
Knight.  Tables  of  Contents,  Index,  Appendix,  Notes  and  Let- 
terpress unabridged.  8  vols.,  4to,  paper,  1370  pp.,  ^2.80;  2  vols., 
4to,  cloth,  ^3.75;  4  vols.,  $4.40;  I  vol.,  sheep,  $4.00;  2  vols., 
^5.00;  I  vol.,  Fr.  im.  morocco,  $4.50;  2  vols.,  ^25. 50. 

This  is  the  most  complete,  and  in  every  way  the  most  desirable 
History  of  England  ever  written.  The  lormer  price  of  this  His- 
tory was  ^18.00  to  $25.00. 

How^  to  Enjoy  Life. 

Clergymen's  and  Students' Health;  or,  Physical  and  Mental 
Hygiene,  the  True  Way  to  Enjoy  Life.  By  William  Mason  Cor- 
nell, M.D.  LL.D.,  Fellow  of  the  Massachusetts  Medical  Society, 
Member  of  the  American  Medical  Association.  {Fifth  Edition), 
i2mo,  cloth,  360  pp.,  $1.00. 

Hymns  for  All  Christians. 

Compiled  by  Charles  F.  Deems,  D.D.  LL.D.,  and  Phebe 

Cary.     'yFifth  Edition).     i2mo,  cloth,  75  cents. 

In  Memoriani.— Wm.  Cullen  Bryant. 

A  Funeral  Oradon.  By  Henry  W.  Bellows,  D.D.  8vo, 
paper,  10  cents. 

Is  Romanism  Good  Enough  for  Romanists  ? 

This  is  a  sermon  in  tract  form,  very  earnest,  bristling  with 
facts.  It  has  excited  already  wide  interest.  By  Justln  D.  Fulton, 
D.D.     Single  number,  6  cents ;  50  copies,  $2.50  ;  100  copies,  $4.00. 

Lothair. 

By  Rt.  Hon.  B.  Disraeli,  Earl  of  Beaconsfield,  2  vols., 
paper,  256  pp.  50  cents;   i  vol.,  8vo,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

Lectures  by  Pere  Hyaeinthe. 

"Respect  for  the  Truth,"  *' Reformation  of  the  Family." 
"The  Moral  Crisis."  Translated  from  the  French  by  Rev.  Leon- 
ard WoLSEY  Bacon.     8vq,  paper,  15  cents. 

Leech's  Reply. 

An  Incisive  Reply  to  Ingersoll's  Attack  on  the  Bible.  By 
S.  V.  Leech,  D.  D.     8vo,  paper,  10  cents. 

J8^  The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post-faid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  W AGNAILS,  NEW  YORK. 

"My  St.  John," 

A  remarkable  pastoral  experience  by  James  M.  Ludlow. 
D.D.  "  A  most  pathetic  and  interesting  story,  whicli  has  brought 
t&zxs  from  many  eyes.'*     32mo,  loc. ;    50  copies,  ^3.50;  100,  ^6. 

Pastor's  Record. 

For  Study,  Work,  Appointments  and  Choir  for  one  year. 
By  Rev.  W.  T.  Wylie.     i2mo,  paper,  50  c;  cloth,  75,  leather,  ^i. 

Robert  Raikes'  Centennial  Addresses. 

Delivered  at  the  Raikes  Centennial  Celebration,  by  Rev. 
Drs.  J.  P.  Newman,  Thos.  Armitage,  Rufus  W.  Clark,  Chas.  S. 
Robinson,  R.  S.  Storrs;  and  others.     8vo,  paper,  10  cents. 

Roek  that  is  Higher  than  1. 

This  is  a  beautiful  gift  book  suitable  at  all  seasons.  By 
Rev.  John  Edgar  Johnson.     8vo,  cloth,  75  cents. 

Sartor  Resartus. 

The  Life  and  Opinions  of  Herr  Teufelsdrockh.  By 
Thomas  Carlyle.     Paper,  176  pp.,  25  cents;  8vo,  cloth,  60 cents. 

Standard  Hymns. 

With  Biographical  Notes  of  their  Authors,  Compiled  by 
Prof.  Ed.  p.  Thwing.     i2mo,  paper,  6c.;  fifty  or  more,  5c.  each. 

Talks  to  Boys  and  Girls  about  Jesus. 

With  Bible  Links  to  make  a  Complete  and  Chronological 
Life  of  Christ  for  the  Young.  Edited  by  Rev.  W.  F.  Crafts. 
i2mo,  400  pp,  cloth,  75  cents,  illustrated,  ^1.50. 

Talks  to  Farmers. 

A  new  book  of  nineteen  Addresses  to  Farmers.  i2mo,  360 
pp.,  cloth,  $1.00.     By  Rev.  Charles  H.  Spurgeon. 

Traps  lor  the  Young. 

A  new,  thrilling,  but  prudent  description  of  the  author's 
adventures  with  crime,  and  in  bringing  the  victims  to  justice.  A 
book  for  parents,  divested  of  all  impiopei  language  or  representa- 
tions. By  Anthony  Comstock,  of  the  Society  for  the  Suppres- 
sion  of    Vice,     uthor  of   "Frauds  Exposed."    i2mo,  cloth, ^i. 00. 

Wall  Street  in  History. 

Giving  the  History  of  this  Street  from  Colonial  Times  to  the 
present  date.  By  Martha  J.  Lamb,  author  of  "  History  of  New 
York,"  editor  of  "Magazine  of  American  History,''  Copiously 
illustrated;  4to,  cloth,  ^2.00. 

What  our  Girls  Ought  to  Know. 

A  book  of  practical  hygiene  for  girls,  containing  excellent 
advice  and  valuable  information.  The  author  was  a  physician 
of  large  practice;  a  graduate,  resident  physician  and  teacher  of 
Natural  Sciences,  in  the  Mass.  State  Normal  School;  graduate  of 
theWoman's  Medical  College,  New  York.  i2mo,  261  pp., cloth,  $l^ 
J^^  The  abovt  works  loiil  be  sent,  post  paid,  on  receipt  c^  ^rice. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUSK  &  WAQNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 


2  00 


15 


3  00 


%he  ^timdard  J»crics. 

Best  Books  for  a  Trifle,  printed  in  readable  type,  on  fair  paper,  and  in  manllla, 
wholly  without  abridgment  except  Nos.  6-7,  9-10.  All  Bonks  -with  stat  (*/  (15 
vols.)  are  also  bound  one  volume,  cloth,  $3.50.  J8@=  Books  with  dagger  (t)  are 
eUso  bound  separately  in  cloth.  See  prices  elsewhere. 
No.  Price. 

*1.  John  Ploughman's  Talk.    C 
H.  Spurgeon.       Carlyle     on 
Choice  of  Books.   4to.    Both  $0  12 
*2.  Manliness  of  Christ.  Thomas 

Hughe-?.    4to 10 

3.  Essays.  Lord  Macaulay.  4to.        15 

4.  Light  of  Asia.  E.  Arnold.  Ato.        15 
*5.  Imitation  of  Christ.  Thomas 

a  Kempis.    4to ..        15 

*6.-7.     Life  of  Christ.  Canon  Far- 

rar.    ito 50 

8.  Essays.  Thomas  Carlyle.  4to.        20 

*9-10.    Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul. 

Canon  Farrar.    4to,  bota....       50 

*11.  S-lf  -  Culture.        Prof.  J.  S. 

Blackie.    4to 10 

tl2-19.  Knight  8  Popular  History 

of  England.     4to,both 2  80 

♦20-21.  Buskin's  Letters  to  Work- 
men and  Laborers    4to  both.        30 

22.  Idyls  of  the  King.      Alfred 
Tennyson.     4to        20 

23.  Life  of  Rowland  Hill.    EeV. 
V.  J.  Charlesworth.    4to 15 

24.  Town     Geology.         Charles 
Kingsley.    4to 15 

25.  Alfred     the    Great.      Thos. 
Hughes.    4to 20 

26.  Outdoor  Life  in  Europe,  Rev. 
E.  P.  Thwing,    4to 20 

27.  Calamities  of  Authors.  I.  D'- 
Israeli.    4to 20 

28.  Salon    of    Madame    Necker. 
Parti.    4to.... 15 

29.  Ethics    of  the  Dust.     John 
Buskin.     4to 15 

80-31.  Memories    of    My    Exile. 

Louis  Kossuth.    4to 40 

''82.  Mister  Horn  and  His  Friends, 

Illustrated.     4to   15 

33-34.  Orations  of  Demosthenes. 

4to 40 

85.  Frondes  Agrestes.  John  Bu8* 

kin.    4to 15 

36.  Joan  of  Arc.    Alphonse    de 

Lamartine.     4to 10 

87.  Thoughts  of  M.  Aurelius  An- 
toninus.   4to 15 

*i8  Salon    of    Madame  Necker. 

Part  11.     4to 15 

39.  The  Hermits.    Chas.  Kings- 
ley.     4to 15 

*40.  John  Ploughman's  Pictures. 

C.  H.  Spurgeon.    4to  , 15 

*41.  Pulpit     Table  -  Talk.     Dean 

Ramsay.     4to  .        10 

»42.  Bible  and  Newspaper.    C.  H. 

Spurgeon.     4to 15 

*43.  Lacon.    Rev.  C.  Colton.    4tc       20 


No.  Price. 

44  Goldsmith's    Citizen  of  the 

WorlH.     4to $0  20 

45.  America  Revisited.     George 
Augustus  Sala.     4to 

46.  Life  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  8vo 
t47.  John  Calvin  M.  Guizot.  4tO 
t48-49  Dickens' Christmas  Books. 

Illustrated.     8vo  .  

50.  Shairp's     Culture    and  Re- 
ligion.   8vo 

t51-52.  Godet's  Commentary  on 
Luke.  Ed.  by  Dr.  John  Hall.» 
8vo,  2  parts, '  both 

t53.  Diary  of  a  Minister's  Wife. 
Part.  I.    8vo 

154-57.  Van  Doren's  Suggestive 
Commentary  on  Luke.  New 
edition,  enlarged.    8vo 

t58.  Diary  of  a  Minister's  Wife. 

Part IL    8vo     

59.  The  Nutritive  Cure.  Dr. 
Robert  Walter.    8vo 

t60.  Sartor  Resartus.  Thomas 
Carlyle.    4to. 

t61-62.  Lothair.  Lord  Beacons- 
field.    8vo 

63.  The  Persian  Queen  and 
Other  Pictures  of  Truth.  Rev. 

E.  P.  Thwing,  8vo 

64.  Salon  of  Madame  Necker. 
PartllL    4to 

t65-66.  The  Popular  History  of 
Ehglish    Bible    Translation. 

H.  P.  Conant.    8vo.  both 

67.  Ingersoll  Answered.    Joseph 

Parker.  D.  D.     8vo 

t68-69.    Studies  in  Mark.    D.  O. 
Hughes.    8vo  in  two  parts.. 
70.  Job's  Comlorter's.     A  Reli- 
gious Satire.  Joseph  Parker^ 
D.  D.  (London  )    16mo     ... 
171.  Reviser's  Englisb.     G.  Wash- 
ington Moon  F.R.S.L.  12mO 
t72.  The  Conversion  of  Children 
Rev.  Ed.  P  Hammond.  12m 0 

73.  New  Testament  Helps.  Rev. 
W.  F.  Crafts.      8vo 

74.  Opium — England's  Coercive 
Policy.   Rev.  J.  Liggins.  8vo. 

t75.  Blood  of  Jesus.  Rev.  Wm.  A. 
Reid.    With  introduction  by 

E.P.Hammond.      12mo 

76.  Lesson  in  the  Closet.     Chas. 

F.  Deems,  D.D.     12mo 

t77-78.    Heroes     and     Holidays. 

Rev.  W.  F.  Crafts.      12mo,  2 

pts.,  both 

79.  Reminiscences  of  Rev.  Ly- 
man Beecher,  D.  D.    8vo.... 


25 


50 


60 


10 


10 


10 


The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post  paid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGNALLS,  NEW  YORK. 


%\it  standard  ^xTrtary,  1883. 

Previous  Numbers  (1-79)  of  this  Library  are  known  as  STANDARD  SERIE*. 

The   set  (26   bookt),  pnfier,  SS'OO  :  cheap  cloth,  $  10.00 ;  fine  cloth,  extra  paper, 

■$l6-00.     26  adjustable  covers,  with  name  of  each  book  on  back 

{J or  paper  edition),  $2.73  ;  single  cover,  iSc 

j^g^All  books  of  this  series  are  llmo  in  size. 


80.  Oliver  Cromwell.   His  Life, 

Times,  Battlefields  and  Con- 
temporaries. By  Paxton 
Hood,  author  of  "  Christmas 
Evans,"  etc.  Paper, 25  centSi 
cloth,  ^i.oo. 

81.  Science  in  Short  Chapters. 
By  W.  Mattieu  Williams, 
F.R.A.S.  Author  of  "Fuel 
of  the  Sun,"  etc.  A  leading 
scientist  in  England.  312  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

82.  American  Humorists.    By 

Rev.  H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.  A 
distinguished  clergyman  of 
London.  Author  of  ' '  Music 
and  Morals,  etc.  192  pp. 
Paper,  15  cents,  fine  cloth,  75c. 

83.  Lives  of  Illustrious  Shoe- 
makers. By  William  Ed- 
ward Links.  A  book  of 
"Self  Help."  288  pp.  Pa- 
per, 25  cents,  fine  cloth, ^i. 00. 

84.  Flotsam  and  Jetsam.     A 

Yachtsman's  Experiences  at 
Sea  and  Ashore.  By  Thos. 
Gibson  Bowles,  Master  Ma- 
rine. 276  pp.  Paper,  25 
cents,  fine  cloth,  ^i  00. 

85.  Highways  of  Literature. 

Or  What  to  Read  and  How 
to  Read.  By  David  Pryde, 
M.A.,  LL.D.  Author  of 
**  Great  Men  of  European 
History,"  etc.  168  pp.  Pa- 
per, 15  cents,  fine  cloth,  75c. 

86.  Colin    Clout's     Calendar. 

Tht  Record  of  a  Summer — 
April  to  October.  By  Geant 
Allen,  author  of  "  Vignettes 


of  Nature,"  etc.  235  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  cloth,|i.oo. 

87.  The    Essays    of    George 

Eli®t.  Collected  and  Ar- 
ranged, with  an  Introduction 
to  her  "  Analysis  of  Motives." 
By  Nathan  Sheppard,  au- 
thor of  "  Readings  from 
George  Eliot,"  etc.  Paper, 
25  cents,  fine  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

88.  Charlotte     Bronte.       An 

Hour  with  Charlotte  Bronte  ; 
or.  Flowers  from  a  Yorkshire 
Moor.  By  Laura  C.  Hol- 
low ay,  author  of  "Mothers 
of  Great  Men  and  Women," 
etc.  156  pp.  Paper,  15  cents; 
fine  cloth,  with  steel  engraving 
of  Charlotte  Bront6,  75  cents. 

89.  Sam  Hobart.  The  Loco- 
motive Engineer.  A  work- 
ingman's  Solution  of  the 
Labor  Problem.  By  Justin 
D.  Fulton,  D.D.  255  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  cloth,  |i. 00. 

90.  Successful  Men  of  To-Day, 

and  what  they  Say  of  Success. 
Based  on  facts  and  opinions 
gathered  from  Five  Hundred 
I'rominent  Men.  By  Rev. 
Wilbur  F.  Crafts,  A.M.  A 
Book  of  Self  Help.  276  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  cloth,  $1.00. 

91.  Nature  Studies.  By  Grant 
Allen,  Andrew  Wils<jn, 
Thomas  Foster,  Edward 
Clood  and  Richard  A. 
Proctor.  A  sterling  vol- 
ume. 264  pp.  Paper,  25 
cents,  fine  cloth,  ^i.oo. 


4^  The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  &  WAGNALLS,  HEW  YORK. 


92.  India  :  What  can  it  Teach 

Us  ?  A  course  of  lectures  de- 
livered before  the  University 
of  Cambridge.  By  F.  Max 
MiiLLER,  K.M.  With  an  In- 
troduction and  Notes  by 
Prof.  Alexander  Wilder,  M.D. 
288  pp.  Paper,  25  cents,  fine 
cloth,  ^i.oo. 

93.  A  Winter  in  India.  By 
Rt.  Hon.  W.  E.  Baxter, 
M.P.  A  fascinating  story  of 
a  journey  through  India. 
With  map.  154  pp.  Paper, 
15  cents,  fine  cloth,  75  cents. 

94.  Scottish     Characteristics. 

By  Paxton  Hood,  Author  of 
"  Oliver  Cromwell,"  "  Christ- 
mas Evans,"  etc.  315  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  fine  cloth, 
^i.oo. 

95.  Historical      and      Other 

Sketches.  By  James  An- 
thony Froude.  Edited  with 
an  Introduction  by  David  H. 
Wheeler,  LL.D.  288  pp. 
Paper,  25  cents,  fine  cloth, 
$1.00. 

96.  Jewish    Artisan   Life  in 

the  TiD?e  of  Jesus.  By  Prof. 
Franz  Delitsch.  Trans- 
lated from  the  latest  German 
edition,  by  Bemhard  Pick, 
Ph.D.  Paper,  15  cents,  fine 
cloth,  75  cents. 

97.  Scientific  Sophisms.    A  re- 

.  view  of  current  Theories,  con- 
cerning Atoms,  Apes  and 
Men.  By  Samuel  Wain- 
WRiGHT,  D.D.,  author  of 
•'Christian  Certainty,"  etc 
Paper,  25  cents,  fine  cloth, 
$1.00. 

98.  Illustrations  and  Medita- 
tions ;  or,  Flowers  from  a 
Puritan's  Garden,  distilled 
and  dispensed  by  C.  H.  Spur- 
GEON.  Paper,  25  cents,  fine 
cloth,  $1.00, 


99.  French   Celebrities.    Pari; 

I.  Brief  Biographies  of  Mar 
shal  De  MacMahon,  Leon 
Gambetta,  Jules  Grevy,  Louis 
Blanc,  Charles  De  Freycinet, 
Victor  Hugo,  Ferdinand  De 
Lesseps.  By  Ernest  Dau- 
DET,  and  others.  Paper,  15 
cents,  fine  cloth,  75  cents. 

100.  By- Ways   of  Literature. 

Or  Essays  on  Old  Things  and 
New,  in  the  Customs,  Educa- 
tion, Character,  Literature, 
and  Language  of  the  English- 
speaking  People.  By  David 
H.  Wheeler,  LL.D.  Paper, 
25  cents,  fine  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

101.  Martin  Luther.    His  Life 

and  Times.  By  Dr.  William 
Rein,  Eisenach,  Germany. 
Based  upon  Kostlin's  "Life 
of  Luther."  Translated.  Pa- 
per, 25  cents,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

102.  French  Celehrities..   ^art 

II.  Brief  Biographies  of 
Jules  Ferry,  George  Clemen- 
ceau,  Ernest  Renan,  Henri 
Rochefort,  Challemel,  Lacour. 
Jules  Simon,  Erckman-Chat- 
rian,  Paul  Bert,  and  Alphonse 
Daudet.  By  Jules  Claretie, 
and  others.  Paper,  15  cents, 
fine  cloth,  75  cents. 

103.  Christmas  in  a  Palace. 

A  traveler's  story  by  Ed- 
ward Everett  Hale.  i2mo. 
Paper,  25  cents,  fine  cloth, 
1 1. 00;  Holiday  edition,  cloth, 
$1.00. 

104.  With  the  Poets.    A  selec 

tion  of  English  poetry.  By 
Canon  Farrar.  Paper,  25 
cents,  cloth,  ^i.oo. 

105.  TheLifeofZwingli.   The 

Swiss  Reformer.  By  Jean 
Groc.  Translated.  Pap  ei 
25  cents,  cloth,  $1.00. 


j6£S*  The  above  works  will  be  sent,  post  paid,  on  receipt  of  price. 


PUBLICATIONS  OF  FUNK  <&  WAGNALLS,  NEW  TORE. 

ISSUED  BI-WEEKLY. 

Set,  S6  Books  in  Paper,  $5  ;  Adjustable  Covers  (^6)  Mritli  name  of 

each  book  on  back,  $'4.75.    Set,  ^6  Books^  in  cheap  Cloth, 

$10.    Set,  ^6  Books,  fine  Cloth,  extra  paper,  $16. 


A  im  ixoiJ.rLoei33.ei3Lt. 


/.  The  Standard  Library,  1884 
Series,  will  contain  26  books,  one 
to  be  issued  every  two  weeks.  The 
paper,  binding,  etc.,  will  be  the 
same  as  *'■  i88j  Series,*' 

2.  Some  nine  of  the  books  will  be 
fiction^  by  many  op  the  ablest  of  our 
writers ;  the  other  books  will  be, 
also,  all  new — not  heretofore  pub- 
lished in  America. 

J,  Each  book  will  be  i2mo  in 
size,    with    clear  type,  good  paper, 


and  bound  in  signatures  {not  inset), 
the  same  as  cioth  books  are  bound, 

4.  The  booki.  will  be  bound  in 
heavy  cover  paper,  with  artistic  de- 
sign printed  in  tzvo  colors,  making 
the  book  an  ornament  for  any  par- 
lor table. 

J".  The  books  will  stand  erect  on 
the  Library  shelf  the  same  as  a 
cloth-bound    book.       The    Title 

will  be  PRINTED  ON  THE  BACK, 
also  on  the  side. 


Prices: — Paper,   15c.   and  25c.  per  volume;  cloth,   75c.  and  ^l.oo. 
Subscription  (26  Books),  paper,  ^5.00;  cloth,  ^16.00. 

J^^Sei^for  "  Standard  Library  *'  Catalogue, 


106.  Story  of  the  Merv-  Epi- 
tomized from  the  "  Merv 
Oasis,"  by  the  author,  Ed- 
MOND  O' Donovan.  A  story 
of  travel  in  Central  Asia. 
i2mo,  paper,  25  cents;  fine 
Hoth,  $1.00. 

10     Mumu  and  the  Diary  of 

a  Superfluous  Man.  Two 
Novels.  By  Ivan  Turge- 
NiEFF.  Translated  from  the 
Russian.  i2mo,  paper,  15 
cents;  fine  cloth,  75  cents. 


108.  Memorie  and    Rime.   A 

story  of  Western  Life,  sketches 
of  travel  in  Europe,  and  va- 
rious poems.  By  Joaquin 
Miller.  i2mo,  paper,  25 
cents;  cloth,  $1.00, 

109.  Christianity  Triumphant. 

Its  defensive  and  aggressive 
victories.  By  J.  P.  Newman, 
D.D.  i2mo,  paper,  15  cents; 
fine  cloth,  75  cents. 


NEW  BOOKS  BY 


JULIAN   HAWTHORNE, 
JOAQUIN    MILLER, 

GEORGE  P.   LATHROP. 
Etc. 


EDWARD   EVERETT   HALE, 
JOHN   HARBERTON, 

Capt.  ROLAND  COFFIN 
Etc. 


4 
^ 


.v- 


