^H  OF  muctfo^ 


<^£OiQGiCM  SEV^\^ 


BS  2615  .M162  1890 
Maclaren,  Alexander,  1826 

1910. 
The  Holy  of  Holies 


THE 


HOLY  OF  HOLIES 

SERMONS  ON  FOURTEENTH,  FIFTEENTH,  AND 

SIXTEENTH  CHAPTERS  OF  THE 

GOSPEL  OF  JOHN 


ALEXANDER    MACLAREN    D.D. 


London 
ALEXANDER    &    SHEPHEARD 

21     FURNTVAL    STREET     HOLBORX 
1890 


LONDON 

PRINTED     BY     ALEXANDER     AND     SHEPHEARD 

2  7,     CHANCERY     LANE,     W.  C. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Faith  in  God,  oxe  with  Faith  in  Cheist 1 

"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  .  .  .  believe  in  God, 
believe  also  in  Me." — John  xiv.  1. 

II. 
"  Many  Mansions  " 12 

"  In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions  ;  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  would  have  told  you."— John  xiv.  2. 

III. 

The  Forerunner ^'^ 

"  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare 
a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you 
unto  Myself  ;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be 
also." — John  xiv.  2,  3. 

IV. 

The  Way,  unknown  and  yet  well  known  33 

"  And  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know. 
Thomas  saith  unto  Him,  Lord,  we  know  not  whither 
Thou  goest ;  and  how  can  we  know  the  way  ?   Jesus 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

saith  unto  him,  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the 
Life  :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  Me. 
If  ye  had  known  Me,  ye  should  have  known  My 
Father  also  :  and  from  henceforth  ye  know  Him, 
and  have  seen  Him." — John  xiv.  4 — 7. 


The  True  Vision  of  the  Father      45 

"  Philip  saith  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father,  and  it 
sufficeth  us.  Jesus  saith  unto  Him,  Have  I  been  so 
long  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  Me, 
Philip  ?  he  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father  ; 
and  how  sayest  thou  then,  Shew  us  the  Father? 
Believest  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  Me  1  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  I 
speak  not  of  Myself  :  but  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in 
Me  He  doeth  the  works.  Believe  Me  that  I  am  in  the 
Father,  and  the  Father  in  i\Ie  :  or  else  believe  Me  for 
the  very  works'  sake."" — John  xiv.  8 — 11. 

VI. 

The  Works  of  the  Ascended  Christ         56 

"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  Me, 
the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and  greater 
■  works  than  these  shall  he  do  ;  because  I  go  unto  My 
Father.  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  maybe  glorified  in  the 
Son.  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  My  name,  I  will  do 
it." — John  siv.  12 — 14. 

VII. 

Love  and  Obedience       68 

"  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments." — John  xiv.  15. 


CONTENTS. 


VIII. 

PAGE 

The    Praying  Christ,    the   Giving   Father,   and   the 

Abiding  Spirit       78 

'•'And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for 
ever  ;  even  the  Spirit  of  Truth  ;  whom  the  world 
cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither 
knoweth  Him  :  but  ye  know  Him  ;  for  He  dwelleth 
with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you." — John  xiv.  16,  17. 

IX. 

The  Absent  Present  Christ 88 

"  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless  :  I  will  come  to  you. 
Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  Me  no  more  ; 
but  ye  see  Me  :  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." — 
John  xiv.  18,  19. 

X. 
The  Gifts  of  the  Present  Christ 100 

"At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  My  Father, 
and  ye  in  Me,  and  I  in  you.  He  that  hath  My  com- 
mandments, and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 
Me  :  and  he  that  loveth  Me  shall  be  loved  of  My 
Father,  and  I  will  love  him.  and  will  manifest  Myself 
to  him."— John  xiv.  20,  21. 

XI. 
Who  bring  and  who  repel  Christ Ill 

"  Judas  saith  unto  Him,  not  Iscariot,  Lord,  how  is  it  that 
Thou  wilt  manifest  Thyself  imto  us,  and  not  unto 
the  world  I  Jesus  answered,  and  said  mito  him.  If  a 
man  love  Me  he  will  keep  My  words  :  and  My  Father 
will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and  make 
Our  abode  with  him.    He  that  loveth  Me  not,  keepeth 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
not  My  saj^ings  :  and  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not 
Mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  Me."— John  xiv. 
22—24. 

XII. 
The  Teacher  Spirit        123 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  being  yet  present 
with  you.  But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy 
Grhost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  My  name.  He 
shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to 
your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you." 
— John  xiv.  2.5,  26. 

XIII. 
Christ's  Peace       135 

"  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  My  peace  I  give  unto  you  ;  not 
as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid." — John 
xiv.  27. 

XIV. 

Joy  and  Faith,  the  Fruits  of  Christ's  Departure     ...     146 

"  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go  away,  and 
come  again  unto  you.  If  ye  loved  Me,  ye  would 
rejoice,  because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the  Father  :  for  My 
Father  is  greater  than  I.  And  now  I  have  told  you 
before  it  come  to  pass,  that,  when  it  is  come  to  pass, 
ye  might  believe." — John  xiv.  28,  29. 

XV. 

How  Christ  anticipated  His  Passion         157 

"  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you  ;  for  the  Prince 
of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me.  But 
that  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  Father  ;  and 
as  the  Father  gave  me  commandment,  even  so  I  do. 
Arise  !    Let  us  go  hence." — John  xiv.  30.  31. 


CONTEXTS. 


XVI. 

PACE 

The  True  Vine      ^^^ 

'■  I  am  the  true  vine,  and  My  Father  is  the  husbandman. 
Every  branch  in  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh 
away ;  and  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  He  purgeth 
it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.  Now  ye  are 
clean  through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto 
you.  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch  can- 
not bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine  ;  no 
more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  Me."— John  xv.  1—1. 

XVII. 

The  True  Branches  of  the  True  Vine     178 

"  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches  :  he  that  abideth  in 
Me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much 
fruit ;  for  without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing.  If  a  man 
abide  not  in  Me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is 
withered  ;  and  men  gather  them  and  cast  them  into 
the  fire,  and  they  are  burned.  If  ye  abide  in  Me.  and 
My  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you.  Herein  is  My  Father 
glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall  ye  be  My 
disciples." — John  xv.  5 — 8. 


XVIII. 
Abiding  in  Love 

"  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  so  have  I  loved  you  ;  con- 
tinue ye  in  My  love. 

"  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  IMy 
love  ;  even  as  I  have  kept  My  Father's  command- 
ments, and  abide  in  His  love. 

••  These  things  have  I  spoken  iinto  you.  that  My  joy  might 
remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full."— 
John  xv.  9 — 11. 


190 


CONTENTS. 


XIX. 

PAGE 

The  Oneness  of  the  Beanches         lii'j 

••  This  is  My  commandment,  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I 
have  loved  you.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this, 
that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends." — John 
XV.  12,  1.3. 

XX. 

€heist's  Friends 210 

"  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you. 
Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants ;  for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth  :  but  I  have  called 
you  friends  ;  for  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  My 
Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you.  Ye  have  not 
chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and  ordained  you, 
that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your 
fruit  should  remain  :  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of 
the  Father  in  My  name,  He  may  give  it  you.  These 
things  I  command  you,  that  ye  love  one  another." — 
John  xv.  14 — 17. 


XXI. 

Sheep  among  Wolves      222 

"  Jf  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  Me  before 
it  hated  you.  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world 
would  love  his  own  ;  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the 
world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  there- 
fore the  world  hateth  you.  Remember  the  word  that 
I  said  unto  you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his 
Lord.  If  they  have  persecuted  Me,  they  will  also 
Itersecute  you  :  if  they  have  kept  My  saying,  they 
will  keep  yours  also." — John  xv.  18 — 20. 


CONTENTS. 


XXII. 

PAGE 

The  World's  Hatred,  as  Christ  saw  it    233 

"  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you  for  My  name's 
sake,  because  they  know  not  Him  that  sent  Me. 

"  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not 
had  sin ;  but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin. 

"He  that  hateth  Me  hateth  My  Father  also. 

"  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which  none 
other  man  did,  they  had  not  sin  ;  but  now  have  they 
both  seen  and  hated  both  Me  and  My  Father. 

"  But  this  Cometh  to  pass,  that  the  word  might  be  f  ulfilleii 
that  is  written  in  their  law,  They  hated  Me  without 
a  cause." — John  xv.  21 — 25. 

XXIII. 

The  Defence  against  a  Hostile  World 24i} 

"  But  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I  will  send  unto 
you  from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which 
proceedeth  from  the  Father,  He  shall  testify  of  Me  : 
and  ye  also  shall  bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been 
with  Me  from  the  beginning." — John  xv.  26,  27. 

XXIV. 

Christ's   Reasons   for   Present    Speech   and   Former 

Silence         2.55 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  imto  you,  that  ye  should  not 
be  offended.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  syna- 
gogues ;  yea,  the  time  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth 
you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  service.  And  these 
things  will  they  do  unto  you,  because  they  have  not 
known  the  Father  nor  Me.  But  these  things  have  I 
told  you,  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may 
remember  that  I  told  you  of  them.    And  these  things 


CONTEJS^TS. 


PAGE 
I  said  not  unto  you  at  the  beginning,  because  I  was 
with  you.  But  now  I  go  My  way  to  Him  that  sent 
Me ;  and  none  of  you  asketh  Me,  Whither  goest  Thou  ? 
But  because  I  have  said  these  things  unto  you,  sorrow 
hath  filled  your  heart." — Johx  xvi.  1 — (3. 

XXV. 

The  Departing  Christ  axd  the  Coming  Spirit 267 

"Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth;  it  is  expedient  for 
you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Com- 
forter will  not  come  unto  you  :  but  if  I  depart,  I  will 
send  Him  unto  you. 

"And  when  He  is  come.  He  will  ronrince  the  world  of 
sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment." — John 
xvi.  7,  8. 

XXVI. 
The  Facts  which  convince  the  World     279 

"  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me  ; 

"  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  My  Father,  and  ye  see 
Me  no  more  ; 

"  Of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged." 
— John  xvi.  9—11. 

XXVII. 

The  Guide  into  all  Truth     291 

"J  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot 
bear  them  now.  Howbeit  when  He,  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  is  come,  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth  :  for 
He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself ;  but  whatsoever  He 
shall  hear  that  shall  He  speak  :  and  He  will  show  you 
things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  Me  :  for  He  shall 
receive  of  Mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you.  All 
things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine  :  therefore  said 
I,  that  He  shall  take  of  Mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto 
you." — John  xvi.  12 — 1."). 


CONTENTS. 


XXVIII. 

PAGE 

"What  is  this  that  He  saith  ?  "      303 

"  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me,  and  again,  a 
little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me  :  because  I  go  to  the 
Father.  Then  said  some  of  His  disciples  among  them- 
selves, What  is  this  that  He  saith  unto  us,  A  little 
while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me  :  and  again,  a  little 
while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me :  and,  Because  I  go  to  the 
Father  ?  They  said  therefore,  What  is  this  that  He 
saith,  A  little  while  1  we  cannot  tell  what  He  saith. 
Now  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask  Him, 
and  said  unto  them.  Do  ye  inquire  among  yourselves 
of  that  I  said,  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me  : 
and  again,  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me  ?  " — 
John  xvi.  16—19. 

XXIX. 

SOEROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY      31G 

"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  shall  weep  and 
lament,  but  the  world  shall  rejoice  :  and  ye  shall  be 
sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy. 
A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because 
her  hour  is  come  :  but  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of 
the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for 
joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world.  And  ye  now 
therefore  have  sorrow  :  but  I  will  see  you  again,  and 
your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh 
from  you." — John  xvi.  20 — 22. 

XXX. 

What  that  Day  will  bring  forth 326 

"  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  nothing.  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in 
My  name.  He  will  gi\e  it  you.  Hitherto  have  ye 
asked  nothing  in  My  name  :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive, 
that  your  joy  may  be  full." — John  xvi.  23,  24. 


CONTENTS. 


XXXI. 

PAGK 

The  Joys  of  "  That  Day  "        337 

'•  These  thing's  have  I  spoken  unto  you  in  proverbs  :  but 
the  time  cometh  when  I  shall  no  more  speak  unto 
you  in  proverbs,  but  I  shall  shew  you  plainly  of  the 
Father.  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  My  Name  :  and 
I  say  not  unto  you,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for 
you  :  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you,  because  ye 
have  loved  Me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out 
from  God." — John  xvi.  25 — 27. 

XXXII. 
From  the  Father  and  to  the  Father      348 

"  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the 
world  :  again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the 
Father." — John  xvi.  28. 

XXXIII. 

The  Disciples'  Confession  and  the  Master's  Warning    3."8 

"His  disciples  said  unto  Jesus,  Lo,  now  speakest  Thou 
plainly,  and  speakest  no  proverb.  Now  are  we  sure 
that  Thou  knowest  all  things,  and  needest  not  that 
any  man  should  ask  Thee  :  by  this  we  believe  that 
Thou  camest  forth  from  God.  Jesus  answered  them, 
Do  ye  now  believe  ?  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is 
now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  everj-  man  to 
his  O'wn,  and  shall  leave  Me  alone  :  and  yet  I  am  not 
alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  Me." — John  xvi. 
29—32. 

XXXIV. 

Peace  and  Victory         370 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  Me  ye 
might  have  peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu- 
lation :  but  be  of  good  cheer  ;  I  have  overcome  the 
world." — John  xvi.  33. 


I. 


jfaitb  in  Gob,  one  witb  faith  in  (Zbviet 

"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled     .     .     .     believe  in  God, 
believe  also  in  Me." — John  xiv.  1. 

HE  twelve  wore  sitting  in  the  upper 
chamber,  stupefied  with  the  dreary, 
half-understood  prospect  of  Christ's 
departure.  He,  forgetting  His  own 
burden,  turns  to  comfort  and  encour- 
age them.  These  sweet  and  great  words  most 
singularly  blend  gentleness  and  dignity.  Who  can 
reproduce  the  cadence  of  soothing  tenderness,  soft 
as  a  mother's  hand,  in  that  "  Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled "  ?  And  who  can  fail  to  feel  the  tone 
of  majesty  in  that  "  Believe  in  God,  believe  also 
in  Me  "  ? 

The  Greek  presents  an  ambiguity  in  the  latter 
half  of  the  verse,  for  the  verb  may  be  either  in- 
dicative or  imperative,  and  so  we  may  read  four 
different  ways,  according  as  we  render  each  of  the 
two  "  believes  "  in  either  of  these  two  fashions.  Our 
Authorised  and  Revised  Aversions  concur  in  adopt- 
ing the  indicative  "  Ye  believe  "  in  the  former  clause 
and   the   imperative   in   the   latter.     But   I   venture 

1 


2        FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST. 

to  think  that  we  get  a  more  true  and  appropriate 
meaning  if  we  keep  both  clauses  in  the  same  mood, 
and  read  them  both  as  imperatives  :  "  Believe  in  God, 
believe  also  in  Me."  It  would  be  harsh,  I  think,  to 
take  one  as  an  affirmation  and  the  other  as  a  com- 
mand. It  would  be  irrelevant,  I  think,  to  remind  the 
disciples  of  their  belief  in  God.  It  would  break  the 
unity  of  the  verse  and  destroy  the  relation  of  the  latter 
half  to  the  former,  the  former  being  a  negative  pre- 
cept— "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled '" — and  the 
latter  being  a  positive  one — "  Instead  of  being  troubled, 
believe  in  God,  and  believe  in  Me."  So,  for  all  these 
reasons,  I  venture  to  adopt  the  reading  I  have  indi- 
cated. 

I. — Now  in  these  words  the  first  thing  that  strikes 
me  is  that  Christ  here  points  to  Himself  as  the  object 
of  precisely  the  same  religious  trust  which  is  to  be 
given  to  God. 

It  is  only  our  familiarity  with  these  words  that 
blinds  us  to  their  wonderfulness  and  their  greatness. 
Try  to  hear  them  for  the  first  time,  and  to  bring  into 
remembrance  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were 
spoken.  Here  is  a  man  sitting  amongst  a  handful  of 
His  friends,  who  is  Avitliin  four  and  twenty  hours  of  a 
shameful  death,  which  to  all  appearance  was  the  utter 
annihilation  of  all  His  claims  and  hopes,  and  He 
says,  "  Trust  in  God,  and  trust  in  Me  ! "  I  think  that 
if  we  had  heard  that  for  the  first  time,  we  should  have 
understood  a  little  better  than  some  of  us  do  the  depth 
of  its  meaning. 

What  is  it  that  Christ  asks  for  here  ?  Or  rather  let 
me  say,  What  is  it  that  Christ  offers  to  us  here  ?  For 
we  must  not  look  at  the  words  as  a  demand  or  as 


FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.         3 

a  command,  but  rather  as  a  merciful  invitation  to  do 
what  it  is  hfe  and  blessing  to  do.  It  is  a  very  low  and 
inadequate  interpretation  of  these  words  which  takes 
them  as  meaninof  little  more  than  "Believe  in  God, 
believe  that  He  is ;  believe  in  Me,  believe  that  I 
am."  But  it  is  scarcely  less  so  to  suppose  that 
the  mere  assent  of  the  understandinsf  to  His  teach- 
ing  is  all  that  Christ  is  asking  for  here.  By  no 
means ;  what  He  invites  us  to  goes  a  great  deal 
deeper  than  that.  The  essence  of  it  is  an  act  of  the 
will  and  of  the  heart,  not  of  the  understanding  at  all. 
A  man  may  believe  in  Him  as  a  historical  person,  may 
accept  all  that  is  said  about  Him  here,  and  yet  not  be 
within  sioht  of  the  trust  in  Him  which  He  here 
speaks  of  For  the  essence  of  the  whole  is  not  the 
intellectual  process  of  assent  to  a  proposition,  but  the 
intensely  personal  act  of  yielding  up  will  and  heart  to 
a  living  person.  Faith  does  not  grasp  a  doctrine 
but  a  heart.  The  trust  which  Christ  requires  is 
the  bond  that  unites  souls  with  Him ;  and  the  very 
life  of  it  is  entire  committal  of  myself  to  Him  in  all 
my  relations  and  for  all  my  needs,  and  absolute  utter 
confidence  in  Him  as  all-sufiicient  for  everything  that 
I  can  require.  Let  us  get  away  from  the  cold  intellec- 
tualism  of  "  belief "  into  the  warm  atmosphere  of 
"  trust,"  and  we  shall  understand  better  than  by  many 
volumes  Avhat  are  the  meaning  and  the  sphere  and  the 
power  and  the  blessedness  of  that  faith  which  Christ 
requires. 

Further,  note  that,  whatever  may  be  this  believing 
in  Him  which  He  asks  from  us  or  invites  us  to 
render,  it  is  precisely  the  same  thing  which  He  bids 
us  render  to  God.     The  two  clauses  in  the  oriofinal 

1* 


4    FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST. 

bring  out  tliat  idea  even  more  vividly  than  in  our 
version,  because  the  order  of  the  words  in  the  latter 
clause  is  inverted ;  and  they  read  literally  thus : — 
"  Believe  in  God,  in  Me  also  beheve."  The  purpose 
of  the  inversion  is  to  put  these  two,  God  and  Christ, 
as  close  together  as  possible  ;  and  to  put  the  two 
identical  emotions  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end, 
at  the  two  extremes  and  outsides  of  the  whole  sen- 
tence. Could  language  be  more  deliberately  adopted 
and  moulded,  even  in  its  consecution  and  arrange- 
ment, to  enforce  this  thought,  that  whatever  it  is 
that  we  give  to  Christ,  it  is  the  very  same  thing 
that  we  give  to  God  ?  And  so  He  here  proposes 
Himself  as  the  worthy  and  adequate  recipient  of  all 
these  emotions  of  confidence,  submission,  resignation, 
which  make  up  religion  in  its  deepest  sense. 

That  tone  is  by  no  means  singular  in  this  place.  It 
is  the  uniform  tone  and  characteristic  of  our  Lord's 
teaching.  Let  me  remind  you  just  in  a  sentence  of 
one  or  two  instances.  What  did  He  think  of  Himself 
Who  stood  up  before  the  world  and,  with  arms  out- 
stretched, like  that  great  white  Christ  in  Thorwaldsen's 
lovely  statue,  said  to  all  the  troop  of  languid  and 
burdened  and  fatigued  ones  crowding  at  His  feet : — 
"  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  are  Aveary  and  are  heav}^ 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest "  ?  That  surely  is  a 
Divine  prerogative.  What  did  He  think  of  Himself 
Who  said,  "  All  men  should  honour  the  Son  even  as 
they  honour  the  Father "  ?  What  did  He  think  of 
Himself  Who,  in  that  very  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (to 
which  the  advocates  of  a  maimed  and  mutilated 
Christianity  tells  us  they  pin  their  faith,  instead  of  to 
mystical  doctrines)  declared  that  He  Himself  was  the 


FAITH  IN  GOD,   ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.         5 

Judge  of  humanity,  and  tlaat  all  men  should  stand  at 
His  bar  and  receive  from  Him  "according  to  the 
deeds  done  in  their  body "  ?  Upon  any  honest 
princijDle  of  interpreting  these  Gospels,  and  unless 
you  avowedly  go  picking  and  choosing  amongst  His 
words,  accepting  this  and  rejecting  that,  you  cannot 
eliminate  from  the  Scriptural  representation  of  Jesus 
Christ  the  fact  that  He  claimed  as  His  own  the 
emotions  of  the  heart  to  which  only  God  has  a  right 
and  only  God  can  satisf}^ 

I  do  not  dwell  upon  that  point,  but  I  say,  in  one 
sentence,  we  have  to  take  that   into  account  if  we 
would   estimate  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ   as  a 
teacher  and  as  a  man.     I  would  not  turn  away  from 
Him  any  imperfect  conceptions,  as  they  seem  to  me, 
of  His  nature  and  His  work — rather   I  would  foster 
them,  and  lead  them  on  to  a  fuller  recognition  of  the 
full  Christ — but  this  I  am  bound  to  say,  that  for  my 
part  I  beheve  that  nothing  but  the  wildest  caprice,  deal- 
ing with  the  Gospels  according  to  one's  own  subjective 
fancies,  irrespective  altogether  of  the  evidence,  can 
strike  out  from  the  teaching  of  Christ  this  its  cliarac- 
teristic  difference.    What  signalizes  Him,  and  separates 
Him  from  all  other  religious  teachers,  is  not  the  clear- 
ness  or  the  tenderness  with  which  He  reiterated  the 
truths  about  the  Divine  Father's  love,  or  about  morality, 
and  justice,  and  truth,  and  goodness;   but  tlie  pecu 
liarity  of  His  call  to  the  world  is,  "  Believe  in  Me." 
And  if  He  said  that,  or  anything  like  it,  and  if  the 
representations  of  His  teaching  in  these  four  Gospels, 
which  are  the  only  source  from  which  we  get  any 
notion  of  Him  at  all,  are  to  be  accepted,  why,  then, 
one  of  two  things.     Either  He  was  wrong,  and  then 


6        FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHFJST. 

He  was  a  crazy  enthusiast,  only  acquitted  of  blas- 
phemy because  convicted  of  insanity ;  or  else — or 
else — He  was  "  God,  manifest  in  the  flesh."  It  is  no 
use  boAving  down  before  a  fancy  portrait  of  a  bit  of 
Christ,  and  exalting  the  humble  sage  of  Nazareth, 
and  leaving  out  the  very  thing  that  makes  the 
difference  between  Him  and  all  others,  namely,  these 
either  audacious  or  most  true  claims  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  the  worthy  Recipient  and  the  adequate  Object 
of  man's  religious  emotions.  "  Believe  in  God,  in  ]\Ie 
also  believe." 

II. — Now,  secondly,  notice  that  faith  in  Christ  and 
faith  in  God  are  not  two,  but  one. 

These  two  clauses  on  the  surface  present  juxta- 
position. Looked  at  more  closely  they  present  inter- 
pretation and  identity.  Jesus  Christ  does  not  merely 
set  Himself  up  by  the  side  of  God,  nor  are  we 
worshippers  ot  two  Gods  when  we  bow  before  Jesus 
and  bow  before  the  Father ;  but  faith  in  Christ  is  faith 
in  God,  and  faith  in  God  which  is  not  faith  in  Christ 
is  imperfect,  incomplete,  and  Avill  not  long  last.  To 
trust  in  Him  is  to  trust  in  the  Father ;  to  trust  in  the 
Father  is  to  trust  in  Him. 

What  is  the  underlying  truth  that  is  here?  How 
conies  it  that  these  two  objects  blend  into  one,  hke  two 
figures  in  a  stereoscope  ;  and  that  the  faith  which 
flows  to  Jesus  Christ  rests  upon  God  ?  This  is  the 
underlying  truth,  that  Jesus  Christ,  Himself  Divine, 
is  the  Divine  Revealer  of  God.  I  need  not  dwell  upon 
the  latter  of  these  two  thoughts :  how  there  is  no  real 
knowledge  of  the  real  God  in  the  depth  of  His  love,  the 
tenderness  of  His  nature  or  the  lustrousness  of  His  holi- 
ness ;  how  there  is  no  certitude ;  how  the  God  that  we 


FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.         7 

see  outside  of  Jesus  Christ  is  sometimes  doubt,  some- 
times hope,  sometimes  fear,  always  far  off  and  vague, 
an  abstraction  rather  than  a  person,  "  a  stream  of 
tendency  "  without  us,  that  which  is  unnameable,  and 
the  hke.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  thought  that 
Jesus  Christ  has  showed  us  a  Father,  has  brought  a 
God  to  our  hearts  Whom  we  can  love.  Whom  Ave  can 
know  really  though  not  fully,  of  Whom  we  can  be 
sure,  with  a  certitude  which  is  as  deep  as  the  certitude 
of  our  own  personal  being ;  that  He  has  brought  to 
us  a  God  before  Whom  we  do  not  need  to  crouch  far 
off'  that  He  has  brou^dit  to  us  a  God  whom  we  can 
trust.  Very  significant  is  it  that  Christianity  alone 
puts  the  very  heart  of  religion  in  the  act  of  trust. 
Other  religions  put  it  in  dread,  worship,  service,  and 
the  like.  Jesus  Christ  alone  says — the  bond  between 
men  and  God  is  that  blessed  one  of  trust.  And  He 
says  so  because  He  alone  brings  us  a  God  whom  it  is 
not  ridiculous  to  tell  men  to  trust. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  truth  that  underlies  this 
is  not  only  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Eevealer  of  God, 
but  that  He  Himself  is  Divine.  The  light  shines 
through  a  wmdow,  but  the  light  and  the  glass  that 
makes  it  visible  have  nothing  in  common  with  one 
another.  The  Godhead  shines  through  Christ,  but  He 
is  not  a  mere  transparent  medium.  It  is  Himself  that 
He  is  showing  us  when  He  is  showing  us  God.  "  He 
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  " — not  the  light  that 
streams  through  Me — but  "hath  seen,  in  Me,  the 
Father."  And  because  He  is  Himself  Divine  and  the 
Divine  Revealer,  therefore  the  faith  that  grasps  Him 
is  inseparably  one  with  the  faith  that  grasps  God. 
Men  could  look  upon  a  Moses,  an  Isaiah,  or  a  Paul, 


8        FAITH  IS  GOD,  OXE  TTITH  FAITH  IX  CHFJST. 

and  in  them  recognise  tlie  eradiation  of  tlie  Divinity 
that  imparted  itself  through  them,  but  the  medium 
"w-as  forgotten  in  proportion  as  that  which  it  revealed 
■was  beheld.  You  cannot  forget  Christ  in  order  to  see 
God  more  clearly,  but  to  behold  Him  is  to  behold  God, 

And  if  that  be  true,  these  two  things  follow.  One 
is  that  all  imperfect  revelation  of  God  is  prophetic  of, 
and  leads  up  towards,  the  perfect  revelation  in  Jesus 
Christ.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
gives  that  truth  in  a  very  striking  fashion.  He  com- 
pares all  other  means  of  knowing  God  to  fragmentary 
syllables  of  a  great  word,  of  which  one  was  given  to 
one  man  and  another  to  another.  God  "  spoke  at 
sundry  times  and  in  manifold  portions  to  the 
fathers  by  the  prophets "  ;  but  the  whole  word  is 
articulately  uttered  b}-  the  Son,  in  whom  He  has 
'•'  spoken  unto  us  in  these  last  times."  The  imperfect 
revelation,  by  means  of  those  who  were  merely 
mediums  for  the  revelation,  leads  up  to  Him  who  is 
Himself  the  Revelation,  the  Revealer,  and  ihe 
Revealed. 

And  in  like  manner  all  the  imperfect  faith  that, 
laying  hold  of  other  fi'agmentary  means  of  knowing 
God,  has  tremulously  tried  to  trust  Him,  finds  its 
chmax  and  consummate  flower  in  the  full-blossomed 
faith  that  lays  hold  upon  Jesus  Christ.  The  uncon- 
scious prophecies  of  heathendom ;  the  trust  that,  up 
and  down  the  world,  select  souls  have  put  in  One 
whom  they  dimly  apprehended :  the  faith  of  the  Old 
Testament  saints;  the  rudimentary  beginnings  of 
a  knowledge  of  God  and  of  a  tnist  in  Him  which  are 
found  in  men  to-day,  and  amongst  us,  outside  of  the 
circle  of  Christianity — all  these  things  are  as  manifestly 


FAITH  IN  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.         9 

incomplete  as  a  building  reared  half  its  lieiglit,  and 
wait  for  the  corner-stone  to  be  brought  forth — the  full 
revelation  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  and  the  intelligent 
and  full  acceptance  of  Him  and  faith  in  Him. 

And  another  thing  is  true,  that  without  faith  in 
Christ  such  faith  in  God  as  is  possible  is  feeble,  incom- 
plete, and  will  not  long  last.  Historically  a  pure 
theism  is  all  but  impotent.  There  is  only  one  example 
of  it  on  a  large  scale  in  the  world,  and  that  is  a  kind 
of  bastard  Christianity — Mohammedanism ;  and  Ave 
all  know  what  s^ood  that  is  as  a  religion.  There  are 
plenty  of  people  amongst  us  now-a-days  who  claim  to 
be  very  advanced  thinkers,  and  who  call  themselves 
Theists,  and  not  Christians.  Well,  I  venture  to  say 
that  that  is  a  j)hase  that  will  not  last.  There  is  little 
substance  in  it.  The  God  Whom  men  l^mow  outside  of 
Jesus  CTirist  is  a  ]3oor,  nebulous  thing ;  an  idea,  not 
a  reaht3^  He,  or  rather  It,  is  a  tilm  of  cloud  shaped 
into  a  vague  form,  through  which  you  can  see  the 
stars.  It  has  little  power  to  restrain.  It  has  less 
to  inspire  and  impel.  It  has  still  less  to  comfort ; 
it  has  least  of  all  to  satisfy  the  heart.  You  will  have 
to  get  something  more  substantial  than  the  far-ott'  god 
of  an  unchristian  Theism  it  3-ou  mean  to  sway  the 
world  and  to  satisfy  men's  hearts. 

And  so,  dear  brethren,  I  come  to  this — perhaps 
the  word  may  be  fitting  for  some  that  hsten  to  me — 
"  Beheve  in  God,"  and  that  \o\\  may,  "  believe  also  in 
Christ."  For  sure  I  am  that  when  the  stress  comes, 
and  you  want  a  o-od,  unless  vour  s^od  is  the  God 
revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  he  will  be  a  powerless  deity. 
If  you  have  not  faith  m  Christ,  you  will  not  long  have 
faith  in  God  that  is  vital  and  worth  anything. 


10        FAITU  IX  GOD,  ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST. 

III. — Lastly,  this  trust  in  Christ  is  the  secret  of  a 
quiet  heart. 

It  is  no  use  saying  to  men,  "  Let  not  your  hearts  be 
troubled,"  unless  you  finish  the  verse  and.  say,  "  Believe 
in  God,  believe  also  in  Him."  For  unless  we  trust  we 
shall  certainly  be  troubled.  The  state  of  man  in  this 
world  is  like  that  of  some  of  those  sunny  islands  in 
southern  seas,  around  which  there  often  rave  the 
Avildest  cj'clones,  and  which  carry  in  their  bosoms, 
beneath  all  their  riotous  luxuriance  of  verdant  beauty, 
hidden  fires,  which  over  and  anon  shake  the  solid 
earth  and  spread  destruction.  Storms  without  and 
earthquakes  within — that  is  the  condition  of  hu- 
manity. And  where  is  the  "  rest"  to  come  from  ?  All 
other  defences  are  weak  and  poor,  We  have  heard 
about  "  pills  against  earthquakes."  That  is  what  the 
comforts  and  tranquilizing  which  the  Avorld  supplies 
may  fairly  be  likened  to.  Unless  we  trust  we  are,  and 
we  shall  be,  and  should  be,  "  troubled." 

If  we  trust  we  may  be  quiet.  Trust  is  always 
tranquility.  To  cast  a  burden  off  myself  on  other's 
shoulders  is  always  a  rest.  But  trust  to  Jesus  Christ 
brings  infinitude  on  my  side.  Submission  is  repose. 
When  we  cease  to  kick  against  the  pricks  they  cease 
to  prick  and  wound  us.  Trust  opens  the  heart,  like 
the  windows  of  the  Ark  tossing  upon  the  black  and 
fatal  flood,  for  the  entrance  of  the  peaceful  dove  Avith 
the  olive  branch  in  its  mouth.  Trust  brinofs  Christ 
to  my  side  in  all  His  tenderness  and  greatness  and 
sweetness.  If  I  trust,  "  all  is  right  that  seems  most 
wrong."  If  I  trust,  conscience  is  quiet.  If  I  trust, 
"  life  becomes  a  solcnui  scorn  of  ills."  If  I  trust," 
inward  unrest  is  changed  into  tranquillity,  and  mad 


FAITH  IN-  GOD,   ONE  WITH  FAITH  IN  CHRIST.         11 


passions  are  cast  out  from  him  that  sits  clothed  and 
in  his  right  mind  at  the  feet  of  Jesus. 

"  The  wicked  is  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot 
rest."  But  if  I  trust,  my  soul  will  become  like  the 
glassy  ocean  when  all  the  storms  sleep,  and  "  birds  of 
peace  sit  brooding  on  the  charmed  wave."  "Peace 
I  leave  with  you."  "  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled. 
Trust  in  God  ;  trust  also  in  Me." 

Help  us,  O  Lord,  to  yield  our  hearts  to  Thy  dear 
Son,  and  in  Him  to  find  Thyself  and  eternal  rest. 


II. 


''  riDan^  riDansion^;' 

"  In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions  ;  if  it  were  not  so,  I 
would  have  told  you." — John  xiv.  2. 

""lORROW  needs  simple  words  for  its 
consolation  ;  and  simple  words  are  tlie 
best  clothinof  for  the  larcfest  truths. 
These  eleven  poor  men  were  crushed 
and  desolate  at  the  thought  of  Christ's 
going;  they  fancied  that  if  He  left  them  they  lost 
Him.  And  so,  in  simple,  childlike  words,  which  the 
weakest  could  grasp,  and  in  which  the  most  troubled 
could  find  peace,  He  said  to  them,  after  having 
encouraged  their  trust  in  Him,  "There  is  plenty  of 
room  for  you  as  well  as  for  ]\Ie  where  I  am  going ;  and 
the  frankness  of  our  intercourse  in  the  past  might  make 
you  sure  that  if  I  were  going  to  leave  you  I  would  have 
told  you  all  about  it.  Did  I  ever  hide  from  j^ou  any- 
thing that  was  painful?  Did  I  ever  allure  you  to 
follow  jMe  by  false  promises  ?  Should  I  have  kept 
silence  about  it  if  our  separation  was  to  be  eternal  ?  " 
So,  simply,  as  a  mother  might  her  babe  upon  her 
breast.  He  soothes  their  sorrow.  And  yet,  in  the 
quiet  words,  so  level  to  the  lowest  apprehension,  there 


MANY  mansions:-  13 


lie  great  truths,  far  deeper  than  we  yet  have  appre- 
ciated, and  which  will  enfold  themselves  in  their 
majesty  and  their  greatness  through  eternity.  "  In 
My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions ;  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  would  have  told  you." 

I. — Now  note,  in  these  words,  first,  the  "Father's 
house,"  and  its  ample  room. 

There  is  only  one  other  occasion  recorded  in  which 
our  Lord  used  this  expression,  and  it  occurs  in  this 
same  Gospel  near  the  beginning  ;  where  in  the  narra- 
tive of  the  first  cleansing  of  the  temple  we  read  that 
He  said :  "  Make  not  my  Father's  house  a  house  of 
merchandise."  The  earlier  use  of  the  words  may  help 
to  throw  light  upon  one  aspect  of  this  latter  employ- 
ment of  it,  for  there  blend  in  the  image  the  two 
ideas  of  what  I  may  call  domestic  familiarity,  and  of 
that  great  future  as  being  the  realit}^  of  which  the 
earthly  temple  was  intended  to  be  the  dim  prophecy 
and  shadow.  Its  courts,  its  many  chambers,  its  ample 
porches  with  room  for  thronging  worshippers  re- 
presented in  some  poor  way  the  wide  sweep  and  space 
of  that  higher  house ;  and  the  sense  of  Sonship, 
which  drew  the  Boy  to  His  Father's  house  in  the 
earliest  hours  of  conscious  childhood,  speaks  here. 

Think  for  a  moment  of  how  sweet  and  familiar  the 
conception  of  heaven  as  the  Father's  house  makes  it 
to  us.  There  is  somethino^  awful,  even  to  the  best  and 
holiest  souls,  in  the  thought  of  even  the  glories  beyond. 
The  circumstances  of  death,  which  is  its  portal,  our 
utter  unacquaintance  Avitli  all  that  lies  behind  the 
veil,  the  terrible  silence  and  distance  which  falls  upon 
our  dearest  ones  as  they  are  sucked  into  the  cloud,  all 
tend  to  make  us  feel  that  there  is  much  that  is  solemn 


14  ' '  MANV  MANSIONS. " 

and  awful  even  in  the  thought  of  eternal  future 
blessedness.  But  how  it  is  all  softened  when  we  say, 
'•■  ]\Iy  Father's  house."  Most  of  us  have  long  since 
left  behind  us  the  sweet  security,  the  sense  of  the 
absence  of  all  responsibility,  the  assurance  of  defence 
and  provision,  which  used  to  be  ours  when  we  lived  as 
children  in  a  father's  house  here.  But  we  may  all 
look  forward  to  the  renewal,  in  far  nobler  form,  of  these 
earl}'-  days,  when  the  father's  house  meant  the  inex- 
pugnable fortress  where  no  evil  could  befall  us,  the 
abundant  home  where  all  wants  were  supplied,  and 
where  the  shyest  and  timidest  child  could  feel  at  ease 
and  secure.  It  is  all  coming  again,  brother !  And 
amidst  the  august  and  unimaginable  glories  of  that 
future  the  old  feeling  of  being  little  children,  nestling 
safe  in  the  Father's  house,  will  till  our  quiet  hearts 
once  more. 

And,  then,  consider  how  the  conception  of  that 
future  as  the  Father's  house  suggests  answers  to  so 
many  of  our  questions  about  the  relationship  of  the 
inmates  to  one  another.  Are  they  to  dwell  isolated 
in  their  several  mansions  ?  Is  that  the  way  in 
which  children  in  a  home  dwell  Avith  each  other  ? 
Surely  if  He  be  the  Father,  and  heaven  be  His  house, 
the  relation  of  the  redeemed  to  one  another  must 
have  in  it  more  than  all  the  sweet  familiarity  and 
unrestrained  frankness  which  subsists  in  the  families 
of  earth.  A  solitary  heaven  would  be  but  half  a 
heaven,  and  would  ill  correspond  Avith  the  hopes  that 
inevitably  spi-ing  from  the  representation  of  it  as  "  my 
Father's  house." 

But  consider,  further,  that  this  great  and  tender 
name   for  heaven   has   its   deepest   meaning   in   the 


"MANY  MANSIONS."  15 


conception  of  it  as  a  spiritual  state  of  which  the 
essential  elements  are  the  loving  manifestation  and 
presence  of  God  as  Father,  the  perfect  consciousness 
of  sonship,  the  happy  union  of  all  the  children  in 
one  great  family,  and  the  derivation  of  all  then- 
blessedness  from  their  elder  Brother. 

The  earthly  temple,  to  which  there  is  some  allusion 
m^  this  great  metaphor,  was  the  place  in  which  the 
Divine  glory  was  manifested  to  seeking  souls,  thouo-h 
in  symbol,  yet  also  in  reality,  and  the  representation 
of  our  text  blends  the  two  ideas  of  the  free,  frank 
mtercourse   of    the   home   and    of    the    mao-nificent 
revelations  of  the  holy  of  hohes.     Under  either  aspect 
of  the   phrase,  whether  we  think  of  "my  Father's 
house  "  as  temple  or  as  home,  it  sets  before  us,  as  the 
mam  blessedness  and  glory  of  heaven,  the  vision  of 
the  Father,  the   consciousness   of  sonship,  and   the 
complete   union   with   Him.      There   are  many  sub- 
sidiary and  more  outward   blessednesses  and  cdories 
which  shine  dimly  through  the  haze  of  metaphors 
and  negations,  by  which  alone  a  state  of  which  we 
have  no  experience  can  be  revealed  to  us ;  but  these 
are  secondary.    The  heaven  of  heaven  is  the  possession 
of  God  the  Father  through  the  Son  in  the  expandino- 
spirits  of  His  sons.     The  sovereign  and  filial  position 
which  Jesus  Christ  in  His  manhood  occupies  in  that 
higher  house,  and  which   He  shares  with  all  those 
who  by  Him  have  received  the  adoption  of  sons,  is 
the  very  heart  and  nerve  of  this  great  metaphor. 

But  I  think  we  must  go  a  step  further  than  that 
and  recognise  that  in  the  image  there  is  inherent  the 
teaching  that  that  glorious  future  is  not  merely  a 
state,  but  also  a  place.     Local  associations  are  not  to 


16  ''MANY  MAXSIONS:' 

be  divorced  from  the  words ;  and  although  we  can  say- 
but  Httle  about  such  a  matter,  yet  ever3'thing  m  the 
teaching  of  Scripture  points  to  the  thought  that  how- 
soever true  it  may  be  that  the  essence  of  heaven  is 
condition,  yet  that  also  heaven  has  a  local  habitation, 
and  is  a  place  in  the  great  universe  of  God.  Jesus 
Christ  has  at  this  moment  a  human  body,  glorified. 
That  body,  as  Scripture  teaches  us,  is  somewhere,  and 
where  He  is  there  shall  also  His  servant  be.  In  the 
context  He  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  "  He  goes  to 
prepare  a  place  for  us,"  and  though  I  would  not  insist 
upon  the  literal  interpretation  of  such  words,  yet 
distinctly  the  drift  of  the  representation  is  in  the 
direction  of  localising,  though  not  of  materiaHsing, 
the  abode  of  the  blessed.  So  I  think  we  can  say,  not 
merely  that  ivliat  He  is  that  shall  also  His  servants 
be,  but  that  ivltere  He  is  there  shall  also  His  servants 
be.  And  fi'om  the  representation  of  my  text,  though 
we  cannot  fathom  all  its  depths,  we  can  at  least  grasp 
this,  which  gives  solidity  and  reality  to  our  con- 
templations of  the  future,  that  heaven  is  a  place,  full 
of  all  sweet  security  and  homelike  repose,  where  God 
is  made  known  in  every  heart  and  to  every  conscious- 
ness as  a  loving  Father,  and  of  which  all  the  in- 
habitants are  knit  tocjether  in  the  frankest  fraternal 
intercourse,  conscious  of  the  Father's  love,  and  re- 
joicing in  the  abundant  provisions  of  His  royal  house. 
And  then  there  is  a  second  thought  to  be  sug- 
gested  from  these  words,  and  that  is  of  the  ample 
room  in  this  great  house.  The  original  purpose  of 
the  words  of  my  text,  as  I  have  already  reminded 
you,  was  simply  to  soothe  the  fears  of  a  handful  of 
disciples. 


■JIAXY  MANSIO.YS."  17 


There  was  room  where  Christ  went  for  eleven  poor 
men.  Yes,  room  enough  for  them  I  but  C'hrist's 
prescient  eye  looked  down  the  ages,  and  saw  all  the 
unborn  millions  that  would  yet  be  drawn  to  Him 
uplifted  on  the  cross,  and  some  gloAv  of  satisfaction 
flitted  across  His  sorrow,  as  He  saw  from  afar  the 
result  of  the  impending  travail  of  His  soul  in  the 
multitudes  by  whom  God's  heavenly  house  should  yet 
be  filled.  "  Many  mansions  ! "  The  thought  widens 
out  far  beyond  our  grasp.  Perhaps  that  upper  room, 
like  most  of  the  roof-chambers  in  Jewish  houses, 
was  open  to  the  skies,  and  whilst  He  spoke,  the  innu- 
merable lights  that  blaze  in  that  clear  heaven  shone 
down  upon  them,  and  He  may  have  pointed  to 
these.  The  better  Abraham  perhaps  looked  forth, 
like  His  prototype,  on  the  starry  heavens,  and 
saw  in  the  vision  of  the  future  those  who  through 
Him  should  receive  the  adoption  of  sons  and  dwell 
for  ever  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  "  so  many  as  the 
stars  of  the  sky  in  multitude,  and  as  the  sand  Avhich 
is  by  the  seashore  innumerable." 

Ah,  brethren  I  if  we  could  only  widen  our  measure- 
ment of  the  Avails  of  the  New  Jerusalem  to  the 
measurement  of  that  "cfolden  rod  which  the  man, 
that  is,  the  angel,"  as  John  says,  applied  to  it,  we 
should  understand  how  much  bigger  it  is  than  any 
of  these  poor  sects  and  communities  of  ours  here  on 
earth.  If  we  would  lay  to  heart,  as  we  ought  to  do, 
the  deep  meaning  of  that  indefinite  "  many "  in  my 
text,  it  would  rebuke  our  narrowness.  There  will  be 
a  great  many  occupants  of  the  mansions  in  heaven 
that  Christian  men  here  on  earth — the  most  Catholic 
of  them — will  be  very  much  surprised  to  see  there, 

2 


"2iAi\v  mansions:' 


and  thousands  will  find  their  entrance  there  that 
never  found  their  entrance  into  any  communities  of 
so-called  Christians  here  on  earth. 

That  one  word  "  many "  should  deepen  our  confi- 
dence in  the  triumphs  of  Christ's  Cross,  and  it  may  be 
used  to  heighten  our  own  confidence  as  to  our  own 
poor  selves.  A  chamber  in  the  great  temple  waits  for 
each  of  us,  and  the  question  is.  Shall  we  occupy  it,  or 
shall  we  not  ?  The  old  rabbis  had  a  tradition  which, 
like  a  great  many  of  their  apparently  foolish  sayings, 
covers  in  picturesque  guise  a  very  deep  truth.  They 
said  that,  however  many  the  throngs  of  worshippers 
who  came  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the  passover,  the  streets 
of  the  city  and  the  courts  of  the  sanctuary  were  never 
crowded.  And  so  it  is  with  that  great  city.  There  is 
room  for  all.  There  are  throngs,  but  no  crowds. 
Each  finds  a  place  in  the  ample  sweep  of  the  Father's 
house,  like  some  of  the  great  palaces  that  barbaric 
Eastern  kings  used  to  build,  in  whose  courts  armies 
might  encamp,  and  the  chambers  of  which  were 
counted  by  the  thousand.  And  surely  in  all  that 
ample  accommodation,  yoxx  and  I  may  find  some 
corner  where  we,  if  we  will,  may  lodge  for  evermore. 

I  do  not  dwell  upon  subsidiary  ideas  that  may  be 
draAvn  from  the  expressions.  "  Mansions  "  means 
places  of  permanent  abode,  and  suggests  the  two 
thoughts,  so  sweet  to  travellers  and  toilers  in  this  fleet- 
ing, labouring  life,  of  unchangeableness  and  of  repose. 
Some  have  supposed  that  the  variety  in  the  attain- 
ments of  the  redeemed,  Avhich  is  reasonable  and 
Scriptural,  might  be  deduced  from  our  text,  but  that 
does  not  seem  to  be  relevant  to  our  Lord's  purpose.  ■ 

One  other  suggestion   may  be   made  without   en- 


"MANY  mansions:'  19 

larging  upon  it.  There  is  only  another  occasion  in 
this  Gospel  in  which  the  word  here  translated  "  man- 
sions "  is  employed,  and  it  is  this :  "  We  will  come  and 
make  our  abode  with  him."  Our  mansion  is  in  God ; 
God's  dwelhng-place  is  in  us.  So  ask  yourselves, 
Have  you  a  share  there  in  that  heavenly  home  ? 
When  prodigal  children  go  away  from  the  father's 
house,  sometimes  a  heart-broken  parent  will  keep  the 
boy's  room  just  as  it  used  to  be  when  he  was  young 
and  pure,  and  will  hope  and  Aveary  through  long  days 
for  him  to  come  back  and  occupy  it  again.  God  is 
keeping  a  room  for  you  in  His  house ;  do  you  see  that 
you  fill  it. 

II. — In  the  next  place,  note  here  the  sufficiency  of 
Christ's  revelation  for  our  needs. 

"  If  it  were  not  so  I  would  have  told  you."  He  sets 
Himself  forward  in  very  august  fashion  as  being  the 
revealer  and  the  opener  of  that  house  for  us.  There 
is  a  singular  tone  about  all  our  Lord's  few  references 
to  the  future — a  tone  of  decisiveness;  not  as  if  He 
were  speaking,  as  a  man  might  do,  that  which  he  had 
thought  out,  or  Avliich  had  come  to  him,  but  as  if  He 
was  speaking  of  what  He  had  Himself  beheld.  "  We 
speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have 
seen."  He  stands  like  one  on  a  mountain  top,  looldng 
down  into  the  valleys  beyond,  and  telling  His  com- 
rades in  the  plain  behind  Him  what  He  sees.  He 
speaks  of  that  unseen  Avorld  always  as  One  who  had 
been  in  it,  and  who  was  reporting  experiences,  and  not 
giving  forth  opinions.  His  knowledge  was  the  know- 
ledge of  One  who  dwelt  with  the  Father,  and  left  the 
house  in  order  to  find  and  bring  back  His  wandering 
brethren.    It  was  "  His  own  calm  home.  His  habitation 

2* 


20  •   MANY  MANSIONS." 

from  eternity  " ;  and  therefore  He  could  tell  us  with 
decisiveness,  with  simplicity,  with  assurance,  all  which 
we  need  to  know  about  the  geography  of  that  un- 
known land — the  plan  of  that,  by  us  unvisited,  house. 
Very  remarkable,  therefore,  is  it  that  with  this  tone 
there  should  be  such  reticence  in.  Christ's  references 
to  the  future.  The  text  implies  the  rationale  of  such 
reticence.  "  If  it  were  not  so  I  Avould  have  told  you." 
I  tell  you  all  that  you  need,  though  I  tell  you  a  great 
deal  less  than  you  sometimes  want. 

The  gaps  in  our  knowledge  of  the  future,  seeing  that 
we  have  such  a  Revealer  as  we  have  in  Christ,  are  re- 
markable. But  my  text  suggest  this  to  us — we  have  as 
much  as  we  need.  /  know,  and  many  of  you  know,  by 
bitter  experience,  how  many  questions,  the  answers  to 
which  would  seem  to  us  to  be  such  a  lightening  of 
our  burdens,  our  desolated  and  troubled  hearts  suggest 
about  that  future,  and  how  vainly  we  ply  heaven 
with  questions  and  interrogate  the  unreplying  Oracle. 
But  we  know  as  much  as  we  need.  We  know  th«,t 
God  is  there.  We  know  that  it  is  the  Father's  house. 
We  know  that  Christ  is  in  it.  We  know  that  the 
dwellers  there  are  a  family.  We  know  that  sweet 
sepurity  and  ample  provision  are  there  ;  and,  for  the 
rest,  if  we  needed  to  have  heard  it,  He  would  have 
told  us. 

My  knowledge  of  that  life  is  small, 

The  eye  of  faith  is  dim  ; 
But  'tis  enough  that  Christ  knows  all, 

And  I  shall  be  with  Him. 

Let   the   gaps    remain.     The    gaps    are   part  of  the 
revelation,  and  we  know  enough  for  faith  and  hope.' 
May  we  not  widen  the  application  of  that  thought 


"  iMAXr  MAySJOH^S."  21 

to  other  matters  than  to  our  bounded  and  fragmentary 
conceptions  of  a  future  hfe  {  In  times  hke  the 
present,  of  doubt  and  unrest,  it  is  a  great  piece  of 
Christian  wisdom  to  recognize  the  Hmitations  of  our 
knowledofe  and  the  sufficiency  of  the  frao'ments  that 
we  have.  What  do  we  u'et  a  revelation  for  ?  To  solve 
theological  puzzles  and  dogmatic  difficulties  ?  to 
inflate  us  Avith  the  pride  of  (/jtttsi-omniscience  ?  or  to 
present  to  us  God  in  Christ  for  faith,  for  love,  for 
obedience,  for  hnitation  ?  Surely  the  latter,  and  for 
such  purposes  we  have  enough. 

So  let  us  recoo-nize  that  our  knowledge  is  very 
partial.  A  gi-eat  stretch  of  wall  is  blank,  and  there 
is  not  a  window  in  it.  If  there  had  been  need  for 
one,  it  would  have  been  struck  out.  Ho  has  been 
pleased  to  leave  many  things  obscure,  not  arbitrarily, 
to  try  our  faith — for  the  implication  of  the  wortls 
before  us  is  that  the  relation  between  Him  and  us 
binds  Him  to  the  utmost  possible  frankness,  and 
that  all  which  we  need  and  He  can  tell  us  He  does 
tell — but  for  high  reasons,  and  because  of  the  very 
conditions  of  our  present  environment,  which  forbid 
the  more  complete  and  all-round  laiowledge. 

So  let  us  recomize  our  limitations.  AVe  know  in 
part,  and  we  are  wise  if  we  affirm  in  part.  Hold  by 
the  Central  Light,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.  "  Many 
things  did  Jesus  which  are  not  written  in  this  book." 
And  many  gaps  and  deficiencies  from  a  human  point 
of  view  exist  in  the  contexture  of  revelation.  ''  But 
these  are  written  that  ye  may  beheve  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ,"  for  which  enough  has  been  told  us,  "  and 
that,  believing,  ye  may  have  life  in  His  name."  If 
that  purpose  be  accomplished   in  us,  God  will  not 


22  "  MANY  MANSIONS." 

have  spoken,  nor  we  have  heard,  in  vain.  Let  us  hold 
by  the  Central  Light,  and  then  the  circumference  of 
darkness  will  gradually  retreat,  and  a  wider  sphere  of 
illumination  be  ours,  until  the  day  when  we  enter  our 
mansion  in  the  Father's  house,  and  then  "in  Thy 
Light  shall  we  see  light "  ;  and  we  shall  "  know  even 
as  we  are  known." 

Let  your  elder  Brother  lead  you  back,  dear  friend, 
to  the  Father's  bosom,  and  be  sure  that  if  you  trust 
Him  and  listen  to  Him,  you  will  knoAv  enough  on 
earth  to  turn  earth  into  a  foretaste  of  heaven,  and 
will  find  at  last  your  place  in  the  Father's  house, 
beside  the  Brother  who  has  prepared  it  for  you. 


III. 


Zbc  forerunner. 


I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place 
for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  Myself  ;  that 
where  I  am.  there  ye  may  be  also."— John  xiv.  2,  3. 


pi,'  HAT  Divine  simplicity  and  depth  are  in 
these  words  !  They  carry  us  up  into 
the  unseen  world,  and  beyond  time ; 
and  yet  a  little  child  can  lay  hold  on 
them,  and  mourning  hearts  and  dying 
men  find  peace  and  sweetness  in  them.  A  very 
familiar  image  underlies  them.  It  was  customary  for 
travellers  in  those  old  days  to  send  some  of  their  party 
on  in  advance,  to  find  lodging  and  make  arrangements 
for  them  in  some  great  city.  Many  a  time  one  or 
other  of  the  disciples  had  been  "  sent  before  His  face 
into  every  place  where  He  Himself  should  come."  On 
that  very  morning  two  of  them  had  gone  in,  at  His 
bidding,  from  Bethany  to  make  ready  the  table  at 
which  they  were  sitting.  Christ  here  takes  that  office 
upon  Himseh".  The  emblem  is  homely,  the  thing- 
meant  is  transcendent. 

Not  less  wonderful  is  the  blending  of  majesty  and 
lowliness.    The  office  which  He  takes  upon  Himself  is 


24  TEE  FORERUNNER. 

that  of  an  inferior  and  a  servant.  And  3^et  the  dis- 
charge of  it,  in  the  present  ease,  implies  His  authority 
over  every  corner  of  the  universe,  His  immortal  life, 
and  the  sufficiency  of  His  presence  to  make  a  heaven. 
Nor  can  we  fail  to  notice  the  blending  of  another  pair 
of  opposites :  His  certainty  of  His  impending  death, 
and  His  certainty,  notwithstanding  and  thereby,  of 
His  continual  Avork  and  His  final  return,  are  insepar- 
ably interlaced  here.  How  comes  it  that,  in  all  His 
premonitions  of  His  death,  Jesus  Christ  never  spoke 
about  it  as  failure  or  as  the  interruption  or  end  of  His 
activity,  but  always  as  the  transition  to,  and  the  con- 
dition of,  His  wider  work  ?  "  I  go,  and  if  I  go  I  return, 
and  take  you  to  myself" 

So,  then,  there  are  three  things  here,  the  departure 
with  its  purpose,  the  return,  and  the  perfected  union. 

I. — The  Departure, 

Our  Lord's  going  away  from  that  little  group  was 
a  journey  in  two  stages.  Calvary  was  the  first ;  Olivet 
was  the  second.  He  means  by  the  phrase  the  whole 
continuous  process  which  begins  with  His  death  and 
ends  in  His  ascension.  Both  are  embraced  in  His  words, 
and  each  co-operates  to  the  attainment  of  the  great 
purpose. 

He  prepares  a  place  for  us  by  His  death.  The  High 
Priest,  in  the  ancient  ritual,  once  a  year  Avas  privileged 
to  lift  the  heavy  veil  and  pass  into  the  darkened 
chamber,  where  only  the  light  between  the  cherubim 
was  visible,  because  he  bore  in  his  hand  the  blood  of 
the  sacrifice.  But  in  our  New  Testament  system  the 
path  into  the  holiest  of  all,  the  reahzation  of  the  most 
intimate  fellowship  with  heavenly  things  and  commu- 
nion with  God  Himself,  are  made  possible,  and  the  way 


THE  FORERUNNER.  25 

patent  for  every  foot,  because  Jesus  has  died.  And  as 
the  communion  upon  earth,  so  the  perfecting  of  the 
communion  in  the  heavens.  Who  of  us  could  step 
within  those  awful  sanctities,  or  stand  serene  amidst 
the  region  of  eternal  light  and  stainless  purity,  unless, 
in  His  death.  He  had  borne  the  sins  of  the  world,  and, 
having  "  overcome  "  its  "  sharpness  "  by  enduring  its 
blow,  had  "opened  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  all 
believers  "  ? 

Old  legends  tell  us  of  magic  gates  that  resisted  all 
attempts  to  force  them,  but  upon  which,  if  one  drop 
of  a  certain  blood  fell,  they  flew  open.  And  so,  by 
His  death,  Christ  has  opened  the  gates  and  made  the 
heaven  of  perfect  purity  a  dwelling-place  for  sinful  men. 

But  the  second  stage  of  His  departure  is  that  which 
more  eminently  is  in  Christ's  mind  here.  He  prepares 
a  place  for  us  by  His  entrance  into  and  His  dwelling 
in  the  heavenly  ]'>laces.  The  words  are  obscure 
because  Ave  have  but  few  others  with  which  to  com- 
pare them,  and  no  experience  by  which  to  interpret 
them.  We  know  so  little  about  the  matter  that  it  is 
not  wise  to  say  much  ;  but,  though  there  bo  vast 
tracts  of  darkness  round  the  little  spot  of  light,  this 
should  only  make  the  spot  of  light  more  vivid  and 
more  precious.  We  know  little,  but  we  laiow  enough 
for  mind  and  heart  to  rest  upon.  Our  ignorance  of 
the  ways,  in  which  Christ  by  His  ascension  prepares  a 
heaven  for  His  followers,  should  neither  breed  doubt 
nor  disregard  of  His  assurance  that  He  does. 

If  Christ  had  not  ascended,  would  there  have  been 
"  a  place  "  at  all  ?  He  has  gone  Avith  a  human  body, 
which,  glorified  as  it  is,  still  has  relations  to  space, 
and  must  be  somewhere.     And  Ave  may  even  say  that 


26  THE  FORERUNNER. 


His  ascending  up  on  high  has  made  a  place  where  His 
servants  are.  But  apart  from  that  suggestion,  Avhich, 
perhaps,  is  going  beyond  our  hmits,  we  may  see 
that  Christ's  presence  in  heaven  is  needful  to  make 
it  a  heaven  for  poor  human  souls.  There,  as  here 
(Scripture  assures  us),  and  throughout  eternity  as 
to-day,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Mediator  of  all  human 
Imowledge  and  possession  of  God.  It  is  from  Him  and 
through  Him  that  there  come  to  men,  whether  they 
be  men  on  earth  or  men  in  the  heavens,  all  that  they 
know,  all  that  they  hope,  all  that  they  enjoy  of  the 
wisdom,  love,  beauty,  peace,  power,  which  flow  from 
God.  Take  away  from  the  heaven  of  the  Christian 
expectation  that  which  comes  to  the  spirit  through 
Jesus  Christ,  and  you  have  nothing  left.  He  and  His 
mediation  and  ministration  alone  make  the  brightness 
and  the  blessedness  of  that  high  state.  The  very 
glories  of  all  that  lies  beyond  the  veil  would  have  an 
aspect  appalling  and  bewildering  to  us,  unless  our 
Brother  were  there.  Like  some  poor  savages  brought 
into  a  great  cit}',  or  rustics  into  the  presence  of  a  king 
and  his  court,  we  should  be  ill  at  ease  amidst  the  s'lories 
and  solemnities  of  that  future  life  unless  we  saw 
standing  there  our  Kinsman,  to  whom  we  can  turn, 
and  who  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  feel  that  it  is 
home.  Christ's  presence  makes  heaven  the  home  of 
our  hearts. 

Not  only  did  He  go  to  prepare  a  place,  but  He  is 
continuously  preparing  it  for  us  all  through  the  ages. 
We  have  to  think  of  a  double  form  of  the  work  of 
Christ,  His  past  work  in  His  earthly  life,  and  His 
present  in  His  exaltation.  We  have  to  think  of  "a 
double  form  of  His  present  activity — His  work  with 


THE  FOEERUNXER.  27 

and  in  us  here  on  earth,  and  His  work  for  ns  there  in 
the  heavens.  We  have  to  think  of  a  double  form  of 
His  work  in  the  heavens — that  which  the  Scripture 
represents  in  a  metaphor,  the  full  comprehension  of 
which  surpasses  our  present  powers  and  experiences, 
as  being  His  priestly  intercession ;  and  that  which  my 
text  represents  in  a  metaphor,  perhaps  a  little  more 
level  to  our  apprehension,  as  being  His  preparing  a 
place  for  us.  Behind  the  veil  there  is  a  working 
Christ,  who,  in  the  heavens,  is  preparing  a  place  for  all 
that  love  Him. 

II. — In  the  next  place,  note  the  Return. 

The  purpose  of  our  Lord's  departure,  as  set  forth  by 
Himself  here,  guarantees  for  us  His  cominof  back  aofain. 
That  is  the  force  of  the  simple  argumentation  of  my 
text,  and  of  the  pathetic  and  soothing  repetition  of  the 
sweet  words,  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you  ;  and  if 
I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and 
receive  you  unto  Myself."  Because  the  departure  had 
for  its  purpose  the  preparing  of  the  place,  therefore  it 
is  necessarily  followed  by  a  return.  He  who  went 
away  as  the  Forerunner  has  not  done  His  work  until 
He  comes  back,  and,  as  Guide,  leads  those  for  whom 
He  had  prepared  the  place,  to  the  place  which  He  had 
prepared  for  them. 

Now  that  return  of  our  Lord,  like  His  departure,  may 
be  considered  as  having  two  stages.  Unquestionably 
the  main  meaning  and  application  of  the  words  is 
to  that  final  and  personal  coming  which  stands  at  the 
end  of  history,  and  to  which  the  hopes  of  every 
Christian  soul  ought  to  be  steadfastly  directed.  He 
will  "  so  come  in  like  manner  as  "  He  has  gone.  "We 
are  not  to  water  down  such  words  as  these  into  any- 


THE  FORERUNNER. 


thing  short  of  a  return  precisely  corresponding  in  its 
method  to  the  departure  ;  and  as  the  departure  was 
visible,  corporeal,  literal,  personal,  and  local,  so  the 
return  is  to  be  visible,  corporeal,  literal,  personal,  local 
too.  And  He  will  come  as  He  went,  a  visible  Man- 
hood, onl}'  throned  amongst  the  clouds  of  heaven  with 
power  and  great  glory.  This  is  the  aim  that  He  sets 
before  Him  in  His  departure.  He  leaves  in  order  that 
He  may  come  back  again. 

And,  oh !  dear  friends,  remember — and  let  us  live 
in  the  strenofth  of  the  remembrance — that  this  return 
ought  to  be  the  prominent  subject  of  Christian  aspira- 
tion and  desire.     There  is  much  about  the  conception 
of  that  solemn  return,  with  all  the  convulsions  that 
attend  it,  and  the  judgment  of  which  it  is  preliminary, 
that  may  Avell  make  men's  hearts  chill  within  them. 
But  for  you  and  me,  if  we  have  any  love  in  our  hearts 
and  loyalty  in  our  spirits  to  that  King,  "  His  coming  " 
should  be  "prepared  as  the  morning,"  and  we  should 
join  in  the  great  burst  of  rapture  of  many  a  psalm, 
which  calls  upon  rocks  and  hills  to  break  forth  into 
singing,  and  trees  of  the  field  to  clap  their  hands, 
because  He  cometh  as  the  King  to  judge  the  earth. 
His  own  parable  tells  us  how  we  ought  to  regard  His 
coming.    When  the  fig-tree's  branch  begins  to  supple, 
and  the  little  leaves  to  push  their  way  through  the 
polished  stem,  then  we  know  that  summer  is  at  hand. 
His  coming  should  be  as  the  approach  of  that  glorious, 
fervid    time,   in    which    the    sunshine    has    tenfold 
brilliancy  and  power,  the  time  of  ripened  harvests  and 
matured  fruits,  the  time  of  joy  for  all  creatures  that 
love  the  sun.     It  should  be  the  glad  hope  of  all  His 
servants. 


THE  FORERUNNER.  29 

We  have  a  double  witness  to  bear  in  the  midst  of 
this  as  of  every  generation.  One  half  of  the  witness 
stretches  backwards  to  the  Cross,  and  proclaims 
"  Christ  has  come " ;  the  other  reaches  onwards  to 
the  Throne,  and  proclaims  "  Christ  will  come."  Be- 
tween these  two  high,  uplifted  piers  swings  the  chain 
of  the  world's  history,  which  closes  with  the  return 
to  judge  and  to  save,  of  the  Lord  who  came  to  die 
and  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us. 

But  do  not  let  us  forget  that  we  may  well  take 
another  point  of  view  than  this.  Scripture  knows  of 
many  comings  of  the  Lord  preliminary  to,  and  in 
principle  one  with,  His  last  coming.  For  nations,  all 
great  crises  of  their  history  are  "  comings  of  the 
Lord,"  the  Judge.  And  we  are  strictly  in  the  line 
of  Scripture  analogy  when,  in  reference  to  individuals, 
we  see  in  each  sinofle  death  a  true  comino:  of  the 
Lord. 

That  is  the  point  of  vicAv  in  which  we  ought  to 
look  upon  a  Christian's  death-bed.  "  The  Master  is 
come,  and  calleth  for  thee."  Beyond  all  secondary 
causes,  deeper  than  disease  or  accident,  lies  the  loving 
will  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of  life  and  of  death. 
Death  is  Christ's  minister,  "  mighty  and  beauteous, 
though  His  face  be  dark,"  and  he,  too,  stands 
amidst  the  ranks  of  the  "  ministering  spirits  sent 
forth  to  minister  to  them  that  shall  be  heirs  of  sal- 
vation." It  is  Christ  that  says  of  one,  "  I  will  that 
this  man  tarry,"  and  to  another,  "  Go  1 "  and  he  goeth. 
But  w^hensocver  a  Christian  man  lies  down  to  die, 
Christ  says  "  Come  1 "  and  he  comes.  How  that 
thouo-ht  should  hallow  the  death-chamber  as  with 
the  print  of  the  Master's  feet !     How  it  should  quiet 


30  THE  FORERUNNER. 

our  hearts  and  dry  our  tears  !  How  it  should  change 
the  whole  aspect  of  that  "  shadow  feared  of  man " ! 
"With  Him  for  our  companion,  the  lonely  road  will  not 
be  dreary ;  and  though,  in  its  anticipation,  our  timid 
hearts  may  often  be  ready  to  say,  "  Surely  the  dark- 
ness shall  cover  me,"  if  we  have  Him  by  our  sides, 
"  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  us."  The  dying- 
martyr  beneath  the  city  wall  lifted  up  his  face  to  the 
heavens,  and  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit ! " 
It  was  the  echo  of  the  Master's  promise,  "  I  will  come 
again,  and  receive  you  to  Myself." 

III. — Lastly,  notice  the  Perfected  Union. 

The  departure  for  such  a  purpose  necessarily  in- 
volved the  return  again.  Both  are  stages  in  the 
process,  which  is  perfected  by  complete  union — "  that 
where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also." 

Christ,  as  I  have  been  saying,  is  Heaven.  His 
presence  is  all  that  we  need  for  peace,  for  joy,  for 
purity,  for  rest,  for  love,  for  growth.  To  be  with  Him, 
as  He  tells  us  in  another  part  of  these  wonderful  last 
words  in  the  upper  chamber,  is  to  behold  His  glory. 
And  to  behold  His  glory,  as  John  tells  us  in  his 
Epistle,  is  to  be  like  Him.  So  Christ's  presence  means 
the  communication  to  us  of  all  the  lustre  of  His 
radiance,  of  all  the  whiteness  of  His  purity,  of  all  the 
depth  of  His  blessedness,  and  of  a  share  in  His  won- 
drous dominion.  His  glorified  manhood  will  pass  into 
ours,  and  they  that  are  with  Him  where  He  is  will 
rest  as  in  the  centre  and  home  of  their  spirits, 
and  find  Him  all-sufficient.  His  presence  is  my 
Heaven. 

That  is  almost  all  we  know.  Oh !  it  is  more  than  - 
all  we  need  to  know.     The  curtain  is  the  picture.     It 


THE  FORERUNNEE.  31 


is  because  what  is  there  transcends  in  gloiy  all  our 
present  experience  that  Scripture  can  only  hint  at  it 
and  describe  it  by  negations — such  as  "  no  night,"  "  no 
sorrow,"  "  no  tears,"  "  former  things  passed  away "  ; 
and  by  symbols  of  glory  and  lustre  gathered  from  all 
that  is  loftiest  and  noblest  in  human  buildings  and 
society.  But  all  that  is  but  secondary  and  poor.  The 
living  heart  of  the  hope,  and  the  lambent  centre  of 
the  brightness,  is,  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the 
Lord." 

And  it  is  enough.  It  is  enough  to  make  the  bond 
of  union  between  us  in  the  outer  court  and  them  in 
the  holy  place.  Parted  friends  will  fix  to  look  at  the 
same  star  at  the  same  moment  of  the  night  and  feel 
some  union ;  and  if  we  from  amidst  the  clouds  of 
earth,  and  they  from  amidst  the  pure  radiance  of  their 
heaven,  turn  our  eyes  to  the  same  Christ,  we  are  not 
far  a]3art.  If  He  be  the  companion  of  each  of  us.  He 
reaches  a  hand  to  each,  and,  clasping  it,  the  parted 
ones  are  united ;  and  "  whether  we  wake  or  sleep  we 
hve  together"  because  we  both  live  with  Him. 

Brother !  Is  Jesus  Christ  so  much  to  j-ou  that  a 
heaven  which  consists  in  nearness  and  likeness  to 
Him  has  any  attraction  for  you  ?  Let  Him  be  your 
Saviour,  your  Sacrifice,  your  Helper,  your  Companion. 
Obey  Him  as  your  King,  love  Him  as  your  Friend,  trust 
Him  as  your  All.  And  be  sure  that  then  the  darkness 
will  be  but  the  shadow  of  His  hand,  and  instead  of 
dreading  death  as  that  which  separates  you  from  life 
and  love  and  action  and  joy,  you  will  be  able  to  meet 
it  peacefully,  as  that  which  rends  the  thin  veil, 
and  unites  you  with  Him  who  is  the  Heaven  of 
heavens. 


32  THE  FORERUNNER. 

He  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us.  And  if  we 
will  let  Him,  He  will  prepare  us  for  the  place,  and 
then  come  and  lead  us  thither.  "  Thou  wilt  show  me 
the  path  of  life"  which  leads  through  death.  "In 
Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  Thy  right  hand 
there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 


IV. 


^be  Ma^,  unknown  ant)  ^ct  well  known, 

■'  And  whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know.  Thomas  saith 
unto  Him,  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  Thou  goest ;  and  how 
can  we  know  the  way  ?  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I  am  the  Way, 
the  Truth,  and  the  Life  ;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but 
by  Me.  If  ye  had  known  Me,  ye  should  have  known  My 
Father  also  :  and  from  henceforth  ye  know  Him,  and  have 
seen  Him." — John  xiv.  4 — 7. 

UR  Lord  has  been  speaking  of  His  de- 
parture, of  its  purpose,  of  His  return 
as  guaranteed  by  that  purpose,  and  of 
His  servants'  eternal  and  perfect  re- 
union with  Him.  But  even  these 
cheering  and  calming  tlioughts  do  not  exliaust  His 
consolations,  as  they  did  not  satisfy  all  the  disciples' 
needs.  They  might  still  have  said,  "  Yes ;  Ave  believe 
that  You  will  come  back  again,  and  we  believe  that 
we  shall  be  together ;  but  what  about  the  parenthesis 
of  absence  ? "  And  here  is  the  answer,  or  at  least  part 
of  it :  "  Whither  I  go  ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know  "  : 
or,  if  we  adopt  the  shortened  form  which  the  Revised 
Version  gives  us,  "  Whither  I  go  ye  know  the  Avay." 
When  you  say  to  a  man,    "  You  knoAv   the   Avay," 

3 


^^: 

34     THE  WA  Y,  UNKNO  WN  AND  YET  WELL  KNO IVN. 

you  mean  "Come."  And  in  these  words  there  lie, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  a  veiled  invitation  to  the  disciples 
to  come  to  Him  before  He  came  back  for  them,  and 
the  assurance  that  they,  though  separated,  might 
still  find  and  tread  the  road  to  the  Father's  house, 
and  so  be  with  Him  still.  They  are  not  left  desolate. 
The  Christ  who  is  absent  is  present  as  the  path  to 
Himself.  And  so  the  parenthesis  is  bridged  across. 
Now  in  these  verses  we  have  several  large  and 
important  lessons  which  I  think  may  best  be  drawn 
by  simply  seeking  to  follow  their  course. 

I. — Observe  the  disciples'  unconscious  knowledge. 

Jesus  Christ  says  :  "  Ye  know  the  way  and  ye  know 
the  goal."  One  of  them  ventures  flatly  to  contradict 
Him,  and  to  traverse  both  assertions  with  a  brusque 
and  thoroughgoing  negative.  "  We  do  not  know 
whither  Thou  goest,"  says  Thomas ;  "  how  can  we 
ImoAv  the  way  ?  "  He  is  the  same  man  in  this  con- 
^  ^  versation  that  we  find  him  in  the  interview  before  our 
Lord's  journey  to  raise  Lazarus,  and  in  the  interview 
after  our  Lord's  resurrection.  In  all  three  cases  he 
appears  as  mainly  under  the  dominion  of  sense,  as 
slow  to  apprehend  anything  beyond  its  limits,  as 
morbidly  melancholy  and  disposed  to  take  the 
blackest  possible  view  of  things — ^a  practical  pessimist 
— and  yet  with  a  certain  kind  of  frank  outspokenness 
which  half  redeems  the  other  characteristics  from 
blame.  He  could  not  understand  all  the  Lord's 
deep  words  just  spoken.  His  mind  was  befogged  and 
dimmed,  and  he  blurts  out  his  ignorance,  knowing 
that  the  best  place  to  carry  it  to  is  to  the  Illuminator 
who  can  make  it  light.  "We  know  not  whither 
Thou  goest,  and  how  can  we  know  the  way  ?  " 


THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND   YET   WELL  KNOWN.  35 

Was  Jesus  right  ?  was  Thomas  right  ?  or  were  they 
both  right  ?  The  fact  is  that  Thomas  and  all  his 
fellows  knew,  after  a  fashion,  but  they  did  not  knoAv 
that  they  knew.  They  had  heard  plenty  in  the  j)ast 
as  to  where  Christ  was  going.  Plainly  enough  it  had 
been  rung  in  their  ears  over  and  over  again.  It  had 
made  some  kind  of  lodgment  in  their  heads,  and, 
in  that  sense,  they  did  know.  It  is  this  unused  and 
unconscious  knowledge  of  theirs  to  which  Christ 
appeals,  and  which  He  tries  to  draw  out  into  con- 
sciousness and  power  when  He  says,  "  You  know 
whither  I  am  going,  and  you  know  the  road."  Is 
not  that  exactly  what  a  patient  teacher  will  do  with 
some  flustered  child  when  he  says  to  it :  "  Take  time  1 
You  know  it  well  enough  if  you  will  only  think "  ? 
So  the  Master  says  here :  "  Do  not  be  agitated  and 
troubled  in  heart.  Reflect,  remember,  overhaul  your 
stores,  and  think  what  I  have  told  you  over  and  over 
again,  and  you  will  lind  that  you  do  know  whither  I 
am  going,  and  that  you  do  know  the  way." 

The  patient  gentleness  of  the  Master  with  the 
slowness  of  the  scholars  is  beautifully  exempHfied 
here,  as  is  also  the  method,  which  He  lovingly  and 
patiently  adopts,  of  sending  men  back  to  consult 
their  own  consciousness  as  illuminated  by  His 
teaching,  and  to  see  whether  there  is  not  lying  some- 
where, unrecked  of  and  unemployed  in  some  dusty 
corner  of  their  mind,  a  truth  that  only  needs  to  be 
draofsred  out  and  cleaned  in  order  to  show  itself  for 
what  it  is,  the  all-sufficient  light  and  strength  for 
the  moment's  need. 

The  dialogue  is  an  instance  of  what  is  true  about 
us  all,  that  Ave  have  in  our  possession  truths  given. 

3* 


36     THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN. 

to  US  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  whole  sweep  and  bearing 
of  which,  the  whole  majesty  and  power  and  illumi- 
nating capacity  of  which,  we  do  not  dream  of  yet. 
How  much  in  our  creeds  lies  dim  and  undeveloped ! 
Time  and  circumstances  and  some  sore  agony  of 
spirit  are  needed  in  order  to  make  us  realize  the 
riches  that  we  possess,  and  the  certitudes  to  which 
our  troubled  spirits  may  cling;  and  the  practice  of 
far  more  patient,  honest,  profound  meditation  and 
reflection  than  finds  favour  with  the  average  Christian 
man  is  needed,  too,  in  order  that  the  truths  possessed 
may  be  possessed,  and  that  we  may  know  what  we 
know,  and  understand  the  things  that  are  given  to  us 
of  God. 

In  all  your  creeds,  there  are  large  tracts  that 
you,  in  some  kind  of  a  fashion,  do  believe ;  and  yet 
they  have  no  vitality  in  your  consciousness  nor 
jDower  in  your  lives.  And  the  Master  here  does  with 
these  disciples  exactly  what  He  is  trying  to  do  day 
by  day  with  us,  namely,  fling  us  back  on  ourselves,  or 
rather  upon  His  revelation  in  us,  and  get  us  to  fathom 
its  depths  and  to  walk  round  about  its  magnitudes, 
and  so  to  understand  the  things  that  we  say  we 
believe. 

All  our  knowledge  is  ignorance.  Ignorance  that 
confesses  itself  to  Him  is  in  the  way  of  becoming 
knowledofe.  His  licfht  will  touch  the  smoke  and 
change  it  into  red  spires  of  flame.  If  you  do  not  know, 
go  to  Him  and  say,  "  Lord  !  I  do  not."  An  accurate 
understanding  of  where  the  darlmess  lies  is  the  first 
step  to  the  light.  We  are  meant  to  carry  all  our 
inadequate  and  superficial  realizations  of  His  triith 
into    His    presence,   that,   from   Him,  avo   may  gain 


THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN.   37 

deeper  knowledge,  a  firmer  faith,  and  a  more  joyous 
certitude  in  His  inexhaustible  lessons.  In  every 
article  and  item  of  the  Christian  faith  there  is  a 
transcendent  element  which  surpasses  our  present 
comprehension.  Let  us  be  confident  that  the  light 
will  break ;  and  let  us  welcome  the  new  illumination 
when  it  comes,  sure  that  it  comes  from  God.  Be  not 
puffed  up  with  the  conceit  that  you  know  all.  Be 
sure  of  this,  that,  according  to  the  good  old  metaphor, 
we  are  but  as  children  on  the  shore  of  the  great 
ocean,  gathering  a  few  of  the  shells  that  it  has 
washed  to  our  feet,  itself  stretching  boundless,  and, 
thank  God  !  sunht  before  us.  "  Ye  know  the  way." 
"  Master !  we  know  not  the  way." 

II. — Observe  here,  in  the  second  place,  our  Lord's 
great  self-revelation  which  meets  this  unconscious 
knowledge. 

"  Jesus  saith  unto  Him :  I  am  the  Way,  the 
Truth,  and  the  Life  ;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father 
but  by  Me."  Now  it  is  quite  plain,  I  think,  from 
the  whole  strain  of  the  context  and  the  purpose  of 
these  Avords  that  the  main  idea  in  them  is  the  first — 
"  I  am  the  Way."  And  that  is  made  more  certain 
because  of  the  last  words  of  the  verse,  which,  summing- 
up  the  force  of  the  three  preceding  assertions,  dwell 
only  upon  the  metaphor  of  the  Way ;  "  No  man 
cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  So  that  of  these 
three  great  words,  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life,  we 
are  to  regard  the  second  and  the  third  as  explanatory 
of  the  first.  They  are  not  co-ordinate,  but  the  first  is 
the  more  general,  and  the  other  two  show  how  the 
first  comes  to  be  true,  "  I  am  the  Way  "  because  "  I 
am  the  Truth  and  the  Life." 


38     THE  WAY,    UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN. 

There  are  no  words  of  the  Master,  perhaps,  to  which 
my  previous  remarks  are  more  necessary  to  be  apphed 
•than  this.  We  know ;  and  yet  oh  !  what  an  overphis 
of  glory  and  of  depth  is  here  that  we  do  not  know 
and  never  can  know.  The  most  fragmentary  and 
inadequate  grasp  of  them  with  heart  and  mind  will 
bring  light  to  the  mind  and  quietness  and  peace  to 
the  heart ;  but  the  Avhole  meaning  of  them  goes  be- 
yond men  and  angels.  We  can  only  skim  the  surface 
and  seek  to  shift  back  the  boundaries  of  our  know- 
ledsfe  a  little  further,  and  to  embrace  within  its  limits 
.a  little  more  of  the  broad  land  into  which  the  words 
bring  us.  So  just  take  a  thought  or  two  which  may 
tend  in  that  direction. 

Note,  then,  as  belonging  to  all  three  of  these 
clauses  that  remarkable  "/  am."  We  show  a 
way,  Christ  is  it.  We  speak  truth,  Christ  is  it. 
Parents  impart  life,  which  they  have  received,  Christ 
is  Life.  He  separates  Himself  from  all  men  by  that 
representation  that  He  is  not  merely  the  communi- 
cator or  the  teacher  or  the  guide,  but  that  He  Himself 
is,  in  His  OAvn  personal  Being,  Way,  Truth,  Life.  He 
said  that,  when  Calvary  was  within  arm's  length. 
What  did  He  think  about  Himself,  and  what  should 
we  think  of  Him  ? 

And  then  note,  further,  that  He  here  sets  forth  His 
unique  relation  to  the  truth  as  being  one  ground  on 
which  He  is  the  Way  to  God.  He  is  the  Truth  in 
reference  to  the  Divine  nature.  That  Truth,  then,  is 
not  a  mere  matter  of  words.  It  is  not  only  His  speech 
that  teaches  us,  but  Himself  that  shows  us  God.  His 
whole  life  and  character.  His  personality,  is  the  true 
representation    within     human     conditions    of    the 


THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN.  39 

Invisible  God ;  and  when  He  says,  "  I  am  the  Way 
and  the  Truth,"  He  is  sa3'ing  substantial!}'  the  same 
thing  as  the  great  prologue  of  this  Gospel  says  when 
it  calls  Him  the  Word  and  the  Light  of  men,  and 
as  Paul  says  when  he  names  Him  "  the  Image  of  the 
Invisible  God."  There  is  all  the  difference,  between 
talking  about  God  and  showing  Him.  Men  reveal  God 
by  their  words  ;  Christ  reveals  Him  by  Himself  and 
the  facts  of  His  life.  The  truest  and  highest  repre- 
sentation of  the  Divine  nature  that  men  can  ever  have 
is  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I  need  only  remind  you  in  a  sentence  about  other 
and  lower  applications  of  this  great  saying,  which  do 
not,  as  I  think,  enter  into  the  purpose  of  the  context. 
He  is  the  Truth,  inasmuch  as,  in  the  life  and  historical 
manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  recorded  in  the 
vScriptures,  men  find  foundation  truths  of  a  moral 
and  spiritual  sort.  Whatsoever  things  are  true,  what- 
soever things  are  noble,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely 
and  of  good  report,  He  is  these.  And  all  true  ethics 
is  but  the  formulating  into  principles  of  the  facts  of 
the  life  and  character  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Further,  my  text  says  He  is  the  Way  because 
He  is  the  Life.  On  the  one  side  God  is  brought 
to  all  hearts,  and  in  some  real  sense  to  our  com- 
prehension, by  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  He 
is  the  Way.  But  that  is  not  enough.  There  must 
be  an  action  upon  us  as  well  as  an  action  having 
reference  to  the  Divine  nature.  God  is  brought  to  men 
by  the  manifestation  in  Christ ;  and  we,  the  dead,  are 
quickened  by  the  communication  of  the  Life.  The 
one  phrase  points  to  all  His  work  as  a  Revealer,  the 
other  points  to  all  His  work  upon   us  as  life-giving 


40     THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN. 

Spirit,  a  Quickener  and  an  Inspirer.  Dead  men  cannot 
walk  a  road.  It  is  no  use  making  a  path  if  it  starts 
from  a  cemetery.  Christ  taught  that  men  apart 
from  Him  arc  dead,  and  that  the  only  life  that  they 
can  have  by  which  they  can  be  knit  to  God  is  the 
Divine  life  which  Avas  in  Himself,  and  of  which  He  is 
the  source  and  the  principle  for  the  whole  world.  He 
does  not  tell  us  here  what  yet  is  true,  and  what  He 
abundantly  tells  in  other  parts  of  this  great  conver- 
sation, that  the  only  way,  by  which  the  life  which  He 
brings  can  be  diffused  and  communicated,  is  by  His 
death.  "  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone."  He  is  the  Life,  and — 
paradox  of  mystery  and  yet  fact  which  is  the  very 
heart  and  centre  of  His  Gospel — His  only  way  of  giving 
His  life  to  us  is  by  giving  up  His  physical  life  for  us. 
He  must  die  that  He  may  be  the  life-spring  for  the 
world.  The  alabaster  box  must  be  broken  if  the 
ointment  and  its  fragrance  are  to  be  poured  out ;  and 
"  death  is  the  gate  of  life  "in  a  deeper  than  the 
ordinary  sense  of  the  saying,  inasmuch  as  the  death 
of  the  Life  which  is  Christ  is  the  life  of  the  death 
which  we  are. 

And  so,  because,  on  the  one  hand,  He  brings  a  God 
to  bur  hearts  that  we  can  love  and  trust,  and  because, 
on  the  other,  He  communicates  to  our  spirits,  dead  in 
the  only  true  death  which  is  the  separation  from  God 
by  sin,  the  life  by  which  we  are  knit  to  God,  He  is  the 
way  to  the  Father. 

And  Avhat  about  people  that  never  heard  of  Him,  to 
whom  that  Way  has  been  closed,  to  whom  that  Truth 
has  never  been  manifested,  to  whom  that  Life  has 
never  been  brought  ?    Ah  !  Christ  has  other  ways  of 


THE  WAY,    UXKXOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN.    41 

working  than  through  His  historical  manifestation, 
for  there  is  no  truth  more  plainly  taught  in  this  great 
fourth  Gospel  than  this,  that  "that  Light  lighteth 
every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  The  eternal 
Word  works  through  all  the  earth,  in  ways  beyond  our 
ken,  and  wherever  any  man  has,  however  imperfectly, 
felt  after  and  grasped  the  thought  of  a  Father  in  the 
heavens,  there  the  AVord,  which  is  the  light  of  men, 
has  wrought. 

But  for  us  to  whom  this  Book  has  come,  for  what 
people  call  in  bitter  irony  "Christendom,"  the  law 
of  my  text  rigidly  appKes.  And  it  is  being  worked 
out  all  round  us  to-day.  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Me."  And  here  we  are,  in  this 
England  of  ours,  and  our  sister  nations  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe  and  in  America,  face  to  face  as 
I  believe  with  this  alternative — either  Jesus  Christ  the 
Revealer  of  God  and  the  Life  of  men,  or  an  empty 
Heaven.  And  for  you,  individually,  it  is  either — take 
Christ  for  the  Way,  or  wander  in  the  wilderness  and 
forget  your  Father.  It  is  either — take  Christ  for  the 
Truth,  or  be  given  over  to  the  insufficiencies  of  mere 
natural,  political,  and  intellectual  truths,  and  the  shows 
and  illusions  of  time  and  sense.  It  is  either — take 
Christ  for  your  Life,  or  remain  in  your  deadness, 
separate  from  God. 

III. — Lastly,  we  have  here  the  disciples'  ignorance 
and  the  new  vision  which  dispels  it. 

"  If  ye  had  known  Me  ye  should  have  known  My 
Father  also,  and  from  henceforth  ye  know  Him  and 
have  seen  Him."  Our  Lord  accepts  for  the  moment 
Thomas'  standpoint.  He  supplements  His  former 
aUeo-ation  of  their  knowledge  with  the  admission  of 


s^ 


42     THE  WAY,  UNKNOWN  A XD  YET  WELL  KNOWN. 

the  ignorance  which  went  with  it  as  its  shadow,  and 
was  only  too  sadly  and  plainly  shown  by  their  failure 
to  discern  in  Him  the  manifestation  of  the  Father. 
He  has  just  told  them  that  they  did  know  Avhat  they 
thought  they  knew  not ;  He  now  tells  them  that  they 
did  not  know  Avhat  they  thought  they  knoAV  so  Avell, 
after  so  many  years  of  companionship — even  Himself. 
The  proof  that  they  did  not  is  that  they  did  not 
know  the  Father  as  revealed  in  Him,  nor  Him  as 
revealing  the  Father.  If  they  missed  that,  they 
missed  everything ;  and,  for  all  they  had  kno^m  of 
His  graciousness,  were  strangers  to  His  truest  self 
Their  ignorance  would  turn  out  knowledge,  if  they 
Avould  think,  and  their  supposed  knoAvledge  would 
turn  out  ignorance. 

The  lesson  for  us  is  that  the  true  test  of  the  com- 
pleteness and  worth  of  our  knowledge  of  Christ 
lies  in  its  being  knowledge  of  God  the  Father, 
brought  near  to  us  by  Him.  This  saying  puts  a  finger 
on  the  radical  deficiency  of  all  merely  humanitarian 
views  of  Christ's  person,  however  clearly  they  may 
see  and  admiringly  extol  the  beauty  of  His  character 
and  the  "sweet  reasonableness"  of  His  wisdom. 
They  all  break  down  here,  and  are  arraigned  as 
so  shallow  and  incomplete  that  they  do  not  deserve 
to  be  called  knowledge  of  Him  at  all.  If  you  know 
anything  about  Jesus  Christ  rightly,  this  is  what 
you  know  about  Him,  that  in  Him  you  see  God. 
If  you  have  not  seen  God  in  Him,  you  have  not 
got  to  the  heart  of  the  mystery.  The  knowledge 
of  Christ  which  stops  with  the  man  and  the  martyr, 
and  the  teacher  and  the  beautiful,  gentle  brother,  is 
knowledge  so  partial  that  even  He  cannot  venture 


THE  WAY,   UXKNOJVN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN.  43 

to  call  it  other  than  ignorance.  Oh  !  brethren,  do 
our  conceptions  of  Him  meet  this  test  which  He 
Himself  has  laid  down,  and  can  wc  say  that,  seeing 
Him,  we  see  in  Him  God  ? 

And  then  our  Lord  passes  on  to  another  thought, 
the  new  vision  which  at  the  moment  was  being  granted 
to  this  unconscious  ignorance  that  was  passing  into 
conscious  knowledge.  "From  henceforth  ye  know 
Him  and  have  seen  Him."  We  must  give  that  "  from 
henceforth,"  as  a  note  of  time,  a  somewhat  liberal 
interpretation,  and  apply  it  to  the  whole  series  of 
utterances  and  deeds  of  which  the  Avords  of  our 
text  are  but  a  portion.  And,  if  so,  we  come  to  this. 
It  was  in  the  wisdom,  and  the  Gjentleness,  and  the 
deep  truths  of  that  upper  chamber ;  it  was  in  the 
agony  and  submission  of  Gethsemane  ;  it  was  in  the 
meek  patience  before  the  judges,  and  the  silent 
acceptance  of  ignominy  and  shame  ;  it  Avas  in  the 
willing,  loving  endurance  of  the  long  hours  upon 
the  cross,  that  Christ  inauofurated  the  new  stage  in 
His  revelation  of  God  and  in  His  life-giving  to  the 
world.  And  it  is  from  henceforth  and  thereby  that 
in  the  man  Jesus,  men  know  and  see  "  the  Father  " 
as  they  never  did  before.  The  cross  and  the  passion 
of  Christ  are  the  unveiling  to  the  world  of  the  heart 
of  God ;  and  by  the  side  of  that  new  vision  the 
fairest  and  the  loftiest  and  the  sweetest  of  Christ's 
former  manifestations  and  utterances  sink  into  com- 
parative insignificance.  It  is  the  d3'ing  Christ  that 
reveals  the  living  God. 

So,  dear  friends.  He  is  your  way  to  God.  See  that 
you'  seek  the  Father  by  Him  alone.  He  is  your 
Truth  ;  grapple  Him  to  your  hearts,  and  by  patient 


44     THE  WAY,   UNKNOWN  AND  YET  WELL  KNOWN. 

meditation  and  continual  faithfulness  enrich  your- 
selves Avith  all  the  communicated  treasures  that  you 
have  already  received  in  Him,  He  is  your  Life; 
cleave  to  Him,  that  the  quick  spirit  that  was  in 
Him  may  pass  into  you  and  make  you  victors  over 
all  deaths,  temporal  and  eternal.  Know  Him  as 
a  Friend,  not  as  a  mere  historical  person,  or  with  mere 
head-knowledge,  for  to  laiow  a  friend  is  something 
far  deeper  than  to  laiow  a  truth.  Acquaint  thyself 
with  Him  and  be  at  peace.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to 
know,"  with  the  knowledge  which  is  life  and  posses- 
sion, "  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
Thou  hast  sent." 


^be  Zvwc  DiQxon  of  tbc  fatbcr, 

'  Philip  saith  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  show  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth 
us.  Jesus  saith  unto  Him,  Have  I  been  so  long  with  you,  and 
yet  hast  thou  not  known  Me,  Philip  ?  He  that  hath  seen  Me 
hath  seen  the  Father  ;  and  how  sayest  thou  then,  Show  us  the 
Father  ?  Believest  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  Me  ?  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of 
Myself  :  but  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  Me  He  doeth  the  works. 
Believe  Me  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me  :  or 
else  believe  Me  for  the  very  work's  sake." — John  xiv.  8 — 11. 

HE  vehement  burst  with  Avhich  Philip 
interrupts  the  calm  flow  of  our  Lord's 
discourse  is  not  the  product  of  mere 
frivolity  or  curiosity.  One  hears  the 
rino'  of  earnestness  in  it,  and  the 
yearnings  of  many  years  find  voice.  Philip  had  felt 
out  of  his  depth,  no  doubt,  in  the  profound  teachings 
which  our  Lord  had  been  giving,  but  His  last  Avords 
about  seeing  God  set  a  famiUar  chord  vibrating.  As 
an  Old  Testament  believer  he  knew  that  Moses  had 
once  led  the  elders  of  Israel  up  to  the  mount  Avhere 
''  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel,"  and  that  to  many  others 
had  been  granted  sensible  manifestations  of  the 
Divine  presence.     As  a  disciple  he  longed  for  some 


C^.  ' 


46  THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER. 

similar  sign  to  confirm  his  faith.  As  a  man  he  was 
conscious  of  the  deep  need  which  all  of  us  have,  V^ 
whether  we  are  conscious  of  it  or  not,  for  something 
more  real  and  tangible  than  an  unseeable  and  un- 
knowable God.  The  peculiarities  of  Philip's  tempera- 
ment strengthened  the  desire.  The  first  appearance 
that  he  makes  in  the  gospels  is  characteristicallj'- 
like  this  his  last.  To  all  Nathaniel's  objections  he 
had  only  the  reply,  "  Come  and  see."  And  here  he 
says :  "  Oh  !  if  we  could  see  the  Father  it  would  be 
enouQfh."  He  was  one  of  the  men  to  whom  seeing  is 
believing,  and  so  he  speaks. 

His  petition  is  childlike  in  its  simplicity,  beautiful 
in  its  trust,  noble  and  true  in  its  estimate  of  what 
men  need.  He  longs  to  see  God.  He  believes  that 
Christ  can  show  God ;  he  is  sure  that  the  sight  of 
God  will  satisfy  the  heart.  These  are  errors,  or  truths, 
according  to  what  is  meant  by  "  seeing."  Philip 
meant  a  palpable  manifestation,  and  so  far  he  was 
wrong.  Give  the  word  its  highest  and  its  truest 
meaning,  and  Philip's  error  becomes  grand  truth. 
Our  Lord  gently,  lovingly,  and  with  only  a  hint  of 
rebuke,  answers  the  request,  and  seeks  to  disengage  ., 
the  error  from  the  truth.  His  answer  lies  in  the 
versCs  that  we  have  read.  Let  us  try  to  follow  them, 
and,  as  we  may,  to  skim  their  surface,  for  their  depths 
are  beyond  us. 

I. — First  of  all,  then,  we  have  the  sight  of  God  in 
Christ  as  enough  to  answer  men's  longings.  There  is 
a  world  of  sadness  and  tenderness,  of  suppressed  pain 
and  of  grieved  affection,  in  the  first  words  of  our 
Lord's  reply.  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with  you,' 
and   yet  hast   thou   not   known   !Me,   Philip  ? "     Ho 


THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER.  47 

seldom  names  His  disciples.  When  He  does,  there 
is  a  deep  cadence  of  affection  in  the  designation. 
This  man  was  one  of  the  first  disciples,  the  little 
original  band  called  by  Christ  Himself,  and  thus  had 
been  with  Him  all  the  time  of  His  ministry,  and 
the  Master  wonders  with  a  gentle  wonder  that,-  before 
eyes  that  loved  Him  as  much  as  Philip's  did,  His 
continual  self-revelation  had  passed  to  so  little 
purpose.  In  the  answer,  in  its  first  portion,  there  lies 
the  reiteration  of  the  thoughts  that  I  was  trying  to 
dwell  upon  in  the  last  sermon,  which,  therefore,  I 
may  lightly  touch  now — viz.,  that  the  sight  of  Christ 
is  the  sight  of  God — "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 
the  Father " — and  that  not  to  know  Christ  as  thus 
showing  God  is  not  to  know  Him  at  all — "  Thou  hast 
not  known  Me,'  Philip."  Further,  there  is  the  thought 
that  the  sight  of  God  in  Christ  is  sufficient,  "  How 
sayest  thou,  Show  us  the  Father  ?  "  From  all  this 
we  may  gather  some  thoughts  on  which  I  lightly  touch. 

I.  The  first  is,  that  we  all  do  need  to  have  God 
made  visible  to  us. 

The  history  of  heathendom  shoAvs  us  that.  In  every 
land  men  have  said,  "  The  gods  have  come  down  to  us 
in  the  likeness  of  men."  And  the  highest  cultivation 
of  this  highly  cultivated  and  self-conscious  nineteenth 
century  has  not  removed  men  from  the  same  necessity 
that  the  rudest  savage  has,  to  have  some  kind  of  mani- 
festation of  the  Divine  nature  other  than  the  dim  and 
vague  ones  which  are  possible  apart  from  the  revelation 
of  God  in  Christ.  A  God  Avho  is  only  the  product 
of  inferences  from  creation,  or  providence,  or  the 
mysteries  of  history,  or  the  wonders  of  my  own  inner 
life,  the  creature    of  logic   or   of  refiection,   is   very 


48  THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER. 

powerless  to  sway  and  influence  men.  The  limitations 
of  our  faculties  and  the  boundlessness  of  our  hearts 
both  cry  out  for  a  God  Who  is  nearer  to  us  than  that, 
and  Whom  we  can  see  and  love  and  be  sure  of.  The 
whole  world  wants  the  making  visible  of  Divinity  as 
its  deepest  want.  And  your  heart  and  mind  require 
it.  Nothing  else  will  ever  stay  our  hunger,  will  ever 
answer  our  questioning  minds. 

Christ  meets  this  need.  How  can  you  make  wisdom 
visible  ?  How  can  a  man  see  love  or  purity  ?  Hoav 
do  I  see  your  spirit  ?  By  the  deeds  of  your  body. 
And  the  only  way  by  which  God  can  ever  come  near 
enough  to  men  to  be  a  constant  power  and  a  constant 
smile  in  their  lives  is  by  their  seeing  Him  at  Avork  in 
a  Man,  who  amongst  them  is  His  image  and  revela- 
tion. Christ's  whole  life  is  the  making  visible  of  the 
invisible  God.  He  is  the  manifestation  to  the  world 
of  the  unseen  Father. 

That  vision  is  enough — enough  for  mind,  enough 
for  heart,  enough  for  will.  There  is  none  else  that  is 
sufficient,  but  this  is.  "  How  sayest  thou,  Show  us 
the  Father  ? "  If  we  can  see  God  it  suffices  us.  Then 
the  mind  settles  down  upon  the  thought  of  Him  as 
the  basis  of  all  being,  and  of  all  change ;  and  the 
heart  can  twine  itself  round  Him,  and  the  seeking 
soul  folds  its  wings  and  is  at  rest ;  and  the  troubled 
spirit  is  quiet,  and  the  accusing  conscience  is  silent, 
and  the  rebellious  will  is  subdued,  and  the  stormy 
passions  are  quieted ;  and  in  the  inner  kingdom  is  a 
o-reat  peace.  The  sight  of  God  in  Christ  brings  rest 
to  every  heart.  And,  oh  !  the  absence  of  the  vision  is 
the  true  secret  of  all  disquiet.  AVe  are  troubl-ed  and 
careful,  and  tossed  from  one  stormy  billow  to  another, 


THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER.  49 

and  swept  over  by  all  the  winds  tliat  blow,  because  we 
see  not  God,  our  Father,  in  the  face  of  Jesus.  "  Show 
us  the  Father  and  it  suthceth  us,"  is  either  a  puerile 
petition,  or  the  deepest  and  noblest  prayer  of  the 
human  heart.  Blessed  are  they  who  have  learned 
what  it  is  to  see,  and  know  where  that  gfreat  sisrht  is 
to  be  seen. 

Our  present  knowledge  and  vision  are  far  higher 
than  that  mere  external  symbol  of  a  presence  which 
this  man  wanted.  The  elders  of  Israel  saw  the  God 
of  Israel,  but  Avhat  they  saw  was  but  some  symbolical 
manifestation  of  that  which  m  itself  is  unseen  and 
unattainable.  But  we  who  see  God  in  Christ  see  no 
symbol  but  the  Reality,  and  have  nothing  more, 
possible  or  to  be  hoped  for  here.  Our  present 
manifestation  and  sight  of  God  in  Christ  does  fall, 
in  some  ways  unloiown  to  us,  beneath  the  bright 
hopes  that  we  are  entitled  to  cherish.  But  howsoever 
imperfect  it  may  be,  as  measured  against  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  vision  when  Ave  shall  see  face  to  face,  and 
laiow  even  as  Ave  are  knoAvn,  it  is  enough,  and  more 
than  enough,  for  aU  the  questionings  and  desires  of  our 
hungering  spirits. 

II. — Our  Lord  goes  on  to  a  further  ansAver,  and 
points  to  the  Divine  and  mutual  indAvelling  by  Avhich 
this  sight  is  made  possible. 

"  Behevest  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and 
the  Father  in  Me  ?  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you, 
I  speak  not  of  Myself,  but  the  Father  that  dAvelleth 
in  Me,  He  doeth  the  Avorks."  There  are  here,  mainly 
tAvo  things,  Christ's  claim  to  the  oneness  of  unbroken 
communion,  and  Christ's  claim,  consequently,  to  the 
oneness  of  complete  co-operation.  "  I  am  in  the  Father," 

4 


V 


so  THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER. 

indicates  the  suppression  of  all  independent  and  there- 
fore rebellious  will,  consciousness,  thought  and  action ; 
*'  And  the  Father  in  Me,"  indicates  the  influx  into  that  H 
perfectly  filial  manhood  of  the  whole  fulness  of  God 
in  unbroken,  continuous,  gentle,  deep  flow.  These  are 
the  two  sides  of  this  greal  mystery  on  which  neither 
wisdom  nor  reverence  lead  us  to  dilate ;  and  they 
combine  to  express  the  closest  and  most  uninterrupted 
blending,  interpenetration,  and  communion. 

And  then  follows  the  other  claim,  that  because  of  , 
this  continuous  mutual  indwelling  there  is  perfect  co- 
operation. This  is  also  stated  in  terms  corresponding 
to  the  preceding  double  representation.  "  The  words 
that  I  speak  unto  you,  I  speak  not  of  Myself,"  cor- 
responds to,  "  I  am  in  the  Father."  "  The  Father  that 
dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth  the  works,"  corresponds  to, 
"  The  Father  in  Me."  The  two  put  together  teach  us 
this,  that  by  reason  of  that  mysterious  and  ineft'able  "^ 
union  of  communion,  Jesus  Christ  in  all  His  words  and 
in  all  His  works  is  the  perfect  instrument  of  the 
Divine  will,  so  that  His  words  are  God's  words,  and 
His  works  are  God's  works  ;  so  that,  when  He  speaks, 
His  gentle  wisdom,  His  loving  sympathy,  His  melting 
tenderness,  His  authoritative  commands.  His  prophetic 
threatenings,  are  the  speech  of  God,  and  that  when 
He  acts,  whether  it  be  by  miracle  or  in  the  ordinary 
•deeds  of  His  life,  what  we  see  is  God  working 
before  our  eyes  as  we  never  see  Him  in  any  human 
being. 

And  from  all  this  follow  just  two  or  three  considera- 
tions which  I  name.  Note  the  absolute  absence  of  any 
consciousness  on  Christ's  part  of  the  smallest  deflection 
or  disharmony  between  Himself  and  the  Father.     Two 


THE  TRUE  VIS  10 X  OF  THE  FATHER  51 

triangles  laid  on  each  other  are  in  every  line,  point, 
and  angle  absolutely  coincident.  That  humanity  is 
capable  of  receiving  the  whole  inflow  of  God,  and  that 
indwelling  God  is  perfectly  expressed  in  the  humanity. 
There  is  no  trace  of  a  consciousness  of  sin.  Every- 
thing that  Jesus  Christ  said  He  knew  to  be  God's 
speaking;  everything  that  He  did  He  knew  to  be 
God's  actinc!'.  There  were  no  barriers  between  the  two. 
Jesus  Christ  Avas  conscious  of  no  film  of  separation — 
not  the  thinnest  film  of  air  between  these  two  who 
adhered  and  inhered  so  closely  and  so  continuously. 
It  is  an  awful  assertion. 

Now  I  pray  you  to  ask  yourselves  the  question :  If 
this  was  what  Christ  said,  what  did  He  think  of 
Himself?  And  is  this  a  Man,  like  the  rest  of  us, 
with  blotches  and  sins,  with  failures  to  embody  His  own 
ideas,  and  still  more  to  carry  out  in  life  the  will  that 
He  knows  to  be  God's  will  ?  Is  this  a  Man  like  other 
men  who  thus  speaks  to  us  ?  If  Jesus  had  this  con- 
sciousness, either  He  was  ludicrously,  tragically,  blas- 
phemously, utterly  mistaken  and  untrustworthy,  or 
He  is  what  the  Church  in  all  agfes  has  confessed  Him 
to  be,  "  the  Everlasting  Son  of  the  Father." 

III. — Lastly,  our  Lord  further  sets  before  us  the 
faith  to  which  He  invites  us  on  the  ground  of  His 
union  with,  and  revelation  of,  God. 

"Believe  Me  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  Me,  or  else  believe  Me  for  the  very  works' 
sake."  Observe  that  the  verb  at  the  beginning  of  this 
last  verse  of  our  text  passes  into  a  plural  form.  Our 
Lord  has  done  with  Philip  especially,  and  speaks  now 
to  all  who  hear  Him,  and  to  us  amongst  the  rest  of 
His  auditors.    ]He  bids  us  believe  Him,  and  believe 


52  THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER. 

something  about  Him  on  the  strength  of  His  own 
testimony,  or,  in  default  of  that,  and  as  second  best, 
beheve  Him  on  the  testimony  of  His  works.  I  gather 
together  what  I  have  to  say  about  this  point  into 
three  remarks.  7 

The  true  bond  of  union  between  men  and  Jesus 
Christ  is  faith.    We  have  to  trust,  and  that  is  better 
than  sight.    We  have  to  trust  Him.    He  is  the  per- 
sonal Object  of  our  faith.     In  all  faith  there  is  what  I 
may  call  a  moral  and  a  voluntary  element.     A  man 
beheves  a  proposition  because  it  is  forced  upon  him, 
and  his  intelligence  is  obliged  to  accept  it.     A  man 
trusts  Christ   because   he  ivill  trust   Him,  and   the 
moral  and  voluntary  element  carries  us  far  beyond 
the  mere  intellectual  conception  of  faith  as  the  assent 
to  a  set  of  theological  propositions.     Faith  really  is 
the  out^oincf  of  the  whole  man — heart,  will,  intellect, 
and  all — to  a  person  whom  it  grasps.     But  the  Christ 
that  you  and  I  have  to  trust  is  the  Christ  as  He  Him- 
self has  Himself  declared  to  us.     "  Believe   Me   that 
I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me."     There  is 
a  bastard,  mutilated  kind  of  thing  that  calls  itself 
Christian  faith,  that  goes  about   the  world  in  this 
generation,  which  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  in  all  sorts 
of  beautiful  ways,  but  it  will  not  believe  in  Him  as 
the   personal   revelation   and  making  visible  of  the 
unseen  God.     Jesus  Christ  Himself  tells  us  here  that 
that  is  not  the  kind  of  faith  that  He  invites  us  to  put 
forth.     If  Ave  put  forth  that  only,  we  have  not  yet 
come  to  understand  Him.     Oh,  dear  friends !   Christ 
as  here  declared  to  us  by  Himself  is  the  only  Christ 
to  whom  it  is  right  to  give  our  trust.     If  He  be- not 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  I  ought  not  to  trust  Him. 


THE  TRUE  riSIOX  OF  THE  FATHER.  53 

I  may  admire  Him  as  a  historical  personage ;  I  may 
reverence  Him  for  His  wisdom  and  beauty;  I  may 
even  in  some  vague  way  have  a  kind  of  love  to  Him. 
But  what  in  the  name  of  common  sense  shall  I  trust 
Him  for?  And  why  should  He  call  upon  me  to 
exercise  faith  in  Him  unless  He  stand  before  me 
as  the  adequate  object  of  a  man's  trust — namely,  the 
manifest  God  ? 

And  then,  further,  note  that  believing  in  the  sense 
of  trusting  is  seeing  and  knowing.  Philip  said,  "  Show 
us  the  Father."  Christ  answers,  "  Believe,  and  thou 
dost  see."  If  you  look  back  upon  the  previous  verses 
of  this  chapter,  you  will  find  that  in  the  earlier  portion 
of  them  the  key-word  is  "  loiow  "  ;  that  in  the  second 
portion  of  them  the  key-word  is  "  see  " ;  that  in  this 
portion  of  them  the  key- word  is  "believe."  The 
world  says,  "  Ah !  seeing  is  believing."  The  Gospel 
says,  "  BeUeving  is  seeing."  The  true  way  to  know- 
ledge, and  to  a  better  vision  than  the  uncertain  vision 
of  the  eye,  is  faith.  In  certitude  and  in  directness, 
the  knowledge  of  God  that  we  have  through  faith  in 
the  Christ  whom  our  eyes  have  never  seen  is  far  ahead 
of  the  certitude  and  the  directness  that  attach  to  our 
mere  bodily  sight.  •  And  so  the  key  to  all  Divine 
knowledge  and  the  sure  road  to  the  truest  vision 
of  God,  is  faith. 

Further,  faith,  even  if  based  upon  lower  than  the 
highest  grounds,  is  still  faith,  and  acceptable  to  Him : 
"  Or  else  believe  Me  for  the  very  works'  sake."  The 
"  works "  are  mainl}-,  I  suppose,  though  not  exclu- 
sively. His  miracles.  And  if  so,  we  are  here  taught 
that,  if  a  man  has  not  come  to  that  point  of  spiritual 
susceptibility  in  which  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  lays 


54  THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER. 

hold  upon  his  heart  and  obHges  him  to  trust  Him  and 
to  love  Him,  there  are  yet  the  miracles  to  look  at ; 
and  the  faith  that  grasps  them,  and  by  help  of  that 
ladder  climbs  to  Him,  though  it  be  second  best,  is 
yet  real.  The  evidence  of  miracles  is  subordinate 
and  yet  it  is  valid  and  true.  So.  our  Lord  contra- 
dicts both  the  exaggerations  of  past  generations 
and  the  exaggerations  of  this,  and  neither  asserts 
that  the  great  reason  for  faith  is  miracles,  nor  that 
miracles  are  of  no  use  at  all.  Former  centuries  in  the 
Christian  Church  reiterated  the  former  exaggeration, 
and  thus  partly  provoked  the  exaggeration  of  this 
day.  Let  us  keep  the  middle  course :  there  is  a  better 
way  of  coming  to  Christ  than  through  the  gate  of 
miracles,  and  that  is  that  He  should  stamp  His  own 
Divine  sweetness  and  elevation  upon  our  minds  and 
hearts.  But  if  we  have  not  reached  that  point,  do 
not  let  us  kick  away  the  ladder  that  may  help  us  to 
it.  "  Believe  Him  for  the  very  works'  sake."  Imperfect 
faith  may  be  the  highway  to  perfection.  Let  us  follow 
the  light,  if  it  be  but  a  far-off  glimmer,  sure  that  it 
will  bring  us  into  perfect  day  if  we  be  faithful  to  its 
leading. 

On  the  other  hand,  dear  friends,  let  us  remember 
that  no  faith  avails  itself  of  all  the  treasures  laid  up 
for  it,  which  does  not  lay  hold  upon  Christ  in  the 
character  in  which  He  presents  Himself.  The  only 
adequate,  worthy  trust  in  Him  is  the  trust  which 
grasps  Him  as  the  Incarnate  God  and  Saviour.  Only 
such  a  faith  does  justice  to  His  own  claim.  Only  such 
a  faith  is  the  sure  path  to  vision  and  to  knowledge. 
Only  such  a  faith  draws  down  the  blessing  of  a  qu'es- 
tionmg  intellect  answered,  a  hungry  heart  satisfied,  a 


THE  TRUE  VISION  OF  THE  FATHER.  55 

conscience,  accusing  and  prophetic  of  a  judgment  to 
come,  cleansed  and  purified. 

To  each  of  us  Christ  addresses  His  merciful  in- 
vitation, "  Believe  Me  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and 
the  Father  in  Me."  May  we  all  answer,  "  We  believe 
that  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  livinf'  God  " ! 


YI. 

Zbc  mov]\5  of  tbc  a6cen^e^  CbriCit 

"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  j-ou,  He  tliat  believeth  on  Me,  the  works 
thay  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall 
he  dp  ;  because  I  go  unto  My  Father.  And  whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  My  name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  be 
glorified  in  the  Son.  Ifj^e  ^halL  ask^  anything  in  My  name, 
I  will  do  it." — John  xiv.  12 — 14. 

HAVE  already  pointed  out  in  a  previous 
sermon  that  the  key- word  of  this  con- 
text is  "  BeHeve  ! "  In  three  successive 
verses  we  find  it,  each  time  wideninsr 
in  its  application.  We  have  first  the 
question  to  the  single  disciple :  "  Philip !  behevest 
thou  not  ? "  We  have  then  the  invitation  addressed 
to  the  whole  group  :  "  Believe  Me  !  "  And  here  we 
have  a  wholly  general  expression  referring  to  all  who, 
in  every  generation  and  corner  of  the  Avorld,  put  their 
trust  in  Christ,  and  extending  the  sunshine  of  this 
great  promise  to  Avhosoever  believeth  in  Him.  Our 
Lord  has  pointed  to  believing  as  the  great  antidote  to 
a  troubled  heart,  as  the  sure  way  of  knowing  the 
Father,  as  the  better  substitute  for  sight ;  and  now 
here  He  opens  before  us  still  more  wonderful  prero- 
gatives and  efiects  of  faith.  His  words  carry  us  up 
into  lofty  and  misty  regions,  where  wc  can  neither 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST.  57 


breathe  freely  nor  see  clearly,  except  as  we  hold  to 
His  words.  Therefore  He  prefaces  them  with  His 
"  Verily,  verily ! "  bidding  us  listen  to  them  with 
sharpened  attention  as  the  disclosure  of  something 
wonderful,  and  receive  them  with  unfaltering  confi- 
dence, on  His  authority,  however  marvellous  and 
otherwise  undiscoverable  they  may  be. 

What  is  it,  then,  that  He  thus  commends  to  our 
acceptance  ?  If  I  may  venture  a  paraphrase  which 
may  at  least  have  the  advantage  of  being  cast  into 
less  familiar  words,  it  is  just  this,  that  because  of,  and 
after,  Christ's  departure  from  earth,  He  will,  in 
response  to  prayer,  work  upon  faithful  souls  in  such 
a  fashion  as  that  they  will  do  what  He  did,  and  in 
some  sense  will  do  even  more. 

I. — We  have  here  the  continuous  work  of  the 
exalted  Lord  for  and  through  His  servants. 

These  disciples,  of  course,  were  trembling  and 
oppressed  with  the  thought  that  the  departure  of 
Jesus  would  be  the  end  of  His  ceaseless  activity  for 
them,  on  which  they  had  depended  impHcitly  for  so 
long.  Henceforward,  whatever  distress  or  need  might 
come,  that  voice  would  be  silent,  and  that  hand 
motionless,  and  they  would  be  left  to  face  every  storm, 
uncompanioned  and  uncounselled.  Some  of  us  know 
how  dreary  such  experience  makes  life,  and  we  can 
understand  how  these  men  shrank  from  the  prospect. 
Christ's  words  give  strength  to  meet  that  trial,  and  not 
only  tell  them  that  after  He  is  gone  they  will  be  able 
to  do  what  they  cannot  do  now,  and  what  He  used  to 
do  for  them,  but  that  in  them  He  will  work  as  well  as 
for  them,  and  be  the  power  of  their  action,  after  He 
has  departed. 


58  THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST. 

For,  notice  the  remarkable  connection  of  the  words 
with  which  we  are  deahng,  "  He  that  beHeveth  on 
Me,  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do,"  and  the  ground 
of  that  is  "  because  I  go  to  My  Father,"  and  whatsoever 
the  believer  "  shall  ask,  /  will  do." 

So,  then,  there  are  here  two  very  distinct  paths 
on  which  Christ  represents  to  us  that  His  future 
activity  will  travel ;  the  one,  that  of  doing  for  us,  in 
response  to  our  prayers ;  the  other,  that  of  working 
on  us  and  in  us,  so  that  our  acts  are  His  and  His  acts 
are  ours.  We  may  look  at  these  two  for  a  moment 
separately. 

Here,  then,  there  is  clearly  stated  this  great  thought, 
that  Christ's  removal  from  the  world  is  not  the  end 
of  His  activity  in  the  world  and  on  material  things, 
but  that,  absent.  He  still  is  a  present  power,  and, 
having  passed  through  death,  and  been  removed  from 
sense,  He  can  still  operate  upon  the  things  round  us, 
and  move  these  according  to  His  Avill.  We  are  not  to 
water  down  such  words  as  these  into  any  such  thought 
as  that  the  continuous  influence  of  the  memory  and 
history  of  His  past  will  be  a  present  power  in  all  ages. 

That  is  true,  gloriously  and  uniquely  true,  but  that 
is  not  the  truth  which  He  speaks  here.  Over  and 
above  that  perpetual  influence  of  past  recorded 
work,  there  is  the  present  influence  of  His  present 
work,  and  to-day  He  is  Avorking  as  truly  as  He 
wrought  when  on  earth.  One  form  of  His  work  was 
finished  on  Calvary,  as  His  dying  breath  proclaimed ; 
but  there  is  another  work  of  Christ  in  the  midst  of 
the  ages,  moving  the  pawns  on  the  chess-board  of  the 
world,  and  presiding  over  the  fortunes  of  the  solemn 
game,  which  will  not  be  ended  until  that  day  when 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST.  59 

the  angel  voices  shall  chant  "  It  is  done.  The  king- 
doms of  the  world  are  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and 
of  His  Christ."  The  living  Christ  works  by  a  true 
forth-putting  of  His  own  present  power  upon  material 
things,  and  amidst  the  providences  of  life.  And 
therefore  these  disciples  were  not  to  be  cast  down 
as  if  His  work  for  them  were  ended. 

Now  it  is  clear,  of  course,  that  such  words  as  these 
do  demand  for  their  vindication  something  perfectly 
unique  and  solitary  in  the  nature  and  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  All  other  men's  work  is  cut  in  twain  by  death. 
"  This  man,  having  served  his  generation  by  the  will 
of  God,  was  gathered  to  his  fathers.  And  he  (and  his 
work)  saw  corruption."  That  is  the  epitaph  over  the 
greatest  thinkers,  statesmen,  heroes,  poets,  the  epitaph 
for  the  tenderest  and  most  hopeful.  Father,  mother, 
husband,  wife,  child,  friend,  all  cease  to  act  when  the}'- 
die.  And  though  thunders  should  break,  they  are 
silent  and  can  help  no  more.  But  Christ  is  living  to- 
day, and  working  all  around  us. 

Now,  brethren,  it  is  of  the  last  importance  for  the 
joyousness  of  our  Christian  lives,  and  for  the  courage 
of  our  conflict  with  sorrow  and  sin,  that  we  should 
give  a  very  prominent  place  in  our  creeds,  and  our 
hearts,  to  this  great  truth  of  a  living  Christ.  What 
a  joyful  sense  of  companionship  it  brings  to  the 
solitary,  what  calmness  of  vision  in  contemplating  the 
complications  and  calamities  of  the  world's  history, 
if  we  grasp  firmly  the  assurance  that  the  living  Christ 
is  actually  working  by  the  present  forth-putting  of 
His  power  in  the  world  to-day  ! 

But  that  is  not  all.  There  is  another  path  on  which 
our  Lord  shows  us  here  a  glimpse  of  His  working. 


60  THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST. 

Not  only  for  us,  but  on  and  in  and  therefore  through 
us,  so  that  the  deeds  that  we  do  in  faith  that  rests 
upon  Him  are  in  one  aspect  His,  and  in  another  ours. 

"  The  works  that  I  do  shall  He  do  also  ;  "  because 
"  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  I  will  do  it." 

We  have  not  to  think  only  of  a  Lord  whose  activity 
for  us,  beneficent  and  marvellous  as  it  is,  was  finished 
in  the  misty  past  upon  the  Cross,  nor  have  we  only  to 
think  of  a  Lord  whose  activity  for  us,  mighty  and 
comforting  as  it  is  to  all  the  solitary  and  the  struggling, 
is  wrought  as  from  the  heights  of  the  heavens,  but  we 
have  to  think  of  One  Avho  is  beside  us  and  in  us,  and 
knows  the  hidden  paths  that  no  eye  sees,  and  no  foot 
but  His  can  tread,  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  our 
souls,  and  there  can  enter  as  king  and  righteousness, 
as  life  and  strength.  This  is  the  deepest  of  the  lessons 
that  He  would  teach  us  here.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  Me,"  and  through  Me,  if  I  keep  close 
to  Him,  will  work  mightily  in  forms  that  My  poor 
manhood  could  never  have  reached.  That  emblem  of 
the  vine  and  the  branches,  and  the  other  emblem  of 
the  house  and  its  inhabitants,  and  the  other  of  the  head 
and  the  members,  all  point  to  this  one  same  thing 
which  shalloAV  and  unspiritual  men  call  "  mystical," 
but  Avhich  is  the  very  heart  of  the  Christian  prerogative 
and  the  anchor  of  the  Christian  hope.  Christ  in  us  is 
our  present  righteousness  and  our  hope  of  a  future 
glory. 

And  now,  mark  that  a  still  more  solemn  and 
mysterious  aspect  of  this  union  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
the  believer  is  given,  since  it  is  set  forth  as  resulting 
in  our  doing  Christ's  works,  and  Christ  doing  ours ; 
and  therein  is  paralleled  Avith  the  yet  more  wonderful 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHlllST.  61 

and  ineffable  union  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
It  is  no  accident  that  in  one  clause  He  says,  "  I  am  in 
the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Me.  The  words  that 
I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of  Myself,  but  the 
Father  that  dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth  the  works ;" 
and  that  in  the  next  He  says,  "  The  works  that  I  do 
shall  he  do  also " ;  and  so  bids  us  see  in  that  union 
betAveen  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  in  that  con- 
sequent union  of  co-operation  between  Him  and  His 
Father,  a  pattern  after  which  our  union  with  Him  is 
to  be  moulded,  both  as  regards  the  closeness  of  its 
intimacy  and  as  regards  the  resulting  manifestations 
in  life.  Christ  is  in  us  and  we  in  Christ  in  some 
fashion  as  the  Son  is  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in 
the  Son.  And  the  works  that  we  do  He  does  in  some 
fashion  that  faintly  echoes  and  shadows  the  perfect 
co-operation  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  Avorks 
that  the  Christ  did  upon  the  earth. 

All  the  doings  of  a  Christian  man,  if  done  in  faith, 
and  holding  by  Christ,  are  Christ's  doings,  inasmuch 
as  He  is  the  life  and  the  power  which  does  them  all. 
And  Christ's  deeds  are  reproduced  and  perpetuated  in 
His  humble  follower,  inasmuch  as  the  life  which  is 
imparted  will  unfold  itself  according  to  its  own  Idnd ; 
and  he  that  loves  Christ  will  be  changed  into  His 
likeness,  and  become  a  partaker  of  His  Spirit.  So  let 
us  curb  all  self-dependence  and  self-will,  that  that 
mighty  tide  may  flow  into  us ;  and  let  us  cast  from  us 
all  timidity,  distrust,  and  gloom,  and  be  strong  in  the 
assurance  that  we  have  a  Christ  living  in  the  heavens 
to  work  for  us,  and  living  within  us  to  work  through 
us. 

There  is  no  record-  of  the  Ascension   in  John's 


62  TBE  WORKS  Ot   TEE  ASCENDED  CHUIST. 

Gospel,  but  these  words  of  my  text  unveil  to  us 
the  inmost  meanine^  of  that  Ascension,  and  are  in  full 
accord  with  the  great  picture  which  one  of  the  Evan- 
gelists has  drawn — a  picture  in  two  halves,  which  yet 
are  knit  together  into  one.  "  So  then,  after  He  had 
spoken  unto  them,  He  was  received  up  into  heaven, 
and  sat  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  and  they  went 
forth  and  preached  everywhere."  What  a  contrast 
between  the  two — the  repose  above,  the  toil  below  ! 
Yes  !  But  the  next  words  knit  them  together — "  The 
Lord  also  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the 
word  with  signs  following," 

II. — Note,  in  the  next  place,  the  greater  work  of 
the  servants  on  and  for  whom  the  Lord  works. 
"Greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do." 

Is,  then,  the  servant  greater  than  his  Lord  ?  and 
he  that  is  sent  greater  than  He  that  sent  him  ?  Not 
so,  for  whatsoever  the  servant  does  is  done  because 
the  Lord  is  with  and  in  him.  And  the  contrast  that 
is  drawn  between  the  works  that  Christ  does  on  earth 
and  the  srreater  works  that  the  servant  is  to  do  here- 
after  is,  properly  and  at  bottom,  the  contrast  between 
Christ's  manifestations  in  the  time  of  His  earthly 
limitation  and  humiliation,  and  His  manifestations  in 
the  time  of  His  ascension  and  celestial  glory. 

We  need  not  be  afraid  that  such  great  words  as 
these  in  any  measure  trench  on  the  unique  and  un- 
approachable character  of  the  earthly  work  of  Christ 
in  its  two  aspects,  which  are  one — of  Revelation  and 
Redemption.  These  are  finished,  and  need  no  copy,  no 
repetition,  no  perpetuation,  until  the  end  of  time.  But 
the  work  of  objective  Revelation,  which  was  completed 
when   He   ascended,  and   the  work   of  Redemption, 


< 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST.  63 

which  was  finished  when  He  rose — these  require 
to  J)e  apphed  through  the  ages.  And  it  is  m  regard 
to  the  appHcation  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ  to 
the  actual  accomphshment  of  its  contemplated  conse- 
quences, that  the  comparison  is  drawn  between  the 
limited  sphere  and  the  small  results  of  Christ's  work 
upon  earth,  and  the  world-wide  sweep  and  majestic 
magnitude  of  the  results  of  the  application  of  that 
work  by  His  servants'  Avitnessing  work.  The  wider 
and  more  complete  spiritual  results  achieved  by 
the  ministration  of  the  servants  than  by  the  minis- 
tration of  the  Lord  is  the  point  of  comparison  here. 
And  I  need  only  remind  you  that  the  poorest  Christian 
who  can  go  to  a  brother  soul,  and  by  word  or  life  can 
draw  that  soul  to  a  Christ  whom  it  apprehends  as 
dying  for  its  sins  and  raised  for  its  glorifying,  does  a 
mightier  thing  than  it  was  possible  for  the  Master  to 
do  by  life  or  lip  whilst  He  was  here  upon  earth.  For 
the  Eedemption  had  to  be  completed  in  act  before  it 
could  be  proclaimed  in  word ;  and  Christ  had  no  such 
weapon  in  His  hands  with  which  to  draw  men's  souls, 
and  cast  down  the  high  places  of  evil,  as  we  have 
when  we  can  say,  "  We  testify  unto  you  that  the  Son 
of  God  hath  died  for  our  sins,  and  is  raised  again 
according  to  the  Scriptures."  Nor  need  I  do  more  than 
remind  you  of  the  comparison,  so  exalting  for  His  humi- 
lity and  so  humbling  for  our  self-exaltation,  between 
the  narroAv  sphere  in  which  His  earthly  ministrations 
had  to  operate  and  the  world-wide  scope  which  is 
given  to  His  servants.  "  He  laid  His  hands  on  a  few 
sick  folk,  and  healed  them ; "  and  at  the  end  of  His 
life  there  were  one  hundred  and  twenty  disciples  in 
Jerusalem,  and  five  hundred  in  Galilee,  and  you  might 


G4  THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST. 

have  put  them  all  into  this  chapel  and  had  ample 
room  to  spare.  That  was  all  that  Jesus  Christ  had 
done ;  while  to-day  and  now  the  world  is  being 
leavened,  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  beginning 
to  recognize  His  name,  "  Greater  works  than  these 
shall  he  do  "  who  lets  Christ  in  him  do  all  his  works. 

in. — Lastly,  notice  the  conditions  on  which  the 
exalted  Lord  works  for  and  on  His  servants. 

These  are  two,  faith  and  prayer. 

"  He  that  believeth  on  Me  the  works  that  I  do  shall 
he  do  also."  Faith,  the  simple  act  of  loving  trust  in 
Jesus  Christ,  opens  the  door  of  our  hearts  and  natures 
for  the  entrance  of  all  His  solemn  Omnipotence,  and 
makes  us  possessors  of  it.  It  is  the  condition,  and 
the  only  condition,  and  plainly  the  indispensable 
condition,  of  possessing  this  Divine  Christ's  power, 
that  we  should  trust  ourselves  to  Him  that  gives  it. 
And  if  we  do,  then  we  shall  not  trust  in  vain,  but  to 
us  there  will  come  power  that  will  surpass  our  desire, 
and  fill  us  with  its  own  rejoicing  and  pure  energy. 
Faith  will  make  us  like  Christ.  Faith  is  intensely  prac- 
tical. "  He  that  believeth  shall  do."  It  is  no  mere 
cold  assent  to  a  creed  which  is  utterly  impotent  to 
operate  upon  men's  acts,  no  mere  hysterical  emotion 
which  is  utterly  impotent  to  energize  into  nobilities  of 
service  and  miracles  of  consecration,  but  it  is  the 
affiance  of  the  whole  nature,  which  spreads  itself  before 
Him  and  prays,  "  Fill  my  emptiness  and  vitalize  me 
with  Thine  own  Spirit."  That  is  the  faith  which  is 
ever  answered  by  the  inrush  of  the  Divine  power,  and 
the  measure  of  our  capacity  of  receiving  is  the  measure 
of  His  gift  to  us. 

So  if  Christian  individuals  and  Christian  communi- 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST. 


ties  are  impotent,  or  all  but  impotent,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  understanding  why.  They  have  cut  the 
connection,  they  have  shut  the  tap.  They  lack  faith  ; 
and  so  their  power  is  weakness.  "  Why  could  we  not 
cast  him  out,"  said  they,  perplexed  when  they  had  no 
need  to  be.  "  Why  could  you  not  cast  him  out  ? 
Because  j^ou  do  not  believe  that  I,  working  in  you, 
can  cast  him  out.  That  is  why ;  and  the  only  why." 
Let  us  learn  that  the  secret  of  the  Christian's  Aveak- 
ness  is  the  weakness  of  their  Christian  faith. 

And  the  other  condition  is  prayer.  "  Whatsoever 
ye  shall  ask  in  My  name  I  will  do  it,"  and  He  repeats 
it,  for  confirmation  and  for  greater  emphasis.  "  If  yo 
shall  ask  anything  in  My  name,"  or,  as  perhaps  that 
clause  ought  to  be  read  with  some  versions,  "  If  ye 
shall  ask  Me  anything  in  My  name  I  will  do  it." 

Three  points  may  be  named  here.  Our  power 
depends  upon  our  prayer,  God's  and  Christ's  fulness 
and  willingness  to  communicate  do  not  depend  upon 
our  prayer.  But  our  capacity  to  receive  of  that 
fulness,  and  so  the  possibility  of  its  communication 
to  us,  do  depend  upon  our  prayer.  "  We  have  not 
because  we  ask  not." 

The  power  of  our  prayer  depends  upon  our  con- 
scious oneness  with  the  revealed  Christ.  "  If  ye  shall 
ask  in  My  name,"  says  He.  And  people  think  they 
have  fulfilled  the  condition  when,  in  a  mechanical 
and  external  manner,  they  say,  as  a  formula  at  the 
end  of  petitions  that  have  been  all  stuffed  full  of  self- 
will  and  seltishncss,  "  For  Christ's  sake.  Amen  ! "  and 
then  they  wonder  they  do  not  get  them  answered ! 
Is  that  askino-  in  Christ's  name  ? 

Christ's  name  is  the  revelation  of  Christ's  character 


66  THE  WOBKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST. 

and  to  do  a  thing  in  the  name  of  another  person  is  to  do 
it  as  His  representative,  and  as  reaUzing  that  in  some 
deep  and  real  sense — for  the  present  purpose,  at  all 
events — we  are  one  with  Him.  And  it  is  when  we 
know  ourselves  to  be  united  to  Christ  and  one  with 
Him,  and  representative  in  a  true  fashion  of  Himself, 
as  well  as  when,  in  humble  reliance  on  His  work  for 
us  and  His  lovinsc  heart,  we  draw  near,  that  our 
prayer  has  power,  as  the  old  divines  used  to  sa}^  "  to 
move  the  hand  that  moves  the  world,"  and  to  bring 
down  a  rush  of  blessing  upon  our  heads.  Prayer  in 
the  name  of  Christ  is  hard  to  offer.  It  needs  much 
discipline  and  watchfulness  ;  it  excludes  all  self-will 
and  selfishness.  And  if,  as  my  text  tells  us,  the  end 
of  the  Son's  working  is  the  glory  of  the  Father,  that 
same  end,  and  not  our  own  ease  or  comfort,  must  be 
the  end  and  object  of  all  prayer  which  is  offered  in 
His  name.  When  we  so  pray  Ave  get  an  answer.  And 
the  reason  why  such  multitudes  of  prayers  never 
travel  higher  than  the  roof,  and  bring  no  blessings  to 
him  who  prays,  is  because  they  are  not  prayers  in 
Christ's  name. 

Prayer  in  His  name  will  pass  into  prayer  to  Him. 
As  He  not  obscurely  teaches  us  here,  if  we  adopt  the 
reading  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  He  has  an 
ear  to  hear  such  requests,  and  He  wields  Divine 
power  to  answer.  Surely  it  was  not  blasphemy  nor 
any  interruption  of  the  worship  due  to  God  alone, 
when  the  dying  martyr  outside  the  city  wall  cried  and 
said,  "Lord  Jesus  !  Receive  my  spirit."  Nor  is  it  an}' 
departure  from  the  solemnest  obligations  laid  upon  us 
by  the  unity  of  the  Divine  nature,  nor  are  we  bring- 
ing idolatrous  petitions  to  another  than  the   Father 


THE  WORKS  OF  THE  ASCENDED  CHRIST.  67 

when  we  draw  near  to  Christ  and  ask  Him  to  give 
lis  that  which  He  gives  as  the  Father's  gift,  and  to 
work  on  us  that  which  the  Father  that  dwclleth  in 
Him  works  through  Him  for  us. 

Trust  yourselves  to  Christ,  and  let  your  desires  be 
still,  to  listen  to  His  voice  in  you,  and  let  that  voice 
speak.  And  then,  dear  brethren,  we  shall  be  lifted 
above  ourselves,  and  strength  will  flow  into  us,  and 
we  shall  be  able  to  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things,  through 
the  Christ  that  dwells  in  me  and  makes  me  stronof." 
And  just  as  the  glad,  sunny  waters  of  the  incoming 
tide  fill  the  empty  places  of  some  oozy  harbour,  where 
all  the  shij)s  are  lying  as  if  dead  and  the  mud  is  fester- 
ing in  the  sunshine,  so  into  the  slimy  emptiness  of  our 
corrupt  hearts  there  will  pour  the  flashing  sunlit  wave, 
the  ever-fresh  rush  of  His  power  ;  and  everything  will 
live  whithersoever  it  cometh,  and  we  shall  be  able  to 
say  in  all  humility,  and  yet  in  glad  recognition  of 
Christ's  faithfulness  to  this,  His  transcendent  promise, 
"  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  "  because 
the  life  which  I  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of 
the  Son  of  God." 


"-^ 


y 


VIL 


Xovc  anb  ©bcbicncc. 

"  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments." — John  xiv.  15. 

S  wc  have  seen  in  former  sermons,  the 
keyword  of  the  precedmg  context  is 
"  Beheve  ! "  and  that  word  passes  now 
into  "  Love."  The  order  here  is  the 
order  of  experience.  There  is  first  the 
beheving  gaze  upon  the  Christ  as  He  is  revealed — the 
image  of  the  invisible  God.  That  kindles  love,  and 
prompts  to  obedience. 

There  is  another  very  beautiful  and  subtle  link  of 
connection  between  these  Avords  and  the  preceding. 
.  Our  Lord  has  just  been  saying,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  ]\Iy  name,  that  will  I  do."  Is  the  parallel 
wholly  accidental  or  fanciful  between  the  Lord  who 
does  as  the  servant  asks  and  the  servant  who  is  to  do 
as  the  Lord  commands  ?  On  both  sides  there  is  love 
delighting  to  be  set  in  motion  by  a  message  from  the 
other  side.  On  the  one  part  there  is  love  supreme 
Avhich  commands  and  delights  to  be  asked,  on  the 
other  part  there  is  love  dependent,  Avhich  asks  and 
delights   to   be   commanded;    and   though   the   gulf 


LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE.  69 

between  the  two  be  great,  and  the  difference  between 
Christ's  law  and  our  jDctitions  be  infinite,  yet  there  is 
an  analogy. 

I  pause  on  these  words,  though  they  are  introduced 
here  only  as  the  basis  of  the  great  promise  which 
follows,  because  they  open  out  into  such  wide  fields. 
They  contain  the  all-sufficient  law  of  Christian  con- 
duct. They  contain  the  one  motive  adequate  to  bring 
that  law  into  realization.  They  disclose  the  very  roots 
of  Christian  morality,  and  part  of  the  secret  of  Christ's 
unique  power  and  influence  amongst  men.  They 
come  with  a  messao-e  of  encouraofcment  to  all  souls 
despairing  of  being  able  to  do  that  which  they  would, 
and  of  freedom  to  all  men  burdened  with  a  crowd  of 
minute  and  external  regulations.  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
keep  My  commandments."  There  arc  three  points 
to  be  dwelt  upon  here — namely,  the  all-sufficient  ideal 
or  guide  of  life,  the  all-powerful  motive  which  Christ 
brings  to  bear,  and  the  all-subduing  gaze  of  faith  by 
which  that  motive  is  brousrht  into  action. 

I. — We  have  here  the  all-sufficient  ideal  or  guide 
for  life. 

Jesus  Christ  is  not  speaking  merely  to  that  little 
handful  of  men  in  the  upper  chamber,  but  to  all 
generations  and  to  all  lands,  to  the  end  of  time  and 
round  the  world.  The  authoritative  tone  which  He 
assumes  here  is  very  noteworthy.  He  speaks  as 
Jehovah  spoke  from  Sinai,  and  quotes  the  very  words 
of  the  old  law  Avhen  He  speaks  of  "  keeping  My  com- 
mandments." There  are  distinctly  involved  in  this 
quite  incidental  utterance  of  Christ's  two  startling 
things — one  the  assumption  of  His  right  to  impose 
His  will  upon  every  human  being,  and  the  other  His 


70  LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE. 

assumption  that  His  will  contains  tlio  all-sufficient 
directory  for  human  conduct. 

What,  then,  are  His  commandments  ?  Those  which 
He  spoke  arc  plain  and  simple ;  and  people  who  Avisli 
to  pick  holes  in  the  greatness  of  Christ's  Avork  in  the 
world  tell  us  that  you  can  match  almost  all  His 
precepts  up  and  down  amongst  moralists  and  philo- 
sophers. And  they  croAV  very  loud  if,  scratching 
amongst  Rabbinical  dust-heaps,  they  find  something 
that  looks  like  anything  that  He  once  said.  Be  it  so ! 
What  does  that  matter  ?  Christ's  "  commandments  " 
are  Christ  Himself.  This  is  the  originality  and  unique- 
ness of  Christ  as  a  moral  teacher,  that  He  says,  not 
"  Do  this,  that,  and  the  other  thing,"  but  "  Copy  Me." 
"  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  Me,  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  His  commandments  are 
Himself ;  and  the  sum  of  them  all  is  this — a  character 
perfectly  self-oblivious,  and  wholly  penetrated  and 
saturated  with  joyful,  filial  submission  to  the  Father, 
and  uttermost  and  entire  giving  Himself  away  to  His 
brethren.  That  is  Christ's  commandment  which  He 
bids  us  keep,  and  His  law  is  to  be  found  in  His  life. 

And  then,  if  that  be  so,  what  a  change  passes  on 
the  aspect  of  law,  when  wo  take  Christ  as  being  our 
living  embodiment  of  it !  Everything  that  was  hard,  re- 
pellent, far-off,  cold,  vanishes.  We  have  no  longer  tables 
of  stone,  but  fleshy  tables  of  a  heart ;  and  the  Law 
stands  before  us,  a  Being  to  be  loved,  to  be  clung  to, 
to  be  trusted  to,  and  whom  it  is  blessedness  to  know 
and  perfection  to  be  like.  The  rails  upon  which  the 
train  travels  may  be  rigid,  but  they  mean  safety,  and 
they  carry  men  smoothly  into  otherwise  maccessihle 
lands.     So  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  brought  to  us  is 


LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE.  71 

the  firm  and  plain  track  along  wliicli  we  are  to  travel ; 
and  all  that  was  ditiicult  and  hard  in  the  cold  thought 
of  duty  becomes  changed  into  the  attraction  of  a 
living  pattern  and  example.  This  living  and  breath- 
in"'  and  lovino-  commandment  is  all-sufficient  for 
every  detail  and  complexity  of  human  life.  It  is  so 
by  the  confession  of  believers  and  of  unbelievers,  by 
the  joyful  confession  of  the  one,  and  by  the  frank 
acknowledgment  of  many  of  the  others.  Listen  to 
one  of  them.  "Whatever  else  may  be  taken  away 
from  us  by  rational  criticism,  Christ  is  still  left,  a 
unique  Figure,  not  more  unlike  all  His  predecessors 
than  all  His  followers.  .  ,  .  Reliofion  cannot  bo 
said  to  have  made  a  bad  choice  in  selecting  this  Man 
as  the  ideal  Representative  and  Guide  of  humanity ; 
nor  even  noAV  would  it  be  easy,  even  for  an  unbeliever, 
to  find  a  better  translation  of  the  rule  of  virtue  from 
the  abstract  into  the  concrete  than  to  endeavour  so 
to  live  that  Christ  would  approve  our  life." 

It  is  enough  for  conduct,  it  is  enough  for  character, 
it  is  enough  in  all  perplexities  of  conflicting  duties, 
that  we  listen  to  and  obey  the  Voice  that  says,  "Keep 
My  commandments." 

11. — Now  note,  secondly,  the  all-powerful  motive. 

Probably  my  text  is  best  understood  as  the  Revised 
Version  understands  it,  which  reads,  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
yc  ivill  keep  My  commandments,"  making  it  an 
assurance  and  not  an  injunction.  Christ  speaks 
with  the  calm  confidence  that  love  to  Him  will 
have  power  enough  to  sway  the  life.  His  utterance 
here  is  not  the  addition  of  another  commandment 
to  the  list,  but  rather  the  pointing  out  of  hoAv  the}'' 
may  all  be  kept. 


72  LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE. 

The  principle  that  underlies  these  words,  then, 
is  this,  that  love  is  the  foundation  of  obedience,  and 
obedience  is  the  sure  outcome  and  result  of  love. 
That  is  true  in  regard  of  the  lower  forms  of  love, 
which  may  teach  us  something  of  the  operation  of 
the  hiofher.  We  all  know  that  love  which  is  real, 
and  not  simply  passion  and  selfishness  with  a  mask 
on,  delights  most  chiefly  in  knowing  and  conforming 
to  the  Avill  of  the  beloved ;  and  that  there  is  nothing 
sweeter  than  to  be  commanded  by  the  dear  voice 
and  to  obey  for  dear  love's  sake.  And  you  have  onl}^ 
to  take  that  which  is  the  experience  of  every  true 
heart,  in  a  thousand  sweet  ways  in  daily  life,  and  to 
lift  it  into  the  higher  regions,  and  to  transfer  it  to  the 
bond  that  unites  us  with  Jesus  Clirist,  to  see  that  He 
has  invoked  no  illusory,  but  an  omnipotent  power, 
when  He  has  rested  the  whole  force  of  His  trans- 
forming and  sanctifying  energy  upon  this  one 
principle,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  the  Lawgiver,  ye  will  keep 
the  commandments  of  My  Law." 

That  is  exactly  what  distinguishes  and  lifts  the 
morality  of  the  Gospel  above  all  other  systems.  The 
worst  man  in  the  world  knows  a  great  deal  more  of 
his  duty  than  the  best  man  does.  It  is  not  for  want 
of  knowledo'e  that  men  go  to  the  devil,  but  it  is  for 
want  of  power  to  live  their  knowledge.  And  what 
morality  fails  to  do,  with  its  clearest  utterances  of 
human  duty,  Christ  comes  and  does.  The  one  is  like 
the  useless  proclamations  posted  up  in  some  rebellious 
district,  where  there  is  no  army  to  back  them,  and 
the  king's  authority  from  whom  they  come  is  flouted. 
The  other  gets  itself  obeyed.  Such  is  the  difference 
between  the  j^owerloss  moralit}'  of  the  world  and  the 


LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE.  73 

commandment  of  Jesus  Christ,  Here  is  the  road 
plain  and  straight.  What  matters  that,  if  there  is  no 
force  to  draw  the  cart  along  it  ?  There  might  as  well 
be  no  road  at  all.  Here  stand  all  your  looms,  polished 
and  in  perfect  order,  but  there  is  no  steam  in  the 
boilers ;  and  so  there  is  no  motion,  and  nothing 
woven.  What  we  want  is  not  law,  but  power.  And 
what  the  Gospel  gives  us,  and  stands  alone  in  giving 
us,  is  not  merel}^  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God, 
and  the  clear  revelation  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  but 
it  is  the  power  to  become  it. 

Love  does  that,  and  love  alone.  That  stronfj  force 
brought  into  action  in  our  hearts  will  drive  out  from 
thence  all  rivals,  all  false  and  Ioav  things.  The  true 
way  to  cleanse  the  Augean  stables,  as  the  old  mj'th 
has  it,  was  to  turn  the  river  into  them.  It  would  have 
been  endless  work  to  wheel  out  the  filth  in  wheel- 
barrows loaded  by  spades :  turn  the  stream  in,  and  it 
will  sweep  away  all  the  foulness.  When  the  Ark 
comes  into  the  Temple,  Dagon  lies,  a  mutilated  stump, 
upon  the  threshold.  When  Christ  comes  into  my 
heart,  then  all  the  obscene  and  twilight-loving  shapes 
that  lurked  there,  and  defiled  it,  Avill  vanish  like 
ghosts  at  cock-crowing  before  His  calm  and  pure 
presence.  He,  and  He  alone,  entering  my  heart  by 
the  portals  of  my  love,  will  coerce  my  evil  and  stimu- 
late my  good.  And  if  I  love  Him,  I  shall  keep  His 
commandments. 

Now,  brethren,  here  is  a  plam  test  and  a  double- 
barrelled  one,  which  tries  both  our  love  and  our 
obedience  with  a  sharp  touchstone.  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
ye  will  keep  My  commandments."  That  impHes,  first, 
that  there  is  no  love  worth  callino-  so  which  does  not 


74  LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE. 

keep  the  commandment.  All  the  emotional  and  the 
mystic,  and  the  so-called  higher  parts  of  Christian 
experience,  have  to  be  content  to  submit  to  this  plain 
test — do  they  help  us  to  live  as  Christ  would  have  us, 
and  that  because  He  would  have  us  ?  Love  to  Him 
that  does  not  keep  His  commandments  is  either 
spurious  or  dangerously  feeble.  The  true  sign  of  its 
presence  in  the  heart  and  the  noblest  of  its  operations 
is  not  to  be  found  in  high-pitched  expressions  of 
fervid  emotion,  nor  even  in  the  sacred  joys  of  solitary 
communion,  but  in  its  making  us,  while  in  the  rough 
struggle  of  daily  life,  and  surrounded  by  trivial  tasks, 
live  near  Him,  and  by  Him,  and  for  Him,  and  like 
Him.  If  I  live  so,  I  love  Him ;  if  not,  not.  Not  that 
I  mean  to  say,  that  in  regard  of  each  individual  action 
of  a  Christian  man's  life  there  must  be  the  conscious 
presence  of  reference  to  the  supreme  love,  but  that 
each  individual  action  of  the  life  ouofht  to  come  from 
a  character  of  which  that  reference  to  the  supreme 
love  is  the  very  formative  principle  and  foundation. 
The  colouring  matter  put  in  at  the  fountain  will  dye 
every  drop  of  the  stream;  and  they  whose  inmost 
hearts  are  tinged  and  tinctured  with  the  sweet  love  of 
Jesus  Christ,  from  their  hearts  will  go  forth  issues  of 
life  all  coloured  and  moulded  thereby.  Test  your 
Christian  love  by  your  practical  obedience. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  obedience  Avortli 
calling  so  which  is  not  the  child  of  love  ;  and  all  the 
multitude  of  right  things  which  Christians  do  without 
that  motive  are  made  short  work  of  by  the  principle. 
Obedience  which  is  formal,  mechanical,  matter-of- 
course,  without  the  presence  in  it  of  a  loving  sub- 
mission  of  the  will ;   obedience  which   is   reluctant. 


LOVB  AXD  OBEDIENCE.  75 

calculated,  forced  upon  us  by  dread,  imitated  from 
others — all  that  is  nothing ;  and  Jesus  Christ  does 
not  count  it  as  obedience  at  all.  This  is  a  sieve  with 
very  small  meshes,  and  there  will  be  a  great  deal  of 
rubbish  left  in  it  after  the  shaking.  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
keep  My  commandments."  The  "  keeping  of  My  com- 
mandments "  which  has  not  "  love  to  Me  "  underlying- 
it  is  no  keeping  at  all. 

III. — And  so,  lastly,  notice  the  all-subduing  gaze. 

That  is  not  included  in  my  text,  but  it  is  necessary 
in  order  to  complete  the  view  of  the  forces  to  which 
Jesus  Christ  here  entrusts  the  hallowing  of  life,  and 
the  sanctifying  of  our  nature  ;  and  we  are  led  to  refer 
to  it  by  what  I  have  aheady  pointed  out ;  the  connec- 
tion between  the  "  love  "  of  my  text  and  the  "  beheve  " 
of  the  preceding  verses.  I  can  fancy  a  man  saying, 
"  Keep  His  commandments  ?  Woe  is  me  !  How 
am  I  to  keep  ?  "  The  answer  is  "  Love."  And  I  can 
fancy  him  saying  "  Love  ? "  Yes  !  "  And  how  am  I 
to  love  ?  I  cannot  get  up  love  at  the  word  of  com- 
mand, or  by  any  voluntary  eftbrt."  And  the  answer 
comes  again,  "  Believe  !  "  Trust  Christ,  and  you  will 
love  Him.  Love  Him  and  you  Avill  do  His  will. 
And  then  the  question  comes  again,  "  Believe  what  ?  " 
And  the  answer  comes,  "  Believe  that  He  is  the  Son 
of  God  who  died  for  you." 

Nothincr  else  will  kindle  a  man's  love  than  the 
faithful  contemplation  and  grasp  of  Christ  in  that 
character  and  aspect.  Only  the  redeeming  Christ 
aftbrds  a  reasonable  ground  for  our  love  to  Him. 
Here  is  a  dead  man,  dead  for  nineteen  centuries, 
expecting  you  and  me  to  have  towards  Him  a  vivid 
personal  affection    which   will  influence  our  conduct 


76  LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE. 

and  our  character.  What  right  has  He  to  expect 
that  ?  There  is  only  one  reasonable  ground  upon 
which  I  may  be  called  to  love  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
is  that  He  died  for  me.  And  such  a  love  towards 
such  a  Christ  is  the  only  thing  Avhich  Avill  wield 
power  sufficient  to  guide,  to  coerce,  to  restrain,  to 
constrain,  and  to  sustain  my  Aveak,  wayward,  rebel- 
lious, and  sluof^ish  will.  All  other  emotions  of 
so-called  admiration  and  worship  and  reverence 
and  affection  for  Jesus  Christ  are  apt  to  be  tepid  ; 
but  this  one  has  power  and  warmth  in  it. 

Here  is  a  unique  fact  in  the  history  of  the  world, 
that  not  only  did  He  make  this  astounding  claim  upon 
all  subsequent  generations ;  but  that  the  subsequent 
generations  have  responded  to  it,  and  that  to-day 
there  are  millions  of  men  Avho  love  Jesus  Christ 
with  a  love  warm,  personal,  deep,  powerful— the 
spring  of  all  their  goodness  and  the  Lord  of  their 
lives.  Why  do  they  ?  For  one  reason  only.  Because 
they  believe  that  He  died  for  them  individually,  and 
that  He  lives  an  ascended  yet  ever-present  Helper 
and  Lover  of  their  souls. 

My  brethren,  that  conviction,  and  that  conviction 
only,  as  I  venture  to  affirm,  has  power  to  send  a  glow 
of  love  into  the  heart  which  shall  move  all  the  limbs 
in  swift  and  happy  obedience.  That  conviction,  and 
that  conviction  alone,  will  melt  the  thick-ribbed  ice 
of  our  spirits  and  will  make  it  flow  down  in  sweet 
waters.  The  love  that  has  looked  upon  the  Cross 
will  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  of  Him  that  speaks 
from  the  Throne.  When  our  faith  has  grasped  Him, 
as  enduring  all  that  for  us,  then  our  love  will  be 
awakened   to   hear   and  to   do   His   commandments. 


LOVE  AND  OBEDIENCE. 


77 


"  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us,"  and  such 
love  will  flower  and  fruit  in  obedience.  I  shall  keep 
His  commandments  when  I  love  Him.  I  shall  love 
Him  with  a  love,  that  makes  my  will  plastic  and  my 
life  a  glad  service,  when  by  faith  I  grasp  Him  as  the 
Incarnate  Lord,  "who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself 
for  me." 


VIII. 

^be  prainuG  Cbnst,  tbc  (Bivino  Jfatber, 
anb  tbc  HbiMncj  Spirit 

"  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  Avith  you  for  ever  ;  even  the 
Spirit  of  Truth  ;  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him  :  but  ye  know  Him  ;  for 
He  dwelleth  with  you.  and  shall  be  in  you." — John  xiv.  16,  17. 


'pray 


HE  "  and "  at  tlie  beo-innino;  of  these 
words  shows  us  that  they  are  con- 
tinuous with  and  the  consequence  of 
what  precedes.  "  If  jq  love  Me,  ye  will 
heep  M.J  commandments,  and  /  will 
.     and   He   will   send."      Such  is  the 


series ;  but  we  must  also  remember  that,  as  Ave  have 
seen  in' previous  sermons,  the  obedience  spoken  of  in 
the  clause  before  my  text  is  itself  treated  as  a  conse- 
quence of  son>e  preceding  steps.  The  ladder  that  is 
fixed  upon  earth  and  has  its  summit  in  heaven  has  for 
its  rungs,  first  and  bottommost,  "  believe  " ;  second, 
"love"  ;  third,  "obey."  And  thus  the  context  carries 
us  from  the  very  basis  of  the  C!hristian  life  up  into  its 
highest  reward,  even  the  larger  gift  to  an  obedient 
spirit  of  that  Great  Spirit  who  is  the  Comforter  and 
the  Teacher. 


THE  PEAYIKCr  CHRIST,   THE  GIVING  FATHER.       79 

And  there  is  another  very  striking  link  of  connec- 
tion between  these  words  and  the  preceding.  There 
are,  if  I  ma}^  so  say,  two  telephones  across  the  abj-ss 
that  separates  the  ascended  Christ  and  us.  One  of 
them  is  contained  in  His  words,  "  If  ye  ask  anything 
in  My  name  I  will  do  it  "  ;  the  other  is  contained  in 
these  words,  "  If  ye  keep  My  commandments  I  will 
ask."  Love  on  this  side  of  the  great  cleft  sets  love  on 
the  other  side  of  it  in  motion  in  a  twofold  fashion.  If 
we  ask.  He  does  ;  if  we  do,  He  asks.  His  action  is  the 
ansAver  to  our  prayers,  and  His  prayers  are  the  answer 
to  our  obedient  action.  So  we  have  here  these  jDoints — 
the  praying  Christ  and  the  giving  Father  ;  the  abiding 
Gift ;  the  blind  world  and  the  recipient  disciples. 

I. — Note,  then,  first,  the  praying  Christ  and  the 
giving  Father.  "  I  will  ask  and  He  Avill  give  "  seems 
a  strange  drop  from  the  lofty  claims  Avith  Avhich  Ave 
have  become  familiar  in  the  earlier  verses  of  this 
chapter.  "  Believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  Me."  "  He 
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  "If  ye 
shall  ask  anything  in  My  name  I  Avill  do  it."  "  Keep 
My  commandments."  All  these  distinctly  express, 
or  necessarily  imply,  Divine  nature,  prerogatives,  and 
authority.  But  here  the  voice  that  spake  the  perfect 
revelation  of  God,  and  gave  utterance  authoritatiA'CiA^ 
to  the  perfect  laAv  of  life,  softens  and  loAvers  its  tones 
into  petition  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  joins  the  rank  of  the 
suppliants.  Noav  common  sense  tells  us  that  appar- 
ently diverse  vicAvs  lying  so  close  together  in  one 
continuous  stream  of  speech  cannot  have  seemed  to 
the  utterer  of  them  to  be  contradictory ;  and  I  venture 
to  affirm  that  there  is  no  explanation  Avhich  does 
justice  to  these  tAA'o  sides  of  Christ's  consciousness — 


80       THE  PRAYING  CHFdST,   THE  GIVING  FATHER, 

the  one  all  Divine  and  authoritative  and  lofty,  and  the 
other  all  lowly  and  identifying  Himself  with  petitioners 
and  suppliants  everywhere — except  the  old-fashioned 
and  to-day  discredited  belief  that  He  is  God  manifej.t 
in  the  flesh,  who  prays  in  His  Manhood  and  hears 
prayer  in  His  Divinity.  The  bare  humanistic  view 
Avhich  emphasizes  such  utterances  as  these  of  my  text 
does  not,  for  the  life  of  it,  know  what  to  do  with  the 
other  ones,  and  cannot  manas^e  to  unite  these  two 
images  into  a  stereoscopic  solid.  That  is  reserved  for 
the  faith  which  believes  in  the  Manhood  and  in  the 
Deity  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour. 

His  intercession  is  the  great  hope  of  the  Christian 
heart.  His  intercession  is  the  great  activity  of  His 
present  exalted  and  glorious  state.  His  intercession 
is  no  mere  verbal  utterance,  nor  the  representation  to 
the  Father  of  an  alien  or  a  diverse  will,  but  His  inter- 
cession, mysterious  as  it  is,  and  unfathomable  to  our 
poor,  short  lines  and  light  plummets,  must  mean  this 
at  all  events— His  continual  activity  in  presenting 
before  the  Divine  Father,  as  the  motive  and  condition 
of  His  blessing  being  granted.  His  own  great  work 
upon  the  Cross.  The  High  Priest  passes  within  the 
veil,  bearing  in  His  hand  the  offering  which  He  has 
made,  and  by  reason  of  that  offering,  and  of  His 
powerful  presence  before  the  mercy-seat,  all  the 
spiritual  gifts  which  redeem  and  regenerate  and  sanc- 
tify humanity  are  for  ever  coming  forth.  "  I  will  pray, 
and  He  will  give,"  is  but  one  way  of  saying,  "  Seeing 
then,  that  Ave  have  a  great  High  Priest  over  the 
House  of  God  who  is  entered  within  the  veil,  let  us  - 
draw  near." 

But  I  would  have  you  notice  how,  as  is  always  the 


AND  THE  ABIDING  SPIRIT.  81 

case  in  all  utterances  of  Jesus  Christ  which  express 
the  lowest  humiliation  and  completest  identification 
of  Himself  with  humanity,  there  is  ever  present  some 
touch  of  obscured  glory,  some  all  but  suppressed  flash 
of  brightness  which  will  not  be  wholly  concealed. 
Note  two  things  in  this  great  utterance ;  one,  Christ's 
quiet  assumption  that  all  through  the  ages,  and 
to-day,  nineteen  centuries  after  He  died.  He  laiows, 
at  the  moment  of  their  being  done,  His  servants' 
deeds.  "  Keep  My  commandments,  and,  knowing 
that  you  keep  them,  I  will  then  and  there  pray 
for  you."  He  claims  in  the  lowly  words  an  altogether 
supernatural,  abnormal.  Divine  cognizance  of  all  the 
acts  of  men  down  the  ages  and  across  the  gulf 
between  earth  and  heaven. 

And  the  other  signature  of  Divinity  stamped  on  the 
prayer  of  Christ  is  His  certitude  of  the  answer. 
"  I  will  ask  and  He  will  give."  He  puts,  as  it  were, 
the  Father's  act  in  pledge  to  us,  and  assures  us,  in 
a  tone  of  certainty,  which  is  not  merely  the  assurance 
of  faith,  but  the  certitude  of  One  who  is  One  with 
the  Father,  that  His  prayer  brings  ever  its  answer. 
"  Father  !  I  Avill  that  they  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me 
be  with  Me."  How  strange !  How  far  beyond  the 
warrantable  language  of  man  1  And  how  impossible 
for  a  fisherman  of  Bethsaida  to  imagine,  if  he  had 
not  heard,  that  strange  blending  of  submission  and  of 
authorit}^  which  speaks  in  such  words. 

Then,  remember  what  I  have  already  said,  that, 
according  to  the  teaching  of  this  verse,  taken  in 
connection  with  its  context,  that  which  put  in  motion 
Christ's  intercessory  activity,  as  represented  in  my 
text,  is  the  obedience  of  a  Christian   man.     If  you 

6 


82       THE  PRAYING  CHRIST,   THE  GIVING  FATHER, 

obey  He  will  pray,  and  the  Father  will  send.  So  the 
reward  of  imperfect  obedience  is  the  larger  measure 
given  to  us  of  that  Divine  Spirit  by  whose  indwelling, 
obedience  becomes  possible,  and  self-surrender  a  joy 
and  a  poAver.  And  that  is  not  merely  because  of  the 
natural  operation  by  which  any  kind  of  conduct  tends 
to  repeat  itself  in  more  complete  measure,  nor  is  it 
merely  a  case  of  "  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given  " ; 
as  a  man's  arm  is  strengthened  by  exercise,  and 
any  faculty  becomes  more  assured,  and  swift,  and 
at  the  command  of  its  owner,  by  use.  But  there 
is  a  distinct  supernatural  impartation  to  every 
obedient  heart,  of  Divine  gifts  which  come  straight 
through  Jesus  Christ  to  it.  He  Himself,  in  this 
immediate  context,  says,  "  If  I  depart  I  will  send  Him 
unto  you."  And  the  true  conception  is  that  in  that 
Spirit's  gift,  which  is  a  reality  waiting  as  its  crov/n 
and  reward  upon  our  poor  stained  obedience,  the 
whole  Godhead  is  present ;  the  Father  the  Source  ; 
the  Son  the  Channel ;  the  Spirit  the  Gift. 

II. — And  so,  secondly,  note  what  our  text  tells  us 
of  that  abiding  gift. 

," He  will  send  another  Comforter,"  "that  He  may 
abide  with  you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of  Truth."  I 
suppose  I  may  take  it  for  granted  that  most  of  my 
audience  know  all  that  need  to  be  said  as  to  the  meaning 
of  this  word  "Comforter."  In  our  present  modern 
English  it  has  a  very  much  narroAver  range  of  meaning 
than  its  etymology  would  give  it,  and  than  probably  it 
had  when  it  was  first  used  in  an  English  translation. 
"  Comforter  "  means  a  great  deal  more  than  "  con- 
soler," though  Ave  have  narroAved  it  to  that  significa- 
tion almost  exclusively.     It  means  not  only  one  Avho 


AND  THE  ABIDING  SPIRIT.  83 

administers  sweet  whispers  of  consolation  in  sorrow, 
but  one  Avho,  in  any  circumstances,  by  his  presence 
makes  strong.  And  the  original  Greek  word,  of 
which  it  is  the  translation  here,  has  jorecisely  an 
analogous  meaning ;  its  original  signification  being 
that  of  one  who  is  called  to  the  aid  of  another, 
primarily  as  an  advocate  in  a  court  of  law,  but  more 
widely  as  a  helper  in  any  form  whatsoever.  And  that 
is  the  idea  which  is  to  be  attached  to  the  word  here : — 
a  Comforter  who  makes  strong  by  His  presence ;  the 
Paraclete,  who  is  our  Advocate,  Helper,  Guide,  and 
Instructor.  Need  I  dwell  upon  the  great  thoughts 
that  spring  from  that  metaphor  ;  how  we  have  to  look 
for  a  person,  and  not  merely  a  vague  influence  ;  a 
Divine  Person  who  will  be  by  our  sides  on  condition 
of  our  faith,  love,  and  obedience,  to  be  our  Strength 
in  ail  weakness,  our  Peace  in  all  trouble,  our  Wisdom 
in  all  darkness,  our  Guide  in  every  perplexity,  our 
Comforter  and  Cherisher,  our  Righteousness  when 
sin  is  strong,  the  Victor  over  our  temptations,  and 
the  Companion  and  Sweetener  of  our  solitude  ? 
The  metaphors  Avith  which  Scripture  represents  this 
great  personal  Influence  are  full  of  instruction  and 
beauty.  He  comes  as  "  the  Fire,"  which  melts,  which 
warms,  which  cleanses,  which  quickens.  He  comes 
as  the  "rushing,  mighty  Wind,"  which  bears  health 
upon  its  wings,  and  sometimes  breathes  gently  as  an 
infant's  breath,  and  sometimes  sweeps  with  irresistible 
power.  He  comes  as  the  "  Oil,"  gently  flowing,  lubri- 
cating, making  every  joint  supple,  nourishing.  He 
comes  as  the  "  Water  of  Life,"  refreshing,  vitalizing, 
quickening  all  growth.  He  comes  fluttering  down  as 
the  Dove  of  God.  the  bird  of  peace  that  will  brood 

6* 


3i       THE  PBAYING  CUEIST,    THE  GIVING  FATHER, 

upon  our  hearts.  The  predicates  which  Scripture 
attaches  to  that  great  Name  are  equally  various,  and 
are  full  of  teaching  as  to  the  manner  in  which  He  is 
the  Comforter  and  the  Advocate.  He  is  the  Spirit  of 
Holiness,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  the  Spirit  of  Wisdom,  the 
Spirit  of  Power,  the  Spirit  of  Love,  the  Spirit  of  a 
Sound  Mind,  the  Spirit  of  Sonship,  the  Spirit  of  Sup- 
pHcation,  and  of  many  great  things  besides.  And 
this  sweet,  strong,  all-sufficient  Person  is  offered  to 
each  of  us,  and  waits  to  enter  our  hearts. 

And  says  Christ,  this  Strengthener  and  Advocate  is 
to  replace  Me  and  to  carry  on  My  work.  He  "  will 
send  another  Comforter."  Who  was  the  other  but  the 
Master  who  was  speaking  ?  So  all  that  that  handful 
of  men  found  of  sweetness  and  shelter  and  assured 
guidance,  and  stay  for  their  weakness,  and  enlighten- 
ment for  their  darkness,  and  companionship  for  their 
solitude,  and  a  breast  on  which  to  rest  their  heads, 
and  love  in  which  to  bathe  their  hearts,  all  these  this 
Divine  Spirit  will  bring  to  each  of  us  if  we  will. 

And,  further,  our  Lord  tells  us  that  this  strong 
continuation  of  His  presence  will  be  a  permanent 
companion.  "  He  will  abide  with  you  for  ever." 
He  was  comforting  the  disciples  who  were  trembling 
at  the  thought  of  His  departure,  and  knowing  that  all 
the  sweetness  of  these  three  short  years  had  come  to 
an  end ;  and  He  says  to  them,  and  through  them  to 
all  the  ages  to  the  end  of  time :  Here  is  the  abiding 
Guest,  that  nothing  but  your  own  sin  will  ever  cast 
out  from  your  hearts. 

And  Christ  tells  us  how  this  great  Spirit  will'  do 
His  work.  He  is  the  "  Spirit  of  Truth,"  not  as  if  He 
brought  new  truth.  To  suppose  that  He  does  opens  the 


AND  THE  ABIDING  SPIRIT.  85 

door  to  all  manner  of  fanaticism,  but  the  truth,  the 
revelation  of  which  is  all  summed  and  finished  in  the 
person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  weapon  by  which 
the  Divine  Spirit  works  all  His  conquests,  the  staff  on 
which  He  makes  us  lean  and  be  strong.  He  is  the 
Spirit  by  whom  the  truth  passes  into  our  personal 
possession,  by  no  mere  imperfect  form  of  outward 
teaching  which  is  always  confused  and  insufficient,, 
but  by  the  inward  teaching  that  deals  with  our  hearts 
and  our  spirits. 

But  Christ  speaks,  too,  of  the  blind  world.  There  is 
a  tone  of  deep  sadiiess  in  His  words.  The  thought  of 
the  immense  multitude  of  men  who  were  incapacitated 
to  receive  this  strengthener  steals  across  and  casts  a 
momentary  shadow  upon  even  the  brightness  and 
greatness  of  His  promise.  "  The  world  cannot  receive 
because  it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him."  The 
"  world  "  is  the  mass  of  man,  considered  as  godless  and 
separate  from  Him.  And  there  is  a  bit  of  the  world  in 
us  all ;  but  there  are  men  who  are  wholly  under  its 
influence  and  dominion.  And  these  men,  says  Christ, 
are  perfectly  incapable  of  receiving  the  teaching  of 
this  Divine  Comforter.  Of  course  there  are  other 
operations  of  that  Great  Spirit  of  which  we  shall  have 
to  hear  as  we  go  on  further  in  this  context,  when 
His  work  convicts  the  world  of  sin  and  of  righteousness 
and  of  judgment.  But  what  our  Lord  is  speaking  of 
here  is  the  work  of  that  Spirit  who  comes  in  response 
to  His  prayer,  which  rises  in  consequence  of  our  obe- 
dience, and  who,  comins;,  brinsrs  Avith  Him  strengfth 
and  purity  and  peace  and  wisdom  ;  and  that  aspect  of 
His  operations  a  heart  that  is  all  full  and  seething 
with  the  world  is  unfit  to  receive.     It  cannot  see  Him 


88       THE  PEA  YING  CHRIST,   THE  GIVING  FA  THEE, 

Embruted   natures   are  altogether    incapacitated  for 
high  thoughts,  for  the  perception  of  natural  beauty, 
for  the  appreciation  of  art ;  and  worldly  men,  bj'-  the 
very  same  law,  are  incapable  of  receiving  this  Divine 
Spirit.     A   savage  stares  at   the   sunshine  and   sees 
nothing  but  a  glare.    And  worldly  men — that  is  to  say, 
men  whose  tastes,  inclinations,  desires,  ho]3es,  purposes, 
strivings,  are  all  bound  by  this  visible  diurnal  round — 
lack  the  organ  that  enables  them  to  see  that  Divine 
Spirit   moving    round    about    them.      Whether   3^ou 
have   put    your   eyes    out    by    fleshly   lusts,   or,    as 
many   men   in    this    generation    have    done,   by  in- 
tellectual self-sufficiency  and   conceit ;   if  the  Avorld, 
in  its  grosser  or  in  its  more  refined   forms,  is  your 
master,  you  are  stone  blind  to  all  the  best  realities  of 
the  universe,  and  you  cannot  see  the  things  that  are. 
If  you  look  out  upon  the  history  of  the  Church,  or 
ujDon  the  present  condition  of  Christendom,  and  say, 
"  I  see  no  Divine  Spirit  working  there;"  well,  then,  the 
only  thing  that  is  to  be  said  to  you  is,  "  Go  to   an 
oculist ;  your  sight  is  bad.    Perhaps  there  is  solid  land, 
as  some  of  us  see  it,  where  you  see  only  mist."     This 
generation   wants    the   preaching  of  a   supernatural 
power  at  work  beside  us  and  among  us,  and  until  we 
come  to  believe  that,  we  do  not  understand  the  fulness 
of  Christ's  gift. 

III. — Then,  lastly,  note  the  recipient  disciples. 

Observe  that  the  order  of  clauses  is  reversed  in  the 
last  part  of  the  text.  The  world  cannot  receive, 
because  it  does  not  know.  The  disciple  knows, 
because  he  receives.  Possession  and  knowledoe  reei- 
procally  interchange  places,  and  may  be  regarded  as 
cause  and  effect  of  one  another.     That  is  to  sa}-,  at 


AXIJ  THE  ABIDING  SPIRIT.  87 

bottom  they  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  Knowledge 
is  possession,  and  possession  is  the  only  knowledge. 
These  disciples  knew  Christ  in  a  fashion.  He  had 
just  been  telling  them  that  they  did  not  know  Him ; 
but  so  far  as  they  did  dimly  grasp  Him,  they  saw  the 
Spirit — in  another  form,  indeed,  than  they  would 
hereafter  see — but  still  truly,  though  imperfectly. 
Beholding  that  Spirit,  though  through  a  glass  darkly, 
and  cherishing  their  partial  possession  of  Him,  they 
will  come  to  more,  and  steadfastly  increase  from  the 
morning  twihght  to  the  mid-day  glory.  So  He  says : 
"  He  dwelleth  with  you  now,  and  He  shall  be  in  you  " 
hereafter. 

There  is  a  better  form  of  possession  opening  before 
them,  Avhich  came  at  Pentecost,  and  has  lasted  ever 
since.  From  thenceforward  we  have  a  Spirit  that  not 
only  stands  by  our  sides  and  holds  fellowship  with  us 
(for  the  two  "  withs "  of  our  text  are  two  different 
words,  expressing  respectively  proximity  and  com- 
munion), but  who  actually  dwells  in  the  central 
depths  of  our  natures,  and  whom  we  thus  possess 
more  perfectly  and  blessedly  than  is  possible  to  even 
the  closest  outward  proximity,  and  the  sweetest  out- 
ward fellowship. 

That  possession  of  an  abiding  and  indwelling  Spirit 
is  the  gift  of  Christ  to  every  Christian  soul,  and  is  to 
be  found  by  us  all  upon  that  path  so  plainly  marked 
out  in  our  text  and  its  connections :  "  believe,"  "  love," 
"obey."  Then  the  Dove  of  God  will  flutter  down 
upon  our  heads  and  nestle  in  our  hearts,  and,  brooding 
over  that  solemn  and  solitary  sea  of  our  chaotic  spirit, 
will  bring  up  from  it  a  new  world  glistening  in  fresh 
order  and  beauty,  and  very  good  in  its  Maker's  eyes. 


IX. 


Zbc  absent  present  Cbrist 

'  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless  :  I  will  come  to  you.  Yet  a 
little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  Me  no  more  ;  but  ye  see  Me  : 
because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." — John  xiv.  IS,  19. 

HE  sweet  and  gracious  comfortings  with 
which  Christ  had  been  soothing  the 
disciples'  fears  went  very  deep,  but 
hitherto  they  had  not  gone  deep 
enough.  It  was  much  that  they 
should  know  the  purpose  of  His  going,  whither  He 
went,  and  that  they  had  an  interest  in  His  departure. 
It  was  much  that  they  should  have  before  them  the 
prospect  of  reunion  ;  much  that  they  should  know 
that  all  through  His  absence  He  would  be  working 
in  them,  and  that  they  should  be  assured  that,  absent. 
He  would  send  them  a  great  gift.  But  reunion,  in- 
fluence from  afar,  and  Gfifts  from  the  other  side  of  the 
gulf  were  not  all  that  their  hearts  needed.  And  so 
here  our  Lord  gives  yet  more,  in  the  paradoxes  that, 
absent  He  will  be  present,  unseen  visible,  and  dying 
will  be  for  them  for  ever,  life  and  life-ofivins]:.  These 
great  thoughts  go  to  the  centre  of  their  needs  and  of 
ours ;  and  on  them  I  now  touch  briefly. 


THE  ABSEXT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 


There  are  in  the  words  I  have  read,  though  they  be 
but  a  fragment  of  a  closely-hnked  together  context, 
these  three  great  thoughts  then :  the  absent  Christ 
the  present  Christ ;  the  unseen  Christ  the  seen  Christ ; 
the  Christ  who  dies  Hfe  and  Hfe-giving.  Let  us  look 
at  these  as  they  stand. 

I. — First,  then,  the  absent  Christ  is  the  present 
Christ. 

"  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless,"  or,  as  the  Revised 
Version  has  it,  "  desolate — I  come  to  you."  Now,  most 
of  us  know,  I  suppose,  that  the  literal  meaning  of 
the  word  rendered  "comfortless,"  or  "desolate,"  is 
"orphans."  But  that  is  rather  an  unusual  form  in 
which  to  represent  the  relation  between  our  Lord  and 
His  disciples.  And  so,  possibly,  our  versions  are 
accurate  in  giving  the  general  idea  of  desolation 
rather  than  the  specific  idea  conveyed  directly  by 
the  word.  But,  still,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  this- 
whole  conversation  begins  with  "  Little  children " ; 
and  there  seems  to  be  no  strong  reason  for  suppressing 
the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,  if  only  it  be  remem- 
bered that  it  is  employed  not  so  much  to  define 
Christ's  relation  to  His  brethren  as  to  describe  the 
comfortless  and  helpless  condition  of  that  little  group 
when  left  by  Him.  They  would  be  like  fatherless  and 
motherless  children  in  a  cold  world.  And  what  is  to 
hinder  that  ?  One  thing  only.  "  I  come  to  you." 
"  Then,  and  only  then,  will  you  cease  to  be  desolate 
and  orphans.  My  presence  will  change  everything,, 
and  turn  winter  into  glorious  summer." 

Now,  what  is  this  "  coming  "  ?  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  our  Lord  says,  not  "  /  ivill,"  as  a  future,  but  "  I 
come,"  or  "  I  am  coming,"  as  an  immediately  impend- 


90  THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

ing,  and,  we  may  almost  say,  present,  tiling.  There 
can  be  no  reference  in  the  word  to  that  final  coming 
to  judgment  Avhich  lies  so  far  ahead ;  because,  if  there 
were,  then  there  would  follow  from  the  text,  that, 
until  that  period,  all  that  love  Him  here  upon  earth 
are  to  wander  about  as  orphans,  desolate  and  forsaken; 
and  that  certainly  can  never  be.  So  that  Ave  have  to 
recognize  here  the  promise  of  a  coming  which  is 
contemporaneous  with  His  absence,  and  which  is,  in 
fact,  but  the  reverse  side  of  His  bodily  absence. 

It  is  true  about  Him  that  He  "  departs  from  "  His 
people  in  bodily  form  "  for  a  season,  that  they  may 
receive  Him  "  in  a  better  form  "  for  ever."  This,  then, 
is  the  heart  and  centre  of  the  consolation  here,  that 
hoAvsoever  the  external  presence  may  be  Avithdrawn, 
and  the  "  foolish  senses  "  may  have  to  speak  of  an 
absent  Christ,  we  may  rejoice  in  the  certainty  that  He 
is  Avith  all  those  that  loA'e  Him,  and  all  the  more  with 
them  because  of  the  very  AvithdraAval  of  the  earthly 
manifestation  which  has  served  its  purpose,  and  noAV 
is  laid  aside  as  an  impediment  rather  than  as  a  help 
to  the  full  communion.  We  confound  bodily  A\dth 
real..  The  bodily  presence  is  at  an  end ;  the  real 
presence  lasts  for  ever. 

I  do  not  need  to  insist,  I  suppose,  upon  the  manifest 
implication  of  absolute  Divinity  Avhich  lies  in  such 
Avords  as  these.  "  I  come."  "  Being  absent,  I  am 
present  in  all  generations,  I  am  present  Avith  every 
single  heart."  That  is  equivalent  to  the  Omnipresence 
of  Deity ;  that  is  equivalent  to  or  implies  the  undying 
existence  of  the  Divine  nature.  And  He  that  says,' 
Avhen  He  is  leaving  earth,  and  AvithdraAving  the 
SAveetness  of  His  Ansible  form  from  the  eyes  of  men. 


THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST.  91 

"  I  come,"  in  the  very  act  of  going,  "  and  I  am  with 
you  always,  with  all  of  you  to  the  end  of  the 
ages,"  can  be  no  less  than  God,  manifest  in  the  flesh 
for  a  time,  and  present  in  the  Spirit  with  His  children 
for  ever. 

I  cannot  but  think  that  the  average  Christian  life 
of  this  day  wofully  fails  in  the  simple,  conscious 
realization  of  this  great  truth,  and  that  we  are  all  far 
too  little  living  in  the  calm,  happy,  strengthening- 
assurance  that  we  are  never  alone,  but  have  Jesus 
Christ  with  each  of  us  more  closely,  more  truly,  in  a 
more  available  fashion,  and  with  more  Omnipotence  of 
influence  than  they  had  who  were  nearest  Him  during 
the  days  that  He  lived  upon  earth. 

Oh,  brethren,  if  we  really  believed,  not  as  an  article 
of  our  creed,  which  has  become  so  familiar  to  us  that 
it  produces  little  impression  upon  us ;  but  as  a  vital 
and  ever-present  conviction  of  our  souls,  that  with  us 
there  was  ever  the  real  presence  of  the  real  Christ, 
how  all  burdens  and  cares  would  be  hghtened,  how- 
all  perplexities  would  begin  to  smooth  themselves  out 
and  be  straightened,  all  the  force  would  be  sucked  out 
of  temptations,  and  how  sorrows  and  joys  and  all 
things  would  be  changed  in  their  aspect  by  that  one 
conviction  intensely  realized  and  constantly  with  us  ! 
A  present  Christ  is  the  Strength,  the  Righteousness, 
the  Peace,  the  Joy,  and  as  we  shall  see,  in  the  most 
literal  sense,  the  Life  of  every  Christian  soul. 

Then,  note,  further,  that  this  coming  of  our  Lord  is 
identified  with  that  of  His  Divine  Spirit.  He  has 
been  speaking  of  sending  that  "  other  Comforter,"  but 
though  He  be  Another,  He  is  yet  so  indissolubly  united 
with  Him  who  sends  as  that  the  coming  of  the  Spmt 


92  THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

is  the  coming  of  Jesus.  He  is  no  gift  wafted  to  us  as 
from  the  other  side  of  a  gulf,  but  by  reason  of  the 
unity  of  the  Godhead  and  the  Divinity  of  the  sent 
Spirit,  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Spirit  whom  He  sends 
are  inseparable  though  separate,  and  so  indissolubly 
united  that  where  the  Spirit  is,  there  is  Christ,  and 
where  Christ  is,  there  is  the  Spirit.  These  are  amongst 
the  deep  things  which  the  disciples  were  "  not  able  to 
carry  "  at  that  stage  of  their  development,  and  they 
waited  for  a  further  explanation.  Enough  for  them, 
and  enough  for  us,  to  know  that  we  have  Christ  in 
the  Spirit  and  the  Sj)irit  in  Christ ;  and  to  remember 
"  that  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is 
none  of  His." 

We  stand  here  on  the  margin  of  a  shoreless  and 
fathomless  sea ;  and  for  my  part  I  venture  to  think 
that  the  men  who  talk  about  the  incredibilities  and  the 
contradictions  of  the  orthodox  faith  would  show  them- 
selves a  little  Aviser  if  they  were  more  conscious  of  the 
limitation  of  human  faculty,  and  remembered  that  to 
pronounce  upon  contradictions  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Divine  Nature  implies  that  the  pronouncer  stands 
above  and  goes  round  about  the  whole  of  that  Nature. 
So,  foi"  my  part,  abjuring  omniscience  and  the  com- 
prehension of  Deity,  I  accept  the  statement  that  the 
Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  come  together 
and  dwell  in  the  heart. 

Then,  note,  further,  that  this  present  Christ  is  the 
only  Remedy  for  the  orphanhood  of  the  world.  The 
words  had  a  tender  and  pathetic  reference  to  that 
little,  bewildered  group  of  followers,  deprived  of  their 
Guide,  their  Teacher,  and  their  Companion.  He  who 
had  been  as  eyes  to  their  weak  vision,  and  Counsellor 


THE  ABSENT  niESENT  CIIIUST. 


and  Inspirer  and  everything  for  three  blessed  years, 
was  going  away  to  leave  them  unsheltered  to  the  storm. 
And  Ave  can  understand  how  forlorn  and  terrified  they 
were,  when  they  looked  forward  to  fronting  the 
things  that  must  come  to  them,  without  His  presence. 
Therefore  He  cheers  them  with  the  assurance  that 
they  will  not  be  left  without  Him,  but  that,  present 
still  just  because  He  is  absent,  He  will  be  all  that  He 
ever  had  been  to  them. 

And  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  How  did  that  dis- 
pirited group  of  cowardly  men  ever  pluck  up  courage 
to  hold  together  after  the  Crucifixion  at  all  ?  Why 
was  it  that  they  did  not  follow  the  example  of  John's 
disciples,  and  dissolve  and  disappear ;  and  say,  "  The 
game  is  up.  It  is  no  use  holding  together  any  lono-er  "  ? 
The  process  of  separation  began  on  the  very  day  of 
the  Crucifixion.  Only  one  thing  could  have  stopped 
it,  and  that  is  the  Resurrection  and  the  presence  with 
His  Church  of  the  risen  Christ  in  His  power  and  in 
all  the  fulness  of  His  gifts.  If  it  had  not  been  that 
He  came  to  them,  they  would  have  disappeared,  and 
Christianity  would  have  been  one  more  of  the  abortive 
sects  forgotten  in  Judaism.  But,  as  it  is,  the  whole 
of  the  New  Testament  after  Pentecost  is  aflame  with 
the  consciousness  of  a  present  Christ,  working  amono-st 
His  people.  And  although  it  be  true  that,  in  one 
aspect,  we  are  "  absent  from  the  Lord  "  when  we  arc 
present  with  the  body,  in  another  aspect,  and  an 
infinitely  higher  one,  it  is  true  that  the  strength  of 
the  Christian  life  of  apostles  and  martyrs  was  this,  the 
assurance  that  Christ  Himself— no  mere  rhetorical 
metaphor  for  His  influence  or  His  example,  or  His 
memory   lingering    in    their    imaginations,    but    the 


94  THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

veritable  Christ  Himself — was  present  with  them,  to 
strengthen  and  to  bless. 

That  same  conviction  you  and  I  must  have,  if  the 
world  is  not  to  be  a  desert  and  a  dreary  place  for  us. 
In  a  very  profound  sense  it  is  true  that  if  you  take 
away  Jesus  Christ,  the  elder  Brother,  who  alone 
reveals  to  men  the  Father,  we  are  all  orphans,  father- 
less children,  who  look  up  into  an  empty  heaven  and 
see  nothing  there.  It  is  only  Christ  who  reveals  to 
us  the  Father  and  makes  our  happy  hearts  feel  that 
Ave  are  of  His  children.  And  in  the  wider  sense  of  the 
word  "  orphans,"  is  not  life  a  desolation  without  Him  ? 
Hollow  joys,  fleeting  blessednesses,  roses  whose  thorns 
last  long  after  the  petals  have  dropped,  real  sorrows, 
shows  and  shams,  bitternesses  and  disappointments — 
are  not  these  our  life,  in  so  far  as  Christ  has  been 
driven  out  of  it  ?  Oh  !  there  is  only  one  thing  that 
saves  us  from  being  as  desolate,  fatherless  children, 
groping  in  the  dark  for  the  lost  Father's  hand,  and 
dying  for  want  of  it,  and  that  is  that  the  Christ  Him- 
self shall  come  to  us  and  be  with  us. 

II. — The  unseen  Christ  is  a  seen  Christ. 

It  is  clear  that  the  period  referred  to  in  the  second 
clause  of  our  text  is  the  same  as  that  referred  to  in 
the  first,  that  "  yet  a  little  while "  covers  the  whole 
space  up  to  His  ascension ;  and  that  if  there  be  any 
reference  at  all  to  the  forty  days  of  His  earthly  life, 
during  which,  literally,  the  world  "saw  Him  no  more," 
but  "  the  apostles  saw  Him,"  that  reference  is  only 
secondary.  These  transitory  appearances  are  not  of 
sufficient  moment  or  duration  to  bear  the  weight  of  so 
great  a  promise  as  this.  The  vision,  which  is  the 
consequence  of  the  coming,  has  the  same  extension  in 


THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST.  95 

time  as  the  coming — that  is  to  say,  is  contimipus  and 
permanent.  We  must  read  here  the  great  promise  of 
a  perpetual  vision  of  the  present  Christ.  It  is  clear, 
too,  that  the  word  "  see "  is  employed  in  these  two 
clauses  in  two  different  senses.  In  the  former  it  refers 
only  to  bodily  sight,  in  the  latter  to  spiritual  percep- 
tion. For  a  few  short  hours  still,  the  ungodly  mass  of 
men  were  to  have  that  outward  vision  which  might 
have  been  so  much  to  them,  but  which  they  had  used 
so  badly  that  "  they  seeing  saw  not."  It  was  to  cease, 
and  they  who  loved  Him  would  not  miss  it  when  it 
did ;  but  the  withdrawal  which  hid  Him  from  sense 
and  sense-bound  souls  would  reveal  Him  more  clearly 
to  His  friends.  They,  too,  had  but  dimly  seen  Him 
while  He  stood  by  them ;  they  would  gaze  on  Him 
with  truer  insight  when  He  was  present  though 
absent. 

So  this  is  what  every  Christian  life  may  and  should 
be — the  continual  sight  of  a  continually-present  Christ. 
It  is  His  part  to  come.  It  is  ours  to  see,  to  be 
conscious  of  Him  who  does  come. 

Faith  is  the  sight  of  the  soul,  and  it  is  far  better 
than  the  sight  of  the  senses.  It  is  more  direct.  My 
eye  does  not  touch,  what  I  look  at.  Gulfs  of  millions  of 
miles  may  lie  between  me  and  it.  But  my  faith  is  not 
only  eye,  but  hand,  and  not  only  beholds  but  grasps 
and  comes  into  contact  with  that  to  which  it  is 
directed.  It  is  far  more  clear.  Senses  may  deceive ; 
my  faith,  built  upon  His  Word,  cannot  deceive.  Its 
information  is  far  more  certain,  far  more  valid.  I 
have  better  reason  for  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  than 
I  have  for  believing  in  the  things  that  I  touch  and 
handle.     So  that  there  is  no  need  for  men  to  say,  "  Oh  ! 


96  THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

if  we  had  onl)'-  seen  Him  with  our  eyes ! "  You 
Avould  very  Hkely  not  have  known  Him  if  you  had. 
There  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Church  has 
retrograded  in  its  privileges,  because  it  has  to  love 
instead  of  beholding,  and  to  believe  instead  of  touch- 
ing. That  is  advance,  and  we  are  better  than  they, 
inasmuch  as  the  blessing  of  those  who  have  not  seen, 
iind  yet  have  believed,  comes  down  upon  our  heads. 
The  vision  of  Christ  which  is  granted  to  the  faithful 
soul  is  better  and  not  worse,  more  and  not  less,  other 
in  kind  indeed,  but  loftier  in  degree  too,  than  that 
which  was  granted  to  the  men  who  saw  Him  upon 
earth.     Sense  disturbs,  faith  alone  beholds. 

"  The  world  seeth  Me  no  more."  Why  ?  Because 
it  is  a  Avorld.  "  Ye  see  Me."  Why  ?  Because,  and  in 
the  measure  in  Avhich  you  have  "  turned  away  your 
eyes  from  seeing  vanity."  If  you  want  the  ejQ  of  the 
soul  to  be  opened,  you  must  shut  the  eye  of  sense. 
And  the  more  we  turn  away  from  looking  at  the 
dazzHng  lies  with  which  time  and  the  material  universe 
befool  and  bewilder  us,  the  more  shall  we  see  Him 
whom  to  see  is  to  live  for  ever. 

Oh !  brethren,  does  that  strong  word  "  see  "  in  any 
measure  express  the  vividness,  the  directness,  the  cer- 
tainty of  our  realization  of  our  Master's  presence  ?  Is 
Jesus  Christ  as  clear,  as  perceptible,  as  sure  to  us  as 
the  men  round  us  are  ?  Which  are  the  shadows  and 
which  are  the  realities  to  us  ?  The  things  which  are 
seen,  which  the  senses  crown  as  "  real,"  or  the  things 
which  cannot  be  seen  because  they  are  so  great,  and 
tower  above  us,  invisible  in  their  eternity  ?  Which' 
world  are  our  eyes  most  oj3en  to,  the  world  where 
Christ  is,  or  the  world  here  ?     Our  happy  eyes  may 


THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST.  97 

behold  and  our  blessed  hands  may  handle  the  Word 
of  Life  which  was  manifested  to  us.  Let  us  beware 
that  we  turn  not  away  from  the  one  thing  worthy  to 
be  looked  at,  to  gaze  upon  a  desolate  and  dreary  Avorld. 

III. — Lastly,  the  present  and  seen  Christ  is  life  and 
life-ocivinfc. 

The  last  words  of  my  text  may  be  connected  with 
the  preceding,  as  the  marginal  rendering  of  the  Revised 
Version  shows.  But  it  is  probably  better  to  take  them 
as  standing  independently,  and  presenting  another  and 
co-ordinate  element  of  the  blessedness  arising  from  the 
coming  of  the  Christ.  Because  He  comes,  His  life 
passes  into  the  hearts  of  the  men  to  whom  He  comes, 
and  who  gaze  upon  Him. 

Time  forbids  me  to  dwell  upon  that  majestic  pro- 
clamation of  His  own  absolute  and  Divine  life,  from 
lips  that  Avere  so  soon  to  be  paled  with  death.  Mark 
the  grand  "  I  live  " — the  timeless  present  tense,  which 
expresses  unbroken,  underived,  undying,  and,  as  I 
believe,  Divine  life.  It  is  all  but  a  quotation  of  the 
great  Old  Testament  name  "  Jehovah."  The  depth  and 
sweep  of  its  meaning  are  given  to  us  in  this  apostle's 
Apocalypse,  Avhcre  Christ  is  called  "  the  living  One," 
Avho  lived  whilst  He  died,  and  having  died  "  is  alive  for 
evermore." 

And  this  Christ,  coming  to  all  His  friends,  possessor 
of  the  fulness  of  life  in  Himself,  and  proclaiming  His 
absolute  possession  of  that  life,  even  Avhilst  He  stands 
Avithin  arm's  length  of  Calvar}^,  is  life-giver  to  all  that 
love  Him  and  trust  Him. 

We  live  because  He  lives.  In  all  senses  of  the  word 
life,  as  I  believe,  the  life  of  men  is  derived  from  the 
Christ  Avho  is  the  asrent  of  creation,  the  channel  from 

7 


98  THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

whom  life  passes  from  the  Godhead  into  the  creatures, 
and  who  is  also  the  one  means  by  whom  any  of  us  can 
ever  hope  to  live  the  better  life  which  is  the  only  true 
one,  and  consists  in  fellowship  Avith  God  and  union  to 
Him. 

"We  shall  live  «.s  long  as  He  lives,  and  His  being  is 
the  pledge  and  the  guarantee  of  the  immortal  being  of 
all  who  love  Him.  Anything  is  possible,  rather  than 
that  it  should  be  credible  that  a  soul,  which  has  drawn 
spiritual  life  from  Jesus  Christ  here  upon  earth,  should 
ever  be  rent  apart  from  Him  by  such  a  miserable  and 
external  trifle  as  the  mere  dissolution  of  the  bodily 
frame.  As  long  as  Christ  lives  your  life  is  secure.  If 
the  Head  has  life,  the  members  cannot  see  corruption. 
"Take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  days:  Tliji 
years  are  throughout  all  generations  "  was  the  prayer 
of  a  saint  of  old,  deeply  feeling  the  contrast  of  the 
worshipper's  transiency  and  God's  eternity,  and  dimly 
hoping  that  the  contrast  might  be  changed  into  like- 
ness. The  great  promise  of  our  text  answers  the 
prayer,  and  assures  us  that  the  worshipper  is  to  live  as 
lonof  as  does  He  whom  he  adores. 

We  shall  live  as  He  lives,  nor  ever  cease  the  apprt)- 
priation  of  His  being  until  all  His  life  we  know,  and  all 
its  fulness  has  expanded  our  natures — and  that  will  bo 
never.     Therefore  we  shall  not  die. 

Men's  lives  have  been  prolonged  by  the  transfusion 
of  blood  from  vigorous  frames.  Jesus  Christ  passes 
His  OAvn  blood  into  our  veins,  and  makes  us  immortal. 
The  Church  chose  for  one  of  its  ancient  emblems  of 
the  Saviour  the  pelican,  which  fed  its  young,  according 
to  the  fable,  with  the  blood  from  its  own  breast.  So 
Christ  vitalizes  us.     He  in  us  is  our  life. 


THE  ABSENT  PRESENT  CHRIST. 


Brethren,  without  Jesus  Christ  we  are  orphans  in  a 
fixtherless  world.  Without  Him,  our  wearied  and  yet 
unsatisfied  eyes  have  only  trifles  and  trials  and  trash 
to  look  at.  Without  Him,  Ave  are  dead  Avhilst  Ave  live. 
He  and  He  only  can  give  us  back  a  Father,  and 
renew  in  us  the  spirit  of  sons.  He  and  He  only  can 
satisfy  our  ej^es  Avith  the  sight  Avhich  is  purity  and 
restfulness  and  joy.  He  and  He  only  can  breathe  life 
into  our  death.  Oh!  Let  Him  do  it  for  you.  He 
comes  to  us  Avith  all  these  gifts  in  His  hands,  for  He 
comes  to  gi\'o  us  Himself  And  in  Himself,  as  "  in  a 
box  Avhere  SAveets  compacted  lie,"  are  all  that  lonely 
hearts  and  Avearied  eyes  and  dead  souls  can  ever  need. 
All  are  yours  if  you  are  Christ's.  All  are  yours  if  He 
is  yours.  And  He  is  yours  if  by  faith  and  love  you 
make  yourselves  His  and  Him  your  OAvn. 


X. 


Z\K  6ift6  of  tbe  present  dbvhjt 

"  At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  My  Father,  and  ye  in  Me, 
and  I  in  you.  He  that  hath  My  commandments,  and  keepeth 
them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Me  :  and  he  that  loveth  Me  shall  be 
loved  of  My  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest 
Myself  to  him." — John  xiv.  20,  21. 

E  have  liearcl  our  Lord  in  the,  previous 
verse  iinveihng  His  deepest  and 
strongest  encouragements  to  His  down. 
cast  followers.  These  were  :  His  pre- 
sence with  thcra,  their  true  sight  of 
Him,  and  their  participation  in  His  life.  The 
first  part  of  (Uir  present  text  is  closely  connected 
Avith  these,  for  it  gives  us  their  upshot  and  conse- 
quence. Because  Christ's  true  disciple  is  conscious  of 
Christ's  presence,  sees  Him  with  the  eyes  of  his  spirit, 
and  draws  life  from  Him,  therefore  he  will  know  by 
experience  the  deep  truths  of  Christ's  indwelling  at 
once  in  the  Father  and  in  His  servant,  and  of  His 
servant's  indwelling  in  him.  Our  Lord  had  just 
previously  been  exhorting  His  disciples  to  believe  that 
He  was  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  Him ;  and 
had  been  gently  wondering  at  the  slowness  of  their 


THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PRESENT  CHRIST.  101 

faith.  NoAv  He  tells  them  that,  when  He  is  gone,  their 
spiritual  stature  will  be  so  increased  as  that  they  shall 
hnoiv  the  thing  which,  with  Him  by  their  side,  they 
found  it  so  hard  to  believe. 

The  second  part  of  our  present  text  is  the  close 
of  this  whole  section  of  our  Lord's  discourse,  and 
in  it  He  urges  the  requirement  of  practical  obedience, 
as  the  sign  and  test  ofSove,  and  as  the  condition  of 
receiving  these  high  and  Avonderful  things  of  which 
He  has  been  speaking.  He  has  been  unveiling  spiritual 
blessings,  which  may  seem  recondite  and  up  in  the 
clouds,  and  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  have  often  been 
perverted  into  dreamy  mysticisms  of  a  most  immoral 
and  unpractical  kind.  And  so  He  brings  us  sharp 
back  again  here  to  very  plain  truths,  and  would  teach 
us  that  all  these  loft}^  and  ineffable  gifts  of  which  He 
has  been  dimly  speaking  are  to  be  reached  only  by 
the  common-place  road  of  honest  obedience  and 
simple  conformity  to  His  commandments.  In  these 
last  words  of  my  text,  He  administers  the  antidote  and 
the  check  to  the  possible  abuses  of  the  great  things 
which  He  has  been  saying. 

I. — Note,  then,  first,  the  knowledge  that  comes 
with  the  Christ  who  comes. 

"  In  that  day  "  covers  the  whole  period  of  which 
He  has  been  speaking,  between  His  withdrawal  from 
the  disciples  and  His  final  corporeal  coming  to  judg- 
ment— that  great  day  of  which  generations  are  but 
the  moments.  In  it  the  men  who  love  Him  are  to 
have  His  presence.  His  vision,  His  life,  and  because 
they  have,  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  My  Father, 
and  ye  in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  The  principle  that 
underlies    these   wonderful   words   is   that   Christian 


102  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

experience  is  tiie  best  teacher  of  fundamental  Chris- 
tian truth.  Observe  with  what  decision,  and  with 
what  strange  boldness,  our  Lord  carries  that  principle 
into  regions  where  we  might  suppose  at  first  sight  that 
it  was  altogether  inapplicable.  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I 
am  in  My  Father."  How  can  such  a  thing  as  the 
relation  between  Christ  and  God  ever  be  a  matter  of 
consciousness  to  us  here  upon  earth  ?  Must  it  not 
always  be  a  truth  that  we  must  take  on  trust  and 
believe  because  Ave  have  been  told  it,  without  having 
any  verification  in  ourselves  ?  ISTot  so ;  remember 
what  has  gone  before.  If  a  man  has  the  consciousness 
of  Christ's  presence  with  Him,  sees  Him  with  the  true 
inward  eye,  which  is  the  only  real  organ  of  real  vision, 
and  is  drawing  from  Him,  moment  by  moment,  His 
own  hiofh  and  immortal  life,  then,  is  it  not  true  that 
this  man's  experiences  are  of  such  a  sort  as  to  be 
utterly  inexplicable,  except  on  the  ground  that  they 
come  from  a  Divine  source  ?  If  I  have  these  things  I 
know  that  it  is  Jesus  Christ  that  gives  them,  and  I 
know  that  He  could  not  give  them,  if  He  did  not  dwell 
in  God  and  were  not  Divine.  These  new  influences, 
this  revolution  in  my  being,  this  healing,  constraining, 
cleansing  touch,  these  calminfc,  c'laddeninof,  elevating- 
powers,  these  new  hopes,  these  reversed  desires,  loving- 
all  to  which  I  was  formerly  indifferent,  and  growing 
dead  to  all  that  formerly  appealed  most  strongly  to  me  ; 
all  these  things  bear  upon  their  very  front  the  signa- 
ture that  they  are  Avrought  by  a  Divine  hand,  and  as 
sure  as  I  am  of  my  own  Christian  consciousness,  so 
sure  am  I  that  all  its  experiences  proclaim  their  author, 
and  that  Christ  who  does  them  is  in  God.  "  Ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  in  My  Father." 


THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  FRESEXT  CHFIST.  103 

The  New  Testament,  as  I  read  it,  is  full  at  eveiy 
point  of  tlio  Divinity  of  Jesus  Clirist ;  and  many  pro- 
found and  learned  arguments  on  that  subject  have 
been  urged  by  theologians,  and  these  arc  all  well  and 
needful  in  their  places,  but  the  true  way  to  be  sure 
of  it  is  to  have  Him  dwelling  with  us  and  Avorking  in 
us ;  and  then  what  was  an  article  of  belief  becomes 
an  article  of  knowledge,  and  we  know  Him  to  be  our 
Saviour  and  the  Son  of  God. 

In  like  manner,  and  yet  more  obviously,  the  other 
elements  of  this  knowledge  which  Christ  promises 
here  may  be  shown  to  flow  naturally  and  necessarily 
from  Christian  experiences.  "  That  ye  are  in  ]\Ie,  and 
I  in  you."  If  a  Christian  man  carries  the  conscious- 
ness of  Christ's  presence,  and  has  Him  as  a  Sun  in  his 
darkness,  and  as  a  Life-source  feeding  his  deadness 
with  life,  then  he  knows  with  a  consciousness  which 
is  irrefragable  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  him,  for  he  feels 
His  touch  ;  and  he  knows  that  he  is  in  Christ,  for  ho 
is  aware  of  the  power  that  girdles  him,  and  in  which 
he  has  peace  and  righteousness  and  all. 

So,  dear  brethren,  let  us  learn  what  the  Christian 
man's  experience  ought  to  be  and  to  do  for  him.  It 
should  change  the  articles  of  your  creed  into  elements 
of  your  consciousness.  It  should  make  all  the  funda- 
mentals of  the  Gospel  vitally  and  vividly  true ;  and 
certified  by  what  has  passed  within  your  own  spirits. 
You  should  be  able  to  say  :  "  We  have  the  witness  in 
ourselves."  And  though  there  will  remain  much  that 
is  uncertain,  much  in  Christian  doctrine  which  is  not 
capable  of  that  plain  and  all-sufficing  verification  ; 
much  about  which  we  must  still  depend  on  the  mere 
teaching  of  others,  or  on  our  own  study,  the  central 


104  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PRESENT  CHRIST. 

facts  which  make  the  Gospel  may  all  become,  b}^  this 
plain  and  short  path,  elements  of  our  very  conscious- 
ness which  stand  undeniable  to  us,  whosoever  denies 
them. 

Such  a  direct  Avay  to  knowledofe  is  reasonable,  is  in 
full  analogy  with  the  manner  by  which  Ave  attain 
to  the  knowledge  of  evcr^-thing  except  the  mere 
•external  facts,  the  knoAvledge  of  which  has  arroofated 
to  itself  the  exclusive  name  of  "science."  Hoav  do 
you  know  anything  about  love  ?  You  may  read 
poems  and  tragedies  to  the  end  of  time,  and  }-ou  Avill 
not  understand  it  until  you  come  under  its  spell  for 
yourself ;  and  then  all  the  things  that  men  said  about 
it  cease  to  be  mere  words,  because  you  yourself  have 
experienced  the  emotion. 

"  He  must  be  loved  ere  that  to  you 
He  ■will  seem  worthy  of  your  love." 

And  the  only  Avay  to  be  sure,  with  a  vital  certitude  of 
Christ  is  to  take  C'hrist  for  your  very  OAvn,  and  then 
He  comes  into  your  very  being,  and  dAvelis  there 
unchanged,  the  Sun  and  the  Life. 

So,  dear  brethren,  though  such  certitude  arising 
from  experience,  which  in  its  nature  is  the  very 
highest,  is  not  available  for  other  people,  the  fact  that 
so  man}'  millions  of  men  allege  that  in  varying  degrees 
they  possess  this  certitude  is  available  for  other 
people.  And  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  by  the 
unbeliever  to  this,  the  attestation  of  the  Christian 
consciousness  to  the  truth  of  the  truths  which  it  has 
tried.  "  Whether  this  man  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I 
know  not."  You  may  jangle  as  much  as  you  like 
About  the  questionable  and  controversial  points  that 


THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PIlESEiVT  CHEIST.  105 

surround  the  Christian  reveLation.  I  do  not  care  in 
the  present  connection  what  answer  you  give  to  them. 
"  Whether  this  man  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not. 
One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  bhnd,  now  I 
see."  And  we  may  push  the  war  into  the  enemy's 
quarters,  and  say :  "  Wh}' !  herein  is  a  marvellous 
thing,  that  you  that  know  everything  do  not  know 
whence  this  man  is.  And  yet  He  has  opened  mine 
eyes."  You  want  facts  ;  there  are  some.  You  want 
verification ;  we  have  verified  by  experiment,  and  we 
set  to  our  seals  that  God  is  true. 

Oh !  but  you  say  that  is  not  a  fair  account  of  the 
way  in  which  Christian  men  and  women  generally  feel 
about  this  matter.  Well,  all  that  I  can  say  about 
that  is,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  so-called  Christian 
men  and  women.  And  if  they  are  Christians,  and  do 
not  know  by  this  inward  experience  that  Christ  is 
Divine  and  their  Saviour,  then  there  is  only  one 
of  two  reasons  to  be  given  for  it  ;  either  their 
experience  is  so  wretchedly  superficial  and  frag- 
mentary, so  rudimentary  as  to  be  scarcely  worth 
calling  by  the  name ;  or,  having  the  facts,  they  have 
failed  to  appreciate  their  significance,  and  to  make 
their  own  by  reflection  the  certitudes  which  are  their 
own. 

Brethren,  it  becomes  every  Christian  man  and 
woman  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Because  I  have  Christ  with 
me,  and  see  Him,  and  derive  my  life  from  Him,  I 
know  that  He  is  in  the  Father  and  I  in  Him,  and  He 
in  me."  And  if  you  cannot  say  that,  it  is  your  grasp 
of  Him,  or  your  meditation  upon  Avhat  you  have 
got  by  your  grasp,  that  is  painfully  and  sinfully 
defective. 


106  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  F^LSENT  CHFJST. 


II- — My  text  speaks  of  the  obedience  which  is  the 
sign  and  test  of  love. 

The  words  hero  are  substantially  equivalent  to 
former  words  in  the  chapter  which  we  have  already 
considered,  where  our  Lord  says  : — "  If  ye  love  Me,  ye 
will  keep  My  commandments." 

There  is,  however,  a  slight  difference  in  the  point  of 
view  in  the  two  sayings ;  the  former  begins  with  the 
root  and  traces  it  upwards  and  outwards  to  its  fruits, 
love  blossoming  into  obedience.  Our  text  reverses  the 
process,  and  takes  the  thing  by  the  other  end;  begins 
with  the  fruits  and  traces  them  doAvnwards  and  in- 
wards to  the  root.  "  He  that  hath  and  keepeth  My 
commandments,  He  it  is  that  loveth  Me."  The  two 
sayings  substantially  mean  the  same  thing ;  but  in  the 
one  love  is  put  first  as  the  cause  of  obedience,  and  in 
the  other  obedience  is  put  first,  as  the  certain  fruit  and 
sure  sign  of  love.  The  connection  between  these  and 
the  preceding  words  is,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out, 
that  our  Lord  here  brings  all  His  lofty  promises  down 
to  the  sharp,  practical  requirement  of  obedience,  as  the 
only  condition  on  which  they  can  be  fulfilled. 

So  note,  and  very  briefly  about  this  matter,  how  re- 
markably our  Lord  here  declares  the  possession  of  His 
commandments  to  be  a  sign  of  love  to  Him.  "  He  that 
hath"  a  word  which  is  generally  passed  over  in  our 
reading — "  He  that  hath  My  commandments,  He  it  is 
that  loveth  Me."  Of  course  there  are  two  ways  of 
having  His  commandments  ;  there  is  having  them  in 
the  Bible,  and  there  is  having  them  in  the  heart ; — 
present  before  my  eye,  as  a  law  that  I  ought  to  obey, 
or  present  within  my  Avill,  as  a  power  that  shapes  it. 
And  the  latter  is  the  only  kind  of  "having"  that  Christ 


THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  FllESEST  CHFJST.  107 


regards  as  real  and  valid.  The  rest  is  only  preparatory 
and  surface.  Love  possesses  the  knowledge  of  the 
loved  one's  will.  Is  not  that  true  ?  Do  we  not  all 
know  how  strange  is  the  power  of  divining  desires  that 
goes  along  with  true  affection,  and  how  the  power,  not 
only  of  divining,  but  of  treasuring,  these  desires  is  the 
test  and  the  thermometer  of  our  true  love  ?  Some  of  us, 
perhaps, have  laid  away  in  sacred, secret  places  tattered, 
yellow,  old  bits  of  paper  with  the  words  of  a  dear  one  on 
them,  that  we  would  not  part  with.  "He  that  hath  My 
commandments "  laid  up  in  lavender  in  the  deepest 
recesses  of  his  faithful  heart,  he  it  is  "  that  loveth 
Me." 

In  like  manner,  our  Lord  says,  the  practical  obedi- 
ence to  His  commandments  is  the  sure  sign  and  test  of 
love.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  that.  There  are  two 
motives  for  keeping  commandments — one  because  they 
are  commanded,  and  one  because  we  love  Him  that 
commands.  The  one  is  slavery,  the  other  is  liberty. 
The  one  is  like  the  Arctic  regions,  cold  and  barren,  the 
other  is  like  tropical  lands,  full  of  warmth  and  sunshine, 
glorious  and  glad  fertility. 

The  form  of  the  sentence  suggests  how  easy  it  is  for 
people  to  delude  themselves  about  their  love  to  Jesus 
Christ.  That  emphatic  "  He,"  and  the  putting  tirst  of 
the  character  before  He  states  its  root,  are  directed 
against  false  pretensions  to  love.  The  love  that  Christ 
stamps  with  His  hall-mark,  and  passes  as  genuine,  is  no 
mere  emotion,  however  passionate,  however  sweet ;  no 
mere  sentiment,  however  pure,  however  deep.  The 
tiniest  little  dribble  that  drives  a  mill  is  better  than  a 
Niagara  that  rushes  and  foams  and  tumbles  idly.  And 
there  is  ever  so  much  so-called  love  to  Jesus  Christ 


1C8  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PRESEXT  CHRIST. 

that  goes  masquerading  up  and  down  the  world,  from 
which  the  paint  is  stripped  by  the  sharp  apphcation  of 
the  words  of  my  text.  Character  and  conduct  arc  the 
true  demonstrations  of  Christian  love,  and  it  is  only 
such  love  that  He  accepts. 

III. — Lastly,  notic3  the  further  and  sweeter  gifts  of 
Divine  love  and  manifestation,  which  reward  our  love 
and  obedience.  "He  that  loveth  Me  shall  be  loved 
of  My  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  Avill  manifest 
Myself  to  him." 

Two  things,  then.  He  tells  us,  are  the  rich  rewards 
and  sparkling  crowns  with  which  He  crowns  our  poor 
love  to  Him — the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  love  of 
the  Christ,  separate  and  yet  united,  and  the  further 
manifestation  of  Christ's  sweetness  to  the  waiting? 
heart.  Note,  as  to  the  first,  the  extraordinary  bold- 
ness of  that  majestic  saying :  "  If  a  man  loves  Me, 
My  Father  will  love  Idiny  God  regards  our  love  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  as  equivalent 
to  our  supreme  love  to  Himself,  as  containing  in  it 
the  germ  of  all  that  is  pleasing  in  His  sight.  And 
so,  upon  our  hearts,  if  we  love  Christ,  there  falls  the 
benediction  of  the  Father's  love. 

Of  course  I  need  not  remind  you  that  our  Lord  here 
is  not  beginning  at  the  very  beginning  of  everything ; 
for  prior  to  all  men's  love  to  Christ  is  Christ's  love  to 
men,  and  ours  to  Him  is  but  the  reflection  and  the 
echo,  called  forth  by  His  to  us.  "  We  love  Him 
because  He  first  loved  us  "  digs  a  story  deeper  down 
in  the  building  than  the  words  of  my  text,  which  is 
spealdng,  not  of  the  process  by  Avhich  a  man  comes  " 
to  receive  the  love  of  God  for  the  first  time,  but  of 
the  process  by  Avhich  a  Christian  man  groAvs  in  his 


THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PRESENT  CHFJST.  109 

possession  of  it.  That  being  understood,  here  is  a 
great  lesson.  It  is  not  all  the  same  to  God  whether  a 
man  is  a  scoundrel  or  a  saint.  The  Divine  love  is  over 
all  its  works,  and  embraces  every  variety  of  humanity, 
the  most  decfraded,  alien,  hostile.  But  in  this  ofenera- 
tion,  as  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  great  need  for  preaching 
that  whilst  that  is  gloriously  and  blessedly  true,  the 
other  thing  is  just  as  true,  that  to  know  the  deepest 
depth  and  to  taste  the  sweetest  sAveetncss  of  the  love 
of  our  Father  God,  there  must  be  in  our  hearts  love  to 
Him  whom  He  has  sent,  which  manifests  itself  by 
our  obedience.  God's  love  is  a  moral  love ;  and 
whilst  the  sunbeams  play  upon  the  ice  and  melt  it 
sometimes,  they  flash  back  from,  and  rest  more 
graciously  and  fully  on,  the  rippling  stream  into 
which  the  ice  has  turned.  God  loves  them  that  love 
Him  not,  but  the  dei^ths  of  His  heart  and  the  secret, 
sacred  favours  of  His  grace  can  only  be  bestowed  upon 
those  who  in  some  measure  are  conformed,  and  are 
growingly  being  conformed,  to  His  likeness  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  who  love  Him  and  obey  Him. 

And,  in  like  manner,  my  text  tells  us  that  if  Ave 
seek  to  know  all  that  is  possible  for  us  here,  amidst 
the  clouds,  and  shadows,  and  darknesses,  to  knoAv  of 
that  dear  Lord,  the  i^ath  to  such  knoAvlcdo-e  is  ulain. 
Walk  on  the  way  of  obedience,  and  Christ  will  meet 
us  with  the  unveiling  of  more  and  more  of  His  love. 
To  live  what  we  believe  is  the  sure  way  to  increase  its 
amount.  To  be  foithful  to  the  little  is  the  certain 
way  to  inherit  the  much.  And  Christ  manifests  Him- 
self, in  all  deep  and  recondite  SAveetness,  gentleness, 
constraining  poAver,  to  the  men  Avho  treasure  the 
partial  knoAvledge  as  yet   possessed,  in   their  loving 


no  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  PllESEXT  CHRIST. 

hearts  and  obedient  wills,  and  Avho  make  a  conscience 
of  translating  all  tlicir  knowledge  into  conduct,  and  of 
basin'''  all  their  conduct  on  knowledo'c  of  Him.  He 
gives  us  His  whole  self  at  the  first,  but  we  traverse 
the  breadth  of  the  gift  by  degrees.  He  puts  himself 
into  our  hands  and  into  our  hearts,  when  we  humbly 
trust  Him,  and  imperfectly  try  to  love  Him.  But  the 
tlower  is  but  a  bud  when  we  get  it,  and,  as  we  hold  it, 
it  opens  its  petals  to  the  light. 

So,  if  "  any  man  wills  to  do  His  will,  he  shall  know 
of  the  doctrine  "  ;  and  if,  touched  b}'  His  Divine  love 
and  infinite  sacrifice  for  me,  I  cast  my  poor  self  upon 
Him,  and  try  to  love  Him  back  again,  and  to  keep 
His  commandments  because  I  love,  then  day  by  day 
I  shall  realize  more  and  more  of  His  strong,  immortal, 
all-satisfying  love,  and  see  more  and  more  deeply  into 
that  Saviour,  whose  infinite  beauties  remain  unrevealed 
after  all  revelation,  and  to  know  more  and  more  of 
Whom  shall  be  the  Heaven  of  Heavens  yonder,  as  it 
is  the  joy  and  life  of  the  soul  here. 


XL 


TObo  briuG  ant)  wbo  repel  Cbrist. 

■  Judas  saith  unto  Him,  not  Iscariot,  Lord,  how  is  it  that  Thou 
wilt  manifest  Thyself  unto  us,  and  not  unto  the  world  I  Jesus 
answered,  and  said  unto  him,  If  a  man  love  me  He  will  keep 
My  words  :  and  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come 
iinto  him,  and  make  Our  abode  with  him.  He  that  loveth  Me 
not,  keepeth  not  My  sayings  :  and  the  word  which  ye  hear  is 
not  Mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  Me." — John  siv.  22 — 24. 

HIS  Judas  held  but  a  low  place  amongst 
the  apostles.  In  all  the  lists  he  is  one 
of  the  last  group  of  fours,  into  which 
they  are  divided,  and  which  Avcre 
evidently  arranged  according  to  their 
spiritual  nearness  to  the  Master.  His  question  is 
exactly  that  which  a  listener,  with  some  dim,  confused 
glimmer  of  Christ's  meaning,  might  be  expected  to 
ask.  He  grasps  at  His  last  words  about  manifesting 
Himself  to  certain  persons ;  he  rightly  feels  that  he 
and  his  brethren  possess  the  qualitication  of  love.  He 
rightly  understands  that  our  Lord  contemplates  no 
public  showing  of  Himself,  and  that  disappoints  him. 
It  was  only  a  day  or  two  ago  that  Jesus  seemed  to 
them  to  have  begun  to  do  what  they  had  always 
wanted  Him  to  do,  manifest  Himself  to  the  world. 


112  TFEO  BEING  AND   WHO  REPEL  CUEIST. 


And  now,  as  lie  thinks,  something  iinknoAvn  to  them 
must  have  happened  in  order  to  make  Him  change 
His  course,  and  go  back  to  the  old  plan  of  a  secret 
commnnication.  And  so  he  says,  "Lord!  What  has 
come  to  2^ass  to  induce  you  to  abandon  and  falter  upon 
the  course  on  which  we  entered,  when  3'ou  rode  into 
Jerusalem  Avith  the  shouting  crowd  ? " 

His  question  is  no  better  in  intelligence,  though  it 
is  a  great  deal  better  in  spirit,  than  the  taunt  of 
Christ's  brethren,  "  If  Thou  do  these  thinofs,  show 
Thyself  to  the  world."  Judas,  too,  thought  of  the 
simple  flashing  of  His  Messianic  glory,  in  some  visible 
vulgar  form,  before  else  blind  eyes. 

How  sad  and  chilling  such  a  question  must  have 
been  to  Jesus  !  Slow  scholars  we  all  are ;  and  with 
what  wonderful  patience,  without  a  word  of  pain  or  of 
rebuke.  He  reiterates  His  lesson,  here  a  little  and  there 
a  little,  and  once  more  unfolds  the  conditions  of  His 
self-revelation,  and  the  fulness  of  the  blessings  that 
He  brings.  He  moulds  His  words  so  as  to  meet  both 
the  clauses  of  Judas's  foolish  question — "  To  us,  not  to 
the  world  " ;  and  quietly  tells  them  the  positive  con- 
ditions and  the  negative  disqualifications  for  His  self- 
revelation.  So  my  text  deals  with  two  things,  the 
crown  of  loving  obedience  in  the  possession  of  a  fuller 
Christ,  and  the  impassable  barrier  to  His  manifestation 
which  unloving  disobedience  makes.  Or,  to  put  it 
into  briefer  words,  we  have  in  one  of  the  verses — first, 
what  brings  Christ  and  what  Christ  brings  ;  and,  in 
the  other,  second,  Avhat  keeps  away  Christ  and  all  His 
(flits.     Now  let  us  look  at  these  two  things. 

I. — We  have  what  brings  Christ  and  what  Christ 
brings. 


WHO  BRISG  AND   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST.  113 

"  If  a  man  love  Me,  lie  will  keep  My  word  "  (not 
*'  words,"  as  our  Authorized  Version  has  it),  "  and  My 
Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and 
make  Our  abode  with  him."  Now  notice  how  here,  in 
the  first  part  of  this  verse,  our  Lord  subtly  and  signifi- 
cantly alters  the  form  of  the  statement  which  He  has 
already  made.  He  had  formerly  said,  "  If  ye  love  Me, 
ye  will  keep  My  commandments,"  but  now  He  casts 
it  into  a  purely  impersonal  form,  and  says,  "If  a 
man,"  anybody,  not  '•'  you  "  only,  but  anybody — "  If  a 
man  love  Me,  he,"  anybody,  "will  keep  My  Avord." 
And  why  the  change  ?  Why,  I  suppose,  in  order  to 
strike  full  and  square  against  that  complacent 
assumption  of  Judas  that  it  was  "  to  us  and  not  to  the 
world"  that  the  showing  was  to  take  place.  Our 
Lord,  by  the  studiously  impersonal  form  into  which 
He  casts  the  promise,  proclaims  its  universality,  and 
says  this  to  His  ignorant  questioner,  "  Do  not  suppose 
that  you  apostles  have  the  monopoly.  You  may 
not  even  have  a  share  in  ^Vy  self-manifestation.  Any- 
body may  have  it.  And  there  is  no  '  world,'  as  you 
suppose,  to  which  I  do  not  show  Myself  Anybody 
may  have  the  vision  if  he  observes  the  conditions." 

Now,  I  need  not  dwell  at  any  length  upon  the 
earlier  words  of  this  text,  because  we  have  had  to 
consider  them  in  previous  sermons  on  the  former 
verses  of  this  chapter.  I  need  only  remark  that  here, 
as  there,  our  Lord  brings  out  the  thought  that  the 
very  lifeblood  of  love  is  the  treasuring  of  the  word  of 
the  beloved  One ;  and  that  there  is  no  joy  comparable 
to  the  joy  of  the  loving  heart  that  yields  itself  to  the 
Beloved's  will.  That  is  true  about  earth,  and  it  makes 
the  sweetest  and  selectest  blessedness  of  our  ordinary 


lU  WHO  BRING  AXD   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST. 

existence.  And  it  is  true  about  heaven,  and  it  makes 
the  Uberty  and  the  gladness  of  the  bond  that  knits  us 
to  Him, 

But  I  would  like  just  to  notice,  before  I  come  to 
the  more  immediate  subject  of  my  discourse,  that 
remarkable  expression,  "  He  will  keep  j\Iy  word." 
That  is  more  than  a  "  commandment,"  is  it  not  ? 
Christ's  "  word "  is  wider  than  'precept-  It  includes 
all  His  sayings,  and  it  includes  them  all  as  in  one  vital 
unity  and  organic  whole.  We  are  not  to  go  picking 
and  choosing  among  them  ;  they  are  one.  And  it 
includes  this  other  thought,  that  every  word  of  Christ, 
be  it  revelation  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  or  be  it  a 
promise  of  the  great  shower  of  blessings  which,  out  of 
His  full  hand.  He  will  drop  upon  our  heads,  enshrines 
within  itself  a  commandment.  He  has  no  revelations, 
simply  that  we  may  know.  He  has  no  comforting 
words,  simply  that  our  sore  hearts  may  be  healed,  but 
in  all  His  utterances  there  is  a  practical  bearing ;  and 
every  word  of  His  teaching,  and  every  word  of  His 
sweet,  whispered  assurances  of  love  and  favour  to  the 
waiting  heart,  hath  in  it  the  imperativeness  of  His  mani- 
fested Avill,  and  has  a  direct  bearing  upon  duty.  All  His 
%vords  are  gathered  into  one  word,  and  all  the  variety 
of  His  sayings  is,  in  their  unity,  the  law  of  our  lives.  So 
much  by  way  of  observation  on  the  more  language  of 
my  text.  And  now  let  us  look  at  what,  as  He  says  to 
us  here,  are  the  rewards  and  crown  of  loving  obedience. 

Christ  Avill  show  Himself  to  the  loving  heart.  That 
is  true  on  the  very  lowest  level.  Every  act  of  obe- 
dience to  any  moral  truth  is  rewarded  by  additional 
insight.  Every  act  of  submission  to  His  will  cleans 
the  lenses  of  the  telescope  from  some  tilm  that  has 


JFIIO  BRING  AND    WHO  REPEL  CHRIST.  llf- 

gathered  upon  tliem,  and  so  the  stars  look  brighter  and 
larger  and  nearer.  All  duty  done  opens  out  into  a 
loftier  conception  of  duty,  and  a  clearer  vision  of  Him. 
"  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  As  we  climb  the 
hill  we  get  a  wider  view.  Obedience  is  in  all  things 
the  parent  of  insight. 

But  in  reference  to  our  relation  to  Him,  we  have  to 
do  not  with  truths  only,  but  with  a  Person.  How  do 
wo  learn  to  know  people  ?  There  is  only  one  way — 
that  is,  by  loving  them.  Sympathy  is  the  parent  oi 
all  true  knowledge  of  one  another.  They  tell  us  in 
the  foolish  old  proverb  that  "  love  is  blind."  No  ; 
There  are  not  such  a  pair  of  clear  eyes  anywhere  as 
the  eyes  of  love ;  and  if  we  Avant  to  see  into  a  man, 
the  first  condition  is  that  we  feel  kindly  towards  him. 
Sympathy  is  the  parent  of  insight  into  persons,  as 
Obedience  is  the  parent  of  insight  into  duty. 

But  both  of  these  illustrations  are  only  imperfect 
preparations  for  the  great  truth  here,  which  is  that 
our  loving  obedience  to  the  discerned  will  of  Jesus 
Christ  has  not  only  an  operation  inwards  upon  us,  but 
has  an  effect  outwards  upon  Him.  I  am  afraid  that 
Christian  people  in  this  generation  have  but  a  very 
imperfect  belief  in  the  actual,  supernatural,  and  if  you 
like  to  call  it  so,  miraculous  manifestation  of  Jesus 
Christ  His  very  Self,  to  men  that  love  Him  and  cleave 
to  Him.  Do  you  believe  as  a  simple  revealed  truth, 
plain  as  a  sunbeam,  in  such  words  as  these,  that 
Jesus  Christ  HimseK  will  do  something  on  you,  and 
in  you,  and  for  you,  if  you  love  Him  and  trust  Him  ; 
that  His  hand  will  be  laid  on  your  eyes  as  it  was  laid 
of  old  ;  that  He  will  indeed,  in  no  metaphor,  but  in 
reality,  show  Himself  to  you  '.     I  may  be  mistaken, 

s* 


116  JFHO  BRiyCr  AND  WHO  REPEL  CHRIST. 

but  I  think  that  too  commonly  is  it  the  case,  that 
even  good  Christian  people  have  a  far  more  vivid 
and  realizing  and  real  faith  in  the  past  work  of  Christ 
on  earth  than  in  the  present  work  of  Christ  in  them- 
selves. They  think  the  one  a  plain  truth,  and  the 
other  something  like  a  metaphor,  whereas  the  New 
Testament  teaches  us,  as  plainly  as  it  can  teach  us 
anything,  that,  far  above  all  the  natural  operations 
of  truth  upon  our  understandings,  hearts,  and  wills, 
there  is  an  actual  supernatural,  continuous  communi- 
cation of  Christ  to  the  hearts  that  love  Him,  which 
leads  day  by  day,  if  they  be  faithful,  to  a  fuller  know- 
ledge, a  sweeter  love,  a  larger  possession,  of  a  fuller 
.Christ.  And  it  is  this  that  He  tells  us  of,  to  fire  our 
.ambition  to  attain,  in  such  words  as  these. 

Brethren,  one  piece  of  honest,  loving  obedience  is 
worth  all  the  study  and  speculation  of  an  unloving 
-heart  when  the  question  is,  "  How  are  we  to  see 
^Christ  ? " 

Again,  Jesus  shows  Himself  to  the  obedient  heart 
>in  ■  indissoluble  union  with  the  Father.  Look  at  the 
^majesty  and,  except  upon  one  hypothesis,  the  insane 
presumption  of  such  words  as  these :  "  If  a  man  love 
Me,  My  Father  will  love  him "  ;  as  if  identifying 
love  to  Christ  with  love  to  Himself.  And  look  at 
that  wondrous  union,  the  consciousness  of  which 
.speaks  in  "  We  will  come."  Think  of  a  onan  sa3"ino- 
that.  Blasphemous  insanity ;  or  else  the  speech  -of 
Him  who  is  conscious  of  union  with  the  Father,  close 
and  indissoluble  and  transcending  all  analogies.  "  We 
will  come,"  together,  hand-in-hand,  if  I  may  so  say ; 
>or  rather,  "  My  coming  is  the  Father's  coming."  Just 
AS  in  heaven,  so  closely  are  They  represented  as  united 


WHO  BRING  AND  WHO  REPEL  CHRIST.  riT 


that  there  is  but  one  throne  for  God  and  the  Lamb, 
so  on  earth  so  closely  are  They  represented  as  united 
that  there  is  but  one  coming  of  the  Father  in  the  Son. 

And  this  is  the  only  belief,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that 
will  keep  this  generation  from  despair  and  moraL 
suicide.  The  question  for  this  generation  is,  Is  it 
possible  for  men  to  know  God?  Science,  both  of 
material  things  and  of  inward  experiences,  is  more 
and  more  unanimous  in  its  proclamation ;  "  Behold  I 
Ave  know  not  anything  "  ;  and  the  only  attitude  to^ 
take  before  that  great  black  vault  above  us  is  to  say,. 
"  We  know  nothing."  The  world  has  learned  half  of 
a  great  verso  of  the  Gospel.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God' 
at  any  time,  nor  can  see  Him."  If  the  world  is  not 
to  go  mad,  if  hearts  are  not  to  be  tortured  into 
despair,  if  morality  and  enthusiasm  and  poetry  and 
everything  higher  and  nobler  than  the  knowledge  oi' 
material  phenomena  and  their  sequences  is  not  to- 
perish  from  the  earth,  the  world  must  learn  the  next 
half  of  the  verse,  and  say,  "  The  only  begotten  Son 
which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared 
Him."  Christ  shows  Himself  in  indissoluble  miion 
with  the  Father. 

Lastly  about  this  matter,  Christ  shows  Himself  ta- 
obedient  love  by  a  true  coming.  "  We  will  come 
and  make  our  mansion  with  him."  And  that  coming 
is  a  fact^  of  a  higher  order,  and  not  to  be  confounded 
either  with  the  mere  Divine  Omnipresence,  by  which 
God  is  everywhere,  nor  to  be  reduced  to  a  figment  ot 
our  own  imaginations,  or  a  strong  way  of  promising 
increased  perception  on  our  part  of  Christ's  fulness.. 
That  great  central  Sun,  if  I  might  use  so  violent  a 
figure,  draws  nearer  and   nearer  and   nearer  to  the- 


118     JFHO  BEING  AND   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST. 

planets  that  move  about  it,  and  having  once  been 
far-off  in  an  ahnost  infinitely  distant  horizon,  ap- 
proaches until  j)lanet  and  Sun  unite. 

Dear  brethren,  if  we  could  only  get  to  the  attitude  of 
simple  acceptance  of  this  as  a  literal  truth,  and  believe 
that,  in  prose  reality,  Christ  comes  to  every  heart  that 
loves  Him,  would  not  all  the  world  be  different  to  us  ? 

That  coming  is  a  permanent  residence  :  "  AVe  will 
make  our  abode  with  him."  Very  beautiful  is  it 
to  notice  that  our  Lord  here  emplo5's  that  same  SAveet 
and  significant  Avord,  with  which  he  began  this  won- 
derful series  of  encouragements,  when  He  said,  "  In 
My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  Yonder 
they  dwell  for  ever  Avitli  God ;  here  God  in  Christ  for 
ever  dAvells  Avith  the  loving  heart.  It  is  a  permanent 
abode  so  long  as  the  conditions  are  fulfilled,  but  onl}' 
so  long.  If  self-Avill,  rising  from  its  torpor  and 
apparent  death  in  the  Christian  heart,  re-asserts  itself 
and  shakes  oft'  Christ's  yoke,  Christ's  presence 
vanishes.  In  the  last  hours  of  the  H0I3'  City,  there 
Avas  heard  by  the  trembling  priests  amidst  the  midnight 
darkness  the  motion  of  departing  Deit}',  and  a  great 
voice  said,  "  Let  us  depart  hence  "  ;  and  to-morroAv 
the  shrine  Avas  empty,  and  the  da}'  after  it  Avas  in 
flames.  Jjrethron,  if  you  Avould  keep  the  Christ  in 
Whom  is  God,  remember  that  Ave  cannot  be  kept  but 
by  the  act  of  loving  obedience. 

II. — NoAv,  in  the  next  place,  my  text  gives  us  the 
negative  side,  and  shoAvs  us  Avhat  keeps  aAvay  Christ 
and  all  His  blessings. 

An  unloving  disobedience  closes  the  eyes  to  the 
vision,  and  the  heart  against  the  entrance,  of  that 
4ear    Lord.      Our    Master    la3-s    doAvn    for    us    tAvo 


IVRO  BEING  AND   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST.  119 

principles,  and  leaves  us  to  draw  the  conclusion  for 
ourselves. 

The  first  is,  "  He  that  loveth  Me  not,  keepeth  not 
My  sayings."  Xo  love,  no  obedience.  That  is  plainly 
true,  because  the  heart  of  all  the  commandments  is 
love,  and,  where  that  is  not,  cUsobedience  to  their  very 
spirit  is.  That  is  plainly  true,  because  there  is  no 
power  that  Avill  lead  men  to  true  obedience  to  Christ's 
yoke  except  the  power  of  love.  His  commandments 
are  too  alien  from  our  nature  ever  to  be  kept,  unless 
by  the  might  of  love.  It  was  only  the  rising  sun- 
beam that  could  draw  music  from  the  stony  lips  of 
Memmon,  as  he  gazed  out  across  the  desert.  And  it 
is  only  when  Christ's  love  shines  on  our  faces  that  we 
open  our  lips  in  praise,  and  move  our  hands  in  service. 
Those  Qfreat  rockin^-stones  down  in  Cornwall  stand 
unmoved  by  any  tempest,  but  a  child's  linger,  put  at 
the  right  place,  will  set  them  vibrating.  And  so  the 
heavy,  hard,  stony  bulk  of  our  hearts  lies  torpid  and 
immovable,  until  He  lays  His  loving  finger  upon  them, 
and  then  they  rock  at  His  will.  There  is  no  keeping 
of  Christ's  commandments  Avithout  love. 

That  makes  short  work  of  a  great  deal  that  calls 
itself  Christianity,  does  it  not  ?  Reluctant  obedience  is 
no  obedience ;  self-interested  obedience  is  no  obedi- 
ence ;  constrained  obedience  is  no  obedience ;  out- 
ward facts  of  service,  if  the  heart  be  wanting,  are 
rubbish  and  dung.  Morality  without  religion  is 
naught.  The  one  thing  that  makes  a  good  man  is 
love  to  Jesus  Christ;  and  where  that  is,  there,  and 
only  there,  is  obedience. 

Talk  they  of  morals  !     O  !  Thou  Bleeding  Lamb, 
The  grand  morality  is  love  to  Thee. 


120     WHO  BRING  ANL  WHO  REPEL  CHRIST. 

"If  a  man  love  Me  not,  he  will  not  keep  My 
words." 

Then  the  second  principle  is,  disobedience  to  Christ 
is  disobedience  to  God,  "  The  Word  which  ye  hear  is 
not  Mine,  but  the  Father's."  Christ's  consciousness  of 
union  so  speaks  out  here  as  that  He  is  quite  sure  that 
all  His  words  are  God's  words,  and  that  all  God's  words 
are  spoken  by  Him.  Paul  has  to  say,  "  So  speak  I,  not 
the  Lord."  And  you  Avould  not  think  a  man  a  very 
sound  or  safe  religious  teacher  who  said  to  you,  to 
begin  with,  "  Now,  mind,  everything  that  I  sa}^  God 
says."  There  are  no  errors  then,  no  deterioration  of 
the  treasure  by  the  vessel  in  which  it  lies.  The  water 
does  not  taste  of  the  vase  in  which  it  is  carried.  The 
personality  of  Jesus  Christ  is  never,  through  all  His 
utterances,  so  separated  but  that  God  speaks  in  Him; 
and,  listening  to  His  voice,  we  hear  the  absolute  utter- 
ance of  the  uncreated  and  eternal  wisdom. 

Therefore  follows  the  conclusion,  which  our  Lord 
does  not  state,  but  leaves  us  to  suppl}^  If  it  be  true 
that  the  absence  of  love  of  Him' is  disobedience  to 
Him,  and  if  it  be  true  that  disobedience  to  Him  is  dis- 
obedience to  God,  then  it  plainly  follows  that  what 
keeps  away  Christ  and  all  His  gifts,  and  God  in  Him, 
is  unloving  obedience.  AVliat  brings  Him  is  the 
obedience  of  love ;  what  repels  Him  is  alienation  and 
rebellion.  If  the  heart  be  full  of  confusion,  of  the 
world,  of  self,  of  unbridled  inclinations,  of  careless  in- 
difference to  His  bleeding  love,  He  "  can  but  listen 
at  the  gate  and  hear  the  household  jar  within," 

And  so,  dear  friends,  from  all  this  there  follow  one 
or  two  points,  which  I  touch  very  briefly.  One  is,  that 
it  is  possible  for  men  not  to  see  Christ,  though  He 


WHO  BRING  AND   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST.  121 

stands  tliere  close  before  them.  It  is  possible  to  grope 
at  noonday  as  at  midnight,  to  see  only  bracken  green 
and  cold  grey  stone  on  the  hillside,  where  another  man 
sees  the  chariots  of  fire  and  the  horses  of  fire.  It  is 
possible  for  you — and,  alas  !  it  is  the  condition  of  some 
of  my  hearers — to  look  upon  Christ  and  to  turn  away 
and  say,  "  I  see  no  beauty  in  Him  that  I  should  desire 
Him,"  whilst  the  man  beside  you,  looking  at  the  same 
facts  and  the  same  face,  can  see  in  Him  the  "  Chief 
among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely." 

Another  thought  is,  that  Christ's  showing  of  HimseK 
to  men  is  in  no  sense  arbitrary.  It  is  you  that  deter- 
mine what  you  shall  see.  You  can  hermetically  seal 
your  heart  against  Him,  you  can  blind  yourselves  to  all 
His  beauty.  The  door  of  your  hearts  is  hinged  to  open 
from  within,  and  if  you  do  not  open  it,  it  stops  shut, 
and  Christ  stops  outside. 

Another  thought  is,  that  you  do  not  need  to  do  any- 
thing to  blind  yourselves.  Simple  negation  is  fatal 
"  If  a  man  love  not ;"  that  is  all.  The  absence  of  love 
is  your  ruin. 

And  the  last  thought  is  this,  that  my  text  does  not 
begin  at  the  beginning.  Jesus  Christ  has  been  speak- 
ing about  manifestations  of  Himself  to  the  loving  and 
obedient ;  but  there  are  manifestations  of  Himself, 
made  that  we  may  become  loving  and  obedient.  You 
can  build  a  barrier  over  which  these  sweeter  revela- 
tions, of  which  \oyA\  love  and  docile  submission  are 
the  conditions,  cannot  rise.  But  you  cannot  build  a 
barrier  over  which  the  prior  revelations  to  the  un- 
thankful and  disobedient  cannot  rise.  Xo  mountains 
of  sin  and  neglect  and  alienation  can  be  piled  so  high 
but  that  the  flood  of  pardoning  grace  will  rise  above 


122  WHO  BRING  AND   WHO  REPEL  CHRIST. 

their  crests,  and  pour  itself  into  your  hearts.  You  ask, 
How  can  I  get  the  love  and  obedience  of  which  you 
have  been  singing  the  praises  now  ?  There  is  only 
one  ansAver,  brethren.  We  know  that  we  love  Him 
when  we  know  that  He  loves  us  ;  and  we  know  that  He 
loves  us  when  we  see  Him  dying  on  His  cross.  So 
here  is  the  ladder,  that  starts  down  in  the  miry  clay  ot 
the  horrible  pit,  and  fastens  its  golden  hooks  on  His 
throne.  The  first  round  is,  Behold  the  dying  Christ 
and  His  love  to  me.  The  second  is,  Let  that  love  melt 
my  heart  into  sweet  responsive  love.  The  third  is.  Let 
my  love  mould  my  life  into  obedience.  And  then 
Christ,  and  God  in  Him,  will  come  to  me  and  show 
Himself  to  me  ;  and  (Ayq  me  a  fuller  knowledofe  and  a 
deeper  love,  and  make  His  dwelling  with  me. 

And  then  there  is  only  one  step  left,  and  that  will 
land  us  by  the  Throne  of  God,  in  the  many  mansions 
of  the  Father's  house,  where  we  shall  make  our  abode 
Avith  Him  for  ever  more. 


XII. 


Z\K  ^cacber  Spirit. 


These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  being  yet  present  with  you. 
But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father 
will  send  in  My  name,  He  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring 
all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto 
you." — John  xiv.  25,  26. 

HIS  wonderful  outpouring  of  consolation 
and  instruction  with  wbicli  our  Lord 
sought  to  soothe  the  pain  of  parting  is 
noaring  its  end.  We  have  to  conceive 
of  a  slight  pause  here,  whilst  He  looks 
back  upon  what  He  has  been  sa3'ing,  and  contrasts 
His  teaching  with  that  of  the  Comforter,  whom  He 
has  once  already,  though  in  a  different  connection, 
promised  to  His  followers.  He  speaks  of  His  earthly 
residence  with  them  as  being  "  an  abiding,"  distinctly 
therein  referring  to  what  He  has  just  said,  that  the 
Father  and  He  will,  in  the  future,  "  make  their  abode  " 
with  His  disciples.  He  contrasts  the  outward  and 
transitory  presence,  which  was  now  nearing  its  end, 
with  the  inward  and  continuous  presence  which  its 
end  was  to  inaugurate. 

And,  in  like  manner,  with,  at  first  sight,  startling 


124  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 

humility,  He  contrasts  "  these  things,"  the  partial  and, 
to  a  large  extent,  unintelligible  utterances  which  He 
had  given  with  His  human  lips,  with  the  complete, 
universal  teaching  of  that  Divine  Spirit,  who  was  to 
instruct  in  "  all  things  "  pertaining  to  man's  salvation. 
We  have  then,  here,  sketched  in  broad  outline,  the 
great  truths  concerning  the  ever-present,  inward 
Teacher  of  God's  Church  who  is  to  come,  now  that 
the  earthly  manifestation  of  Christ,  w^hom  the  twelve 
called  their  "  Teacher,"  had  reached  a  close.  I  think 
we  may  best  gain  the  deep  instruction  which  lies  in 
the  words  before  us,  if  we  look  at  three  points  of  view 
which  they  bring  into  prominence  :  the  Teacher,  His 
lesson,  and  His  scholars. 

I. — Now  as  to  the  first,  the  promised  Teacher. 

I  need  not  repeat  what  I  have  said  in  former 
sermons  as  to  the  wide  sweep  of  that  word,  "the 
Comforter,"  beyond  just  reminding  you  that  it  means 
literally  one  Avho  is  called  to  the  side  of  another, 
primarily  for  the  purpose  of  being  his  representative 
in  some  legal  process ;  and  more  widely,  for  any 
purpose  of  help,  encouragement,  and  strength.  That 
being  so,  "  Comforter,"  in  its  modern  sense  of  Consoler, 
is  far  too  narrow  for  the  full  force  of  the  word,  which 
means  much  rather  "Comforter,"  in  its  ancient  and 
etymological  sense  of  one  who,  in  company  with 
another,  makes  him  strong  and  brave. 

But  the  ]ioint  to  which  I  desire  to  turn  attention 
now  is  this,  that  this  comforting  and  strengthening 
office  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  brought  into  immediate 
connection  here  Avith  the  conception  of  Him  as  a 
Teacher.  That  is  to  say,  the  best  strength  that  God, 
by  His  Spirit,  can  give  us  is  by  our  firm  grasp  and 


THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT.  125 

growing  clearness  of  understanding  of  the  truths  which 
are  wrapped  up  in  Jesus  Christ,  All  power  for  endu- 
rance, for  service,  is  there,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  God 
teaches  a  man  what  God  reveals  in  Christ,  He  therein 
and  thereby  most  full}^  discharges  His  office  of 
Streno'thener. 

Then,  note,  still  further,  the  other  designation  of 
this  Divine  Teacher  which  is  here  given,  "  the  Com- 
forter, which  is  the  Holy  Ghost." 

We  might  have  expected,  as  indeed  w^e  find  in 
another  context  of  this  great  final  discourse,  the 
"Spirit  of  Truth"  as  appropriate  in  connection  with 
the  office  of  teaching.  But  is  there  not  a  profound 
lesson  for  us  here  in  this,  that,  side  by  side  with  the 
thought  of  illumination,  there  lies  the  thouofht  of 
purity  built  upon  consecration,  Avhich  is  the  Scripture 
definition  of  holiness  ?  That  suggests  that  there  is  an 
indissoluble  connection  between  the  real  knowledofe  of 
God's  truth  and  practical  holiness  of  hfe.  That 
connection  is  of  a  double  sort.  There  is  no  holiness 
without  such  knowledge,  and  there  is  no  such  know- 
ledo'e  without  holiness. 

There  is  no  real  knowledge  of  Christ  and  His  truth 
without  purity  of  heart.  The  man  who  has  no  musical 
taste  can  never  be  brought  to  understand  the  deep 
harmonies  of  the  great  masters  and  magicians  of 
sound.  The  man  who  has  no  eye  for  beauty  can 
never  be  brought  to  bow  his  spirit  before  some  of 
those  embodiments  of  loveliness  and  sublimity  which 
the  painter's  brush  has  cast  upon  the  canvas.  And 
the  man  who  has  no  longings  after  purity,  nor  has 
attained  to  any  degree  of  moral  conformity  Avith  the 
Divine  image,  is  not  in  possession  of  the  sense  Avhich 


126  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 

is  needed   in   order  that  he   should  understand  the 
deep  things  of  God. 

The  scholars  in  this  school  have  to  wash  their  hands 
before  they  go  to  school,  and  come  there  Avith  clean 
hands  and  clean  hearts.  Foulness  and  the  love  of 
it  are  bars  to  all  understanding  of  God's  truth. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  truest  inducements, 
motives,  and  powers  for  purity  are  found  in  that 
great  word,  which  is  all  "according  to  godliness," 
and  is  meant  much  rather  to  make  us  good  than  to 
make  us  wise. 

So,  in  this  designation  of  the  teaching  Spirit  as 
holy,  there  lie  lessons  for  two  classes  of  people.  All 
fanatical  professions  of  possessing  Divine  illumination, 
which  are  not  warranted  and  sealed  by  purity  of  life, 
are  lies  or  self-delusion.  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
cold-blooded  intellectualism  will  never  force  the  locks 
of  the  palace  of  Divine  truth,  but  they  that  come 
there  must  have  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart ;  and 
only  those  who  have  the  love  and  the  longing  for 
goodness  will  be  wise  scholars  in  Christ's  school. 
Your  theology  is  nothing  unless  its  distinct  outcome 
is  morality,  and  you  must  be  prepared  to  accept  the 
painful,  the  punitive,  the  purifying  influences  of  that 
Divine  Spirit  on  your  moral  natures,  if  you  want  to 
have  His  enlightening  influences  shining  on  the  "  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus."  "  If  any  man  wills  to  do  His  will, 
he,"  and  only  he, "  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  Know-  • 
ledge  and  holiness  in  Divine  things  are  as  inseparable 
as  liu'ht  and  heat. 

And,  still  further,  note  that  this  great  Teacher  is 
"sent  by  God"  in  Christ's  name.  That  pregnant 
phrase,  "  in  !My  name,"  cannot  be  represented  by  any 


THE  TEACHER  SPUlIT.  1-27 

one  form  of  expression  into  which  avg  may  translate  it, 
but  covers  a  large  space.  God  in  Christ's  name  sends 
the  Spirit.  That  is  to  say,  in  some  deep  sense  God 
acts  as  Christ's  Kepresentative ;  just  as  Christ  comes 
in  the  Father's  name  and  acts  as  His  Representative. 
And,  again,  God  sends  in  Christ's  name.  That  is, 
the  historical  manifestation  of  Christ  is  the  basis  on 
which  the  sending  of  the  Spirit  is  possible,  and  rests. 
The  revelation  had  to  be  complete  before  He  who 
came  to  unfold  the  meaning  of  the  revelation  had 
material  to  work  upon.  The  Spirit,  which  is  sent  in 
Christ's  name,  has,  for  the  basis  of  His  mission,  and 
the  sphere  in  which  He  acts,  the  recorded  facts  of 
Christ's  life  and  death,  these  and  none  other. 

And  then  note,  finally,  about  this  matter,  the  strong 
and  unmistakeable  declaration  hero,  that  that  Divine 
Spirit  is  a  Person.  "  He  shall  teach  you  all  things." 
They  tell  us  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not  in 
the  New  Testament.  The  n-ord  is  not,  but  the  tldnij 
is.  In  this  verse  Ave  have  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Spirit  brought  into  such  close  and  indissoluble 
union  as  is  only  vindicated  from  the  charge  of  blas- 
phemy by  the  belief  in  the  divinity  of  each.  Just  as 
the  apostolic  benediction,  '•'  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  com- 
munion of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  necessarily  involves  the 
divinity  of  all  who  are  thus  invoked,  so  we  stand  here 
in  the  presence  of  a  truth  which  pierce  into  the  deeps 
of  Deity. 

That  Divine  Spirit  is  more  than  an  influence.  "  Ho 
shall  teach,"  and  He  can  be  grieved  by  evil  and  sin. 
I  do  not  enlarge  upon  these  thoughts.  My  purpose 
is  mainly  to  bring  them  out  clearly  before  you. 


128  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 


II. — I  pass  in  the  second  place  to  the  consideration 
of  the  Lesson  which  this  promised  Teacher  gives. 

Mark  the  words,  "  He  shall  teach  you  all  things, 
and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever 
I  have  said  unto  you."  Now,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
exposition  of  the  words  "in  My  name,"  the  whole 
subject-matter  of  the  Divine  S])irit's  teaching  is  the 
life  and  work  and  death  and  person  of  Jesus  Christ. 
"  He  shall  teach  you  all  things  "  is  wider  than  "  He 
shall  bring  all  things  Avhich  I  have  said  to  you,  to  your 
remembrance."  But  whilst  that  is  so,  the  clear  im- 
plication of  the  words  before  us  is  that  Christ  is  the 
lesson  book,  of  Avhich  the  Divine  Spirit  is  the  Teacher. 
His  Aveapon,  to  take  another  metaphor,  with  which 
He  plies  men's  hearts  and  minds  and  wills,  convincing 
the  world  of  sin  and  of  righteousness  and  of  judgment, 
and  leading  those  who  are  convinced  into  deeper 
knowled"'e  and  larger  wisdom,  is  the  recorded  facts 
concerning  the  life  and  manifestation  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

The  significance  of  this  lesson  book,  the  history  of 
our  Lord,  cannot  be  unfolded  all  at  once.  There  is 
something  altogether  unique  in  the  incorruption  and 
germinant  power  of  all  His  deeds  and  of  all  His  Avords. 
This  Carpenter  of  Nazareth  has  reached  the  heights 
Avhich  the  greatest  thinkers  and  poets  of  the  past 
have  never  reached,  or  only  in  little  snatches  and 
fragments  of  their  Avords.  Kh  Avords  open  out,  gene- 
ration after  generation,  into  undreamed-of  Avisdom, 
and  there  are  found  to  be  hived  in  them  stores  of 
SAveetness  that  Avere  never  suspected,  until  the  occasion 
came  that  dreAV  them  forth.  The  Avorld  and  the 
Church  recei\'cd  Christ,  as  it  Avere,  in  the  dark ;  and, 


THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT.  129 


as  with  some  man  receiving  a  precious  gift  as  tlie 
morninsf  was  dawning,  each  fresh  moment  re- 
vealecl,  as  the  hght  grew,  new  beauties  and  new 
preciousness  in  the  thing  possessed.  So  Christ, 
in  His  infinite  significance,  fresh  and  new  for  all 
generations,  was  given  at  first,  and  ever  smce 
the  Church  and  the  world  have  been  learn- 
ing the  meaning  of  the  gift  which  they  received. 
Christ's  words  are  inexhaustible,  and  the  Spirit's 
teaching  is  to  unveil  more  and  more  the  infinite 
significance  that  lies  in  the  apparently  least  signifi- 
cant of  them. 

Now,  then,  note  that  if  this  be  our  Lord's  meaning 
here,  Jesus  Christ  plainly  anticipated  that,  after  His 
departure  from  earth,  there  should  be  a  development 
of  Christian  doctrine.  AYe  are  often  taunted  with  the 
fact,  which  is  exaggerated  for  the  purpose  of  contro- 
versy, that  a  clear  and  full  statement  of  the  central 
truths,  which  orthodox  Christianity  holds,  is  found 
rather  in  the  apostolic  epistles  than  in  the  Master's 
words,  and  the  shallow  axiom  is  often  quoted  with 
great  approbation  :  "  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Master,  and 
not  Paul."  I  do  not  grant  that  the  germs  and  the 
central  truths  of  the  Gospel  are  not  to  be  found  in 
Christ's  words,  but  I  admit  that  the  full,  articulate 
statement  of  them  is  to  be  found  rather  in  the 
servant's  letters,  and  I  say  that  is  exactly  what  Jesus 
Christ  told  us  to  expect,  that  after  He  was  gone, 
words  that  had  been  all  obscure,  and  thoughts  that 
had  been  only  fragmentarily  intelligible,  would  come 
to  be  seen  clearly,  and  would  be  discerned  for  what 
they  were.  The  earlier  disciples  had  only  a  very 
partial  grasp  of  Christ's  nature.     They  kncAv  next  to 

0 


130  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 

nothing  of  the  great  doctrine  of  sacrifice ;  they  knew 
nothing  about  His  resurrection ;  they  did  not  in  the 
least  understand  that  He  was  going  back  to  heaven ; 
they  had  but  ghmmering  conceptions  of  the  spirit- 
uahty  or  universahty  of  His  Kingdom.  Whilst  they 
were  listening  to  Him  at  that  table  they  did  not 
believe  in  the  Atonement ;  they  but  dimly  believed  in 
the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ ;  they  did  not  believe 
in  His  resurrection ;  they  did  not  believe  in  His 
ascension  ;  they  did  not  believe  that  He  was  founding 
a  spiritual  kingdom,  a  kingdom  that  was  to  rule  over  all 
the  world  till  the  end  of  time.  None  of  these  thinsfs 
were  in  their  mind.  They  had  all  been  in  germ  in 
His  words.  And  after  He  was  gone,  there  came  over 
them  a  breath  of  the  teaching  Spirit,  and  the  un- 
intelligible flashed  up  into  significance.  The  history 
of  the  Church  is  the  proof  of  the  truth  of  this 
promise,  and  if  anybody  says  to  me,  "  Where  is  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  a  spirit  that  will  bring 
all  things  to  your  remembrance  ? "  I  say,  Here,  in 
this  Book !  These  four  Gospels,  these  apostolic 
Epistles,  show  that  the  Avord  which  our  Lord  here 
speaks  has  been  gloriously  fulfilled.  Christ  anticipated 
a  development  of  doctrine,  and  it  casts  no  slur  or 
suspicion  on  the  truthfulness  of  the  apostolic  repre- 
sentation of  the  Christian  truths,  that  they  are  only 
sparsely  and  fragmentarily  to  be  found  in  the  records 
of  Christ's  life. 

Then  there  is  another  practical  conclusion  from  the 
words  before  us,  on  which  I  touch  for  a  moment,  and 
that  is,  If  Jesus  Christ  and  the  deep  understanding 
of  Him  be  the  true  lesson  of  the  Divine,  teaching 
Spirit,   then   real    progress   consists,   not    in   getting 


THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT.  131 

beyond  Christ,  but  in  getting  more  fully  into  Him. 
We  bear  a  great  deal  in  these  days  about  advanced 
thought  and  progressive  Christianity.  I  hope  I 
believe  in  the  continuous  advance  of  Christian 
thought  as  joyfully  as  any  man,  but  my  notion  of  it 
— and  I  humbly  venture  to  say  Christ's  notion  of  it — 
is  to  get  more  and  more  into  His  heart,  and  to  find 
within  Him,  and  not  away  from  Him,  "  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  We  leave  all 
other  great  men  behind.  All  other  teachers'  words 
become  feeble  by  age,  as  their  persons  become  ghostly, 
wrapped  in  thickening  folds  of  obhvion;  but  the 
progress  of  the  Church  consists  in  absorbing  more  and 
more  of  Christ,  in  understanding  Him  better,  and 
becoming  more  and  more  moulded  by  His  influence. 
The  Spirit's  teaching  brings  out  the  ever  fresh 
significance  of  the  ancient  and  perpetual  revelation 
of  God  in  Jesus  Christ. 

III. — And  now,  lastly,  note  the  Scholars. 

Primarily,  of  course,  these  are  the  apostolic  group ; 
but  the  apostles,  in  all  these  discourses,  stand  as  the 
representatives  of  the  Church,  and  not  as  separated 
from  it.  And  whilst  the  teaching  Spirit  could  "  bring 
to  the  remembrance"  only  of  those  who  first  heard 
them  the  "  words  that  He  said  unto  them,"  that  Spirit's 
teaching  function  is  not  limited  to  those  who  listened 
to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  fire  that  was  kindled  on 
Pentecost  has  not  died  down  into  grey  ashes,  nor  the 
river  that  then  broke  forth  been  sucked  up  by  thirsty 
sands  of  successive  generations,  but  the  fire  is  still  with 
us,  and  the  river  still  flows  near  our  lips,  and  we,  too, 
may  be  taught  by  that  Divine  Spirit,  For  this  very 
Evangehst,  in  writing  this  epistle,  has  at  least  two 

9* 


132  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 


distinct  references  to,  and  almost  verbal  quotations  of, 
this  promise,  when  he  says,  addressing  all  his  Asiatic 
brethren,  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One, 
and  knoAv  all  things."  And,  again,  "  The  unction 
which  ye  have  of  Him  abidoth  with  you,  and  ye  need 
not  that  any  man  should  teach  you." 

So,  then.  Christian  men  and  Avomen,  every  believ- 
ing soul  has  this  Divine  Spirit  for  His  Teacher,  and 
the  humblest  of  us  may,  if  we  will,  learn  of  Him, 
and  be  led  by  Him  into  profounder  Imowledge  of  that 
great  Lord. 

Oh  !  dear  brethren,  the  belief  in  the  actual  presence 
with  the  church  of  a  Spirit,  that  teaches  all  faithful 
members  thereof,  is  far  too  much  lost  out  of  the  siuht 
of  the  common  Christianity  of  this  dmy.  AVe  ought 
to  be  the  standing  witnesses  in  the  world  of  the 
reality  of  a  supernatural  influence,  and  how  can  Ave 
be,  if  Avc  do  not  believe  it  ourselves,  and  never  feel 
that  we  arc  under  it  ? 

But  Avhilst  a  continuous  inspiration  from  that  self- 
same Spirit  is  the  prerogative  of  all  believing  souls, 
let  us  not  forget  that  the  early  teaching  is  the 
standard  by  which  all  such  must  be  tried.  As,  to  the 
first  disciples,  the  oflice  of  the  Divine  Spirit  was  to 
bring  before  them  the  deep  significance  of  their 
Master's  life  and  words,  so  to  us  the  oflice  of  the 
teaching  Spirit  is  to  bring  to  our  minds  the  deep 
significance  of  the  record  by  these  earliest  scholars  of 
what  they  learned  from  Him.  The  authority  of  the 
New  Testament  over  our  faith  is  based  upon  these 
words,  and  Paul's  warning  applies  especially  to  this 
generation,  with  its  thoughts  about  a  continuous 
inspiration   and  outgrowing   of  the   New   Testament 


THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT.  133 

teaching : — "  If  a  man  think  himself  to  be  spiritual, 
let  him  acknowledge  that  the  things  that  I  write  unto 
you  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord." 

Now  from  all  this  take  three  counsels.  Let  this 
great  promise  fill  us  Avith  shame.  Look  at  Christen- 
dom. Does  it  not  contradict  such  Avords  as  these  ? 
Disputatious  sects,  Christians  scarcely  agreed  upon 
any  one  of  the  great  central  doctrines,  seem  a  strange 
fulfilment.  The  present  condition  of  Christendom 
does  not  prove  that  Jesus  Christ  did  not  send  the 
Spirit,  but  it  does  prove  that  Christ's  followers  have 
been  wofuUy  remiss  and  negligent  in  their  acceptance 
and  use  of  the  Spirit.  What  slow  scholars  Ave  are  ! 
HoAv  little  Ave  have  learnt !  Hoav  avc  have  let  passion, 
prejudice,  human  voices,  the  babble  of  men's  tongues, 
anybody  and  everybody  take  the  office  of  teaching  us 
God's  truth,  instead  of  Avaitin^^  before  Him  and  lettino- 
His  Spirit  teach  us  !  It  is  the  shame  of  us  Christians 
that,  Avith  such  a  Teacher,  Ave,  "  Avhen  for  the  time  Ave 
ouQfht  to  be  teachers,  have  need  that  one  teach  us 
again  wliich  be  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of 
Christ." 

Let  it  fill  us  Avith  desire  and  Avfitli  diliijence. 
Let  it  fill  us  Avith  calm  hope.  They  tell  us  that 
Christianity  is  effete.  Have  Ave  got  all  out  of  Jesus 
Christ  that  is  in  Him  ?  Is  the  process  that  has  been 
going  on  for  all  these  centuries  to  stop  noAv  ?  No  ! 
Depend  upon  it  the  ncAv  problems  of  this  gene- 
ration Avill  find  their  solution  Avhere  the  old  problems 
of  past  generations  have  found  theirs,  and  the  old 
commandment  of  the  old  Christ  Avill  be  the  new 
commandment  of  the  new  Christ. 

Foolish  men  both  on  the  Christian  and  on  the  anti- 


134  THE  TEACHER  SPIRIT. 

Christian  side  stand  and  point  to  the  western  sky  and 
say,  "  The  Sun  is  setting,"  But  there  is  a  flush  in  the 
opposite  horizon  in  an  hour,  as  at  midsummer  ;  and 
that  which  sank  in  the  west  rises  fresh  and  bright  in 
the  east  for  a  new  day,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Christ  for  all 
the  ages  and  for  every  soul,  and  the  world  will  only 
learn  more  and  more  of  His  inexhaustible  fulness.  So 
let  us  be  ever  quiet,  patient,  hopeful  amidst  the  babble 
of  tongues  and  the  surges  of  controversy,  assured  that 
all  change  will  but  make  more  plain  the  inexhaustible 
significance  of  the  infinite  Christ,  and  that  humble 
and  obedient  hearts  will  ever  possess  the  promised 
Teacher,  nor  ever  cry  in  vain,  "  Teach  me  to  do  Thy 
will,  for  Thou  art  my  God.  Thy  Spirit  is  good,  lead 
me  into  the  paths  of  uprightness." 


XIII. 

Cbri6t'5   peace. 

"  Peace  I  leave  with  you.  My  peace  I  give  unto  you  :  not  as  the 
world  giveth  give  I  unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  lie  troubled, 
neither  let  it  be  afraid." — John  xiv.  27. 

EACE  be  unto  you  "  was,  and  is,  the 
common  Eastern  salutation,  both  in 
meeting  and  in  parting.  It  carries 
us  back  to  a  state  of  society  in  which 
every  stranger  might  be  an  enemy 
It  is  a  confession  of  the  deep  unrest  of  tlie  human 
heart.  Christ  was  about  closing  His  discourse,  and 
the  common  word  of  leave-taking  came  naturally  to 
His  lips  ;  just  as  when  He  first  met  His  followers 
after  the  Resurrection,  He  soothed  their  fears  by  the 
calm  and  famihar  greeting,  "  Peace  be  unto  you." 
But  common  words  deepen  their  force  and  meaning 
when  He  uses  them.  In  Him  "  all  things  become 
new,"  and  on  His  lips  the  conventional,  threadbare 
salutation  changes  into  a  tender  and  mysterious 
communication  of  a  real  gift.  His  words  are  deeds, 
and  His  wishes  for  His  disciples  fulfil  themselves. 

I. — So  we  have  here,  first,  the  greetino-,  which  is  a 
gift — "  Peace  I  leave  with  you.  My  peace  give  I  unto 
you." 


13 6  CUIUS TS  PEA CE. 


We  have  seen,  in  former  discourses  on  this  chapter, 
how  prominently  and  repeatedly  our  Lord  insists  on 
the  great  truth  of  His  dwelling  with  and  in  His 
disciples.  He  gives  His  peace  because  He  gives 
Himself;  and  in  the  bestowal  of  His  life  He  bestows, 
in  so  far  as  we  possess  the  gift,  the  qualities  and 
attributes  of  that  life.  His  peace  is  inseparable  from 
His  presence.  It  comes  with  Him,  like  an  atmosphere ; 
it  is  never  where  He  is  not.  It  was  His  peace  inas- 
much as,  in  His  own  experience.  He  possessed  it. 
His  manhood  was  untroubled  by  perturbation  or 
tumult,  by  passions  or  contending  desires,  and  no 
outward  things  could  break  His  calm.  If  we  open 
our  hearts  by  lowly  faith,  love,  and  aspiration  for 
His  entrance,  we  too  may  be  at  rest ;  for  His  peace, 
like  all  which  He  is  and  has,  is  His  that  it  may  be 
ours. 

The  first  requisite  for  peace  is  consciousness  of 
harmonious  and  loving  relations  between  me  and  God. 
The  deepest  secret  of  Christ's  peace  was  His  unbroken 
consciousness  of  unbroken  communion  Avith  the 
Father,  in  Avhich  the  Will  submitted  and  the  Avhole 
being  of  the  man  hung  in  filial  dependence  upon  God. 
And  the  centre  and  foundation  of  all  the  peace-giving 
power  of  Jesus  Christ  is  this,  that  in  His  death,  by 
His  one  offering  for  sin  for  ever,  Ho  has  swept  aAvay 
the  occasion  of  antagonism,  and  so  made  peace 
betAvcen  the  tAvain,  the  Father  in  the  heaA^ens  and  the 
child,  rebellious  and  prodigal,  here  beloAv.  Little  as 
these  disciples  dreamed  of  it,  the  death  imj)ending, 
Avhich  Avas  already  beginning  to  cast  its  shadoAv 
over  their  souls,  Avas  the  condition  of  securincf  to 
them  and  to  us  the  true  beginnings  of  all  peace  of 


CHRIST'S  PEACE.  137 


nature,  the  rectifying  of  our  antagonistic  relation  to 
God,  and  the  bringing  Him  and  us  into  perfect 
concord. 

My  brother !  no  man  can  be  at  rest  down  to  the 
very  roots  of  His  being,  in  the  absence  of  the  con- 
sciousness that  he  is  at  peace  with  God.  There  may 
be  tumults  of  gladness,  there  may  be  much  of  stormy 
brightness  in  the  life,  but  there  cannot  be  the  calm, 
still,  impregnable,  all-pervading  and  central  tran- 
quillity that  our  souls  hunger  for,  unless  we  know  and 
feel  that  wo  are  right  with  God,  and  that  there  is 
nothing  between  us  and  Him.  And  it  is  because 
Jesus  Christ,  dying  on  the  Cross,  has  made  it  possible 
for  you  and  me  to  feel  this,  that  He  is  our  peace,  and 
that  He  can  say,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you." 

Another  requisite  is  that  we  must  be  at  peace  with 
ourselves.  There  must  be  no  stinGfincr  conscience, 
there  must  be  no  unsatisfied  desires,  there  must  be  no 
inner  schism  between  inclination  and  duty,  reason 
and  will,  passion  and  judgment.  There  must  be  the 
quiet  of  a  harmonized  nature  which  has  one  ob- 
ject, one  aim,  one  love ;  which — to  use  a  very  vulgar 
phrase — has  "  all  its  eggs  in  one  basket,"  and  has 
no  contradictions  running  through  its  inmost  self. 
There  is  only  one  way  to  get  that  peace — cleaving  to 
Jesus  Christ  and  making  Him  our  Lord,  our  ris^'hteous- 
ness,  our  aim,  our  all.  Your  consciences  will  sting, 
and  that  destroys  peace ;  or,  if  they  do  not  sting,  they 
will  be  torpid,  and  that  destroys  peace,  for  death  is 
not  peace.  Unless  we  take  Christ  for  our  love,  for  the 
light  of  our  minds,  for  the  Sovereign  Arbiter  and 
Lord  of  our  Avill,  for  the  home  of  our  desires,  for  the 
aim  of  our  efforts,  we  shall  never  know  what  it  is  to 


138  CHRIST'S  PEACE. 


be  at  rest.  Unsatisfied  and  liimgiy  we  sliall  go 
through  life,  seeking  what  nothing  short  of  an  Infinite 
Humanity  can  ever  give  us,  and  that  is,  a  heart  to 
lean  our  heads  upon,  an  adequate  object  for  all  our 
faculties,  and  so  a  quiet  satisfaction  of  all  our  desires. 
"  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  your  money  for  that  which 
is  not  bread  ? "  A  question  that  no  man  can  answer 
without  convicting  himself  of  folly !  There  is  One, 
and  only  One,  who  is  enough  for  me,  poor  and  weak 
and  lowly  and  fleeting  as  I  am,  and  as  my  earthly  hfe 
is.  Take  that  One  for  your  Treasure,  and  you  are 
rich  indeed.  The  Avorld  without  Christ  is  nought. 
Christ  without  the  world  is  enoufdi. 

Nor  is  there  any  other  way  of  healing  the  inner 
discord,  schism,  and  contradiction  of  our  anarchic 
nature,  except  in  bringing  it  all  into  submission  to  His 
merciful  rule.  Look  at  that  troubled  kingdom  that 
each  of  us  carries  about  within  himself,  passion  drag- 
ging this  way,  conscience  that,  a  hundred  desires  all 
arrayed  against  one  another,  inclination  here,  duty 
there,  till  we  are  torn  in  i)ieces  like  a  man  drawn 
asunder  by  wild  horses.  And  Avhat  is  to  be  done  with 
all  that  rebellious  self,  over  Avhich  the  poor  soul  rules 
as  it  may,  and  rules  so  poorly  ?  Oh,  there  is  an  inner 
unrest,  the  necessary  fate  of  every  man  wlio  does  not 
take  Christ  for  his  King.  But  when  He  enters  the 
heart  with  His  silken  leash,  the  old  fable  comes  true, 
and  He  binds  the  lions  and  the  ravenous  beasts  there 
with  its  slender  tie  and  leads  them  along,  tamed,  by 
the  cord  of  love,  and  all  harnessed  to  pull  together  in 
the  chariot  that  He  guides.  There  is  only  one  way 
for  a  man  to  be  at  peace  with  himself  through  and 
through,  and  that  is  that  he  should  put  the  guidance 


CHRISrS  PEACE.  139 


of  his  life  into  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  let  Him 
do  with  it  as  He  will. 

There  is  one  power,  and  only  one,  that  can  draw 
after  it  all  the  multitudinous  heaped  waters  of  the 
weltering  ocean,  and  that  is  the  quiet  silver  moon 
in  the  heavens,  which  pulls  the  tidal  wave,  into  which 
melt  and  mergfe  all  currents  and  small  breakers,  and 
rolls  it  round  the  whole  earth.  And  so  Christ, 
shininof  down  lambent  and  ojentle,  but  chano^eless, 
from  the  darkest  of  our  skies,  will  draw,  in  one  ofreat 
surge  of  harmonized  motion,  all  the  else  contradictory 
currents  of  our  stormy  souls.     "  ^ly  peace  I  give  unto 

you." 

Another  element  in  true  tranquillity,  which  again 
is  supplied  only  by  Jesus  Christ,  is  peace  with  men, 
"  Whence  come  wars  and  fightings  amongst  you  ? 
From  your  lusts."  Or,  to  translate  the  old-fashioned 
phraseology  into  modern  English,  the  reason  why 
men  are  in  antasfonism  with  one  another  is  the 
central  selfishness  of  each.  And  there  is  only  one  wa}' 
by  which  men's  relations  can  be  thoroughly  sweetened, 
and  that  is,  by  the  Divine  love  of  Jesus  Christ  pouring 
into  their  hearts,  and  casting^  out  the  devil  of  selfish- 
ness,  and  so  blending  them  all  into  one  harmonious 
whole. 

The  one  basis  of  true,  happy  relations  between  man 
and  man,  without  which  there  is  not  the  all-round 
tranquility  that  we  require,  hes  in  the  common 
relation  of  all,  if  it  may  be,  but  certainly  in  the 
individual  relation  of  myself,  to  Him  who  is  the  Lover 
and  the  Friend  of  all.  And  in  the  measure  in  which 
the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  Life  which  was  in  Jesus 
Christ  is  in  me,  in  that  measure  do  I  find  it  possible 


140  CHRIST'S  FEACE. 


to  reproduce  His  gentleness,  sympath}?-,  compassion, 
insight  into  men's  sorrows,  patience  with  men's 
offences,  and  all  which  makes,  in  our  relations  to 
one  another,  the  harmony  and  the  happiness  of 
humanity. 

Another  of  the  elements  or  aspects  of  peace  is 
peace  with  the  outer  world.  "It  is  hard  to  kick 
against  the  pricks,"  but  if  you  do  not  kick  against 
them,  they  will  not  prick  you.  We  beat  ourselves  all 
bruised  and  bleeding  against  the  bars  of  the  prison- 
house  in  trying  to  escape  from  it,  but  if  we  do  not 
beat  ourselves  against  them,  they  will  not  hurt  us. 
If  we  do  not  want  to  get  out  of  prison,  it  does  not 
matter  though  we  are  locked  in.  And  so  it  is  not 
external  calamities,  but  the  resistance  of  the  will  to 
these,  that  makes  the  disturbances  of  life.  Submis- 
sion is  peace,  and  when  a  man  with  Christ  in  his 
heart  can  say  what  Christ  did,  "  Not  My  Avill,  but 
Thine  be  done,"  oh  !  then,  some  faint  beginnings,  at 
least,  of  tranquillity  come  to  the  most  agitated  and 
buft'eted  ;  and,  even  in  the  depths  of  our  sorrow,  we 
may  have  a  deeper  depth  of  calm.  If  we  have 
yielded  ourselves  to  the  Father's  will,  through  that 
dear  Son,  who  has  set  the  example  and  communicates 
the  power  of  filial  obedience,  then  all  winds  blow  us 
to  our  haven ;  "  and  all  thinofs  work  toQ:ether  for  our 
good."  And  nothing  "  that  is  at  enmity  Avith  joy  "  can 
break  our  settled  peace. 

Storms  may  break  upon  the  rocky  shore  of  our 
islanded  lives,  but  deep  in  the  centre  there  will  be  a 
secluded,  inland  dell  "  which  heareth  not  the  loud 
winds  when  they  call,"  and  where  no  tempest  can 
ever  reach.     Peace   may  be   ours    in    the    midst  of 


CHRIST'S  PEACE.  141 


warfare  and  of  storms,  for  Christ  with  us  reconciles 
us  to  God,  harmonizes  us  with  ourselves,  brings  us 
into  amity  with  men,  and  makes  the  world  all  good. 

II. — So,  secondly,  note  here  the  world's  gift,  which 
is  an  illusion. 

"  Not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you."  Our 
Lord  contrasts,  as  it  seems  to  me,  primarily  the 
manner  of  the  world's  bestowment,  and  then  passes 
insensibly  into  a  contrast  between  the  character  of 
the  world's  gifts  and  His  own.  That  phrase  "the 
world "  may  have  a  double  sense.  It  may  mean 
either  mankind  in  general  or  the  whole  external  and 
material  frame  of  things.  I  think  we  may  use 
both  significations  in  elucidatinof  the  words  before 
us. 

Regarding  it  in  the  former  of  them,  the  thought  is 
suggested — Christ  gives ;  men  can  only  wuh.  "  Peace 
be  unto  you  "  comes  from  many  a  lip,  and  is  addressed 
to  many  an  ear,  unfulfilled.  Christ  says  "  peace,"  and 
His  word  is  a  conveyance.  How  little  we  can  do  for 
one  another's  tranquillity,  how  soon  we  come  to  the 
limits  of  human  love  and  human  help  !  How  awful 
and  impassable  is  the  isolation  in  which  each  human 
soul  lives  !  After  all  love  and  fellowship  we  dwell 
alone  on  our  little  island  in  the  deep,  separated  by 
"  the  salt,  unplumbed,  estranging  sea,"  and  we  can  do 
little  more  than  hoist  signals  of  goodwill,  and  now 
and  then  for  a  moment  stretch  our  hands  across  the 
"  echoing  straits  between."  But  it  is  little  after  all 
that  husband  or  wife  can  do  for  one  another's  central 
peace,  little  that  the  dearest  friend  can  give.  We 
have  to  depend  upon  ourselves  and  upon  Christ 
for  peace.     That  which  the  world  wishes  Christ  gives. 


142  CHRIST S  PEACE. 


And,  then,  if  we  take  tlie  other  signification  of  the 
"  world,"  and  the  other  application  of  the  whole 
promise,  we  may  say — Outward  things  can  give  a  man 
no  real  peace.  The  world  is  for  excitement ;  Christ 
alone  has  the  secret  of  tranquillity.  It  is  as  if  to  a 
man  in  a  fever  a  physician  should  come  and  say :  "  I 
cannot  give  you  anything  to  soothe  you  ;  here  is  a 
glass  of  brandy  for  you."  That  would  not  help  the 
fever,  would  it  ?  The  world  comes  to  us  and  says  : 
"  I  cannot  give  you  rest ;  here  is  a  sharp  excitement 
for  you,  more  highly  spiced  and  titillating  for  your 
tongue  than  the  last  one,  which  has  turned  flat  and 
stale."     That  is  about  the  best  that  it  can  do. 

Oh  !  what  a  confession  are  the  rush  and  recklessness, 
the  fever  and  the  fret  of  this  nineteenth  centur}^ 
and  of  this  great  roaring,  busy  city  in  which  we 
live  !  You  go  about  our  streets  and  look  men  in 
the  face,  and  you  see  how  all  manner  of  hungry 
desires  and  eager  wishes  have  imprinted  themselves 
there.  And  now  and  then — how  seldom  ! — you  come 
across  a  face  out  of  which  beams,  a  deep  and  settled 
peace.  How  many  of  you  are  there  that  dare  not  be 
quiet  because  then  you  are  most  troubled  ?  How 
many  of  you  are  there  that  dare  not  reflect  because 
then  you  are  wretched  ?  How  many  of  you  that  are 
uncomfortable  Avhen  alone,  either  because  you  are 
utterly  vacuous,  or  because  then  you  are  surrounded 
by  the  ghosts  of  ugly  thoughts  that  murder  sleep  and 
stuff  every  pillow  with  thorns  ?  The  Avorld  will  bring 
you  excitement ;  (.-hrist,  and  Christ  alone,  will  bring 
you  rest. 

The  peace  that  earth  gives  is  a  poor  aflair  at  best. 
It  is  shallow  ;    a  very  thin   plating  over  a  depth  of 


CHRIST'S  PEACE.  143 


restlessness,  like  some  skin  of  turf  on  a  volcano, 
where  a  foot  below  the  surface  sulphurous  fumes  roll, 
and  hellish  turbulence  seethes.  That  is  the  kind  of 
rest  that  the  Avorld  brings. 

Oh,  dear  friends,  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  that 
will  fill  and  satisfy  your  hearts  except  only  Jesus 
Christ.  The  Avorld  is  for  excitement ;  and  Christ  is 
the  only  real  Giver  of  real  peace. 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  duty  of  the  recipients  of  that 
peace  of  Christ's :  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled, 
neither  let  it  be  afraid." 

The  words  that  introduced  this  great  discourse 
return  again  at  its  close,  somewhat  enlarged  and  with 
a  deepened  soothing  and  tenderness.  There  are  two 
things  referred  to  as  the  source  of  restlessness, 
troubled  agitation  or  disturbance  of  heart ;  and  that 
mainly,  I  suppose,  because  of  terror  in  the  outlook 
towards  a  dim  and  unknown  future.  The  disciples 
are  warned  to  fight  against  these  if  they  would 
keep  the  gift  of  peace. 

That  is  to  say,  casting  the  exhortation  into  a  more 
general  expression,  Christ's  gift  of  peace  does  not  dis- 
pense with  the  necessity  for  our  own  effort  after  tran- 
quillity. There  is  much  in  the  outer  world  that  will 
disturb  us  to  the  very  end,  and  there  is  much  within 
ourselves  that  will  surge  up  and  seek  to  shake  our 
repose  and  break  our  peace  ;  and  we  have  to  coerce 
and  keep  down  the  temptations  to  anxiety,  the  tempta- 
tions to  undue  agitation  of  desire,  the  temptations  to 
tumults  of  sorrow,  the  temptations  to  cowardly  fears 
of  the  unknown  future.  All  these  will  continue,  even 
though  we  have  Christ's  peace  in  our  hearts.  And  it 
is  for  us  to  see  to  it  that  we  treasure  the  peace,  "  and 


144  CHRIST'S  PEACE. 


in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks- 
giving let  our  requests  be  made  knoAvn  unto  God," 
that  nothing  may  break  the  calm  which  we  possess. 

So,  then,  another  thought  arises  from  this  final 
exhortation,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  useless  to  tell  a 
man,  "  Do  not  be  troubled  and  do  not  be  afraid," 
unless  he  first  has  Christ's  peace  as  his.  Is  that  peace 
yours,  my  brother,  because  Jesus  Christ  is  yours  ?  If 
so,  then  there  is  no  reason  for  your  being  troubled  or 
dreading  any  future.  If  it  is  not,  you  are  mad  not  to 
be  troubled,  and  you  are  insane  if  you  are  not  afraid. 
The  word  for  you  is,  "  Be  troubled,  ye  careless  ones," 
for  there  is  reason  for  it,  and  be  afraid  of  that  which 
is  certainly  coming. 

The  one  thing  that  gives  security  and  makes  it 
possible  to  possess  a  calm  heart  is  the  possession  of 
Jesus  Christ  by  faith.  Without  Him  it  is  a  waste  of 
breath  to  say  to  people.  Do  not  be  frightened,  and  it 
is  wicked  counsel  to  say  to  men,  Be  at  ease.  They 
ought  to  be  terrified,  and  they  ought  to  be  troubled, 
and  they  will  be  some  day,  whether  they  think  it 
or  not. 

And  then  the  last  thought  from  this  exhortation  is 
— and  now  I  speak  to  Christian  people — your  im- 
perfect possession  of  this  peace  is  all  your  own  fault. 

Why,  there  are  hundreds  of  professing  Christian 
people  who  have  some  kind  of  faint,  rudimentary 
faith,  and  there  are  many  of  them,  I  dare  say,  in  this 
chapel  this  morning,  who  have  no  assured  possession 
of  any  of  these  elements,  of  which  I  have  been 
speaking,  as  the  constituent  parts  of  Christ's  peace. 
You  arc  not  sure  that  you  are  right  Avith  God.  You 
do  not  know  what  it  is  to  have  satisfied  desires.     You 


CHRIST S  FEACE.  145 


do  know  what  it  is  to  have  conflicting  inchnations 
and  impulses ;  you  have  envy  and  malice  and  hostility 
against  men ;  and  the  world's  storms  and  disasters  do 
strike  and  disturb  you.  Why  ?  Because  you  have 
not  a  firm  grasp  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  I  have  set  the 
Lord  always  at  my  right  hand,  therefore  I  shall  not 
be  moved."  There  is  the  secret.  Keep  near  Him, 
my  brother;  and  then  all  things  are  fair  and  your 
heart  is  at  peace. 

I  remember  once  standing  by  the  side  of  a 
little  Highland  loch,  on  a  calm  autumn  day,  when 
all  the  winds  Avere  still,  and  every  birch  tree 
stood  unmoved,  and  every  twig  reflected  on  the 
steadfast  mirror,  into  the  depths  of  Avhich  Heaven's 
own  blue  seemed  to  have  found  its  way.  That  is 
what  our  hearts  may  be,  if  Ave  let  Christ  put  His 
guarding  hand  round  them  to  keep  the  storms  off, 
and  have  Him  within  us  for  our  rest.  But  the  man 
who  does  not  trust  Jesus  is  like  the  troubled  sea 
Avhich  cannot  rest,  bat  goes  moaning  round  half  the 
world,  homeless  and  hungry,  rolling  and  heaving, 
monotonous  and  yet  changeful,  salt  and  barren — the 
true  emblem  of  every  soul  that  has  not  listened  to  the 
merciful  call,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 


10 


XIV. 

3o^  an^  Jfaitb,  tbc  ifruits  of  Cbrist's 
Departure. 

''  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said  unto  you,  I  go  away,  and  come  again 
unto  you.  If  ye  loved  Me,  ye  Avould  rejoice,  because  I  said,  I 
go  unto  the  Father  :  for  My  Father  is  greater  than  I.  And 
now  I  have  told  you  before  it  come  to  pass,  that,  when  it  is 
come  to  pass,  ye  might  believe." — John  xiv.  28,  2[i. 


^^  UR  Lord  here  casts  a  glance  backward 
on  the  course  of  His  previous  words, 
and  Qfathers  tocfether  the  substance 
and  purpose  of  these.  He  brings 
out  the  intention  of  His  warnings  and 
the  true  effect  of  the  departure,  concerning  which  He 
had  given  them  notice,  as  being  twofold.  In  the 
first  verse  of  my  text  His  words  about  that  going 
away,  and  the  going  away  itself,  are  represented  as 
the  source  of  joy,  which  is  an  advance  on  the  peace 
that  He  had  just  previously  been  promising.  In  the 
second  of  our  verses  these  two  things — His  words, 
and  the  facts  which  they  revealed — are  represented 
as  being  the  very  ground  and  nourishment  of  faith. 
So,  then,  avc  have  these  two  thoughts  to  look  at 


JOV  AND  FAITH.  147 


now,  the  departed  Lord,  the  fountain  of  joy  to  all 
who  love  Him;  the  departed  Lord,  the  ground  and 
food  of  faith. 

I. — The  departure  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  joy 
to  those  who  love  Him. 

In  the  first  part  of  our  text  the  going  away  of  Jesus 
is  contemplated  in  two  aspects. 

The  first  is  that  with  which  we  have  already  be- 
come familiar  in  previous  sermons  on  this  chapter 
— viz.,  its  bearing  upon  the  disciples  ;  and  in  that 
respect,  it  is  declared  that  Christ's  going  is  Christ's 
coming^. 

But  then  we  have  a  new  aspect,  one  on  which, 
in  His  subhme  self-repression,  He  very  seldom 
touches — viz.,  its  bearing  upon  Himself ;  and  in 
that  aspect  we  are  taught  here  to  regard  our  Lord's 
going  as  ministering  to  His  exaltation  and  joy,  and 
therefore  as  being  a  source  of  joy  to  all  His  lovers. 

So,  then,  we  have  these  thous^hts,  Christ's  ojoinGf  is 
Christ's  coming,  and  Christ's  going  is  Christ's  exalta- 
tion, and  for  both  reasons  that  departure  ought  to 
minister  to  His  friends'  gladness.  Let  us  look  at 
these  three  things  for  a  little  while. 

First  of  all,  there  comes  a  renewed  utterance  of 
that  great  thought  which  runs  through  the  whole 
chapter,  that  the  departure  of  Jesus  Christ  is  in 
reaUty  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  word  "  again  "  is  a 
supplement,  and  somewhat  restricts  and  destroys  the 
true  flow  of  thought  and  meaning  of  the  words.  For 
if  we  read,  as  our  Authorised  Version  does,  "I  go 
away  and  come  again  unto  you,"  we  are  inevitably 
led  to  think  of  a  coming,  separated  by  a  considerable 
distance    of    time    from    the    departure.      And   for 

10* 


JOY  AND  FAITH, 


most  of  US  tliat  wliicli  is  susrsfested  is  the  final  comino- 
and  return,  in  bodily  form,  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Now,  great  and  glorious  as  that  hope  is,  it  is  too  far 
away  to  be  in  itself  a  sufficient  comfort  to  the 
mourning  disciples,  and  too  remote  to  be  for  us,  if 
taken  alone,  a  sufficient  ground  of  joy  and  of  rest. 
But  if  you  strike  out  that  intrusive  word  ''-again" 
and  read  the  sentence  as  being  what  it  is,  a  descrip- 
tion of  one  continuous  process,  of  which  the  parts  are 
so  closely  connected  as  to  be  all  but  contemporaneous, 
you  get  the  true  idea.  "  I  go  away,  and  I  come  to 
you."  There  is  no  gap,  the  thing  runs  on  without  a 
break.  There  is  no  moment  of  absolute  absence  ; 
there  are  not  two  motions,  one  from  us  and  the  other 
back  again  towards  us,  but  all  is  one.  The  "  going: " 
is  the  "coming"  ;  the  solemn  series  of  events  which 
began  on  Calvary,  and  ended  on  Olivet,  to  the  eye  of 
sense  were  successive  stages  in  the  departure  of 
Jesus  Christ.  But  looked  at  with  a  deeper  under- 
standing of  their  true  meaning,  they  are  successive 
stages  in  His  approach  towards  us.  His  death.  His 
resurrection.  His  ascension,  were  not  steps  in  the 
cessation  of  His  presence,  but  they  were  simply  steps 
in  the  transition  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  kind  of  that 
presence.  He  changed  the  limitations  and  externali- 
ties of  a  mere  bodily,  local  nearness  for  the  reahties  of 
a  spiritual  presence.  To  the  eye  of  sense,  the  "  going 
away  "  was  the  reality,  and  the  "  coming  "  a  metaphor. 
To  the  eye  enlightened  to  sec  things  as  they  are,  the 
dropping  away  of  the  visible  corporeal  was  but  the 
inauguration  of  the  higher  and  the  more  real.  And 
we  need  to  reverse  our  notions  of  what  is  real  and 
what   is   figurative  in  Christ's  presence,  and  to  feel 


THE  FRUITS  OF  CHRIST'S  DEPARTURE.  149 

that  that  form  of  His  presence  which  we  may  all 
have  to-day  is  far  more  real  than  the  form  which 
ceased,  when  the  Shekinah  cloud  "received  Him 
out  of  their  sight,"  before  we  can  penetrate  to  the 
depth  of  His  words,  or  grasp  the  whole  fulness  of 
blessing  and  of  consolation  which  lie  in  them  here. 
In  a  very  deep  and  real  sense,  "  He  departed 
from  us  for  a  season  that  we  might  receive  Him  for 
ever." 

The  real  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  to-day,  and 
through  the  long  ages  with  every  waiting  heart,  is 
the  very  key-note  to  the  solemn  music  of  these 
chapters.  And,  again,  I  press  upon  you,  and  upon 
m3^sclf,  the  question.  Do  we  believe  it  ?  Do  we  live 
in  the  faith  of  it  ?  Does  it  fill  the  same  place  in  the 
perspective  of  our  Christian  creed  as  it  does  in  the 
revelation  of  the  Scripture,  or  have  we  refined  it  and 
watered  it  down,  until  it  comes  to  be  little  more  than 
merely  the  continuous  influence  of  the  record  of  His 
past,  just  as  any  great  and  sovereign  spirit  that  has 
influenced  mankind  may  still  "  rule  the  nations  from 
his  urn "  ?  Or  do  we  take  Him  at  His  Avord  and 
beheve  that  He  meant  what  He  said,  in  something 
fiir  other  than  a  violent  figure  for  the  continuance  of 
His  influence,  and  of  the  inspiration  drawn  from  Him, 
"  Lo  !  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world  "  ?  "  Say  not  in  Thine  heart.  Who  shall  ascend 
up  into  heaven  ? — that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down 
again  from  above — the  Word,"  the  Incarnate  Word, 
"  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy  heart,"  if  thou  lovest  and  trustest 
Him. 

Then,  again,  the  other  aspect  of  our  Lord's  coming, 
which   is   emphasized   here,   is   that   in  which   it    is 


150  JOY  AXD  FAITH, 

regarded    as    affecting   Himself.      Christ's    going    is 
Christ's  exaltation. 

Now  observe  that,  in  the  first  clause  of  our  verse, 
there  is  simply  specitiod  the  fact  of  departure,  without 
any  reference  to  the  "  whither  "  ;  because  all  that  was 
wanted  was  to  contrast  the  going  and  the  coming. 
But,  in  this  second  clause,  in  which  the  emphasis 
rests  not  so  much  upon  the  fact  of  departure  as  upon 
the  goal  to  which  He  went,  we  read :  "  I  go  to  the 
Father."  Hitherto  we  have  been  contemplating 
Christ's  departure  simply  in  its  bearing  upon  us,  but 
here,  with  exquisite  tenderness.  He  unveils  another 
aspect  of  it,  and  that  in  order  that  He  may  change 
His  disciples'  sadness  into  joy ;  and  says  to  them,  "  If 
you  were  not  so  absorbed  in  yourselves,  you  would 
have  a  thought  to  spare  about  ^Me,  and  you  would 
feel  that  you  should  be  glad  because  I  am  about  to  be 
exalted." 

Very,  very  seldom  does  He  open  such  a  glimpse  into 
His  heart,  and  it  is  all  the  more  tender  and  im- 
pressive when  He  does.  What  a  hint  of  the  continual 
self-sacrifice  of  the  human  life  of  Jesus  Christ  lies  in 
this  thought,  that  He  bids  His  disciples  rejoice  with 
Him,  because  the  time  is  s^ettino'  nearer  its  end,  and 
He  goes  back  to  the  Father  !  And  what  shall  we  say 
of  the  nature  of  Him  to  whom  it  was  martyrdom  to 
live,  and  a  supreme  instance  of  self-sacrificing  humili- 
ation to  be  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  "  ? 

He  tells  His  followers  hero  that  the  reason  for  their 
joy  in  His  departure  is  to  be  found  in  this  fact,  that 
He  goes  to  the  Father,  who  is  greater  than  Himself. 

Now  mark,  with  reci'ard  to  that  remarkable  utter- 
ance,  that  the  whole  course  of  thought  in  the  context 


THE  FRUITS  OF  CHRIST'S  DEPARTURE.  151 

requires,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  we  should  suppose 
that  for  Ciirist  to  go  to  the  Father  was  to  share  in  the 
Father's  greatness.  A\Tiy  else  should  the  disciples  be 
bidden  to  rejoice  in  it  ?  or  why  should  He  say  any- 
thing about  the  greatness  of  the  Father  at  all  ?  If  so, 
then  this  follows,  that  the  oreatness  to  which  He  here 
alludes  is  such  as  He  enters  by  His  ascension.  Or,  in 
other  words,  that  the  inferiority,  of  whatever  nature  it 
may  be,  to  which  He  here  alludes,  falls  away  when  He 
passes  hence. 

Now  these  Avords  are  often  quoted  triumphantly,  as 
if  they  were  dead  against  what  I  venture  to  call  the 
orthodox  and  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the  Divinity  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  it  may  be  worth  while 
to  remark  that  that  doctrine  accepts  this  as  fully  as  it 
does  Christ's  other  word,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one." 
I  venture  to  think  that  it  is  the  only  construction  of 
Scripture  phraseology  which  does  full  justice  to  all 
the  elements.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  I  want  to 
remind  you  that  the  creed  which  confesses  the  unity 
of  the  Godhead  and  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
not  to  be  overthrown  by  pelting  this  verse  at  it ;  for 
this  verse  is  part  of  that  creed,  which  as  fully  declares 
that  the  Father  is  greater  than  the  Son,  as  it  declares 
that  the  Son  is  One  with  the  Father.  You  may  be 
satisfied  with  it  or  no,  but  as  a  matter  of  simple 
honesty  it  must  be  recognized  that  the  creed  of  the 
Catholic  Church  does  combine  both  the  elements 
of  these  representations. 

Now,  we  can  only  speak  in  this  matter  as  Scripture 
guides  us.  The  depths  of  Deity  are  far  too  deep  to  be 
sounded  by  our  plummets.  And  he  is  a  bold  man 
who  ventures  to  say  that  he  knows  Avhat  is  impossible 


152  JOY  AND  FAITH. 


in  reference  to  the  Divine  nature.  He  need  to  have 
gone  all  round  God,  and  down  to  the  depths,  and  up 
to  the  heights  of  a  bottomless  and  summitless  infini- 
tude, before  he  has  a  right  to  say  that.  But  let  me 
remind  you  that  we  can  dimly  see  that  the  very 
names  "  Father "  and  "  Son "  do  imply  some  sort  of 
subordination,  but  that  that  subordination,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  in  the  timeless  and  inward  relations  of  Divinit}', 
must  be  supposed  to  exist  after  the  Ascension,  as  it 
existed  before  the  Incarnation  ;  and,  therefore,  any  such 
mysterious  difference  is  not  that  Avhich  is  referred  to 
here.  What  is  referred  to  is  what  dropped  away  from  the 
Man  Jesus  Christ,  when  He  ascended  up  on  high.  As 
Luther  has  it,  in  his  strong,  simple  way,  in  one  of  his 
sermons,  "  Here  Ho  was  a  poor,  sad,  suffering  Christ "  ; 
and  that  garb  of  lowliness  falls  from  Him,  Uke  the 
mantle  that  fell  from  the  prophet  as  he  Avent  up  in 
the  chariot  of  fire,  when  He  passes  behind  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Shekinah  cloud  that  hides  Him  from  our 
sight.  That  in  which  the  Father  w\as  greater  than 
He,' in  so  far  as  our  present  purpose  is  concerned,  was 
that  which  He  left  behind  when  He  ascended,  even 
the  pain,  the  suffering,  the  sorrow,  the  restrictions,  the 
humiliation,  that  made  so  much  of  the  burden  of  His 
life.  Therefore,  Ave,  as  His  followers,  have  to  rejoice 
in  an  ascended  Christ,  beneath  Avhose  feet  are  foes, 
and  far  away  from  Avhose  human  personality  are  all 
the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to.  "  If  ye  loved  Me,  ye 
Avould  rejoice  that  I  said,  I  go  to  the  Father,  for  My 
Father  is  greater  than  I." 

So  the  third  thought,  in  this  first  part  of  our 
subject,  is  that  on  both  these  grounds  Christ's  ascen- 
sion  and    departure   is   a   source   of  joy.     The    two 


TEE  FRUITS  OF  CHRIST'S  DEPARTURE.  153 

aspects  of  His  departure,  as  affecting  Him  and  as 
affecting  us,  are  inseparably  welded  together.  There 
can  be  no  presence  with  us,  man  b}^  man,  through  all 
the  ages,  and  in  every  land,  unless  He  whose  presence 
it  is,  participates  in  the  absolute  glory  of  Divinity. 
For  to  be  with  you  and  me  and  all  our  suffering 
brethren,  through  the  centuries  and  over  the  world, 
involves  somethinof  more  than  belongfs  to  mere 
humanity.  Therefore,  the  two  sources  of  gladness 
are  confluent — Christ's  ascension  as  affecting  us  is 
inseparably  woven  up  Avith  Christ's  ascension  as 
affecting  Himself. 

Love  will  delight  to  dwell  upon  that  thought  of  its 
exalted  lover.  We  may  fairly  apply  the  simplicity  of 
human  relationships  and  affections  to  the  elucidation 
of  what  ought  to  be  our  affection  to  Him,  our  Lord. 
And  surely  if  our  dearest  one  were  far  away  from  us, 
in  some  lofty  position,  our  hearts  and  our  thoughts 
would  ever  be  going  thither,  and  we  should  live  more 
there  than  here,  Avhero  we  are  "cribbed,  cabined, 
and  confined."  And  if  we  love  Jesus  Christ  with  any 
depth  of  earnestness  and  fervour  of  affection,  there 
will  be  no  thought  more  sweet  to  us,  and  none  which 
will  more  naturally  flow  into  our  hearts,  whenever 
they  are  for  a  moment  at  leisure,  than  this,  the 
thought  of  Him,  our  brother  and  forerunner,  who  has 
ascended  up  on  high  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  glory 
of  the  throne  bears  us  in  his  Heart,  and  uses  His 
glory  for  our  blessing.  Love  will  spring  to  where  the 
beloved  is,  and  if  we  be  Christians  in  any  deep  and 
real  sense,  our  hearts  will  have  risen  with  Christ,  and 
we  shall  be  sitting  with  Him  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.     M}^  brother,   measure   your  Christianity,   and 


154  JOY  AND  FAITH, 


the  reality  of  your  love  to  Jesus  Christ,  by  this.  Is 
it  to  you  natural,  and  a  joy,  to  turn  to  Him,  and  ever 
to  make  present  to  your  mind  the  glories  in  which  He 
loves  and  lives,  and  intercedes,  and  reigns,  for  you  ? 
"If  ye  love  Me,  ye  will  rejoice,  because  I  go  unto  the 
Father." 

II. — And  now  I  can  deal  with  the  second  verse  of 
our  text  very  briefly.  For  our  purpose  is  less 
important  than  the  former  one.  In  it  we  find  our 
Lord  setting  forth,  secondly,  His  departure  and  His 
announcement  of  His  departure  as  the  ground  and 
food  of  faith. 

He  knew  what  a  crash  Avas  comincf,  and  with 
exquisite  tenderness,  gentleness,  knowledge  of  their 
necessities,  and  suppression  of  all  His  own  feelings 
and  emotions.  He  gave  Himself  to  prepare  the  dis- 
ciples for  the  storm,  that,  forewarned,  they  might  be 
forearmed,  and  that,  when  it  did  burst  upon  them,  it 
might  not  take  them  by  surprise. 

So  He  does  still,  about  a  great  many  other  things 
besides,  and  tells  us  beforehand  of  what  is  sure  to 
come  to  us,  that  when  we  are  caught  in  the  midst 
of  the  tempest  we  may  not  bate  one  jot  ol'  heart  or 
hope. 

Why  should  I  complain 

Of  want  or  distress, 
Temptation  or  pain  / 

He  told  me  no  less. 

And  when  my  sorrows  come  to  me,  I  may  say  about 
them  what  He  says  about  His  departure.  He 
has  told  us  before,  that  when  it  comes  we  may 
beheve. 

But   note   how,    in   these  tinal  words  of  my  text, 


THE  FRUITS  OF  OHBISTS  DEPARTURE.  155 


Christ  avows  that  the  sreat  aim  of  His  utterances 
and  of  His  departure  is  to  evoke  our  faith.  And 
what  does  He  mean  by  faith  ?  He  means,  first  of  all, 
a  grasp  of  the  historic  facts — His  death,  His  resurrec- 
tion, His  ascension.  He  means,  next,  the  under- 
standing of  these  as  He  Himself  has  explained  them 
— a  death  of  sacrifice,  a  resurrection  of  victory  over 
death  and  the  crrave,  and  an  ascension  to  rule  and 
guide  His  Church  and  the  world,  and  to  send  His 
Divine  Spirit  into  men's  hearts  if  they  will  receive  it. 
And  He  means,  therefore,  as  the  essence  of  the  faith 
that  He  would  produce  in  all  our  hearts — a  reliance 
upon  Himself  as  thus  revealed.  Sacrifice  by  His  death, 
Victor  by  His  resurrection,  Kmg  and  interceding  Priest 
by  His  ascension — a  reliance  upon  Himself  as  absolute 
as  the  facts  are  sure,  as  unfaltering  as  His  eternal  same- 
ness. The  faith  that  grasps  the  Christ,  dead,  risen, 
ascended,  as  its  all  in  all,  for  time  and  for  eternity,  is 
the  faith  which  by  all  His  work,  and  by  all  His  words 
about  His  work.  He  desires  to  kindle  in  our  hearts. 
Has  He  kindled  it  in  yours  ? 

Then  there  is  a  second  thought — viz.,  that  these 
facts,  as  interpreted  b}-  Himself,  are  the  ground  and 
the  nourishment  of  our  faith.  How  differently  they 
looked  when  seen  from  the  further  side  and  when  seen 
from  the  hither  side !  Anticipated  and  dimly  antici- 
pated, they  were  all  doleful  and  full  of  dismay ;  re- 
membered and  looked  back  upon,  they  were  radiant 
and  bright.  The  disciples  felt,  with  shrinking  hearts 
and  fainting  spirits,  that  their  Avhole  rehance  upon 
Jesus  Christ  was  on  the  point  of  being  shattered,  and 
that  everything  was  going  when  He  died.  "  We  trvMed," 
said   two  of  them,  with  such  a  sad  use  of  the  past 


156  JOY  AXD  FAITH. 


tense,  "  we  trusted  tliat  this  had  been  He  which  should 
have  redeemed  Israel.  But  we  do  not  trust  it  any 
more,"  nor  do  we  expect  Him  to  bo  Israel's  Redeemer 
now.  But  after  the  facts  were  all  unveiled,  there 
came  back  the  memory  of  His  words,  and  they  said  to 
one  another,  "  Did  He  not  tell  us  that  it  was  all  to  be 
so  ?     How  blind  we  were  not  to  understand  Him  ! " 

And  so  the  cross,  the  grave,  the  skies,  are  the 
foundations  of  our  faith;  and  they  who  see  Him 
dying,  rising,  ascended,  henceforth  will  find  it  im- 
possible to  doubt.  Feed  your  faith  upon  these  great 
facts,  and  take  Christ's  own  explanation  of  them,  and 
your  faith  will  be  strong. 

Again,  we  learn  here  that  faith  is  the  condition  of 
the  true  presence  of  our  absent  Lord.  Faith  is  that 
on  our  side  which  corresponds  to  His  spiritual  coming 
to  us.  Whosoever  trusts  Him  possesses  Him,  and  He 
is  with  and  in  every  soul  that,  loving  Him,  relies  upon 
Him,  in  a  closeness  so  close  and  a  presence  so  real  that 
heaven  itself  does  not  bring  the  spirit  of  the  believer 
and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  nearer  one  another,  though 
it  takes  away  the  bodily  film  that  sometimes  seems  to 
part  their  lives. 

We,  too,  may  and  should  be  glad  when  we  lift  our 
eyes  to  that  Throne  where  our  Brother  reigns.  We, 
too,  may  be  glad  that  He  is  there,  because  His  being 
there  is  the  reason  why  He  can  be  here  ;  and  Ave,  too, 
may  feed  our  faith  upon  Him,  and  so  bring  Him  in 
very  deed  to  dwell  in  our  hearts.  If  we  would  have 
Christ  within  us,  let  us  trust  Him  dying,  rising,  Hving 
in  the  heavens  ;  and  then  we  shall  learn  how,  by  all 
three  apparent  departures,  He  is  drawing  the  closer  to 
the  souls  that  love  and  trust. 


XV. 


Ibovv  Cbrist  Biiticipatcb  Ibis  passion, 

"  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you  :  for  the  Prince  of  this 
world  Cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me.  But  that  the  world 
may  know  that  I  love  the  Father  ;  and  as  the  Father  gave 
me  commandment,  even  so  I  do.  Arise  !  Let  us  go  hence." — 
John  xiv.  30,  31. 


HE  summons  to  departure  which  closes 
these  verses  shows  that  we  have  now 
reached  the  end  of  that  sacred  hour  in 
the  upper  room.  In  obedience  to  the 
summons,  we  have  to  fancy  the  little 


"A, 

~?n° 

M 

^g^ 

Jl 

y( 

tI/^v^ 

\o° 

•Ko\ 

'^^°  vOT/c 

lX^o 

•V^ 

/Mw^-v 

^l\ 

«  o>t 

*^^^    o  ^ 

^K^ 

group  leaving  its  safe  shelter,  as  sailors  might  put 
out  from  behind  a  breakwater  into  a  stormy  sea. 
They  pass  from  its  seclusion  and  peace  into  the  joyous 
stir  of  the  crowded  streets,  filled  with  feast-keeping 
multitudes,  on  Avhom  the  full  paschal  moon  looked 
doAvn,  pure  and  calming.  Somewhere  between  the 
upper  chamber  and  the  crossing  of  the  brook  Kedron, 
the  Divine  words  of  the  following  chapters  were 
spoken,  but  this  discourse,  closely  connected  as  it  is 
with  them,  reaches  its  fitting  close  in  these  pene- 
trating, solemn  words  of  outlook  into  the  near  future, 
so  calm,  so  weighty,  so  resolute,  so  almost  triumphant, 


158        EOJF  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION. 

with  which  Christ  seeks  finally  to  impart  to  His 
timorous  friends  some  of  His  own  peace  and  assurance 
of  victory. 

They  lead  us  into  a  region  seldom  opened  to  our 
view,  and  never  to  be  looked  upon  but  Avith  reverent 
awe.  For  they  tell  us  what  Christ  thought  about 
His  sufferings,  and  how  He  felt  as  He  went  down 
to  that  cold,  black  river,  in  which  He  was  to  be  bap- 
tized. "  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off"  thy  feet,  for  the 
place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 

So,  reverently  listening  to  the  Avords,  sacred  because 
of  the  Speaker,  the  theme,  and  the  circumstances, 
we  note  in  them  these  things :  His  calm  anticipa- 
tion of  the  assailant,  His  unveiling  of  the  secret 
and  motive  of  His  apparent  defeat,  and  His  resolute 
advance  to  the  conflict.  Let  us  look  at  these  three 
points. 

I. — First,  we  have  here  our  Lord's  calm  anticipa- 
tion-of  the  assailant:  "Hereafter  I  Avill  not  speak 
much  Avith  you :  for  the  Prince  of  this  Avorld  cometh, 
and  hath  nothing  in  Me." 

One  of  the  other  Gospels  tells  us,  in  finishing  its 
account  of  our  Lord's  temptation  in  the  A\dlderness, 
that  Avhen  Satan  had  ended  all  these  temptations  "  he 
departed  from  Him  for  a  season."  And  noAV  avc 
have  the  second  and  the  intenser  form  of  that  assault. . 
The  first  AA^as  addressed  to  desires,  and  sought  to 
stimulate  ambition  and  ostentation  and  the  animal 
appetites,  and  so,  through  the  cravings  of  human 
nature,  to  shake  the  Master's  fixed  faith.  The 
second  used  sharper  and  more  fatal  Aveapons,  and 
appealed,  not  to  desire  of  enjoyment,  or  ease,  or  good, 
but  to  the  natural,  human  shrinking  from  pain  and 


HOW  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION.  159 

suffering  and  shame  and  death.  He  that  was 
impervious  on  the  side  of  natural  necessities  and 
more  subtle  spiritual  desires  might  yet  be  reached 
through  terror.  And  so  the  second  form  of  the 
assault,  instead  of  tempting  the  traveller  to  cast 
aside  his  cloak  by  the  sunshine,  tempted  him  to 
fling  it  aside  by  storm  and  tempest ;  and  the  one, 
as  the  other,  was  doomed  to  failure. 

Note  how  the  Master,  with  that  clear  eye  which 
saw  to  the  depths  as  well  as  the  heights,  and  before 
which  men  and  things  were  but,  as  it  were,  the 
transparent  media  through  which  unseen  spiritual 
powers  wrought,  just  as  He  discerns  the  Father's  will 
as  supreme  and  sovereign,  sees  here — beneath  Judas' 
treachery,  and  Pharisees'  and  priests'  envy,  and 
people's  stolid  indifference,  and  the  Roman  soldiers' 
impartial  scorn — the  workings  of  a  personal  source 
and  centre  of  all.  The  "  Prince  of  this  world,"  who 
rules  men  and  things  when  they  are  severed  from  God, 
"  Cometh."  Christ's  sensitive  nature  apprehends  the 
approach  of  the  evil  thing,  as  some  organisations  can 
tell  when  the  thunder-storm  is  about  to  burst.  His 
Divine  Omniscience,  working,  as  it  did,  even  within 
the  limits  of  humanity,  luiows  not  only  Avhen  the 
storm  is  about  to  burst  upon  Him,  but  knows  who  it 
is  that  has  raised  the  tempest.  And  so  He  says,  "  The 
Prince  of  this  world  cometh." 

But  note,  as  j^et  more  important,  that  tremendous 
and  unique  consciousness  of  absolute  invulner- 
abihty  against  the  assaults.  "  He  hath  nothing 
in  Me."  He  is  "the  Prince  of  the  world  but  His 
dominion  stops  outside  My  breast.  He  has  no  rule 
or    authority    there.      His    writs    do    not    run,   nor 


160        HOW  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION. 

is    His    dominion    recognized,    within    that    sacred 
realm." 

Was  there  ever  a  man  that  could  say  that  ?  Are 
there  any  of  us,  the  purest  and  the  noblest,  who, 
standing  single-handed  in  front  of  the  antagonistic 
power  of  evil,  and  believing  it  to  be  consolidated  and 
concentrated  in  a  person,  dare  to  profess  that  there  is 
not  a  thing  in  us  on  which  he  can  lay  his  black  claAv 
and  say — "  That  is  mine  "  ?  Is  there  nothing  inflam- 
mable within  us  which  the  "  fiery  darts  of  the 
wicked  "  can  kindle  ?  Are  there  any  of  us  who  bar 
our  doors  so  tightly  as  that  Ave  can  say  that  none  of 
his  seductions  will  find  their  way  therein,  and  that 
nothing  there  will  respond  to  them  ?  Christ  sets 
Himself  here  against  the  whole  embattled  and 
embodied  power  of  evil,  and  puts  Himself  in  con- 
trast to  the  universal  human  experience,  when  He 
calmly  declares  "  He  hath  nothing  in  ]\[e." 

It  is  an  assertion  of  His  absolute  freedom  from  sin- 
fulness, and  it  involves,  as  I  take  it,  the  other  assertion 
— that  as  He  is  free  from  sin,  so  He  is  not  subject  to 
that  consequence  of  sin,  which  is  death,  as  we  know 
it. 

Another  part  of  Scripture  speaks  to  us  in  strange 
language,  which  yet  has  in  it  a  deep  truth,  of  "  him  that 
had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil."  Men  fall 
under  the  rightful  dominion  of  the  king  of  evil  Avhen 
they  sin,  and  part  of  the  proof  of  his  dominion  is  the 
fact  of  physical  death,  with  its  present  accompani- 
ments. 

Thus,  in  His  calm  anticipation,  Jesus  stands  waiting 
for  the  enemy's  charge,  knowing  that  all  its  force  will 
be  broken  against  the  serried  ranks  of  His  immaculate 


HO  IF  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION.        161 


purity,  and  that  He  will  come  from  the  dreadful  close 
unwounded  all,  and  triumphant  for  evermore. 

But  do  not  let  us  suppose  that  because  Christ,  in 
His  anticipation  of  suffering  and  death,  knew  Him- 
self invulnerable,  with  not  even  a  spot  on  His  heel 
into  Avhich  the  arrow  could  go,  therefore  the  conflict 
was  an  unreal  or  shadowy  one.  It  was  a  true  fight, 
and  it  was  a  real  struggle  that  He  was  anticipating,  in 
these  solemn  words,  thus  calmly  as  knowing  Himself 
the  victor  ere  He  entered  on  the  dreadful  field. 

II. — So  note,  secondly,  in  these  words,  our  Lord's 
unveiling  of  the  motive  and  aim  of  His  apparent 
defeat.  "  But  that  the  world  might  know  that  I  love 
the  Father,  and,  as  the  Father  gave  me  command- 
ment, even  so  I  do." 

There  may  be  some  uncertainty  about  the  exact 
grammatical  relation  of  these  clauses  to  one  another, 
with  which  I  need  not  trouble  you,  because  it 
does  not  aft'ect  their  substantial  meaning.  However 
we  solve  the  mere  grammatical  questions,  the  funda- 
mental significance  of  the  Avliole  remains  unaffected, 
and  it  is  this :  that  Christ's  sufferings  and  death  were, 
in  one  aspect,  for  the  purpose  that  the  world  might 
knoAV  His  love  to  the  Father,  and,  in  another  aspect, 
were  obedience  to  the  Father's  commandment.  And 
if  we  regard  these  two  things,  I  think  we  shall  get 
some  thoughts  worth  considering  as  to  the  way  'w, 
which  the  Master  Himself  looks  upon  these  sufferings 
and  that  death. 

The  first  thing  I  note  in  this  division  of  my  dis- 
course is,  that  Christ  would  have  us  resfard  His 
sufferings  and  His  death  as  His  own  act.  Note  that 
strange  word  "  thus  I  do."    A  strange  word  to  be  used 

11 


162        HOW  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION. 

in  such  a  connection,  but  full  of  profound  meaning. 
We  sjoeak,  and  rightly,  of  the  solemn  events  of  these 
coming  days  as  the  passion  of  our  Lord,  but  they 
were  His  action  quite  as  much  as  His  ixLssion.  He 
was  no  mere  passive  sufferer.  In  them  all  He  acted, 
or,  as  He  says  here,  we  may  look  upon  them  all,  not 
as  things  inflicted  upon  Him  from  without  by  any 
power,  however  it  might  seem  to  have  the  absolute 
control  of  His  fate,  but  as  things  which  He  did  Himself. 

There  is  one  Man  who  died,  not  of  physical  neces- 
sity, but  because  of  free  choice.  There  is  one  Man 
who  chose  to  be  born,  and  who  chose  to  die ;  who,  in 
His  choosing  to  be  born,  chose  humiliation,  and  who, 
in  His  choosing  to  die,  chose  yet  deeper  humiliation. 
This  sacrifice  was  a  voluntary  sacrifice,  or,  to  speak 
more  accurately,  He  was  both  Priest  and  Sacrifice, 
Avhen  "  through  the  Eternal  Spirit  He  offered  Himself 
without  spot  unto  God."  The  hving  Christ  is  the 
Lord  of  Life,  and  lives  because  He  will ;  the  dying 
Christ  is  the  Lord  of  Death,  and  dies  because  He 
chose.  He  would  have  us  learn  that  all  His  bitter 
sufferings,  inflicted  from  without  as  they  were,  and 
traceable  to  a  deeper  source  than  merely  human 
antagonism,  were  also  self-inflicted  and  self-chosen, 
and  further  traceable  to  the  Father's  will  in  harmony 
with  His  own.  "  Thus  I  do,"  and  thus  He  did  when 
He  died. 

Then,  further,  our  Lord  Avould  have  us  regard  these 
sufferings  and  that  death  as  being  His  crowning  act 
of  obedience  to  His  Father's  will.  That  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  Avhole  tone  of  His  self-consciousness, 
especially  as  set  before  us  in  this  precious  Gospel  of 
John,  which  traces  up  everything  to  the  submission  of 


HOJF  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  FASSIOK        163 

the  Divine  Son  to  the  Divine  Father,  a  submission 
which  is  no  mere  external  thing,  but  results  from,  and 
is  the  expression  of  the  absolute  unity  of  will  and  the 
perfect  oneness  of  mutual  love.  And  so,  because  He 
loved  the  Father,  therefore  He  came  to  do  the 
Father's  will,  and  the  crowning  act  of  His  obedience 
was  this,  that  He  was  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  Cross.  It  was  a  voluntary  sacrifice,  but 
that  voluntariness  was  not  self-will.  It  was  a  sacrifice 
in  obedience  to  the  Father's  will,  but  that  obedience 
was  not  reluctant.  Christ  was  the  embodiment  of  the 
Divine  purpose,  formed  before  the  ages,  realized  in 
time,  when  He  bowed  His  head  and  yielded  up  the 
ghost.  The  highest  proof  of  His  filial  obedience  was 
the  Cross.  And  to  it  He  points  us,  if  we  would  know 
what  it  is  to  love  and  obey  the  Father. 

Now  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  motive  of  our 
Lord's  death  is  not  the  usual  one  given  in  the  Scrip- 
ture. And  I  can  suppose  the  question  being  put, 
"  Why  did  not  Jesus  Christ  say,  in  that  supreme 
moment,  that  He  went  to  the  Cross  because  of  His 
love  to  us  rather  than  because  of  His  love  to  the 
Father  ? "  But  I  think  the  answer  is  not  far  to  seek. 
There  are  several  satisfactory  ones  which  may  be 
given.  One  is  that  this  making  prominent  of  His  love 
to  God  rather  than  to  us,  as  the  motive  for  His  death, 
is  in  accordance  with  that  comparative  reticence  on 
the  part  of  Jesus  as  to  the  atoning  aspect  of  His 
death,  which  I  have  had  frequent  occasion  to  point 
out,  and  which  does  not  carry  in  it  the  implication 
that  that  doctrine  was  a  new  thing  in  the  Christian 
preaching  after  Pentecost.  Another  reason  may  be 
drawn  from  the  whole  strain  and  tone  of  this  chapter, 

11* 


164         110 JF  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION. 

which,  as  I  have  already  said,  traces  up  everything  to 
the  loving  relations  of  obedience  between  the  Father 
and  Son.  And  yet  another  reason  may  be  given  in 
that  the  very  statement  of  Christ's  love  to  God,  and 
loving  obedience  to  the  Father's  commandment  as  the 
motive  of  His  death,  includes  in  it  necessarily  the 
other  thing — love  to  us.  For,  what  was  the  Father's 
commandment  which  Christ  with  all  His  heart 
accepted,  and  with  His  glad  will  obeyed  unto  death  ? 
It  was  that  the  Son  should  come  as  the  Kansom  for 
the  world.  "  The  Son  of  man  was  sent,  not  to  be 
ministered  unto  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a 
Kansom  for  many."  Or,  as  He  Himself  said,  in  one 
of  His  earliest  discourses,  "  God  so  loved  the  world 
that  He  sent  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish."  And  for  what 
He  sent  that  Son  is  clearly  stated  in  the  context  itself 
of  that  passage.  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in 
the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  hfted 
up." 

To  speak  of  Christ's  acceptance  of  the  Father's 
commandment,  then,  is  but  another  way  of  saying 
that  Christ,  in  all  the  fidness  of  His  self-surrender, 
entered  into  and  took  as  His  OAvn  the  great,  eternal, 
Divine  purpose,  that  the  world  should  be  redeemed  by 
His  death  upon  the  Cross.  The  heavenward  side  of 
His  love  to  man  is  His  love  to  the  Father,  God. 

Now  there  is  another  aspect  still  in  which  our  Lord 
would  here  have  us  regard  His  sufferings  and  death, 
and  that  is  that  they  are  of  world-wide  significance. 

Think  for  a  moment  of  the  obscurity  of  the  speaker 
— a  Jewish  peasant  in  an  upper  room,  Avith  a  handful 
of  poor  men  round  Him,  all  of  them  ready  to  forsake 


EOir  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  FASSIOK.         165 


Him,  Avithin  a  few  hours  of  His  ignominious  death, 
and  yet  He  says,  "  I  am  about  to  die,  that  the  echo  of 
it  may  reverberate  through  the  whole  world."  He 
puts  Himself  forth  as  of  world-wide  significance,  and 
His  death  as  adapted  to  move  mankind,  and  as  one 
day  to  be  known  all  over  the  world.  There  is  nothing 
in  history  to  approach  to  the  gigantic  arrogance  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  it  is  only  expHcable  on  the  ground 
of  His  Divinity.  "This  I  do  that  the  ivorld  may 
know." 

And  what  did  it  matter  to  the  world  ?  Why  should 
it  be  of  any  importance  that  the  world  should  know  ? 
For  one  plain  reason,  because  true  knowledge  of  the 
true^  nature  and  motive  of  that  death  breaks  the 
dominion  of  the  Prince  of  the  world,  and  sets  men 
free  from  his  tyranny.  Emancipation,  hope,  victory, 
purity,  the  passing  from  the  tyranny  of  the  darkness 
into  the  blessed  kingdom  of  the  light— all  depend  on 
the  world's  knowing  that  Christ's  death  was  His  own 
voluntary  act  of  submission  to  the  infinite  love  and 
will  of  the  Father,  which  will  and  love  He  made  His 
own,  and  therefore  died,  the  sacrifice  for  the  world's 
sin. 

The  enemy  was  approaching.  He  was  to  be  hoist 
with  his  own  petard.  "  He  digged  a  pit ; "  he  digged 
it  deep,  and  into  the  pit  which  he  digged,  he  himself 
fell.  "  Oh  :  death,  I  will  be  thy  plague  "  by  entering 
into  thy  realm.  "  Oh  !  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction  " 
by  dwelhng  for  a  moment  within  thy  dark  portals  and 
rending  them  irreparably  as  I  pass  from  them.  The 
Prmce  of  this  world  was  defeated  when  he  seemed  to 
triumph,  and  Christ's  mighty  words  came  true  :  "  Now 
shall  the  Prince  of  this  Avorld  be  cast  out."   He  would 


166         HOW  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION. 

have  the  world  know — with  the  knowledge  which  is  of 
the  heart  as  well  as  the  head,  which  is  life  as  well  as 
understanding — which  is  possession  and  appropriation, 
the  mystery,  the  meaning,  the  motive  of  His  death, 
because  the  world  thereby  ceases  to  be  a  world,  and 
becomes  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ. 

III. — Lastly,  notice  here  the  resolute  advance  to  the 
conflict. 

"  Arise !  Let  us  go  hence " — a  word  of  swift 
alacrity.  Evidently  He  started  to  His  feet  whilst  they 
lay  round  the  table.  He  bids  them  rise  with  Him 
and  follow  Him  on  the  path. 

But  there  is  more  in  the  words  than  a  mere  close  of 
a  conversation,  and  a  summons  to  change  of  place. 
They  indicate  a  kind  of  Divine  impatience  to  be  in 
the  fight,  and  to  have  it  over.  The  same  emotion  is 
plainly  revealed  m  the  whole  of  the  latter  days  of 
our  Lord's  life.  You  remember  how  His  disciples 
followed  amazed,  as  He  strode  up  the  road  from 
Jericho,  hastening  to  His  Cross.  You  remember  His 
deliberate  purpose  to  draw  upon  Himself  public  notice 
during  that  dangerous  and  explosive  week  before  the 
Passover,  as  shown  in  the  publicity  of  His  entry  into 
Jerusalem,  His  sharp  rebukes  of  the  rulers  in  the 
Temple,  and  in  every  other  incident  of  those  days. 
You  remember  His  words  to  the  betrayer,  "  That  thou 
doest,  do  quickly."  These  latter  hours  of  the  Lord 
were  strongly  marked  by  the  emotion  to  which  He 
gave  utterance  in  His  earlier  words  :  "  I  have  a  baptism 
to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be 
accomplished  ! "  Perhaps  that  feeling  indicated  His 
human  shrinking ;  for  we  all  know  how  we  sometimes 
are  glad  to  precipitate  an  unwelcome  thing,  and  how. 


HOJV  CHRIST  ANTICIPATED  HIS  PASSION.         167 

the  more  we  dread  it,  the  more  we  are  anxious  to  get 
it  over.  But  there  was  far  more  than  that  in  it. 
There  was  the  resolved  determination  to  carry  out  the 
Father's  purpose  for  the  world's  salvation,  which  was 
His  own  purpose,  and  was  none  the  less  His  though 
He  knew  all  the  suffering  which  it  involved. 

Let  us  adore  that  steadfast  will,  which  never  faltered, 
though  the  natural  human  weakness  was  there  too, 
and  which,  as  impelled  by  some  strong  spring,  kept 
persistently  pressing  towards  the  Cross  that  on  it  He 
might  die,  the  world's  Redeemer. 

And  do  not  let  us  forQ-et  that  He  summoned  His 
lovers  and  friends  to  follow  Him  on  the  road.  "  Let  tis 
go  hence."  It  is  ours  to  take  up  our  cross  daily  and 
follow  the  Master,  to  do  with  persistent  resolve  our 
duty,  whether  it  be  welcome  or  unwelcome,  and  to  see 
to  it  that  we  plant  no  faltering  nor  reluctant  foot  in 
our  Master's  footsteps.  For  us,  too,  if  we  have  learned 
to  flee  to  that  Cross  for  our  redemption  and  salvation, 
the  resolve  of  our  Redeemer  and  the  very  passion  of 
the  Saviour  itself  become  the  pattern  and  the  law  of 
our  lives.  We,  too,  have  to  cast  ourselves  into  the 
fight,  and  to  take  our  cross,  that  the  world  may  know 
that  we  love  the  Father,  and  as  the  Father  hath  given 
us  commandment.  And  if  so  we  live,  then  our  death, 
too,  in  some  humble  measure,  may  be  like  His — the 
crowning  act  of  obedience  to'  the  Father's  will;  in 
which  we  are  neither  passively  nor  resistingly  dragged 
under  by  a  force  that  we  cannot  effectually  resist,  but 
in  which  we  go  down  willingly  into  the  dark  valley, 
where  death  "  makes  our  sacrifice  complete." 


XVI. 

Zbc  Zvixc  IDine, 

am  the  true  vine,  and  My  Father  is  the  husbandman.  Every 
branch  in  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh  away  :  and 
every  branch  that  beareth  fruit  He  purgeth  it,  that  it  may 
bring  forth  more  fruit.  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word 
which  I  have  spoken  unto  you.  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you. 
As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself ,  except  it  abide  in  the 
vine,  no  more  can  ye  except  ye  abide  in  Me." — JOHK  xv.  1 — 1. 


HAT  suggested  this  lovely  pai'able  of  the 
vine  and  the  branches  is  equally  unim- 
portant and  undiscoverable.  Many 
guesses  have  been  made,  and,  no  doubt, 
as  was  the  case  with  almost  all  our 
Lord's  parables,  some  external  object  gave  occasion 
for  it.  It  is  a  significant  token  of  our  Lord's  calm 
coUectedness,  even  at  that  supreme  and  heart-shaldng 
moment,  that  He  should  have  been  at  leisure  to 
observe,  and  to  use  for  His  purposes  of  teaching,  some- 
thing that  was  present  at  the  instant.  The  deep  and 
solemn  lessons  which  He  draws,  perhaps  from  some 
vine  by  the  wayside,  are  the  richest  and  sweetest 
clusters  that  the  vine  has  ever  grown.  The  great  truth 
in  this  chapter,  applied  in  manifold  directions,  and 
viewed  in  many  aspects,  is  that  of  the  living  union 


THE  TRUE  VINE.  169 


between  Christ  and  those  who  beheve  on  Him.  And 
the  parable  of  the  vine  and  the  branches  affords  the 
foundation  for  all  which  follows. 

We  take  the  first  half  of  that  parable  this  morning. 
It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  trace  the  course  of  thought 
in  it,  but  there  seems  to  be,  first  of  all,  the  similitude 
set  forth,  without  explanation  or  interpretation,  in  its 
most  general  terms,  and  then  various  aspects  in  which 
its  apphcations  to  Christian  duty  are  taken  up  and 
reiterated.  I  simply  follow  the  words  Avhich  I  have 
read  for  my  text. 

I. — We  have,  then,  first,  the  vine  in  the  vital  unit}^ 
of  all  its  parts. 

"  I  am  the  true  vine,"  of  which  the  material  one  to 
which  He  points  is  but  a  shadow  and  an  emblem. 
The  reality  lies  in  Him.  We  shall  best  understand 
the  deep  significance  and  beauty  of  this  thought  if  we 
recur  in  imagination  to  some  of  those  great  vines 
which  we  sometimes  see  in  royal  conservatories,  where 
for  hundreds  of  yards  the  phant  branches  stretch 
along  the  espaliers,  and  yet  one  life  pervades  the 
whole,  from  the  root,  through  the  crooked  stem,  right 
away  to  the  last  leaf  at  the  top  of  the  furthest  branch, 
and  reddens  and  mellows  every  cluster.  So,  says 
Christ,  Between  Me  and  the  totality  of  them  that 
hold  by  Me  in  faith  there  is  one  life,  passing  ever  from 
root,  through  branches,  and  ever  bearing  fruit. 

Let  me  remind  you  that  this  great  thought  of  the 
unity  of  life  between  Jesus  Christ  and  all  that  believe 
upon  Him  is  the  familiar  teaching  of  ScrijDture,  and  is 
set  forth  by  other  emblems  besides  that  of  the  vine, 
the  queen  of  the  vegetable  world  ;  for  we  have  it  in 
the  metaphor  of  the  body  and  its  members,  where  not 


170  THE  TRUE  VINE. 


only  are  tlie  many  members  declared  to  be  parts  of 
one  body,  but  the  name  of  the  collective  body,  made  up 
of  many  members,  is  Christ.  "  So  also  is  " — not,  as  we 
might  expect,  the  Church,  but — "  Christ,"  the  whole 
bearing  the  name  of  Him  who  is  the  source  of  life  to 
every  part.  Personality  remains,  individuality  re- 
mains :  I  am  I,  and  He  is  He,  and  thou  art  thou  ;  but 
across  the  awful  gulf  of  the  individual  consciousness, 
which  parts  us  from  one  another,  Jesus  Christ  assumes 
the  Divine  prerogative  of  passing  and  joining  Himself 
to  each  of  us,  if  we  love  Him  and  trust  Him,  in  a 
union  so  close,  and  with  a  communication  of  life  so 
real,  that  every  other  union  which  we  know  is  but  a 
faint  and  far-off  adumbration  of  it.  A  oneness  of 
life  from  root  to  branch,  which  is  the  sole  cause  of 
fruitfulness  and  growth,  is  taught  us  here. 

And  then  let  me  remind  you  that  that  living  unity 
between  Jesus  Christ  and  all  who  love  Him  is  a  one- 
ness which  necessarily  results  in  oneness  of  relation 
to  God  and  men,  in  oneness  of  character,  and  in 
oneness  of  destiny.  In  relation  to  God  He  is  the  Son, 
and  we  in  Him  receive  the  standing  of  sons.  He  has 
access  ever  into  the  Father's  presence,  and  we  through 
Him  and  in  Him  have  access  with  confidence  and  are 
accepted  in  the  Beloved.  In  relation  to  men,  if  He  be 
Light,  we,  touched  with  His  light,  are  also,  in  our 
measure  and  degree,  the  lights  of  the  world  ;  and-  in 
the  proportion  in  which  we  receive  into  our  souls,  by 
patient  abiding  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  very  poAver  of  His 
Spirit,  we,  too,  become  God's  anointed,  subordinately 
but  truly  His  Messiahs,  for  He  Himself  says  :  "  As  the 
Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  I  send  you." 

In  reccard  of  character,  the  livino-  union  between 


THE  TRUE  VINE.  171 


Christ  and  His  members  results  in  a  similarity  if  not 
identity  of  character,  and  with  His  righteousness  we 
are  clothed,  and  by  that  righteousness  Ave  are  justified, 
and  by  that  righteousness  we  are  sanctifiied.  The 
oneness  between  Christ  and  His  children  is  the  ground 
at  once  of  their  forgiveness  and  acceptance,  and  of  all 
virtue  and  nobleness  of  life  and  conduct  that  can  ever 
be  theirs. 

And,  in  like  manner,  we  can  look  forward  and  be 
sure  that  we  are  so  closely  joined  with  Him,  if  we  love 
Him  and  trust  Him,  that  it  is  impossible  but  that 
where  He  is  there  shall  also  His  servants  be  ;  and 
that  what  He  is  that  shall  also  His  servant  be.  For 
the  oneness  of  life,  by  which  we  are  delivered  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  and  the  law  of  sin  and 
death  here,  will  never  halt  nor  cease  until  it  brings  us 
into  the  unity  of  His  glory,  the  measure  of  the  stature 
of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  And  as  He  sits  on  the 
Father's  throne,  His  children  must  needs  sit  with 
Him,  on  His  throne. 

Therefore,  the  name  of  the  collective  whole,  of 
which  the  individual  Christian  is  part,  is  Christ.  And 
as  in  the  great  Old  Testament  prophecy  of  the  Servant 
of  the  Lord,  the  figure  that  rises  before  Isaiah's  vision 
fluctuates  between  that  which  is  clearly  the  collective 
Israel  and  that  which  is,  as  clearly,  the  personal 
Messiah ;  so  the  "  Christ "  is  not  only  the  individual 
Redeemer  who  bears  the  body  of  the  flesh  literally 
here  upon  earth,  but  the  whole  of  that  redeemed 
Church,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  it  is  His  body,  the 
fuhiess  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all." 

II. — Now  note,  secondly,  the  husbandman,  and  the 
dressing  of  the  vine. 


172  THE  TRUE  VINE. 


The  one  tool  that  a  vinedresser  needs  is  a  knife. 
The  chief  secret  of  culture  is  merciless  pruning.  And 
so  sa3^s  my  text,  "the  Father  is  the  husbandman." 
Our  Lord  assumes  that  office  in  other  of  His  parables. 
But  here  the  exigencies  of  the  parabolic  form  require 
that  the  office  of  Cultivator  should  be  assigned  only 
to  the  Father  ;  although  we  are  not  to  forget  that  the 
Father,  in  that  office,  works  through  and  in  His 
Son. 

But  we  should  note  that  the  one  kind  of  husbandry 
spoken  of  here  is  pruning — not  manuring,  not  digging, 
but  simply  the  hacking  away  of  all  that  is  rank  and 
all  that  is  dead. 

Were  you  ever  in  a  greenhouse  or  in  a  vineyard  at 
the  season  of  cutting  back  the  vines  ?  What  flagitious 
waste  it  would  seem  to  an  ignorant  person  to  see 
scattered  on  the  floor  the  bright  green  leaves  and  the 
incipient  clusters,  and  to  look  up  at  the  bare  stem, 
bleeding  at  a  hundred  points  from  the  sharp  steel. 
Yes  !  But  there  was  not  a  random  stroke  in  it  all,  and 
there  was  nothing  cut  away  which  it  was  not  loss  to 
keep  and  gain  to  lose  ;  and  it  was  all  done  artistically, 
scientificalty;  for  a  set  purpose — that  the  plant  might 
bring  forth  more  fruit. 

Thus,  says  Christ,  the  main  thing  that  is  needed 
— not,  indeed,  to  improve  the  life  in  the  branches, 
but  to  improve  the  branches  in  which  the  life  is-^- 
is  excision.  There  are  two  forms  of  it  given  here 
— absolutely  dead  wood  has  to  be  cut  out ;  wood 
that  has  life  in  it,  but  which  has  also  rank  shoots, 
that  do  not  come  from  the  all-pervading  and 
hallowed  life,  has  to  be  pruned  back  and  deprived  of 
its  shoots. 


THE  TRUE  VINE.  173 


It   seems   to   me   that  the   very  language   of  the 
metaphor    before    us    requh-es    us   to   interpret    the 
fruitless  branches  as  meanmg  all  those  who  have  a 
mere  superficial,  external  adherence  to  the  true  vine. 
For,  according  to  the  whole  teaching  of  the  parable^ 
if  there  be  any  real  union,  there  will  be  some  life,  and  ^ 
if  there   be  any  life,  there  will  be  some  fruit,  and 
therefore,  the  branch  that  has  no  fruit  has  no  life 
because  it  has  no  real  union.     And  so  the  application' 
as    \    take    it,    is    necessarily    to    those    professino' 
Christians,  nominal  adherents  to  Christianity  or  to 
Christ's   Church,   people   that   come   to   church  and 
chapel,  and  if  you  ask  them  to  put   down   in   the 
census  paper  what  they  are,  will  say  that  they  are 
Christians— Churchmen,  or  Dissenters,  as  the  case  may 
be— but  who  have  no  real  hold  upon  Jesus  Christ,  and 
no  real  reception  of  anything  from  Him  ;  and  the 
"taking   away"   is   simply  that,  somehow   or  other, 
God  makes  visible,  what  is  a  fact,  that  they  do  not 
belong  to  Him  with  whom  they  have  this  nominal 
connection. 

The  longer  Christianity  continues  in  any  country, 
the^  more  does  the  Church  get  weighted  and  lowered 
in  its  temperature  by  the  aggregation  round  about  it 
of  people  of  that  sort.  And  one  sometimes  longs  and  x 
prays  for  a  storm  to  come,  of  some  sort  or  other,  to 
blow  the  dead  wood  out  of  the  tree,  and  to  get  rid 
of  aU  this  oppressive  and  stifling  weight  of  sham 
Christians  that  has  come  round  every  one  of  our 
churches.  "  His  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and  He  will 
throughly  purge  His  floor,"  and  every  man  that  has 
any  reality  of  Christian  life  in  him  should  pray  that 
this  pruning  and  cutting  out  of  the  dead  wood  may 


174  THE  TRUE  VI XE. 


< 


be  done,  and  that  He  would  "  come  as  a  refiner's  fire 
and  purify  "  His  priesthood. 

Then  there  is  the  other  side,  the  pruning  of  the 
fruitful  branches.  "VYe  all,  in  our  Christian  life,  carry 
with  us  the  two  natures — our  own  poor,  miserable  selves, 
and  the  better  life  of  Jesus  Christ  within  us.  The  one 
flourishes  at  the  expense  of  the  other ;  and  it  is  the 
Husbandman's  merciful,  though  painful  work,  to  cut 
back  unsparingly  the  rank  shoots  that  come  from  self, 
in  order  that  all  the  force  of  our  lives  may  be  flung 
into  the  growing  of  the  cluster  which  is  acceptable  to 
Him. 

So,  dear  friends,  let  us  understand  the  meaning  of 
all  that  comes  to  us.  The  knife  is  sharp  and  the 
tendrils  bleed,  and  things  that  seem  very  beautiful  and 
very  precious  are  unsparingly  shorn  away,  and  we  are 
left  bare,  and,  as  it  seems  to  ourselves,  impoverished 
But  oh  !  it  is  all  sent  that  we  may  fling  our  force  into 
the  production  of  fruit  unto  God.  And  no  stroke  will 
be  a  stroke  too  many  or  too  deep  if  it  helps  us  to  that. 
Only  let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  let  regrets  for  the 
vanished  good  harm  us  just  as  much  as  joy  in  the 
present  good  did,  and  let  us  rather,  in  humble  sub- 
mission of  will  to  His  merciful  knife,  say  to  Him, 
"  Cut  to  the  quick,  Lord,  if  only  thereby  my  fruit 
unto  Thee  may  increase." 

III. — Lastly,  we  have  here  the  branches  abiding  in 
the  vine,  and  therefore  fruitful. 

Our  Lord  deals  Avith  the  little  group  of  His  disciples 
as  incipiently  and  imperfectly,  but  really,  cleansed 
through  "  the  word  which  He  has  spoken  to  them," 
and  srives  them  the  exhortation  toAvards  that  conduct 
throudi  Avhich  the  cleansing  and  the  union  and  the 


THE  TRUE  VINE.  175 


fruitfulness  will  all  be  secured.  "  Now  ye  are  clean, 
abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot 
bear  fruit  of  itself  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more 
can  ye  except  ye  abide  in  Me." 

Union  with  Christ  is  the  condition  of  all  fruitful- 
ness. There  may  be  plenty  of  activity  and  yet 
barrenness.  Works  are  not  fruit.  We  can  bring  forth 
a  great  deal  "  of  ourselves/'  and  because  it  is  of  our- 
selves it  is  naught.  Fruit  is  possible  only  on  condition 
of  union  with  Him.  He  is  the  productive  source  of 
it  all. 

There  is  the  great  glory  and  distinctive  blessedness 
of  the  Gospel.  Other  teachers  come  to  us  and  tell  us 
how  we  ought  to  live,  and  give  us  laws,  patterns,  and 
examples,  reasons,  and  motives  for  pure  and  noble  lives. 
The  Gospel  comes  and  gives  us  life,  if  we  will  take  it, 
and  unfolds  itself  in  us  into  all  the  virtues  that  Ave 
have  to  possess.  What  is  the  use  of  giving  a  man  a 
copy  if  he  cannot  copy  it  ?  Morality  comes  and 
stands  over  the  cripple,  and  says  to  him,  "  Look  here  ! 
This  is  how  3"ou  ought  to  walk."  And  he  lies  there, 
paralyzed  and  crippled,  after  as  before  the  exhibition 
of  what  graceful  progression  is.  But  Christianity 
comes  and  bends  over  him,  and  lays  hold  of  his  hand, 
and  says,  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth, 
rise  up  and  walk."  And  his  feet  and  anlde  bones 
receive  strength,  and  "  he  leaps,  and  walks,  and 
praises  God."  Christ  gives  more  than  commandments, 
patterns,  motives  ;  He  gives  the  power  to  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly,  and  in  Him  alone  is  that  power 
to  be  found. 

Then,  note  that  our  reception  of  that  power  depends 
upon  our  own  eltbrts.     "Abide  in  Me  and  I  m  j'ou." 


176  THE  TRUE  VINE. 


Is  that  last  clause  a  commandment  as  well  as  the 
first  ?  How  can  His  abiding  in  us  be  a  duty  incumbent 
upon  us  ?  But  it  is.  And  we  might  paraphrase  the 
intention  of  this  imperative  in  its  two  halves,  by — Do 
you  take  care  that  you  abide  in  Christ,  and  that 
Christ  abides  in  you.  The  two  ideas  are  but  two  sides 
of  the  one  great  sphere  ;  they  complement  and  do  not 
contradict  each  other.  ^Ye  dwell  in  Him  as  the  part 
does  in  the  whole,  as  the  branch  does  in  the  vine, 
recipient  of  its  life  and  fruit-bearing  energy.  He 
dwells  in  us  as  the  whole  does  in  the  part,  as  the  vine 
dwells  in  the  branch,  communicating  its  energy  to 
every  part ;  or  as  the  soul  does  in  the  body,  being 
alive  equally  in  every  part,  though  it  be  sight  in  the 
eyeball,  and  hearing  in  the  ear,  and  colour  in  the 
cheek,  and  strength  in  the  hand,  and  swiftness  in  the 
foot. 

"  Abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you."  So  we  come  down  to 
very  plain  practical  exhortations.  Dear  brethren, 
suppress  yourselves,  and  empty  your  lives  of  self,  that 
the  life  of  Christ  may  come  in,  A  lock  upon  a  canal,  / 
if  it  is  empty,  will  have  its  gates  pressed  open  by  the  \> 
Avater  in  the  canal  and  will  be  filled.  Empty  the 
heart  and  Christ  will  come  in.  "  Abide  in  Him  "  by 
continual  direction  of  thought,  love,  desire  to  Him ;  by 
continual  and  reiterated  submission  of  the  will  to 
Him,  as  commanding  and  as  appointing ;  by  the  honest 
reference  to  Him  of  daily  life  and  all  petty  duties 
which  otherwise  distract  us  and  draw  us  away  from 
Him.  Then,  dwelling  in  Him  wo  shall  share  in  His 
life,  and  shall  bring  forth  fruit  to  His  praise. 

Here  is  encouragement  for  us  all.     To  all  of  us, 
sometimes,  our  lives  seem  barren  and  poor ;  and  we 


THE  TRUE  VINE.  177 

feel  as  if  Ave  had  brought  forth  no  fruit  to  perfection. 
Let  us  get  nearer  to  Him  and  He  will  see  to  the  fruit. 
Some  poor  stranded  sea-creature  on  the  beach, 
floundering  in  the  pools  vainly,  is  at  the  point  of 
death  ;  but  the  great  tide  comes,  leaping  and  rushing 
over  the  sands,  and  bears  it  away  out  into  the  middle 
deeps  for  renewed  activity  and  joyous  life.  Let  the 
flood  of  Christ's  life  bear  you  on  its  bosom,  and  you 
will  rejoice  and  expatiate  therein. 

Here  is  a  lesson  of  solemn  warning  to  professing 
Christians.  The  lofty  mysticism  of  inward  life  in 
Jesus  Christ  all  terminates  at  last  in  simple  practical 
obedience ;  and  the  fruit  is  the  test  of  the  life. 
"  Depart  from  Me,  I  never  knew  you,  ye  that  work 
iniquity." 

And  here  is  a  lesson  of  solemn  appeal  to  us  all. 
Our  only  possibility  of  bearing  any  fruit  worthy  of  our 
natures  and  of  God's  purpose  concerning  us  is  by  vital 
union  with  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  have  not  that,  there 
may  be  plenty  of  activity  and  mountains  of  work  in 
our  lives,  but  there  will  be  no  fruit.  Only  that  is  fruit 
which  pleases  God  and  is  conformed  to  His  purpose 
concerning  us,  and  all  the  rest  of  your  busy  doings  is 
no  more  the  fruit  a  man  should  bear  than  cankers  are 
roses,  or  than  oak-galls  are  acorns.  They  are  but  the 
work  of  a  creeping  grub,  and  diseased  excrescences 
that  suck  into  themselves  the  juices  that  should  swell 
the  fruit.  Open  your  hearts  to  Christ  and  let  His  life 
and  His  Spirit  come  into  you,  and  then  you  will 
"  have  your  fruit  unto  holmess,  and  the  end  ever- 
lastinec  hfe." 


12 


XVII. 

^be  Zvnc  Branches  of  tbc  ^rue  Dine. 

"  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches  :  he  that  abideth  in-  Me,  and  I 
in  Him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit ;  for  without  Me  "-' 
ye  can  do  nothing.  If  a  man  abide  not  in  Me,  he  is  cast  forth 
as  a  branch,  and  is  withered ;  and  men  gather  them  and  cast 
them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned.  If  ye  abide  in  Me, 
and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you.  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,  that  ye 
bear  much  fruit,  so  shall  ye  be  My  disciples." — John  xv.  5 — 8. 

0  wise  teacher  is  ever  afraid  of  repeating 
himself.  The  average  mind  requires 
the  reiteration  of  truth  before  it  can 
make  that  truth  its  own.  One  coat  of 
paint  is  not  enough,  it  soon  rubs  off. 
Especially  is  this  true  in  regard  of  lofty  spiritual  and 
religious  truth,  remote  from  men's  ordinary  thinkings, 
and  in  some  senses  unwelcome  to  them.  So  our  Lord, 
the  great  Teacher,  never  shrank  from  repeating  His 
lessons  when  He  saw  that  they  were  but  partially 
apprehended.  It  was  not  grievous  to  Him  to  say  the 
same  things,  because  for  them  it  was  safe.  He  broke 
the  bread  of  life  into  small  pieces,  and  fed  them  little 
and  often. 


THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.        179 


So  here,  in  tlie  verses  that  we  have  to  consider 
now,  Ave  have  the  repetition,  and  yet  not  the  mere 
repetition,  of  the  great  parable  of  the  vine,  as  teaching 
the  union  of  Christians  with  Christ,  and  their  con- 
sequent fruitfulness.  He  saw,  no  doubt,  that  the 
truth  was  but  partially  dawning  upon  His  disciples' 
minds.  Therefore,  He  said  it  all  over  again,  Avith 
deepened  meaning,  following  it  out  into  new  applica- 
tions, presenting  further  consequences,  and,  above  all, 
giving  it  a  more  sharp  and  definite  personal  applica- 
tion. 

Are  we  any  SAvifter  scholars  than  these  first  ones  ?  X 
Have  Ave  absorbed  into  our  oAvn  thinldng  this  truth 
so  thoroughly  and  constantly,  and  Avrought  it  out  in 
our  lives  so  completely,  that  Ave  do  not  need  to  be 
reminded  of  it  any  more  ?  Shall  Ave  not  be  Avise  if  Ave 
faithfully  listen  to  His  repeated  teachings  ? 

The  verses  Avhich  I  have  read  give  us  four  aspects 
of  this  great  truth  of  union  with  Jesus  Christ ;  or  of 
its  converse,  separation  from  Him.  There  is,  first,  the 
fruitfulness  of  union;  second,  the  Avithering  and 
destruction  of  separation  ;  third,  the  satisfaction  of 
desire  Avhich  comes  from  abiding  in  Christ ;  and,  lastly, 
the  great,  noble  issue  of  fruitfulness,  in  God's  glory, 
and  our  oAvn  increasing  discipleship.  Now  let  me 
touch  upon  these  briefly. 

I. — First,  then,  our  Lord  sets  forth,  Avith  no  mere 
repetition,  the  same  broad  idea  Avhich  He  has  already 
been  insisting  upon — viz.,  that  union  Avith  Him  is  sure 
to  issue  in  fruitfulness.  He  repeats  the  theme,  "  I  am 
the  Vine  "  ;  but  He  points  its  application  by  the  next 
clause,  "  Ye  are  the  branches."  That  had  been  implied 
before,  but  it  needed  to  be  said  more  definitely.     And 

12* 


180         THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE. 

are  we  not  all  too  apt  to  think  of  religious  truth  as 
swinging  in  vacuo  as  it  were,  with  no  personal  appli- 
cation to  ourselves  ?  And  is  not  the  one  thinii:  needful 
in  regard  to  the  truths  which  are  most  famihar  to  us, 
to  bring  them  into  close  connection  with  our  own 
personal  life  and  experience  ? 

"  I  am  the  Vine  "  was  a  general  truth,  with  no  clear 
personal  application.  "  Ye  are  the  branches  "  brought 
each  individual  listener  into  connection  with  it.  How 
many  people  there  are  in  this  chapel  this  morning, 
as  there  are  in  all  our  congregations,  that  listen 
pleasedly,  and,  in  a  fitful  sort  of  languid  way,  in- 
terestedly, to  the  most  glorious  and  most  solemn 
words  that  come  from  preachers'  lips,  and  never 
dream  that  what  he  has  been  saying  has  any  bear- 
ing upon  themselves  !  And  the  one  thing  that  is  most 
of  all  needed  with  people  like  some  of  you,  who  have 
been  listening  to  the  truth  all  your  days,  is  that  it 
should  be  sharpened  to  a  point,  and  the  conviction 
driven  into  you,  that  you  have  got  something  to  do 
with  this  great  message.  "  Ye  are  the  branches  "  is 
the  one  side  of  that  sharpening  and  making  definite 
of  the  truth  in  its  personal  application,  and  the  other 
side  is  "  Thou  art  the  man."  All  preaching  and 
religious  teaching  is  toothless  generality,  utterly 
useless  unless  we  can  manage  somehow  or  other  to 
force  it  through  the  wall  of  indifierence  and  vague- 
assent  to  a  general  proposition,  with  which  the  Gospel- 
hardened  hearers  surround  themselves,  and  make 
them  feel  that  the  thing  has  got  a  point,  and  that  the 
point  is  touching  their  own  consciousness.  "  Ye  are 
the  branches." 

Note  next  the  great  promise  of  fruitfuhiess.     "  He 


THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.        181 


that  abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  Him,  the  same  bringeth 
forth  much  fruit." 

I  need  not  repeat  what  I  have  said  in  former 
sermons  as  to  the  plain,  practical  duties  which  are 
included  in  that  abiding  in  Christ,  and  Christ's  con- 
sequent abiding  in  us.  It  means,  on  the  part  of  pro- 
fessedly Christian  people,  a  temper  and  tone  of  mind 
very  far  remote  from  the  noisy,  bustling  distractions 
too  common  in  our  present  Christianity.  We  want 
quiet  patient  waiting  within  the  veil.  We  want  still- 
ness of  heart,  brought  about  by  our  own  distinct  effort 
to  put  away  from  ourselves  the  strife  of  tongues  and 
the  pride  of  life.  We  want  activity,  no  doubt,  but  we 
want  a  wise  passiveness  as  its  foundation. 

Think  you,  midst  all  this  mighty  sum 

Of  things  for  ever  speaking. 
That  nothing  of  itseK  w-ill  come, 

But  we  must  still  be  seeking  I 

Get  away  into  the  "  secret  place  of  the  Most  High," 
and  rise  into  a  higher  altitude  and  atmosphere  than 
the  region  of  work  and  effort ;  and,  sitting  still  with 
Christ,  let  His  love  and  His  power  pour  themselves 
into  your  hearts.  "  Come,  My  people,  enter  thou  into 
thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee."  Get 
away  from  the  jangling  of  politics,  and  empty  con- 
troversies, and  busy  distractions  of  daily  duty.  The 
harder  our  toil  necessarily  is,  the  more  let  us  see  to 
it  that  we  keep  a  little  cell  within  the  central  life 
where  in  silence  we  hold  communion  with  the  Master. 
"  Abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you." 

That  is  the  way  to  be  fruitful,  rather  than  by  efforts 
after   individual   acts   of  conformity  and   obedience. 


182         THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE. 


howsoever  needful  and  precious  these  are.  There  is  a 
deeper  thing  wanted  than  these.  The  best  way  to 
secure  Christian  conduct  is  to  cultivate  communion 
with  Christ.  It  is  better  to  work  at  the  increase  of 
the  central  force  than  at  the  improvement  of  the  cir- 
cumferential manifestations  of  it.  Get  more  of  the 
sap  into  the  branch,  and  there  will  be  more  fruit. 
Have  more  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  and  the 
conduct  and  the  speech  will  be  more  Christlike.  We 
may  cultivate  individual  graces  at  the  expense  of  the 
harmony  and  beauty  of  the  whole  character.  We 
may  grow  them  artificially  and  they  will  be  of  little 
worth — by  imitation  of  others,  by  special  efforts  after 
special  excellence,  rather  than  by  general  effort  after 
the  central  improvement  of  our  nature  and  therefore 
of  our  life.  But  the  true  way  to  influence  conduct  is 
to  influence  the  springs  of  conduct ;  and  to  make  a 
man's  life  better,  the  true  way  is  to  make  the  man 
better.  First  of  all  be,  and  then  do ;  first  of  all 
receive,  and  then  give  forth ;  first  of  all  draw  near  to 
Christ,  and  then  there  will  be  fruit  to  His  praise. 
That  is  the  Christian  way  of  mending  men,  not 
tinkering  at  this,  that,  and  the  other  individual 
excellence,  but  grasping  the  secret  of  total  excellence 
in  communion  with  Him. 

Our  Lord  is  here  not  merely  laying  down  a  law,  but 
giving  a  promise,  and  putting  His  veracity  into  pawn 
•  for  the  fulfilment  of  it.  If  a  man  will  keep  near  i\Ie, 
He  says,  "  he  shall  bear  fruit." 

Notice  that  little  word  which  now  appears  for  the 
first  time.  "  He  shall  bear  miiclb  fruit."  We  are  not 
to  be  content  Avitli  a  little  fruit ;  a  poor  shrivelled 
bunch   of  grapes   that   arc  more  like  marbles  than 


THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.        183 

grapes,  here  and  there,  upon  the  half-nourished  stem. 
The  abiding  in  Him  will  produce  a  character  rich  in 
manifold  graces.  "  A  little  fruit "  is  not  contemplated 
by  Christ  at  all.  God  forbid  that  I  should  say  that 
there  is  no  possibility  of  union  with  Christ  and  a  httle 
fruit.  A  little  union  will  have  a  little  fruit ;  but  I 
would  have  you  notice  that  the  only  two  alternatives 
which  come  into  Christ's  view  here  are,  on  the  one 
hand  "  no  fruit,"  and  on  the  other  hand  "  much  fruit." 
And  I  would  ask  why  it  is  that  the  average  Christian 
man  of  this  generation  bears  only  a  berry  or  two  here 
and  there,  like  such  as  are  left  upon  the  vines  after 
the  vintage,  when  the  promise  is  that  if  he  will  abide 
in  Christ,  he  will  bear  much  fruit  ? 

This  verse,  setting  forth  the  fruitfulness  of  union 
with  Jesus,  ends  with  the  brief  solemn  statement  of 
the  converse — the  barrenness  of  separation — "  Apart 
from  ]\fe  (not  merely  'without,'  as  the  Authorized 
Version  has  it),  ye  can  do  nothing."  There  is  the 
condemnation  of  all  the  busy  life  of  men  which  is  not 
lived  in  union  with  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  long  row  of 
figures  which,  like  some  other  long  rows  of  figures 
added  up,  amount  just  to  Zero.  "  Without  Me, 
nothing."  All  your  busy  life,  when  you  come  to  sum 
it  up,  is  made  up  of  plus  and  minus  quantities,  which 
precisely  balance  each  other,  and  the  net  result,  unless 
you  are  in  Christ,  is  just  nothing ;  and  on  your  grave- 
stones the  only  right  epitaph  is  a  great  round  cypher. 
"  He  did  not  do  anything.  There  is  nothing  left  of 
his  toil ;  the  whole  thing  has  evaporated  and  disap- 
peared."    That  is  life  apart  from  Jesus  Christ. 

n. — And  so  note,  secondly,  the  withering  and 
destruction  following  separation  from  Him. 


184         THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE. 

Commentators  tell  us,  I  think  a  little  prosaically, 
that  when  our  Lord  spoke,  it  was  the  time  of  pruning 
the  vine  in  Palestine,  and  that,  perhaps,  as  they  went 
from  the  upper  room  to  the  garden  they  might  see  in 
the  valley,  here  and  there,  the  fires  that  the  labourers 
had  kindled  in  the  vineyards  to  burn  the  loppings  of 
the  vines.  That  does  not  matter.  It  is  of  more  con- 
sequence to  notice  how  the  solemn  thought  of  wither- 
ing and  destruction  forces  itself,  so  to  speak,  into  these 
gracious  words ;  and  how,  even  at  that  moment,  our 
Lord,  in  all  His  tenderness  and  pity,  could  not  but 
let  words  of  warning — grave,  solemn,  tragical — drop 
from  His  lips. 

This  generation  does  not  like  to  hear  them,  for  its 
conception  of  the  Gospel  is  a  thing  with  no  minor 
notes  in  it,  with  no  threatenings,  a  proclamation  of  a 
deliverance,  and  no  proclamation  of  anything  from 
which  deliverance  is  needed — which  is  a  strange  kind 
of  Gospel !  But  Jesus  Christ  could  not  speak  about 
the  blessedness  of  fruitfulness  and  the  joy  of  life  in 
Himself  without  speaking  about  its  necessary  converse, 
the  awfulness  of  separation  from  Him,  of  barrenness, 
of  withering,  and  of  destruction. 

Separation  is  withering.  Did  you  ever  see  a  haw- 
thorn bough  that  children  brinsf  home  from  the  woods, 
and  stick  in  the  grate  ;  how  in  a  day  or  two  the  little 
fresh  green  leaves  all  shrivel  up  and  the  Avhite  blossoms 
become  brown  and  smell  foul,  and  the  only  thing  to 
be  done  with  it  is  to  fling  it  into  the  fire  and  get  rid 
of  it  ?  And  so,  says  Jesus  Christ,  As  long  as  a  man 
holds  on  to  Mc  and  the  sap  comes  into  him,  he  will 
flourish,  and  as  soon  as  the  connection  is  broken,  all 
that  was  so  fair  will  begin  to  shrivel,  and  all  that  Avas 


THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.        185 

Cfreen  will  Qfet  brown  and  turn  to  clnst,  and  all  that 
Avas  blossom  will  droop,  and  there  will  bo  no  more 
fruit  any  more  for  ever.  Separate  from  Christ,  the 
individual  shrivels,  and  the  possibilities  of  fair  buds 
wither  and  set  into  no  fruit.  And  no  man  is  the  man 
he  might  have  been  unless  he  holds  by  Jesus  Christ 
and  lets  His  life  come  into  him. 

And  as  for  individuals,  so  for  communities.  The 
Church  or  the  body  of  professing  Christians  that  is 
separate  from  Jesus  Christ  dies  to  all  noble  life,  to  all 
high  activity,  to  all  Christlike  conduct,  and,  being 
dead,  rots. 

AVithering  means  destruction.  The  language  of 
our  text  is  a  description  of  what  befalls  the  actual 
branches  of  the  literal  vine  ;  but  it  is  made  a  represen- 
tation of  what  befalls  the  individuals  Avhom  these 
branches  represent  by  that  added  clause,  "  like  a 
branch."  Look  at  the  mysteriousness  of  the  language. 
"  They  gather  them,"  Who  ?  "  They  cast  them  into 
the  fire."  Who  have  that  tragic  task  of  flinging  the 
withered  branches  into  sonie  mysterious  fire  ?  All  is 
left  vague  with  unexplained  awfulness.  The  solemn 
fact  that  the  withering  of  manhood  by  separation 
from  Jesus  Christ  requires,  and  ends  in,  the  consuming 
of  the  withered,  is  all  that  we  have  here.  We  have 
to  speak  of  it  pityingly,  with  reticence,  with  terror, 
with  tenderness,  with  awe  lest  it  should  be  our  fate. 

But  oh  !  dear  brethren,  be  on  your  guard  against 
that  tendency  of  the  thinking  of  this  generation,  to 
paste  a  bit  of  blank  paper  over  all  the  threatenings  of 
the  Bible,  and  to  blot  out  from  our  consciousness 
the  grave  issues  that  it  holds  forth.  One  of  two 
things  must  befall  the  branch,  either  it  is  in  the  Vine 


186         THE  TRUE  BliAXOlIEH  OF  THE  TRUE  VIXE. 


or  it  gets  into  the  fire.     And  if  we  would  avoid  the 
fire  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  in  the  Vine. 

in. — Thirdly,  we  have  here  the  union  Avith  Christ 
as  the  condition  of  satisfied  desires. 

"  If  ye  abide  in  i\Ie,  and  My  words  abide  in  you,  ye 
shall  ask  Avhat  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 
Notice  how  our  Lord  varies  His  phraseology  here,  and 
instead  of  saying  "  I  in  you,"  says  "  My  words  in  you." 
He  is  speaking  about  prayers,  consequently  the  vari- 
ation is  natural.  In  fact,  His  abiding  in  us  is  largely 
the  abiding  of  His  words  in  us ;  or,  to  speak  more 
accurately,  the  abiding  of  His  words  in  us  is  largely 
the  means  of  His  abidiner  in  us. 

What  is  meant  by  Christ's  Avords  abiding  in  us  ? 
Something  a  great  deal  more  than  the  mere  intellectual 
acceptance  of  them.  Something  very  different  from 
reading  a  verse  of  the  Gospels  in  a  morning  before  we 
go  to  our  work,  and  forgetting  all  about  it  all  the  day 
long ;  something  very  different  from  coming  in  contact 
with  Christian  truth  on  a  Sunday,  when  somebody 
else  preaches  what  he  has  found  in  the  Bible  to  us, 
and  we  take  in  a  httle  of  it.  It  means  the  whole  of 
the  conscious  nature  of  a  man  being,  so  to  speak, 
saturated  with  Christ's  Avords  ;  His  desires.  His  under- 
standing, His  affections,  His  Avill,  all  being  steeped  in 
these  great  truths  Avhich  the  Master  spoke.  Put  a 
little  bit  of  colouring  matter  into  the  fountain  at  its 
head,  and  you  Avill  ha\^e  the  stream  dyed  doAvn  its 
course  for  ever  so  far.  See  that  Christ's  Avords  be 
lodged  in  your  inmost  selves,  by  patient  meditation 
upon  them,  by  continual  recurrence  to  them,  and  all 
the  life  Avill  be  glorified  and  flash  into  richness  of 
colouring  and  beauty  by  their  presence. 


THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.         187 

The  main  effect  of  such  abiding  of  the  Lord's  words 
with  us  which  our  Lord  touches  upon  here  is,  that  in 
such  a  case,  if  my  whole  inward  nature  is  influenced 
by  the  continual  operation  upon  it  of  the  words  of 
the  Lord,  then  my  desire  will  be  granted.  Do  not  so 
vulgarise  and  lower  the  nobleness  and  the  loftiness  of 
this  great  promise  as  to  suppose  that  it  only  means.  If 
you  remember  His  words  you  will  get  anything  you 
like.  It  means  something  a  great  deal  better  than 
that.  It  means  that  if  Christ's  Y\'ords  are  the  sub- 
stratum, so  to  speak,  of  your  wishes,  then  your  wishes 
will  harmonize  with  His  will,  and  so  "  ye  shall  ask 
what  ye  will  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

Christ  loves  us  a  great  deal  too  well  to  give  our  own 
foolish  and  selfish  wills  the  keys  of  His  treasure- 
house.  The  condition  of  our  getting  what  we  will  is 
our  willing  what  He  desires  ;  and  unless  our  prayers 
are  a  great  deal  more  the  utterance  of  the  submission 
of  our  wills  to  His  than  they  are  the  attempt  to  im- 
pose ours  upon  Him,  they  will  not  be  answered.  We 
get  our  wishes  when  our  wishes  are  moulded  by  His 
word. 

IV. — The  last  thought  that  is  here  is  that  this  union 
and  fruitfulness  lead  to  the  noble  ends  of  glorifying 
God  and  increasing  disciplcship. 

"  Herein  is  My  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear  much 
fruit."  Christ's  life  was  all  for  the  gioriiying  of  God. 
The  lives  which  are  ours  in  name,  but  being  drawn 
from  Him,  in  their  depths  are  much  rather  the  life  of 
Christ  in  us  than  our  lives — will  have  the  same  end 
and  the  same  issue. 

Ah  1  dear  brethren,  Ave  come  there  to  a  very  sharp 
test  for  us  all.     I  wonder  how  many  of  us  there  are 


188         THE  TRUE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE. 

on  whom  men  looking  think  more  loftily  of  God  and 
love  Him  better,  and  are  drawn  to  Him  by  strange 
longings.  How  many  of  us  are  there  about  whom 
people  will  say,  "There  must  be  something  in  the 
religion  that  makes  a  man  like  that "  ?  How  many  of 
us  are  there  to  look  upon  whom  suggests  to  men  that 
God,  who  can  make  such  a  man,  must  be  infinitely 
sweet  and  lovely  ?  And  yet  that  is  what  we  should  all 
be — mirrors  of  the  Divine  radiance,  on  which  some 
eyes,  that  are  too  dim  and  sore  to  bear  the  light  as  it 
streams  from  the  sun,  may  look,  and,  beholding  the 
reflection,  may  learn  to  love.  Does  God  so  shine  in 
me  that  I  lead  men  to  magnify  His  name  ?  If  I  am 
dwelling  with  Christ  it  will  be  so. 

I  shall  not  know  it.  "  Moses  wist  not  that  the  skin 
of  his  face  shone  " ;  but,  in  meek  unconsciousness  of 
the  glory  that  rays  from  us,  we  may  walk  the  earth, 
reflecting  the  light  and  making  God  known  to  our 
fellows. 

And  if  thus  we  abide  in  Him  and  bear  fruit  we 
shall  "  be,"  or  (as  the  word  might  more  accurately  be 
rendered)  we  shall  become  His  "  disciples."  The  end 
of  our  discipleship  is  never  reached  on  earth  :  we 
never  so  much  are  as  we  are  in  the  process  of 
hecoming,  His  true  followers  and  servants. 

If  we  bear  fruit  because  we  are  knit  to  Him  the 
fruit  itself  will  help  us  to  get  nearer  Him,  and  so  be 
more  His  disciples  and  more  fruitful.  Character  pro- 
duces conduct,  but  conduct  reacts  on  character,  and 
strengthens  the  impulses  from  which  it  springs.  And 
thus  our  action  as  Christian  men  and  women  will  tell 
upon  our  inward  lives  as  Christians,  and  the  more  our 
outward  conduct  is  conformed  to  the  pattern  of  Jesus 


THE  TRUE  BRANUHES  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.  189 


Christ,  the  more  shall  wc  love  Him  in  our  inmost 
hearts.  "We  ourselves  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  which  we 
ourselves  have  borne  to  Him. 

The  alternatives  are  before  us — in  Christ,  livino-  and 
fruitful ;  out  of  Christ,  barren,  and  destined  to  be 
burned.  As  the  prophet  says,  "  Will  men  take  of  the 
wood  of  the  vine  for  any  work  ? "  Vine-wood  is 
worthless,  its  only  use  is  to  bear  fruit ;  and  if  it  does 
not  do  that,  there  is  only  one  thing  to  be  done  with 
it,  and  that  is,  "  they  cast  it  into  the  fire,  and  it  is 
burned." 


XVIII. 

HbtMncj  in  %ovc. 

"  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  so  have  I  loved  you  :  continue  ye  in 

My  love. 
"If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love  ;  even  as 

I  have  kept  My  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  His  love. 
"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain 

in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full." — John  xv.  0 — 11. 

HE  last  of  these  verses  shows  that  they 
are  to  be  taken  as  a  kind  of  conclusion 
of  the  great  parable  of  the  Vine  and 
the  Branches,  for  it  looks  back  and 
declares  Christ's  purpose  in  His  pre- 
ceding utterances  J\  The  parable  proper  is  ended,  but 
the  thoughts  of  it  still  linger  in  our  Lord's  mind,  and 
echo  throucjh  His  words,  as  the  vibration  of  some 
great  bell  after  the  stroke  has  ceased.  JJlie  main  ^ 
thoughts  of  the  parable  were  these  two,  that  partici- 
pation in  Christ's  life  was  the  source  of  all  good,  and 
that  abiding  in  Him  was  the  means  of  participation 
in  His  life.^  And  these  same  thoughts,  though  modi-  m 
tied  in  their  form,  and  free  from  the  parabolical  clement,  ' 
appear  in  the  words  that  we  have  to  consider  this 
morning.     The  parable  spoke  about  abiding  in  Christ ; 


A  BIDING  IN  L  0  VE.  191 

our  text  defines  that  abiding,  and  makes  it  still  more 
tender  and^racioiis  by  substituting  for  it,  "  abiding  in 
His  love."_jTlie  parable  spoke  of  conduct  as  fruit,  the 
effortless  result  of  communion  with  Jesus.  Our  text 
speaks  of  it  with  more  emphasis  laid  on  the  human 
side,  as  "  keeping  the  commandments."  The  parable 
told  us  that  abiding  in  Christ  was  the  condition  of 
bearing  fruit.  Our  text  tells  us  the  converse,  which 
is  also  true,  that  bearing  fruit,  or  keeping  the  com- 
mandments, is  the  condition  of  abiding  in  Christ.  So 
our  Lord  takes  His  thought,  as  it  were,  and  turns  it 
round  before  us,  letting  us  see  both  sides  of  it,  and 
then  tells  us  that  He  does  all  this  for  one  purpose, 
which  in  itself  is  a  token  of  His  love,  namely,  that  our 
hearts  may  be  filled  with  perfect  and  perennial  jo)', 
a  drop  from  the  fountain  of  His  own. 

These  three  verses  have  three  words  which  may  be 
taken  as  their  key-notes — love,  obedience,  joy.  We 
shall  look  at  them  in  that  order. 

I. — First,  then,  we  have  here  the  love  in  which  it  is 
our  sweet  duty  to  abide.  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved 
Me,  so  have  I  loved  you.     Abide  ye  in  My  love." 

What  shall  we  say  about  these  mysterious  and  pro- 
found first  words  of  this  verse  ?  They  carry  us  into 
the  very  depths  of  Divinity,  and  suggest  for  us  that 
wonderful  analogy  between  the  relation  of  the  Father 
to  the  Son,  and  that  of  the  Son  to  His  disciples,  which 
appears  over  and  over  again  in  the  solemnities  of  these 
last  hours  and  words  of  Jesus.  Christ  here  claims  to 
be,  in  a  unique  and  solitary  fashion,  the  object  of  the 
Father's  love,  and  He  claims  to  be  able  to  love  like 
God.  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved  ]\Ie,  so  have  I  loved 
you."     As  deeply,  as  purely,  as  fully,  as  eternally,  and 


192  ABIDING  IN  LOVE. 


with  all  the  iinnameable  perfectnesses  which  must 
belong  to  the  Divine  affection,  does  Christ  declare 
that  He  loves  us. 

I  know  not  whether  the  majesty  and  uniqueness  of 
His  nature  stand  out  more  clearly  in  the  one  or  in  the 
other  of  these  two  assertions.  As  beloved  of  God, 
and  as  loving  like  God,  He  equally  claims  for  Himself 
a  place  which  none  other  can  till,  and  declares  that 
the  love  which  falls  on  us  from  His  pierced  and 
bleeding  heart  is  really  the  love  of  God. 

In  this  mysterious,  awful,  tender,  perfect  affection 
He  exhorts  us  to  abide.  That  comes  yet  closer  to 
our  hearts  than  the  other  phrase  of  which  it  is  the 
modification,  and  in  some  sense  the  explanation.  The 
command  to  abide  in  Him  suggests  much  that  is 
blessed,  but  to  have  all  that  mysterious  abiding  in 
Him  resolved  into  abiding  in  His  love  is  infinitely 
tenderer,  and  draws  us  still  closer  to  Himself, 
Obviously,  what  is  meant  is  not  our  continuance  in 
the  attitude  of  love  to  Him,  but  rather  our  con- 
tinuance in  the  sweet  and  sacred  atmosphere  of  His 
love  to  us.  For  the  connection  between  the  two 
halves  of  the  verse  necessarily  requires  that  the  love 
in  which  we  are  to  abide  should  be  identical  with  the 
love  which  had  been  previously  spoken  of,  and  tlmt  is 
clearly  His  love  to  us,  and  not  ours  to  Him.  But  then, 
on  the  other  hand,  whosoever  thus  abides  in  Christ's 
love  to  him  will  echo  it  back  again,  in  an  equally  con- 
tinuous love  to  Him.  So  that  the  two  thing's  flow 
together,  and  to  abide  in  the  conscious  possession  of 
Christ's  love  to  me  is  the  certain  and  inseparable 
cause  of  its  effect,  my  abiding  in  the  continual 
exercise  and  outgoing  of  my  love  to  Him. 


ABIDING  IN  LOVE.  193 

Now,  note  that  this  continuance  in  Christ's  love 
is  a  thing  in  our  power,  since  it  is  commanded. 
Although  it  is  His  atiection  of  which  my  text  prim- 
arily speaks,  I  can  so  modify  and  regulate  the  flow  of 
that  Divine  love  to  my  heart  that  it  becomes  my 
duty  to  continue  in  Christ's  love  to  me. 

What  a  quiet,  blessed  home  that  is  for  us !  The 
image,  I  suppose,  that  underlies  all  this  sweet  speech 
in  these  last  hours,  about  dwelling  in  Christ,  in  His 
joy,  in  His  words,  in  His  peace,  and  the  like,  is  that 
of  some  safe  house,  into  which,  going,  Ave  may  be 
secure.  And  what  sorrow  or  care  or  trouble  or 
temptation  would  be  able  to  reach  us  if  we  were 
folded  in  the  protection  of  that  strong  love,  and 
always  felt  that  it  was  the  fortress  into  which  we 
might  continually  resort?  They  Avho  make  their 
abode  there,  and  dwell  behind  those  firm  bastions, 
need  fear  no  foes,  but  are  lifted  high  above  them  all. 
"  Abide  in  My  love,"  for  they  who  dwell  within  the 
clefts  of  that  Rock  need  none  other  defence ;  and 
they  to  whom  the  riven  heart  of  Christ  is  the  place 
of  their  abode  are  safe,  whatsoever  befalls.  "  As  the 
Father  hath  loved  Me,  so  have  I  loved  you.  Abide 
ye  in  My  love." 

II. — Now,  note,  secondly,  the  obedience  by  which 
we  continue  in  Christ's  love. 

The  analogy,  on  Avhich  He  has  already  touched,  is 
still  continued.  "If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye 
shall  abide  in  My  love,  even  as  I  have  kept  My 
Father's  commandments  and  abide  in  His  love." 
Note  that  Christ  here  claims  for  Himself  absolute 
and  unbroken  conformity  with  the  Father's  Avill,  and 
consequent  uninterrupted  and  complete  communion 

13 


X 


194  ABIDING  IN  love: 

with  the  Father's  love.  It  is  the  utterance  of  a 
nature  conscious  of  no  sin,  of  a  humanity  that  never 
knew  one  instant's  film  of  separation,  howsoever  thin, 
howsoever  brief,  between  Him  and  the  Father.  No 
more  tremendous  words  were  ever  spoken  than  these 
quiet  ones  in  which  Jesus  Christ  declares  that  never, 
all  His  life  long,  had  there  been  the  smallest  deflec- 
tion or  want  of  conformity  between  the  Father's  will 
and  His  desires  and  doings,  and  that  never  had  there 
been  one  grain  of  dust,  as  it  were,  between  the  two 
polished  plates  which  adhered  so  closely  in  insepar- 
able union  of  harmony  and  love. 

And  then  notice,  still  further,  how  Christ  here, 
with  His  consciousness  of  perfect  obedience  and 
communion,  intercepts  our  obedience  and  diverts  it 
to  Himself.  He  does  not  say,  "  Obey  God  as  I  have 
done  and  He  will  love  you  "  ;  but  He  says,  "  Obey  Me 
as  I  obey  God  and  /  will  love  you."  Who  is  this 
that  thus  comes  between  the  child's  heart  and  the 
Father's  ?  Does  He  come  between  when  He  stands 
thus  ?  or  does  He  rather  lead  us  up  to  the  Father, 
and  to  a  share  in  His  own  filial  obedience  ? 

He  further  assures  us  that,  by  keeping  His  com- 
mandments, we  shall  continue  in  that  sweet  home  and 
safe  stronghold  of  His  love.  Of  course,  the  keeping 
of  the  commandment  is  somethinsf  more  than  mere 
outward  conformity  by  action.  It  is  the  inward 
harmony  of  will,  and  the  bowing  of  the  whole  nature. 
It  is,  in  fact,  the  same  thing  (though  considered 
under  a  different  aspect,  and  from  a  somewhat 
different  point  of  view)  as  He  has  already  been 
speaking  aljout  as  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  by  the 
bearing  of  which  the  Father  is  glorified.     And  this 


ABIDING  IN  LOVE.  195 

obedience,  the  obedience  of  the  hands  because  the 
heart  obeys,  and  does  so  because  it  loves,  the  bowing 
of  the  will  in  glad  submission  to  the  loved  and  holy- 
will  of  the  heavens — this  obedience  is  the  condition  of 
our  continuing  in  Christ's  love. 

He  will  love  us  better  the  more  we  obey  His  com- 
mandments, for  althousfh  His  tender  heart  is  charged 
with  the  love  of  pity  and  of  desire  to  help,  towards 
all,  even  the  disobedient.  He  cannot  but  feel  a  growing 
thrill  of  satisfied  and  gratified  affection  towards  us,  in 
the  measure  in  which  we  become  like  Himself  The 
love  that  wept  over  us,  when  we  were  enemies,  will 
"  rejoice  over  us  with  singing,"  when  we  are  friends. 
The  love,  that  sought  the  sheep  when  it  was  wandering, 
will  pour  itself  yet  more  tenderly  and  with  selector 
gifts  upon  it  when  it  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  the 
flock,  and  keeps  close  at  the  heels  of  the  Good 
Shepherd.  "  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall 
abide  in  My  love,"  and  will  put  nothing  between 
you  and  Me  which  will  make  it  impossible  for  the 
tender  tenderness  of  that  holy  love  to  come  to  your 
hearts. 

The  obedience  which  we  render  for  love's  sake  will 
make  us  more  capable  of  receiving,  and  more  blessedly 
conscious  of  possessing,  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
lightest  cloud  before  the  sun  will  prevent  it  from 
focussing  its  rays  to  a  burning  point  on  the  convex 
glass.  And  the  small,  thin,  fleeting,  scarcely  visible 
acts  of  self-will  that  sometimes  pass  across  our  skies 
will  prevent  our  feeling  the  warmth  of  that  love  upon 
our  shrouded  hearts.  Every  known  piece  of  rebellion 
against  Christ  will  shatter  all  true  enjoyment  of  His 
favour,   unless    we   are   hopeless   hvpocrites   or  self- 

13* 


196  ABIDING  IN  LOVE. 

deceived.  /-The  condition  of  knowing  and  feeling  the 
warmth  and  blessedness  of  Christ's  love  to  me  is  the 
honest  submission  of  my  nature  to  His  commandments. 
You  cannot  rejoice  in  Jesus  Christ  unless  you  do  His 
will.  i-You  will  have  no  real  comfort  and  blessedness 
in  your  religion  unless  it  works  itself  out  in  your  daily 
lives.  That  is  why  so  many  of  you  know  nothing,  or 
next  to  nothing,  about  the  joy  of  Christ's  felt  presence, 
because  you  do  not,  for  all  your  professions,  hourly 
and  momentarily  regulate  and  submit  your  wills  to 
His  commandments.  Do  what  He  wants,  and  do  it 
because  He  wants  it,  if  you  wish  that  His  love  should 
fill  your  hearts.  ^ 

And,  further,  we  shall  continue  in  His  love  by 
obedience,  inasmuch  as  every  emotion  which  finds  ex- 
pression in  our  daily  life  is  strengthened  by  the  fact 
that  it  is  expressed.  The  love  which  works  is  love 
which  grows,  and  the  tree  that  bears  fruit  is  the  tree 
that  is  healthy  and  increases.  So,  note  hoAv  all  these 
deepest  things  of  Christian  teaching  come  at  last  to 
a  plain  piece  of  practical  duty.  AVe  talk  about  the 
mysticism  of  John's  Gospel,  about  the  depth  of  these 
last  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ.  Yes  !  They  are  mystical, 
they  are  deep — unfathomably  deep,  thank  God  ! — but 
connected  by  the  shortest  possible  road  with  the 
plainest  possible  duties.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you. 
He  that  doeth  risfhteousness  is  ricfhteous."  It  is  no 
use  talking  about  communion  with  Jesus  Christ,  and 
abiding  in  Him,  in  possession  of  His  love,  and  all  those 
other  properly  mystical  sides  of  Christian  experience, 
unless  you  verify  them  for  yourselves  by  the  plain 
way  of  practice.  Doing  as  Christ  bids  us,  and  doing 
that  habitually  and  doing  it  gladly,  then,  and  only 


y 


ABIDING  IN  LOVE.  197 

then,  are  we  in  no  danger  of  losing  ourselves  in  the 
depths,  or  of  forgetting  that  Christ's  mission  has  for 
its  last  result  the  influencing  of  character  and  of  con- 
duct. "  If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide 
in  My  love,  even  as  I  have  kept  My  Father's  command- 
ments, and  abide  in  His  love." 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  joy  which  follows  on  this 
practical  obedience.  "  These  things  have  I  spoken 
unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain,"  or  might  he  in 
you,  "  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full." 

"My joy  might  be  in  you."  A  strange  time  to  talk 
of  His  "joy."  In  half-an-hour  He  would  be  in  Geth- 
semane,  and  we  know  what  happened  there.  Was 
Christ  a  joyful  man  ?  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows. 
But  one  of  the  old  psalms  says,  "Thou  hast  loved 
righteousness,  .  .  .  therefore  God  hath  anointed 
thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows."  The 
deep  truth  that  lies  there  is  the  same  that  He  here 
claims  as  being  fulfilled  in  His  own  experience,  that 
absolute  surrender  and  submission  in  love  to  the 
beloved  commands  of  a  loving  Father  made  Him,  in 
spite  of  sorrows,  in  spite  of  the  baptism  with  which  He 
was  baptized,  in  spite  of  all  the  burden  and  the  weight 
of  our  sins — the  most  joyful  of  men. 

This  joy  He  ofters  to  us,  a  joy  coming  from  perfect 
obedience,  a  joy  coming  from  a  surrender  of  self  at  the 
bidding  of  love,  to  a  love  that  to  us  seems  absolutely 
good  and  sweet.  There  is  no  joy  that  humanity  is 
capable  of  to  compare  for  a  moment  with  that  bright, 
warm,  continuous  sunshine  which  floods  the  soul,  that 
is  freed  from  all  the  clouds  and  mists  of  self  and  the 
darkness  of  sin.  SeK-sacrifice  at  the  bidding  o±  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  recipe  for  the  highest,  the  most  exquisite. 


ABIDING  IN  LOVE. 


the  most  godlike  gladnesses  of  which  the  human  heart 
is  capable.  Our  joy  will  remain  if  His  joy  is  ours. 
Then  our  joy  will  be,  up  to  the  measure  of  its  capacity, 
ennobled,  and  filled,  and  progressive,  advancing  ever 
towards  fuller  possession  of  His  joy,  and  deeper  calm 
of  that  pure  and  perennial  rapture,  which  makes  the 
settled  and  celestial  bliss  of  those  who  have  entered 
into  the  joy  of  their  Lord. 

Brother !  there  is  only  one  gladness  that  is  worth 
callinsf  so  -  and  that  is,  that  which  comes  to  us,  when 
we  give  ourselves  utterly  away  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
let  Him  do  with  us  as  He  will.  It  is  better  to  have  a 
joy  that  is  central  and  perennial — though  there  may 
be,  as  there  will  be,  a  surface  of  sorroAV  and  care — 
than  to  have  the  converse,  a  surface  of  joy  and 
a  black  unsympathetic  kernel  of  aching  unrest  and 
sadness.  In  one  or  other  of  these  two  states  we  all 
live.  Either  we  have  to  say,  "  as  sorrowful  yet 
always  rejoicing,"  or  we  have  to  feel,  "even  in  laughter 
the  heart  is  sorrowful,  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is 
heaviness."  Let  us  choose  for  ourselves,  and  let  us 
choose  aright,  the  gladness  which  coils  round  the 
heart,  and  endures  for  ever,  and  is  found  in  submission 
to  Jesus  Christ,  rather  than  the  superficial,  fleeting 
joys  which  are  rooted  on  earth  and  perish  with  time. 


XIX. 

Z\K  ®ucne65  of  the  Branches, 

^'This  is  My  commandment,  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved  you.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay 
down  his  life  for  his  friends." — John  xv.  12,  13. 

HE  union  between  Christ  and  His 
disciples  has  been  tcnderiy  set  forth 
in  the  parable  of  the  Vine  and  the 
branches.  We  now  turn  to  the  union 
between  the  disciples,  which  is  the 
consequence  of  their  common  union  to  the  Lord. 
The  branches  are  parts  of  one  whole,  and  necessarily 
bear  a  relation  to  each  other.  We  may  modify  for  our 
present  purpose  the  analogous  statement  of  the  Apostle 
in  reference  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  as  He  says,  "  We, 
being  many,  are  one  body,  for  we  are  all  partakers  of 
that  one  bread,"  so  we  may  say — The  branches,  being 
many,  are  one  Vine,  for  they  are  all  partakers  of  that 
one  Vine.  Of  this  union  amongst  the  branches,  which 
results  from  their  common  inherence  in  the  Vine,  the 
natural  expression  and  manifestation  is  the  mutual 
love,  which  Christ  here  gives  as  the  commandment,  and 
commends  to  us  all  by  His  own  solemn  example. 
There  are  four  things  suggested  to  me  by  the  words 


200       THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES. 

of  our  text — the  Obligation,  the  Sufficiency,  the  Pattern,, 
and  the  Motive  of  Christian  love. 

I. — First,  the  Obligation. 

The  two  ideas  of  commandment  and  love  do  not  go 
well  together.  You  cannot  pump  up  love  to  order, 
and  if  you  try  you  generally  produce  what  we  see  in 
abundance  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church,  sentimental 
hypocrisy,  hollow  and  unreal.  But  whilst  that  is  true, 
and  whilst  it  seems  strange  to  say  that  we  are  com- 
manded to  love,  still  we  can  do  a  great  deal,  directly 
and  indirectly,  for  the  cultivation  and  strengthening 
of  any  emotion.  We  can  either  cast  ourselves  into 
the  attitude  which  is  favourable  or  unfavourable  to 
it.  We  can  either  look  at  the  subjects  which  will 
create  it  or  at  those  which  will  check  it.  We  can  go 
about  with  a  sharp  eye  for  the  lovable  or  for  the 
unlovable  in  man.  We  can  either  consciously  war 
against  or  lazily  acquiesce  in  our  own  predominant 
self-absorption  and  selfishness.  And  in  these  and  in 
a  number  of  other  ways,  our  feelings  towards  other 
Christian  people  are  very  largely  under  our  own  control, 
and  therefore  are  fitting  subjects  for  commandment. 

Our  Lord  lays  down  the  obligation  which  devolves 
upon  all  Christian  people,  of  cherishing  a  kindly  and 
loving  regard  to  all  others  who  find  their  place  within 
the  charmed  circle  of  His  Church.  It  is  an  obligation 
because  He  commands  it.  He  puts  Himself  here  in 
the  position  of  the  absolute  Lawgiver,  who  has  the 
right  of  entire  and  authoritative  control  over  men's 
affections  and  hearts.  And  it  is  further  obligatory 
because  such  an  attitude  is  the  only  fitting  expression 
of  the  mutual  relation  of  Christian  men,  throu^'h 
their  common  relation  to  the  Vine.     If  there  be  the 


THE  ONENESS  OF  THE   BRANCHES.  201 


one  life-sap  circling  through  all  parts  of  the  mighty 
whole,  how  anomalous  and  how  contradictory  it  is  that 
these  parts  should  not  be  harmoniously  concordant 
among  themselves  !  However  unlike  any  two  Christian 
people  are  to  each  other  in  character,  in  culture,  in 
circumstances,  the  bond  that  knits  those  who  have  the 
same  relations  to  Jesus  Christ  one  to  another  is  far 
deeper,  far  more  real,  and  ought  to  be  far  closer,  than 
the  bond  that  knits  either  of  them  to  the  men  or 
women  to  whom  they  are  likest  in  all  these  other 
respects,  and  to  whom  they  are  unlike  in  this 
central  one.  Christian  men  !  you  are  closer  to  every 
other  Christian  man,  down  in  the  depths  of  your  being, 
however  he  may  be  differenced  from  you  by  thmgs 
that  are  very  hard  to  get  over,  than  you  are  to  the 
people  that  you  like  best  and  love  most,  if  they  do  not 
participate  with  you  in  this  common  love  to  Jesus 
Christ. 

I  dread  talking  mere  sentiment  about  this  matter, 
for  there  is  perhaps  no  part  of  Christian  duty  which 
has  been  so  vulgarized  and  pawed  over  by  mere 
unctuous  talk,  as  that  of  the  fellowship  that  should 
subsist  between  all  Christians.  But  I  have  one  plain 
question  to  put — Does  anybody  believe  that  the  present 
condition  of  Christendom,  and  the  relations  to  one 
another  even  of  good  Christian  people  in  the  various 
churches  and  communions  of  our  oAvn  and  of  other 
lands,  is  the  sort  of  tiling  that  Jesus  Christ  meant,  or 
is  anything  like  a  fair  and  adequate  representation  of 
the  deep,  essential  unity  that  knits  us  all  together  ? 

We  need  far  more  the  realizing  of  the  fact  that  our 
emotions  towards  our  brother  Christians  are  not 
matters  in  which  our  own  inclinations  may  have  theh 


:202       THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES. 

■way,  but  that  there  is  a  simple  commandment  given  to 
us,  and  that  we  are  bound  to  cherish  love  to  every  man 
that  loves  Jesus  Christ.  Never  mind  thouu-h  he  does 
not  hold  your  theology  ;  never  mind  though  he  be 
very  ignorant  and  narrow  as  compared  with  you ; 
never  mind  though  your  outlook  of  the  world  may  be 
entirely  unlike  his.  Never  mind  though  you  be  a  rich 
man  and  he  a  poor  one,  or  you  a  poor  one  and  he  rich, 
which  is  just  as  hard  to  get  over.  Let  all  these 
secondary  grounds  of  union  and  of  separation  be  rele- 
gated to  their  proper  subordinate  place  ;  and  let  us 
recognize  this,  that  the  children  of  one  Father  are 
brethren.  And  do  not  let  it  be  possible  that  it  shall 
be  said,  as  so  often  has  been  said,  and  said  truly,  that 
"  brethren "  in  the  Church  means  a  great  deal  less 
than  brothers  in  the  world.  Lift  your  eyes,  beyond 
the  walls  of  the  little  sheepfold  in  Avhich  you  live,  and 
hearken  to  the  bleating  of  the  flocks  away  out  yonder, 
and  feel — "  Other  sheep  He  has  which  are  not  of  this 
fold";  and  recognize  the  solemn  obligation  of  the 
commandment  of  love, 

IL — Note,  secondly,  the  Sufficiency  of  love. 

Our  Lord  has  been  speaking  in  a  former  verse  about 
the  keeping  of  His  commandiuf«/s.  Now  He  gathers 
them  all  up  into  one.  "  This  is  My  command^no^i. 
That  ye  love  one  another."  All  duties  to  our  fellows, 
and  all  duties  to  our  brethren,  are  summed  up  in,  or 
resolved  into,  this  one  germinal,  encyclopa-diacal,  all- 
comprehensive  simplification  of  duty,  into  the  one 
word  "  love." 

Where  the  heart  is  right  the  conduct  will  be  right. 
Love  will  soften  the  tones,  will  instinctively  teach 
what  we  ought  to  be  and  do  ;    will  take  the  bitterness 


THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES.  203 

off  opposition  and  diversity,  will  make  even  rebuke, 
when  needful,  only  a  form  of  expressing  itself.  It  the 
heart  be  right  all  else  will  be  right ;  and  if  there  be  a 
deficiency  of  love  nothing  will  be  right.  You  cannot 
help  anybody  except  on  condition  of  having  an  honest, 
beneficent,  and  benevolent  regard  towards  him.  You 
cannot  do  any  man  in  the  world  any  good  unless  there 
is  a  shoot  of  love  in  your  heart  towards  him.  You 
may  pitch  him  benefits,  and  you  will  neither  get  nor 
deserve  thanks  for  them ;  you  may  try  to  teach  him, 
and  your  words  will  be  hopeless  and  profitless.  The 
one  thing  that  is  required  to  bind  Christian  men 
together  is  this  common  affection.  That  being  there, 
everything  will  come.  It  is  the  germ  out  of  which  all 
is  developed.  As  we  read  in  that  great  chapter  to  the 
Corinthians — the  lyric  praise  of  Charity — all  kinds  of 
blessing-  and  sweetness  and  gladness  come  out  of  this. 
It  is  the  central  force  which,  being  present,  secures 
that  all  shall  be  right,  which,  being  absent,  secures 
that  all  shall  be  wronsf. 

And  is  it  not  beautiful  to  see  how  Jesus  Christ, 
leaving  the  little  flock  of  His  followers  in  the  world, 
gave  them  no  other  instruction  for  their  mutual  rela- 
tionship ?  He  did  not  talk  to  them  about  institutions 
and  organizations,  about  orders  of  the  ministry  and 
sacraments,  or  Church  polity  and  the  like.  He  knew 
that  all  that  would  come.  His  one  commandment 
was,  "  Love  one  another,"  and  that  will  make  you  wise. 
Love  one  another,  and  you  will  shape  yourselves  into 
the  right  forms.  He  knew  that  they  needed  no  exhor- 
tations such  as  ecclesiastics  would  have  put  in  the 
foreground.  It  was  not  Avorth  while  to  talk  to  them 
about  organizations  and  oflicers.     That  would  come  to 


204       THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BLANCHES. 

them  at  the  right  time  and  in  the  right  way.  The 
one  thing  needful  was  that  they  should  be  knit 
together  as  true  participators  of  His  life.  Love  was 
sufficient  as  their  law  and  as  their  guide. 

III. — Note,  further,  the  Pattern  of  love. 

"  As  I  have  loved  you.  Greater  love  hath  no  man 
than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends." 
Christ  sets  Himself  forward,  then,  here,  and  in  this 
aspect,  as  He  does  in  all  aspects  of  human  conduct 
and  character,  as  being  the  realized  ideal  of  them  all. 
And  although  the  thought  is  a  digression  from  my 
present  purpose,  I  cannot  but  pause  for  a  moment  to 
reflect  upon  the  strangeness  of  a  man  thus  calmly 
saying  to  the  whole  world,  "  I  am  the  embodiment  of 
all  that  love  ought  to  be.  You  cannot  get  beyond  ]\Ie, 
nor  have  anything  more  pure,  more  deep,  more  self- 
sacrificing,  more  perfect,  than  the  love  which  I  have 
borne  to  you." 

But,  passing  that,  the  pattern  that  He  proposes  for 
us  is  even  more  august  than  appears  at  first  sight. 
For,  if  you  remember,  a  verse  or  two  before  our  Lord 
had  said,  "  As  the  Father  hath  loved  Me  so  I  have  loved 
you."  Now  He  says,  "  Love  one  another  as  I  have 
loved  you."  There  stand  the  three,  as  it  were,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  the  disciple.  The  Son  in  the 
midst  receives  and  transmits  the  Father's  love  to  the 
disciple,  and  the  disciple  is  to  love  his  fellows,  in  some 
deep  and  august  sense,  as  the  Father  loved  the 
Son.  The  divinest  thing  in  God,  and  that  in  which 
men  can  be  like  God,  is  love.  In  all  our  other  attitudes 
to  Him  we  rather  correspond  than  copy.  His  fulness 
is  met  by  our  emptiness,  His  giving  by  our  recipiency, 
His   faithfulness  by  our  faith,   His  command  by  our 


THE  ONENESS,  OF  THE  BRANCHES.  205 

obedience,  His  light  by  our  eye.  But  here  it  is  not  a 
case  of  correspondence  only,  but  of  similarity.  My 
faith  answers  God's  gift  to  me,  but  my  love  is  like 
God's  love.  "  Be  ye,  therefore,  imitators  of  God  as 
beloved  children  " ;  and  having  received  that  love  on 
to  your  hearts  ray  it  out,  "  and  walk  in  love  as  God  also 
hath  loved  us." 

But  then  our  Lord  here,  in  a  very  wonderful  manner, 
sets  forth  the  very  central  point  of  His  work,  even 
His  death  upon  the  Cross  for  us,  as  being  the  pattern 
to  which  our  poor  aftection  ought  to  aspire,  and  after 
which  it  must  tend  to  be  conformed.  I  need  not 
remind  you,  I  suppose,  that  our  Lord  here  is  not 
speaking  of  the  propitiatory  character  of  His  death, 
nor  of  the  issues  which  depend  upon  it,  and  upon 
it  alone — viz.,  the  redemption  and  salvation  of  the 
world.  He  is  not  speaking,  either,  of  the  peculiar 
and  unique  sense  in  which  He  lays  down  His  life 
/or  us,  His  friends  and  brethren,  as  none  other  can 
do.  He  is  speaking  about  it  simply  in  its  aspect 
of  being  a  voluntary  surrender,  at  the  bidding  of 
love,  for  the  good  of  those  whom  He  loved,  and 
that.  He  tells  us — that,  and  nothing  else,  is  the 
true  pattern  and  model,  towards  which  all  our  love 
is  bound  to  tend  and  to  aspire.  That  is  to  say,  the 
heart  of  the  love  that  He  commands  is  self-sacrifice, 
reaching  to  death  if  death  be  needful.  And  no  man 
loves  as  Christ  would  have  him  love  who  does  not  bear 
in  his  heart  affection  which  has  so  conquered  selfishness 
that,  if  need  be,  he  is  ready  to  die. 

The  expression  of  Christian  life  is  not  to  be  found 
in  honeyed  words,  or  the  indolent  indulgence  in 
benevolent  emotion,  but  in  self-sacrifice,  modelled  after 


206  THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES. 


that  of  Christ's  sacrificial  death,   which  is    imitable 
by  us. 

Brethren,  it  is  a  solemn  obligation,  Avhich  may  well 
make  us  tremble,  that  is  laid  on  us  in  these  words, 
"  As  I  have  loved  you."  Calvary  was  less  than  twenty- 
four  hours  off,  and  He  says  to  us,  "  Tltat  is  your 
pattern ! "  Contrast  our  love  at  its  height  with  His — 
a  drop  to  an  ocean,  a  poor  little  flickering  rushlight 
held  up  beside  the  sun.  My  love,  at  its  best,  has  so 
far  conquered  my  selfishness  that  now  and  then  I  am 
ready  to  suffer  a  little  inconvenience,  to  sacrifice  a 
little  leisure,  to  give  away  a  little  money,  to  spend  a 
little  dribble  of  sympathy  upon  the  people  who  are 
its  objects.  Christ's  love  nailed  Him  to  the  cross, 
and  led  Him  down  from  the  throne,  and  shut  for  a 
time  the  gates  of  the  gior}^  behind  Him.  And  He 
says,  "  That  is  your  pattern  !  " 

Oh !  let  us  bow  down  and  confess  how  His  Word, 
which  commands  us,  puts  us  to  shame,  when  we  think 
of  how  miserably  we  have  obeyed. 

Remember,  too,  that  the  restriction  which  here 
seems  to  be  cast  around  the  floAv  of  His  love  is  not  a 
restriction  in  reality,  but  rather  a  deepening  of  it.  He 
says,  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  But  evidently  He 
calls  them  so  from  His  point  of  view  and  as  He  sees 
them,  not  from  their  point  of  view,  as  they  see  Him — 
that  is  to  say.  He  means  by  "  friends  "  not  those  who 
love  Him,  but  those  whom  He  loves.  The  "  friends  " 
for  whom  He  dies  are  the  same  persons  as  the  Apostle, 
in  his  sweet  variation  upon  the  words  of  my  text,  has 
called  by  the  opposite  name,  when  he  saj's  that  He 
died  for  His  "  enemies." 


THE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES.  207 

There  is  an  old  wild  ballad  that  tells  of  how  a  knio-ht 
found,  coiling  round  a  tree  in  a  dismal  forest,  a  loathly 
dragon  breathing  out  poison ;  and  how,  undeterred  by 
its  hideousncss  and  foulness,  he  cast  his  arms  round 
it  and  kissed  it  on  the  mouth.  Three  times  he  did  it 
undisgusted,  and  at  the  third  the  shape  changed  mto 
a  fair  lady,  and  he  won  his  bride.  Christ  "  kisses  Avith 
the  kisses  of  His  mouth  "  His  enemies,  and  makes  them 
His  friends  because  He  loves  them.  "  If  He  had  never 
died  for  His  enemies,"  says  one  of  the  old  fathers,  "He 
would  never  have  possessed  His  friends."  And  so  He 
teaches  us,  in  what  seems  to  be  this  restriction  of  the 
purpose  of  His  death  and  the  sweep  of  His  love,  that 
the  way  by  which  we  are  to  meet  even  alienation  and 
hostility  is  by  pouring  upon  it  the  treasures  of  an 
unselfish,  self-sacrificing  affection  which  Avill  conquer 
at  the  last. 

Christ's  death  is  the  pattern  for  our  lives  as  Avell  as 
the  hope  of  our  hearts. 

IV. — Lastly,  Ave  have  here  by  implication,  though 
not  b}''  direct  statement,  the  motive  of  the  love. 

Surely  that,  too,  is  contained  in  the  Avords,  "  As  I 
have  loved  you."  Christ's  commandment  of  loA^e 
is  a  ncAA'  commandment,  not  so  much  because  it 
is  a  revelation  of  a  ncAv  duty,  though  it  is  the 
casting  of  an  old  duty  into  ncAv  prominence,  as, 
because  it  not  merely  a  revelation  of  an  obligation, 
but  the  communication  of  a  poAver  to  fulfil  it. 
The  novelty  of  Christian  morality  lies  here,  that 
in  its  laAv  there  is  a  self-fulfillinof  force.  We  haA'e 
not  to  look  to  one  place  for  the  knoAvledge  of 
our  duty,  and  somcAvhere  else  for  the  strength 
to    do   it,    but    both    are    s^iA'cn    to   us    in    the   one 


^08       TUB  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES. 

thing,  the  gift  of  the  dying  Christ  and  His  immortal 
love. 

That  love,  received  into  our  hearts,  will  conquer, 
and  it  alone  will  conquer,  our  selfishness.  That  love, 
received  into  our  hearts,  will  mould,  and  it  alone 
will  mould,  them  into  its  own  likeness.  That  love, 
received  into  our  hearts,  will  knit,  and  it  alone 
will  knit,  all  those  who  participate  in  it  into  a  com- 
mon bond,  sweet,  deep,  sacred,  and  all  victorious. 

And  so,  brethren,  if  we  want  to  know  the  blessed- 
ness and  the  sweetness  of  victory  over  these  miserable 
selfish  hearts  of  ours,  and  to  walk  in  the  liberty  of 
love,  we  can  only  get  it  by  keeping  close  to  Jesus 
Christ.  In  any  circle,  the  nearer  the  points  of  the 
circumference  are  to  the  centre,  the  closer  they  will 
necessarily  be  to  one  another.  As  we  draw  nearer, 
each  for  ourselves,  to  the  Master,  we  shall  feel  that 
we  have  approximated  to  all  those  who  stand  round 
the  same  centre,  and  draw  from  it  the  same  life.  In 
the'  early  spring,  when  the  wheat  is  green  and  young, 
and  scarcely  appears  above  the  ground,  it  comes  up  in 
the  lines  in  which  it  Avas  sown,  parted  from  one 
another  and  distinctly  showing  their  separation  and 
the  furrows.  But,  when  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  waves 
on  the  autumn  plain,  all  the  lines  and  separations  have 
disappeared,  and  there  is  one  unbroken  tract  of 
sunny  fruitfulness.  And  so  when  the  life  in  Christ 
is  low  and  feeble.  His  servants  may  be  separated  and 
drawn  up  in  rigid  lines  of  denominations,  and 
churches,  and  sects  ;  but  as  they  grow  the  lines  dis- 
appear. If  to  the  churclies  of  England  to-day  there 
came  a  sudden  accession  of  knowledge  of  Christ,  and 
of  union  with   Him,   the  first  thing    that  would  go 


TEE  ONENESS  OF  THE  BRANCHES.  209 


would  be  the  wretched  barriers  that  separate  us  from 
one  another.  For  if  we  have  the  hfe  of  Christ  in  any 
adequate  measure  in  ourselves,  we  shall  certainly  have 
gro^vn  up  above  the  fences  behind  which  we  began  to 
grow,  and  shall  be  able  to  reach  out  to  all  that  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  feel  with  thankfulness 
that  we  are  one  in  Him. 


14 


XX. 


Cbri^rs  jfrient)5» 


Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you.  Hence- 
forth I  call  you  not  servants  ;  for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what 
his  lord  doeth  :  but  I  have  called  you  friends  ;  f Or  all  things 
that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you. 
Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and  ordained 
you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your 
fruit  should  remain  :  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father 
in  My  name.  He  may  give  it  you.  These  things  I  command  you 
that  ye  love  one  another." — John  xv.  14 — 17. 


WONDERFUL  word  has  just  dropped 
from  the  JMaster's  hps,  when  He  spoke 
of  laying  down  His  Hfe  for  His  friends. 
He  Hngers  on  it  as  if  the  idea  con- 
veyed was  too  great  and  sweet  at  once 
to  be  taken  in,  and  with  soothing  reiteration  He  assures 
the  Uttlc  group  that  thc}^  even  they,  are  His  friends. 

I  have  ventured  to  take  so  many  verses  for  con- 
sideration now,  although  each  of  them,  and  each 
clause  of  them,  might  afford  ample  material  for  a 
discourse,  because  they  have  one  common  theme. 
They  are  a  description  of  what  Christ's  friends  are  to 
Him,  of  what  He  is  to  them,  and  of  what  they  should 
be  to  one  another.     So  they  are  a  little  picture,  in  the 


CHRIST S  FRIENDS.  211 


sweetest  form,  of    the   reality,  the   blessedness,   the 
obligations  of  Christ's  friendship. 

I. — Notice  what  Christ's  friends  do  for  Him. 
"  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command 
you."  In  the  former  verse,  "  friends  "  means  chiefly 
those  Avhom  He  loved.  Here  it  means  mainly  those 
who  love  Him.  They  love  Him  because  He  loves  them, 
of  course  ;  and  the  two  sides  of  the  one  thought 
cannot  be  parted.  But  still  in  this  verse  the  idea  of 
friendship  to  Christ  is  looked  at  from  the  human  side ; 
and  He  tells  His  disciples  that  they  are  His  lovers  as 
well  as  beloved  of  Him,  on  condition  of  their  doino- 
whatsoever  He  commands  them. 

He  lingers,  as  I  said,  on  the  idea  itself.  As  if  He 
would  meet  the  doubts  arising  from  the  sense  of 
unworthiness,  and  from  some  dim  perception  of  how 
He  towers  above  them,  and  their  limitations,  He 
reiterates,  "  Wonderful  as  it  is,  you  poor  men,  half- 
intelligent  lovers  of  Mine,  you  are  My  friends,  beloved 
of  Me,  and  loving  Me,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command 
you." 

How  wonderful  that  stooping  love  of  His  is,  which 
•condescends  to  array  itself  in  the  garments  of  ours  ! 
Every  form  of  human  love  Christ  lays  His  hand  upon, 
and  claims  that  He  Himself  exercises  it  in  a  transcend- 
ent degree.  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father 
which  is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother  and  sister 
and  mother."  That  which  is  even  sacreder,  the  purest 
and  most  complete  union  that  humanity  is  capable  of — 
that,  too,  He  consecrates  ;  for  even  it,  sacred  as  it  is, 
is  capable  of  a  higher  consecration,  and,  sweet  as  it  is, 
receives  a  new  sweetness  when  we  think  of  the  Bride, 
the  Lamb's  wife,  and  remember  the  parables  in  which 

14* 


212  CHRIST'S  FRIENDS. 


He  speaks  of  the  Marriage  Supper  of  the  Great  King, 
and  sets  forth  Himself  as  the  Husband  of  humanity. 
And,  passing  from  tliat  Holy  of  Holies  out  into  this 
outer  court,  He  lays  His  hand,  too,  on  that  more  com- 
mon and  familiar,  and  yet  precious  and  sacred,  thing 
— the  bond  of  friendship.  The  Prince  makes  a  friend 
of  the  beggar. 

Even  if  we  do  not  think  more  loftily  of  Jesus  Christ 
than  do  those  who  regard  Him  simply  as  the  per- 
fection of  humanity,  is  it  not  beautiful  and  wonderful 
that  He  should  look  with  such  eyes  of  beaming  love 
on  that  handful  of  poor,  ignorant  fishermen,  who  knew 
Him  so  dimly,  and  say  :  "  I  pass  by  all  the  wise  and 
the  mighty,  all  the  lofty  and  noble,  and  My  heart 
clings  to  you  poor,  insignificant  people  "  ?  He  stoops 
to  make  them  His  friends,  and  there  are  none  so  Ioav 
but  that  they  may  be  His. 

This  friendship  lasts  to-day.  A  peculiarity  of  Chris- 
tianity is  the  strong  personal  tie  of  real  love  and 
intimacy,  which  will  bind  men,  to  the  end  of  time,  to 
this  Man  that  died  nineteen  hundred  years  ago. 
We  look  back  into  the] wastes  of  antiquity:  mighty 
names  rise  there  that  Ave  reverence ;  there  are  great 
teachers  from  Avhom  we  have  learned,  and  to  whom, 
after  a  fashion,  Ave  are  grateful.  But  Avhat  a  gulf  there 
is  betAveen  us  and  the  best  and  noblest  of  them  !  But 
here  is  a  dead  Man,  Avho  to-day  is  the  object  of  pas- 
sionate attachment  and  a  love  deeper  than  life  to 
millions  of  ]5Cople,  and  Avill  be  till  the  end  of  time. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Avhole  history  of  the  Avorld  the 
least  like  that  strange  bond  Avhich  ties  you  and  me  to 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  paradox  of  the  Apostle  remains 
a  unique  fact  in  the  experience  of  humanity  :    "  Jesus 


CHRIST S  FFdENDS.  213 


Christ,  whom,  having  not  seen,  ye  love."  We  stretch 
out  our  hands  across  the  waste,  silent  centuries,  and 
there,  amidst  the  mists  of  oblivion,  thickening  round 
all  other  figures  in  the  past,  we  touch  the  warm, 
throbbing  heart  of  our  Friend,  wdio  lives  for  ever,  and 
for  ever  is  near  us.  We  here,  nearly  two  millen- 
niums after  the  words  fell  on  the  nightly  air  on  the 
road  to  Gethsemane,  have  them  coming  direct  to  our 
hearts.  A  perpetual  bond  unites  men  with  Christ  to- 
day ;  and  for  us,  as  really  as  in  that  long-past  Paschal 
night,  is  it  true,  "  Ye  are  My  friends." 

There  are  no  limitations  in  that  friendship,  no  mis- 
constructions in  that  heart,  no  alienation  possible,  no 
change  to  be  feared.  There  is  absolute  rest  for  us 
there.  Why  should  I  be  solitary  if  Jesus  Christ  is  my 
Friend  ?  Why  should  I  fear  if  He  walks  by  my  side  ? 
Why  should  anything  be  burdensome  if  He  lays  it 
upon  me,  and  helps  me  to  bear  it  ?  What  is  there  in 
life  that  cannot  be  faced  and  borne — aye,  and  conquered 
— if  we  have  Him,  as  we  all  may  have  Him,  for  the 
Friend  and  the  Home  of  our  hearts  ? 

But  notice  the  condition,  "  If  ye  do  what  I  command 
you."  Note  the  singular  blending  of  friendship  and 
command,  involving  on  our  parts  the  cultivation  of 
the  two  tilings  which  are  not  incompatible,  absolute 
submission  and  closest  friendship.  He  commands 
though  He  is  Friend;  though  He  commands  He  is 
Friend.  The  conditions  that  He  lays  down  are  the 
same  which  have  already  occupied  our  attention  in 
former  sermons  of  this  series,  and  so  may  be  touched 
very  lightly.  "  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  the 
things  which  I  command  you,"  may  either  corre- 
spond with  His  former  saying,  "  If  a  man  love  Me  he 


214  CHRISrS  FRIENDS. 


will  keep  My  commandments,"  or  with  His  later  one, 
which  immediately  precedes  it,  "If  ye  keep  My 
commandments  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love."  For  this 
is  the  relationship  between  love  and  obedience,  in 
regard  to  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  love  is  the  parent  of 
the  obedience,  and  the  obedience  is  the  efiiard  and 
guarantee  of  the  love.  They  that  love  will  obey,  they 
who  obey  will  strengthen  the  love  by  acting  according 
to  its  dictates,  and  will  be  in  a  condition  to  feel  and 
realize  more  the  warmth  of  the  ra3's  that  stream  down 
upon  them,  and  to  send  back  more  answering  obedience 
from  their  hearts.  Not  in  mere  emotion,  not  in  mere 
verbal  expression,  not  in  mere  selfish  realizing  of  the 
blessings  of  His  friendship,  and  not  in  mere  mechanical, 
external  acts  of  conformity,  but  in  the  flowing  down 
and  melting  of  the  hard  and  obstinate  iron  will,  at 
the  warmth  of  His  great  love,  is  our  love  made  perfect. 
Obedience,  which  is  the  child  and  the  preserver  of 
love,  is  something  far  deeper  than  the  mere  outward 
conformity  with  the  externally  apprehended  command- 
ments. To  submit  is  the  expression  of  love,  and  love 
is  deepened  by  submission. 

II. — Secondly,  note  what  Christ  does  for  His  friends. 

"  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,  for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth."  The  slave  may 
see  what  his  lord  does,  but  he  does  not  know  his 
purpose  in  his  acts.  "  Theirs  not  to  reason  why."  In 
so  far  as  the  relation  of  master  and  servant  goes,  and 
still  more  in  that  of  owner  and  slave,  there  is  simply 
command  on  the  one  side  and  unintelligent  obedience 
on  the  other.  The  command  needs  no  cx2)lanation,  and 
if  the  servant  is  in  his  master's  confidence  he  is  more 
than  a  servant.     But,  says  Christ,  "  I  have  called  3-ou 


CHRIST S  FRIENDS.  215 

friends  "  ;  and  He  called  them  so  before  He  now  named 
them  so.  He  called  them  so  in  act,  and  He  points  to 
all  His  past  relationship,  and  especially  to  the  heart- 
outpourings  of  the  upper  room,  as  the  proof  that  He 
has  called  them  His  friends,  by  the  fact  that  whatsoever 
He  had  heard  of  the  Father  He  had  made  known  to 
them. 

Jesus  Christ,  then,  recognizes  the  obligation  of 
absolute  frankness,  and  He  will  tell  His  friends 
everything  that  He  can.  When  He  tells  them  what 
He  can,  the  voice  of  the  Father  speaks  through  the 
Son.  Every  one  of  Christ's  friends  stands  nearer  to 
God  than  did  Moses  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle, 
when  the  wondering  camp  beheld  him  face  to  face 
with  the  blaze  of  the  Shekinah  glory,  and  dimly  heard 
the  thunderous  utterances  of  the  Godhead  as  He 
spake  to  him  as  a  man  speaks  to  his  friend.  That  was 
surface-speech  compared  with  the  Divine  depth  and 
fulness  of  the  communications  which  Jesus  Christ 
deems  Himself  bound,  and  assumes  Himself  able,  to 
make  to  them  who  love  Him  and  whom  He  loves. 

Of  course,  to  Christ's  frankness  there  are  limits. 
He  will  not  pour  out  His  treasures  into  vessels  that 
Avill  spill  them;  and,  as  He  Himself  saj^s  in  the 
subsequent  part  of  this  great  discourse,  "I  have 
many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  you  are  not  able  to 
carry  them  now."  His  last  word  was,  "  I  have  declared 
Thy  name  unto  My  brethren,  and  ivill  declare  it."  And 
though  here  He  speaks  as  if  His  communication  was 
perfect,  we  are  to  remember  that  it  was  necessarily 
conditioned  by  the  power  of  reception  on  the  part  of 
the  hearers,  and  that  there  was  much  yet  to  be  revealed 
of  Avhat  God  had  whispered  to  Him,  ere  these  men, 


216  CHRIST'S  FPdENDS. 


that     clustered   round    Him,    could   understand  the 
message. 

That  frank  speech  is  continued  to-day.  Jesus 
Christ  recognizes  the  obligation  that  binds  Him  to 
impart  to  each  of  us  all  that  each  of  us  is  capable  of 
receiving  in  our  inmost  spirits.  By  the  light  which 
He  sheds  on  the  Word,  by  many  a  suggestion  through 
human  lips,  by  many  a  blessed  thought  rising  quietly 
within  our  hearts,  and  bearinsf  the  token  that  it  comes 
from  a  sacreder  source  than  our  poor,  blundering 
minds.  He  still  speaks  to  us,  His  friends. 

Ought  not  that  thought  of  the  utter  frankness  of 
Jesus  make  us,  for  one  thing,  very  patient,  intellectu- 
ally and  spiritually,  of  the  gaps  that  are  left  in  His 
communications  and  in  our  knowledge  ?  There  are 
so  many  things  that  we  sometimes  think  we  should 
like  to  know,  things  about  that  dark  future  where 
some  of  our  hearts  live  so  constantly,  things  about 
the  depths  of  His  nature  and  the  Divine  character, 
things  about  the  relation  between  God's  love  and 
God's  righteousness,  things  about  the  meanino:  of  all 
this  dreadful  mystery  in  which  we  grope  our  way. 
These  and  a  hundred  others  suggest  to  us  that  it  would 
have  been  so  easy  for  Him  to  have  lifted  a  little  corner 
of  the  veil,  and  let  a  little  more  of  the  light  shine  out. 
He  holds  all  in  His  hand.  AVhy  does  He  thus  open 
one  finger  instead  of  the  whole  palm  ?  Because  He 
loves.  A  friend  exercises  the  right  of  reticence  as 
well  as  the  prerogative  of  speech.  And  for  all  the 
gaps  that  are  left,  let  us  bow  quietly  and  beHeve 
that  if  it  had  been  better  for  us  He  would  have  spoken. 
"  If  it  were  not  so  I  would  have  told  you."  "  Trust 
Me  !  I  tell  you  all  that  it  is  good  for  you  to  receive." 


CHRIST S  FRIENDS.  217 


And  that  frankness  may  well  teach  us  another 
lesson — viz.,  the  obligation  of  keeping  our  ears  open 
and  our  hearts  prepared  to  receive  the  speech  that 
comes  from  Him.  Ah !  brother !  many  a  message 
from  your  Lord  flits  past  you,  like  the  idle  wind 
through  an  archway,  because  you  are  not  listening  for 
His  voice.  If  we  kept  down  the  noise  of  that  "  house- 
hold jar  within " ;  if  we  silenced  passion,  ambition, 
seltishness,  worldliness ;  if  we  withdrew  ourselves,  as 
we  ought  to  do,  from  the  Babel  of  this  world,  and  hid 
ourselves  in  His  pavilion  from  the  strife  of  tongues ;  if 
we  took  less  of  our  reliijion  out  of  books  and  from 
other  people,  and  were  more  accustomed  to  "  dwell  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  and  to  say,  "Speak, 
Friend,  for  Thy  Friend  heareth,"  we  should  more  often 
understand  how  real  to-day  is  the  voice  of  Christ  to 
them  that  love  Him. 

Such  rebounds  the  inward  ear 

Catches  often  from  afar  ; 
Listen  !  prize  them,  hold  them  dear, 

For  of  God — of  God  ! — they  are. 

III. — Thirdly,  notice  how  Christ's  friends  come  to 
be  so,  and  why  they  are  so. 

"Ye  have  not  chosen,"  &c.  (verse  1(3). 

Our  Lord  refers  hero,  no  doubt,  primarily  to  the 
little  group  of  the  Apostles  ;  the  choice  and  ordaining 
as  well  as  "the  fruit  that  abides,"  pointing,  in  the 
first  place,  to  their  apostolic  office,  and  to  the  results 
of  their  apostolic  labours.  But  we  must  widen  out 
the  words  a  great  deal  more  than  that. 

In  all  the  cases  of  friendship  between  Christ  and 
men,  the  origination  and  initiation  come  from  Him. 
'''  We  love  Him  because  He  tirst  loved  us."     He  has 


218  CHRIST S  FRIENDS. 

told  lis  liow,  in  His  Divine  alchemj^,  He  changes  by 
the  dropping  of  His  blood  our  enmity  into  friendship. 
In  the  previous  verse  He  has  said,  "  Greater  love  hath 
no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for 
his  friends."  And,  as  I  remarked  in  my  last  sermon, 
the  friends  here  are  the  same  as  "  the  enemies  "  for 
whom  the  Apostles  tell  us  that  Christ  laid  down  His 
life.  Since  He  has  thus  by  the  blood  of  the  Cross 
changed  men's  enmity  into  friendship,  it  is  true 
universally  that  the  amity  between  us  and  Christ 
comes  entirely  from  Him, 

But  there  is  more  than  that  in  the  words.  I  do 
not  suppose  that  any  man,  whatever  his  theological 
notions  and  standpoint  may  be,  who  has  felt  the  love 
of  Christ  in  his  own  heart  in  however  feeble  a  measure, 
but  will  say,  as  the  Apostle  said,  "  I  was  apprehended 
of  Christ."  It  is  because  He  lays  His  seeking  and 
drawing  hand  upon  us  that  we  ever  come  to  love 
Him.  And  it  is  true  that  His  choice  of  us  pre- 
cedes our  choice  of  Him,  and  that  the  Shepherd 
always  comes  to  seek  the  sheep  that  is  lost  in  the 
wilderness. 

This,  then,  is  how  we  come  to  be  His  friends ; 
because,  when  we  were  enemies.  He  loved  us,  and  gave 
Himself  for  us,  and  ever  since  has  been  sending  out 
the  ambassadors  and  the  messengers  of  His  love — or, 
rather,  the  rays  and  beams  of  it,  which  are  parts  of 
Himself — to  draw  us  to  His  heart.  And  the  purpose 
which  all  this  forthcfoini?  of  C/hrist's  initial  and 
originating  friendship  has  had  in  view  is  set  forth 
in  words  which  I  can  onl}^  touch  in  the  lightest 
possible  manner.  The  intention  is  twofold.  First,  it 
respects  service  or  fruit.     "  That  ye  may  go."     There 


CHRIST'S  FRIENDS.  219' 

is  deep  patlios  and  meaning  in  that  word.  He  had 
been  telHng  them  that  He  was  going  ;  now  He  says  to 
them,  "  You  are  to  go  !  We  part  here.  My  road  hes 
upward  ;  yours  runs  onward.  Go  into  all  the  world." 
He  gives  them  a  gitasi-independent  position ;  He 
declares  the  necessity  of  separation  ;  He  declares  also 
the  reality  of  union  in  the  midst  of  the  separation  ; 
He  sends  tltem  out  on  their  course  with  His  benedic- 
tion, as  He  does  us.  Wheresoever  we  go  in  obedience 
to  His  will,  we  carry  the  consciousness  of  His  friend- 
ship. 

"  That  ye  may  bring  forth  fruit."  He  goes  back  for 
a  moment  to  the  sweet  emblem  with  which  this 
chapter  begins,  and  recurs  to  the  imagery  of  the  Vine 
and  the  fruit.  "  Keeping  His  commandments  "  does 
not  explain  the  whole  process  by  which  we  do  the 
things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight.  AVe  must  also 
take  this  other  metaphor  of  the  bearing  of  fruit. 
Neither  an  effortless,  instinctive  bringing  forth  from 
the  renewed  nature  and  the  Christlike  disposition,  nor 
a  painful  and  strenuous  effort  at  obedience  to  His 
law,  describes  the  whole  realities  of  Christian  service. 
There  must  be  the  effort ;  for  men  do  not  grow 
Christlike  in  character  as  the  vine  grows  its  grapes, 
but  there  must  also  be,  regulated  and  disciplined 
by  the  effort,  the  inward  life,  for  no  mere  outAvard 
obedience  and  tinkering  at  duties  and  command- 
ments will  produce  the  fruit  that  Christ  desires  and 
rejoices  to  have.  First,  unit}^  of  life  with  Him ;  and 
then  effort.  Take  care  of  modern  teachings  that  do 
not  recognize  these  two  as  both  essential  to  the 
complete  ideal  of  Christian  service — the  spontaneous 
fruit-bearing,  and  the  strenuous  effort  aftoi'  obedience. 


220  CHRIST'S  FRIENDS. 


"  That  your  fruit  should  remain."  Nothing  cor- 
rupts faster  than  fruit.  There  is  only  one  kind  ot 
fruit  that  is  permanent,  incorruptible.  The  only  life's 
activity  that  outlasts  life  and  the  world  is  the  activity 
of  the  men  that  obey  Christ. 

The  other  half  of  the  issues  of  this  friendship  is 
the  satisfying  of  our  desires,  "  that  whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  the  Father  in  My  name  He  may  give  it  you."  We 
have  already  had  substantially  the  same  promise  in 
previous  parts  of  this  discourse,  and  therefore  I  may 
deal  with  it  very  lightly.  Hoav  comes  it  that  it  is 
certain  that  Christ's  friends,  living  close  to  Him,  and 
bearing  fruit,  will  get  what  they  want  ?  Because  Avhat 
they  want  will  be  in  His  name — that  is  to  say, 
in  accordance  with  His  disposition  and  will.  Make 
your  desires  Christ's,  and  Christ's  yours,  and  you  will 
be  satisfied. 

IV. — And  now,  lastly,  for  one  moment,  note  the 
mutual  friendship  of  Christ's  friends. 

We  have  frequently  had  to  consider  that  point — 
the  relation  of  the  friends  of  Christ  to  one  another. 
"These  things  I  command  you,  that  3'e  love  one 
another."  This  whole  context  is,  as  it  were,  enclosed 
within  a  golden  circlet  by  that  commandment  which 
appeared  in  a  former  verse,  at  the  beginning  of  it,  "  This 
is  My  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,"  and 
re-appears  here  at  the  close,  thus  shutting  off  this  por- 
tion from  the  rest  of  the  discourse.  Friends  of  a  friend 
should  themselves  be  friends.  We  care  for  the  lifeless 
things  that  a  dear  friend  has  cared  for  ;  books,  articles 
of  use  of  various  sorts.  K  these  have  been  of  interest 
to  him,  they  are  treasures  and  precious  evermore  to 
us.     And  here  arc  living  men  and  women,  in  all  diver- 


CHKISrS  FRIENDS.  221 


sities  of  character  and  circumstances,  but  with  this 
stamped  upon  them  all — Christ's  friends,  lovers  of  and 
loved  by  Him.  And  how  can  we  be  indifferent  to 
those  to  whom  Christ  is  not  indifferent  ?  We  are  knit 
together  by  that  bond.  Oh,  brother,  we  are  but  poor 
friends  of  that  Master,  unless  we  feel  that  all  which  is 
dear  to  Him  is  dear  to  us.  Let  us  feel  the  electric 
thrill  which  ought  to  pass  through  the  whole  linked 
circle,  and  let  us  beware  that  we  slip  not  our  hands 
from  the  grasp  of  the  neighbour  on  either  side,  lest, 
parted  from  them,  we  should  be  isolated  from  Him 
and  lose  some  of  the  love  which  we  fail  to  transmit. 


XXI. 

Sbccp  mnom  Molvce, 

If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  Me  before  it  hated 
you.  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own  : 
but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out 
of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you.  Remember  the 
word  that  I  said  unto  you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his 
Lord.  If  they  have  ijersecuted  Me,  they  will  also  persecute 
you  :  if  they  have  kept  My  saying,  they  Avill  keep  yours  also." — 
John  xv.  18—20. 

HESE  words  strike  a  discord  in  the 
midst  of  the  sweet  music  to  which  we 
have  been  listening.  The  keynote  of 
all  that  has  preceded  has  been  love — 
the  love  of  Christ's  friends  to  one 
another,  and  of  all  to  Him,  as  an  answer  to  His  love 
to  all.  That  love,  which  is  one,  whether  it  rise  to 
Him  or  is  diffused  on  the  level  of  earth,  is  the 
result  of  that  unity  of  life  between  the  Vine  and  the 
branches,  of  which  our  Lord  has  been  speaking  such 
great  and  wonderful  things.  J  Jut  that  unity  of  life 
between  Christians  and  Christ  has  another  con- 
sequence than  the  spread  of  love.  Just  because  it 
binds  them  to  Him  in  a  sacred  community,  it  separates 
them  from  those  who  do  not  share  in  His  life,  and 


:^ 

-,      ,■ 

0 

^oi 

b  °y 

f^ 

Z/^ 

MJy 

111 

3^° 

K 

m^\ 

/C 

V 

\m 

^ 

^ 

SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  223 

hence  the  "  hate "  of  our  context  is  the  shadow  of 
"  love  " ;  and  there  result  two  communities — to  use  the 
much-abused  words  that  designate  them — the  Church 
and  the  World ;  and  the  antagonism  between  these  is 
deep,  fundamental,  and  perpetual. 

Unquestionably,  our  Lord  is  here  speaking  with 
special  reference  to  the  Apostles,  who,  in  a  very  tragic 
sense,  were  "  sent  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves."  If  we  may  trust  tradition,  every  one  of  that 
little  company,  Speaker  as  well  as  hearers,  died  a 
martyr's  death,  with  the  exception  of  John  himself, 
who  was  preserved  from  it  by  miracle.  But,  be  that 
as  it  may,  our  Lord  is  here  laying  down  a  universal 
statement  of  the  permanent  condition  of  things  ;  and 
there  is  no  more  reason  for  restrictinof  the  force  of 
these  words  to  the  original  hearers  of  them  than 
there  is  for  restricting  the  force  of  any  of  the  rest  of 
this  wonderful  discourse.  The  world  will  be  in 
antagonism  to  the  Church  until  the  world  ceases  to  be 
a  world,  because  it  obeys  the  King ;  and  then,  and 
not  till  then,  will  it  cease  to  be  hostile  to  His 
subjects. 

I. — What  makes  this  hostility  inevitable  ? 

Our  Lord  here  prepares  His  hearers  for  what  is 
coming  by  putting  it  in  the  gentle  form  of  an 
hypothesis.  The  frequency  with  which  "  if "  occurs 
in  this  section  is  very  remarkable.  He  will  not  startle 
them  by  the  bare,  naked  statement  which  they,  in 
that  hour  of  depression  and  agitation,  were  so  little 
able  to  endure,  but  He  puts  it  in  the  shape  of  a 
"  suppose  that,"  not  because  there  is  any  doubt,  but  in 
order  to  alleviate  the  pain  of  the  impression  Avliich  He 
needs  to  make.    He  says,  "  If  the  world  hates,"  not  "  if 


224  SHEEP  AMONG   WOLVES. 

the  world  hate  "  ;  and  the  tense  of  the  original  shows 
that,  whilst  the  form  of  the  statement  is  hypothetical, 
the  substance  of  it  is  prophetic. 

Jesus  points  to  two  things,  as  you  will  observe, 
which  makes  this  hostility  inevitable.  "  If  the  world 
hates  you,  know  that  it  hated  Me  before  you."  And 
again,  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love 
his  own,  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I 
have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you."  The  very  language  carries  with  it  the 
implication  of  necessary  and  continual  antagonism. 
For  what  is  "  the  world,"  in  this  context,  but  the 
asffjresfate  of  men,  who  have  no  share  in  the  love  and 
life  that  flow  from  Jesus  Christ  ?  Necessarily,  they 
constitute  a  unity,  whatever  diversities  there  may 
be  amongst  them,  and,  necessarily,  that  unity  in  its 
banded  phalanx  is  in  antagonism,  in  some  measure,  to 
those  who  constitute  the  other  unity,  which  holds  by 
Christ,  and  has  been  drawn  by  Him  from  out  of  the 
world. 

If  we  share  Christ's  life,  we  must,  necessarily,  in 
some  measure,  share  His  fate.  It  is  the  typical 
example  of  what  the  world  thinks  of,  and  does  to, 
goodness.  And  all  who  have  "  the  spirit  of  life  which 
was  in  Jesus  Christ"  for  the  animating  principle  of 
their  lives,  will,  just  in  the  measure  in  which  they 
possess  it,  come  under  the  same  influences  which 
carried  Him  to  the  Cross.  In  a  world  like  this,  it  is 
impossible  for  a  man  to  "  love  righteousness  and  hate 
iniquity,"  and  to  order  his  life  accordingly,  without 
treading  on  somebody's  corns  ;  being  a  rebuke  to  the 
opposite  course  of  conduct,  either  interfering  with 
men's  self-complacency,  or  with  their  interests.     From 


SHEEP  AMONG   TFOL  FES.  225 


the  beginning  the  blind  world  has  repaid  goodness  by- 
antagonism  and  contempt. 

And  then  our  Lord  touches  another,  and  yet  closely- 
connected,  cause  when  He  speaks  of  His  selecting  the 
apostles,  and  drawing  them  out  of  the  world,  as  a  reason 
for  the  world's  hostility.      There  are  two  groups,  and 
the  fundamental   principles    that    underlie  each   are 
in  deadly  antagonism.       In    the   measure  in  which 
you  and  I  are  Christians  we  arc  in   direct   opposi- 
tion to  all  the   maxims  which  rule   the  world   and 
make  it  a  world.     What  we  believe  to  be  precious 
it   reofards  as  of  no  account.      What  we   believe   to 
be   fundamental  truth  it  passes  by  as  of  little  im- 
portance.    Much  which  we  feel  to  be  wrong  it  regards 
as  good.    Our  jewels  are  its  tinsel,  and  its  jewels  are  our 
tinsel.     We  and  it  stand  in  diametrical  opposition  in 
thought  about  God,  about  self,  about  duty,  about  life, 
about  death,  about  the  future ;  and  that  opposition 
fjoes  rioiit  down  to  the  bottom  of  things.     However  it 
may  be  covered  over,  there  is  a  gulf,  as  in  some  of  those 
American  canons  :    the  towering  banks  may  be  very 
near — only  a  yard  or  two  seems  to  separate  them ;  but 
they  go  down  for  thousands  and  thousands  of  feet, 
and  never  get  any  nearer  each  other,  and  between 
them  at  the  bottom  a  black,  sullen  river  flows.      "  If 
ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its  own." 
If  it  loves  you,  it  is  because  ye  are  of  it. 

II. — And  so  note,  secondly,  how  this  hostility  is 
masked  and  modified. 

There  are  a  great  many  other  bonds  that  unite  men 
together  besides  the  bonds  of  religious  life  or  its 
absence.  There  are  the  domestic  ties,  there  are  the 
associations  of  commerce  and  neighbourhood.     There 

15 


226  SHEEP  AMONG   WOL  VES. 

are  surface  identities  of  opinion  about  many  im- 
portant things.  The  greater  portion  of  our  Hves 
moves  on  this  surface,  where  all  men  are  alike.  "  If 
you  tickle  us,  do  we  not  laugh ;  if  you  wound  us,  do 
we  not  bleed  ? "  We  have  all  the  same  aft'ections  and 
needs,  pursue  the  same  avocations,  do  the  same  s'.ort  of 
things,  and  a  large  portion  of  everybody's  life  is  under 
the  dominion  of  habit  and  custom,  and  determined  by 
external  circumstances.  So  there  is  a  film  of  roofins: 
thrown  over  the  gulf.  You  can  make  up  a  crack  in  a 
wall  with  plaster  after  a  fashion,  and  it  will  hide  the  solu- 
tion of  continuity  that  lies  beneath.  But  let  bad  weather 
come,  and  soon  the  bricks  ga|)e  apart  as  before.  And 
so,  as  soon  as  we  get  down  below  the  surface  of  things 
and  grapple  with  the  real,  deep-lying,  and  for- 
mative principles  of  a  life,  we  come  to  antagonism, 
just  as  they  used  to  come  to  it  long  ago,  though  the 
form  of  it  has  become  quite  different. 

Then  there  are  other  causes  modifying  this  hostility. 
The  world  has  got  a  dash  of  Christianity  into  it  since 
Jesus  Christ  spoke.  We  cannot  say  that  it  is  half 
Christianized,  but  some  of  the  issues  and  remoter  con- 
sequences of  Christianity  have  permeated  the  general 
conscience,  and  the  ethics  of  the  Gospel  are  largely 
diffused  in  such  a  land  as  this.  Thus  Christian  men 
and  others  have,  to  a  large  extent,  a  common  code  of 
morality,  as  long  as  you  keep  on  the  surface  ;  and  not 
only  do  a  good  many  things  exactly  alike,  but  do  a 
great  many  things  from  substantially  the  same  motives, 
and  have  the  same  way  of  looking  at  much.  And 
thus  the  gulf  is  partly  bridged  over ;  and  the  hos- 
tility takes  another  form.  We  do  not  Avrap  Christians 
in    pitch   and    stick    them    up    for    candles    in    the 


SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES.  227 

emperor's  garden  nowadays,  but  the  same  thing  can 
be  done  in  different  ways.  Newspaper  articles,  the 
hght  laugh  of  scorn,  the  whoop  of  exultation  over  the 
failures  or  fiiults  of  any  prominent  man  that  has  stood 
out  boldly  on  Christ's  side ;  all  these  indicate  what 
lies  below  the  surface,  and  sometimes  not  so  very  far 
below.  Many  a  young  man  in  a  Manchester  warehouse, 
trying  to  live  a  godly  life,  many  a  workman  at  his 
bench,  many  a  commercial  traveller  in  the  inn  or  on 
the  road,  many  a  student  on  the  college  benches,  has 
to  tind  out  that  there  is  a  great  gulf  between  him  and 
the  man  that  sits  close  to  him  ;  and  that  he  cannot  be 
faithful  to  his  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time,  down  to  the 
depths  of  his  being,  a  friend  of  one  who  has  no  friend- 
ship to  his  Master. 

Still  another  thing  masks  the  antagonism,  and  that 
is  that,  after  all,  the  world,  meaning  thereby  the  aggre- 
gate of  godless  men,  has  a  conscience  that  responds 
to  goodness,  though  grumblingly  and  reluctantly. 
After  all,  men  do  know  that  it  is  better  to  be  good, 
that  it  is  better  and  wiser  to  be  like  Christ,  that  it  is 
nobler  to  live  for  Him  than  for  self,  and  that  cannot 
but  modify  to  some  extent  the  manifestations  of  the 
hostility.  But  it  is  there  all  the  same.  And  whoso- 
ever will  be  a  Christian  after  Christ's  pattern  will  find 
out  that  it  is  there. 

Let  a  man  for  Christ's  sake  avow  unpopular  beliefs, 
let  him  try  honestly  to  act  out  the  New  Testament, 
let  him  boldly  seek  to  apply  Christian  principles  to  the 
fashionable  and  popular  sins  of  his  class  or  of  his 
country,  let  him  in  any  way  be  ahead  of  the  conscience 
of  the  majority,  and  what  a  chorus  will  be  yelping 
at  his  heels  !     Dear  brethren,  the  law  remains  still.  If 

15* 


•228  SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES. 

any  man  Avill  be  a  friend  of  the  Avorld  lie  is  at  enmity 
with  God. 

III. — Thirdly.  Note  how  you  may  escape  the  hos- 
tility. 

A  half-Christianized  Avorld  and  a  more  than  half- 
secularized  Church  get  on  well  together.  "  "When  they 
do  agree,  their  agreement  is  wonderful."  And  it  is  a 
miserable  thing  to  reflect  that  about  the  average 
Christianit}^  of  this  generation  there  is  so  very  little 
that  does  deserve  the  antagonism  of  the  Church. 
Why  should  the  world  care  to  hate  or  trouble  itself 
about  a  professing  Church,  large  parts  of  which  are 
only  a  bit  of  the  world  under  another  name?.  There 
is  no  need  whatever  that  there  should  be  any 
antagonism  at  all  between  a  u'odless  Avorld  and  hosts 
of  professing  Christians.  If  you  want  to  escape  the 
hostility  drop  your  flag,  button  3^our  coat  over  the 
badge  that  shows  that  you  belong  to  Christ,  and  do 
the  thing  that  the  people  round  about  3'ou  do,  and  you 
will  have  a  perfectly  easy  and  undisturbed  life. . 

Of  course,  in  the  bad  old  slavery  days,  a  Christianity 
that  had  not  a  word  to  say  about  the  sin  of  slave- 
holding  ran  no  risk  of  being  tarred  and  feathered. 
Of  course,  a  Christianity  in  Manchester  that  winks 
hard  at  commercial  immoralities  is  very  welcome  on 
the  Exchange.  Of  course,  a  Christianity  that  lets  beer 
barrels  alone  may  reckon  upon  having  publicans  for 
its  adherents.  Of  course  a  Christianity  that  blesses 
flags  and  sings  Te  Deums  over  victories  will  get  its 
share  of  the  spoil.  Why  should  the  world  hate,  or 
persecute,  or  do  anything  but  despise  a  Christianity 
like  that,  any  more  than  a  man  need  to  care  for  a 
tame  tiger  that  has  had  its  claws  pared  ?     If  the 


SHEEP  AMOMi   WOLVES.  229 

world  can  put  a  hook  in  the  nostrils  of  leviathan,  and 
make  him  play  with  its  maidens,  it  will  substitute 
good-nature,  half  contemptuous,  for  the  hostility  which 
our  Master  hero  predicts.  It  was  out-and-out  Chris- 
tians that  He  said  the  world  would  hate ;  the  world 
hkes  Christians  that  are  like  itself.  Christian  men 
and  women  !  be  you  sure  that  you  deserve  the  hostility 
which  my  text  predicts. 

IV. — And  now,  lastly,  note  how  to  meet  this 
antagonism. 

Reckon  it  as  a  sign  and  test  of  our  true  union  with 
Jesus  Christ.  And  so,  if  ever,  by  reason  of  our  passing 
at  the  call  of  duty  or  benevolence  outside  the  circle 
of  those  who  sympathize  with  our  faith  and  funda- 
mental ideas,  we  encounter  it  more  manifestly  than 
when  we  dwell  among  our  own  people,  let  us  count 
the  reproach  of  Christ  as  a  treasure  to  be  proud  of, 
and  to  be  guarded. 

Be  sure  that  it  is  your  goodness  and  not  your  evils 
or  your  weakness,  that  men  dislike.  The  world  has 
a  very  keen  eye  for  the  inconsistencies  and  the 
faults  of  professing  Christians,  and  it  is  a  good 
thing  that  it  has.  The  loftier  your  profession  the 
sharper  the  judgment  that  is  applied  to  you.  Many 
well-meaning.  Christian  people,  by  an  injudicious  use 
of  Christian  phraseology  in  the  wrong  place,  and  by 
the  glaring  disproportion  between  their  prayers  and 
their  talks  and  their  daily  life,  bring  down  a  great 
deal  of  deserved  hostility  upon  themselves  and  of 
discredit  upon  Christianity ;  and  then  they  comfort 
themselves  and  say  they  are  bearing  the  reproach  of 
the  Cross.  Not  a  bit  of  it.  They  are  bearing  the 
natural  results  of  their  own  failinscs  and  faults.      And 


230  SHEEP  AMONG  WOLVES. 

it  is  for  us  to  see  to  it  that  what  provokes,  if  it  does 
provoke,  the  hostile  judgments  and  uncharitable 
criticisms,  insulting  speeches  and  sarcasms,  and  the 
sense  of  our  belonging  to  another  regiment  and 
having  other  objects,  is  our  cleaving  to  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  the  imperfections  and  the  sins  with  Avhich  Ave 
so  often  spoil  that  cleaving.  Bo  you  careful  for  this, 
that  it  is  Christ  in  3'ou  that  men  turn  from,  and  not 
you  yourself  and  your  weakness  and  sin. 

Meet  this  antagonism  by  not  dropping  your  standard 
one  inch.  Keep  the  flag  right  at  the  masthead.  If 
you  begin  to  haul  it  down,  where  are  you  going  to 
stop  ?  Nowhere,  until  you  have  got  it  draggling  in 
the  mud  at  the  foot.  It  is  no  use  trying  to  conciliate 
by  compromise.  All  that  wo  shall  gain  by  that  will 
be,  as  I  have  said,  inditterence  and  contempt ;  all  that 
we  shall  gain  will  be  a  loss  to  the  cause.  A  great 
deal  is  said  in  this  day,  and  many  efforts  are  being 
made — I  cannot  but  think  mistaken  efforts — by  Chris- 
tian people  to  bridge  over  this  gulf  in  the  wrong 
way — that  is,  by  trying  to  make  out  that  Christianity 
in  its  fundamental  principles  does  approximate  a 
great  deal  more  closely  to  the  things  that  the  world 
goes  by  than  it  really  does.  It  is  all  vain,  and  the 
only  issue  of  it  will  bo  that  we  shall  have  a  decaying 
Christianity  and  a  dying  spiritual  life.  Keep  the  flag^ 
up ;  emphasize  and  accentuate  the  things  that  the 
world  disbelieves  and  denies,  not  pushing  them  to  the 
"  falsehood  of  extremes,"  but  not  one  jot  diminishing 
the  clearness  of  our  testimony  by  reason  of  the 
world's  unwillingness  to  receive  it.  The  only  victory 
is  to  be  won  through  absolute  faithfulness. 

And,  lastly,  meet  hostility  Avitli  unmoved,  patient. 


SHEEP  AMONG   WOLVES.  231 

Christlike,  and  Christ-derived  love  and  sympath}'. 
The  patient  sunshine  pours  upon  the  glaciers  and 
melts  the  thick-ribbed  ice  at  last  into  sweet  water. 
The  patient  sunshine  beats  upon  the  mist-cloud  and 
breaks  up  its  edges  and  scatters  it  at  the  last.  And 
our  Lord  here  tells  us  that  our  experience,  if  we  are 
faithful  to  Him,  Avill  be  like  His  experience,  in  that 
some  will  hearken  to  our  word  thousrh  others  will 
persecute,  and  to  some  our  testimony  will  come  as  a 
message  from  God  that  draws  them  to  the  Lord 
Himself.  These  are  our  onl}'^  weapons,  brethren.  The 
only  conqueror  of  the  world  is  the  love  that  was  in 
Christ  breathed  through  us;  the  only  victory  over 
suspicion,  contempt,  alienation,  is  pleading,  persistent, 
long-suffermg,  self-den3dng  love.  The  only  way  to 
overcome  the  world's  hostility  is  by  turning  the  world 
into  a  church,  and  that  can  onl}^  be  done  when 
Christ's  servants  oppose  pity  to  wrath,  love  to  hate, 
and,  in  the  strength  of  His  life  who  has  won  us  all  by 
the  same  process,  seek  to  w^in  the  world  for  Him  by 
the  manifestation  of  His  victorious  love  in  our  patient 
love. 

Dear  brethren,  to  which  army  do  you  belong  ?  Which 
community  is  yours  ?  Are  you  in  Christ's  ranks,  or  are 
you  in  the  world's  ?  Do  you  love  Him  back  again,  or  do 
you  meet  His  open  heart  with  a  closed  one,  and  His  hand, 
laden  with  blessings,  with  hands  clenched  in  refusal  ? 
To  which  class  do  I  belong  ]  It  is  the  question  of 
questions  for  us  all ;  and  I  pray  that  you  and  I,  won 
from  our  hatred  by  His  love,  and  wooed  out  of  our 
death  by  His  life,  and  made  partakers  of  His  life  by 
His  death,  may  3-ield  our  hearts  to  Him,  and  so  pass 
from  out  of  the  hostility  and  mistrust  of  a  godless 


232  SHEEP  AMONG   WOLVES. 

world  into  the  friendships  and  peace  of  the  sheltering 
Vine.  And  then  we  "  shall  esteem  the  reproach  of 
Christ "  if  it  fall  upon  our  heads,  in  however  modified 
and  mild  a  form,  "  greater  riches  than  the  treasures 
of  Egypt,"  and  "  have  respect  unto  the  recompense 
of  the  reward." 

May  it  be  so  with  us  all ! 


XXIL 

Z\K  moiWe  Ibatrct),  ae  CbritJt  t?a\v  it 

"  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you  for  3Iy  name's  sake, 

because  they  know  not  Him  that  sent  Me. 
'•  If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin  ; 

but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin. 
"  He  that  hateth  Me  hateth  My  Father  also. 
"  If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which  none  other  man 

did,  they  had  not  sin  :  but  now  have  they  both  seen  and  hated 

both  Me  and  My  Father. 
"  But  this  cometh  to  pass,  that  the  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is 

written  in  their  law,  They  hated  Me  without  a  cause." — John 

XV.  21— 2.-5. 

UR  Lord  has  been  speaking  of  the 
world's  hostility  to  His  followers,  and 
tracing  that  to  its  hostility  to  Himself. 
In  these  solemn  words  of  our  text 
He  goes  still  deeper,  and  parallels 
the  relation  which  His  disciples  bear  to  Him  and 
the  consequent  hostility  that  falls  on  them  to  the 
relation  which  He  bears  to  the  Father  and  the  con- 
sequent hostility  that  falls  on  Him,  "  They  hate  you 
because  they  hate  Me,"  And  then  His  words  become 
sadder  and  pierce  deeper,  and  with  a  tone  of  wounded 
love  and  disappointed  eftbrt,  and  almost  surprise  at 
the  world's  recpiital  to  Him,  He  goes  on  to  say, "  They 
hate  Me,  because  they  hate  the  Father." 


234       THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAU'  IT. 

So,  then,  here  we  have,  in  very  pathetic  and  solemn 
words,  Christ's  view  of  the  relation  of  the  world  to 
Him  and  to  God. 

I,— The  first  point  that  He  signalizes  is  the  world's 
ignorance. 

"  These  things  they  will  do  unto  you,"  and  the}^  will 
do  them  "  for  My  name's  sake ; "  they  will  do  them 
"  because  they  know  not  Him  that  sent  Me." 

"  The  world,"  in  Christ's  language,  is  the  aggregate 
of  godless  men.  Or,  to  put  it  a  little  more  sharply, 
our  Lord,  in  this  context,  gives  in  His  full  adhesion  to 
that  narrow  view  which  divides  those  that  have  come 
under  the  influence  of  His  truth  into  two  portions. 
There  is  no  mincing  of  the  matter  in  the  antithesis 
which  Christ  here  draws  ;  no  hesitation,  as  if  there  were 
a  great  central  mass,  too  bad  for  a  blessing  perhaps, 
but  too  good  for  a  curse  ;  which  was  neither  black  nor 
white,  but  neutral  grey.  No  !  however  it  may  be  with 
the  masses  beyond  the  reach  of  the  dividing  and 
revealing  power  of  His  truth,  the  men  that  come  into 
contact  with  Him,  like  a  heap  of  metal  filings  brought 
into  contact  with  a  magnet,  mass  themselves  into  two 
bunches,  the  one  those  who  yield  to  the  attraction, 
and  the  other  those  who  do  not.  The  one  is  "  My 
disciples,"  and  the  other  is  "  the  world."  And  now, 
sa3's  Jesus  Christ,  all  that  mass  that  stands  apart  from 
Him,  and,  having  looked  upon  Him  with  the  super- 
ficial eye  of  those  men  round  about  Him  at  that  day,  or 
of  the  men  who  hear  of  Him  now,  have  no  real  love  to 
Him — have,  as  the  underlying  motive  of  their  conduct 
and  their  feelings,  a  real  ignorance  of  God.  "  They 
know  not  Him  that  sent  Me." 

Our  Lord  assumes  that  He  is  so  completely  the 


THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAW  IT.      235 

coj)y  and  revealer  of  the  Divine  nature  as  that  any 
man  that  looks  upon  Him  has  had  the  opportunity  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  God,  and  that  any  man  who 
turns  away  from  Him  has  lost  that  opportunity.  The 
God  that  the  men  who  do  not  love  Jesus  Christ  believe 
in  is  not  the  Father  that  sent  Him.  It  is  a  fragment, 
a  distorted  image  tinted  by  the  lens.  The  world  has 
its  conception  of  God  ;  but,  outside  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
His  manifestation  of  the  whole  Divine  name,  the 
world's  God  is  but  a  syllable,  a  fragment,  a  broken 
part  of  the  perfect  completeness.  "  The  Father  of  an 
infinite  majesty,"  and  of  as  intinite  a  tenderness,  the 
stooping  God,  the  pitying  God,  the  forgiving  God,  the 
loving  God  is  known  only  where  Christ  is  accepted. 
In  other  hearts  He  may  be  dimly  hoped  for,  in  other 
hearts  He  may  be  half  believed  in,  in  other  hearts  He 
may  be  thought  possible  ;  but  hope,  and  anticipations 
and  fears  and  doubts  are  not  knowledge,  and  they 
who  see  not  the  light  in  Christ  see  but  the  darkness. 
Out  of  Him  God  is  not  known,  and  they  that  turn  away 
from  His  beneficent  manifestation  turn  their  faces  to 
the  black  North,  from  which  no  light  can  shine. 
Brother,  do  you  knoAv  God  in  Christ  ?  Unless  you  do, 
you  do  not  know  the  God  who  is. 

But  there  is  a  deeper  meaning  in  that  word  than 
simply  the  possession  of  true  thoughts  concerning  the 
Divine  nature.  We  know  God  as  we  know  one 
another ;  because  God  is  a  Person,  as  we  are  persons, 
and  the  only  Avay  to  know  persons  is  through  familiar 
acquaintance  and  sympathy.  So  the  world  which 
turns  away  from  Christ  has  no  acquaintance  with  God. 

This  is  a  surface  fact.  Our  Lord  goes  on  to  show 
what  lies  below  it. 


236       THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAW  IT. 

II. — His  second  thought  here  is — the  world's 
ignorance  in  the  face  of  Christ's  light  is  worse  than 
ignorance ;  it  is  sin. 

Mark  how  He  speaks :  "  If  I  had  not  come  and 
spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin,  but  now  they 
have  no  cloke  for  their  sin."  And  then  again :  "  If  I 
had  not  done  amongst  them  the  works  which  none 
other  men  did,  they  had  not  had  sin,"  So  then  He 
puts  before  us  two  forms  of  His  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  nature,  by  His  words  and  His  works.  Of 
these  two  He  puts  His  words  foremost,  as  being  a 
deeper  and  more  precious  and  brilliant  revelation  of 
what  God  is  than  the  miracles.  They  are  subordinate, 
they  come  as  a  second  source  of  illumination.  Men 
that  will  not  see  the  beauty  and  listen  to  the  truth 
that  lie  in  His  word  may  perchance  be  led  by  the 
deed.  But  the  word  towers  in  its  nature  high  above 
the  work,  and  the  miracle  to  the  word  is  but  like 
the  picture  in  the  child's  book  to  the  text,  fit  for 
feeble  eyes  and  infantile  judgments,  but  containing 
far  less  of  the  revelation  of  God  than  the  sacred 
words  which  He  speaks.  First  the  word,  next  the 
miracles. 

But  notice,  too,  how  decisively,  and  yet  simply  and 
humbly  and  sorrowfully,  our  Lord  here  makes  a  claim 
which,  on  the  lips  of  any  but  Himself,  would  have 
been  mere  madness  of  presumption.  Think  of  any  of 
us  saying  that  our  words  made  all  the  difference 
between  innocent  ignorance  and  criminality !  Think 
of  any  of  us  saying  that  to  listen  to  us,  and  not  be 
persuaded,  was  the  sin  of  sins  !  Think  of  any  of  us 
pointing  to  our  actions  and  saying,  In  these  God  is  so 
manifest  that  not  to  see  Him  augurs  wickedness,  and 


THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAJF  IT.      237 


is  condemnation  !  And  yet  Jesus  Christ  says  all  this. 
And,  what  is  more  wonderful,  nobody  Avonders  that 
He  says  it,  and  the  world  believes  that  He  is  saying 
the  truth  when  He  says  it. 

HoAv  does  that  come  ?  There  is  only  one  answer ; 
only  one.  His  words  were  the  illuminating  manifesta- 
tion of  God,  and  His  deeds  were  the  plain  and  unam- 
biguous operation  of  the  Divine  hand  then  and  there 
only  because  He  Himself  was  Divine,  and  in  Him  God 
was  manifested  in  the  flesh. 

But,  passing  from  that,  notice  how  our  Lord  here 
declares  that  in  comparison  with  the  sin  of  not  listen- 
ing to  His  words,  and  being  taught  by  His  manifesta- 
tion, all  other  sins  dwindle  into  nothing.    "  If  I  had  not 
spoken,  they  had  not  had  sin."     That  does  not  mean, 
of  course,  that  these  men  would  have  been  clear  of  all 
moral  delinquency  ;  it  does  not  mean  that  there  would 
not  have  been  amongst  them  crimes  against  their  own 
consciences,  crimes  against  the  law  written  on  their 
own    hearts,   crimes   against   the   law   of    revelation. 
There  were  liars,  impure  men,  selfish  men,  and  men 
committing  all  the  ordinary  forms  of  human  trans- 
gression amongst  them.      And  yet,  says  Christ,  black 
and  spattered  as  these  natures  are,  they  are  Avhite  in 
comparison   with   the   blackness   of    the    man    that, 
looking  into   His   face,  sees   nothing  there   that   he 
should  desire.     Beside  the  mountain  belching  out  its 
sulphurous  flame  the  little  pimple  of  a  molehill  is 
nought.     And  so,  says  Christ,  heaven  heads  the  count 
of  suis  with  this— unbelief  in  Me. 

Ah  :  brother,  as  light  grows  responsibility  grows 
and  this  is  the  misery  of  all  illumination  that  comes 
through  Jesus  Christ,  that  where  it  does  not  draw  a 


288       THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SA  W  IT. 

man  into  His  sweet  love,  and  fill  him  with  the  know- 
ledge of  God  which  is  eternal  life,  it  darkens  His  nature 
and  aggravates  His  condemnation,  and  lays  a  heavier 
burden  upon  the  soul.  The  truth  that  the  measure 
of  light  is  the  measure  of  guilt  has  many  aspects.  It 
turns  a  face  of  alleviation  to  the  dark  places  of  the 
earth  ;  but,  just  in  the  measure  that  it  lightens  the 
condemnation  of  the  heathen,  it  adds  weight  to  the 
condemnation  of  you  men  and  women  who  are  bathed 
in  the  light  of  Christianity,  and  all  your  days  have  had 
it  streaming  in  upon  you.  The  measure  of  the  guilt 
is  the  brightness  of  the  light.  No  shadows  are  so 
black  as  those  which  the  intense  sunshine  at  the 
tropics  casts.  And  you  and  I  live  in  the  very 
tropical  regions  of  Divine  revelation,  and  if  we  turn 
away  from  Him  that  spoke  on  earth  and  speaketh 
from  heaven,  of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  think 
you,  shall  we  be  thought  worthy  than  those  who 
live  away  out  in  the  glimmering  twilight  of  an  un- 
evanglized  Paganism,  or  who  stood  by  the  side  of 
Jesus  Christ  when  they  had  only  His  earthly  life  to 
teach  them  ? 

III. — The  ignorance  which  is  sin  is  the  manifestation 
of  hatred. 

Our  Lord  has  sorrowfully  contemplated  the  not 
knowing  God,  which  in  the  blaze  of  His  light  can  only 
come  from  wilful  closing  of  the  eyes,  and  is  therefore 
the  very  sin  of  sins.  But  that,  sad  as  it  is,  is  not  all 
which  has  to  be  said  about  that  blindness  of  unbelief 
in  Him.  It  indicates  a  rooted  alienation  of  heart  and 
mind  and  will  from  God,  and  is,  in  fact,  the  manifesta- 
tion of  an  unconscious  but  real  hatred.  It  is  an  awful 
saying,  and  one  which  the  lips  into  which  grace  was 


THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAW  IT.      239 

poured  could  not  pronounce  without  a  sigh.     But  it 
is  our  wisdom  to  listen  to  what  it  Avas  His  mercy  to 

say. 

Observe  our  Lord's  identification  of  Himself  with  the 
Father,  so  as  that  the  feelings  with  which  men  regard 
Him  are,  ipso  facto,  the  feelings  with  which  they 
regard  the  Father  God.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath 
seen  the  Father."  "  He  that  hath  loved  Me  hath 
loved  the  Father."  "  He  that  hath  hated  Me  hath 
hated  the  Father."  An  ugly  word — a  word  that  a 
great  many  of  us  think  far  too  severe  and  harsh  to  be 
applied  to  men  who  simply  are  indifferent  to  the 
Divine  love.  Some  say,  "  I  am  conscious  of  no  hatred. 
I  do  not  pretend  to  be  a  Christian,  but  I  do  not  hate 
God.  Take  the  ordinary  run  of  people  round  about 
us  in  the  world ;  if  you  say  God  is  not  in  all  their 
thoughts,  I  agree  with  you  ;  but  if  you  say  that  they 
hate  God,  I  do  not  believe  it." 

"Well,  what  do  j^ou  think  the  fact  that  men  go 
through  their  days  and  weeks  and  months  and  years, 
and  have  not  God  in  all  their  thouo-hts,  indicates  as 
to  the  central  feeling  of  their  hearts  towards  God  ? 
Granted  that  there  is  not  actual  antagonism,  because 
there  is  no  thought  at  all,  do  you  think  it  would  be 
possible  for  a  man  that  loved  God  to  go  on  for  a 
twelvemonth  and  never  think  of,  or  care  to  please,  or 
desire  to  be  near,  the  object  that  he  loved  ?  And 
inasmuch  as,  deep  down  at  the  bottom  of  our  moral 
being,  there  is  no  such  thing  possible  as  indifference 
and  a  perfect  equipoise  in  reference  to  God,  it  is  clear 
enough,  I  think,  that — although  the  word  must  not  be 
pressed  as  if  it  meant  conscious  and  active  antagonism 
— where  there  is  no  love  there  is  hate. 


240       THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SA  W  IT. 

If  a  man  does  not  love  God  as  He  is  revealed  to 
him  in  Jesus  Christ,  he  neither  cares  to  please  Him 
nor  to  think  about  Him,  nor  does  he  order  his  life  in 
obedience  to  His  commands.  And  if  it  be  true  that 
obedience  is  the  very  lifebreath  of  love,  disobedience 
or  non-obedience  are  the  manifestation  of  antagonism, 
and  antagonism  towards  God  is  the  same  thing  as 
hate. 

Oh  !  dear  friends,  I  want  some  of  ni}-  hearers  to-day 
who  have  never  asked  themselves  honestly  the  ques- 
tion of  what  their  relation  to  God  is,  to  go  doAvn  into 
the  deep  places  of  their  hearts  and  test  themselves 
by  this  simple  inquiry :  "  Do  I  do  an3lhing  to  please 
Him  ?  "  Do  I  try  to  serve  Him  ?  Is  it  a  joy  to  me  to 
be  near  Him  ?  Is  the  thought  of  Him  a  dclicfht,  like 
a  fountain  in  the  desert  or  the  cool  shadow  of  a  great 
rock  in  the  blazing  wilderness  ?  Do  I  turn  to  Him  as 
my  Home,  my  Friend,  my  All  ?  If  I  do  not,  am  I 
not  deceiving  myself  by  fancying  that  I  stand  neutral  ? 
There  is  no  neutrality  in  a  man's  relation  to  God.  It 
is  one  thing  or  other.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
M'ammon."  "The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity 
against  God." 

IV. — And  now,  lastly,  note  how  our  Lord  here 
touches  the  deep  thought  that  this  ignorance  Avhich 
is  sin,  and  is  more  properly  named  hatred,  is  utterly 
irrational  and  causeless.  "  All  this  will  they  do  that 
it  might  be  fulfilled  which  is  written  in  their  law, 
they  hated  ]\le  without  a  cause." 

One  hears  sighing  through  these  Avords  the  Master's 
meek  wonder  that  His  love  should  be  so  met,  and  that 
the  requital  which  He  receives  at  men's  hands,  for  such 
an  unexampled  and  lavish  outpouring  of  it,  should  bo 


THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAW  IT.      241 

such  a  carelessness,  reposing  upon  a  hidden  basis  of 
such  a  rooted  aUenation. 

"  Without  a  cause."  Yes !  that  suggests  the  deep 
thought  that  the  most  mysterious  and  irrational  thing 
in  men's  whole  history  and  experience  is  the  way  in 
which  they  recompense  God  in  Christ  for  what  He 
has  done  for  them.  "Be  astonished,  0  ye  heavens! 
and  wonder,  0  ye  earth ! "  said  one  of  the  old 
prophets  ;  the  mystery  of  mysteries,  which  can  give 
no  account  of  itself  to  satisfy  the  reason,  which  has 
no  apology,  excuse,  or  vindication,  is  just  that  when 
God  loves  me  I  do  not  love  Him  back  again ;  and 
that  when  Christ  pours  out  the  whole  fulness  of  His 
heart  upon  me,  my  dull  and  obstinate  heart  gives  back 
so  little  to  Him  who  has  given  me  so  much. 

"  Without  a  cause."  Think  of  that  Cross  ;  think,  as 
every  poor  creature  on  earth  has  a  right  to  think,  that 
he  and  she  individually  were  in  the  mind  and  heart 
of  the  Saviour  when  He  suffered  and  died,  and  then 
think  of  what  we  have  brought  Him  for  it.  Do  we 
not  stand  ashamed  at — -if  I  might  use  so  trivial  a 
word — the  absurdity  as  well  as  at  the  criminality  of 
our  requital  ?  Causeless  love  on  the  one  side, 
occasioned  by  nothing  but  itself,  and  causeless 
indifference  on  the  other,  occasioned  by  nothing  but 
itself,  are  the  two  powers  that  meet  in  this  mystery — 
men's  rejection  of  the  intinite  love  of  God. 

Oh !  brother,  come  away  from  the  unreasonable 
people,  come  away  from  the  men  that  can  give  no 
account  of  their  attitude.  Come  away  from  those  Avho 
pay  benefits  by  carelessness,  and  a  Love  that  died, 
by  an  indifference  that  will  not  cast  an  eye  upon 
that  miracle  of  mercy,  and  let  His  love  kindle  the 

16 


242       THE  WORLD'S  HATRED,  AS  CHRIST  SAW  IT. 

answering  flame  in  your  hearts.  Then  you  will  know 
God  as  only  they  who  love  Christ  know  Him,  and 
in  the  sweetness  of  a  mutual  bond  will  lose  the 
misery  of  self,  and  escape  the  deepening  condemnation 
of  those  who  see  Christ  on  the  Cross  and  do  not  care 
for  the  sight,  nor  learn  by  it  to  know  the  infinite 
tenderness  and  holiness  of  the  Father  that  sent  Him. 


XXIII. 

Zbc  H)efencc  aijainst  a  1b05tile  Morl^ 

"  But  when  the  Comforter  is  come,  whom  I  will  send  mito  you 
from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  which  proceedeth 
from  the  Father,  He  shall  testify  of  Me  ;  and  ye  also  shall 
bear  witness,  because  ye  have  been  with  Me  from  the 
beginning." — John  st.  26,  27. 


UR  Lord  has  been  speaking  of  a  world 
hostile  to  His  followers  and  to  Him. 
He  proceeds,  in  the  words  which 
immediately  follow  our  text,  to  paint 
that  hostility  as  aggravated  even  to 
the  pitch  of  religious  murder.  But  hero  He  lets  a 
beam  of  light  in  upon  the  darkness.  These  forlorn 
twelve,  listeninijf  to  Him,  misfht  well  have  said,  "  Thou 
art  about  to  leave  us  ;  how  can  Ave  alone  face  this 
world  in  arms,  with  which  Thou  dost  terrify  us  ? " 
And  here  He  lets  them  see  that  they  will  not  be  left 
alone,  but  have  a  great  Champion,  clad  in  celestial 
armour,  who,  comini>'  strais^ht  from  God,  will  be 
with  them  and  put  into  their  hands  a  weapon,  with 
which  they  may  conquer  the  world,  and  turn  it  into 
a  friend,  and  with  which  alone  they  must  meet  the 
world's  hate. 

16* 


244      THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

So,  then,  we  have  three  things  in  this  text,  the  great 
promise  of  an  Ally  in  the  conflict  with  the  world ; 
the  witness  which  that  Ally  bears,  to  fortify  against 
the  world ;  and  the  consequent  witness  with  which 
Christians  may  win  the  world, 

I. — Now  consider  briefly  the  first  of  these  points, 
the  great  promise  of  an  Ally,  in  the  conflict  with 
the  world. 

I  may  touch  upon  the  wonderful  designation  of 
this  Champion-Friend  whom  Christ  sends,  very 
lightly,  because  on  former  occasions  in  this  course  of 
sermons  we  have  had  to  deal  with  the  same  thoughts, 
and  there  will  bo  subsequent  opportunities  of  recur- 
ring to  them.  But  I  may  just  emphasize  in  a  few 
sentences  the  points  which  our  Lord  here  signalizes 
in  regard  of  the  Champion  whom  He  sends.  There 
is  a  double  designation  of  that  Spirit,  "the  Com- 
forter "  and  the  "  Spirit  of  Truth,"  There  is  a  double 
description  of  His  mission,  as  being  "  sent "  by  Jesus, 
and  as  "  proceeding  from  the  Father."  And  there  is  a 
single  statement  as  to  the  position  from  which  He 
comes  to  us.    A  Avord  about  each  of  these  things. 

I  have  already  explained  in  former  sermons  that 
the  notion  of  Comforter,  as  it  is  understood  in  modern 
EnsTflish,  is  a  cfreat  deal  too  restricted  and  narroAV  to 
cover  the  whole  ground  of  this  great  and  blessed 
promise.  The  Comforter  whom  Christ  sends  is  no 
mere  dryer  of  men's  tears  and  gentle  Consoler  of 
human  sorrows,  but  He  is  a  mightier  Spirit  than  that, 
and  the  word  by  which  He  is  described  in  our  text, 
which  means  one  who  is  summoned  to  the  side  of 
another,  conveys  the  idea  of  a  helper  who  is  brought 
to  the  man  to  be  helped,  in  order  to  render  Avhatever 


TEE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD.      245 


aid  and  succour  that  man's  weakness  and  circum- 
stances may  require.  The  verses  before  our  text 
suggest  what  sort  of  aid  and  succour  the  disciples 
will  need.  They  are  to  be  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves.  Their  defenceless  purity  will  need  a 
Protector,  a  strong  Shepherd.  They  stand  alone 
amonofst  enemies.  There  must  be  someone  beside 
them  to  fight  for  them,  to  shield  and  to  encourage 
them,  to  be  their  safety  and  their  peace.  And  that 
Paraclete,  who  is  called  to  our  side,  comes  for  the 
special  help  which  these  special  circumstances  require, 
and  is  a  strong  Spirit  who  will  be  our  Champion  and 
our  Ally,  whatever  antagonism  may  storm  against  us, 
and  however  strong  and  Avell-armed  may  be  the 
assaulting  legions  of  the  world's  hate. 

Then,  still  further,  the  other  desisrnation  here  of 
this  strong  Succourer  and  Friend  is  "  the  Spirit  of 
truth,"  by  which  is  designated,  not  so  much  His 
characteristic  attribute  as  rather  the  weapon  which 
He  wields,  or  the  material  with  which  He  works. 
The  "  truth  "  is  His  instrument ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
Spirit  of  God  sent  by  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Strengthener,  the  Encourager,  the  Comforter,  the 
Fighter  for  us  and  with  us,  because  He  wields  that 
great  body  of  truth,  the  perfect  revelation  of  God, 
and  man,  and  duty,  and  salvation,  which  is  embodied 
in  the  Incarnation  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
The  truth  is  His  Aveapon,  and  it  is  by  it  that  He 
makes  us  stroncf. 

Then,  still  further,  there  is  a  twofold  description 
here  of  the  mission  of  this  Divine  Champion,  as 
"'  sent "  by  Christ,  and  "  proceeding  from  the  Father." 

In  regard  to  the  former  I  need  only   remind   you 


246      THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

that,  in  a  previous  part  of  this  wonderful  discourse,  our 
Lord  speaks  of  that  Divine  Spirit  as  being  sent  b}' 
the  Father  in  His  name  and  in  answer  to  His  prayer. 
The  representation  here  is  by  no  means  antagonistic 
to,  or  diverse  from,  that  other  representation,  but 
rather  the  fact  that  the  Father  and  the  Son,  ac- 
cording to  the  deep  teaching  of  Scripture,  are  in  so 
far  one  as  that  "  whatsoever  the  Son  seeth  the  Father 
do  that  also  the  Son  dueth  likewise,"  makes  it 
possible  to  attribute  to  Him  the  work  which,  in 
another  place,  is  ascribed  to  the  Father.  We  speak 
of  the  Persons  of  the  Deity,  let  us  never  forget  that 
that  word  is  only  partially  applicable  to  that  ineffable 
relation,  and  that  whilst  with  us  it  means  absolute 
separation  of  the  individuals,  it  does  not  mean  such 
separation  in  the  case  of  its  imperfect  transference  to 
the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  nature.  But  rather  the 
Son  doeth  what  the  Father  doeth,  and  therefore 
the  Spirit  is  sent  forth  by  the  Father,  and  also  the 
Son  sends  the  Spirit. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  to  regard  that 
Divine  Spirit  as  merely  a  Messenger  sent  by  another. 
He  "  proceeds  from  the  Father."  That  word  has 
been  the  battlefield  of  theological  controversy,  with 
which  I  do  not  purpose  to  trouble  you  now.  For  I 
do  not  suppose  that  in  its  use  here  it  refers  at  all  to 
the  subject  to  which  it  has  been  sometimes  aj^plied, 
nor  contains  any  kind  of  revelation  of  the  eternal 
depths  of  the  Divine  Nature  and  its  relations  to 
itself.  What  is  meant  here  is  the  historical  comincf 
forth  into  human  life  of  that  Divine  Spirit.  And, 
possibly,  the  word  "  proceeds "  is  chosen  in  order  to 
contrast  with  the  word  "  sent,"  and  to  give  the  idea 


THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  JFORLlK      247 

of  a  voluntary  and  personal  action  of  the  Messenger, 
who  not  onl}^  is  sent  by  the  Father,  but  of  Himself 
•proceeds  on  the  mighty  work  to  which  He  is  destined. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  mark  onl}^  for  the  last  thought 
here  about  the  details  of  this  great  promise,  that 
wonderful  phrase,  twice  repeated  in  our  Lord's  words, 
and  emphasised  by  its  verbal  repetition  in  the  two 
clauses,  which  in  all  other  respects  are  so  different — 
■'•' from  the  Father."  The  word  translated  "from"  is 
not  the  ordinary  word  so  rendered,  but  rather  desig- 
nates a  position  at  the  side  of  than  an  ori(jiii  from, 
and  suggests  much  rather  the  intimate  and  ineffable 
union  between  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  than  the 
source  from  which  the  Spirit  comes.  I  touch  upon 
these  things  very  lightly,  and  gather  them  up  into 
one  sentence.  Here,  then,  are  the  points.  A 
Person  who  is  spoken  of  as  He — a  Divine  Person 
whose  home  from  of  old  has  been  close  by  the 
Father's  side — a  Person  whose  instrument  is  the 
revealed  truth  ensphered  and  in  germ  in  the  facts 
of  Christ's  Incarnation  and  life — a  Divine  Person, 
wielding  the  truth,  who  is  sent  by  Christ  as  His 
Representative,  and  in  some  sense  a  continuance  of 
His  Personal  presence — a  Divine,  Personal,  Spirit 
coming  from  the  Father,  Avielding  the  truth,  sent  by 
Christ,  and  at  the  side  of  all  the  persecuted  and  the 
weak,  all  world-hated  and  Christian  men,  as  their 
Champion,  their  Combatant,  their  Ally,  their  In- 
spiration, and  their  Power.  Is  not  that  enough  to 
make  the  weakest  stroncf  ?  Is  not  that  enouofh  to 
make  us  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that 
loved  us  "  ?  All  nations  have  legends  of  the  gods 
lighting  at  the   head  of  their  armies,  and   through 


•248       THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

the  dust  of  battle  the  white  horses  and  the  shininof 
armour  of  the  celestial  champions  have  been  seen. 
The  childish  dream  is  a  historical  realit}'.  It  is  not 
we  that  fight,  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  fighteth 
in  us. 

II. — And  so  note,  secondly,  the  witness  of  the  Spirit 
which  fortifies  against  the  Avorld.  "  He  shall  bear 
witness  of  Me." 

Now  we  must  especially  observe  here  that  little 
phrase,  "  unto  .you."  For  that  tells  us  at  once  that 
the  witness  which  our  Lord  has  in  mind  here  is 
somethins?  which  is  done  within  the  circle  of  the 
Christian  believers,  and  not  in  the  wide  field  of  the 
world's  history  or  in  nature.  Of  course  it  is  a  great 
truth  that  long  before  Jesus  Christ,  and  to-day  far 
beyond  the  limits  of  His  name  and  knowledge,  to  say 
nothing  of  His  faith  and  obedience,  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  workincj.  As  of  old  He  brooded  over  the  chaotic 
darkness,  ever  labouring  to  turn  chaos  into  order,  and 
darkness  into  light,  and  deformity  into  beauty  ;  so 
to-day,  all  over  the  field  of  humanit}^.  He  is  operating. 
Grand  as  that  truth  is,  it  is  not  the  truth  here.  What 
is  spoken  of  here  is  something  that  is  done  in  and  on 
Christian  men,  and  not  even  throusj'h  them  on  the 
world,  but  in  them  for  themselves.  "  He  shall  testily 
of  Me  "  to  you. 

Now  it  is  to  be  noted,  also,  that  the  first  and  special 
application  of  these  Avords  is  to  the  little  grouj) 
listening  to  Him.  Never  were  men  more  desolate  and 
beaten  down  than  these  were,  in  the  prospect  of 
Christ's  departure.  Never  were  men  more  utterly 
bewildered  and  dispirited  than  these  were,  in  the 
days  between  His  Crucitixion  and  His  Resurrection. 


THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD.      249 

Think  of  tliem  during  His  earthly  Ufe,  their  narrow 
understandings,  their  manifold  faults,  moral  as  well  as 
intellectual.  How  little  perception  they  had  of  any- 
thin  r^  that  He  said  to  them,  as  their  own  foolish 
questions  abundantly  show !  How  little  they  had 
drunk  in  His  Spirit,  as  their  selfish  and  ambitious 
janglings  amongst  themselves  abundantly  show ! 
They  were  but  Jews  like  their  brethren,  believing, 
indeed,  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Messiah,  but  not 
knowing  what  it  was  they  believed,  or  of  what  kind 
the  Messiah  was  in  whom  they  were  thus  partially 
trusting.  But  they  loved  Him  and  were  led  by  Him, 
and  so  they  Avere  brought  into  a  larger  place  by  the 
Spirit  whom  Christ  sent. 

What  was  it  that  made  these  dwarfs  into  cjiants  in 
six  weeks  ?  What  was  it  that  turned  their  narrowness 
into  breadth ;  that  made  them  start  up  all  at  once  as 
heroes,  and  that  so  swiftly  matured  them,  as  the  fruits 
and  flowers  are  ripened  under  tropical  sunshine  ?  The 
Resurrection  and  Ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  had  a 
great  deal  to  do  with  the  change ;  but  they  were  not 
all.  There  is  no  explanation  of  the  extraordinary 
transformation  of  these  men  as  we  see  them  in  the 
pages  of  the  Gospels,  and  as  wo  tind  them  on  the 
pages  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  except  this — the 
Resurrection  and  the  Ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  as 
facts,  and  the  Spirit  on  Pentecost  as  an  indAvelling 
Interpreter  of  the  facts.  He  came,  and  the  weak 
became  strong,  and  the  foolish  wise,  and  the  blind 
enlightened,  and  they  began  to  understand — though 
it  needed  all  their  lives  to  perfect  the  teaching — what 
it  was  that  their  ignorant  hands  had  grasped  and 
their  dim  perceptions  had  seen,  when  they  touched  the 


250      THE  DEFEXCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

hands  and  looked  upon  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God  working  within  them, 
working  upon  what  they  knew  of  the  historical  facts 
of  Christ's  life,  and  interpreting  these  to  them,  was 
the  explanation  of  their  change  and  growth.  And 
the  New  Testament  is  the  product  of  that.  Christ's 
life  was  the  truth  which  the  Spirit  used,  and  a 
product  of  His  teaching  Vv^as  these  Epistles  which  we 
have,  and  which  for  us  step  into  the  place  which  the 
historical  facts  held  for  them,  and  become  the 
Instrument  with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  will  deepen 
our  understandinsr  of  Christ  and  enlarge  our  know- 
ledsfe  of  what  He  is  to  us. 

So,  dear  friends,  whilst  here  we  have  a  promise 
which  specially  applies,  no  doubt,  to  these  twelve 
Apostles,  and  the  result  of  which  in  them  is  different 
from  its  result  in  us,  inasmuch  as  the  Spirit's  teaching, 
recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  becomes  for  us  the 
authoritative  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  the  promise 
still  applies  to  each  of  us  in  a  secondary  and  modified 
sense.  For  there  is  nothing  in  these  great  valedictory 
words  of  our  Lord's  which  has  not  a  universal  bearing, 
and  is  not  the  revelation  of  a  permanent  truth  in 
regard  to  the  Christian  Church.  And,  therefore,  here 
we  have  the  promise  of  a  universal  gift  to  all  Chris- 
tian men  and  women,  of  an  actual  Divine  Spirit  to 
dwell  with  each  of  us,  to  speak  in  our  hearts. 

And  what  will  He  do  there  ?  He  will  teach  us  a 
deeper  knoAvledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  help  us 
to  understand  better  Avhat  He  is.  He  will  show  us 
more  and  more  of  the  whole  sweep  of  His  work,  of  the 
Avhole  infinite  truth  for  morals  and  religion,  for  j^olitics 
and  society,  for  time  and  for  eternity,  about  men  and 


THE  UEFEXCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD.      251 

about  God,  which  is  wrapped  up  in  that  great  saying 
Avhich  we  first  of  all,  perhaps  under  the  pressure  of 
our  own  sense  of  sin,  grasp  as  our  deliverance  from 
sin :  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believed  in  Him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  That  is  the 
sum  of  truth  which  the  Spirit  of  God  interprets  to 
every  faithful  heart.  And  as  the  days  roll  on,  and 
new  problems  rise,  and  new  difficulties  present  them- 
selves, and  new  circumstances  emerge  in  our  personal 
life,  we  find  the  truth,  which  Ave  at  first  dimly  grasped 
as  life  and  salvation,  opening  out  into  wisdom  and 
depth  and  meaning  that  we  never  dreamed  of  in 
the  early  hours.  A  Spirit  that  bears  witness  of  Christ 
and  will  make  us  understand  Him  better  every  day 
we  live,  if  we  choose,  is  the  promise  that  we  have  here, 
for  all  Christian  men  and  women. 

Then,  note  that  this  inward  Avitness  of  Christ's 
depth  and  preciousness  is  the  true  Aveapon  and  stay 
against  a  hostile  Avorld.  A  little  candle  in  a  room  will 
make  the  lightning  outside  almost  in\^isible ;  and  if  I 
have  burning  in  my  heart  the  iuAvard  experience  and 
couAdction  of  Avhat  Jesus  Christ  is  and  Avhat  He  has 
done  and  Avill  do  for  me — oh,  then,  all  the  storm 
Avithout  may  rage,  and  it  Avill  not  trouble  us. 

If  you  take  an  empty  vessel  and  bring  pressure 
to  bear  upon  it,  in  go  the  sides.  Fill  it,  and  they  Avill 
resist  the  pressure.  So  Avith  groAving  knoAvledge  of 
Christ,  and  groAving  personal  experience  of  His 
sweetness  in  our  souls,  Ave  shall  be  able  to  throAv  off, 
untouched  and  undinted,  the  pressure  Avhich  Avould 
otherAvise  have  crushed  us. 

Therefore,  dear  friends,  here  is   the  true   secret  of 


252      THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

tranquillity,  in  an  age  of  questioning  and  doubt.  Let 
me  have  that  Divine  voice  speaking  in  my  heart,  as  I 
may  have,  and  no  matter  what  questions  may  be 
doubtful,  this  is  sure — "  We  know  in  whom  we  have 
believed " ;  and  we  can  say,  "  Settle  all  your  con- 
troversies any  Avay  you  like :  one  thing  I  know,  and 
that  Divine  voice  is  ever  saying  it  to  me  in  my  deepest 
consciousness — the  Son  of  God  is  come  and  hath 
given  us  understanding  that  Ave  may  know  Him  that 
is  true ;  and  we  are  in  Him  that  is  true."  Labour  for 
more  of  this  inward,  personal  conviction  of  the 
preciousness  of  Jesus  Christ  to  strengthen  you  against 
a  hostile  world. 

And  remember  that  there  are  conditions  under 
which  this  Voice  speaks  in  our  souls.  One  is  that  Ave 
attend  to  the  instrument  Avhich  the  Spirit  of  God  uses, 
and  that  is  "  the  truth."  If  Christians  Avill  not  read 
their  Bibles,  the}^  need  not  expect  to  have  the  Avords 
of  these- Bibles  interpreted  and  made  real  to  them  by 
any  iuAvard  experience.  If  3'ou  Avant  to  have  a  faith 
Avhich  is  vindicated  and  Avarranted  by  your  daily 
experience,  there  is  only  one  Avay  to  get  it,  and  that  is, 
to  use  the  truth  Avhich  the  Spirit  uses,  and  to  bring 
yourself  into  contact,  continual  and  reverent  and 
intelligent,  Avith  the  great  body  of  Divine  truth  that 
is  conveyed  in  these  authoritatiA^o  Avords  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  speaking  through  the  first  Avitnesses. 

And  there  must  be  moral  discipline  too.  Laziness, 
Avorldliness,  the  absorption  of  attention  Avith  other 
things,  self-conceit,  prejudice,  and,  I  Avas  going  to  say, 
almost  above  all,  the  taking  of  our  religion  and 
religious  opinions  at  secondhand  from  men  and 
teachers  and  books — all  these  stand  in  the  Avay  of  our 


THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD.      253 

hearing  the  Spirit  of  God  when  He  speaks.  Come 
away  from  the  babble  and  go  by  yourself,  and  take 
your  Bibles  with  you,  and  read  them,  and  meditate 
upon  them,  and  get  near  the  Master  of  whom  they 
speak,  and  the  Spirit  which  uses  the  truth  will  use  it 
to  fortify  you. 

III. — And,  lastly,  note  the  consequent  witness  with 
which  the  Christian  may  win  the  Avorld.  "  And  ye  also 
shall  boar  witness  of  Me  because  ye  have  been  with 
Me  from  the  beginning."  That  also  has,  of  course, 
direct  reference  to  the  Apostles'  witness  to  the  facts  of 
our  Lord's  historical  appearance.  His  life,  His  death. 
His  resurrection,  and  His  ascension ;  and  therefore 
their  qualification  was  simply  the  companionship  with 
Him  which  enabled  them  to  say,  "  Wo  saw  what  we 
tell  you ;  we  were  witnesses  from  the  beginning." 

But  then,  again,  I  say  that  there  is  no  word  here 
that  belongs  only  to  the  Apostles ;  it  belongs  to  us  all, 
and  so  here  is  the  task  of  the  Christian  Church  in  all 
its  members.  They  receive  the  witness  of  the  Spirit, 
and  they  are  Christ's  witnesses  in  the  world. 

Note  what  we  have  to  do — to  bear  witness ;  not  to 
argue,  not  to  adorn,  but  simply  to  attest.  Kote  what 
we  have  to  attest — the  fact,  not  of  the  historical  life 
of  Jesus  Christ,  because  we  arc  not  in  a  position  to  be 
witnesses  of  that,  but  the  fact  of  His  preciousness  and 
power,  and  the  fact  of  our  own  experience  of  what  He 
has  done  for  us.  Note  that  that  is  by  far  the  most 
powerful  agency  for  winning  the  world.  You  can  never 
make  men  angry  by  saying  to  them,  "  We  have  found 
the  Messias,"  You  cannot  irritate  people,  or  provoke 
them  into  a  controversial  opposition  when  you  sa}', 
"  Brother !   let  me  tell  you   my  experience.      I  was 


254      THE  DEFENCE  AGAINST  A  HOSTILE  WORLD. 

dark,  sad,  sinful,  weak,  solitary,  miserable ;  and  I  got 
light,  gladness,  pardon,  strength,  companionship,  and  a 
joyful  hope.  I  was  blind — yon  remember  me  when 
my  e3^es  were  dark,  and  I  sat  begging  outside  the 
Temple ;  I  Avas  blind,  now  I  see — look  at  my  eyeballs," 
We  can  all  say  that.  This  is  the  witness  that  needs 
no  eloquence,  no  genius,  no  anything  except  honesty 
and  experience ;  and  whosoever  has  tasted  and  felt 
and  handled  of  the  Word  of  Life  may  surely  go  to  a 
brother  and  say,  "  Brother !  I  have  eaten  and  am 
satisfied.  Will  you  not  helj)  yourselves  ? "  We  can 
all  do  it,  and  we  ought  to  do  it.  The  Christian 
privilege  of  being  witnessed  to  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
our  hearts  brings  with  it  the  Christian  duty  of  being 
witnesses  in  our  turn  to  the  world.  That  is  our  only 
weapon  against  the  hostility  which  godless  humanity 
bears  to  ourselves  and  to  our  i\Iaster.  We  may  win  men 
by  that ;  we  can  win  them  by  nothing  else.  "  Ye  are 
My  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord,  and  My  servants  whom 
I  have  chosen."  Oh  !  brother.  Christian  friend  !  listen 
to  the  ]^Iaster,  who  says,  "  Him  that  confesseth  Me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  confess  before  My  Father 
in  heaven." 


-v«^ 


XXIV. 

dbriet'ci  IRcaeons  for  present  Speech 
ant)  jfonner  Silence. 

■■'  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be 
offended.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  sj'nagogues  ;  yea,  the 
time  Cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  you  -will  think  that  he 
doeth  God  service.  And  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you, 
because  they  have  not  known  the  Father  nor  Me.  But  these 
things  have  I  told  you,  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye 
may  remember  that  I  told  you  of  them.  And  these  things  I 
said  not  unto  you  at  the  beginning,  because  I  was  with  you. 
But  now  I  go  My  way  to  Him  that  sent  Me  ;  and  none  of  you 
asketh  Me.  "Whither  goest  Thou  /  But  because  I  have  said 
these  things  unto  you  sorrow  hath  filled  your  heart." — John 
xvi.  1 — 6. 

HE  unbroken  flow  of  tlioudit,  and  the 
many  subtle  links  of  connection  be- 
tween the  parts,  of  these  inexhaus- 
tible last  words  of  our  Lord  make  any 
attempt  at  grouping  them  into  sec- 
tions more  or  less  unsatisfactory  and  artificial.  But 
I  have  ventured  to  throw  these,  perhaps  too  many, 
verses  together  for  our  consideration  now,  because 
a  phrase  of  frequent  recurrence  in  them  manifestly 
affords  a  ke}'  to  their  main  subject.  Notice  how  our 
Lord  four  times  repeats  the  expression,  "  these  things 


256  CHEISrS  REASONS  FOR  PRESENT  SPEECH 

have  I  spoken  unto  you."  He  is  not  so  much  adding 
anything  new  to  His  words,  as  rather  contemplating 
the  reasons  for  His  speech  now,  the  reasons  for  His 
silence  before,  and  the  imperfect  apprehension  of  the 
things  spoken  which  His  disciples  had,  and  which 
led  to  their  making  His  announcement,  thus  im- 
perfectly understood,  an  occasion  for  sorrow  rather 
than  for  joy.  There  is  a  kind  of  landing-place  or 
pause  here  in  the  ascending  staircase.  Our  Lord 
meditates  for  Himself,  and  invites  us  to  meditate 
with  Him,  rather  upon  His  past  utterances  than  upon 
anything  additional  to  them.  So,  then,  whilst  it  is  true 
that  we  have  in  two  of  these  verses  a  repetition,  in  a 
somewhat  more  intense  and  detailed  form,  of  the 
previous  warnings  of  the  hostility  of  the  world,  in 
the  main  the  subject  of  the  present  section  is  that 
which  I  have  indicated.  And  I  take  the  fourfold 
recurrence  of  that  clause  to  Avhich  I  have  pointed  as 
marking  out  for  us  the  main  ideas  that  we  are  to 
Cfather  from  these  words. 

I. — There  is,  first,  our  Lord's  loving  reason  for  His 
speech. 

This  is  given  in  a  double  form.  "These  things 
have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  ye  should  not  be 
offended."  And,  again,  "  These  things  have  I  told 
you,  that  when  the  time  shall  come  3^e  may  remember 
that  I  told  you  of  them."  These  two  statements 
substantially  coalesce  and  point  to  the  same  idea. 

They  are  separated,  as  I  have  said,  by  a  reiteration; 
in  more  emphatic  form,  of  the  dark  prospect  which  He 
has  been  holding  out  to  His  disciples.  He  tells  them 
that  the  world  which  hates  them  is  to  be  fully 
identified  with  the  apostate  Jewish  Church.     "  The 


AND  FORMER  SILENCE.  257 

synagogue "  is  for  them  "  the  world."  There  is  a 
solemn  lesson  in  that.  The  organized  body  that  calls 
itself  God's  Church  and  House  may  become  the  most 
rampant  enemy  of  Christ's  people,  and  be  the  truest 
embodiment  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  of  all  that  He 
means  by  "  the  world."  A  formal  church  is  the  true 
world  always ;  and  to-day  as  then.  And  such  a  body 
will  do  the  cruellest  things  and  believe  that  it  is 
offering  up  Christ's  witnesses  as  sacrifices  to  God, 
That  is  partly  an  aggravation,  and  partly  an  alleviation 
of  the  sin.  It  is  possible  that  the  inquisitor  and  the 
man  in  the  San  Benito  whom  he  ties  to  the  stake  may 
shake  hands  yet,  at  His  side  up  yonder.  But  a 
church  which  has  become  the  world  will  do  its 
persecution  and  think  that  it  is  worship,  and  call  the 
burning  of  God's  people  an  auto-da-fe  (act  of  faith)  ; 
and  the  bottom  of  it  all  is  that,  in  the  blaze  of  light, 
and  calling  themselves  God's,  "  they  do  not  know " 
either  God  or  Christ.  They  do  not  know  the  one 
because  they  will  not  know  the  other. 

But  that  is  all  parenthetical  in  the  present  section, 
and  so  I  say  nothing  more  about  it ;  and  ask  you, 
rather,  just  to  look  at  the  loving  reasons  which 
Christ  here  suggests  for  His  present  speech — "  that  ye 
should  not  be  offended,"  or  stumble.  He  warns  them 
of  the  storm  before  it  bursts,  lest,  when  it  bursts,  it 
should  sweep  them  away  from  their  moorings.  Of 
course,  there  could  be  nothing  more  productive  of 
intellectual  bewilderment,  and  more  likely  to  lead  to 
doubt  as  to  one's  own  convictions,  than  to  find  oneself 
at  odds  with  the  synagogue  about  the  question  of  the 
Messiah.  A  modest  man  might  naturally  say,  "  Per- 
haps  I    am   wrong  and  they  are  right."     A  coward 


258         CHRISTS  REASONS  FOR  PRESENT  SPEECH 

would  be  sure  to  say,  "  I  will  sink  my  convictions  and 
fall  in  with  the  majority."  The  stumbling-block  for 
these  first  Jewish  converts  in  the  attitude  of  the  whole 
mass  of  the  nation  towards  Christ  and  His  pretensions, 
is  one  of  such  a  magnitude  as  we  cannot,  by  any  exer- 
cise of  our  imagination,  realize.  And,  says  Christ, 
"  the  only  way  by  which  you  will  ever  get  over  the 
temptation  to  intellectual  doubt  or  to  cowardly  apos- 
tacy  that  arises  from  your  being  thrown  out  of  sym- 
pathy with  the  whole  mass  of  your  people,  and  the 
traditions  of  the  generations,  is  to  reflect  that  I  told 
you  it  would  be  so,  before  it  came  to  pass." 

Of  course,  all  that  has  a  special  bearing  upon 
those  to  whom  it  was  originally  addressed,  and  then 
it  has  a  secondary  bearing  upon  Christians,  Avhose 
lot  it  is  to  live  in  a  time  of  actual  persecution.  But 
that  does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  destroy  the  fact 
that  it  also  has  a  bearing  upon  every  one  of  us.  For, 
if  you  and  I  are  Christian  people,  and  trying  to  live 
like  our  Master,  and  to  do  as  He  would  have  us  to  do, 
we,  too,  shall  often  have  to  stand  in  such  a  very  small 
minority,  and  be  surrounded  by  people  who  take  such 
an  entirely  opposite  view  of  duty  and  of  truth,  as  that 
we  shall  be  only  too  much  disposed  to  give  up  and 
falter  in  the  clearness,  fulness,  and  bravcness  of  our 
utterance,  and  say,  "  Well,  perhaps  after  all  it  is  better 
for  me  to  hold  my  tongue." 

And  then,  besides  this,  there  are  all  the  cares  and 
griefs  which  befall  each  of  us,  with  regard  to  which 
also,  as  well  as  with  regard  to  the  difliculties  and 
dangers  and  oppositions  which  we  may  meet  with  in  a 
faithful  Christian  life,  the  principles  of  my  text  have  a 
distinct  and   direct   application.     He  has  told  us  in 


AXD  FORMER  SILENCE.  259 


order  that  we  might  not  stumble,  because  when  the 
hour  comes  and  the  sorrow  comes  with  it,  we  remember 
that  He  told  us  all  about  it  before. 

It  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Christianity  that 
Jesus  Christ  does  not  try  to  enlist  recruits  by  highly- 
coloured,  rosy  pictures  of  the  blessmg  and  joy  of  serving 
Him,  keeping  His  hand  all  the  while  upon  the  weary 
marches   and   the   wounds   and   pains.     He    tells   us 
plainly  at  the  beginning,  "  If  you  take  My  yoke  upon 
you,  you  will  have  to  carry  a  heavy  burden.     You  will 
have  to  abstain  from  a  great  many  things  that  you 
would  like  to  do.     You  will  have   to  do  a  great  many 
things  that  your  flesh  will   not   Hke."     The  road  is 
rough,  and  a  high  wall  on  each  side.     There  are  lovely 
Howers  and  green  pastures  on  the  other  side  of  the 
hedge,  where  it  is  a  great  deal  easier  walking  upon  the 
short  grass  than  it  is  upon  the  stony  path.  '  The  road- 
way is  narrow,  and  the  gateway  is  very  strait,  but 
the  track  goes  steadily  up.     Will  you  accept  the  terms 
and  come  in  and  walk  upon  it  ? 

It  is  far  better  and  nobler,  and  more  attractive 
also,  to  tell  frankly  and  fully  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  than  to  try  to  coax  us  by  dwelling  on  plea- 
sures and  ease.  Jesus  Christ  will  have  no ''service  on 
false  pretences,  but  will  let  us  understand  at  the 
begmning  that  if  we  serve  under  His  flag  we  have  to 
make  up  our  minds  to  hardships  which  otherwise  we 
may  escape,  to  antagonisms  which  otherwise  will  not 
be  provoked,  and  to  more  than  an  ordinary  share  of 
soiTow  and  suffering  and  pain.  Through  much  tribu- 
lation we  must  enter  the  Kingdom. 

And  the  way  by  which  all  these  troubles  and  cares, 
whether  they  be  those  incident  and  peculiar  to  Chris- 

17* 


2o0  CHRIST'S  REASONS  FOR  PRESENT  SPEECH 

tian  life,  or  those  common  to  humanity,  can  best  be 
met  and  overcome,  is  precisely  by  this  thought,  "  The 
Master  has  told  us  before,"  Sorrows  anticipated  are  more 
easily  met.  It  is  when  the  vessel  is  caught  with  all  its 
sails  set  that  it  is  almost  sure  to  go  down,  and,  at  all 
events,  sure  to  be  badly  damaged  in  the  typhoon.  But 
when  the  barometer  has  been  watched,  and  its  fall  has 
given  warning,  and  everything  movable  has  been  made 
fast,  and  every  spare  yard  has  been  sent  below,  and  all 
tightened  up  and  ship-shape — then  she  can  ride  out 
the  storm.  Forewarned  is  forearmed.  Savages  think, 
when  an  eclipse  comes,  that  a  wolf  has  swallowed  the 
sun,  and  it  will  never  come  out  again.  We  know  that 
it  has  all  been  calculated  beforehand,  and,  since  we 
know  that  it  is  coming  to-morrow,  when  it  does  come, 
it  is  only  a  passing  darkness.  Sorrow  anticipated  is 
sorrow  half  overcome  ;  and  when  it  falls  on  us,  the  be- 
wilderment, as  if  "  some  strange  thing  had  happened," 
will  be  escaped,  when  we  can  remember  that  the 
Master  has  told  us  it  all  beforehand. 

And  again,  sorrow  foretold  gives  us  confidence  in 
our  Guide.  We  have  the  chart,  and  as  Ave  look  upon 
it  Ave  see  marked  "waterless  country,"  "pathless 
rocks,"  "desert  and  sand,"  "Avells  and  palm  trees." 
Well,  Avhen  Ave  come  to  the  first  of  these,  and  find 
ourselves,  as  the  map  says,  in  the  Avaterless  country ; 
and  Avhen,  as  Ave  go  on  step  by  step,  and  mile  after 
mile,  Ave  find  that  it  is  all  doAvn  there,  Ave  say  to  our- 
selves, "  The  remainder  Avill  be  accurate,  too."  And 
if  Ave  are  in  Marah  to-day,  Avhcrc  the  Avater  is  bitter, 
and  nothing  but  the  Avood  of  the  tree  that  groAvs  there 
can  ever  SAveeten  it,  Ave  shall  be  at  Elim  to-morroAv, 
■where  there  are  the  tAvelve  Avells  and  the  seventy  palm 


AND  FORMER  SILENCE.  261 


trees.  The  chart  is  right,  and  the  chart  says  that  the 
end  of  it  all  is  the  land  that  flows  with  milk  and 
honey.  He  has  told  us  this ;  if  there  had  been  any- 
thing worse  than  this,  He  would  have  told  us  that 
"If  it  were  not  so  I  would  have  told  you."  The  sorrow 
foretold  deepens  our  confidence  in  our  Guide. 

Sorrow  that  comes  punctually  in  accordance  with 
His  word  plainly  comes  in  obedience  to  His  will.  Our 
Lord  uses  a  little  word  in  this  context  which  is  very 
significant.     He  says,  "  when  their  hour  is  come." 

"  Their  hour  "—the  time  allotted  to  them.  Allotted 
by  whom?  Allotted  by  Him.  He  could  tell  that 
they  would  come,  because  it  was  as  His  instruments 
that  they  came.  "  Their  time  "  was  His  appointment. 
It  was  only  an  "  hour,"  a  definite,  appointed,  and  brief 
period  in  accordance  with  His  loving  purpose.  It 
takes  all  sorts  of  weathers  to  make  a  year ;  and  after 
all  the  sorts  of  weathers  are  run  out,  the  year's  results 
are  realized  and  the  calm  comes.  And  so  the  good 
old  hymn,  with  its  rhythm  that  speaks  at  once  of 
fear  and  triumph,  has  caught  the  true  meaning  of 
these  words  of  our  Lord's — 

Why  should  I  complain 

Of  want  or  distress, 
Temptation  or  pain .' 

He  told  me  no  less. 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  ye  might 
not  be  offended." 

II-— Well,  still  further,  note  our  Lord's  loving 
reasons  for  past  silence.  "These  things  I  said  not 
unto  you  from  the  beginning,  because  I  was  with 
jou." 

Of  course   there  had   been  in   his   early  ministry 


262  CHRISTS  REASONS  FOR  FRESENT  SFEECH 

hints,  and  very  plain  references,  to  persecutions  and 
trials,  but  we  must  not  restrict  the  "  these  things  "  of 
my  text  to  that  only,  but  rather  include  the  whole  of 
the  previous  chapter,  in  which  He  sets  the  sorrow  and 
the  hostility  which  His  servants  have  to  endure  in  its 
true  light,  as  being  the  consequence  of  their  union 
with  Him  and  of  the  closeness  and  the  identity  of 
life  and  fate  between  the  Vine  and  the  branches.  In 
so  systematic  and  detailed  fashion,  and  with  such  an 
exhibition  of  the  grounds  of  its  necessity,  our  Lord 
had  not  spoken  of  the  world's  hostility  in  His  earlier 
ministry,  but  had  reserved  it  to  these  last  moments. 
And  the  reason  why  He  had  given  but  passing  hints 
before  was  because  He  was  there.  What  a  superb 
confidence  that  expresses  in  His  ability  to  shield  His 
poor  followers  from  all  that  might  hurt  and  harm 
them !  He  spreads  the  ample  robe  of  His  protection 
over  them,  or  rather,  to  go  back  to  His  own  metaphor, 
"  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings  " 
so  He  gathers  them  to  His  own  breast,  and  stretches 
over  them  that  which  is  at  once  protection  and 
warmth,  and  keeps  them  safe.  As  long  as  He  is  there, 
no  harm  can  come  to  them.  But  He  is  going  away, 
and  so  it  is  time  to  speak,  and  to  speak  more  plainly. 

That,  too,  yields  for  us,  dear  brethren,  truths  that 
apply  to  us  quite  as  much  as  to  that  little  group  of 
silent  listeners.  For  us,  too,  difficulties  and  sorrows, 
though  foretold  in  general  terms,  are  largely  hidden 
till  they  are  near.  It  would  have  been  of  little  use 
for  Christ  to  have  spoken  more  plainly  in  those  earl}^ 
days  of  His  ministry.  The  disciples  managed  to 
forget  and  to  misunderstand  His  plain  utterances, 
for  instance,  about  His  own  death  and  resurrection. 


AND  FORMER  SILENCE.  263 

There  needs  to  be  an  adaptation  between  the  hearing 
ear  and  the  spoken  word,  in  order  that  the  word 
spoken  should  be  of  use.  And  there  are  great  tracts 
of  Scripture  deahng  Avith  the  sorrows  of  hfe,  which 
He  perfectly  dark  and  dead  to  us,  until  experience 
vitalizes  them.  The  old  Greeks  used  to  send  messages 
from  one  army  to  another  by  means  of  a  roll  of 
parchment  twisted  spirally  round  a  baton,  and  then 
written  upon.  It  was  perfectly  unintelligible  when 
it  fell  into  a  man's  hands  that  had  not  a  corre- 
sponding baton  to  twist  it  upon.  Many  of  Christ's 
messages  to  us  are  like  that.  You  can  only  under- 
stand the  utterances  when  life  gives  you  the  frame 
round  which  to  wrap  them,  and  then  they  flash  up 
into  meaning,  and  we  say  at  once,  "  He  told  us  it  all 
before,  and  I  scarcely  Imew  that  He  had  told  me,  until 
this  moment  when  I  need  it." 

Oh !  it  is  merciful  that  there  should  be  a  gradual 
unveiling  of  what  is  to  come  to  us,  that  the  road 
should  wind,  and  that  we  should  see  so  short  a  way 
before  us.  Did  you  never  say  to  yourselves,  "  If  I 
had  known  all  this  before,  I  do  not  think  I  could 
have  lived  to  face  it"?  And  did  you  not  feel  how 
good  and  kind  and  loving  it  was,  that  in  the  reve- 
lation there  had  been  concealment,  and  that  while 
Jesus  Christ  had  told  us  in  general  terms  that  we 
must  expect  sorrows  and  trials,  this  specific  form 
of  sorrow  and  trial  had  not  been  foreseen  by  us 
until  we  came  close  to  it  ?  Thank  God  for  the 
loving  reticence,  and  for  the  as  loving  eloquence  of 
His  speech  and  of  His  silence,  with  regard  to  sorrow. 
And  take  this  further  lesson,  that  there  ought  to  be 
in  all  our  lives  times  of  close  and  blessed  communion 


264  CHRIST S  REASONS  FOR  PRESENT  SPEECH 

with  that  Master,  Avhen  the  sense  of  His  presence 
with  us  makes  all  thous^ht  of  sorrows  and  trials  in 
the  future,  out  of  place  and  needlessly  disturbing.  If 
these  disciples  had  drunk  in  the  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ  when  they  were  with  Him,  then  they  would 
not  have  been  so  bewildered  when  He  left  them. 
When  He  was  near  them  there  was  something? 
better  for  them  to  do  than  to  be  "  over  exquisite  to 
cast  the  fashion  of  uncertain  evils  "  in  the  future — 
namely,  to  grow  into  His  life,  to  drink  in  the  sweet- 
ness of  His  presence,  to  be  moulded  into  the  likeness 
of  His  character,  to  understand  Him  better,  and  to 
realize  His  nearness  more  fully.  And,  dear  brethren, 
for  us  all  there  are  times — and  it  is  our  own  fault  if 
these  are  not  very  frequent  and  blessed — when  thus, 
in  such  an  hour  of  sweet  communion  with  the  present 
Christ,  the  future  will  be  all  radiant  and  calm,  if  Ave 
look  into  it,  or,  better,  the  present  will  be  so  blessed 
that  there  will  be  no  need  to  think  of  the  future. 
These  men  in  the  upper  chamber,  if  they  had  learnt 
all  the  lessons  that  He  was  teachinof  them  then,  Avould 
not  have  gone  out,  to  sleep  in  Gethsemane,  and  to  tell 
lies  in  the  high  priest's  hall,  and  to  fly  hke  frightened 
sheep  from  the  Cross,  and  to  despair  at  the  tomb. 
And  you  and  I,  if  we  sit  at  His  table,  and  keep  our 
hearts  near  Him,  eating  and  drinking  of  that  heavenly 
manna,  shall  "  go  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  forty 
days  into  the  wilderness,"  and  say — 

E'en  let  the  unknown  morrow 
Bring  with  it  what  it  may. 

ni. — Lastly,  I   must   touch,  for  the  sake  of  com- 
pleteness, upon  the  final  thought  in  these  pregnant 


AND  FORMER  SILEXCE.  265 

verses,  and  that  is,  the  imperfect  apprehension  of 
our  Lord's  words,  Avhich  leads  to  sorrow  instead  of 
joy.  "Now  I  go  My  way  to  Him  that  sent  Me,  and 
none  of  you  asketh  Me,  Whither  goest  Thou  ?  But 
because  I  have  said  these  things  unto  you,  sorrow 
hath  filled  your  heart." 

He  had  been  tellinof  them — and  it  was  the  one 
definite  idea  that  they  gathered  from  His  words — that 
He  Avas  going.  And  what  did  they  say  ?  They  said, 
"  Goinof !  What  is  to  become  of  us  ? "  If  there  had 
been  a  little  less  selfishness  and  a  little  more  love,  and 
if  they  had  put  their  question,  "  Going  !  What  is  to 
become  of  Him  ? "  then  it  Avould  not  have  been  sorrow 
that  would  have  filled  their  hearts,  but  a  joy  that 
would  have  flooded  out  all  the  sorrow,  "and  the 
winter  of  their  discontent "  would  have  been  chansfed 
into  "glorious  summer,"  because  He  was  Gfoincf  to 
Him  that  sent  Him ;  that  is  to  say,  He  was  going 
with  His  Avork  done  and  His  message  accomplished. 
And  therefore,  if  they  could  have  only  looked  over 
their  own  selves,  and  the  bearing  of  His  departure,  as 
it  seemed  to  them,  on  themselves,  and  have  thoui^ht 
of  it  a  little  as  it  affected  Him,  they  would  have 
found  that  all  the  oppressive  and  the  dark  in  it 
would  have  disappeared,  and  they  would  have  been 
glad. 

Ah !  dear  brethren,  that  gives  us  a  thought  on 
which  I  can  but  touch  now,  that  the  steadfast 
contemplation  of  the  ascended  Christ,  who  has  gone 
to  the  Father,  having  finished  His  work,  is  the 
sovereign  antidote  against  all  sense  of  separation  and 
solitude,  the  sovereign  power  by  which  we  may  ftice  a 
hostile  world,  the  sovereign  cure  for  every  sorrow.     If 


266  CHRIST S  REASONS  FOR  PRESENT  SPEECH. 

we  could  live  in  tlie  light  of  the  great  triumphant 
ascended  Lord,  then,  oh !  how  small  would  the  babble 
of  a  world  be.  If  the  great  White  Throne,  and  He 
that  sits  upon  it,  was  more  distinctly  before  us,  then 
we  could  face  anything,  and  sorrow  would  "  become 
a  solemn  scorn  of  ills,"  and  all  the  transitory  would 
be  reduced  to  its  proper  insignificance,  and  we  should 
be  emancipated  from  fear  and  every  temptation  to 
unfaithfulness  and  apostacy.  Look  up  to  the  Master 
that  has  gone,  and  as  the  dying  martyr  outside  the 
city  wall  "  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of 
Man  standing  " — having  sprung  to  his  feet  to  help  his 
poor  servant — "at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  so  with 
that  vision  in  our  eyes  and  the  light  of  that  face 
flashing  upon  our  faces,  and  making  them  like  the 
angels',  we  shall  be  masters  of  grief  and  care,  and 
pain  and  trial,  and  enmity  and  disappointment,  and 
sorrow  and  sin,  and  feel  that  the  absent  Christ  is  the 
present  Christ,  and  that  the  present  Christ  is  the  con- 
quering power  in  us. 

Dear  brethren,  there  is  nothing  else  that  will  make 
us  victors  over  the  world  and  ourselves.  If  we  can 
grasp  Him  by  our  faith  and  keep  ourselves  near  Him, 
then  union  with  Him  as  of  the  Vine  and  the  branches, 
which  will  result  inevitably  in  suffering  here,  will 
result  as  inevitably  in  joy  hereafter.  For  He  will 
never  relax  the  adamantine  grasp  of  His  strong  hand 
until  He  raises  us  to  Himself,  and  if  so  be  that  Ave 
suffer  with  Him  we  shall  also  be  glorified  together. 


XXV. 


Zbc  2)cpartino  Cbrist  anb  tbc  domim 
Spirit 

"  Nevertheless,  I  tell  you  the  truth,  it  is  expedient  for  you  that  I 
go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come 
unto  you  :  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  Him  unto  you. 

"  And  when  He  is  come,  He  will  eonrince  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment."— Johx  xvi.  7,  8. 

E  read  these  words  in  the  light  of  all  that 
has  gone   after,   and   to   us   they   are 
familiar  and  almost  threadbare.     But . 
if  we  would  appreciate  their  sublimit}-, 
we  must  think  away  eighteen  centuries, 
and  all  Christendom,  and  recall  these  eleven  poor  men 
and  their  peasant  Leader  in  the  upper  room.     They 
were  not  very  wise,  nor  very  strong,  and  outside  these 
four  walls  there  was  scarcely  a  creature  in  the  whole 
world  that  had  the  least  belief  either  in  Him  or  m 
them.     They  had  everything  against  them,  and  most 
of  all  their  own  hearts.     They  had  nothing  for  them 
but  their  Master's  promise.      Their   eyes   had   been 
dimmed  by  their  sorrowful  hearts,  so  that  they  could 
not  see  the  truth  which  He  had  been  trying  to  reveal 
to  them  ;  and  His  departure  had  presented  itself  to 


268  THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST 

them  only  as  it  aftected  themselves,  and  therefore  had 
brought  a  sense  of  loss  and  desolation. 

And  now  He  bids  them  think  of  that  departure,  as 
it  aftects  themselves,  as  pure  gain.  "  It  is  for  your 
profit  that  I  go  away."  He  explains  that  staggering 
statement  by  the  thought  which  He  has  already  pre- 
sented to  them,  in  varying  aspects,  of  His  departure 
as  the  occasion  for  the  coming  of  that  Great  Comforter, 
who,  when  He  is  come,  will  through  them  work  upon  the 
world,  which  knows  neither  them  nor  Him.  They  are 
to  go  forth  "  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves,"  but  in 
this  promise  He  tells  them  that  they  will  become  the 
judges  and  accusers  of  the  world,  which,  by  the  Spirit 
dwelling  in  them,  they  will  be  able  to  overcome,  and 
convict  of  error  and  of  fault. 

We  must  remember  that  the  whole  purpose  of 
the  words  which  we  are  considering  now  is  the 
strengthening  of  the  disciples  in  their  conflict  with 
the  world,  and  that,  therefore,  the  operations  of  that 
Divine  Spirit  which  are  here  spoken  of  are  operations 
carried  on  by  their  instrumentality  and  through  the 
word  which  they  spake.  With  that  explanation  we 
can  consider  the  great  words  before  us. 

I. — The  first  thing  that  strikes  me  about  them  is 
that  wonderful  thought  of  the  gain  to  Christ's  servants 
from  Christ's  departure.  "  It  is  expedient  for  you 
that  I  go  awa}'." 

I  need  not  enlarge  here  upon  what  we  have  had 
frequent  occasion  to  remark,  the  manner  in  vrhich 
our  Lord  here  represents  the  complex  whole  of  His 
death  and  ascension  as  being  His  own  voluntary 
act.  He  goes.  He  is  neither  taken  away  by  death 
nor  rapt  up  to  heaven  in  a  whirlwind,  but  of  His  own 


AND  THE  COMING  SFIFJT.  269 

exuberant  power  and  by  His  own  will  He  goes  into 
the  region  of  the  grave  and  thence  to  the  throne. 
Contrast  the  story  of  His  ascension  with  that  Old 
Testament  story  of  the  ascension  of  Elijah.  One 
needed  the  chariot  of  fire  and  the  horses  of  fire  to  bear 
him  up  into  the  sphere,  all  foreign  to  his  mortal  and 
earthly  manhood ;  the  Other  needed  no  outward 
power  to  lift  Him,  nor  any  vehicle  to  carry  Him  from 
this  dim  spot  which  men  call  earth,  but  slowly 
serenely,  upborne  by  His  own  indwelling  energy,  and 
rising  as  to  His  native  home.  He  ascended  up  on  high, 
and  went  where  the  very  manner  of  His  going  pro- 
claimed that  He  had  been  before.  "  If  /  go  away,  I 
will  send  him." 

But  that  is  a  digression.  What  we  are  concerned 
with  now  is  the  thought  of  Christ's  departure  as  being 
a  step  in  advance,  and  a  positive  gain,  even  to  these 
poor,  bewildered  men  who  were  clustering  round  Him, 
depending  absolutely  upon  Himself,  and  feeling  them- 
selves orphaned  and  helpless  without  Him. 

Now,  if  we  would  feel  the  full  force  and  singularity 
of  this  saying  of  our  Lord's,  let  us  put  side  by  side 
Avith  it  that  other  one,  "I  have  a  desire  to  depart 
and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better.  Neverthe- 
less, to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you." 
Why  is  it  that  the  Apostle  says,  "  Though  I  want  to  go, 
I  am  bound  to  stay  ?  "  and  why  is  it  that  the  Master 
says,  "  It  is  for  your  good  that  I  am  going,"  but 
because  of  the  essential  difi:erence  in  the  relation  of 
the  two  to  the  people  who  are  to  be  left,  and  in  the 
continuance  of  the  work  of  the  two  after  they  had 
departed  ?  Paul  kncAv  that  when  he  went,  whatever 
befell  those  whom  he  loved  and  would  fain  help,  he 


270  THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST 

could  not  stretch  a  hand  to  do  anything  for  them.  Ho 
knew  that  death  dropped  the  portculhs  between  him 
and  them,  and,  whatever  their  sore  need  on  the  one 
side  of  the  iron  gate,  he  on  the  other  could  not  succour 
or  save.  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  It  is  better  for  you  that  I 
should  go,"  because  He  knew  that  all  His  influences 
would  flow  through  the  grated  door  unchecked,  and 
that,  departed,  He  would  still  be  the  life  of  them  that 
trusted  in  Him ;  and,  having  left  them,  would  come 
near  them  by  the  very  act  of  leaving  them. 

And  so  there  is  here  indicated  for  us — as  we  shall 
have  occasion  to  see  more  fully  presently — in  that  one 
singular  and  anomalous  fact  of  Christ's  departure  being 
a  positive  gain  to  those  that  trust  in  Him,  the  singu- 
larity and  uniqueness  of  His  work  for  them  and  His 
relation  to  them. 

The  words  mean  a  great  deal  more  than  the  analo- 
gies of  our  relatioii  to.  dear  ones  or  great  ones,  loves  or 
teachers,  who  have  departed,  might  suggest.  Of 
course  we  all  know  that  it  is  quite  true  that  death 
reveals  to  the  heart  the  sweetness  and  the  precious- 
ness  of  the  departed  ones,  and  that  its  refining  touch 
manifests  to  our  blind  eyes  what  we  did  not  see  so 
clearly  when  they  were  beside  us.  We  all  know  that 
it  needs  distance  to  measure  men,  and  the  dropping 
away  of  the  commonplace  and  the  familiar  ere  avc  can 
see  the  likeness  of  our  contemporaries  to  the  great  of 
old.  We  have  to  travel  across  the  plains  before  we 
can  measure  the  relative  height  of  the  clustered  moun- 
tains, and  discern  which  is  manifestly  the  loftiest. 
And  all  this  is  true  in  reference  to  Jesus  Christ  and 
His  relation  to  us.  But  that  does  not  go  half-way 
down  to  the  understanding  of  such  words  as  these  of 


AKD  THE  COMING  SPIRIT.  271 

my  text,  which  tell  us  that  so  singular  and  solitaiy  is 
His  relation  to  us  that  the  thing  which  ends  the  work 
of  all  other  men,  and  begins  the  decay  o£  their  influence, 
begins  for  Him  a  higher  form  of  work  and  a  wider 
sweep  of  sway.  He  is  nearer  us  when  He  leaves  us, 
and  works  with  us  and  in  us  more  mightily  from  the 
throne  than  He  did  upon  the  earth.  Who  is  He  of 
Whom  this  is  true  ?  And  what  kind  of  work  is  it  of 
which  it  is  true  that  death  continues  and  perfects  it  ? 

So  let  me  note,  before  I  pass  on,  that  there  is  a  great 
truth  here  for  us.  We  are  accustomed  to  look  back  to 
our  Lord's  earthly  ministry,  and  to  fancy  that  those 
who  gathered  round  Him,  and  heard  Him  speak,  and 
saw  His  deeds,  were  in  a  better  position  for  loving 
Him  and  trusting  Him  than  you  and  I  are.  It  is  all  a 
mistake.  We  have  lost  nothing  that  they  had  which 
was  worth  the  keeping ;  and  \ve  have  gained  a  great 
deal  which  they  had  not.  We  have  not  to  compare 
our  relation  to  Christ  Avith  theirs,  as  we  might  do  our 
relation  to  some  great  thinker  or  poet,  with  that  of  his 
contemporaries,  but  we  have  Christ  in  a  better  form, 
if  I  may  so  speak  ;  and  we,  on  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come,  may  have  a  deeper  and  a  fuller  and  a 
closer  intimacy  with  Him  than  was  possible  for  men 
whose  perceptions  Avere  disturbed  by  sense,  and  Avho 
had  to  pierce  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say.  His 
flesh,  before  they  reached  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  His 
Spirit. 

II. — Note,  secondly,  the  coming  for  which  Christ's 
going  Avas  needful,  and  Avhich  makes  that  going  a 
Q:ain. 

"  If  I  go  not  aAvay  the  Comforter  Avill  not  come 
unto  you,  but  if  I  depart  I  Avill  send  him  unto  you." 


272  THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST 

Now  we  have  already,  in  former  sermons,  touched 
upon  many  of  the  themes  which  would  naturally  he 
suggested  by  these  words,  and  therefore  I  do  not 
propose  to  dwell  upon  them  at  any  length.  There  is 
only  one  point  to  which  I  desire  to  refer  briefly  here, 
and  that  is  the  necessity  which  here  seems  to  be  laid 
down  by  our  Lord  for  His  departure,  in  order  that  that 
Divine  Spirit  may  come  and  dwell  with  men.  That 
necessity  goes  down  deeper  into  the  mysteries  of  the 
Divinity  and  of  the  processes  and  order  of  Divine 
revelation  than  it  is  given  to  us  to  follow.  But 
though  we  can  only  speak  superficially  and  fragment- 
arily  about  such  a  matter,  let  me  just  remind  you,  in 
the  briefest  possible  words,  of  what  Scripture  plainly 
declares  to  us  with  regard  to  this  hio-h  and,  in  its 
fulness,  ineffable  matter.  It  tells  us  that  the  complete 
work  of  Jesus  Christ — not  merely  His  coming  upon 
earth,  or  His  life  amongst  men,  but  also  His  sacrificial 
death  upon  the  cross — was  the  necessary  j)reliminary, 
and  in  some  sense  procuring,  cause  of  the  gift  of  that 
Divine  Spirit.  It  tells  us — and  there  Ave  are  upon 
ground  on  which  we  can  more  fully  verify  the 
statement — that  His  work  must  be  completed  ere  that 
Spirit  can  be  sent,  because  the  Word  is  the  Spirit's 
weapon  for  the  world,  and  the  revelation  of  God  in 
Him  must  be  ended,  ere  the  application  of  that 
revelation,  which  is  the  Spirit's  work,  can  be  begun  in 
its  full  energy. 

It  tells  us,  further  (and  there  our  eyesight  fails,  and 
we  have  to  accept  what  Ave  are  told),  that  Jesus  Christ 
must  ascend  on  high  and  be  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
ere  He  can  pour  doAvn  upon  men  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit  Avhich  dAvelt  uncommunicatcd  in  Him  in  the 


AND  TEE  COMING  SPIRIT.  273 

time  of  His  earthly  humiliation.  "  Thou  hast  ascended 
up  on  high,"  and  therefore  "  Thou  hast  given  gifts  to 
men."  We  accept  the  declaration,  not  knowing  all 
the  deep  necessity  in  the  Divine  nature  on  which  it 
rests,  but  believing  it,  because  He  in  whom  we  have 
confidence  has  declared  it  to  us. 

And  we  are  further  told — and  there  our  experience 
may,  in  some  degree,  verify  the  statement — that  only 
those,  in  whose  hearts  there  is  union  to  Jesus  Christ 
by  faith  in  His  completed  work  and  ascended  glory, 
are  capable  of  receiving  that  Divine  gift.  So  every 
way,  both  as  regards  the  depths  of  Deity  and  the 
processes  of  revelation,  and  as  regards  the  power  of 
the  humanity  of  Christ  to  impart  His  Spirit,  and  as 
regards  the  capacity  of  us  poor  recipients  to  receive  it, 
the  words  of  my  text  seem  to  be  confirmed,  and  we 
can,  though  not  with  full  insight,  at  any  rate  with  full 
faith,  accept  the  statement,  "  If  I  go  not  away,  the 
Comforter  will  not  come  to  you." 

That  coming  is  gain.  It  teaches  a  deeper  knowledge 
of  Him.  It  teaches  and  gives  a  fuller  possession  of 
the  life  of  righteousness  which  is  like  His  own.  It 
draws  us  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Son. 

III. — Lastly,  note  here  the  threefold  conflict  of  the 
Spirit  through  the  Church  with  the  world. 

"  When  He  is  come  He  will  convince  the  world  "  in 
respect  "  of  sin  and  of  righteousness  and  of  judgment." 
By  the  "  reproof,"  or  rather  "  conviction,"  which  is 
spoken  about  here,  is  meant  the  process  by  which 
certain  facts  are  borne  in  upon  men's  understanding 
and  consciences,  and,  alonsf  with  these  facts,  the 
conviction'  of  error  and  fault  in  reference  to  them. 
It    is    no    mere    process    of    demonstration    of   an 

18 


274  THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST 

intellectual  truth,  but  it  is  a  process  of  conviction  of 
error  in  respect  of  great  moral  and  religious  truth,  and 
of  manifestation  of  the  truths  in  regard  to  which  the 
error  and  the  sin  have  been  committed.  So  we  have 
here  the  triple  division  of  the  great  work  which  the 
Divine  Spirit  does,  through  Christian  men  and  women, 
in  the  world. 

"  He  shall  convince  the  world  of  sin."  The  out- 
standing first  characteristic  of  the  whole  Gospel 
message  is  the  new  gravity  which  it  attaches  to  the 
fact  of  sin,  the  deeper  meaning  which  it  gives  to  the 
word,  and  the  larger  scope  which  it  shows  its  blighting 
influences  to  have  had  in  humanity.  Apart  from  the 
conviction  of  sin  by  the  Spirit  using  the  Word 
proclaimed  by  disciples,  the  world  has  scarcely  a 
notion  of  what  sin  is,  its  inwardness,  its  universality, 
the  awfulness  of  it  as  a  fact  affecting  man's  whole 
being  and  all  His  relations  to  God.  All  these 
conceptions  are  especially  the  product  of  Christian 
truth.  Without  it,  what  does  the  world  Imow  about 
the  poison  of  sin  ?  And  what  does  it  care  about  the 
poison  until  the  conviction  has  been  driven  home 
to  the  reluctant  consciousness  of  mankind  by  the 
Spirit  wielding  the  Word  ?  This  conviction  comes 
lirst  in  the  Divine  order.  I  do  not  say  that  the 
process  of  turning  a  man  of  the  world  into  a  member 
of  Christ's  Church  always  begins,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
with  the  conviction  of  sin.  I  believe  it  most  generally 
does ;  but  without  insisting  upon  a  pedantic  adherence 
to  a  sequence,  and  without  saying  a  word  about  the 
depth  and  intensity  of  such  a  conviction,  I  am  here 
to  assert  that  a  Christianity  which  is  not  based  upon 
the  conviction  of  sin  is  an  impotent  Christianity,  and 


AND  THE  COMING  SPIRIT.  275 

will  be  of  very  little  use  to  the  men  who  profess  it, 
and  have  no  power  to  propagate  itself  in  the  world. 
Everything  in  our  conception  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  of  His  work  for  us  depends  upon  what  we 
think  about  this  primary  fact  of  man's  condition,  that 
he  is  a  sinful  man.  The  root  of  all  heresy  lies  there. 
Every  blunder  that  has  led  away  men  from  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  Cross  may  be  traced  up  to  defective 
notions  of  sin  and  a  defective  realization  of  it.  If  I 
do  not  feel  as  the  Bible  would  have  me  feel,  that  I  am 
a  sinful  man,  I  shall  think  difterently  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  of  my  need  of  Him,  and  of  what  He  is  to  me. 
Christianity  may  be  to  me  a  system  of  beautiful 
ethics,  a  guide  for  life,  a  revelation  of  much  precious 
truth,  but  it  will  not  be  the  redemptive  power, 
without  which  I  am  lost.  And  Jesus  Christ  will  be 
shorn  of  His  brightest  beams,  unless  I  see  Him  as  the 
Redeemer  of  my  soul  from  sin,  which  else  would 
destroy  and  is  destroying.  Is  Christianity  merely  a 
better  morality  ?  Is  it  merely  a  higher  revelation 
of  the  Divine  nature  ?  Or  does  it  do  something 
as  well  as  say  something,  and  what  does  it  do  ? 
Is  Jesus  Christ  only  a  Teacher,  a  Wise  Man,  an 
Example,  a  Prophet,  or  is  He  the  Sacrifice  for  the 
sins  of  the  world  ?  Oh !  brethren,  we  must  begin 
where  this  text  begins ;  and  our  whole  conception 
of  Him  and  of  His  work  for  us  must  be  based  upon 
this  fact,  that  we  are  sinful  and  lost,  and  that  Jesus 
Christ,  by  His  sweet  and  infinite  love  and  all-powerful 
sacrifice,  is  our  soul's  Redeemer  and  our  only  Hope. 
The  world  has  to  be  convicted  and  convinced  of  sin 
as  the  first  step  to  its  becoming  a  Church. 

The  next  step  of  this  Divine  Spirit's  conviction  is 

18* 


276  THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST 


that  wliicli  corresponds  to  the  consciousness  of  sm, 
the  dawning  upon  the  darkened  soul  of  the  blessed 
sunrise  of  righteousness.  The  triple  subjects  of  con- 
viction must  necessarily  belong  to  the  world  of  which 
our  Lord  is  speaking.  It  must  be  the  world  that  is 
convinced,  and  it  must  be  the  world's  sin  and  the 
world's  righteousness  and  the  world's  judgment,  of 
which  my  text  speaks.  How,  then,  can  there  follow 
on  the  conviction  of  sin  as  mine  a  conviction  of 
righteousness  as  mine  ?  I  know  but  one  way,  "  not 
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  laAV, 
but  that  which  is  of  God  through  faith."  When  a 
man  is  convinced  of  sin,  there  will  dawn  upon  the 
heart  the  wondrous  thought  that  a  righteousness  may 
be  his,  given  to  him  from  above,  which  will  sweep 
away  all  his  sin  and  make  him  righteous  as  Christ  is 
righteous.  That  conviction  will  never  awake  in  its 
blessed  and  hope-giving  power  unless  it  be  preceded 
by  the  other.  It  is  of  no  use  to  exhibit  medicine  to 
a  man  that  does  not  know  himself  diseased.  It  is  of 
no  use  to  talk  about  righteousness  to  a  man  that  has 
not  found  himself  to  be  a  sinner.  And  it  is  of  as 
little  use  to  talk  of  sin  to  a  man  unless  you  are  ready 
to  tell  him  of  a  righteousness  that  will  cover  all  his 
sin.  The  one  conviction  without  the  other  is  misery ; 
the  second  without  the  first  is  irrelevant  and  far  away. 
The  world  as  a  world  has  but  dim  and  inadequate 
conceptions  of  what  righteousness  is.  A  Pharisee  is 
its  type,  or  a  man  that  keeps  a  clean  life  in  regard  of 
great  transgressions ;  a  whited  sepulchre  of  some  sort 
or  other.  The  world  apart  from  Christ  has  but 
languid  desires  after  even  the  poor  righteousness  that 
it  understands,  and  the  world  apart  from  Christ  is 


AND  THE  COMING  SPIRIT.  277 

afflicted  by  a  despairing  scepticism  as  to  the  possibility 
of  ever  beinof  rio-hteous  at  all.  And  there  are  men 
listening  to  me  now  in  every  one  of  these  three 
conditions — not  caring  to  be  righteous,  not  under- 
standing what  it  is  to  be  righteous,  and  cynicall}^ 
disbeUeving  that  it  is  possible  to  be  so.  My  brother, 
here  comes  the  message  to  you — first,  thou  art  sinful ; 
second,  God's  righteousness  lies  at  thy  side  to  take 
and  wear  if  thou  wilt. 

The  last  of  these  triple  convictions  is  "judg- 
ment." If  there  be  in  the  world  these  two  things, 
both  operating,  sin  and  righteousness,  and  if  the  two 
come  together,  what  then  ?  If  there  is  to  be  collision, 
as  there  must  be,  which  will  go  down  ?  Christ  tells 
us  that  this  Divine  Spirit  will  teach  us  that  righteous- 
ness wiU  triumph  over  sin,  and  that  there  will  be  a 
judgment  which  Avill  destroy  that  which  is  the  weaker, 
though  it  seems  the  stronger.  Now  I  take  it  that  the 
judgment  which  is  spoken  about  here  is  not  merely  a 
future  retribution  beyond  the  grave,  but  that,  whilst 
that  is  included,  and  is  the  principal  part  of  the  idea, 
we  are  always  to  regard  the  judgment  of  the  here- 
after as  being  jDrepared  for  by  the  continual  judgment 
here. 

And  so  there  are  a  blessed  thought,  and  a  terrible 
one,  wrapped  up  in  that  word — a  blessed  thought  for 
us  sinful  men,  inasmuch  as  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
Divine  righteousness,  which  is  given  to  us,  will  judge 
us  and  separate  us  day  by  day  from  our  sins ;  and 
a  terrible  thought,  inasmuch  as  if  I,  a  sinful  man,  do 
not  make  friends  with  and  ally  myself  to  the  Divine 
righteousness  which  is  preferred  to  me,  I  shall  one 
day  have  to  front  it  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood. 


278     THE  DEPARTING  CHRIST  AND  THE  COMING  SPIRIT. 

when  the  contact  must  necessarily  be  to  me  destruc- 
tion. 

Time  does  not  allow  me  to  dwell  upon  these 
solemn  matters  as  I  fain  would,  but  let  me  gather 
all  I  have  been  feebly  trying  to  say  to  you  now 
into  one  sentence.  This  threefold  conviction,  in 
conscience,  understanding,  and  heart,  of  sin  which 
is  mine,  of  righteousness  which  may  be  mine,  and  of 
judgment  which  must  be  mine — this  threefold  convic- 
tion is  that  which  makes  the  world  into  a  Church.  It 
is  the  message  of  Christianity  to  each  of  us.  How  do 
you  stand  to  it  ?  Do  you  hearken  to  the  Spirit  who 
is  striving  to  convince  you  of  these  ?  Or  do  you  gather 
yourselves  together  into  an  obstinate,  close-knit  un- 
belief, or  a  loose-knit  indifference  which  is  as  impene- 
trable ?  "  BcAvare  that  you  resist  not  the  Spirit  of  God. 


XXVI. 

Zbc  3fact0  wbicb  convince  tbc  Morl^♦ 

"  Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me  ; 

"  Of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  My  Father,  and  ye  see  Me  no 

more  ; 
"  Of  judgment,  because  the   prince   of   this   world  is   judged.'" — 

John  xvi.  9 — 11. 

UR  Lord  lias  just  been  telling  His 
disciples  liow  He  will  equip  them,  as 
His  champions,  for  their  conflict  with 
the  world.  A  Divine  Spirit  is  coming 
to  them,  who  will  work  in  them  and 
through  them ;  and  by  their  simple  and  unlettered 
testimony  will  "  convict,"  or  convince,  the  mass  of 
ungodly  men  of  error  and  crime  in  regard  of  these 
three  things — sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment. 

He  now  advances  to  tell  them  that  this  threefold 
conviction  which  they,  as  counsel  for  the  prosecution, 
will  establish  as  against  the  world  at  the  bar,  will  be 
based  upon  three  facts  :  first,  a  truth  of  experience  ; 
second,  a  truth  of  history ;  third,  a  truth  of  revelation, 
all  three  facts  havincf  reference  to  Jesus  Christ  and 
His  relation  to  men, 

Now  these  three  facts  are- — the  world's  unbeUef; 
Christ's  ascension,  and  session  at  the  rio'ht  hand  of 


280       THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD. 


God ;  and  the  "judgment  of  the  prince  of  this  world." 
If  we  remember  that  what  our  Lord  is  here  speaking 
about  is  the  work  of  a  Divine  Spirit  through  the  min- 
istration of  beheving  men,  then  Pentecost  with  its 
thousands  "  pricked  to  the  heart,"  and  the  Roman 
ruler  Avho  trembled,  as  the  prisoner  "  reasoned  of 
righteousness  and  judgment  to  come,"  are  illustrations 
of  the  way  in  which  the  humble  disciples  towered 
above  the  pride  and  strength  of  the  world,  and  from 
criminals  at  its  bar  became  its  accusers. 

These  three  facts  are  the  staple  and  the  strength  of 
the  Christian  ministry.  These  three  facts  are  mis- 
apprehended, and  have  failed  to  produce  their  right 
impression,  unless  they  have  driven  home  to  our 
consciences  and  understandings  the  triple  conviction 
of  my  text.  And  so  I  come  to  you  with  the  simple 
questions  which  are  all-important  for  each  of  us : 
Have  you  looked  these  three  facts  in  the  face — 
unbelief;  the  ascended  Christ;  a  judged  prince  of 
the  Avorld  ?  and  have  you  learned  their  meaning 
as  it  bears  on  your  own  character  and  religious 
life  •? 

I. — The  first  point  here  is  the  rejection  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  climax  of  the  world's  sin. 

Strange  words  !  They  are  in  some  respects  the 
most  striking  instance  of  that  gigantic  self-assertion 
of  our  Lord's,  of  which  we  have  had  occasion  to  see  so 
many  examples  in  these  valedictory  discourses.  The 
world  is  all  full  of  unrighteousness  and  wickedness, 
lust  and  immorality,  intemperance,  cruelty,  hatred  ; 
all  manner  of  buzzing  evils  that  stink  and  stino- 
around  us.  But  Jesus  Christ  passes  them  all  by  and 
points  to  a  mere  negative  thing,  to  an  inward  thing. 


THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WOLLD.       281 

to  the  attitude  of  men  towards  Himself ;  and  He  says, 
"  If  you  want  to  know  what  sin  is,  look  at  that." 
There  is  the  worst  of  all  sins.  There  is  a  typical 
instance  of  what  sin  is,  in  which,  as  in  some  anatomi- 
cal preparation,  you  may  see  all  its  fibre  straightened 
out  and  made  visible.  Look  at  that  if  you  want  to 
know  what  the  world  is,  and  what  the  world's  sin  is. 

Some  of  us  do  not  think  it  is  sin  at  all ;  and 
tell  us  that  man  is  no  more  responsible  for  his  belief 
than  he  is  for  the  colour  of  his  hair,  and  such  like 
talk.  Well,  let  me  put  a  very  plain  question :  AVhat 
is  it  that  a  man  turns  away  from  when  he  turns  away 
from  Jesus  Christ  ?  The  plainest,  the  loveliest,  the 
loftiest,  the  perfectest  revelation  of  God  in  His  beauty 
and  completeness  that  ever  dawned,  or  ever  w^ill  dawn 
upon  creation.  He  rejects  that.  Anything  more  ? 
Yes  !  He  turns  away  from  the  loveliest  human  life 
that  ever  was,  or  will  be,  lived.  Anything  more  ? 
Yes  !  He  turns  away  from  a  miracle  of  self-sacrificing 
love,  which  endured  the  Cross  for  enemies,  and  will- 
ingly embraced  agon}^  and  shame  and  death  for  the 
sake  of  those  who  inflicted  them  upon  Him.  An}^- 
thing  more  ?  Yes  !  Ho  turns  away  from  hands 
laden  with,  and  offering  Him,  the  most  precious  and 
needful  blessings  that  a  poor  soul  on  earth  can  desire 
or  expect. 

And  if  this  be  true,  if  unbelief  in  Jesus  Christ  be 
indeed  all  this  that  I  have  sketched  out,  another 
question  arises.  What  does  such  an  attitude  and  act 
indicate  as  to  the  rejecter  ?  He  stands  in  the  presence 
of  the  loveliest  revelation  of  the  Divine  nature  and 
heart,  and  he  sees  no  light  in  it.  Why,  but  because 
he  has  blinded  his  eyes  and  cannot  behold  ?     He  is 


282       THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  JfOIiLD. 

incapable  of  seeing  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  because 
he  loves  the  darkness  rather  than  the  lischt.  He  turns 
away  from  the  revelation  of  the  loveliest  and  most 
self-sacrificing  love.  Why,  but  because  he  bears  in 
himself  a  heart  cased  with  brass  and  triple  steel  of 
selfishness,  against  the  manifestation  of  love  ?  He 
turns  away  from  the  offered  hands  heaped  with  the 
blessings  that  he  needs.  Why,  but  because  he  does 
not  care  for  the  gifts  that  are  offered  ?  Forgiveness, 
cleansing,  purity,  a  heaven  which  consists  in  the 
jDerfecting  of  all  these,  have  no  attractions  for  him. 
The  fugitive  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  said,  '•'  We 
do  not  want  your  light,  tasteless  manna.  It  may  do 
very  well  for  angels,  but  we  have  been  accustomed  to 
garlic  and  onions  down  in  Egypt.  They  smell  strong, 
and  there  is  some  taste  in  them.  Give  us  tJteni." 
And  so  some  of  you  say,  "  The  offer  of  pardon  is  of  no 
use  to  me,  for  I  am  not  troubled  with  my  sin.  The 
offer  of  purity  is  of  no  attraction  to  me,  for  I  rather 
like  the  dirt  and  wallowing  in  it.  The  offer  of  a 
heaven  of  that  sort  is  but  a  dreary  prospect  to  me. 
And  so  I  turn  aAva}^  from  the  hands  that  offer 
precious  things."  The  man  who  is  blind  to  the  God 
that  beams,  lambent  and  loving,  upon  him  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ — the  man  who  has  no  stirrinus 
of  responsive  gratitude  for  the  great  outpouring  of 
love  upon  the  cross — the  man  Avho  docs  not  care  for 
anything  that  Jesus  Christ  can  give  him,  surely,  in 
turning  away,  commits  a  true  sin. 

I  do  not  deny,  of  course,  that  there  may  be  intel- 
lectual difficulties  cropping  up  in  connection  with  the 
acceptance  of  the  message  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ, 
but  as,  on  the  one  hand,  I  am  free  to  admit  that  many 


THE  FACTS  JFHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD.       283 

a  man  may  be  putting  a  true  trust  in  Christ  whicli  is 
joined  -with  a  very  hesitant  grasp  of  some  of  the  things 
which,  to  me,  are  the  very  essence  and  heart  of  the 
Gospel ;  so,  on  the  other  side,  I  would  have  you 
remember  that  there  is  necessarily  a  moral  quality  in 
our  attitude  to  all  moral  and  religious  truth ;  and 
that  sin  does  not  cease  to  be  sin,  because  its  doer  is  a 
thinker  or  has  systematized  his  rejection  into  a  creed. 
Though  it  is  not  for  us  to  measure  motives  and  to 
peer  into  hearts,  at  the  bottom  there  lies  what  Christ 
Himself  put  His  finger  on.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me 
that  ye  might  have  life." 

Then,  still  further,  let  me  remind  you  that  our  Lord 
here  presents  this  fact  of  man's  unbelief  as  being  an 
instance  in  which  we  may  see  what  the  real  nature  of 
sin  is.  To  use  learned  language,  it  is  a  "  typical "  sin. 
In  all  other  acts  of  sin  you  get  the  poison  manipulated 
into  various  forms,  associated  with  other  elements, 
disguised  more  or  less.  But  here,  because  it  is  purel}'' 
an  inward  act  having;'  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  to 
God  manifested  in  Him,  and  not  done  at  the  bidding 
of  the  animal  nature,  or  of  any  of  the  other  strong 
temptations  and  impulses  which  hurry  men  into  gross 
and  coarse  forms  of  manifest  transgression,  you  get  sin 
in  its  essence.  Belief  in  Christ  is  the  surrender  of 
myself  Sin  is  living  to  myself  rather  than  to  God. 
And  there  you  touch  the  bottom.  All  those  different 
kinds  of  sin,  however  unlike  they  may  be  to  one 
another — the  lust  of  the  sensualist,  the  craft  of  the 
cheat,  the  lie  of  the  deceitful,  the  passion  of  the  un- 
reojulated  man,  the  avarice  of  the  miser — all  of  them 
have  this  one  common  root,  a  diseased  and  bloated 
regard   to   self     The   definition   of  sin   is,    living  to 


284       THE  FACTS  WHICH  C02iVIXCE  THE  WORLD. 

myself  and  making  myself  my  own  centre.  The  defi- 
nition of  faith  is,  making  Christ  my  centre  and  living 
for  Him.  Therefore,  if  yon  want  to  know  what  is  the 
sinfulness  of  sin,  there  it  is.  And,  if  I  may  use  such 
a  word  in  such  a  connection,  it  is  all  packed  away  in 
its  inirest  form  in  the  act  of  rejecting  that  Lord. 

Brother,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that,  when  you 
have  summoned  up  before  you  the  ugliest  forms  of 
man's  sin  that  you  can  fancy,  this  one  overtops  them 
all,  because  it  presents  in  the  simplest  form  the 
mother-tincture  of  all  sins,  which,  variously  coloured 
and  perfumed  and  combined,  makes  the  evil  of 
them  all.  A  heap  of  rotting,  poisonous  matter  is 
offensive  to  many  senses,  but  the  colourless,  scentless, 
tasteless  drop  has  the  poison  in  its  most  virulent  form, 
and  is  not  a  bit  less  virulent,  though  it  has  been 
learnedly  distilled  and  christened  with  a  scientific 
name,  and  put  into  a  dainty  jewelled  flask.  "  This  is 
the  condemnation,  that  \\(A\t  is  come  into  the  world, 
and  men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because 
their  deeds  are  evil."  I  lay  that  upon  the  hearts  and 
consciences  of  some  of  my  friends  here  to-night  as  the 
key  to  their  rejection  or  disregard  of  Christ  and  His 
salvation. 

II. — Now,  secondly,  notice  the  ascension  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  pledge  and  the  channel  of  the  world's 
righteousness.  "  Because  I  go  to  the  Father,  and  ye 
see  Me  no  more." 

He  speaks  as  if  the  process  of  departure  were 
already  commenced.  It  had  three  stages — death, 
resurrection,  ascension  ;  but  these  three  are  all  parts 
of  the  one  departure.  And  so  He  says :  "  Because,  in 
the  future,  when  you  go  forth  to  preach  in  My  Name, 


THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVIXCE  THE  WOULD.       2S£ 


I  shall  be  there  with  the  Father,  having  finished  the 
work  for  Avhich  He  sent  Me ;  therefore  you  will  con- 
vince the  world  of  righteousness." 

Now  let  me  put  that  briefly  in  two  forms.  First  of 
all,  the  fact  of  an  ascended  Christ  is  the  guarantee 
and  proof  of  His  own  complete  fulfilment  of  the  ideal 
of  a  righteous  man.  Or,  to  put  it  into  simpler  words, 
suppose  Jesus  Christ  is  dead ;  suppose  that  He  never 
rose  from  the  grave  ;  suppose  His  bones  mouldered  in 

some  sepulchre;    suppose  there  was  no  ascension 

would  it  be  possible  to  believe   that   He  was  other 
than  an  ordinary  man  ?     And  would  it  be  possible  to 
believe  that,  hoAvever  beautiful  these  familiar  records 
of  His  life,  and  however  lovely  the  character  which 
they  reveal,  there  was  really  in  Him  no  sin  at  all  ?     A 
dead  Christ  means  a  Christ  who,  like  the  rest  of  us, 
had  His  limitations  and  His  faults.     But,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  it  be  true  that   He   sprang  from   the   grave 
because  "  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden 
of  it,"  and  because  in  His  nature  there  was  no  pro- 
clivity to  death,  since  there  had  been  no  indulo-ence 
in  sin ;  and  if  it  be  true  that  He  ascended  up  on  high 
because  that  was  His  native  sphere,  and  He  rose  to 
it  as  naturally  as  the  water  in  the  valley  will  rise  to 
the  height  of  the  hill  from  which  it  has  descended, 
then  we  can  see  that  God  has  set  His  seal  upon  that 
life  by  that  resurrection  and  ascension;  and,  as  we 
gaze  on  Him  swept  up  heavenward  by  His  own  calm 
power,  a  light  Mis  backward  upon  all  His  earthly  life, 
upon  His   claims   to   purity,  and  to  union  with  the 
Father,  and  we   sa}^    "Surely  this  was    a    perfectly 
righteous  man." 

And,  further,  let  me   remind    you    that  with  this 


286        THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD. 

supernatural  fact  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  and 
ascension  stands  or  falls  the  possibility  of  His 
communicating  any  of  His  righteousness  to  us  sinful 
men.  If  there  be  no  such  possibility,  what  does 
Jesus  Christ's  beauty  of  character  matter  to  me  ? 
Nothing.  I  shall  have  to  stumble  on  as  best  I  can, 
sometimes  ashamed  and  rebuked,  sometimes  stimulated 
and  sometimes  reduced  to  despair,  by  looking  at  the 
record  of  His  life.  If  He  be  lying  dead  in  a  forgotten 
grave,  and  hath  not  ascended  up  on  high,  then  there 
can  come  from  His  history  and  past  nothing  other  in 
kind,  though,  perhaps,  a  httle  more  in  degree,  than 
comes  from  the  history  and  the  past  of  the  beautiful 
and  white  souls  that  have  sometimes  lived  in  the 
world.  He  is  a  saint  like  them,  He  is  a  teacher  like 
them,  He  is  a  prophet  like  some  of  them,  and  we 
have  but  to  try  our  best  to  copy  that  marble  purity 
and  white  righteousness.  But  if  He  hath  pvscended 
up  on  high,  and  sits  there,  wielding  the  forces  of  the 
universe,  as  we  believe  He  does,  then  to  Him  belongs 
the  Divine  prerogative  of  imparting  His  nature  and 
His  character  to  them  that  love  Him.  Then  His 
righteousness  is  not  a  solitary,  uncommunicative 
perfectness  for  Himself,  but  like  a  sun  in  the  heavens, 
which  streams  out  vivifying  and  enlightening  rays  to 
all  that  seek  His  face.  If  it  be  true  that  Christ  has 
risen,  then  it  is  also  true  that  you  and  I,  convicted  of 
sin,  and  learning  our  weakness  and  our  faults,  may 
come  to  Him,  and,  by  the  exercise  of  that  simple  and 
yet  omnipotent  act  of  faith,  may  ally  our  incomplete- 
ness with  His  perfectness,  our  sin  with  His  righteous- 
ness, our  emptiness  with  His  fulness,  and  may  have 
all  the  grace  and  the  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ  passing 


THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD.       287 

over  into  us  to  be  the  spirit  of  life  in  us,  making  us 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  If  Christ  be 
risen,  His  righteousness  may  be  the  world's  ;  if  Christ 
be  not  risen,  His  righteousness  is  useless  to  any  but 
to  Himself 

My  brother !  wed  yourself  to  that  dear  Lord  by 
faith  in  Him,  and  His  righteousness  will  become 
yours,  and  you  will  be  found  in  Him  without  spot  and 
blameless,  clothed  with  white  raiment  like  His  own, 
and  sharing  in  the  Throne  which  belongs  to  the 
righteous  Christ. 

III. — Lastly,  notice  the  judgment  of  the  world's 
prince  as  the  prophecy  of  the  judgment  of  the  world. 

We  are  here  upon  ground  which  is  only  made 
known  to  us  by  the  revelation  of  Scripture.  We 
began  with  a  fact  of  man's  experience,  we  passed  on 
to  a  fact  of  history ;  now  we  have  a  fact  certified  to 
us  only  on  Christ's  authority. 

The  world  lias  a  prince.  That  ill-omened  and 
chaotic  agglomeration  of  diverse  forms  of  evil  has  yet 
a  kind  of  anarchic  order  in  it,  and,  like  the  fabled 
serpent's  locks  on  the  Gorgon  head,  they  intertwme 
and  sting  one  another,  and  yet  they  are  a  unity.  We 
hear  very  little  about  the  prince  of  the  world  in 
Scripture.  Mercifully  the  existence  of  such  a  being 
is  not  plainly  revealed  until  the  fact  of  Christ's 
victory  over  him  is  revealed.  But  however  ludicrous 
mediaeval  and  vidgar  superstitions  may  have  made 
the  notion,  and  however  incredible  the  tremendous 
figure  painted  by  the  great  Puritan  poet  has  proved 
to  be,  there  is  nothing  ridiculous,  and  nothing  that 
we  have  the  right  to  say  is  incredible,  in  the  plain 
declarations  that  came  from   Christ's  lij)s  over  and 


288        THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD. 

over  again,  that  the  world,  the  aggregate  of  ungodly 
men,  has  a  prince. 

And  then  my  text  tells  us  that  that  prince  is 
judged.  The  Cross  did  that,  as  Jesus  Christ  over  and 
over  again  indicates,  sometimes  in  plain  words  as 
"  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world,"  "  Now  is  the 
prince  of  this  world  cast  out ; "  sometimes  in  metaphor 
as  "  I  beheld  Satan  as  lischtninc^  fall  from  heaven," 
"  First  bind  the  strong  man  and  then  spoil  his  house." 
We  do  not  know  how  far-reaching  the  influences  of  the 
Cross  may  be,  and  what  they  may  have  done  in  those 
dark  res^ions,  but  we  know  that  since  that  Cross,  the 
power  of  evil  in  the  world  has  been  broken  in  its 
centre,  that  God  has  been  disclosed,  that  new  forces 
have  been  lodged  in  the  heart  of  humanity,  which 
only  need  to  be  developed  in  order  to  overcome  the 
evil.  We  know  that  since  that  auspicious  day  Avhen 
"  He  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  making  a 
show  of  them  openly  and  leading  them  in  triumph," 
even  when  He  was  nailed  upon  the  cross,  the  history 
of  the  world  has  been  the  judgment  of  the  world. 
Hoary  iniquities  have  toppled  into  the  ceaseless  wash- 
ing sea  of  Divine  love  which  has  struck  against  their 
bases.  Ancient  evils  have  vanished,  and  more  are  on 
the  point  of  vanishing.  A  loftier  morality,  a  higher 
notion  of  righteousness,  a  deeper  conception  of  sin, 
new  hopes  for  the  world  and  for  men,  have  dawned 
upon  mankind ;  and  the  prince  of  the  world  is  led 
bound,  as  it  were,  at  the  victorious  chariot  wheels. 
The  central  fortress  has  been  captured,  and  the  rest  is 
an  affair  of  outposts. 

My  text  has  for  its  last  word  this — the  prince's 
judgment    prophesies    the   world's   future    judgment 


THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD.       289 

ment.  The  process  which  began  when  Jesus  Christ 
died  has  for  its  consummation  the  Divine  condemna- 
tion of  all  the  evil  that  still  afflicts  humanity,  and  its 
deprivation  of  authority  and  power  to  injure.  A  final 
judgment  will  come,  and  that  it  will  is  manifested  by 
the  fact  that  Christ,  when  He  came  in  the  form  of  a 
servant  and  died  upon  the  cross,  judged  the  Prince. 
When  He  comes  in  the  form  of  a  King  on  the  great 
White  Throne  He  will  judge  the  world  which  He  has 
delivered  from  its  Prince. 

That  thought,  my  brother,  ought  to  be  a  hope  to  us 
all.  Are  you  glad  when  you  think  that  there  is  a  day 
of  judgment  coming  ?  Does  your  heart  leap  up  when 
you  realize  the  fact  that  the  righteousness,  which  is  in 
the  heavens,  is  sure  to  conquer  and  coerce  and  clap 
under  the  hatches  the  sin  that  is  riding  rampant 
through  the  world  ?  It  was  a  joy  and  a  hope  to  men 
who  did  not  know  half  as  much  of  the  Divine  love 
and  the  Divine  righteousness  as  we  do.  They  called 
upon  the  rocks  and  the  hills  to  rejoice,  and  the  trees 
of  the  forest  to  clap  their  hands  before  the  Lord,  "  for 
He  Cometh  to  judge  the  world."  Does  your  heart 
throb  a  glad  Amen  to  that  ? 

It  ought  to  be  a  hope ;  it  is  a  fear  ;  and  there  are 
some  of  us  who  do  not  like  to  have  the  conviction 
driven  home  to  us,  that  the  end  of  the  strife  between 
sin  and  righteousness  is  that  Jesus  Christ  shall  judge 
the  world,  and  take  unto  Himself  His  eternal  kmor- 
dom. 

But,  my  friends,  hope  or  fear,  it  is  a  fact,  as  cer- 
tain in  the  future,  as  the  Cross  is  sure  in  the  past, 
or  the  Throne  in  the  present.  Let  me  ask  you  this 
question,  the  question  which  Christ  has  sent  all  His 

19 


290        THE  FACTS  WHICH  CONVINCE  THE  WORLD. 

servants  to  ask — Have  you  learned  your  sin  ?  have 
you  opened  your  lieart  to  Christ's  righteousness  ? 
If  we  have,  when  men's  hearts  are  faihn^f  them  for 
fear,  and  they  call  on  the  rocks  and  the  hills  to 
cover  them  from  the  face  of  Him  that  sitteth  upon 
the  Throne,  we  shall  "  have  a  song  as  in  the  night 
when  a  holy  solemnity  is  kept,"  and  lift  up  our  heads, 
for  our  redemption  draweth  nigh.  "  Herein  is  our  love 
made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness  before  Him 
in  the  day  of  judgment." 


XXVII. 


Z\K  6ui^e  into  all  Zlrutb. 


"  I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now.  Howbeit,  when  He,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is  come.  He  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth  ;  for  He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself^ 
but  whatsoever  He  shall  hear  that  shall  He  speak ;  and 
He  will  show  you  things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  Me  ;  for 
He  shall  receive  of  Mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All 
things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine  ;  therefore  said  I,  that 
He  shall  take  of  Mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you." — John  xvi. 
12—1.5. 


HIS  is  our  Lord's  last  expansion,  in  tliese 
discourses,  of  the  great  promise  of  the 
Comforter  which  has  appeared  so  often 
in  them.  First,  He  was  spoken  of 
simply  as  dwelling  in  Christ's  servants,, 
without  any  more  special  designation  of  His  work  than 
was  involved  in  the  name.  Then,  His  aid  was  pro- 
mised, to  remind  the  Apostles  of  the  facts  of  Christ's 
life,  especially  of  His  words  ;  and  so  the  inspiration 
and  authority  of  the  four  Gospels  Avere  certified  for  us. 
Then  He  was  further  promised  as  the  witness  in  the 
disciples  to  Jesus  Christ.  And,  finally,  in  the  imme- 
diately preceding  context,  we  have  His  office  of  conv 
vincing,   or    convicting,   the   world    of    sin,   and    of 

19* 


292  THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 

righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  And  now  we  come 
to  that  gracious  and  gentle  work  which  that  Divine 
Spirit  is  declared  by  Christ  to  do,  not  only  for  that 
little  group  gathered  round  Him  then,  but  for  all  those 
who  trust  themselves  to  His  guidance.  He  is  to  be 
the  "  Spirit  of  Truth  "  to  all  the  ages,  who  in  simple 
verity  will  help  true  hearts  to  know  and  love  the 
truth.  There  are  three  things  in  the  words  before  us 
— first,  the  avowed  incompleteness  of  Christ's  own 
teaching ;  second,  the  completeness  of  the  truth  into 
which  the  Spirit  of  Truth  guides  ;  and,  last,  the  unity 
of  these  two. 

I. — First,  then,  we  have  here  the  avowed  incom- 
pleteness of  Christ's  own  teaching.  "  I  have  yet  many 
things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now." 

Now,  in  an  earlier  portion  of  these  great  dis- 
courses, we  have  our  Lord  asserting  that  all  things 
whatsoever  He  had  heard  of  the  Father  He  had 
made  known  unto  His  servants.  How  do  these  two 
representations  harmonize  ?  Is  it  possible  to  make 
thein  agree  ?  Surely,  yes.  There  is  a  difference 
between  the  germ  and  the  unfolded  flower.  There 
is  a  difference  between  principles  and  the  complete 
development  of  these.  I  suppose  you  may  say 
that  all  Euclid  is  in  the  axioms  and  definitions.  I 
suppose  you  may  also  say  that  when  you  have 
learned  the  axioms  and  definitions,  there  are  many 
things  yet  to  be  said,  of  which  you  have  not  grown 
to  the  apprehension.  And  so  our  Lord,  as  far  as 
confidence  was  concerned,  and  as  far  as  the  funda- 
mental and  seminal  principles  of  all  religious  truth 
were  concerned,  had  even  then  declared  all  that  He 


THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH.  293 

had  heard  of  the  Father.  But  yet,  in  so  far  as  the 
unfolding  of  these  was  concerned,  the  tracing  of  their 
consequences,  the  exhibition  of  their  harmonies,  the 
weavinsf  of  them  into  an  ordered  whole  in  which  a 
man's  understanding  could  lodge,  there  were  many 
things  yet  to  be  said,  which  that  handful  of  men  were 
not  able  to  bear.  And  so  our  Lord  Himself  here 
declares  that  His  words  spoken  on  earth  are  not  His 
completed  revelation. 

Of  course  we  find  in  them,  as  I  believe,  hints  pro- 
found and  pregnant,  which  only  need  to  be  unfolded 
and  smoothed  out,  as  it  were,  and  their  depths 
fathomed,  in  order  to  lead  to  all  that  is  worthy 
of  being  called  Christian  truth.  But  upon  many 
points  we  cannot  but  contrast  the  desultory, 
brief,  obscure  references  Avhich  came  from  the 
Master's  lips  with  the  more  systematized,  full, 
and  accurate  teaching  which  came  from  the  ser- 
vants. The  great  crucial  instance  of  all  is  the 
comparative  reticence  which  our  Lord  observed  in 
reference  to  His  sacrificial  death,  and  the  atoning 
character  of  His  sufferings  for  the  world.  I  do 
not  admit  that  the  silence  of  the  Gospels  upon 
that  subject  is  fairly  represented  when  it  is  said 
to  be  absolute.  I  believe  that  that  silence  has 
been  exaggerated  by  those  who  have  no  desire 
to  accept  that  teaching.  But  the  distinction  is  plain 
and  obvious,  not  to  be  ignored,  rather  to  be  marked 
as  being  fruitful  of  blessed  teachinsf,  between  the 
way  in  which  Christ  speaks  about  His  Cross,  and 
the  way  in  Avhich  the  Apostles  speak  about  it  after 
Pentecost. 

What  then  ?     !My  text  gives  us  the  reason.     "  You 


294  TUB  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 

cannot  bear  them  now."  Now  the  word  rendered 
'•'  bear "  hero  does  not  mean  "  bear "  in  the  sense  of 
endure,  or  tolerate,  or  suffer,  but  "  bear "  in  the 
sense  of  carry.  And  the  metaphor  is  that  of  some 
weight — it  may  be  gold,  but  still  it  is  a  weight — 
laid  upon  a  man  Avhose  muscles  are  not  strong  enough 
to  sustain  it.  It  crushes  rather  than  gladdens. 
So  because  they  had  not  strength  enough  to  carr}-, 
had  not  capacity  to  receive,  our  Lord  was  lovingly 
reticent. 

There  is  a  great  principle  involved  in  this  sa3dng, 
that  revelation  is  measured  by  the  moral  and  spiritual 
capacities  of  the  men  who  receive  it.  The  light  is 
graduated  for  the  diseased  03^0.  A  wise  physician  does 
not  flood  that  eye  with  full  sunshine,  but  he  puts  on 
veils  and  bandages,  and  closes  the  shutters,  and  lets  a 
stray  beam,  ever  growing  as  the  cure  is  perfected,  fall 
upon  it.  So,  from  the  beginning  until  the  end  of  the 
process  of  revelation,  there  was  a  correspondence 
between  men's  capacity  to  receive  the  light  and  the 
light  that  was  granted ;  and  the  faithful  use  of  the 
less  made  them  capable  of  receiving  the  greater,  and 
as  soon  as  they  were  capable  of  receiving,  it  came, 
"To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  In  His  love, 
then,  Christ  did  not  load  these  men  Avith  principles 
that  they  could  not  carry,  nor  feed  them  with  strong- 
meat  instead  of  milk,  until  they  were  able  to  bear  it. 
Revelation  is  progressive,  and  Christ  is  reticent,  from 
regard  to  the  feebleness  of  His  listeners. 

Now  that  same  principle  is  true  in  a  modified  form 
about  us.  HoAv  many  things  there  are  which  we 
sometimes  feel  we  should  like  to  know,  that  God  has 
not  told  us,  because  we  have  not  yet  grown  up  to  the 


THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH.  295 

point  at  Avhicli  we  could  apprehend  them !  Compassed 
with  these  veils  of  flesh  and  weakness,  groping*  amidst 
the  shadows  of  time,  bewildered  by  the  cross-lights 
that  fall  upon  us  from  so  many  surrounding  objects, 
we  have  not  yet  eyes  able  to  behold  the  ineffable 
glory.  He  has  many  things  to  say  to  us  about  that 
blessed  future,  and  that  strange  and  awful  life  into 
which  we  are  to  step  when  we  leave  this  poor  world. 
But  "  ye  cannot  bear  them  now,"  Let  us  wait  with 
patience  until  we  are  ready  for  the  illumination.  For 
two  things  go  to  make  revelation,  the  light  that 
reveals  and  the  eye  that  beholds. 

Xow,  one  remark  before  I  go  further.  Tcople  tell 
us,  "Your  modern  theology  is  not  in  the  Gospels." 
And  they  say  to  us,  as  if  they  had  administered  a 
knock-down  blow,  "  We  stick  by  Jesus,  not  Paul." 
Well,  as  I  said,  I  do  not  admit  that  there  is  no 
"  Pauline  "  teaching  in  the  Gospels,  but  I  do  confess 
there  is  not  much.  And  I  say,  "  What  then  ?  "  Why, 
this,  then — it  is  exactly  what  we  were  to  expect ;  and 
people  who  reject  the  Apostolic  form  of  Christian 
teaching  because  it  is  not  found  in  the  Gospels  are 
flying  in  the  face  of  Christ's  own  teaching.  You  say 
you  will  take  His  words  as  the  only  source  of  religious 
truth.  You  are  going  clean  contrary  to  His  own 
words  in  saying  so.  Remember  that  He  proclaimed 
their  incompleteness,  and  referred  us,  for  the  fuller 
knowledge  of  the  truth  of  God,  to  a  subsequent 
Teacher. 

II. — So,  secondly,  mark  here  the  completeness  of 
the  truth  into  which  the  Spirit  guides. 

I  must  trouble  j-ou  with  just  a  word  or  two  of 
remark  as  to  the  lano-uac>-e  of  our  text.     Note  the 


296  THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 

personality,  designation,  and  office  of  this  new 
Teacher.  "He,"  not  it,  He,  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth 
whose  cliaracteristic  and  weapon  is  truth.  "  He  will 
guide  you  " — suggesting  a  loving  hand  put  out  to 
lead ;  suggesting  the  graciousness,  the  gentleness,  the 
gradualness  of  the  teaching.  "  Into  all  truth  " — that 
is  no  promise  of  omniscience,  but  it  is  the  assurance  of 
gradual  and  growing  acquaintance  with  the  spiritual 
and  moral  truth  which  is  revealed,  such  as  may  be 
iitly  paralleled  by  the  metaphor  of  men  passing  into 
some  broad  land,  of  which  there  is  much  still  to  be 
possessed  and  explored.  Not  to-day,  nor  to-morrow, 
Avill  all  the  truth  belong  to  those  whom  the  Spirit 
guides;  but  if  they  are  true  to  His  guidance,  "to- 
morrow shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more 
abundant,"  and  the  land  will  all  be  traversed  at  the 
last.  "  He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself,  but  whatsoever 
He  shall  hear  that  shall  He  speak."  Mark  the 
parallel  between  the  relation  of  the  Spirit-teacher  to 
Jesus  and  the  relation  of  Jesus  to  the  Father.  Of 
Him,  too,  it  is  said  by  Himself,  "All  things  whatsoever 
I  have  heard  of  the  Father  I  have  declared  unto 
you."  The  mark  of  Satan  is,  "  He  speaketh  of  His 
own " ;  the  mark  of  the  Divine  Teacher  is,  "  He 
speaketh  not  of  Himself,  but  Avhatsoever  things,"  in 
all  their  variety,  in  their  continuity,  in  their  com- 
pleteness, "  He  shall  hear."  Where  ?  Yonder  in  the 
depths  of  the  Godhead — "  whatsoever  things  He  shall 
hear,"  there  He  shall  show  to  you.  And  especially, 
"He  will  show  you  the  things  that  are  to  come." 
These  Apostles  Avere  living  in  a  revolutionary  time. 
Men's  hearts  were  failing  them  for  fear  of  the 
things  that  were  coming  on  the  earth.     Step  by  step 


TUE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH.  "297 

tliey  would  be  taught  the  evolving  glory  of  that 
kingdom  which  they  were  to  be  the  instruments  in 
founding ;  and  step  by  step  there  would  be  spread  out 
before  them  the  vision  of  the  future  and  all  the 
wonder  that  should  be,  the  world  that  was  to  come, 
the  new  constitution  which  Christ  was  to  establish. 

Now,  if  that  be  the  interpretation,  however  inade- 
quately, of  these  great  and  wonderful  words,  there 
are  but  two  things  needful  to  say  about  them.  One 
is  that  this  promise  of  a  complete  guidance  into 
truth  applies  in  a  peculiar  and  unique  fashion  to  the 
original  hearers  of  it.  I  ventured  to  say  that  one  of 
the  other  promises  of  the  Spirit,  which  I  quoted  in  my 
introductory  remarks,  was  the  certificate  to  us  of  the 
inspiration  and  reliableness  of  these  four  Gospels. 
And  I  now  remark  that  in  these  words,  in  their  plain 
and  unmistakable  meaning,  there  lie  involved  the  in- 
spiration and  authority  of  the  Apostles  as  teachers  of 
religious  truth.  Here  we  have  the  guarantee  for  the 
authority  over  our  faith,  of  the  words  which  came 
from  these  men,  and  from  the  other  who  was 
added  to  their  number  on  the  Damascus  road. 
They  were  guided  "  into  all  the  truth,"  and  so  our 
task  is  to  receive  the  truth  into  which  they  were 
guided. 

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  the  best  commentary  on 
these  words  of  my  text.  There  you  see  how  these 
men  rose  at  once  into  a  new  region ;  how  the  things 
about  their  Master  which  had  been  bewildering  puzzles 
to  them  flashed  into  light ;  how  the  Cross,  which  had 
baflled  and  dispersed  them,  became  at  once  the  centre 
of  union  for  themselves  and  for  the  world  ;  how  the 
obscure  became  lucid,  and  Christ's  Death  and  the  Re- 


298  THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 

surrection  stood  forth  to  tliem  as  the  great  central  facts 
of  the  world's  salvation.  In  the  book  of  the  Apocalypse 
we  have  part  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  closing  pro- 
mise :  "  He  will  show  you  things  to  come  "  ;  when  the 
Seer  was  "  in  the  Spirit "  on  the  Lord's-day,  and  the 
heavens  were  opened,  and  the  history  of  the  Church 
(whether  in  chronological  order,  or  in  the  exhibition 
of  symbols  of  the  great  forces  which  shall  be  arrayed 
for  and  against  it,  over  and  over  again,  to  the  end  of 
time,  does  not  at  present  matter)  Avas  spread  before 
Him  as  a  scroll. 

Now,  dear  friends,  this  great  principle  of  my  text 
has  a  moditied  application  also  to  us  all.  For  that 
Divine  Spirit  is  given  to  each  of  us  if  we  will  use  it, 
is  given  to  any  and  every  man  who  desires  it,  does 
dwell  in  Christian  hearts,  though,  alas  !  so  many  of 
us  are  so  little  conscious  of  it,  and  does  teach  us  the 
truth  Avhich  Christ  Himself  left  incomplete. 

Only  let  me  make  one  remark  here.  We  do  not 
stand  on  the  same  level  as  these  men  who  clustered 
round  Christ  on  His  road  to  Gethsemane,  and  re- 
ceived the  first  fruits  of  the  promise — the  Spirit. 
They,  taught  by  that  Divine  Guide  and  by  experience, 
were  led  into  the  deeper  apprehension  of  the  words 
and  the  deeds,  of  the  life  and  the  tleath,  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  We,  taught  by  that  same  Spirit,  are  led 
into  a  deeper  apprehension  of  the  words  which  they 
spake,  both  in  recording  and  interpreting  the  facts 
of  Christ's  life  and  death. 

And  so  we  come  sharp  up  to  this,  "  If  any  man 
thinketh  himself  to  be  a  prophet,  or  spiritual,  let  him 
acknowledge  that  the  things  Avhich  I  speak  unto  him 
arc  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."     That  is  Iioav  an 


THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH.  299 

apostle  put  his  relation  to  the  other  possessors  of  the 
Divine  Spirit.  And  you  and  I  have  to  take  this  as 
the  criterion  of  all  true  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
that  it  bows  in  humble  submission  to  the  authoritative 
teachino-  of  this  book. 

III. — Lastly,  we  have  here  our  Lord  pointing  out 
the  unity  of  these  two. 

In  the  verse  on  which  I  have  just  been  commenting 
He  says  nothing  about  Himself,  and  it  might  easily 
appear  to  the  listeners  as  if  these  two  sources  of  truth, 
His  own  incomplete  teaching,  and  the  full  teaching  of 
the  Divine  Spirit,  were  independent  of,  if  not  opposed 
to,  one  another.  So  in  the  last  words  of  our  text  He 
shows  us  the  blending  of  the  two  streams,  the  union 
of  the  two  beams. 

"  He  shall  glorify  Me."  Think  of  a  riian  saying 
that :  The  Spirit  who  Avill  come  from  God  and  guide 
men  into  all  truth  has  for  His  distinctive  office  the 
glorifying  of  Jesus  Christ.  So  fair  is  He,  so  good,  so 
radiant,  that  to  make  Him  known  is  to  glorify  Him. 
The  glorifying  of  Christ  is  the  ultimate  and  adequate 
purpose  of  ever3-thing  that  God  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Spirit  has  done,  because  the  glorifying  of  Christ 
is  the  glorifying  of  God,  and  the  blessing  of  the  eyes 
that  behold  His  glory. 

"  For  He  shall  take  of  Mine,  and  show  it  unto 
you."  All  that  that  Divine  Spirit  brings  is  Christ's. 
So,  then,  there  is  no  new  revelation,  only  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  revelation.  The  text  is  given ; 
and  its  last  word  was  spoken,  when  the  cloud 
received  Him  out  of  their  sight,  and  henceforward 
all  is  commentary.  The  Spirit  takes  of  Christ's; 
applies  the  principles,  unfolds  the  deep    meaning  of 


300  THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 

words  and  deeds,  and  especially  the  meaning  of  the 
mystery  of  the  Cradle,  and  the  tragedy  of  the  Cross, 
and  the  mystery  of  the  Ascension,  as  declaring  that 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  Sacrifice  for  the  world. 
Christ  said,  "  I  am  the  Truth."  Therefore,  when  He 
promises,  "  He  shall  guide  you  into  all  the  truth," 
we  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  "  truth  "  into  which 
the  Spirit  guides  is  the  personal  Christ.  It  is  the 
whole  Christ,  the  whole  truth,  that  we  are  to  receive 
from  that  Divine  teacher ;  growing  up  day  by  da}- 
into  the  capacity  to  grasp  Christ  more  firmly,  to 
understand  Him  better,  and  by  love  and  trust  and 
obedience  to  make  Him  more  entirely  our  own.  We 
are  like  the  first  settlers  uj^on  some  great  island- 
continent.  There  is  a  little  fringe  of  population 
round  the  coast,  but  away  in  the  interior  are  leagues 
of  virgin  forests  and  fertile  plains  stretching  to  the 
horizon,  and  snow-capped  summits  piercing  the 
clouds,  on  which  no  foot  has  ever  trod.  "  He  shall 
guide  you  into  all  truth  ; "  through  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  boundless  land,  the  person  and  the 
work  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

"  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine,  there- 
fore said  I  that  He  shall  take  of  Mine  and  show  it 
unto  you."  What  awful  words  !  A  Divine  teaching 
Spirit  can  only  teach  concerning  God.  Christ  here 
explains  the  paradox  of  His  words  preceding,  in 
which,  if  He  were  but  human.  He  seems  to  have 
given  that  teaching  Spirit  an  unworthy  ofiice  b}' 
explaining  that  whatsoever  is  His  is  God's,  and  what- 
soever is  God's  is  His. 

My  brother  !  Do  you  believe  that  ?  Is  that  what 
you  think   about   Jesus  Christ  ?     He  puts  out  here 


THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH.  301 

an  impresumptuous  hand,  and  grasps  all  the  constel- 
lated glories  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  says,  "  They 
are  Mine ;  "  and  the  Father  looks  down  from  heaven 
and  says,  "  Son,  Thou  art  ever  with  Me,  and  all  that 
I  have  is  Thine."  Do  you  answqr,  "  Amen !  I 
believe  it "  ? 

Here  are  three  lessons  from  these  ofreat  words 
which  I  leave  with  you  without  attempting  to 
unfold  them.  One  is.  Believe  a  great  deal  more 
definitely  in,  and  seek  a  great  deal  more  consciously 
and  earnestly,  and  use  a  great  deal  more  diligently 
and  honestly,  that  Divine  Spirit  who  is  given  to  us 
all.  I  fear  me  that  over  very  large  tracts  of  pro- 
fessing Christendom  to-day,  men  only  stand  up  Avith 
very  faltering  lips  and  confess,  "  I  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  Hence  comes  much  of  the  weakness  of  our 
modern  Christianity,  the  worldliness  of  professing 
Christians,  "  and  when  for  the  time  they  ought  to 
be  teachers,  they  have  need  that  one  teach  them 
again  which  be  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles 
of  God."  "  Quench  not,  grieve  not,  despise  not  the 
Holy  Spirit." 

Another  lesson  is,  Use  the  Book  that  He  uses — 
else  you  will  not  grow,  and  He  will  have  no  means  of 
contact  with  you. 

And  the  last  is,  Try  the  spirits.  If  anything  calling 
itself  Christian  teaching  comes  to  you  and  does  not 
glorify  Christ,  it  is  self-condemned.  For  none  can 
exalt  Him  highly  enough,  and  no  teaching  can  present 
Him  too  exclusively  and  urgently  as  the  sole  Salva- 
tion and  Life  of  the  Avhole  earth.  And  if  it  be,  as  my 
text  tells  us,  that  the  great  teaching  Spirit  is  to 
come,  who  is  to  "  guide  us  into  all  truth,"  and  therein 


302  THE  GUIDE  INTO  ALL  TRUTH. 


is  to  glorify  Christ,  and  to  show  us  the  things  that  are 
His,  then  it  is  also  true,  '•'  hereby  know  we  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God ;  and  every  spirit  that 
confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is 
not  of  God.     And  this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist." 


XXVIII. 

^*Mbat  16  tbie  tbat  1bc  tniitb?" 

"  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me  :  and  again,  a  little  while, 
and  ye  shall  see  Me  :  because  I  go  to  the  Father.  Then  said  some 
of  His  disciples  among  themselves,  "What  is  this  that  He  saith 
unto  us,  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  JMe  :  and  again,  a 
little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me  :  and,  because  I  go  to  the 
Father .'  They  said  therefore.  What  is  this  that  He  saith,  A 
little  while  1  we  cannot  tell  what  He  saith.  Now  Jesus  knew 
that  they  were  desirous  to  ask  Him,  and  said  unto  them,  Do  ye 
inquire  among  yourselves  of  that  I  said,  A  little  while,  and  ye 
shall  not'  see  Me  :  and  again,  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see 
Me  ?  "—John  xvi.  Ifi— in. 

SUPERFICIAL  glance  at  the  former 
part  of  these  verses  ma_y  fail  to  detect 
their  connection  with  the  great  pre- 
ceding promise  of  the  Spirit  who  is  to 
guide  the  disciples  "  into  all  truth." 
They  appear  to  stand  quite  isolated  and  apart  from 
that.  But  a  little  thought  will  bring  out  an  obvious 
connection.  The  first  words  of  our  text  are  really  the 
climax  and  crown  of  the  promise  of  the  Spirit ;  for 
that  Spirit  is  to  "  guide  into  all  the  truth "  by 
declaring  to  the  disciples  the  things  that  arc 
Christ's,  and  in  consequence  of  that  ministration, 
they  are  to  be  able  to  see  their  unseen  Lord.     So  this 


304  "  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 

is  the  loftiest  tliouglit  of  what  the  Divine  Spirit  does 
for  the  Christian  heart,  that  it  shows  him  a  visible 
thouQ^h  absent  Christ. 

Then  we  have  in  the  subsequent  part  of  our  text 
the  blundering  of  the  bewildered  disciples  and  the 
patient  answer  of  the  long-suftering  Teacher.  So  that 
there  are  these  three  points  to  take  up  :  the  times  of 
disappearance  and  of  sight ;  the  bewildered  disciples  ; 
and  the  patient  Teacher. 

I. — First  of  all,  then,  note  the  deep  teaching  of  our 
Lord  here,  about  the  times  of  disappearance  and  of 
sight. 

The  words  are  plain  enough  ;  the  difficulty  lies  in 
the  determination  of  the  periods  to  which  they  refer. 
He  tells  us  that,  after  a  brief  interval  from  the  time  at 
which  He  was  speaking,  there  should  come  a  short 
parenthesis  during  which  He  was  not  to  be  seen ;  and 
that  upon  that  would  follow  a  period  of  which  no  end 
is  hinted  at,  during  which  He  is  to  be  seen.  The  two 
words  employed  in  the  two  consecutive  clauses,  for 
"  sight,"  are  not  the  same,  and  so  they  natural^ 
sus'Gfest  some  difference  in  the  manner  of  vision. 

But  the  question  arises,  Where  are  the  limits  of 
these  times  of  which  the  Lord  speaks  ?  Now  it  is 
quite  clear,  I  suppose,  that  the  first  of  the  "  little 
whiles  "  is  the  few  hours  that  intervened  between  His 
speaking  and  the  Cross.  And  it  is  equally  clear  that 
His  death  and  burial  began,  at  all  events,  the  period 
during  which  they  were  not  to  see  Him.  But  where- 
(loes  the  second  period  begin,  during  which  they  are 
to  see  Him  ?  Is  it  at  His  Kesurrection  or  at  His 
Ascension,  when  the  process  of  going  "  to  the  Father  " 
was  completed  in  all  its  stages  ;  or  at  Pentecost,  when 


"  JVHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITIir'  305 

the  Spirit,  by  whose  ministration  He  was  to  be  made 
visible,  was  poured  out  ?  The  answer  is,  perhaps,  not 
to  be  restricted  to  any  one  of  these  periods ;  but  I 
think  if  we  consider  that  all  disciples,  in  all  ages,  have 
a  portion  in  all  the  rest  of  these  great  discourses,  and 
if  we  note  the  absence  of  any  hint  that  the  promised 
seeing  of  Christ  was  ever  to  terminate,  and  if  we  mark 
the  diversity  of  words  under  which  the  two  manners 
of  vision  are  described,  and,  above  all,  if  we  note  the 
close  connection  of  these  words  with  those  which  pre- 
cede, we  shall  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  full 
realization  of  this  great  promise  of  a  visible  Christ 
did  not  begin  until  that  time  when  the  Spirit,  poured 
out,  opened  the  eyes  of  His  servants,  and  they  saw 
His  glory.  But,  however  we  settle  the  minor  question 
of  the  chronology  of  these  periods,  the  great  truth 
shines  out  here  is  that,  throusfh  all  the  stretch  of  the 
ages,  true  hearts  may  truly  see  the  true  Christ. 

If  we  might  venture  to  suppose  that  in  our  text  the 
second  of  the  periods  to  which  He  refers,  when  they 
did  not  see  Him,  was  not  conterminous  with,  but 
preceded,  the  second  "  little  while,"  all  would  be  clear. 
Then  the  first  "  little  while  "  would  be  the  few  hours 
before  the  Cross.  "  Ye  shall  not  see  Me  "  would  refer 
to  the  days  in  which  He  lay  in  the  tomb.  "  Again  a 
little  while  "  would  point  to  that  strange  transitional 
period  between  His  death  and  His  ascension,  in  which 
the  disciples  had  neither  the  close  intercourse  of 
earlier  days  nor  the  spiritual  communion  of  later  ones. 
And  the  final  period,  "  Ye  shall  see  Me,"  Avould  cover 
the  whole  course  of  the  centuries  till  He  comes 
again. 

However   that  may   be,   and   I  only  offer  it  as  a 

20 


306  "  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 


possible  suggestion,  tlie  tiling  that  we  want  to  fasten 
upon  for  ourselves  is  this — we  all,  if  we  Avill,  may 
have  a  vision  of  Christ  as  close,  as  real,  as  firmly 
certifying  us  of  His  reality,  and  making  as  vivid  an 
impression  uj^on  us,  as  if  He  stood  there,  visible  to 
our  senses.  And  so  "  by  this  vision  splendid "  we 
may  "be  everywhere  attended,"  and  whithersoever 
we  go,  have  burning  before  us  the  light  of  His 
countenance,  in  the  sunshine  of  which  we  shall 
walk. 

Brother  !  that  is  personal  Christianity — to  see  Jesus 
Christ,  and  to  live  with  the  thrilling  consciousness, 
printed  deep  and  abiding  upon  our  spirits,  that,  in 
very  deed.  He  is  b}^  our  sides.  Oh  !  how  that  con- 
viction would  make  life  strong  and  calm  and  noble 
and  blessed  !  How  it  would  lift  us  up  above  tempta- 
tion! "He  endured  as  seeing  Him  who  is  Invisible." 
What  should  terrify  us  if  Christ  stood  before  us  ? 
What  should  charm  us  if  we  saw  Him  ?  Competing 
glories  and  attractions  would  fade  before  His  presence, 
as  a  dim  candle  dies  at  noon.  It  would  make  all  life 
full  of  a  blessed  companionship.  Who  could  be 
solitary  if  he  saw  Christ ;  or  feel  that  life  was  dreary 
if  that  Friend  was  by  his  side  ?  It  Avould  fill  our 
hearts  with  joy  and  strength,  and  make  us  evermore 
blessed  with  the  light  of  His  countenance. 

And  how  are  we  to  get  it  ?  Eemember  the  con- 
nection of  my  text.  It  is  because  there  is  a  Divine 
Spirit  to  show  men  the  things  that  are  Christ's,  that 
therefore,  unseen,  He  is  visible  to  the  eye  of  faith. 
And  therefore  the  shortest  and  directest  road  to  the 
vision  of  Jesus  is  the  submitting  of  heart  and  mind 
and   spirit   to    the    teaching   of  that    Divine   Spirit, 


"WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?"  307 

who  uses  the  record,  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  means 
by  which  He  makes  Jesus  Christ  known  to  us. 

But  besides  this  waiting  upon  that  Divine  Teacher, 
let  me  remind  you  that  there  are  conditions  of 
disciphne  which  must  be  fulfilled  upon  our  parts,  if 
any  clear  vision  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  bless  us  pilgrims 
in  this  lonely  world.  And  the  first  of  these  conditions 
is — If  you  want  to  see  Jesus  Christ,  think  about  Him. 
Occupy  your  minds  with  Him.  If  men  in  the  city 
walk  the  pavements  with  their  eyes  fixed  upon  the 
gutters,  what  does  it  matter  though  all  the  glories  of 
a  sunset  are  dyeing  the  western  sky  ?  They  will  see 
none  of  them ;  and  if  Christ  stood  beside  you,  closer 
to  you  than  any  other,  if  your  eyes  were  fixed  upon 
the  trivialities  of  this  poor  present,  you  would  see  not 
Him.  If  you  want  to  see  Christ  honestly,  meditate 
upon  Him. 

And  if  you  want  to  see  Him,  shut  out  competing 
objects,  and  the  dazzling  cross-lights  that  come  in  and 
hide  Him  from  us.  There  must  be  a  "looking  off 
unto  Jesus."  There  must  be  a  rigid  limitation,  if  not 
excision  of  other  objects,  if  we  are  to  grasp  Him.  If 
we  would  sec,  and  have  our  hearts  filled  with,  the 
calm  sublimity  of  the  solemn,  white  wedge  that  lifts 
itself  into  the  far-off  blue,  we  must  not  let  our  gaze 
stop  on  the  busy  life  of  the  valleys  or  the  green  slopes 
of  the  lower  Alps,  but  must  lift  it  and  keep  it  fixed 
aloft.  Meditate  upon  Him,  and  shut  out  other 
things. 

If  you  want  to  see  Christ,  do  His  will.  One  act  of 
obedience  has  more  power  to  clear  a  man's  eyes  than 
hours  of  idle  contemplation ;  and  one  act  of  dis- 
obedience  has    more    power   to   dim   his   eyes   than 

20* 


308  "  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 

anything  besides.  It  is  in  the  dusty  common  road 
that  He  draws  near  to  us,  and  the  experience  of  those 
disciples  that  journeyed  to  Emmaus  may  be  ours. 
He  meets  us  in  the  way,  and  makes  our  hearts  burn 
within  us.  The  experience  of  the  dying  martyr 
outside  the  city  gate  may  be  ours.  Sorrows  and  trials 
will  rend  the  heavens  if  they  be  rightly  borne,  and 
so  we  shall  see  Christ  standinof  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of 
God.  Rebellious  tears  blind  our  eyes,  as  Mary's  did, 
so  that  she  did  not  know  the  Master  and  took  Him 
for  the  gardener.  Submissive  tears  purge  the  eyes 
and  wash  them  clean  to  see  His  face.  To  do  His 
Avill  is  the  sovereign  method  for  beholdinor  His 
countenance. 

Brethren  !  is  this  our  experience  ?  You  professing 
Christians,  do  you  see  Christ  ?  Are  your  eyes  fixed  upon 
Him  ?  Do  you  go  through  life  with  Him  consciousl}^ 
nearer  to  you  than  any  beside  ?  Is  He  closer  than 
the  intrusive  insignificancies  of  this  fleeting  present  ? 
Have  you  Him  as  your  continual  Companion  ?  Oh  ! 
when  we  contrast  the  difference  between  the 
largeness  of  this  promise — a  promise  of  a  thrilling 
consciousness  of  His  presence,  of  a  vivid  perception 
of  His  character,  of  an  unwavering  certitude  of  His 
reality — and  the  fly-away  glimpses  and  wandering 
sight,  and  faint,  far-off  views,  as  of  a  planet  weltering 
amid  clouds,  which  the  most  of  Christian  men  have 
of  Christ,  what  shame  should  cover  our  faces,  and 
how  we  should  feel  that,  if  we  have  not  the  fulfil- 
ment, it  is  our  own  fault !  Blessed  they  of  whom 
it  is  true  that  they  see  "no  man  any  more  save  Jesus 
only";  and  to  whom  all  sorrow,  joy,  care,  anxiety, 
work,  and  repose  are  but  the  means  of  revealing  that 


1VEAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 


309 


sweet  and  all-sufficient  presence!     "I  have  set  the 

moved^  '''''^''    ^efoi-e   me,   therefore  I    shall   not    be 

^II.-Now  notice,  secondly,  these  bemldered  disci- 

fh  J?  ^''"^'.i"'  ^^'^  '^'^^'  P^'^^°^  «^'  ^^'^'^  discourses, 

1^1  7  ^^\  '^'^''"'"^  '"  ^^^^^^™P^  «"^'  I^^rd  with 
more  or  less  relevant  questions,  but  as  the  wonderful 
words  flowed  on,  they  seem  to  have  been  awed  into 
silence,  and  our  Lord  Himself  almost  complains  of 

^h!^'!!.'     Tl"      "r^^?,  '-^l^^th  Me,  Whither  goest 
ihou  ?      The  mexhaustible  truths  that  He  had  spoken 
seem  to  have  gone  clear  over  their  heads,  but  the 
verbal  repetition  of  the  "  httle  whiles,"  and  the  recurring 
ring  of  the  sentences  seem  to  have  struck  upon  their 
ears.     So,  passing  by  all  the  great  words,  they  fasten 
upon  this  minor  thmg,  and  whisper  among  themselves 
perhaps  lagging  behind  on  the  road,  as  to  what  He 
means  by  these  "  little  whiles."     The  Revised  Version 
IS    probably    correct,    or,    at    least,    it    has    stron- 
manuscript  authority  in  its  favour,  in  omitting  the 
clause  m   our   Lord's   words,  '^  Because  I  go  tS  the 
i^atlier         Ihe  disciples  seem   to   have   quoted,   not 
rom  the  preceding  verse,   but  from  a  verse  a  Httle 
betore  that  in  the  context,  where  He  said  that  "the 
bpirit    Avill    convince    the    world    of    righteousness 
because  I  go  to  My  Father,  and  ye  see  Me  no  more." 
ilie  contradiction  seems  to  strike  them 

These  disciples  in  their  bewilderment  seem  to  me 
to  represent  some  very  common  faults  which  we  all 
commit  in  our  dealing  with  the  Lord's  words,  and  to 
one  or  two  of  these  I  turn  for  a  moment. 

Note  this,  to  begin  with,  how   they  pass   by  the 


310  "  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 

greatest  truths  in  order  to  fasten  upon  a  smaller 
outstanding  difficulty.  They  have  no  questions  to 
ask  about  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  nor  about  the  unity 
of  Christ  and  His  disci]3les  as  represented  in  the  Vine 
and  the  branches,  nor  about  what  He  tells  them  of 
the  love  that  la3^s  down  its  life  for  its  friends.  But 
when  He  comes  into  the  region  of  chronology,  they 
are  all  agog  to  know  the  "  Avhen  "  about  which  He  is 
so  enigmatically  spealdng. 

Now  is  not  that  exactly  like  us,  and  does  not  the 
Christianity  of  this  day  very  much  want  the  hint  to 
pay  most  attention  to  the  greatest  truths,  and  let  the 
little  difficulties  fall  into  their  subordinate  place  ? 
The  central  truths  of  Christianity  are  the  Incarnation 
and  Atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  jQt  outside 
questions,  altogether  subordinate  and,  in  comparison 
Avith  this,  unimportant,  are  filling  the  attention  and 
the  thoughts  of  people  at  present  to  such  an  extent 
that  there  is  great  danger  of  the  central  truth  of  all 
being  either  passed  by,  or  the  reception  of  it  being 
suspended  on  the  clearing  up  of  smaller  questions. 

The  truth  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  "Who  has 
died  for  our  salvation,  is  the  heart  of  the  Gospel. 
And  why  should  we  make  our  faith  in  that,  and  our 
living  by  it,  contingent  on  the  clearing  up  of  certain 
external  and  secondary  questions ;  chronological,  his- 
torical, critical,  philological,  scientific,  and  the  like  ? 
And  why  should  men  be  so  occupied  in  jangling  about 
the  latter  as  that  the  towering  supremacy,  the  absolute 
independence,  of  the  former  should  be  lost  sight  of? 
What  would  you  think  of  a  man  in  a  fire  Avho,  when 
they  brought  the  fire-escape  to  him,  said,  "  I  decline 
to  trust  myself  to  it,  until  you  first  of  all  explain  to 


"  JFEAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?"  311 

me  the  principles  of  its  construction ;  and,  secondly, 
tell  me  all  about  who  made  it ;  and,  thirdly,  inform 
me  where  all  the  materials  of  Avhich  it  is  made  came 
from "  ?  But  that  is  very  much  what  a  number  of 
people  are  doing  to-day  in  reference  to  the  Gospel  of 
our  salvation,  when  they  demand  that  the  small  ques- 
tions— on  which  the  central  verity  does  not  at  all 
depend — shall  be  answered  and  settled  before  they 
cast  themselves  upon  that. 

Another  of  the  blunders  of  these  disciples,  in  which 
they  show  themselves  as  our  brethren,  is  that  they 
fling  up  the  attempt  to  apprehend  the  obscurity  in  a 
very  swift  despair.  "  We  cannot  tell  what  He  saith, 
and  we  are  not  going  to  try  any  more.  It  is  all 
cloudland  and  chaos  together." 

Intellectual  indolence,  spiritual  carelessness  deal  so 
with  outstanding  difficulties,  abandoning  precipitatel}'- 
the  attempt  to  grasp  them  or  that  which  lies  behind 
them.  And  yet,  although  there  are  no  gratuitous 
obscurities  in  Christ's  teaching.  He  said  a  great  many 
things  which  could  not  possibly  be  understood  at  the 
time,  in  order  that  the  disciples  might  stretch  up 
towards  what  was  above  them,  and,  by  stretching  up, 
might  grow.  I  do  not  think  it  is  a  good  thing  to . 
break  down  the  children's  bread  too  small.  A  Avise 
teacher  will  now  and  then  blend  with  the  utmost  sim- 
plicity something  that  is  just  a  little  in  advance  of  the 
capacity  of  the  listener,  and  so  encourage  a  little  hand 
to  stretch  itself  out,  and  the  arm  to  grow  because  it  is 
stretched.  If  there  are  no  difficulties  there  is  no  eftbrt, 
and  if  there  is  no  eftbrt  there  is  no  growth.  Difficul- 
ties are  there  in  order  that  we  may  grapple  with  them, 
and  truth  is  sometimes  hidden  in  a  well  in  order  that 


312  "  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITH?" 

we  may  have  the  blessing  of  the  search,  and  that  the 
truth  found  after  the  search  may  be  more  precious. 
The  tropics  with  their  easy,  kixuriant  growth,  where 
the  footfall  turns  up  the  warm  soil,  grow  languid  men, 
and  our  less  smiling  latitude  grows  strenuous  ones. 
Thank  God  that  everything  is  not  easy,  even  in  that 
which  is  meant  for  the  revelation  of  all  truth  to  all 
men.  Instead  of  turning  tail  at  the  first  fence,  let  us 
learn  that  it  will  do  us  good  to  climb,  and  that  the 
fence  is  there  in  order  to  draw  forth  our  effort. 

There  is  another  point  in  which  these  bewildered 
disci23les  are  uncommonly  like  the  rest  of  us ;  and 
that  is,  that  they  have  no  patience  to  wait  for  time 
and  growth  to  solve  the  difficult}^  They  want  to 
know  all  about  it  now,  or  not  at  all.  If  they  would 
wait  for  six  weeks  they  Avould  understand,  as  they 
did.  Pentecost  explained  it  all.  We,  too,  are  often 
in  a  hurry.  There  is  nothing  that  the  ordinary 
mind,  and  often  the  educated  mind,  detests  so  much 
as  uncertainty,  and  being  consciously  baffled  by  some 
outstanding  difficulty.  And  in  order  to  escape  that 
uneasiness,  men  are  dogmatical  when  they  should  be 
doubtful,  and  positively  asserting,  when  it  would  be  a 
great  deal  more  for  the  health  of  their  souls  and  of 
their  Usteners  to  say,  "  Well,  really  I  do  not  know,  and 
I  am  content  to  wait."  So,  on  both  sides  of  great  con- 
troversies, you  get  men  who  will  not  be  content  to  let 
things  stand,  for  all  must  be  made  clear  and  plain 
to-day. 

Ah  !  brethren,  for  ourselves,  for  our  own  intellectual 
difficulties,  and  for  the  difficulties  of  the  world,  there 
is  nothing  like  time  and  patience.  The  m3-steries 
that  used  to  plague  us  Avhen  we  were  boys  melted 


"  jrHAT  IS  Tins  THAT  HE  SAITHV  313 

away  Avhen  we  grew  up.  And  many  questions  which 
trouble  me  to-day,  and  through  which  I  cannot  find 
my  way,  if  I  lay  them  aside,  and  go  about  my  ordinary 
duties,  and  come  back  to  them  to-morrow  with  a  fresh 
eye  and  an  unwearied  brain,  will  have  straightened 
themselves  out  and  become  clear,  \Ye  grow  into  our 
best  and  deepest  convictions,  Ave  are  not  dragged  into 
them  by  any  force  of  logic.  So  for  our  own  sorrows, 
questions,  pains,  griefs,  and  for  all  the  riddle  of  this 
painful  world 

'•  Take  it  on  trust  a  little  while, 
Thou  soon  shall  read  the  mystery  right 
In  the  full  sunshine  of  His  smile." 

III. — Lastly,  and  very  briefly,  a  word  about  the 
patient  Teacher. 

"  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask 
Him."  He  knows  all  our  difficulties  and  perplexities. 
Perhaps  it  is  His  supernatural  knowledge  that  is  indi- 
cated in  the  words  before  us,  or  perhaps  it  is  merely 
that  He  saAV  them  whispering  amongst  themselves  and 
so  inferred  their  wish.  Be  that  as  it  ma}',  we  may  take 
the  comfort  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  Teacher  who 
accurately  understands  how  much  we  understand  and 
where  Ave  grope,  and  Avill  shape  His  teaching  accord- 
ing to  our  necessities. 

He  had  not  a  Avord  of  rebuke  for  the  slowness  of 
their  apprehension.  He  might  Avell  have  said  to  them, 
"  Oh  !  fools,  and  sIoav  of  heart  to  beheve."  But  that 
word  Avas  not  addressed  to  them  then,  though  tAvo  of 
them  deserved  it  and  got  it,  after  events  had  brought 
light  to  His  teachino-.  He  never  rebukes  us  either  for 
our  stupidity  or  for  our  carelessness,  but  has  long 
patience  Avith  us. 


314  "  JVHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAIIEV' 

He  does  give  them  a  kind  of  rebuke.  "  Do  ye 
inquire  among  yourselves  ?"  That  is  a  hopeful  source 
to  go  to  for  knowledge.  Why  did  they  not  ask  Him 
instead  of  whispering  and  muttering  there  behind 
Him,  as  if  two  people  equally  ignorant  could  help  each 
other  to  knowledge  ?  Inquiry  "  among  yourselves  "  is 
folly ;  to  ask  Him  is  Avisdom.  AVe  can  do  much  for 
one  another,  but  the  deepest  riddles  and  mysteries 
can  only  be  wisely  dealt  with  in  one  way.  Take  them 
to  Him,  tell  Him  about  them.  Told  to  Him  they 
often  dwindle.  They  become  smaller  when  they  are 
looked  at  beside  Him,  and  He  will  help  us  to  under- 
stand as  much  as  may  be  understood,  and  patiently 
to  wait  and  leave  the  residue  unsolved,  until  the  time 
shall  come  when  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known. 

In  the  context  here,  Jesus  Christ  does  not  explain 
to  the  disciples  the  precise  point  that  troubled  them. 
Olivet  and  Pentecost  were  to  do  that ;  but  He  gives 
them  what  Avill  tide  them  over  the  time  until  the 
explanation  shall  come,  in  triumphant  hopes  of  a  jo}'' 
and  peace  that  is  drawing  near. 

And  so,  there  is  a  OTcat  deal  in  all  our  lives, 
in  His  dealings  Avith  us,  in  His  revelation  of  Himself 
to  us,  that  must  remain  mysterious  and  unintelligible. 
But  if  Ave  Avill  keep  close  to  Him,  and  speak  plainlj^ 
to  Him  in  prayer  and  communion  about  our  difficul- 
ties. He  Avill  send  us  triumphant  hope  and  largo 
confidence  of  a  coming  joy,  that  Avill  float  us  over  the 
bar  and  make  us  feel  that  the  burden  is  no  longel* 
painful  to  carry.  Much  that  must  remain  dark 
through  life  Avill  be  lightened  Avhen  Ave  get  yonder ; 
for  the  vision  here  is  not  perfect,  and  the  knoAvledgo 
here  is  as  imperfect  as  the  vision. 


"  WHAT  IS  THIS  THAT  HE  SAITHr' 


m 


Dear  friends,  the  one  question  for  us  all  is,  Do  our 
eyes  fix  and  fasten  on  that  dear  Lord,  and  is  it 
the  description  of  our  whole  lives,  that  Ave  see  Him 
and  Avalk  with  Him  ?  Oh  !  if  so,  then  life  will  bo 
blessed,  and  death  itself  will  be  but  as  "  a  little  while," 
when  we  "  shall  not  see  Him,"  and  then  we  shall  open 
our  eyes  and  behold  Him  close  at  hand,  whom  we  saw 
from  afar,  and  with  wandering  eyes,  amidst  the  mists 
and  illusions  of  earth.  To  see  Him  as  He  has  become 
for  our  sakes  is  heaven  on  earth.  To  see  Him  as  Ho 
is  will  be  the  heaven  of  heaven  ;  and  before  that  Face, 
as  the  sun  shininsic  in  His  streni^th,  all  sorrows,  difficul- 
ties  and  mysteries  will  melt  as  morning  mists. 


XXIX. 


Sorrow  turncb  into  3ov\'^ 

'  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but 
the  world  shall  rej  oice  :  and  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your 
sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  A  woman  when  she  is  in 
travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come  :  but  as  soon  as 
she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the 
anguish,  for  joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world.  And  ye 
now,  therefore,  have  sorrow  :  but  I  will  see  you  again,  and 
your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  youi'  joy  no  man  taketh  from 
you." — John  xvi.  20 — 22. 

HESE  -svorcls,  to  which  we  have  come  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  our  exposition, 
make  an  appropriate  text  for  Easter 
Sunda}'.  For  their  one  theme  is  the 
joy  which  began  upon  that  day,  and 
was  continued  in  increasing  measure  as  the  posses- 
sion of  Christ's  servants  after  Pentecost.  Our  Lord 
promises  that  the  momentary  sadness  and  pain  shall 
be  turned  into  a  swift  and  continual  joy.  He  pledges 
His  word  for  that,  and  bids  us  believe  it  on  His  l)are 
word.  He  illustrates  it  by  that  tender  and  beautiful 
image  which,  in  the  pains  and  bliss  of  motherhood, 
finds  an  analogy  for  the  pains  and  bliss  of  the 
disciples,    inasmuch   as,   in   both    cases,    pain    leads 

*  Preached  on  Easter  Sunday. 


SORROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  317 


directly  to  blessedness  in  which  it  is  forgotten.  And 
He  crowns  His  great  promises  by  exj^laining  to  us 
Avhat  is  the  deepest  foundation  of  our  truest  gladness, 
"  I  will  see  you  again,"  and  by  declaring  that  such' 
a  joy  is  independent  of  all  foes  and  all  externals, 
"  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you." 

There  are,  then,  two  or  three  aspects  of  the 
Christian  life  as  a  glad  life  which  are  set  before  us  in 
these  words,  and  to  which  I  ask  your  attention. 

I. — There  is,  first,  the  promise  of  a  joy  which  is  a 
transformed  sorrow. 

"  Your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  jo}^"  not  merely 
that  the  one  emotion  is  substituted  for  the  other,  but 
that  the  one  emotion,  as  it  were,  becomes  the  other. 
This  can  only  mean  that  that,  which  was  the  cause  of 
the  one,  reverses  its  action  and  becomes  the  cause  of 
the  opposite.     Of  course  the  historical  and  immediate 
fulfilment  of  these  words  lies  in  the  double  result  of 
C'hrist's  Cross  upon  His  servants.     For  part  of  three 
dreary  days  it  was  the  occasion  of  their  sorrow,  their 
panic,  their  despair;  and  then,  all  at  once,  when  with 
a  bound  the  mighty  fact  of  the  Resurrection  dawned 
upon  them,  that  which  had  been   the   occasion  for 
their  deep  grief,  for  their  apparently  hopeless  despair, 
suddenly  became  the  occasion  for  a  rapture  beyond 
their   dreams,   and   a  joy   which   would   never  pass. 
The  Cross  of  Christ,  which  for  some  few  hours  Avas 
pain,  and  all  but  ruin,  has  ever  since  been  the  centre 
of  the  deepest  gladness  and  confidence  of  a  thousand 
generations. 

I  do  not  need  to  remind  you,  I  suppose,  of  the 
value,  as  a  piece  of  evidence  of  the  historical  veracity 
of    the   Gospel    story,   of    this    sudden   change   and 


318  SOIIROIV  TURNED  INTO  JOY. 


complete  revolution  in  the  sentiments  and  emotions 
of  that  handful  of  believers.  What  Avas  it  that  lifted 
them  out  of  the  pit  ?  What  was  it  that  revolutionized 
in  a  moment  their  notions  of  the  Cross  and  of  its 
bearing  uj^on  them  ?  What  was  it  that  changed  down- 
hearted, despondent,  and  all  but  apostate  disciples^ 
into  heroes  and  martyrs  ?  It  Avas  the  one  fact  which 
Christendom  commemorates  to-day :  the  Resurrection 
of  Jesus  Christ.  That  was  the  clement,  added  to  the 
dark  potion,  which  changed  it  all  in  a  moment  into 
ficolden  flashincf  li^iit.  The  Resurrection  Avas  Avhat 
made  the  death  of  Christ  no  longer  the  occasion  for 
the  dispersion  of  His  disciples,  but  bound  them  to  Him 
Avith  a  closer  bond.  And  I  venture  to  say  that,  unless 
the  first  disciples  Avere  lunatics,  there  is  no  explanation 
of  the  changes  through  Avhich  they  passed  in  some 
eight-and-forty  hours,  except  the  supernatural  and 
miraculous  fact  of  the  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead.  That  set  a  light  to  the  thick  column 
of  smoke,  and  made  it  blaze  up  a  pillar  of  fire.  That 
changed  sorroAv  into  joy.  The  same  death  Avhich, 
before  the  Resurrection,  drcAv  a  pall  of  darkness  over 
the  heavens,  and  draped  the  earth  in  mourning,  by 
reason  of  that  Resurrection  Avhich  SAvept  aAvay  the 
cloud  and  brought  out  the  sunshine,  became  the 
source  of  joy.  A  dead  Christ  Avas  the  Church's 
despair;  a  dead  and  risen  Christ  is  the  Church's 
triumph,  because  He  is  "  the  Christ  that  died  .  ,  . 
and  is  alive  for  evermore." 

But,  more  generally,  let  me  remind  you  hoAv  this 
very  same  principle,  Avhich  applies  directly  and 
historically  to  the  Resurrection  of  our  Lord,  may  be 
legitimately   expanded    so   as    to    cover    the    Avhole 


SORROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  319 

ground  of  devout  men's  sorrows  and  calamities. 
Sorrow  is  the  first  stage,  of  which  the  second  and 
completed  stage  is  transformation  into  joy.  Ever}^ 
thundercloud  has  a  rainbow  lying  in  its  depths  when 
the  sun  smites  upon  it.  Our  purest  and  noblest 
joys  are  transformed  sorrows.  The  sorrow  of  contrite 
hearts  becomes  the  gladness  of  pardoned  children; 
the  sorrow  of  bereaved  empty  hearts  may  become  the 
gladness  of  hearts  filled  with  God;  and  every  grief 
that  stoops  upon  our  path  may  be,  and  will  bo,  if  we 
keep  near  that  dear  Lord,  changed  into  its  own 
ojDposite,  and  become  the  source  of  blessedness  else 
unattainable.  Every  stroke  of  the  bright,  sharp 
ploughshare  that  goes  through  the  fallow  ground,  and 
every  dark  winter's  day  of  pulverizing  frost  and 
lashing  tempest  and  howling  wind,  are  represented  in 
the  broad  acres,  waving  with  the  golden  grain.  All 
your  griefs  and  mine,  brother,  if  we  carry  them  to  the 
Master,  will  flash  up  into  gladness  and  be  turned 
into  joy. 

II. — Still  further,  another  aspect  here  of  the  glad 
life  of  the  true  Christian  is,  that  it  is  a  joy  founded 
upon  the  consciousness  that  Christ's  eye  is  upon  us. 

"  I  will  see  you  again  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice." 
In  other  parts  of  these  closing  discourses  the  form  of 
the  promise  is  the  converse  of  this,  as  for  instance — 
"Yet  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  see  Me"  Here 
Christ  lays  hold  of  the  thought  by  the  other  handle, 
and  says,  "/will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall 
rejoice."  Now  these  two  forms  of  putting  the  same 
mutual  relationship),  of  course,  agree,  in  that  they  both 
of  them  suocsrest,  as  the  true  foundation  of  the 
blessedness  which  they  promise,  the  fact  of  communion 


320  SORROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY. 

with  a  present  Lord.  But  they  differ  from  one 
another  in  colouring,  and  in  the  emphasis  which  they 
place  upon  the  two  parts  of  that  communion.  "  Ye 
shall  see  Me''  fixes  attention  upon  us  and  our 
perception  of  Him.  "  /  will  see  you  "  fixes  attention 
rather  upon  Him  and  His  beholding  of  us.  "  Ye  shall 
see  Me  "  speaks  of  our  going  out  after  Him  and  being- 
satisfied  in  Him.  "  I  will  see  you  "  speaks  of  His 
perfect  knowledge,  of  His  loving  care,  of  His  tender, 
compassionate,  complacent,  ever-watchful  eye  resting 
upon  us,  in  order  that  He  may  communicate  to  us  all 
needful  good. 

And  so  it  requires  a  loving  heart  on  our  part,  in 
order  to  find  joy  in  such  a  promise.  His  eyes  are  as 
a  flame  of  fire,  and  He  sees  all  men ;  but  unless  our 
hearts  cleave  to  Him  and  we  know  ourselves  to  bo 
knit  to  Him  by  the  tender  bond  of  love  from  Him, 
accepted  and  treasured  in  our  souls,  then  "  I  will  see 
you  again  "  is  a  threat  and  not  a  promise.  It  depends 
upon  the  relation  which  Ave  bear  to  Him,  whether  it  is 
blessedness  or  misery  to  think  that  He  whose  flaming 
eye-  reads  all  men's  sins  and  pierces  through  all 
hypocrisies  and  veils  has  it  fixed  upon  us.  The 
sevenfold  utterance  of  His  words  to  the  Asiatic 
churches — the  last  recorded  words  of  Jesus  Christ — 
begins  with  "  I  know  thy  works."  It  was  no  joy 
to  the  lukewarm  professors  at  Laodicea,  nor  to  the 
church  at  Ephesus  which  had  lost  the  freshness  of  its 
early  love,  that  the  Master  knew  them  ;  but  to  the 
faithful  souls  in  Philadelphia,  and  to  the  few  in 
Sardis,  who  "had  not  defiled  their  garments,"  it 
was  blessedness  and  life  to  feel  that  they  walked  in 
the  sunshine  of  His  face. 


SOEROJF  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  821 

Is  there  any  joy  to  us  in  the  thought  that  the  Lord 
Christ  sees  us  ?  Oh,  if  our  hearts  are  really  His,  if 
our  lives  are  as  truly  built  upon  Him  as  our 
profession  of  being  Christians  alleges  that  they  are, 
then  all  that  we  need  for  the  satisfaction  of  our 
nature,  for  the  supply  of  our  various  necessities,  or  as 
an  armour  against  temptation,  and  an  amulet  against 
sorrow,  will  be  given  to  us,  in  the  belief  that  His  eye 
is  fixed  upon  us.  There  is  the  foundation  of  the 
truest  joy  for  men.  "  There  be  many  that  say.  Who 
will  show  us  any  good  ? "  "  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the 
light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us.  Thou  hast  put 
gladness  in  my  heart  more  than  in  the  time  when 
their  corn  and  their  wine  abound."  One  look 
toivards  Christ  will  more  than  repay  and  abolish 
earth's  sorrow.  One  look  from  Christ  will  till  our 
hearts  with  sunshine.  All  tears  are  dried  on  eyes 
that  meet  His.  Loving  hearts  find  their  heaven  in 
looking  into  one  another's  faces,  and  if  Christ  be  our 
love,  our  deepest  and  purest  joys  will  be  found  in  His 
glance  and  our  answering  gaze. 

If  one  could  take  a  bit  of  the  Arctic  world  and 
float  it  doAvn  into  the  tropics  anyhow,  the  ice  would 
all  melt,  and  the  grey  dreariness  would  disappear, 
and  a  new  splendour  of  colour  and  of  light  would 
clothe  the  fields,  and  an  unwonted  vegetation  would 
spring  up  where  barrenness  had  been.  And  if  you 
and  I  will  only  float  our  lives  southward  beneath 
the  direct  vertical  rays  of  that  great  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  then  all  the  dreary  winter  and  ice 
of  our  sorrows  Avill  melt,  and  joy  will  spring. 
Brother,  the  Christian  life  is  a  glad  life,  because 
Christ,    the    Infinite    and    Incarnate    lover    of   our 

21 


322  SORROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY. 

souls,  looks  upon  the  heart  that  loves  and  trusts 
Him. 

III. — Still  further,  note  how  our  Lord  here  sets 
forth  His  disciples'  joy  as  beyond  the  reach  of  violence 
and  independent  of  externals. 

"No  man  taketh  it  from  you."  Of  course,  that 
refers  primarily  to  the  opposition  and  actual  hostility 
of  the  persecuting  world,  which  that  handful  of 
frightened  men  were  very  soon  to  face ;  and  our 
Lord  assures  them  here  that,  whatsoever  the  power  of 
the  Devil  working  through  the  world  may  be  able  to 
filch  away  from  them,  it  cannot  filch  away  the  joy 
that  He  gives.  But  we  may  expand  the  meaning 
beyond  that  reference. 

Much  of  our  joy,  of  course,  depends  upon  our 
fellows,  and  disappears  when  they  fade  away  from  our 
sight  and  we  struggle  along  in  a  solitude,  made  the 
more  dreary  because  of  remembered  companionship. 
And  much  of  our  joy  depends  upon  the  goodwill  and 
help  of  our  fellows,  and  they  can  snatch  away  all  that 
so  depends.  They  can  hedge  up  our  road  and  make 
it  uncomfortable  and  sad  for  us  in  many  ways,  but  no 
man  but  myself  can  put  a  roof  over  my  head  to  shut 
me  out  from  God  and  Christ ;  and  as  long  as  I  have 
a  clear  sky  over  head,  it  matters  very  little  how  high 
may  be  the  walls  that  foes  or  hostile  circumstances 
pile  around  me,  and  how  close  they  may  press  upon  me. 
And  much  of  our  joy  necessarily  depends  upon  and 
fluctuates  with  external  circumstances  of  a  hundred 
different  kinds,  as  we  all  only  too  well  know.  But  we 
do  not  need  to  have  all  our  joy  fed  from  these  surface 
springs.  We  may  dig  deeper  down  if  we  like.  If  we 
are  Christians,  Ave  have,  hke  some  beleaguered  garrison 


SORROW  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  323 

in  a  fortress,  a  well  in  the  courtyard  that  nobody  can 
get  at,  and  which  never  can  run  dry.  "  Your  joy  no 
man  taketh  from  you," 

As  long  as  we  have  Christ,  we  cannot  be  desolate. 
If  He  and  I  were  alone  in  the  universe,  or,  paradoxical 
as  it  may  sound,  if  He  and  I  were  alone,  and  the 
universe  were  not,  I  should  have  all  that  I  needed  and 
my  joy  would  be  full,  if  I  loved  Him  as  I  ought  to  do. 

So,  my  brother,  let  us  see  to  it  that  Ave  dig  deep 
enough  for  the  foundation  of  our  blessedness,  and 
that  it  is  on  Christ  and  nothing  less  infinite,  less 
eternal,  less  unchangeable,  that  we  repose  for  inward 
blessedness  which  nothing  outside  of  us  can  touch. 
That  is  the  blessedness  which  we  may  all  possess, 
"  for  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 
present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth, 
nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  " 
from  the  eye  and  the  heart  of  the  risen  Christ  who 
lives  for  us. 

But  remember,  though  externals  have  no  power  to 
rob  us  of  our  joy,  they  have  a  very  formidable 
power  to  interfere  with  the  cultivation  of  that  faith, 
which  is  the  essential  condition  of  our  loy.  They 
cannot  force  us  away  from  Christ,  but  they  may 
tempt  us  away.  The  sunshine  did  for  the  traveller  in 
the  old  fable  what  the  storm  could  not  do  ;  and  the 
world  may  cause  you  to  think  so  much  about  it  that 
you  forget  your  Master.  Its  joys  may  compel  Him  to 
hide  His  face,  and  may  so  fill  your  eyes  that  you  do 
not  care  to  look  at  His  face ;  and  so  the  sweet  bond 
may  be  broken,  and  the  consciousness  of  a  living, 
loving  Jesus  may  fade,  and  become  filmy  and  unsub- 

21* 


324  SORROIF  TURNED  INTO  JOY. 

stantial,  and  occasional  and  interrupted.  Do  you  see 
to  it  that  Avhat  the  world  cannot  do  by  violence  and 
directly,  it  does  not  do  by  its  harlot  kisses  and  its 
false  promises,  tempting  you  away  from  the  paths 
where  alone  you  can  meet  your  Master. 

IV. — Lastly,  note  that  this  life  of  joy,  which  our 
Lord  here  speaks  of,  is  made  certain  by  the  promise  of 
a  faithful  Christ. 

"  Verily  !  verily !  I  say  unto  you."  He  was  accus- 
tomed to  use  that  impressive  and  solemn  formula, 
when  He  was  about  to  speak  words  beyond  the  reach 
of  human  wisdom  to  discover,  or  of  j^rime  importance 
for  men  to  accept  and  believe.  He  tells  these  men^, 
who  had  nothing  but  His  bare  word  to  rely  upon^ 
that  the  astonishinQ-  thinof  which  He  is  cfoinsf  to 
promise  them  Avill  certainly  come  to  pass.  He  would 
encourage  them  to  rest  an  unfaltering  confidence,  for 
the  brief  parenthesis  of  sorrow,  upon  His  faithful 
promise  of  joy.  He  puts  His  own  character,  so  to 
speak,  in  pawn.  His  words  are  precisely  equivalent 
in  meaning  to  the  soleDin  Old  Testament  words  which 
are  represented  as  being  the  oath  of  God,  "  As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord."  "  You  may  be  as  sure  of  this  thing 
as  you  are  of  My  Divine  existence,  for  all  My  Divine 
Being  is  pledged  to  you  to  bring  it  about." — "  Verily ! 
verily !  I  say  unto  you."  "  You  may  be  as  sure  of 
this  thing  as  you  are  of  Me,  for  all  that  I  am  is  pledged 
to  fulfil  the  words  of  My  lips." 

So  Christ  puts  His  whole  truthfulness  at  stake,  as  it 
were ;  and  if  any  man  that  has  ever  loved  Jesus 
Christ  and  trusted  Him  aright  has  not  found  this 
"joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,"  then  Jesus  Christ 
has  said  the  thing  that  is  not. 


SOEEOn^  TURNED  INTO  JOY.  325 

Then  why  is  it  that  so  many  professing  Christians 
have  such  joyless  hves  as  they  have?  Simply  because 
they  do  not  keep  the  conditions.  If  we  will  love  Him 
so  as  to  set  our  hearts  upon  Him,  if  we  will  desire 
Him  as  our  chief  good,  if  we  will  keep  our  eyes  fixed 
upon  Him,  then,  as  sure  as  He  is  living  and  is  the 
Truth,  He  Avill  flood  our  hearts  with  blessedness,  and 
His  joy  will  pour  into  our  souls  as  the  flashing  tide 
rushes  into  some  muddy  and  melancholy  harbour,  and 
sets  everything  dancing  that  was  lying  stranded  on 
the  slime.  If,  my  brother,  you,  a  professing  Chris- 
tian, know  but  little  of  this  joy,  why,  then,  it  is  your 
fault,  and  not  His.  The  joyless  lives  of  so  many  who 
say  they  are  His  disciples  cast  no  shadow  of  suspicion 
upon  His  veracity,  but  they  do  cast  a  very  deep 
shadow  of  doubt  upon  their  profession  of  faith  in 
Him. 

Is  your  religion  joyful  ?  Is  your  joy  religious  ? 
The  two  questions  go  together.  And  if  we  cannot 
answer  these  questions  in  the  light  of  God's  eye  as  we 
ought  to  do,  let  these  great  promises  of  my  text  prick 
us  into  holier  being,  into  more  consistent  Christian 
character,  and  a  closer  walk  with  our  Master  and 
Lord. 

The  out-and-out  Christian  is  a  J03'ful  Christian. 
The  half-and-half  Christian  is  the  kind  of  Christian 
that  a  great  many  of  you  are — little  acquainted  with 
the  joy  of  the  Lord.  Why  should  Ave  live  half  way 
up  the  hill,  and  swathed  in  mists,  when  we  might  have 
an  unclouded  sky  and  a  visible  sun  over  our  heads,  if 
we  would  only  climb  higher  and  Avalk  in  the  hght  of 
His  face  ? 


XXX. 

TObat  tbat  H)a^  will  brino  fovUx 

"  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  nothing.  Verily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  name,  He 
will  give  it  you.  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  My  name  : 
ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." — John 
xvi.  23,  24. 

UR  Lord  here  sums  up  the  prerogatives 
and  privileges  of  His  servants  in  the 
day  that  was  about  to  dawn  and  to 
last  till  He  came  again.  There  is 
nothing  absolutely  new  in  the  words; 
substantially  the  promises  contained  in  them  have 
appeared  in  former  parts  of  these  discourses  under 
somewhat  difterent  aspects  and  connections.  But  our 
Lord  brings  them  together  here,  in  this  condensed 
repetition,  in  order  that  the  scattered  rays,  being  thus 
focussed,  may  have  more  power  to  illuminate  w^ith 
certitude,  and  to  warm  into  hope.  "  Ye  shall  ask  Me 
nothing.  .  .  .  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive.  .  -.  . 
Your  joy  shall  be  full."  These  are  the  jewels  which 
He  sets  in  a  cluster,  the  juxtaposition  making  each 
brighter,  and  gives  to  us  for  a  parting  keepsake. 
Now  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  two  askings  which 


WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH.  327 


are  spoken  of  here  are  expressed  by  different  words 
in  the  Greek.  Our  English  word  "ask"  means  two 
things,  either  to  question  or  to  request ;  to  ask  in  the 
sense  of  interrogating,  in  order  to  get  information  and 
teaching,  or  in  the  sense  of  beseeching,  in  order  to  get 
gifts.  In  the  former  sense  the  word  is  employed  in 
the  first  clause  of  my  text,  with  distinct  reference  to 
the  disciples'  desire  to  ask  Him  a  very  foolish  ques- 
tion a  moment  or  tAvo  before;  and  in  the  second 
sense  it  is  employed  in  the  central  portion  of  my 
text. 

So,  then,  there  are  three  things  hero  as  the  marks 
of  the  Christian  life  all  through  the  ages :  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  ignorant  questions  addressed  to  a  present 
Christ ;  the  satisfaction  of  desires  ;  and  the  perfecting 
of  joy-  These  are  the  characteristics  of  a  true 
Christian  hfe.  My  brother !  are  they  in  any  de<^ree 
the  characteristics  of  yours  ? 

I- — Note  then,  first,  no  more  questionings. 

"  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  nothing."  And  do 
not  you  think  that  when  the  disciples  heard  that  they 
Avould  be  tempted  to  say,  "  Then  what  in  all  the  world 
are  we  to  do  ?  "  To  them  the  thought  that  He  was  not 
going  to  be  at  their  sides  any  longer,  for  them  to  go  to 
with  their  difficulties,  must  have  seemed  despair  rather 
than  advance ;  but  in  Christ's  eyes  it  was  progress. 
He  tells  them  and  us  that  we  gain  by  losing  Him,  and 
are  better  off  than  they  were,  precisely  because  He 
does  not  any  longer  stand  at  our  sides  for  us  to 
question.  It  is  better  for  a  boy  to  puzzle  out  the 
meaning  of  a  Latin  book  by  his  own  brains  and  the 
help  of  a  lexicon  than  it  is  lazily  to  use  an  interlinear 
translation.     And,  though  we  do  not  always  feel  it, 


328  WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTE. 

and  are  often  tempted  to  think  how  blessed  it  would 
be  if  we  had  an  infallible  Teacher  visible  here  at  our 
sides,  it  is  a  great  deal  better  for  us  that  we  have  not ; 
and  it  is  a  step  in  advance  that  He  has  gone  away. 
Many  eager  and  honest  Christian  souls,  hungering 
after  certainty  and  rest,  have  cast  themselves  in  these 
latter  days  into  the  arms  of  an  infallible  Church,  I 
doubt  whether  any  such  questioning  mind  has  found 
what  is  sought ;  and  I  am  sure  that  it  has  taken  a 
step  dowmvards,  and  not  upwards,  from  the  spiritual 
guidance  realized  by  our  own  honest  industry  and 
earnest  use  of  the  materials  supplied  to  us  in  Christ's 
word,  to  any  external  authority  which  comes  to  us  to 
save  us  the  trouble  of  thinking,  and  to  confirm  to  us 
truth,  which  we  have  not  made  our  own  by  search  and 
effort.  We  gain  by  losing  the  visible  Christ;  and 
He  was  proclaiming  progress  and  not  retrogression, 
when  He  said :  "  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  no  more 
questions," 

For  what  have  we  instead  ?  We  have  two  things  : 
a  completed  revelation,  and  an  inward  Teacher. 

We  have  a  completed  revelation.  Great  and  won- 
derful and  unspeakably  precious  as  were  and  are  the 
words  of  Jesus  Christ,  His  deeds  are  far  more.  The 
death  of  Christ  has  told  us  things  that  Christ  before 
His  death  could  not  tell.  The  resurrection  of  Christ 
has  cast  light  upon  all  the  darkest  places  of  man's 
destiny  which  Christ,  before  His  resurrection,  could 
not  by  any  words  so  illuminate.  The  ascension  of 
Christ  has  opened  doors  for  thought,  for  faith,  for 
hope,  which  were  fast  closed,  notwithstanding  all  His 
teachings,  until  He  had  burst  them  asunder  and  passed 
to  His  throne.     And  the  facts  which  are  substituted 


WRAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH.  329 

for  the  bodily  presence  of  Jesus  Avitli  His  disciples 
tell  us  a  great  deal  more  than  they  could  ever  have 
drawn  from  Him  by  questionings,  however  persistent 
and  however  wisely  directed.  We  have  a  completed 
revelation,  and  therefore  we  need  ask  Him  nothing. 

And  we  have  a  Divine  Spirit  that  will  come  to  us 
if  we  will,  and  teach  us  by  means  of  blessing  the 
exercise  of  our  own  faculties,  and  guiding  us,  not, 
indeed,  into  the  uniform  perception  of  the  intellectual 
aspects  of  Christian  truth,  but  into  the  apprehension 
and  the  loving  possession,  as  a  power  in  our  hves,  of 
all  the  truth  that  we  need  to  mould  our  characters 
and  to  raise  us  to  the  likeness  of  Himself. 

Only,  brother,  let  us  remember  what  such  a  method 
of  teaching  demands  from  us.  It  needs  that  we 
honestly  use  the  revelation  that  is  given  us ;  it  needs 
that  we  loyally,  lovingly,  trustfully,  submit  ourselves 
to  the  teaching  of  that  Spirit  that  will  dwell  in  us ; 
it  needs  that  we  bring  our  lives  up  to  the  height  of 
our  present  knowledge,  and  make  everything  that  we 
know  a  factor  in  shaping  what  we  do  and  what  we 
are.  If  thus  we  will  to  do  His  will,  "  we  shaU  loiow 
of  the  doctrine "  ;  if  thus  we  yield  ourselves  to  the 
Divine  Spirit,  we  shall  be  taught  the  practical  bearings 
of  all  essential  truth  ;  and  if  thus  we  ponder  the  facts 
and  principles  that  are  enshrined  in  Christ's  life,  and 
the  apostolic  commentary  on  them,  as  preserved  for  us 
in  the  Scripture,  we  shall  not  need  to  envy  those  that 
could  go  to  Him  with  their  questions,  for  He  will  come 
to  us  with  His  all-satisfying  answers. 

Ah  !  but  you  say  experience  does  not  verify  these 
promises.  Look  at  a  divided  Christendom  ;  look  at 
my  own  difficulties  of  laiowing  what  I  am  to  beUeve 


330  WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH. 

and  to  think.  Well,  as  for  a  divided  Christendom, 
saintly  souls  are  all  of  one  Church,  And  however 
they  may  formulate  the  intellectual  aspects  of  their 
creed,  when  they  come  to  pray  they  say  the  same 
things.  Roman  Catholic  and  Protestant,  and  Quaker 
and  Churchman,  and  Calvinist  and  Arminian,  and 
Greek  and  Latin  Christians — all  contribute  to  the 
hymn-book  of  every  sect ;  and  we  all  sing  their  songs. 
So  the  divisions  are  like  the  surface  cracks  on  a  dry 
field,  and  a  few  inches  down  there  is  continuity.  As 
for  the  difficulty  of  knowing  what  I  am  to  believe  and 
think  about  controverted  questions,  no  doubt  there 
will  remain  many  gaps  in  the  circle  of  our  knowledge ; 
no  doubt  there  will  be  much  left  obscure  and  un- 
answered ;  but  if  we  will  keep  ourselves  near  the 
Master,  and  use  honestly  and  diligently  the  helps  that 
He  gives  us — the  outward  help  in  the  Word,  and  the 
inward  help  in  His  teaching  Spirit — we  shall  not  walk 
in  darkness,  but  shall  have  lisfht  enoucfh  Gfiven  to  be 
to  us  the  Light  of  Life. 

Brother,  keep  close  to  Christ,  and  Christ — present 
though  absent — will  teach  you. 

II. — Secondly,  satisfied  desires. 

This  second  great  promise  of  my  text,  introduced 
again  by  the  solemn  affirmation,  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say 
unto  you,"  substantially  appeared  in  a  former  part  of 
these  discourses  with  a  very  significant  difference. 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name  that  will  I  do." 
"  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  My  name  I  will  do  it." 
There  Christ  presented  Himself  as  the  Answerer  of 
the  petitions,  because  His  more  immediate  purpose 
was  to  set  forth  His  going  to  the  Father  as  His  eleva- 
tion  to  a  yet   loftier  position.      Here,  on  the  other 


WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BFdXG  FORTH.  331 

hand,  He  sets  forth  the  Father  as  the  Answerer  of  the 
petitions,  because  His  purpose  is  to  point  away  from 
undue  dependence  on  His  own  corporeal  presence.  But 
the  fact  that  He  thus,  as  occasion  required,  substitutes 
the  one  form  of  speech  for  the  other,  and  indifferently 
represents  the  same  actions  as  being  done  by  Himself 
and  by  the  Father  in  heaven,  carries  with  it  large 
teachings  which  I  do  not  dwell  upon  now.  Only  I 
would  ask  you  to  consider  how  much  is  involved  in 
that  fact,  that,  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  without 
explanation  of  the  difference,  our  Lord  alternates  the 
two  forms,  and  sometimes  says,  "  I  will  do  it,"  and 
sometimes  says,  "  The  Father  will  do  it."  Does  it  not 
point  to  that  great  and  blessed  truth,  "  Whatsoever 
thing  the  Father  doeth,  that  also  doeth  the  Son 
likewise  ? " 

But  passing  from  that,  let  me  ask  3'ou  to  note  very 
carefully  the  limitation,  which  is  here  given  to  the 
broad  universality  of  the  declaration  that  desires 
shall  be  satisfied.  "H  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  My 
name."  There  is  the  definition  of  Christian  prayer. 
And  what  does  it  mean  ?  Is  a  prayer,  which  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  is  reeking  with  self-will,  hallowed 
because  we  say,  as  a  kind  of  charm  at  the  end  of 
it,  "  For  Christ's  sake.  Amen  "  ?  Is  that  praymg  in 
Christ's  name  ?  Surely  not !  What  is  the  name  of 
Christ  ?  His  whole  revealed  character.  So  these 
disciples  could  not  pray  in  His  name  "hitherto," 
because  His  character  was  not  all  revealed.  Therefore, 
to  pray  in  His  name  is  to  pray,  recognizing  what  He 
is,  as  revealed  in  His  life  and  death  and  Resurrection 
and  Ascension,  and  to  base  all  our  dependence  of 
acceptance  of  our  prayers  upon  that  revealed  char- 


332  WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH. 

acter.  Is  that  all  ?  Are  any  kind  of  wishes,  which 
are  presented  in  dependence  upon  Christ  as  our 
only  hope  and  channel  of  Divine  blessing,  certain 
to  be  fulfilled  ?  Certainly  not !  To  pray  "  in  My 
name  "  means  yet  more  than  that.  It  means  not  only 
to  pray  in  dependence  upon  Christ  as  our  only  ground 
of  hope  and  source  of  acceptance  and  God's  only 
channel  of  blessing,  but  it  means  exactly  what  the 
same  phrase  means  when  it  is  applied  to  us.  If  I  say 
that  I  am  doing  something  in  your  name,  that  means 
on  your  behalf,  as  your  representative,  as  your  organ, 
and  to  express  your  mind  and  will.  And  if  we  pray 
in  Christ's  name,  that  implies,  not  only  our  dependence 
upon  His  merits  and  work,  but  also  the  harmony  of 
our  wills  with  His  will,  and  that  our  requests  are  not 
merely  the  hot  products  of  our  own  selfishness,  but 
are  the  calm  issues  of  communion  with  Him.  TJcus 
to  pray  requires  the  suppression  of  self  Heathen 
prayer,  if  there  be  such  a  thing,  is  the  violent  eftbrt 
to  make  God  will  what  I  wish.  Christian  prayer  is 
the  submissive  effort  to  make  my  wish  what  God 
wills.     And  that  is  to  pray  in  Christ's  name. 

My  brother,  do  we  construct  our  prayers  thus  ?  Do 
we  try  to  bring  our  desires  into  harmony  with  Him, 
before  we  venture  to  express  them  ?  Do  we  go  to  His 
footstool  to  pour  out  petulant,  blind,  passionate, 
unsanctified  wishes  after  questionable  and  contingent 
good,  or  to  wait  until  He  tills  our  spirits  with  longings 
after  what  it  must  be  His  desire  to  give,  and  then  to 
breathe  out  those  desires  caught  from  His  own  heart, 
and  echoing  His  own  will  ?  Ah !  The  discipline 
that  is  wanted  to  make  men  pray  in  Christ's  name  is 
little  understood  by  multitudes  amongst  us. 


WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH.  333 

Notice  how  certain  such  prayer  is  of  being  answered. 
Of  course,  if  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  it 
is  sure  not  to  be  offered  in  vain.  Our  Revised  Version 
makes  a  slight  alteration  in  the  order  of  the  words  in 
the  first  clause  of  this  promise  by  reading,  "  If  ye  ask 
anything  of  the  Father  He  will  give  it  you  in  My 
name"  God's  gifts  come  down  through  the  same 
channel  through  which  our  prayer  goes  up.  We  ask 
in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  get  our  answers  in  the 
name  of  Christ. 

But,  whether  that  be  the  true  collocation  of  ideas 
or  no,  mark  the  plain  principle  here,  that  only  desires 
which  are  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will  are  sure  of 
being  satisfied.  What  is  a  bad  thing  for  a  child 
cannot  be  a  good  thing  for  a  man.  What  is  a  foolish 
and  Avicked  thing  for  a  father  to  do  down  here  cannot 
be  a  kind  and  a  wise  thing  for  the  Father  in  the 
heavens  to  do.  If  you  want  to  spoil  your  child  you 
say,  "  What  do  you  want,  my  dear  ?  tell  me  and 
3^ou  shall  have  it."  And  if  God  were  saying  anything 
like  that  to  us,  through  the  lips  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Son,  in  the  text,  it  would  be  no  blessing,  but  a  curse. 
He  knows  a  great  deal  better  what  is  good  for  us ;  and 
so  He  says :  "  Bring  3^oiu'  wishes  into  line  with  My 
purpose,  and  then  you  will  get  them;"  "Delight 
thyself  in  the  Lord,  and  He  will  give  thee  the  desires 
of  thine  heart."  If  you  want  God  most  you  will  be 
sure  to  get  Him  ;  if  your  heart's  desires  are  after  Him, 
your  heart's  desires  will  be  satisfied.  "  The  young  lions 
do  roar  and  suffer  hunger."  That  is  the  world's  way 
of  getting  good ;  fighting  and  striving  and  snarling, 
and  forcibly  seeking  to  grasp.  And  there  is  hunger 
after  all.     There  is  a  better  way  than  that.     Instead 


334  WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH. 

of  striving  and  struggling  and  fighting  to  snatch  and 
to  keep  a  perishable  and  questionable  portion,  let  us 
wait  upon  God  and  quiet  our  hearts,  stilling  them 
into  the  temper  of  communion  and  conformity  with 
Him,  and  we  shall  not  ask  in  vain. 

He  who  prays  in  Christ's  name  must  pray  Christ's 
prayer,  "  Not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  And  then, 
though  many  wishes  may  be  unanswered,  and  many 
weak  petitions  unfulfilled,  and  many  desires  unsatis- 
fied, the  essential  spirit  of  the  prayer  will  be  answered, 
and.  His  will  being  done  in  us  and  on  us,  our  wishes 
will  acquiesce  in  it  and  desire  nothing  besides.  To 
him  who  can  thus  pray  in  Christ's  name  in  the  deepest 
sense,  and  after  Christ's  pattern,  every  door  in 
God's  treasure-house  flies  open,  and  he  may  take  as 
much  of  the  treasure  as  he  desires.  The  Master 
bends  lovingly  over  such  a  soul,  and  looks  him  in  the 
eyes,  and  with  outstretched  hand  says,  "What  wilt 
thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?  Be  it  unto  thee 
even  as  thou  wilt." 

III. — Lastly,  the  perfect  joy  which  follows  upon 
these  two. 

"  That  your  joy  may  be  fulfilled."  Again  we  have  a 
recurrence  of  a  promise  that  has  appeared  in  another 
connection  in  an  earlier  part  of  this  discourse ;  but 
the  connection  here  is  worthy  of  notice.  The 
promise  is  of  joy  that  comes  from  the  satisfaction  of 
meek  desires  in  unison  with  Christ's  will.  Is  it 
possible,  then,  that,  amidst  all  the  ups  and  downs,  the 
changes  and  the  sorrows  of  this  fluctuating,  tempest- 
tossed  life  of  ours,  we  may  have  a  deep  and  stable 
joy  ?  "  That  your  joy  may  be  full,"  says  my  text,  or 
"  fulfilled,"  like  some  jeAvellcd,  golden  cup  charged  to 


WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRIXG  FORTH.  335 

the  very  brim  with  rich  and  quickening  wine,  so  that 
there  is  no  room  for  a  drop  more.  Can  it  be  that 
ever,  in  this  world,  men  shall  be  happy  up  to  the 
very  limits  of  their  capacity  ?  Was  anybody  ever  so 
blessed  that  he  could  not  be  more  so  ?  Was  your 
cup  ever  so  full  that  there  was  no  room  for  another 
drop  in  it  ?  Jesus  Christ  sa3'S  that  it  may  be  so, 
and  He  tells  us  how  it  may  be  so.  Bring  your  desires 
into  harmony  with  God's,  and  you  will  have  none 
unsatisfied  amongst  them ;  and  so  you  Avill  be  blessed 
to  the  full ;  and  though  sorrow  comes,  as  of  course 
it  will  come,  still  Ave  may  be  blessed.  There  is  no 
contradiction  between  the  presence  of  this  deep, 
central  joy  and  a  surface  and  circumference  of  sorrow. 
Eather  we  need  the  surrounding  sorrow,  to  concentrate, 
and  so  to  intensify,  the  central  joy  in  God.  There  are 
some  flowers  Avhich  only  blow  in  the  night ;  and  white 
blossoms  are  visible  with  startling  plainness  in  the 
twilight,  when  all  the  flaunting  purples  and  reds  are 
hid.  We  do  not  know  the  depth,  the  preciousness, 
the  power  of  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  until  we  have  felt  it 
shining  in  our  hearts  in  the  midst  of  tlie  thick 
darkness  of  earthly  sorrow,  and  bringing  life  into  the 
very  death  of  our  human  delights.  It  may  be  ours 
on  the  conditions  that  my  text  describes. 

My  dear  friends,  there  are  only  two  courses  before 
us.  Either  we  must  have  a  life  with  superficial, 
transitory,  incomplete  gladnesses,  and  an  aching 
centre  of  vacuity  and  pain,  or  Ave  may  have  a  life 
Avhich,  in  its  outAvard  aspects  and  superficial  appear- 
ance, has  much  about  it  that  is  sad  and  trying,  but 
doAvn  in  the  heart  of  it  is  calm  and  joyful.  Which 
of  the  tAvo  do  you  deem  best,  a  superficial  gladness 


336  WHAT  THAT  DAY  WILL  BRING  FORTH. 

and  a  rooted  sorrow,  or  a  superficial  sorrow  and  a 
central  joy  ? 

"  Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful,  and  the 
end  of  that  mirth  is  heaviness."  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  "  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and 
come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon 
their  heads.  They  shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness; 
and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away." 


XXXI. 

Zbc  3o\!6  of  '^^bat  H)a^/' 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  in  proverbs  :  but  the  time 
Cometh  when  I  shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but 
I  shall  show  you  plainly  of  the  Father.  At  that  day  ye  shall 
ask  in  My  Name  :  and  I  say  not  unto  you  that  I  will  pray  the 
Father  for  you  :  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you,  because  ye 
have  loved  Me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out  from  God." 
— JoHX  xvi.  25 — 27. 

HE  Stream  which  we  have  been  tracking 
for  so  long  in  these  discourses  has  now 
nearly  reached  its  close.  Our  Lord,  in 
these  all  but  final  words,  sums  up  the 
great  salient  features  which  He  has 
already  more  than  once  specilied,  of  the  time  when 
His  followers  shall  live  with  an  absent  and  3'et  present 
Christ.  He  reiterates  here  substantially  just  what 
He  has  been  saying  before,  but  in  somewhat  dift'erent 
connection,  and  with  some  slight  expansion.  And 
this  reiteration  of  the  glad  features  of  the  day  which 
was  about  to  dawn  suggests  how  much  the  disciples 
needed,  and  how  much  wo  need,  to  have  repeated 
over  and  over  again  the  blessed  and  profound  lessons 
of  these  words. 

What   a  sublime  self-repression  there  was  in  the 

22 


338  THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DAY." 

Master  !  Not  one  word  escapes  from  His  lips  of  the 
personal  pain  and  agony  into  which  He  had  to  plunge 
and  be  baptized,  before  that  day  could  dawn.  All 
that  was  crushed  down  and  kept  back,  and  He  only 
speaks  to  the  disciples  and  to  us  of  the  joy  that 
comes  to  them,  and  not  at  all  of  the  bitter  sorrow  by 
which  it  is  bought.  There  are  in  these  words,  as  it 
seems  to  me,  especially  three  characteristics  which 
belong  to  the  whole  period  between  the  Ascension  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  His  coming  again  for  judgment.  It 
is  a  day  of  continual  and  clearer  teaching  by  Him. 
It  is  a  day  of  desires  in  His  name.  It  is  a  day  of 
filial  experience  of  a  Father's  love.  These  are  the 
characteristics  of  the  Christian  period,  and  they 
ought  to  be  the  characteristics  of  our  individual 
Christian  life.  My  brother  !  are  they  the  characteris- 
tics of  yours  ? 

Let  us  note  them  in  order. 

I. — First,  our  Lord  tells  us  that  the  whole  period  of 
the  Christian  life  upon  earth  is  to  be  a  period  of  con- 
tinuous and  clearer  teaching  by  Himself. 

"  Hitherto  I  have  spoken  to  you  in  proverbs,"  or 
parables.  The  word  means,  not  only  a  comparison  or 
parable,  but  also,  and  perhaps  primarily,  a  mysterious 
and  enigmatical  saying.  The  reference  is,  of  course, 
directly  to  the  immediately  preceding  thoughts,  in 
which  His  departure  and  the  sorrow  that  accompanied 
it  and  was  to  merge  into  joy,  were  described  under 
that  touching  figure  of  the  woman  in  travail.  But 
the  reference  must  be  extended  very  much  further 
than  that.  It  includes  not  only  this  discourse,  but 
the  whole  of  His  teaching  by  word  whilst  He  was 
here  upon  earth. 


THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DAY."  339 

Now  the  first  thing  that  strilves  me  here  is  this 
strange  fact.  Here  is  a  man  who  knew  Himself  to  be 
within  four-and- twenty  Iiours  of  His  death,  and  knew 
that  scarcely  another  word  of  instruction  was  to  come 
from  His  Ups  upon  earth,  calmly  asserting  that,  for  all 
the  subsequent  ages  of  the  world's  history,  He  is  to 
continue  its  Teacher.  We  know  how  the  wisest  and 
profoundest  of  earthly  teachers  have  their  lips  sealed 
by  death,  so  as  that  no  counsel  can  come  from  them 
any  more,  and  their  disciples  long  in  vain  for  re- 
sponses from  the  silenced  oracle,  which  is  dumb 
whatever  new  problems  may  arise.  But  Jesus  Christ 
calmly  poses  before  the  world  as  not  having  His 
teaching  activity  in  the  slightest  degree  suspended  by 
that  fact  which  puts  a  conclusive  and  complete  close 
to  all  other  teachers'  words.  Rather  He  says  that 
after  death  He  will,  more  clearly  than  in  life,  be  the 
Teacher  of  the  world. 

What  does  He  mean  by  that  ?  Well,  remember 
first  of  all  the  facts  which  followed  this  saying — 
the  Cross,  the  Grave,  Olivet,  the  Heavens,  the 
Throne.  These  were  still  in  the  future  when  He 
spoke.  And  have  not  these — the  bitter  Passion, 
the  supernatural  Resurrection,  the  triumphant  As- 
cension, and  the  everlasting  session  of  the  Son  at 
the  risfht  hand  of  God — taught  the  whole  world  the 

o  o 

meaning  of  the  Father's  name,  and  the  love  of  the 

Father's  heart,  and  the  power  of  the  Father's  Son,  as 

nothing  else,  not  even  the  sweetest  and  tenderest  of 

His   utterances,   could   have   tauQ:ht   them  ?     When, 

then,  He  declares  the  continuance  of  His  teaching 

functions  unbroken  through  death  and  beyond  it,  He 

refers  partly  to  the  future  facts  of  His  earthly  manifes- 
to* 


340  THE  JO  YS  OF  ' '  Til  A  T  DA  Y. " 

tation,  and  still  more  does  He  refer  to  that  continuous 
teaching  which,  by  that  Divine  Spirit  whom  He  sends, 
is  granted  to  every  believing  soul  all  through  the 
ages. 

This  great  truth,  which  recurs  over  and  over  again 
in  these  discourses  of  our  Lord's,  is  far  too  much 
dropped  out  of  the  consciousness  and  creeds  of  the 
modern  Christian  Church.  We  call  ourselves  Christ's 
disciples.  If  there  be  disciples,  there  must  be  a 
Master.  His  teaching  is  by  no  means  merely  the 
effect  of  the  recorded  facts  and  utterances  of  the  Lord, 
preserved  here  in  the  Book  for  us,  and  to  be  pondered 
upon  by  ourselves,  but  it  is  the  hourly  communication, 
to  waiting  hearts  and  souls  that  keep  themselves  near 
the  Lord,  of  deeper  insight  into  His  will,  of  larger 
views  of  His  purposes,  of  a  firmer  grasp  of  the 
contents  of  Scripture,  and  a  more  complete  subjection 
of  the  whole  nature  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Christian  men  and  women !  do  you  know  anything 
about  what  it  is  to  learn  of  Christ  in  the  sense  that 
He  Himself,  and  no  poor  human  voice  like  mine,  nor 
even  merely  the  records  of  His  past  words  and  deeds 
as  garnered  in  these  Gospels  and  expounded  by  His 
Apostles,  is  the  source  of  your  growing  knowledge 
of  Him  ?  If  we  would  keep  our  hearts  and  minds 
clearer  than  Ave  do  of  the  babble  of  earthly  voices, 
and  be  more  loyal  and  humble  and  constant  and 
patient  in  our  sitting  on  the  benches  in  Christ's 
school  till  the  Master  Himself  came  to  give  His 
lessons,  these  great  words  of  my  text  would  not,  as 
they  so  often  do  in  the  mass  of  professing  Christians, 
lack  the  verification  of  experience  and  the  assurance 
that  it  is  so  with  us.    Have  you  sat  in  Christ's  school. 


THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DAY."  341 

and  do  you  know  the  secret  and  illuminative  whispers 
of  His  teaching  ?  If  not,  there  is  something  wrong  in 
your  Christian  character,  and  something  insincere  in 
your  Christian  profession. 

Notice,  still  further,  that  our  Lord  here  prefers  that 
subsequent  teaching  to  all  that  He  said  upon  earth, 
great  and  precious  as  it  was.  Now  I  do  not  mean  for 
one  moment  to  allege  that  fresh  communications  of 
truth,  uncontained  in  Scripture,  are  given  to  us  in  the 
age-long  and  continuous  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ. 
That  I  do  not  suppose  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  great 
promises  before  us,  for  the  facts  of  revelation  were 
finished  when  He  ascended,  and  the  inspired  commen- 
tary upon  the  facts  of  Revelation  was  completed  with 
these  writings  which  follow  the  Gospels  in  our  New 
Testament.  But  Christ's  teaching  brings  us  up  to 
the  understanding  of  the  facts  and  of  the  commentary 
upon  them  which  Scripture  contains,  so  that  what  was 
parable  or  proverb,  dimly  apprehended,  mysterious  and 
enigmatical  when  it  Avas  spoken,  and  what  remains  mys- 
terious and  enigmatical  to  us  until  we  grow  up  to  it, 
gradually  becomes  full  of  significance  and  heavy  with 
a  plain  and  certain  meaning.  This  is  the  teaching 
which  goes  on  through  the  ages — the  lifting  of  His 
children  to  the  level  of  apprehending  more  and  more 
of  the  inexhaustible  and  complicated  wisdom  which 
is  stored  for  us  in  this  Book.  The  mine  has  been 
Avorked  on  the  surface,  but  the  deeper  it  goes  the 
richer  is  the  lode ;  and  no  ages  will  exhaust  the 
treasures  that  arc  hid  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

He  uses  the  new  problems,  the  ncAv  difficulties,  the 
new  circumstances  of  each  successive  age,  and  of  each 
individual  Christian  in  order  to  evolve  from  His  Avord 


342  THE  JOTS  OF  "  THAT  DAY." 

larger  lessons,  and  to  make  the  earlier  lessons  more 
fully  and  deeply  understood.  And  this  generation, 
with  all  its  new  problems,  with  all  its  uneasiness 
about  social  questions,  with  all  its  new  attitude  to 
many  ancient  truths,  will  find  that  Jesus  Christ  is,  as 
He  has  been  to  all  past  generations — the  answer  to 
all  its  doubts,  using  even  these  doubts  as  a  means  of 
evolving  the  deeper  harmonies  of  His  Word,  and  of 
unveiling  in  the  ancient  truth  more  than  former 
generations  have  seen  in  it.  "  Brethren,  I  write  unto 
you  no  new  commandment.  Again,  a  new  com- 
mandment I  write  unto  you."  The  inexhaustible 
freshness  of  the  old  Word  taught  us  anew,  with 
deeper  significance  and  larger  applications,  by  the 
everlasting  Teacher  of  the  Church,  is  the  hope  that 
shines  through  these  words.  I  commend  to  you, 
dear  brethren,  the  one  simple,  personal  question. 
Have  I  submitted  myself  to  that  Teacher,  and  said  to 
men  and  systems  and  preachers  and  books  and 
magazines,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  noisy  and  clamorous 
tongues  that  bewilder  under  pretence  of  enlightening 
this  generation — have  I  said  to  them  all,  "  Hold  your 
peace,  and  let  me,  in  the  silence  of  my  waiting  soul, 
hear  the  Teacher  Himself  speak  to  me.  Speak, 
Lord !  for  Thy  servant  heareth.  Teach  me  Thy  way 
and  lead  me,  for  Thou  art  my  Master,  and  I  the 
humblest  of  Thy  scholars  "  ? 

II. — In  the  next  place,  another  of  the  glad  features 
of  this  dawning  day  is  that  it  is  to  be  a  day  of  dcsil'es 
based  upon  Christ,  and  Christlike. 

"  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name."  Our 
translators  have  wisely  put  a  colon  at  the  end  of  that 
clause,  in  order  that  we  may  not  hurrj^  over  it  too 


THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DA  F."  343 

quickly  in  order  to  get  to  the  next  one.  For  there 
is  a  substantial  blessing  and  privilege  wrapped  up  in 
it.  Our  Lord  has  just  been  saying  the  same  thing  in 
the  previous  verses,  but  He  repeats  it  here  in  order  to 
emphasize  it,  and  to  set  it  by  the  subsequent  words 
in  a  somewhat  different  hght.  But  I  dwell  upon  it 
for  a  very  simple,  practical  purpose.  I  have  already 
explained  in  former  sermons  the  full,  deep  meaning  of 
that  phrase,  "asking  in  Christ's  name,"  and  have 
suggested  to  you  that  it  implied  two  things — the  one, 
that  our  desires  should  all  be  based  upon  His  great 
work  as  the  only  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God ; 
and  the  other,  that  our  desires  should  all  be  such 
as  represent  His  heart  and  His  mind.  When  we 
"  ask  in  His  name "  we  ask,  first,  for  His  sake,  and, 
second,  as  in  His  person.  And  such  desires,  resting 
their  hopes  of  answer  solely  upon  His  mighty 
sacrifice  and  all-sufiicient  merit,  and  shaped  ac- 
curately and  fully  after  the  pattern  of  the  wishes  that 
are  dear  to  His  heart,  are  to  be  the  prerogative  and 
the  joy  of  His  servants,  in  the  new  "  day "  that  is 
about  to  dawn. 

Note  how  beautifully  this  thought  of  wishes, 
moulded  into  conformity  with  Jesus  Christ,  and 
offered  in  reliance  upon  His  great  sacrifice,  follows 
upon  that  other  thought,  "  I  will  tell  you  plainly  of 
the  Father."  The  Master's  voice  speaks,  revealing  the 
paternal  heart ;  the  scholar's  voice  answers  Avith 
desires  kindled  by  the  knowledge.  Longings  and 
aspirations  humbly  offered  for  His  sake,  and  after  the 
pattern  of  His  own,  are  our  true  response  to  His 
teaching  voice.  As  the  astronomer,  the  more  power- 
ful his  telescope,  though  it  may  resolve  some  of  the 


344  THE  JOYS  OF  "  TEA  T  DA  Y." 

nebulse  that  resisted  feebler  instruments,  only  has  the 
bounds  of  creation  enlarged  as  He  looks  through  it, 
and  sees  yet  other  and  mightier  star-clouds  lying 
mysterious  beyond  its  ken — so  each  new  influx  and 
tidal  wave  of  knowledge  of  the  Father,  Avhich  Christ 
gives  to  His  waiting  child,  leads  on  to  enlarged  desires, 
to  longings  to  press  still  further  into  the  unexplored 
mysteries  of  that  magnificent  and  boundless  land,  and 
to  nestle  still  closer  into  the  infinite  heart  of  God. 
He  declares  to  us  the  Father,  and  the  answer  of  the 
child  to  the  declaration  of  the  Father  is  the  cry, 
"  Abba  !  Father !  Show  me  yet  more  of  Thy  heart. ' 
Thus  asphation  and  fruition,  longing  and  satisfaction 
in  unsatiated  and  inexhaustible  and  unwearying 
alternation,  are  the  two  blessed  poles  between  which 
the  life  of  a  Christian  may  revolve  in  smoothness 
and  music. 

My  friend,  is  that  anything  like  the  transcript  of 
our  experience,  that  the  more  we  know  of  God,  the 
more  we  long  to  know  of,  and  to  possess.  Him ;  and 
the  more  we  long  to  Iniow  of,  and  to  possess.  Him,  the 
more  full,  gracious,  confidential,  tender,  and  con- 
tinuous are  the  teachings  of  our  Master  ?  Is  not  that 
a  far  hio'her  level  of  Christian  life  than  we  Uve 
upon  ?  And  why  so  ?  Is  Christ's  word  faithless  ? 
Hath  He  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  Was  this  promise 
of  His  idle  wind  ?  Or  is  it  that  you  and  I  have 
never  grasped  the  fulness  of  privileges  that  He 
bestows  upon  us  ? 

III. — Kote,  lastly,  that  is  to  be  a  day  of  filial 
experience  of  a  Father's  love. 

"  I  say  not  unto  you  that  I  will  pray  the  Father 
for  you,  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you  because  ye 


THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DA  F."  345 

have  loved  Me,  and  have  believed  that  I  came  out 
from  God,"  Jesus  Christ  does  not  deny  His  inter- 
cession. He  simply  does  not  bring  it  into  evidence 
here.  To  deny  it  would  have  been  impossible,  tor 
soon  afterwards  we  find  Him  saying,  "  I  pray  for  them 
which  Thou  hast  given  Me,  for  they  are  Thine."  But 
He  does  not  emphasize  it  here,  in  order  that  He  may 
emphasize  another  blessed  source  of  solace — viz.,  that 
to  those  who  listen  to  the  Master's  teaching,  and  have 
their  desires  moulded  into  harmony  with  His,  and 
their  wishes  and  hopes  all  based  upon  His  sacrifice 
and  work,  the  Divine  Father's  love  directly  flows. 
There  is  no  need  of  any  intercession  to  turn  Him  to  be 
merciful.  Men  sometimes  caricature  the  thought  of 
the  intercession  of  Christ,  as  if  it  meant  that  He,  by 
His  prayer,  bent  the  reluctant  will  of  the  Father  in 
heaven.  All  such  horrible  misconceptions  Christ 
sweeps  out  of  the  field  here,  even  whilst  there  remains, 
in  the  fact  that  the  prayers  of  Avhich  He  is  speaking 
are  offered  in  His  name,  the  substance  and  reality  of 
all  that  we  mean  by  the  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ. 

And  now  note  that  God  loves  the  men  who  love 
Jesus  Christ.  So  completely  does  the  Father  identify 
Himself  with  the  Son,  that  love  to  Christ  is  love  to 
Him,  and  brings  the  blessed  answer  of  His  love  to  us. 
Whosoever  loves  Christ  loves  God. 

Whosoever  loves  Christ  must  do  so,  believing  that 
He  came  forth  from  God.  There  are  the  two 
characteristics  of  a  Christian  disciple — Faith  in  the 
Divine  mission  of  the  Son,  and  Love  that  flows  from 
faith.  Now,  of  course,  it  does  not  follow  from  the 
words  before  us,  that  this  Divine  love  which  comes 
dow^n  upon  the  heart  which  loves  Christ  is  the  original 


346  THE  JOYS  OF   '  TEAT  DA  Y." 

and  first  flow  of  tliat  love  towards  that  heart.  "We 
love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  Christ  is  not 
here  tracking  the  stream  to  its  source,  but  is  pointing 
to  it  midway  in  its  flow.  If  you  want  to  go  up  to  the 
fountain-head  you  have  to  go  up  to  the  Divine 
Father's  heart,  who  loved  when  there  was  no  love  m  us ; 
and,  because  He  loved,  sent  the  Son.  First  comes  the 
unmotived,  spontaneous,  self-originated,  undeserved, 
infinite  love  of  God  to  sinners  and  aliens  and  enemies  ; 
then  the  Cross  and  the  mission  of  Jesus  Christ ;  then 
the  faith  in  His  Divine  mission  ;  then  the  love  which 
is  the  child  of  faith,  as  it  grasps  the  Cross  and 
recognises  the  love  that  lies  behind  it;  and  then, 
after  that,  the  special,  tender,  and  paternal  love  of 
God  falling  upon  the  hearts  that  love  Him  in  His 
Son.  There  is  nothing  here  in  the  slightest  degree 
to  conflict  with  the  grand  universal  truth  that  God 
loves  enemies  and  sinners  and  aliens.  But  there  is 
the  truth,  as  precious  as  the  other,  that  they  who 
"have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath 
to  us "  live  under  the  selectest  influences  of  His 
loving  heart,  and  have  a  place  in  its  tenderness  which 
it  is  impossible  that  any  should  have  Avho  do  not  so 
love.  And  that  sweet  commerce  of  a  Divine  love 
answering  a  human,  which  itself  is  the  ansAver  to  a 
prior  Divine  love,  brings  with  it  the  firm  confidence 
that  prayers  in  His  name  shall  not  be  pra3^ers  in 
vain. 

So,  dear  friends,  o-rowinof  knowledsfe,  an  ever- 
present  Teacher,  the  peace  of  calm  desires  built  upon 
(Jhrist's  Cross  and  fashioned  after  Christ's  Spirit,  and 
the  assurance  in  wiy  quiet  and  filial  heart  that  my 
Father  in  the  heavens  loves  me,  and  will  neither  give 


THE  JOYS  OF  "  THAT  DA  Y."  347 

me  serpents  when  I  ask  for  them,  thmldng  them  to  be 
fishes,  nor  refuse  bread  when  I  ask  for  it — these 
things  ought  to  mark  the  hves  of  all  professing 
Christians,  Are  they  our  experience  ?  If  not,  why 
are  they  not,  but  because  Ave  do  not  believe  that 
"  Thou  art  come  forth  from  God,"  nor  love  Thee  as 
we  ou!"iit  ? 


XXXII. 


3From  tbe  fatbcr  anb  to  tbe  ffatbcn 


"  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,   and  am  come  into   the   world  : 
again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father." — JOHX  xvi.  28. 

HESE  majestic  and  strange  words  are 
the  proper  close  of  our  Lord's  dis- 
course, what  follows  being  rather  a 
reply  to  the  disciples'  exclamation. 
There  is  nothing  absolutely  new  in 
them,  but  what  is  new  is  the  completeness  and  the 
brevity  with  which  they  cover  the  whole  ground  of 
His  being,  work,  and  glory.  They  fall  into  two 
halves,  each  consisting  of  two  clauses ;  the  former  half 
describing  our  Lord's  descent,  the  latter  His  ascent. 
In  each  half  the  two  clauses  deal  with  the  same  fact, 
considered  from  the  two  opposite  ends  as  it  were — the 
point  of  dejiarture  and  the  point  of  arrival.  "  I  came 
forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world : 
again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father."  But 
the  first  point  of  departure  is  the  last  point  of  arrival, 
and  the  end  comes  round  to  the  beGjinning.  Our 
Lord's  earthly  life  is,  as  it  were,  a  jewel  enclosed 
within  the  flashing  gold  of  His  eternal  dwellino;  with 
God. 


FROM  THE  FATHER  AND  TO  THE  FATHER.         349 


So  I  think  we  shall  best  apprehend  the  scope,  and 
appropriate  to  ourselves  the  blessing  and  power  of 
these  words,  if  we  deal  with  the  four  points  to  which 
they  call  our  attention— the  dweUing  with  the  Father  ; 
the  voluntary  coming  to  the  earth;  the  voluntary 
departure  from  the  earth;  and,  once  more,  the 
dweUing  with  the  Father.  We  must  grasp  them  all 
if  we  would  know  the  whole  Christ  and  all  that  He  is 
able  to  do  and  to  bo  to  us  and  to  the  world.  So,  then, 
I  deal  simply  with  these  four  points. 

I. — Note,  then,  first,  the  dwelling  with  the  Father, 
If  we  adopt  the  most  probable  reading  of  the  first 
clause  of  my  text,  it  is  even  more  forcible  than  in  our 
version :  "  I  came  forth  out  of  the  Father."  Such  an 
egress  implies  a  being  in  the  Father  in  a  sense  in- 
effable for  our  words,  and  transcending  our  thoughts. 
It  implies  a  far  deeper  and  closer  relation  than  even 
that  of  juxtaposition,  companionship,  or  outward 
presence. 

Now,  in  these  great  words  there  is  involved 
obviously,  to  begin  with,  that,  during  His  earthly  hfe, 
our  Lord  bore  about  with  Him  the  remembrance  and 
consciousness  of  an  individual  existence  prior  to  His 
life  on  earth.  I  need  not  remind  you  how  frequently 
such  hints  drop  from  His  lips—"  Before  Abraham  was, 
I  am,"  and  the  like.  But  beyond  that  solemn  thought 
of  a  remembered  previous  existence  there  is  this  other 
one— that  the  words  are  the  assertion  by  Christ 
Himself  of  a  previous,  deep,  mysterious,  ineffable 
union  with  the  Father.  On  such  a  subject  wisdom 
and  reverence  bid  us  speak  only  as  wo  hear ;  but  I 
cannot  refrain  from  emphasizing  the  flxct  that,  if  this 
fourth  Gospel  be  a  genuine  record  of  the  teachino-  of 


350        FROM  THE  FATHER  AND  TO  THE  FATHER. 

Jesus  Christ — and,  if  it  is  not,  what  genius  was  he 
who  wrote  it  ? — if  it  be  a  genuine  record  of  the  teach- 
ing of  Jesus  Christ,  then  nothing  is  more  plain  than 
that  over  and  over  again,  in  all  sorts  of  ways,  by 
implication  and  by  direct  statement,  to  all  sorts  of 
audiences,  friends  and  foes.  He  reiterated  this 
tremendous  claim  to  have  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  long  before  He  lay  on  the  breast  of  Mary. 
What  did  He  mean  when  He  said,  "No  man  hath 
ascended  up  into  heaven  save  He  which  came  down 
from  heaven "  ?  What  did  He  mean  when  He  said, 
"  What  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  ascend  up 
where  He  was  before  "  ?  What  did  He  mean  when 
He  said,  "  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  Mine 
own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me  "  ?  And 
what  did  He  mean  when,  in  the  midst  of  the  solem- 
nities of  that  last  prayer.  He  said,  "  Glorify  Thou  Me 
with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  Thee  before  the 
world  was  "  ? 

Dear  friends,  it  seems  to  me  that  if  we  know  any- 
thing about  Jesus  Christ,  we  know  tliat.  If  we 
cannot  believe  that  He  thus  spoke,  we  know  nothing 
about  Him  on  which  we  can  rely.  And  so,  without 
venturing  to  enlarge  at  all  upon  these  solemn  words, 
I  leave  this  with  you  as  a  plain  fact,  that  the  meekest, 
lowliest,  and  most  sane  and  wise  of  religious  teachers 
made  deliberately  over  and  over  again  this  claim, 
which  is  either  absolutely  true,  and  lifts  Him  into  the 
region  of  the  Deity,  or  else  is  fatal  to  His  pretensions 
to  be  either  meek  or  modest,  or  wise  or  sane,  or  a 
religious  teacher  to  whom  it  is  worth  our  while  to  listen. 

11. — Note,  secondly,  the  voluntary  coming  into  the 
world. 


FROM  THE  FA  THER  AND  TO  THE  FA  THEll.        351 


"  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  mto 
the  world."  We  all  talk  in  a  loose  Avay  about  men 
coming  into  the  world  Avhen  they  are  born ;  but  the 
weight  of  these  words  and  the  solemnity  of  the  occa- 
sion in  which  they  were  spoken,  and  the  purpose  for 
which  they  were  spoken — viz.,  to  comfort  and  to 
illuminate  these  disciples — forbid  us  to  see  such  a 
mere  platitude  as  that  in  them.  There  would  have 
been  no  consolation  in  them  unless  they  meant  some- 
thing a  great  deal  more  than  the  undeniable  fact 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  born,  and  the  melancholy  fact 
that  Jesus  Christ  Avas  about  to  die. 

"  I  am  co-nie  into  the  Avorld."  There  has  been  a 
Man  who  chose  to  be  born.  There  has  been  a  Man 
who  appeared  here,  not  "  by  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor 
by  the  will  of  blood,"  but  by  His  own  free  choice. 
He  willed  to  take  upon  Him  the  form  of  humanity. 
Now  the  voluntariness  of  the  entrance  of  Jesus  Christ 
into  the  conditions  of  our  human  life  is  all-important 
for  us,  for  it  underlies  the  whole  value  of  that  life  and 
its  whole  power  to  be  blessing  and  good  to  us.  It 
underlies,  for  instance,  the  personal  sinlessness  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  hence  His  power  to  bring  a  new 
beginning  of  pure  and  perfect  life  into  the  midst  of 
humanity.  All  the  rest  of  mankind,  knit  together  by 
that  mysterious  bond  of  natural  descent  which  only 
now  for  the  first  time  is  beginning  to  receive  its  due 
attention  on  the  part  of  men  of  science,  by  heredit}' 
have  the  taint  upon  them.  And  if  Jesus  Christ  is 
only  one  of  the  series,  then  there  is  no  deliverance  in 
Him,  for  there  is  no  sinlessness  in  that  life.  How- 
ever fair  its  record  may  seem  on  the  surface,  there  is 
beneath,  somewhere  or  other  the  leprosy  that  infects 


352        FROM  THE  FA  TIIER  AND  TO  THE  FA  THER. 

US  all.  Unless  He  came  in  another  fashion  from  all 
the  rest  of  us,  He  came  with  the  same  sin  as  all  the 
rest  of  us,  and  He  is  no  deliverer  from  sin.  Bather  He 
is  one  of  the  series  who,  like  the  melancholy  captives 
on  the  road  to  Siberia,  each  carry  a  link  of  the  hope- 
less chain  that  binds  them  all  together.  But,  if  it 
be  true  that  of  His  own  will  He  took  to  Himself 
humanity,  and  was  born  as  the  Scripture  tells  us  He 
was  born,  His  birth  being  His  coming  and  not  His 
being  brought,  then,  being  free  from  taint.  He  can 
deliver  us  from  taint,  and.  Himself  unbound  by  the 
chain.  He  can  break  it  from  off  our  necks.  The 
stream  is  fouled  from  its  source  downwards,  and  flows 
on,  every  successive  drop  participant  of  the  primeval 
pollution.  But,  down  from  the  white  snows  of  the 
eternal  hills  of  God,  there  comes  into  it  an  affluent 
which  has  no  stain  on  its  pure  waters,  and  so  can 
purge  that  into  which  it  enters.  Jesus  Christ  willed 
to  be  born,  and  to  plant  a  new  beginning  of  holy  life 
in  the  very  heart  of  humanity  Avhich  henceforth 
should  work  as  leaven. 

Let  me  remind  you,  too,  that  this  voluntary  assump- 
tion of  our  nature  is  all-important  to  us,  for  unless  we 
preserve  it  clear  in  our  minds  and  hearts,  the  power 
to  sway  our  aflections  is  struck  away  from  Jesus 
Christ.  Unless  He  voluntarily  took  upon  Himself 
the  nature  which  He  meant  to  redeem,  why  should  I 
be  thankful  to  Him  for  what  He  did  ?  And  what 
right  has  He  to  claim  my  love  ?  But  if  He  willingly 
came  down  amongst  us,  and  "  to  this  end  was  born, 
and  for  this  cause,"  of  His  own  loving  heart,  came 
into  the  world,  then  I  am  knit  to  Him  by  cords  that 
cannot  be  broken.     One  thing  only  saves  Jesus  Christ 


FROM  THE  FA  THER  AND  TO  THE  FA  THER.         353 

for  tlie  unbounded  and  perpetual  love  of  mankind, 
and  tliat  is,  that  from  His  own  infinite  and  perpetual 
love  He  came  into  tlie  Avorld.  We  talk  about  kings 
leaving  tlieir  palaces  and  putting  on  the  rags  of  tlie 
beggar,  and  learning  "  love  in  huts  where  poor  men 
lie,"  and  making  experience  of  the  conditions  of  their 
lowliest  subjects.  But  here  is  a  fact,  infinitely  beyond 
all  these  legends.  It  is  set  forth  for  us  in  a  touching- 
fashion,  in  the  incident  that  almost  immediately 
preceded  these  parting  words  of  our  Lord,  when 
"  Jesus,  knowinoj  that  He  came  forth  from  God,  laid 
aside  His  garments  and  took  a  towel,  and  girded 
Himself,"  and  washed  the  foul  feet  of  these  travel- 
stained  men.  That  was  a  parable  of  the  Incarnation. 
The  consciousness  of  His  Divine  origin  was  ever  with 
Him,  and  that  consciousness  led  Him  to  lay  aside 
the  garments  of  His  majesty,  and  to  gird  Himself 
with  the  towel  of  service.  That  He  had  a  body 
round  which  to  wrap  it  was  more  humiliation  than 
that  He  wrapped  it  round  the  body  which  He  took. 
And  we  may  learn  there  what  it  is  that  gives  Him 
His  supreme  right  to  our  devotion  and  our  surrender 
— viz.,  that,  "  being  in  the  form  of  God,  He  thought 
not  equality  w^ith  God  a  thing  to  be  covetously 
retained,  but  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  was. 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man." 

III. — Note  the  voluntary  leaving  the  world. 

The  stages  of  that  departure  are  not  distinguished. 
They  are  threefold  in  fact — the  Death,  the  Kesur- 
rection,  the  Ascension.  And  in  all  three  we  have 
the  majestic,  spontaneous  energy  of  Christ  as  their 
cause. 

There  was  a  voluntary  death.     I  have  so  often  had 


354        FROM  THE  FATHER  AND  TO  THE  FATHER. 

occasion  to  insist  upon  that,  in  the  course  of  these 
sermons,  that  I  do  not  need  to  dwell  upon  it  noAv. 
Let  me  remind  you  only  how  distinctly  and  in  what 
various  forms  that  thought  is  presented  to  us  in  the 
Scriptures.  We  have  our  Lord's  own  words  about 
His  having  power  to  lay  down  His  life.  We  have  in 
the  story  of  the  Passion  hints  that  seem  to  suggest 
that  His  relation  to  death,  to  which  He  is  about  to 
bow  His  head,  was  altogether  difierent  from  that  of 
ours.  For  instance,  we  read :  "  Into  Thy  hands  I 
comwiit  My  Spirit " ;  and  "  He  gave  up  the  Spirit." 
We  have  hints  of  a  similar  nature  in  the  very  swift- 
ness of  His  death  and  unexpected  brevity  of  His 
suffering,  to  be  accounted  for  by  no  natural  result  of 
the  physical  process  of  crucifixion.  The  fact  is  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  death,  and  was  so  even 
when  He  seemed  to  be  its  servant,  and  that  He  never 
showed  Himself  more  completely  the  Prince  of  Life 
and  the  Conqueror  of  Death  than  when  He  gave  up 
His  life  and  died,  not  because  He  must,  but  because 
He  would.  There  is  a  scene  in  a  modern  book  of 
fiction  of  a  man  sitting  on  a  rock  and  the  ocean 
stretching  round  him.  It  reaches  high  upon  his 
breast,  but  it  threatens  not  his  life,  till  he,  sitting- 
there  in  his  calm,  bows  his  head  beneath  the  wave 
and  lets  it  roll  over  him.  So  Christ  willed  to  die,  and 
died  because  He  willed. 

There  was  also  a  voluntary  resurrection  by  His  own 
power;  for  although  Scripture  sometimes  represents 
His  rising  again  from  the  dead  as  being  the  Father's 
attestation  of  the  Son's  finished  work,  it  also  re- 
presents it  as  being,  in  accordance  with  His  own 
claim  of  "  power  to  lay  down  j\Iy  life,  and  to  take  it 


FROM  THE  FATHER  AND  TO  THE  FATHER         355 

again,"  the  Son's  triumpliant  egress  from  the  prison 
into  which,  for  the  moment,  He  willed  to  pass.  Jesus 
"  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father," 
but  also  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead  by  His  own  power. 

There  was  also  a  voluntary  ascension  to  the  heavens. 
There  was  no  need  for  Elijah's  chariot  of  fire.  There 
was  no  need  for  a  whirlwind  to  sweep  a  mortal  to  the 
sky.  There  was  no  need  for  any  external  vehicle  or 
agency  whatsoever.  No  angels  bore  Him  up  upon  their 
wings.  But,  the  cords  of  duty  which  bound  Him  to 
earth  being  cut,  He  rose  to  His  own  native  sphere ; 
and,  if  one  might  so  say,  the  natural  forces  of  His 
supernatural  life  bore  Him,  by  inverted  gravitation, 
upward  to  the  place  which  was  His  own.  He 
ascended  by  His  own  inherent  power. 

Thus,  by  a  voluntary  death,  He  became  the  Sacri- 
fice for  our  sins  ;  by  the  might  of  His  self-effected 
Resurrection  He  proclaimed  Himself  the  Lord  of 
death  and  the  Resurrection  for  all  that  trust  Him ; 
and  by  ascending  up  on  high  He  draws  our  heart's 
desires  after  Him,  so  that  we,  too,  as  we  see  Him  lost 
from  our  sight,  behind  the  bright  Shekinah  cloud 
that  stooped  to  conceal  the  last  stages  of  His  voyage 
from  our  view,  may  return  to  our  lowly  work  with 
great  joy,  and  set  our  affections  on  things  above, 
where  Christ  is,  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

IV. — So,  lastly,  we  have  here  the  dAvelling  again 
with  the  Father. 

But  that  final  dwelling  with  God  is  not  wholly 
identical  with  the  initial  one.  The  earthly  life  was 
no  mere  parenthesis,  and  He  who  returned  to  the 
Throne  carried  with  Him  the  manhood  which  He  had 
assumed,  and  bore  it  thither  into  the  glory  in  which 

23* 


356        FROM  THE  FATHER  AND  TO  THE  FATHER. 

the  Word  had  dwelt  from  the  beginning.  And  this 
is  the  true  consolation  which  Christ  offered  to  these 
His  weeping  servants,  and  which  He  still  offers  to  us 
His  waiting  children,  that  now  the  manhood  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  exalted  to  participation  in  the  Divine  glorj^, 
and  dwells  there  in  the  calm,  invisible  sweetness  and 
solemnity  of  fellowship  with  the  Father, 

If  that  be  so,  it  is  no  mere  abstract  dogma  of 
theology,  but  it  touches  our  daily  life  at  all  points, 
and  is  essential  to  the  fulness  of  our  satisfaction  and 
our  rest  in  Christ. 

"  We  see  not  all  things  put  under  Him,  but  we  see 
Jesus."  Our  Brother  is  elevated  to  the  Throne,  and, 
if  I  might  so  say,  He  makes  the  fortunes  of  the 
family,  and  none  of  them  will  be  poor  as  long  as  He 
is  so  rich.  He  sends  us  from  the  far-off  land  where 
He  is  gone  precious  gifts  of  its  produce,  and  He  will 
send  for  us  to  share  His  Throne  one  day. 

Christ's  Ascension  to  the  Father  is  the  elevation  of 
our  best  and  dearest  Friend  to  the  Throne  of  the 
Universe,  and  the  hands  that  were  pierced  for  us 
oh  the  cross  hold  the  helm  and  sway  the  sceptre  of 
Creation,  and  therefore  we  may  calmly  meet  all  events. 

The  elevation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Throne  fills 
Heaven  for  our  faith,  our  imagination,  and  our  hearts. 
How  different  it  is  to  look  up  into  those  awful 
abysses,  and  to  wonder  where,  amidst  their  crushing 
infinitude,  the  spirits  of  dear  ones  that  are  gone  are 
Avandering,  if  they  are  at  all ;  and  to  look  up  and. to 
think  "  My  Christ  hath  passed  through  the  Heavens,' 
and  is  somewhere  with  a  true  Body,  and  with  Him  all 
that  loved  Him !  Without  an  ascended  Christ  we 
recoil    from    the    cold    splendours   of    an   unkno'\ATi 


Heaven,  as  a  savage  might  from  the  unintellio-ible 
magmhcence  of  a  palace.     But  if  we  beheve  that  He 

neai  and  the  vague  becomes  definite,  and  the  un- 
substantial becomes  sohd,  and  what  was  a  fear 
becomes  a  joy,  and  we  can  trust  ourselves  and  the 
dear  dead  n,  His  hands,  knowing  that  where  He  L 
tliey  are,  and  that  in  Him  they  and  we  have  all  we  need 
bo,  dear  friends  it  all  comes  to  this-make  sure 
that  you  have  hold  of  the  whole  Christ  for  yourselves 
His  earthly  hfe  is  httle  without  that  celestial  halo 

dpl'"''^^- '  "T'}  ^''  ^'^'  ''  ^°^^"^g  ^^^thout  His 
^leath.  His  death  without  His  resurrection  and 
ascension  may  be  a  httle  more  pathetic  than  millions 

fe  and  death  and  resurrection  are  not  apprehended 
m  their  fullest  power  until  they  are  set  between  the 
eternal  glory  before  and  the  eternal  glory  after 

Ihese  four  facts-the  dwelhng  with  the  Father- 
the  voluntary  coming  to  earth  ;  the  voluntary  leavino' 
earth;  and  again,  the  dwelling  with  the  Father-are 
the  walls  of  the  strong  fortress  into  which  we  may  flee 
and  be  safe      With  them  it  "  stands  four  square  to 
every  wmd  that"  blows.     Strike  away  one  of  them 
aiKU    totters  into  ruin.     Make  the  whole  Christ  youi' 
Christ;    for    nothing    less    than    the    whole   Christ 
^conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  born   of  the   Virc^in 
^^^'^^y'     ■    •    ■     crucified,   dead,   and   buried  " 

ascended  into  Heaven,  and  sitting  at  the  right'  hand 
o±  God,  IS  strong  enough  to  help  your  infirmities 
vast  enough  to  satisfy  your  desires,  loving  enough  to 
love  you  as  you  need,  or  able  to  deliver  you  from°your 
sins,  and  to  lift  you  to  the  glories  of  His  own  Throne 


XXXIII. 

TTbe  Disciples*  Confession  anb  tbe 
fIDastcr's  TOarning* 

His  disciples  said  unto  Jesus,  Lo,  now  speakest  Thou  plainly,  and 
speakest  no  proverb.  Now  are  we  sure  that  Thou  knowest  all 
things,  and  needest  not  that  any  man  should  ask  Thee  :  by  this 
we  believe  that  Thou  earnest  forth  from  G-od.  Jesus  answered 
them.  Do  ye  now  believe  /  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is 
now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own, 
and  shall  leave  Me  alone  :  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the 
Father  is  with  Me." — John  xvi.  29 — 32. 

HE  tirst  words  of  these  wonderful  dis- 
courses were,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled."  They  struck  the  key-note 
of  the  whole.  The  aim  of  all  Avas  to 
bring  peace  and  confidence  unto  the 
disciples'  spirits.  And  this  joyful  burst  of  confession, 
which  wells  up  so  spontaneously  and  irrepressibly 
from  their  hearts,  shows  that  the  aim  has  been 
reached.  For  a  moment  sorrow,  bewilderment, 
dulness  of  apprehension,  had  all  passed  away,  and  the 
foolish  questioners  and  non-receptive  listeners  had 
been  lifted  into  a  higher  region,  and  possess  insight, 
courage,  confidence.  The  last  sublime  utterance  of 
our  Lord  had  gathered  all  the  scattered  rays  into  a 


TEE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION.  359 


beam  so  bright  that  the  blmdest  could  not  but  see, 
and  the  coldest  could  not  but  bo  warmed. 

But  yet  the  calm,  clear  eye  of  Christ  sees  some- 
thing not  wholly  satisflictory  in  this  outpouring  of  the 
disciples'  confidence.  He  does  not  reject  their 
imperfect  faith,  but  He  warns  them,  seeing  the 
impending  hour  of  denial  which  was  so  terrilly  to 
contradict  the  rapture  of  that  moment.  And  then, 
with  most  pathetic  suddenness,  He  passes  from  theni 
to  Himself;  and  in  a  singularly  blended  utterance 
lets  us  get  a  glimpse  into  His  deep  solitude  and  the 
companions  that  shared  it. 

My  words  this  morning  make  no  attempt  at  any 
further  connection  than  is  involved  in  following  the 
course  of  thought  in  the  words  before  us. 

I.— Note  the  disciples'  joyful  confession. 
_  Their  words  are^  permeated  throughout  with  allu- 
sions to  the  previous  promises  and  sayings  of  our 
Lord,  and  the  very  allusions  show  how  shallow  was 
their  understanding  of  Avhat  they  thought  so  plain. 
He  had  said  to  them  that,  in  that  coming  day  which 
was  so  near  its  dawn,  He  would  speak  to  them  no  more 
in  proverbs,  but  show  them  plainly  of  the  Father ;  and 
they  answer,  with  a  land  of  rapture  of  astonishment, 
that  the  promised  day  has  come  already,  and  that 
even  now  He  is  speaking  to  them  plainly,  and  without 
mysterious  sayings.  Did  they  understand  His  words 
when  they  thought  them  so  plain?  "I  came  forth 
from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world. 
Again  I  leave  the  world  and  go  unto  the  Father." 
That  summary  statement  of  the  central  mysteries  of 
Christianity,  which  the  generations  have  found  to  be 
inexhaustible,  and  which  to  so  many  minds  has  been 


360  THE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION 


absolutely  incredible,  seemed  to  the  shallow  appre- 
hension of  these  disciples  to  be  sun-clear.  If  they 
had  understood  what  He  meant,  could  they  have 
spoken  thus,  or  have  left  Him  so  soon  ? 

They  begin  with  what  they  believed  to  be  a  fact. 
His  clear  utterance.  Then  follows  a  conviction  which 
they  infer  from  the  fact,  and  rightly  infer,  and  which 
has  allusion  to  His  previous  words.  "  Now,"  say  they, 
"  we  know  that  Thou  knowest  all  things,  and  neeclest 
not  that  any  man  should  ask  Thee."  He  had  said  to 
them,  "  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  Me  nothing ; "  and 
from  the  fact  that  He  had  interpreted  their  unspoken 
Avords,  and  had  anticipated  their  desire  to  ask  Avhat 
they  durst  not  ask,  they  draw,  and  rightly  draw,  the 
conclusion  of  His  Divine  Omniscience.  They  think 
that  therein,  in  His  answer  to  their  question  before  it 
is  asked,  is  the  fulfilment  of  that  great  promise.  Was 
that  all  that  He  meant  ?  Certainly  not.  Did  He 
merely  mean  to  say,  "  You  will  ask  Me  nothing,  because 
I  shall  know  what  you  want  to  know,  without  your 
asking  ? "  No  !  But  He  meant,  "  Ye  shall  ask  Me 
nothing,  because  in  that  day  you  will  have  with  you 
an  illuminating  Spirit  who  will  solve  all  your  diffi- 
culties." So,  again,  a  shallow  interpretation  empties 
the  words  which  they  accept  of  their  deepest  and  most 
precious  meaning. 

And  then  they  take  yet  a  further  step.  First,  they 
begin  with  a  fact ;  then  from  that  they  infer  a  con- 
viction ;  and  now,  upon  the  basis  of  the  inferred 
conviction,  they  rear  a  faith.  "  We  believe  that  Thou 
earnest  forth  from  God."  But  what  they  meant  by 
"  coming  forth  from  God  "  fell  far  short  of  the  great- 
ness of  what  He  meant  by  the  declaration,  and  they 


AND  THE  MASTERS  JVARNING.  361 

stand,  in  this  final,  articulate  confession  of  their  faith, 
but  a  little  in  advance  of  Nicodemus  the  Rabbi,  and 
behind  Peter  the  Apostle  when  he  said :  "  Thou  art 
the  Son  of  the  livino;-  God." 

So  their  confession  is  a  strangly  mingled  warp  and 
Avoof  of  insight  and  of  ignorance.  And  they  may 
stand  for  us  both  as  examples  to  teach  us  what  we 
ought  to  be,  and  as  beacons  teaching  us  what  wo 
should  not  be. 

Let  me  note  just  one  or  two  lessons  drawn  from  the 
disciples'  demeanour  and  confession. 

The  first  remark  that  I  would  make  is  that  here  we 
learn  what  it  is  that  gives  life  to  a  creed — Experience. 
These  men  had,  over  and  over  again,  in  our  Lord's 
earlier  utterances,  heard  the  declaration  that  "  He 
came  forth  from  God  "  ;  and  in  a  sort  of  fashion  they 
believed  it.  But,  as  so  many  of  our  convictions  do,  it 
lay  dormant  and  half  dead  in  their  souls.  But  now, 
rightly  or  wrongly,  experience  had  brought  them  into 
contact,  as  they  thought,  with  a  manifest  proof  of 
His  Divine  Omniscience,  and  the  torpid  conviction 
flashes  all  up  at  once  into  vitality.  The  smouldering 
fire  of  a  mere  piece  of  abstract  belief  was  kindled  at 
once  into  a  glow  that  shed  warmth  through  their 
whole  hearts ;  and  although  they  had  professed  to 
believe  long  ago  that  He  came  from  God,  now,  for  the 
first  time,  they  grasp  it  as  a  living  reality.  Why  ? 
Because  experience  had  taught  it  to  them.  That  is 
the  only  thing  that  teaches  us  the  articles  of  our 
creed  in  a  way  worth  learning  them.  Every  one  of  us 
carries  professed  beliefs,  which  lie  there  inoperative, 
bedridden,  in  the  hospital  and  dormitory  of  our  souls., 
until  some  great   necessity  or  sudden  circumstance 


362  THE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION 

comes  that  flings  a  beam  of  light  upon  them  and 
then  they  start  and  waken.  We  do  not  know  the  use 
of  the  sword  until  we  are  in  battle.  Until  the  ship- 
wreck comes,  no  man  puts  on  the  lifebelt  in  his  cabin. 
Every  one  of  us  has  large  tracts  of  Christian  truth 
which  we  think  we  most  surely  believe,  but  which 
need  experience  to  quicken  them,  and  need  us  to 
grow  up  into  the  possession  of  them.  Of  all  our 
teachers  who  turn  beliefs  assented  to  into  beliefs 
really  believed  none  is  so  mighty  as  sorrow  ;  for  that 
makes  a  man  lay  a  firm  hold  on  the  deep  things  of 
God's  Word. 

Then  another  lesson  that  I  draw  from  this  orlad 
confession  is — the  bold  avowal  that  always  accompanies 
certitude.  These  men's  stammering  tonofues  are  loosed. 
They  have  a  fact  to  base  themselves  upon.  They 
have  a  piece  of  assured  knowledge  inferred  from  the 
fact.  They  have  a  faith  built  upon  the  certitude  of 
what  they  know.  Having  this,  out  it  all  comes  in  a 
gush.  No  man  that  believes  with  all  his  heart  can 
help, speaking.  You  silent  Christians  are  so,  because 
you  do  not  more  than  half  grasp  the  truth  that  you 
say  you  hold.  "Thy  word,  when  shut  up  in  my 
bones,  was  like  a  fire  "  ;  and  it  ate  its  way  through  all 
the  dead  matter  that  enclosed  it,  until  at  last  it 
flamed  out  heaven  high.  Can  you  sa}^,  "  AVo  know 
and  we  believe,"  with  unfaltering  confidence  ?  Not 
"  we  argue  ;  "  not  "  we  humbly  venture  to  think  that 
on  the  whole ; "  not  "  we  are  inclined  rather  to  be- 
lieve ; "  but  "  we  hnoiv  that  Thou  knowcst  all  thinsfs, 
and  that  Thou  hast  come  from  God."  Seek  for  that 
blessed  certitude  of  knowledge,  based  upon  the  facts 
of  individual  experience,  which  makes  the  tongue  of 


AND  THE  MASTER'S  WARNING.  368 

the  dumb  sing,  and  changes  all  the  deadness  of  an 
outward  profession  of  Christianity  into  a  living,  re- 
joicing power. 

Then,  further,  I  draw  this  lesson.  Take  care  of 
indolently  supposing  that  you  understand  the  depths 
of  God's  truth. 

These  apostles  fancied  that  they  had  grasped  the 
whole  meaning  of  the  jMaster's  Avords,  and  were  glad 
in  them.  They  fed  on  them,  and  got  something  out 
of  them ;  but  how  far  they  Avere  from  the  true 
perception  of  their  meaning  !  This  generation  abhors 
mystery,  and  demands  that  the  deepest  truths  of  the 
highest  subject,  Avhich  is  religion,  shall  be  so  broken 
down  into  mincemeat  that  the  "  man  in  the  street " 
can  understand  them  in  the  intervals  of  reading  the 
newspaper.  There  are  only  too  many  of  us  who 
are  disposed  to  grasp  at  the  most  superficial  inter- 
pretation of  Christian  truth,  and  lazily  to  rest  ourselves 
in  that.  A  creed  which  has  no  depth  in  it  is  like  a 
picture  which  has  no  distance.  It  is  flat  and  un- 
natural, and  self-condemned  by  the  very  fact.  It  is 
better  that  we  should  feel  that  the  smallest  Avord  that 
comes  from  God  is  like  some  little  leaf  of  a  Avater 
plant  on  the  surface  of  a  pond  ;  if  you  lift  that  you 
draAV  a  Avhole  trail  after  it,  and  nobody  knoAvs  hoAv  far 
off  and  hoAV  deep  doAvn  are  the  roots.  It  is  better  that 
Ave  should  feel  Iioav  Infinity  and  Eternity  press  in 
upon  us  on  all  sides,  and  should  take  as  ours  the 
temper  that  recognizes  that  till  the  end  Ave  are  but 
learners,  seeins^  "  in  a  fdass,  in  a  riddle,"  and  therefore 
patiently  Avaiting  for  light  and  strenuously  striving  to 
stretch  our  souls  to  the  Avidth  of  the  infinite  truth  of 
God. 


364  THE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION 

II. — So,  then,  look,  in  the  second  place,  at  the  sad 
questions  and  forebodings  of  the  Master. 

"  Do  ye  now  believe  ? "  That  does  not  cast  doubt 
on  the  reality  of  their  faith  so  much  as  on  its 
permanence  and  power.  "Behold  the  hour  cometh 
that  ye  shall  bo  scattered  " — as  He  had  told  them  a 
little  while  before  in  the  upper  room,  like  a  flock  when 
the  shepherd  is  stricken  down — "  Every  man  to  his 
own."  He  does  not  reject  their  imperfect  homage, 
though  He  discerns  so  clearly  its  imperfection  and  its 
transiency,  but  sadly  warns  them  to  beware  of  the 
fleeting  nature  of  their  present  emotion  ;  and  would 
seek  to  prepare  them,  by  the  knowledge,  for  the 
terrible  storm  that  is  going  to  break  upon  them. 

So  let  us  learn  two  or  three  simple  lessons.  One  is 
that  the  dear  Lord  accepts  imperfect  surrender, 
ignorant  faith  and  love,  of  which  He  knows  that  it  will 
soon  turn  to  denial.  Oh  !  if  He  did  not,  what  would 
become  of  us  all  ?  We  reject  half  hearts  ;  we  will  not 
have  a  friendship  on  which  we  cannot  rely.  The 
sweetness  of  vows  is  all  sucked  out  of  them  to  our 
apprehension,  if  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  they 
will  be  falsified  in  an  hour.  But  the  patient  Master 
was  willing  to  put  up  with  what  you  and  I  will  not 
put  up  with ;  and  to  accept  what  we  reject ;  and  be 
pleased  that  they  gave  Him  even  that.  His  "  charity 
suft'ereth  long,  and  is  kind."  Let  us  not  be  afraid  to 
bring  even  imperfect  consecration — 

"  A  little  faith  all  undisproved," — 

to  His  merciful  feet. 

Then  another  lesson  is  the  need  for  Christian  men 
sedulously  to  search  and  make  sure  that  their  inward 


AND  THE  PIASTER'S   WARNING.  365 

life  corresponds  with  their  words  and  professions.  I 
wonder  how  many  thousands  of  people  will  stand  up 
this  day  and  say,  "  I  believe  in  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  and  in  Jesus  Christ  His  only  Son,"  whose 
words  would  stick  in  then-  throats  if  that  question 
of  the  Master's  was  put  to  them,  ''Do  ye  now 
believe  ? "  And  I  wonder  how  many  of  us  are  the 
fools  of  our  own  verbal  acknowledgments  of  Christ. 
Self-examination  is  not  altogether  a  wholesome 
exercise,  and  it  may  easily  be  carried  too  far,  to  the 
destruction  of  the  spontaneity  and  the  gladness  of 
the  Christian  life.  A  man  may  set  his  pulse  going 
irregularly  by  simply  concentrating  his  attention 
upon  it,  and  there  may  be  self-examination  of  the 
Avrong  sort,  which  does  harm  rather  than  good.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  all  need  to  verify  our  position, 
lest  our  outward  life  should  fatally  slip  away  from 
correspondence  with  our  inward.  Our  words  and  acts 
of  Christian  profession  and  service  are  like  bank 
notes.  What  will  be  the  end  if  there  is  a  whole 
ream  of  such  going  up  and  down  the  world,  and  no 
balance  of  bullion  in  the  cellars  to  meet  them  ? 
Nothing  but  bankruptcy.  Do  3'ou  see  to  it  that  your 
reserve  of  gold,  deep  down  in  your  hearts,  always 
leaves  a  margin  beyond  the  notes  in  circulation 
issued  by  you.  And  in  the  midst  of  your  professions 
hear  the  Master  saying,  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ? " 

Another  lesson  that  I  draw  is,  trust  no  emotions,  no 
reUgious  experiences,  but  only  Him  to  whom  they  turn. 

These  men  were  perfectly  sincere,  and  there  was  a 
glow  of  gladness  in  their  hearts,  and  a  real  though 
imperfect  faith  when  they  spoke.  In  an  hour's  time 
where  were  they  ? 


THE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION 


We  often  deal  far  too  hard  measure  to  these  poor 
disciples,  in  our  estimate  of  their  conduct  at  that 
critical  moment.  We  talk  about  them  as  cowards. 
Well,  they  were  better  and  they  were  worse  than 
cowards  ;  for  their  courage  failed  second,  but  their 
faith  had  failed  first.  The  Cross  made  them  dastards 
because  it  destroyed  their  confidence  in  Jesus  Christ. 

"  AVe  trustee?."  Ah  !  what  a  world  of  sorrow  there 
is  in  those  two  final  letters  of  that  word.  "  We  trustee? 
that  it  had  been  He  who  should  have  redeemed 
Israel."  But  they  do  not  trust  it  any  more,  and  so 
why  should  they  put  themselves  in  peril  for  One  on 
whom  their  faith  can  no  longer  build  ? 

Would  we  have  been  any  better  if  we  had  been 
there  ?  Suppose  you  had  stood  afar  off'  and  seen 
Jesus  die  on  the  cross,  would  your  faith  have  lived  ? 
Do  we  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  a  great  deal  more 
exuberant  in  our  professions  of  faith — and  real  faith 
it  is,  no  doubt — in  some  quiet  hour  when  we  are 
with  Him  by  ourselves,  than  when  SAVords  are  flashing 
and  we  are  in  the  presence  of  His  antagonists  ?  Do 
we  hot  know  what  it  is  to  grasp  conviction  at  one 
moment,  and  the  next  to  find  it  gone  like  a  handful 
of  mist  from  our  clutch  ?  Is  our  Christian  life  always 
lived  upon  one  high  uniform  level  ?  Have  we 
no  experience  of  hours  of  exhaustion  coming  after 
deep  religious  emotion?  "Let  him  that  is  without 
sin  among  you  cast  the  first  stone."  There  will  not 
be  many  stones  flung  if  that  law  be  applied.  Let  us- 
all,  recognizing  our  own  weakness,  trust  to  nothing, 
either  in  our  convictions  or  our  emotions,  but  only 
to  Him,  and  cry,  "  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be 
safe." 


AND  THE  MASTER'S  JVAllXIXG.  367 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  lonely  Christ  and  His  com- 
panion. 

"  Ye  shall  leave  me  alone."  There  is  sadness, 
though  it  be  calm,  in  that  clause.  And  then,  I 
suppose,  there  was  a  moment's  pause  before  the  quiet 
voice  began  again.  "And  yet  I  am  not  alone,  for 
the  Father  is  with  Me."  There  are  two  currents 
there,  both  calm ;  but  the  one  bright  and  the  other 
dark. 

Jesus  was  the  loneliest  man  that  ever  lived.  All 
other  forms  of  human  solitude  were  concentrated  in 
His.  He  knew  the  pain  of  unappreciated  aims, 
unaccepted  love,  unbelieved  teachings,  a  heart  thrown 
back  upon  itself.  Xo  man  understood  Him,  no  man 
knew  Him,  no  man  deeply  and  thoroughly  loved  Him 
or  sympathized  with  Him,  and  He  dwelt  apart.  He 
felt  the  pain  of  solitude  more  sharply  than  sinful  men 
do.  Perfect  purity  is  keenly  susceptible  ;  a  heart  fully 
charged  with  love  is  wounded  sore  when  the  love  is 
thrown  l.xick,  and  all  the  more  sorely  the  more  un- 
selfish it  is. 

Solitude  was  no  small  part  of  the  pain  of  Christ's 
passion.  Remember  the  pitiful  appeal  in  Gethsemane, 
'•'  Tarry  3'e  here  and  watch  with  Me."  Remember  the 
threefold  vain  returns  to  the  sleepers  in  the  hope  of 
finding  some  sympathy  from  them.  Remember  the 
emphasis  with  which,  more  than  once  in  His  life,  He 
foretold  the  loneliness  of  His  death.  And  then  let  us 
understand  how  the  bitterness  of  the  cup  that  He 
drank  had  for  not  the  least  bitter  of  its  ingredients 
the  sense  that  He  drank  it  all  alone. 

Now,  dear  friends,  some  of  us,  no  doubt,  have  to  Uve 
outwardly  solitary  lives.     We  all  of  us  live  alone  after 


368  THE  DISCIPLES'  CONFESSION 

all  fellowsliip  and  communion.  Physicists  tell  us  that 
in  the  most  solid  bodies  the  atoms  do  not  touch. 
Hearts  come  closer  than  atoms,  but  yet,  after  all,  we 
die  alone,  and  in  the  depths  of  our  souls  we  all  live 
alone.  So  let  us  be  thanldul  that  the  Master  knows 
the  bitterness  of  solitude,  and  has  Himself  trod  that 
path. 

Then  we  have  the  calm  consciousness  of  unbroken 
communion.  Jesus  Christ's  sense  of  union  with  the 
Father  was  deep,  close,  constant,  in  manner  and 
measure  altogether  transcending  any  experience  of 
ours.  But  still  He  sets  before  us  a  pattern  of  what  we 
should  aim  at  in  these  great  words.  They  shov/  the 
path  of  comfort  for  every  lonely  heart.  "  I  am  not 
alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  Me."  If  earth  be  dark, 
let  us  look  to  Heaven.  If  the  world  Avith  its  millions 
seems  to  have  no  friend  in  it  for  us,  let  us  turn  to  Him 
who  never  leaves  us.  If  dear  ones  are  torn  from  our 
grasp,  let  us  grasp  God.  Solitude  is  bitter ;  but,  like 
other  bitters,  it  is  a  tonic.  It  is  not  all  loss  if  the 
trees,  which  with  their  leafy  beauty  shut  out  the  sky 
from  us  are  felled,  and  so  we  see  the  blue. 

Christ's  company  is  to  us  what  the  Father's  fellow- 
ship was  to  Christ.  He  has  borne  solitude  that  He 
might  be  the  companion  of  all  the  lonely.  And  the 
same  voice  which  said,  "  Ye  shall  leave  Me  alone,"  said 
also,  "  I  am  with  you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world." 

But  that  communion  of  Christ  with  the  Father  was' 
broken,  in  that  awful  hour  when  He  cried :  "  My  God, 
why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  We  tread  there  on  the 
verge  of  mysteries  beyond  our  comprehension  ;  but 
this  we  know — that  it  was  our  sin  and  the  world's, 


AXD  THE  MASTERS  WARNING. 


369 


made  His  by  His  Avilling  identifying  of  Himself  witli 
lis,  which  built  up  that  black  wall  of  separation. 
That  hour  of  utter  desolation,  forsaken  by  God, 
deserted  by  men,  was  the  hour  of  the  world's  re- 
demption. And  Jesus  Christ  was  forsaken  by  God 
and  deserted  by  men,  that  you  and  I  might  never  be 
either  the  one  or  the  other,  but  mis^ht  find  in  His 
sweet  and  constant  companionship  at  once  the  society 
of  a  man  and  the  presence  of  a  God. 


24 


XXXIV. 

peace  an^  \Dictor\>. 

'  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  Me  ye  might  have 
peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ;  but  be  of  good 
cheer  ;  I  have  overcome  the  world." — John  xvi.  33. 

0  end  these  wonderful  discourses,  and  so 
ends  our  Lord's  teaching  before  His 
passion.  He  gathers  up  in  one  might}^ 
word  the  total  intention  of  these 
sweet  and  deep  sayings  which  we  have 
so  long  been  pondering  together.  He  sketches  in 
broad  outline  the  continual  characteristics  of  the 
disciple's  life,  and  closes  all  with  the  strangest  shout 
of  victory,  even  at  the  moment  when  He  seems  most 
utterly  defeated. 

We  shall,  I  think,  best  lay  on  our  hearts  and  minds 
the  spirit  and  purpose  of  these  words  if  we  simply 
follow  their  course,  and  look  at  the  three  things  which 
Christ  emphasizes  here:  the  inward  peace  which  is 
His  purpose  for  us ;  the  outward  tribulation  which  is 
our  certain  fate  ;  and  the  courageous  confidence  which 
Christ's  victory  for  us  gives. 

I. — Note,  then,  first,  the  inward  peace. 


PEACE  AND  VICTORY.  371 

"  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  in  Me 
ye  might  have  peace."  Peace  is  not  lethargy ;  and  it 
is  very  remarkable  to  notice  how,  in  immediate 
connection  with  this  great  promise,  there  occur  words 
Avhich  suggest  its  opposite — tribulation  and  battle. 
"  In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation."  "  I  have  over- 
come " — that  means  a  fight.  These  are  to  go  side  by 
side  with  the  peace  that  He  promises.  The  two  con- 
ditions belong  to  two  different  spheres.  The  Chris- 
tian life  bifurcates,  as  it  were,  into  a  double  root,  and 
moves  in  two  realms — "  in  Me  "  and  "  in  the  world." 
And  the  predicates  and  characteristics  of  these  two 
lives  are,  in  a  large  measure,  diametrically  opposite. 
So  here,  without  any  contradiction,  our  Lord  brackets 
together  the  two  opposite  conditions  as  both  pertain- 
ing to  the  life  of  a  devout  soul.  He  promises  a  peace 
which  co-exists  with  tribulation  and  disturbance,  a 
peace  which  is  realized  in  and  through  conflict  and 
struggle.  The  tree  will  stand,  with  its  deep  roots  and 
its  firm  bole,  unmoved,  though  wildest  winds  may 
toss  its  branches  and  scatter  its  leaves.  In  the 
fortress,  beleaguered  by  the  sternest  foes,  there  may 
be,  right  in  the  very  centre  of  the  citadel,  a  quiet 
oratory  through  whose  thick  walls  the  noise  of  battle 
and  the  shout  of  victory  or  defeat  can  never  penetrate. 
So  we  may  live  in  a  centre  of  rest,  however  wild  may 
be  the  uproar  in  the  circumference.  "  In  Me  .  .  . 
peace."  That  is  the  innermost  life.  "In  the  world 
.     .     .     tribulation."     That  is  only  the  surface. 

But,  then,  note  that  this  peace,  which  exists  with, 
and  is  realized  through,  tribulation  and  strife,  depends 
upon  certain  conditions.  Our  Lord  does  not  say, 
"  Ye  have  peace,"  but  "  These  things  I  have  spoken 

24* 


372  PEACE  AND   VIC  TOUT. 

that  you  may  have  it."  It  is  a  possibiUty ;  and  He 
lays  down  distinctly  and  plainly  here  the  twofold  set 
of  conditions,  in  fulfilment  of  which  a  Christian 
disciple  may  dAvell  secure  and  still,  in  the  midst  of  all 
confusion.     Note,  then,  these  two. 

It  is  peace,  if  we  have  it  all,  in  Him.  Now  you 
remember  how  emphatically  and  loftily,  as  one  of  the 
very  key-notes  of  these  discourses,  our  Lord  has  spoken 
to  us,  in  them,  of  dwelling  in  Him  as  the  prerogative 
and  the  duty  of  every  Christian.  We  are  in  Him  as 
in  an  atmosphere.  In  Him  our  true  lives  are  rooted 
as  a  tree  in  the  soil.  We  are  in  Him  as  a  branch  in 
the  vine,  in  Him  as  the  members  in  a  body,  in  Him  as 
the  residents  in  a  house.  We  are  in  Him  by  simple 
faith,  by  the  trust  that  rests  all  upon  Him,  by  the 
love, that  finds  all  in  Him,  by  the  obedience  that  does 
all  for  Him.  And  it  is  only  when  we  are  in  Christ 
that  we  rest,  and  reahze  peace.  All  else  brings  dis- 
traction. Even  delights  trouble.  The  world  may 
give  excitement,  the  world  may  give  vulgar  and 
lleeting  joys,  the  world  may  give  stimulus  to  much 
that  is  good  and  true  in  us,  but  there  is  only  one 
thing  that  gives  peace,  and  that  is  that  our  hearts 
should  dwell  in  the  Fortress,  and  should  ever  be 
surrounded  b}^  Jesus  Christ.  Brother!  let  nothing- 
tempt  us  down  from  the  heights,  and  out  from  the 
.  citadel  where  alone  we  are  at  rest ;  but  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  pressing  duties,  the  absorbing  cares,  the 
carking  anxieties,  the  seducing  temptations  of  the- 
world,  and  in  the  presence  of  all  the  necessity  for 
noble  conflict  which  the  world  brings  to  every  man 
that  is  not  its  slave,  let  us  try  to  keep  the  roots  of 
our  lives  in  contact  with  that  soil  from  which  they 


PEACE  AND  VICTORY.  373 

draw  all  their  noiirisliment,  and  to  wrap  ourselves 
round  with  the  hfe  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  shall  make 
an  impenetrable  shield  between  us  and  the  fiery  darts 
of  the  wicked.  Keep  on  the  lee  side  of  the  break- 
water and  your  little  cock-boat  will  ride  out  the  gale. 
Keep  Christ  between  you  and  the  hurtling  storm,  and 
there  will  be  a  quiet  place  below  the  wall  where  you 
may  rest,  hearing  not  the  loud  winds  when  they  call. 
"These  things  have  I  spoken  that  in  Me  ye  might 
have  peace." 

But  there  is  another  condition.  Christ  speaks  the 
great  words  which  have  been  occupying  us  so  long, 
that  they  may  bring  to  us  peace.  I  need  not  do  more 
than  remind  you,  in  a  sentence,  of  the  contents  of 
these  wonderful  discourses.  Think  of  hoAV  they  have 
spoken  to  us-  of  our  Brother's  Ascension  to  Heaven  to 
prepare  a  place  for  us ;  of  His  coming  again  to  receive 
us  to  Himself ;  of  His  presence  with  us  in  His  absence ; 
of  His  indwelling  in  us  and  ours  in  Him  ;  of  His  gift 
to  us  of  a  Divine  spirit.  If  we  believed  all  these 
things ;  if  wo  realized  them  and  lived  in  the  faith  of 
them ;  if  we  meditated  upon  them  in  the  midst  of  our 
daily  duties ;  and  if  they  were  real  to  us,  and  not 
mere  Avords  written  down  in  a  Book,  how  should  any- 
thing be  able  to  disturb  us,  or  to  shake  our  settled 
confidence  ?  Cleave  to  the  words  of  the  Master,  and 
let  them  pour  into  our  hearts  the  quietness  and  con- 
fidence which  nothing  else  can  give.  And  then, 
whatsoever  storms  may  be  around,  the  heart  will  be 
at  rest.  We  find  peace  nowhere  else  but  where  Mary 
found  her  rejDose,  and  could  shake  oft'  care  and 
trouble  about  many  things,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus, 
wrapt  in  His  love  and  listening  to  His  word. 


374  PEACE  AND  VICTORY. 

II. — Then  note,  secondly,  the  outward  tribulation 
which  is  the  certain  fate  of  His  followers. 

Of  course  there  is  a  very  sad  and  true  sense  in 
which  the  warning,  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have 
tribulation,"  applies  to  all  men.  Pain  and  sickness, 
loss  and  death,  the  monotony  of  hard,  continuous,  un- 
welcome toil,  hopes  blighted  or  disappointed  even  in 
their  fruition,  and  all  the  other  ills  that  flesh  is  heir 
to  afflict  us  all.  But  our  Lord  is  not  speaking  here 
about  the  troubles  that  befall  men  as  men,  nor  about 
the  chastisement  that  befalls  them  as  sinners,  nor 
about  the  evils  which  dog  them  because  they  are 
mortal  or  because  they  are  bad,  but  of  the  yet  more 
mysterious  sorrows  which  fall  upon  them  because 
they  are  good.  "  In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation  "  is 
the  proper  rendering  and  reading.  It  had  already 
begun,  and  it  was  to  be  the  standing  condition  and 
certain  fate  of  all  that  followed  Him. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  Christian  life  moves  in 
two  spheres,  and  hence  there  must  necessarily  be 
antagonism  and  conflict.  Whoever  reahzes  the 
inward  life  in  Christ  will  more  or  less,  and  sooner  or 
later,  find  himself  coming  into  hostile  collision  with 
lives  which  only  move  on  the  surface  and  belong  to 
the  world.  If  you  and  I  are  Christians  after  the 
pattern  of  Jesus  Christ,  then  we  dwell  in  the  midst  of 
an  order  of  things  which  is  not  constituted  on  or  for 
the  principles  that  regulate  our  lives  and  the  objects 
at  which  we  aim.  And  hence,  in  that  fundamental ' 
discordance  between  the  Christian  life  and  society  as 
it  is  constituted,  there  must  always  be,  if  there  be 
honesty  and  consistency  on  the  side  of  the  Christian 
man,  more  or  less  of  collision  betAveen  him  and  it.  All 


rEACE  AND  riCTonv 


that  you  regard  as  axiomatic  the  world  regards  as 
folly,  if  you  take  Christ  for  your  teacher.  All  that 
you  labour  to  secure  the  world  does  not  care  to 
possess,  if  you  have  Him  for  your  aim.  All  that  you 
live  to  seek  it  has  abandoned ;  all  that  you  desire  to 
obey  it  will  not  even  consult,  if  you  are  taking  Christ 
and  His  law  for  your  rule.  And  therefore  there  must 
come,  sooner  or  later,  and  more  or  less  intensely  in  all 
Christian  lives,  opposition  and  tribulation.  You  can- 
not get  away  from  the  necessity,  so  it  is  as  well  to 
face  it. 

No  doubt  the  form  of  antaofonism  varies.  No  doubt 
the  more  the  world  is  penetrated  by  Christian  princi- 
ples divorced  from  their  root  and  source,  the  less 
vehement  and  painful  will  the  collision  be.  But  there 
is  the  gulf,  and  there  it  will  stop,  until  the  world  is  a 
Church.  No  doubt  some  portion  of  the  battlements 
of  organized  Christianity  has  tumbled  into  the  ditch, 
and  made  it  a  little  less  deep.  Christians  have 
dropped  their  standard  far  too  much,  and  so  the 
antagonism  is  not  so  plain  as  it  ought  to  be,  and 
as  it  used  to  be,  and  as,  some  day,  it  will  be.  But 
there  it  is,  and  if  you  are  going  to  live  out  and 
out  like  a  Christian  man,  you  will  get  the  old  sneers 
flung  at  you.  You  will  be  "  crochety,"  "  impracticable," 
"  spoiling  sport,"  "  not  to  be  dealt  with,"  "  wet  blanket," 
"  Pharisaical,"  "  bigoted,"  and  all  the  rest  of  the  prett}^ 
words  which  have  been  so  frequently  used  about  the 
men  that  try  to  live  like  Jesus  Christ.  Never  mind. 
"  In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation."  "  I  bear  in  my 
body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  the  branding-iron 
which  tells  whose  owner  the  slave  is.  And  if  it  is 
His  initials  that  I  carry  I  may  be  proud  of  the  marks. 


376  PEACE  AXD  VICTORY. 

But  at  any  rate  there  will  be  antagonism.  You 
young  men  in  your  warehouses,  you  men  that  go  on 
'Change,  we  people  that  Hve  by  our  pens  or  our 
tongues,  and  find  ourselves  in  opposition  to  much  of 
the  tendencies  of  the  present  day — we  have  all,  in  our 
several  ways,  to  bear  the  cross.  Do  not  let  us  be 
ashamed  of  it,  and,  above  all,  do  not  let  us,  for  the 
sake  of  easing  our  shoulders,  be  unfaithful  to  our 
Master.  '-'In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation" ;  and  the 
Christian  man's  peace  has  to  be  like  the  rainbow  that 
lives  above  the  cataract — stUl  and  radiant,  whilst  it 
shines  above  the  hell  of  white  waters  that  are 
tortured  below. 

III. — Lastlv,  notice  the  courasreous  confidence  which 
comes  from  the  Lord's  victor}-. 

"  Be  of  good  cheer."  It  is  the  old  commandment 
that  nmg  out  to  Joshua  when,  on  the  departure  of 
Moses,  the  conduct,  of  the  war  fell  into  his  less 
experienced  hands.  '•  Be  strong,  and  of  a  good  cour- 
age :  onlv  be  thou  stroni?  and  ven'  coura!?eous."  So 
says  the  Captain  of  Salvation,  leaving  His  soldiers  to 
face  tlie  current  of  the  heady  fight  in  the  field.  Like 
some  leader  who  has  chmbed  the  ramparts,  or  hewed 
his  way  through  the  broken  ranks  of  the  enemies,  and 
rini?s  out  the  voice  of  encourasfement  and  call  to  his 
followers,  our  Captain  sets  before  us  His  own  example : 
"  I  have  overcome  the  world."  He  said  this  the  day 
before  Calvary.  If  that  was  victor}-,  what  would 
defeat  have  been  ? 

Xotice,  then,  how  our  Lord's  life  was  a  true  battle. 
The  world  tried  to  draw  Him  away  from  God  by 
appealing  to  things  desirable  to  sense,  as  in  the 
wddemess ;  or  to  things  dreadful  to  sense,  as  on  the 


PEACE  A XD   VICTORY. 


cross ;  and  both  the  one  and  the  other  form  of 
temptation  He  faced  and  conquered.  It  was  no 
shadow  fight  which  evoked  this  pasan  of  victory  from 
His  Hps.  The  reahty  of  His  conflict  is  somewhat 
concealed  from  us  by  reason  of  its  calm  and  the 
completeness  of  His  conquest.  We  do  not  appreciate 
the  force  that  drives  a  planet  upon  its  path  because  it 
is  calm  and  continuous  and  silent,  but  the  power  that 
kept  Jesus  Christ  continually  faithful  to  His  Father, 
continually  sure  of  that  Father's  presence,  continuall}- 
averse  to  all  self-will  and  selfish  living,  was  a  power 
mightier  than  all  others  that  have  been  manifested  in 
the  history  of  humanit}^  The  Captam  of  our  salva- 
tion has  really  fought  the  fight  before  us. 

But  mark,  again,  that  our  Lord's  life  is  the  type  of 
all  victorious  life.  The  world  coiiquers  me  when  it 
draws  me  away  from  God,  when  it  makes  me  its  slave, 
when  it  coaxes  me  to  trust  it,  and  to  despair  if  I  lose 
it.  The  world  conquers  me  when  it  comes  between 
me  and  God,  Avhen  it  fills  my  desires,  when  it  absorbs 
my  energies,  Avhen  it  blinds  my  eyes  to  the  things 
unseen  and  eternal.  I  conquer  the  world  when  I 
put  my  foot  upon  its  temptations,  when  I  crush  it 
down,  when  I  shake  off  its  bonds,  and  when  nothing 
that  time  and  sense,  with  their  dehghts  or  their 
dreadfulnesses,  can  bring,  prevents  me  from  clea\-ing 
to  my  Father  with  all  my  heart,  and  from  living  as 
His  child  here.  Whoso  thus  coerces  Time  and  Sense 
to  be  the  servants  of  his  filial  love  has  conquered 
them  both.  And  whoso  lets  them  draw  him  awa}- 
from  God  is  beaten,  however  successful  he  may  dream 
himself  to  be  and  men  may  call  him. 

My  friends,  there  is  a  lesson  for  Manchester  people. 


378  PEACE  AND  VlCfORY. 

Jesus  Christ  was  not  a  very  successful  man  according 
to  the  standard  of  Market  Street  and  the  Exchange. 
He  made  but  a  poor  thing  of  the  world,  and  He  was 
going  to  be  martyred  on  the  cross  the  day  after  He 
said  these  words.  And  yet  that  was  victory.  Ay ! 
Many  a  man  beaten  down  in  the  struggle  of  daily  life, 
and  making  very  little  of  it,  according  to  our  vulgar 
estimate,  is  the  true  conqueror.  Success  means 
making  the  world  a  stepping-stone  to  God. 

Still  further,  note  our  share  in  the  j\faster's  victory 
— "J  have  overcome  the  world.  Be  ye  of  good  cheer." 
That  seems  an  irrelevant  way  of  arguing.  What  does 
it  matter  to  me  though  He  has  overcome  ?  So  much 
the  better  for  Him ;  but  what  good  is  it  to  me  ? 

It  may  aid  us  somewhat  to  more  strenuous  fighting, 
if  we  know  that  a  Brother  has  fought  and  conquered, 
and  I  do  not  under-estimate  the  blessing  and  the 
benefit  of  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  recorded  in  these 
Scriptures,  even  from  that,  as  I  conceive  it,  miserably 
inadequate  and  imperfect  point  of  view.  But  the 
victory  of  Jesus  Christ  is  of  extremely  little  practical 
use  to  me,  if  all  the  use  of  it  is  to  show  me  how  to 
fifdit.  Ah !  you  must  go  a  deal  deeper  than  that. 
"  I  have  overcome  the  world,  and  I  will  come  and 
put  My  overcoming  Spirit  into  your  weakness,  and 
till  you  with  My  own  victorious  life,  and  make  your 
hands  strong  to  war  and  your  fingers  to  fight ;  and  be 
in  you  the  conquering  and  omnipotent  power." 

My  friends,  Jesus  Christ's  victory  is  ours,  and  we 
are  victors  in  it,  because  He  is  more  than  the  pattern 
of  brave  warfare,  even  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  who 
gave  Himself  for  us,  and  ffives  Himself  to  us,  and 
dwells  in  us  our  Strength  and  our  Righteousness. 


PEACE  AX D  VICTORY. 


Lastly,  remember  that  the  condition  of  that  victory's 
bemg  ours  is  the  simple  act  of  reliance  upon  Him  and 
upon  It.  The  man  Avho  goes  into  the  battle  as  that 
httle  army  of  the  Hebrews  did  against  the  wide- 
stretchmg  hosts  of  the  enemy,  saying,  "0  Lord '  we 
know  not  what  to  do,  but  our  eyes  are  np  unto 
Ihee,  will  come  out  more  than  conqueror  throu-h 
Him  that  Joyed  him.  For  "this  is  the  victory  tliat 
overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith  " 


London  :  Printed  by  ALEXAXi)ER"I^^^;^I^II^^^T^;^i^;;i;^^^ 


SECOXD  EBITIOX.    •Crown  8ro,  cloth  boards,  price  5.s.,  post-free. 

The  Unchanging  Christ, 

AND     OTHER     SERMONS. 

By  Rev.   ALEX.   MACLAREN,   D.D. 


Rev.  C.  H.  Spuegeon. — "  TFe  do  not  review  such  sermons  as  these,  but  enjoy 
them.  Dr.  Maclaren  we  put  in  a  niche  by  himself,  among  those  ivhom 
we  admire  and  reverence.  The  only  fault  we  ever  find  with  any  sermon 
of  his  is  the  fact  that  it  comes  to  an  end ;  irc  could  wish  the  silver  bell 
to  ring  on  and  on,  for  it  never  wearies  the  gracious  ear.  Friends  arc 
sure  of  the  quality,  and  have  only  to  remember  the  publisher^ s  names." — 
Sword  and  Troioel. 

LiVEEPOOL  Meecuey. — "  JVill  fully  sustain  the  high  character  of  the  author  as 
a  p)vinee  of  preachers.'''' 

Christian  CoioioisrwrEALTH. — "  The  practical  vein  for  which  Dr.  Maclaren  is 

distinguished  runs  through  all  of  thc?n." 
Illusteated  Missionary  News. — "  For  ministers  such  utterances  are  amine 

of  .sacred  suggestion,  and  for  every  reader  they  cannot  fail  to  prove  helpful 

and  refreshing.'" 

Christian  World.— "Ji  is  not  possible  to  open  a  page  ivithout  perceiving 
illustrations  of  his  commanding  power  as  an  exponent  of  Divine  truth." 

Freeman. — "  I'he  work  of  a  master  of  pulpit  oratory.'" 

Manqhestee  Examiner. — "  He  is  a  real  poet  amongst  preachers  ;  never  turgid 
or  boinbastical,  his  language  is  beautiful,  because  it  contains  a  beautiful 
thought  si)nj}ly  expressed." 

Christian  Leader. — "  While  they  are  distinguished  by  the  finest  scholarship 
and  the  most  exquisite  literary  finish  they  are  at  the  same  time  as  plain 
and  simple  as  the  homeliest  talk  of  Moody  or  of  Spurgcon." 

Christian. — "  All  as  eminently  readable  as  they  are  liccid  and  pointed." 

NoNCONFOEMiST  AND  INDEPENDENT. — ' '  Few  preachcrs  of  our  generation  combine 
so  many  elements  of  effective  pulpit  address." 

"Wbsleyan  Methodist  Magazine. — "  To  say  that  these  sermons  are  at  least 
equal  to  any  of  Dr.  Maclaren'' s  former  publications  would  be  almost  super- 
fluous. His  '  bow  abides  in  strength.''  This  is  a  capital  book  for  a  class- 
leadcr''s  library.  It  deals  ivith  '  the  ttnder-side  of  our  livcs.^  It  aboundu 
in  quotable  apothegms,  in  sayings  that  stick." 


Loudon  :  ALEXANDER  &  SHEPHEARD,  21  &  22,  Funiival  Street,  E.G. 

AND   ALL   BOOKSELLEES. 


Pnncflon    rheolog,c,,|    SeminJrySpee,    L.brar, 


1    1012  01026  2808 


DATE  DUE 


^xhihv 

1  1 

GAYLORD 


#3523PI        Printed  in  USA 


