fF : a | a Thal 
AN i nn 


FIRST SERIES. 


THE 


FOUR GREAT PREACHERS 


| CHOICE SERMONS 


SPURGEON, MOODY, TALMACE AND BEECHER. 


WITH 
|) SHORT BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 


OF THESE CELEBRATED DIVINES. 


ILLUSTRATED, 


Toronto: 
ROSE PUBLISHING COMPANY, 


uy }OR a time it used to be said that nobody reads 
sermons ; and to a certain extent the saying 
may still be true. But there are sermons and 
sermons. Few, we apprehend, either listen to or read 
> with acceptance the dry type of doctrinal discourses 
that was once common in the pulpit. The type has 
been succeeded by more interesting expositions of 
Evangelical truth, and by more enlivening appeals 
to the human heart and conscience. The Church, as 
it has dropped dogma, has in large degree returned to 
its first work of evangelizing the world Ly the spirit 
and power of the Gospel; and in the true missionary 
spirit, it is again going into the highways and by- 
ways to reclaim the world to Christ, and to bring the pro- 
digal back to the Father. 

The power of the Pulpit, however much it may be said 
to have declined, is yet great; and public interest in the 
foremost preachers of the time is no whit abated. On the 
contrary, it is not too much to say, that the interest of the 


v1 PREFACF. 


religious world in the themes, as well as in the rhetorical 
efforts of our pulpit orators is greater to-day than at any 
time since the golden age of preaching. With the spread 
of education, and the general dissemination of critical and 
scientific thought in the last five-and-twenty years, the 
lay mind is not so dependent as it once was upon the pul- 
pit for instruction and guidance in matters of spiritual 
concern. Nor are theological and speculative discussions 
the exclusive province now of the clergy. The press is 
now the pulpit; and theological problems, and every phase 
of religious thought find their debative ground, not alone 
in the pulpit, but in almost every newspaper and maga- 
zine in the land. Nor is the religious community confined, 
as it once was, to the pulpit ministrations of its own neigh- 
bourhood; nor, however lacking in gifts, is the church- 
goer necessarily bound to hear “the local light,” and to 
listen to him alone. The press now brings the current 
utterances of the great preachers of the age to every house, 
and their message may find a universal audience. A 
Spurgeon can be heard on two continents, and a Beecher’s 
eloquence, like Britain’s drum-beat, may encircle the earth. 
The interest felt in the pulpit-work of these typical 
preachers of Britain and America, and in that of Talmage 
and Moody, is such as to call for the collection of sermons 
in the within volume. ‘They are characteristic specimens 
of the work of each preacher, and are here offered in the 
hope that their message may be fraught with blessing, 
and find fitting response in many a Christian heart. 


THE EpIvor, 
Toronto, April 10th, 1885, 


he 


CONTENTS. 


_ PAGE, 
BroGRAPHICAL SKETCH oF Rev. CHARLES HAppRN SpurGceon- 11 


SERMONS BY REV. CHARLES HADDEN SPURGEON : 


Sovereignty and Salvation - - - - ° « AG 
Christ Crucified - - - - - - - - 32 
Christ’s People—Imitators of Him - : ° - dd 
Faith - 2 s 1% ee at one Ee 


BroGRAPHICAL SketcH oF Dwicut Lyman Moopy 


| SERMONS BY DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY :— 


‘* Where art Thou ?” - - . ° 
There is no Difference 
Good News” - - - - - ° ° ° - 132 
What think ye of Christ ? - - - ° 
Christ seeking Sinners = « . - ° . ° - 156 


vill ; CONTENTS, 


PAGE. 
BIOGRAPHICAL SkEtcH oF Rev. THos De Witt TatmMsce - 175 
SERMONS BY REV. THOMAS DE WITT TALMAGE :— 
Christ Everything - - - - + + + +177 
Life at Home - - - - - ° - ° ~ 187 | 
The Father’s Kiss - - - * ° ° - - 198 
Woman’s Lamentation over a Wasted Life - - - 207 
The Wrath of the Seas - ° . m > « - 217 
‘a The Coming Sermon ee ee ee ee er 
! The Red Cord in the Window - - - - - - 241 
} 


BIoGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF Rev. HENRY WARD BEECHER - - 265 


i) SERMONS BY REV. HENRY WARD BEECHER :— 
The Old andthe New’ - - - « -« 


- + 257 
i The Duty of using one’s life for others - - - - 274 
) The Value of Deep Feelings - - . «  « 908 


Suffering the Measure of Worth -— -« - - 314 
The Crime of Degrading Men - ~ - - - - 335 


Endex to Ellustrations. 


i ‘© ASK AND IT SHALL BE GIVEN YOU” - - - FRONTISPIECE 


h Portrait oF Rev. CHar.es Happen SepuRGEON -PAGE 10 
és Dwicut Lyman Moopy- - - - - - 92 
i Rev, THomas De Witr TatmaGe~ - . - 174 
Rev, Henry WarkD BEECHER - - - - 254 


Hae eth Pi 


| Na nar y xi - oe 
Ap ig bo cage at atta g amin tates 2 


PAGE. 
AGE - 176 


: - 177 
* e 187 
- - 198 
* - 207 
- - 217 
Zz - 229 
- - 241 
R - - 255 
- - 257 
- - 274 
- - 292 
- - 314 
- - 335 
LONTISPIECE 
-PAGE 10 
- - 92 
- - 174 


- - 254 


hei 


REV. CHARLES HADDEN SPURGEON, 


RAV. CHARLES HADDEN SPURGEON, 


—-—_2 ee 


3 HIS celebrated preacher was bora in Kelvedon, Fssex, 
a Englard, in 1834. Intended by his family for the 
ay) 4 "office of an Independevt minister, his own sympathies 
drew him towards the Baptists, and he joined that con- 
nection in 1850. He becanie at once an active Sunday Schoo 
teacher and Tract distributor, and removing to Cambridge in 
1851, began to deliver Cottage Sermons in the neighborhood. 
The popularity of the ‘‘ Boy Preacher,” as he was at this time 
called, was e!most immediately established, and at the age of 
eighteen he took charge of a small Baptist congregation in 

the village of Waterbeach. 
In 1854 he entered upon the pastorate of the New Park 
Street Chapel, London, where his preaching proved so at- 
tractive, that in two years time the building had to be greatly en- 
larged. His hearers continued to increase ; the Surrey Music Hall 
was for some time engaged for his use: and finally his followers 


12 REV. CHARLES HADDEN SPURGEON. 


built for him his well-known “ Tabernacle” in Newington Butts, 
which was opened in 1801]. 

The evangelistic and philanthropic agencies in connection with 
this immense chapel comprise the Stockwell Orphanage, of which 
Mr. Spurgeon is president ; a Pastor’s College, where hundreds of 
young men are trained for the ministry under Mr. Spurgeon’s care ; 
the Golden Lane Mission, etc. 

Mr. Spurgeon preaches in the ‘‘ Tabernacle ” every Sunday to 
thousands of hearers, and few of our people visit London without 
going to hear him. 

His sermons have been published weekly in London since 1854, 
and the Toronto Globe has now made arranyements to give its 
readers one of them in each Saturday’s edition. Yearly volumes 
have also been published since 1856, and both weekly sermons 
and yearly volumes have found thousands of readers. Many of 
his sermons have been translated into various foreign languages. 

Mr. Spurgeon has also written many popular works, among others 


“¢ John Ploughman’s Talk,” ‘‘ Morning by Morning,” ‘‘ Evening by 
Evening,” ‘‘ The Treasury of David,” ‘* Lectures to My Students,” 
‘The Saint and his Saviour;’ and sinco 1865 he has edited the 
monthly magazine, ‘' The Sword and the Trowel.” 


FOUR GREAT PREACHERS. 


RAWAL 


SERMONS BY REV. C. H. SPURGEON, 


oF LONDoWw. 


—-—— ame -- 


IX years ago to-day, as near as possible at this 
very hour of the day, I was “in the gall of 
bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity,” but 
had yet, by divine grace, been led to feel the bitter- 
ness of that bondage, and to cry out by reason of 
. the soreness of its slavery. Seeking rest, and tind- 
" ing none, I stepped within the house of God, and 
sat there, afraid to look upward, lest I should be 
utterly cut off, and lest His fierce wrath should con- 
sume me, The minister rose in his pulpit, and, as I 
have done this morning, read this text, “ Look unto 
me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for 
I am Cod, and there is none else.” I looked that 
moment; the grace of faith was vouchsafed to me 
in the self-same instant; and now I think I can say 

with truth, 


SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


** Ere since by faith I saw the stream 

His flowing wounds supply, 

Redeeming love has been my theme, ae 
Aud shall be till 1 die.” : 


T shall never forget that day, while memory holds its q 
place ; nor can I help repeating this text whenever I re- 4 

member that nour when first I knew the Lord. How | 
| strangely gracious! How wonderfully and marvellously 4 
| kind, that he who heard these words so little time ago 
for his own soul’s profit, should now address you this 
morning as his hearers from the same text, in the full and 
{| confident hope that some poor sinner within these walls 
may hear the glad tidings of salvation for himself also, 
{|| and may to-day, on this 6th of January, be “turned from 
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto 
ti God !” 

11] If it were within the range of human capacity to con- 
| ceive a time when God dwelt alone, without his creatures, 4 
we should then have one of the grandest and most stu- a 
pendous ideas of God. There was a season when as yet « 
the sun had never run his race, nor commenced flinging 4 
his golden rays across space, to gladden the earth. There ; 
was an era when no stars sparkled in the firmament, for 
there was no sea of azure in which they might float. 
There was a time when all that we now behold of God’s 
great universe was yet unborn, slumbering within the 
mind of God, as yet uncreate and non-existent ; vet there 
| was God, and He was “over all blessed for ever;” thouvh 
Hi no seraphs hymned His ee though no strong-winged 
i cherubs flashed like lightning to do His high behests, : 
though He was without a retinue, yet He sat as a king a 
on His throne, the mighty God, for ever to be worshipped 
—the Dread Supreme, in solemn silence dwelling by Him- 
self in vast immensity, making of the placid clouds his 
| canopy, and the light from His own countenance forming 
HT, the brightness of His glory. God was, and God is. From 
i the hecinning God was God; ere worlds had beginning, 


its 
re- 
Low 
usly 
ago 
this 
and 
valls 
also, 
from 
unto 


» CON- 
tures, 
gtu- 
3 yet 
nging 
here 
t, for 
float. 
God’s 
h the 
there 
houvh 
inged 
hests, 
king 
ipped 
tim- 
1s his 
ming 
From 


ning, 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION, 15 


He was “from everlasting to everlasting.” Now, when 
it pleased Him to create His creatures, does it not strike 
you how infinitely those creatures must have been below 
Himself? If you are potters, and you fashion upon the 
wheel a vessel, shall that piece of clay arrogate to itself 
equality with you? Nay, at what a distance will it be 
frdm you, because you have been in part its creator. So 
when the Almighty formed His creatures, was it not con- 
summate impudence, that they should venture for a mo- 
ment to compare themselves with Him? Yet that arch 
traitor, that leader of rebels, Satan, sought to climb to the 
high throne of God, soon to find his aim too high, and 
hell itself not low enough wherein to escape divine ven- 
geance, He knows that God is “God alone.” Since the 
world was created, man has imitated Satan; the creature 
of a day, the ephemera of an hour, has sought to match 
itself with the Eternal. Hence it has ever been one of 
the objects of the great Jehovah, to teach mankind that 
He is God, and beside Him there is none else. This is 
the lesson He has been teaching the world since it went 
astray from Him. He has been busying Himself in 
breaking down the high places, in exalting the valleys, 


in casting down imaginations and lofty looks, that all the 
world might 


** Know that the Lord is God alone, 
He can create, and He destroy.” 


This morning we shall attempt to show you, in the 
first place, how God has been teaching this great lesson to 
the world—that He is God, and beside Him there is none 
else ; and then, secondly, the special way in which He de- 
signs to teach it in the matter of salvation—“ Look unto 
sing and be ye saved: for I am God, and there is none 
else.” 


I, Firat, then, How HAs GoD BEEN TEACHING THIS LES- 
SON TO MANKIND ? 


SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


We reply, He has taught it, first of all, to false gods, 
and to the idolaters who have bowed before them. Man. 
in his wickedness and sin, has set up a block of wood and 
stone to be his maker, and has bowed before it. He hath 
fashioned for himself out of a goodly tree an image made 
unto the likeness of mortal man, or of the fishes of the 
sea, or of creeping things of the earth, and he has pros- 
trated his body, and his soul too, before that creature of 
his own hands, calling it god, while it had neither eyes to 
see, nor hands to handle, nor ears to hear? But how hath 
God poured contempt on the ancient gods « f the heathen ? 
Where are they now? Are they so much as known? 
Where are those false deities before whom the multitudes 
of Nineveh prostrated themselves? Ask the moles and 
the bats, whose companions they are; or ask the mounds 
beneath which they are buried; or go where the idle ga- 
zer walketh through the museum—see them there as curi- 
osities, and smile to think that men should ever bow be- 
fore such gods as these. And where are the gods of Per- 
sia? Where are they? The fires are quenched, and the 
fire-worshipper hath almost ceased out of the earth. 
Where are the gods of Greece—those gods adorned with 
poetry, and hymned in the most sublime odes? Where 
are they? They are gone. Who talks of them now, but 
as things that were of yore? Jupiter—doth any one bow 
before him ? and who is he that adores Saturn? They 
are passed away, and they are forgotten. And where are 
the gods of Rome? Doth Janus now command the tem- 
ple? or do the vestal virgins now feed their perpetual 
fires? Are there any now that bow before these gods ? 
No, they have lost their thrones. And where are the 

ods of the South Sea Islands—those bloody demons be- 
lors whom wretched creatures prostrated their bodies ? 
They have well-nigh become extinct. Ask the inhabi- 
tants of China and Polynesia where are the gods before 
which they bowed? Ask, and echo says ask, and ask 
agaiv, They are cast down from their thrones; they are 


ods, 
fan. 
and 
rath 
1ade 
the 
yYOS- 
e of 
es to 
hath 
hen ? 
ywn ? 
pudes 
- and 
yunds 
le ga- 
curi- 
v be- 
Per- 
d the 
earth. 
with 
NV here 
, but 
p bow 
They 
re are 
b tem- 
netual 
ods ? 
wf the 
ns be- 
bdies 2 
habi- 
before 


d ask 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION, 17 


hurled from their pedestals; their chariots are broken, 
their sceptres are burnt in the fire, their glories are de- 
parted ; God hath gotten unto Himself the victory over 
false gods, and taught their worshippers that He is God, 
and that beside Him there is none else. Are their gods 
still worshipped, or idols before which the nations bow 
themselves? Wait but a little while, and ye shall see 
them fall. Cruel Juggernaut, whose car still crushes in 
its motion the foolish ones who throw themselves before 
it, shall yet be the object of derision ; and the most noted 
idols, such as Buddha, and Biahma, and Vishnu, shall yet 
stoop themselves to the earth, and men shall tread them 
down as mire in the streets; for God will teach all men 
that He is God, and that there is none else. 

Mark ye, yet again, how God has taught this truth to 
empires. Empires have risen up, and have been the gods 
of the era; their kings and princes have taken to them- 
selves high titles, and have been worshipped by the mul- 
vitude. But ask the empires whether there is any beside 
God? Do you not think you hear the boasting soliloquy 
of Babylon—“ I sit as a queen, and am no widow; I shall 
see no sorrow; I am god, and there is none beside me?” 
And think ye not now, if ye walk over ruined Babylon, 
that ye will meet aught save the solemn spirit of the Bible, 
standing like a prophet gray with age, and telling you 
that there is one God, and that beside him there is none 
else? Go ye to Babylon, covered with its sand, the sand 
of its own ruins; stand ye on the mounds of Nineveh, 
and let the voice come up—‘ There is one God, and em- 
pires sink before him; there is only one Potentate, and 
the princes and kings of the earth, with their dynasties 
and thrones, are shaken by the trampling of his foot.” 
Go, seat yourselves in the temples of Greece; mark ye 
there what proud words Alexander once did speak ; but 
now, where is he, and where his empire too? Sit on the 
ruined arches of the bridge of Carthage, or walk ye through 
the desolated theatres of Rome, and ye will hear a voice 


SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


in the wild wind amid those ruins—* I am God and there 
is none else.” ‘O city, thou didst call thyself eternal ; I 
have made thee melt away like dew. Thou saidst ‘I sit 
on seven hills, and I shall last forever;’ I have made 
thee crumble, and thou art now a miserable and contemp- 
tible place, compared with what thou wast. ‘Thou wast 
once stone, thou madest thyself; J have made thee stone 
again, and brought thee low.” O! how has God taught 
monarchies and empires that have set themselves up like 
new kingdoms of heaven, that he is God, and. that there 
is none else! 

Again: how has he taught his great truth to monarchs ! 
There are some who have been most proud that have had 
to learn it in a way more hard than others. Take, for 
instance, Nebuchadnezzar. His crown is on his head, his 
purple robe is over his shoulders ; he walks through proud 
Babylon, and says, “Is not this great Babylon which I have 
builded? Do you see that creature in the field there ? It 
isaman, “A man?” say you; its hair has grown like 
eagles’ feathers, and its nails like birds’ claws ; It walketh 
on all-fours, and eateth grass, like an ox; it is driven out 
from men. That is the monarch who said—“Is not this 
great Babylon that F have builded?” And now he is re- 
stored to Babylon’s palece, that he may “bless the Most 
High who is able to abase those that walk in pride.” Re- 
member another monarch. Look at Herod. He sits in 
the midst of his people, and he speaks. Hear ye the im- 
pious shout? “It is the voice of God,” they ery, “and not 
the voice of man.” The proud monarch gives not God the 
glory ; he affects the God, and seems to shake the spheres, 
haagining himself divine. There isa worm that creepeth 
into his body, and yet another, and another; and ere that 
sun is set, he iseaten up of worms. Ah! monarch! thou 
thoughtest of being a God, and worms have eaten thee! 
Thou hast thought of being more than man; and what 
ert thou? Less than man, for worms consume thee, and 
tea art the prey of corruption. Thus God humbleth the 


there 
al; I 
‘T sit 
made 
emp- 
wast 
stone 
aught 
» like 
‘there 


urches ! 
re had 
e, for 
id, his 
proud 
IT have 
e? It 
like 
alketh 
en out 
t this 
bh is r'e- 
b Most 
ied Re- 
sits 17 
he im- 
nd not 
od the 
bheres, 
eepeth 
e that 

! thou 
thee ! 
what 
8, and 
bth the 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION 19 


proud; thus he abaseth the mighty. We might give you 
instances from modern history; but the death of a king 
is all-sufficient to teach this one lesson, if men would but 
learn it. When kings die, and in funeral pomp are carried 
to the grave, we are taught the lesson—“I ain God, and 
beside me there is none else.” When we hear of revo- 
lutions, and the shaking of empires—when we see old 
dynasties tremble, and gray-haired monarchs driven from 
their thrones, then it is that Jehovah seems to put his 
foot upon land and sea, and with his hand uplifted cries— 
“Hear! ye inhabitants of the earth! Ye are but as grass- 
hoppers; ‘I am God, and beside me there is none else.’” 
Again: our God has had much to do to teach this lesson 
to the wise men of this world; for as rank, pomp, and power, 
have set themselves up in place of God, so has wisdom; and 
one of the greatest enemies of Deity has always been the 
wisdom of man. The wisdom of man will not see God. Pro- 
fessing themselves to be wise, wise men have become fools. 
But have ye not noticed, in reading history, how God has 


| abased the pride of wisdom? In ages long gone by, he 


sent mighty minds into the world, who devised systems 
of philosophy. “These systems,” they said, “will last 
forever.” Their pupils thought them infallible, and there- 
fore wrote their sayings on enduring parchment, saying, 
“This book will last forever; succeeding generations of 
men will read it, and to the last man that book shall be 
handed down, as the epitome of wisdom.” “ Ah! but,” 
said God, “ that book of yours shall be seen to be folly, 
ere another hundred years have rolled away.” And so 
the mighty thoughts of Socrates, and the wisdom of 
Solon, are utterly forgotten now ; and could we hear them 
speak, the veriest child in our schools would laugh to 
think that he understandeth more of philosophy than 
they. But when man has found the vanity of one system, 
his eyes sparkled at another ; if Aristotle will not suffice, 
here is Bacon; now I shall know everything; and he sets 
to work, and says that this new philosophy is to last for- 


a 
f 

i 
Pi 
1 
a 


20 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


ever. He lays his stones with fair colours, and he thinks 
that every truth he piles up is a precious imperishable 
truth. But, alas! another century comes, and it is found 
to be “ wood, hay, and stubble.” A new sect of philoso- 
sophers rise up, who refute their predecessors. So, too, 
we have wise men in this day—wise secularists, and so 
on, who fancy they have obtained the truth; but within 
another fifty years—and mark that word—this hair shall 
not be silvered over with gray, until the last of that race 
shall have perished, and that man shall be thought a fool 
that was ever connected with such a race. Systems of 
infidelity pass away like a dew-drop before the sun, for 
God says, “I am God, and beside me there is none else.’ 
This Bible is the stone that shall break in powder philos- 
ophy ; this is the mighty battering-ram that shall dash all 
systems of philosophy in pieces; this is the stone that a 
woman may yet hurl upon the head of every Abimelech, 
and he shall utterly be destroyed. O Church of God! 
fear not; thou shalt do wonders; wise men shall be con- 
founded, and thou shalt know, and they too, that he is 
God, and that beside him there is none else. 

“Surely,” says one, “the Church of God does not need 
to be taught this.” Yes, we answer, she does; for of all 
beings, those whom God has made the object of His 
grace are perhaps the most apt to forget this cardinal 
truth, that He is God, and that beside Him there is none 
else. How did the church in Canaan forget it, when 
they bowed before other gods, and therefore He brought. 
against them mighty kings and princes, and afflicted 
them sore. How did Israel forget it; and he carried 
them away captive into Babylon. And what Israel did 
in Canaan and in Babylon, that we do now. We too, 
too often, forget that He is God, and beside Him there is 
none else. Doth not the Christian know what I mean 
when I tell him this great fact? Forehath he not done 
it himself? In certain times prosperity has come upon 
him ; soft gales have blown his bark along, just where 


RIT ey 


oot Se gta oR Nn et 


tl 


thinks 
shable 
found 
hiloso- 
0, too, 
ynd so 
within 
ir shall 


philos- 
lash all 
that a 
melech, 
f God! 
be con- 

he is 


ot need 
r of all 
of His 
ardinal 
is none 
, when 
brought, 
hfflicted 
carried 
‘ael did 
e too, 
here is 
I mean 
t done 
e upon 
where 


pe a 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION. 


his wild will wished to steer; and he has said within 
himself : “ Now I have peace, now I have happiness, now 
the object I wished for is within my grasp, now I will 
say, ‘Sit down my soul, and take thy rest; eat, drink 
and be merry ; these things will well content me; make 
thou these thy god, be thou blessed and happy.” But 
have we not seen our God dash the goblet to the earth, 
spill the sweet wine, and instead thereof fill it with gall ? 
And as He has given it to us, he has said :—“ Drink it, 
drink it; you have thought to find a god on earth, but 
drain the cup and know its bitterness.” When we have 
drunk it, nauseous the draught was, and we have cried, 
“ Ah! God, I will no more drink from these things ; thou 
art God, and beside Thee there is none else.” And ah! 
how often, too, have we devised schemes for the future, 
without asking God’s permission! Men have said, like 
those foolish ones whom James mentioned, “ We will do 


© such-and-such things on the morrow; we will buy and 


sell and get gain,” whereas they knew not what was to 
be on the morrow, for long ere the morrow came they 
were unable to buy and sell; death had claimed them, 
and a small span of earth held all their frame. God 
teaches his people every day, by sickness, by affliction, 
by depression of spirits, by the forsakings of God, by 
the loss of the Spirit for a season, by the lackings of the 
joys of His countenance, that He is God, and that beside 
Him there is none else. And we must not forget that 
there are some special servants of God raised up to do 
great works, who in a peculiar manner have to learn 
this legson. Let a man, for instance, be called to the 
great work of preaching the Gospel. He is successful ; 
God helped him ; thousands wait at his feet, and multi- 
tudes hang upon his lips; as truly as that man is a man, 
he will have a tendency to be exalted above measure, 
and too much will he begin to look to himself, and too 
little to his God. Let men speak who know, and what 
they know, let them speak; and they will say: “It ir 


ot pete ieeape-alpiliesrceesiaen 


opti te, April ia ic DEIN ia 


22 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


true, it is most true.” If God gives us a special mission, 
we generally begin to take some honour and glory to 
ourselves, But in the review of the eminent saints of 
God, have you never observed how God has made them 
feel that He was God, and beside Him there was none 
else? Poor Paul might have thought himself a god, and 
been puffed up Leyond measure, by reason of the great- 
ness of his revelation, had there not been a thorn in the 
ilesh. But Paul could feel that he was not a God, for he 
had a thorn in the flesh, and gods could not have thorns 
in the flesh. Sometimes God teaches the minister by 
denying him help on special occasions. We come uy 
into our pulpits, and say “Oh! I wish I could havea 
good day, to-day !” We begin to labour; we have been 
just as earnest in prayer, and just as indefatigable ; but 
it is like a blind horse turning round a mill, or like 
Samson with Delilah: we shake our vain limbs with 
vast surprise, “inake feeble fight,” and win no victories. 
We are made to see that the Lord is God, and that beside 
Him there is none else. Very frequently God teaches 
this to the minister, by leading him to see his own sinful 
nature. He will have such an insight into his own 
wicked and abominable heart, that he will feel as he 
comes up the pulpit stairs that he does not deserve so 
much as to sit in his pew, much less to preach to his 
fellows. Although we feel always joy in the declaration 
of God’s Word, yet we have known what it is to totter 
on the pulpit steps, under a sense that the chief of sin- 
ners should scarcely be allowed to preach to others. Ah! 
beloved, I do not think he will be very successful as a 
minister who is not taken into the depths and blackness 
of his own soul, and made to exclaim: “ Unto me, who 
am less than the leust of all saints, is this grace given, 
that I should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearch- 
able riches of Christ.” There is another antidote which 
God applies in the case of ministers. If he does not deal 
with them personally, he raises up a host of enemies, 


= "~~ TP =~ ~~ ee as et 


tf 


3s10N, 
ry to 
ats of 
them 
none 
|, and 
rreat- 
n the 
‘or he 
horns 
ar by 
1e UD 
ave a 
. been 
: but 
r like 
with 
tories. 
eside 
baches 
sinful 
own 
as he 
ve so 
o his 
‘ation 
totter 
f sin- 
Ah! 
lasa 
kness 
, who 
piven, 
barch- 
which 
deal 
pmies, 


|= woe is unto us, if we preach not the Gospel.” 
> opposition through which God carries His servants, leads 


© God, and that there is none else. 
» plauded, if all were gratified, we should think ourselves 
© God; but when they hiss and hoot, we turn to our God, 


23 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION. 


that it may be seen that He is God, and God alone. An 
esteemed friend sent we, yesterday, a valuable old MS. 
of one of George Whitefield’s hymns which was sung on 
Kennington Common. It is a splendid hymn, thor- 
oughly Whitefieldian all through. It showed that his 
reliance was wholly on the Lord, and that God was 
within him. What! will a man subject himself to the 
calumnies of the multitude, will he toil and work, day 
after day, unnecessarily, will he stand up Sabbath after 
Sabbath, and preach the Gospel, and have his name 
maligned and slandered, if he has not the grace of God 
in him? For myself, I can say, that were it not that 


© the love of Christ constrained me, this hour might be 


the last that I should preach, so far as the ease of the 
thing is concerned. “ Necessity is laid upon us; yea, 
But that 


them to see at once that He is God, and that there is 
If every one ap- 


and cry, 


‘Tf on my face, for Thy dear name, 
Shame and reproach should be, 
T’ll hail reproach, and welcome shame, 
If thou’lt remember me.” 


II. This brings us to the second portion of our dis- 
course, Salvation is God’s greatest work; and, therefore, 
in His greatest work, He specially teaches us this lesson, 
that He is God, and that beside Him there is none else. 
Our text tells us how He teaches it. He says, “ Look un- 
to me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.” He 
shows us that He is God, and that beside Him there is 
none else, in three ways. First, by the person to whom 
He directs us:  “ Look unto me, and be ye saved.” Se- 
vondly, by the means He tells us to use to obtain mercy: 


24 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


“ Look,” simply, ‘ Look.” And thirdly, by the persons 
whom He calls to “look:” “ Look unto me, and be ye 
saved, all the ends of the earth.” 

1. First, To whom does God tell us to look for salvation? 
O, does it not lower the pride of man, when we hear the 
Lord say, “ Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends 
of the earth?” It is not, “ Look to your priest, and be ye 
saved:” if you did, there would be another god, and be- 
side him there would be some one else. It is not, “ Look 
to yourself ;” if so, then there would be a being who 
might arrogate some of the praise of salvation. But it is 
“Look unto me.” How frequently you who are coming 
to Christ look to yourselves. “QO!” you say, “I do not 
repent enough.” ‘That is looking to yourself. “I do not 
believe enough.” ‘That is looking to yourself. “I am too 
unworthy.” That is looking to yourself. “I cannot dis- 
cover,” says another, “that I have any righteousness.” 
It is quite right to say that you have not any righteous- 
ness; but it is quite wrong to look for any. It is, “ Look 
unto me.” God will have you turn your eye off yourself (77% 
and look unto Him. The hardcst thing in the worldis | 
to turn a man’s eye off himself; as long as he lives,he (| 
by always has a predilection to turn his eyes inside, and 
‘ei look at himself; whereas God says, “ Look unto me.” 
ay From the cross of Calvary, where the bleeding hands of 
rae Jesus drop mercy; from the garden of Gethsemane, where 
| the bleeding pores of the Saviour sweat pardons, the er 
comes, “ Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of 


Te DR ee = —™ ~~ . 


~ 
~— 


Fd 

Hf the earth.” From Calvary’s summit, where Jesus cries, 

i “Tt is finished,’ I hear a shout, “ Look, and be saved.” 

Bit But there comes a vile cry from our soul, “ Nay, look to :. 

Pay yourself! look to yourself!” Ah, my hearer, look to your- hi 
if self, and you will be damned. That certainly will come F 
i of it. As long as you look to yourself there is no hope ° 
i for you. It is not a consideration of what you are, but a MW 
i consideration of what God is, and what Christ is, that ean Li 


save you. It is looking from yourself to Jesus, O! there 


& 


rsons 
be ye 


ition? 
ir the 
» ends 

be ye 
1d be- 
G Look 
o who 
ut it is 
coming 
do not 
do not 
am too 
not dis- 
usness.” 
rhteous- 

“ Look 
yourself 
world 1s 
lives, he 
side, and 
to me.” 

ands of 

e, where 

;, the cry 

"ends of 
kus cries, 
bh saved.” 
r, look to 

to your- 

ill come 
sno hope 
are, but a 

3, that ean 

O! there 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION, 


be men that quite misunderstand the gospel; they think 
that righteousness qualifies them to come to Christ; 
whereas sin is the only qualification for a man to come 
to Jesus. Good old Crisp says, “ Righteousness keeps me 
from Christ: the whole have no need of a physician, but 
they that are sick. Sin makes me come to Jesus, when 
sin is felt ; and, in coming to Christ, the more sin I have 
the more cause I have to “hope for mercy.” David said, 
and it was a strange thing, too, “ Have mercy upon me, 
for mine iniquity is oreat,” But, David, why did not 
you say that it was little? Because, David knew that the 
bigger his sins were, the better reason for asking mercy. 
The more vile a man is, the more eagerly I invite him to 
believe in Jesus. A sense of sin is all we have to look 
for as minister We preach to sinners ; and let us know 
that a man wili take the title of sinner to himself, and we 
then say to him, “Look unto Christ, and ye shall be 
saved,” “ Look,” this is all He demands of thee, and even 
this He gives thee. If thou lookest to thyself thou art 
damned ; thou art a vile miscreant, filled with loathsome- 
ness, corrupt and corrupting others. But look thou here 
—seest thou that man hanging on the cross? Dost thou 


© behold his agonized head dropping meekly down upon his 
'"* breast? Dost thou see that thorny crown, causing drops - 


of blood to trickle down his cheeks? Dost thou see his 


» hands pierced and rent, and his blest feet, snpporting the 
» weight of his own frame, rent well-nigh in twain with 


the cruel nails? Sinner! dost thou hear him shriek, 
“ Kloi, Eloi, lama sabbacthani?” Dost thou hear him cry, 


.“Itis finished ?” Dost thou mark his head hang down in 


death? Seest thou that side pierced with the spear, and 


= the body taken from the cross? O, come thou hither! 
> Those hands were nailed for thee ; those feet gushed gore 
> for thee; that side was opened wide for thee; “and if thou 


wantest to know how thou canst find merey, there it is. 

“Look!” “Look unto me!” Look no longer to Moses 

Look no longer to Sinai. Come thou here and look to 
B 


i 
2 aan 
Ae = 
Anosbesninn 


a ee tte 


OP ate, 


es 


RT on 
: : 
Oi ae Hioonamsnrlbnacetnianiat tinea 
ee eee 
ony a een een 


a 


es 
ie ee ee 
A eng 


ant 6 
Se a Se, 


Siamiinanmer cena — 


Pin — SOLE. <tr meg ya or 


~ ean motions Sia oF sins 
oa tiotgenthaee: — ome putsS 


Lathe eee a en “hho Harve Sarees 


26 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


Calvary, to Calvary’s victim, and to Joseph’s grave. And 
look thou yonder, to the man who near the throne sits 
with his Father, crowned with light and immortality. 
“ Look, sinner,” he says, this morning, to you, “ Leok un- 
to me, and be ye saved.” It is in this way God teaches 
that there is none beside Him; because He makes us look 
entirely to Him, and utterly away from ourselves. 

2. But the second thought is, the means of salvation. 
It is “ Zook unto me, and be ye saved.” You have often 
observed, I am sure, that many people are fond of 
an intricate worship, an involved religion, one they can 
hardly understand. They cannot endure worship so sim- 
ple as ours. Then they must havea man dressed in white, 
and a man dressed in black ; then they must have what 
is called an altar and a chancel. After a little while that 
will not suffice, and they must have flower pots and can- 
dles, the clerygyman then becomes a priest, and he must | 
have a variegated dress, with a cross on it. So it goes 
on; what is simply a plate becomes a paten, and what | 
was once a cup becomes a chalice; and the more compli- | 
cated the ceremonies are, the better they like them. 
They like their minister to stand like a superior being. 
The world likes a religion they cannot comprehend. But | 
have you never noticed how gloriously simple the Bible 
is? It will not have any of your nonsense; it speaks 
plain, and nothing but plain things. “Look!” There is 
not an unconverted man who likes this, “Look unto | 
Christ, and be ye saved.” No, he comes to Christ like 7 
‘Naaman to Elijah ; and when it is said, “Go, wash in © 
Jordan,” he replies, “I verily thought he would come and | | 
put his hand on the place, and call on the name of his | 
God. But the idea of telling me to go wash in Jordan, | 
what a ridiculous thing! Anybody could do that!” If 7% 
the prophet had bidden him do some great thing, would |= 
he not have done it? Ah! certainly he would. And if, 77 
this morning, I could preach that any one who walked 7 


from here to Bath without his shoes and stockings, or did | 


we. And 
arone sits 
mortality. 
Look un- 
yd teaches 
es us look 
ves. 
salvation. 
have often 
e fond of 
they can 
hip so sim- 
1 in white, 
have what 
while that 
g and can- 
.d he must 
So it goes 
, and what 
ore compli- 
like them. 
brior being. 
hend. But 
the Bible 
; it speaks 
1” There 1s 
Look unto 
Christ like 
io, wash in 


ld come and a 


tame of his 
in Jordan, 
’ that !” If 
hing, would 


ld. And. if, 


sho walked 
kings, or did § 
al 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION, 27 


some impossible thing, should be saved, you would start 
off to-morrow morning before breakfast. If it would take 
me seven years to describe the way of salvation, I am sure 
you would all long to hear it. If only one learned doc- 
tor could tell the way to heaven, how would he be run 
after! And if it were in hard words, with a few scraps 
of Latin and Greek, it would be all the better. But it is 
a simple gospel that we have to preach. It is only 
“Look!” “Ah!” you say, “is that the gospel? I shal! 
not pay any attention to that.” Bnt why has God or- 
dered you to do such a simple thing? Just to take down 
your pride, and to show you that he is God, and that be- 
side him there is none else, O, mark how simple the way 
of salvation is. It is, “ Look! Look! Look!” Four let- 
ters, and two of them alike! “Look unto me and be ye 
saved, all the ends of the earth.” Some divines want a 
week to tell you what you are to do to be saved; but 
God and the Holy Ghost only wants four letters to do it. 
“Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the 
earth.” Howsimple is that way of salvation! and O, how 
instantaneous! It takes us some time to move our hand, 
but a look does not require a moment. So a sinner be- 
lieves in a moment; and the moment that sinner believes 
and trusts in his crucified God for pardon, at once he 
receives salvation in full through his blood. There 
may be one that came in here this morning unjustified 
in his conscience, that will go out justified rather 
than others. There may be some here, filthy sin- 
ners one moment, pardoned the next. Iv is done in an 
instant. “Look! Look! Look!” And how universal is 
it! Because, whereever [ am, however far off, it just says, 
“Look!” If we look on a thing in the dark, we cannot 
see it; but we have done what we were told. So, if a 
sinner looks to Jesus he will save him; for Jesus in the 
dark is as good as Jesus in the light; and Jesus, when 
you cannot see him, is as good as Jesus when you can. 
It is only, “Look!” “Ah,” says one, “I have been try- 


28 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


ing to see Jesus this year, but I have not seen him.” It 
does not say, see him, but “ Lovk untohim.” And it says 
that they who looked were lightened. If there is an ob- 
stacle before you, and you only look in the right direction, 
it is sufficient. ‘“ Look unto me.” It is not seeing Christ 
so much as looking after him. ‘The will after Christ, the 
wish after Christ, the desire after Christ, the trusting in 
Christ, the hanging on Christ, that is what is wanted. 
“Look! Look! Look!” Ah! if the man bitten by the 
serpent had turned his sightless eyeballs towards the 
brazen serpent, though he had not seen it, he would still 
have had his life restored. It is looking, not seeing, that 
saves the sinner. 

We say again, how this humbles a man! There is a 
gentleman who says, “ Well, if it had been a thousand 
pounds that would have saved me, I would have thought 
nothing of it.” But your gold and silver is cankered ; it 
is good for nothing. “Then, am Ito be saved just the 
same asiny servant Betty?” Yes, just the same; there 
is no other way of salvation for you. This is to show 
man that Jehovah is God, and that beside him there is 
none else. ‘This wise man says, “If it had been to work 
the most wonderful problem, or to solve the greatest mys- 
tery, [ would have done it. May J not have some myster- 
ious gospel? Muy I not believe in some mysterious re- 
ligion?” No; it is “Look!” “What! am I to be saved 
like that Ragged School boy, who can’t read his letters ?” 
Yes, you must, or you will not be saved at all. Another | 
says, “I have been very moral and upright; I have ob- | 
served all the laws of the land; and, if there is anything | 
else to do, I will do it. I will eat only fish on Fridays, | 
and keep all the fasts of the church, if that will save me.” | 

No, sir, that will not save you; your good works are good | 

for nothing. “What! must I be saved in the same way @% 
asa harlot ora drunkard?” Yes, sir; there is only one 
way of salvation for all. “He hath concluded all in un- 
belief, that he might have merey upon all.” He hath 


I TOR" Aap sae a : 
Sin doi sieidorwinta rvenrwmitie op ei 
{ 


ee ete 


cae thee nahin 
erasers 


eR 


nacamnaatienatiinas 


ATi Bae Rip Re.ny ENR. Re 


PA = Mana 


soaps ee 


Ronepesionetiin. 


OE gg me 


cathe tetas ne 
Ih Tis A Ni ie SE 


pronapaitannmpeietsystis oe re ee 
ew ae tt Rae RMS age ape 


| 
} 
, 
| 
| 
tt 
i 
i 
| 


3 es 


ae 
eat eB ge Heme 


oe ne Rm estes 


mustne oe 


nos Sa lat ees 
ao : 


FS A a al aS ou lr a 


ag 


RNR lt mee teas nonccrmmen 


einen iadipey Teapdtidaion tae eae 


et tes 


And it says 
‘eis an OD- 
ib direction, 
seing Christ 
Christ, the 
trusting 1n 
is wanted. 
tten by the 
towards the 
, would still 
, seeing, that 


There is a 
a thousand 
have thought 
cankered ; 1t 
ved just the 

same; there 
s is to show 
him there 1s 
been to work 

reatest mys- 
some myster- 
ysterious re- 

I to be saved ‘ 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION. 29 


passsed a sentence of condemnation on all, that the free 
grace of God might come upon many to salvation. “Look ! 
look! look!” This is the simple method of salvation. 
‘Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the 
-earth.” 

- But, lastly, mark how God has cut down the pride of 
man, and has exalted himself by the persons whom he haa 
‘calied to look. “ Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the 
fends of the earth.” When the Jew heard Isaiah say 
hat, “Ah!” he exclaimed, “you ought to have said, 
- Look unto me, O Jerusalem, and be saved. That would 
have been right. Dut those Gentile dogs, are they to look 
“and be saved?” “Yes,” says God; “I will show you 
Jews, that, though I have given you many privileges, I 
will exalt others above you; I can do as I will with my 
“own.” 

' Now, who are the ends of the earth? Why, there are 
poor heathen nations now that are very few degrees re- 
moved from brutes, uncivilized and untaught; but if I 
“qnight go and tread the desert, and find the Bushman in 
his kraal, or go to the South Seas, and find a cannibal, I 
vould say to the cannibal or the Bushman “ Look unto 
esus, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth.” They 
re some of “the ends of the earth,’ and the Gospel is 
ent as much to them as to the polite Grecians, the re- 
ined Romans, or the educated Britons. But I think 


1 his letters?” 9 the ends of the earth,” imply those who have gone the 
Another “@farthest away from Christ. I say, drunkard, that means 
i 


; [I have ob: 
‘eis anything 7 
» on Fridays, 
will save me. | 


ou. You have been staggering back, until you have 
@ot right to “the ends of the earth;” you have almost 
Dad delirium tremens ; you cannot be much worse. There 
snot aman breathing worse than you. Jsthere? Ah! 


orks are goo ut God in order to humble your pride says to you, 
he same way iB Look unto Me, and be ye saved.” There is another 
e is only one (ho has lived a life of infamy and sin, until she has 


Jed all in wn 


= 
wt 
nA 


ined herself, and even Satan seems to sweep her out 


He hath 4 f the back door; but God says’ “ Look unto Me, and be 


30 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


iimetiiteessteeee i : 
EOE aeebeanme mg 2 
ta eS ETRE en ages nine oe 


ye saved, all the ends of the earth.” Methinks I see one 
trembling here and saying, “ Ah, I have not been one of 
these, sir, but I have been something worse; for I have 
attended the house of God, and I have stifled ecnvietions, 
and put off all thoughts of Jesus, and now I think He 
will never have mercy on me. You are one of them. 
“ Ends of the earth.” So long as I find any who feel like 
that, I can tell them that they are “the ends of the 
earth.” “But,” savs another, “I am so peculiar; if I 
did not feel as I dc, it would be all very well; but I feel 
that my case is a peculiar one.” That is all right; they 
are a peculiar people. You will do. But another one 
says. “There is nobody inthe world like me. I do not 
think you will tind a being under the sun that has had so 
many calls, and put them all away, and so many sins on 
his head. Besides, [ have guilt that I should not like to 
confess to any living creature.” One of “ the ends of the 
earth” again; therefore, all I have to do is to cry out in 
the Master’s name, “ Look unto me, and be ye saved, all 
the ends of the earth: for Iam God, and there is none 
else.” But thou sayest, sin will not let thee look. I tell 
thee, sin will be removed the moment thou dost look. 
“ But I dare not, He will condemn me; I fear to look.” | 
He will condemn thee more if thou dost not look. Fear, 
then, and look; but do not let thy fearing keep thee from 
looking, “But He will cast me out.” Try him! “ But © 
I cannot see Him.” I tell you it is not seeing, but look- | 
ing. “But my eyes are so fixed on the earth, so earthly, 
so wordly.” Ah! but poor soul, he giveth power to look 
and live. He saith, “ Look unto Me, and by ye saved all | 
the ends of the earth.” 

Take this, dear friends, for a new year’s text, both ye | 
who love the Lord, and ye who are only looking for the 
first time. Christian! in all thy troubles through this — 
year, look unto God and be saved. In all thy agony, | 
poor soul, in all thy repentance for thy guilt, look unto|7 
Christ, and find pardon, This year remember to put)] 


ae 


a 
— NES 
scan 


een 


Saeed 


A ferent reenter 


ease 


es Se ect 


a 
CPE: 


i 
# 


sa 
Fs 
; 
4% 
P| 
4 
i% 
‘ 
i 
r 


eirerotcce 


per nye A ores -_ te 
a eee ee a 


cg I see one 
been one of 
. for I have 
eonvietions, 
I think He 
ne of them. 
vho feel like 
ends of the 
eculiar; if T | 
1; but I feel = | 
right ; they 

another one 

ne. I do not 

at has had so 

many sins on 

ld not like to 
e ends of the 
o ery out in 
ye saved, all 
here is none 
b look. I tell 
ou dost look. 


ear to look.” = 


look. Fear, 
eep thee from 
him! “ But - 


ing, but look- 7% 
h, so earthly, a 
power to look ae 
by ye saved all | 


s text, both ye | 
poking for the es 
through this | % 


nll thy agony,/@ 
uilt, look unto) 
ember to pul 4 


he 


thine eyes heavenward, and thine heart heavenward, too. 
Remember; this day, that thou bind round thyself a gold- 
en chain, and put one link of it in the staple in heaven. 
Look unto Christ; fear not. There is no stumbling when 
a man walks with his eyes up to Jesus. He that looked 
at the stars fell into the ditch; but he that looks at 
Christ walks safely. Keep your eyes up all the year 
long. “Took unto him, and be ye saved ;” and remember 
that “. is God, and besides him there is none else.” 
And thou, poor trembler, what sayest thou? Wilt thou 
begin the year by looking unto him? You know how 
sinful you are this morning; you know how filthy you 
are; and yet it is possible that, before you open your pew- 
door, and get into the aisle, you will be as justified as the 
apostles before the throne of God. It is possible that, 
ere your foot treads the threshold of your door, you will 
have lost the burden that has been on your back, and you 
will go on your way, singing, “I am forgiven, I am for- 
given; I am a miracle of grace; this day is my spiritual 
birthday.” O, that it might be such to many of you, that 
at last I might say, “Here am I, and the children thou 
hast given me.” Hear this, convinced sinner! “This poor 
man cried, and the Lord delivered him out of his dis- 


SOVEREIGNTY AND SALVATION. 31 


tresses.” QO, taste and see that the Lord is good! Now 
believe on him; now cast thy guilty soul upon his right- 
eousness ; now plunge thy black soul into the bath of his 
blood; now put thy naked soul at the door of the ward- 
robe of his righteousness; now seat thy famished soul at 
the feast of plenty. Now “Look,” How simple does it 
seem! And yet it is the hardest thing in the world to 
bring men to, They never will do it, till constraining grace 
makes them. Yet there it is, “Look!” Co thou away 
with that thought. “Look unto me and be ye saved, all 
ae ends of the earth: for Iam God, and there is none 
else, 


a i 
* 5 wr se 
MG Gs, av 


Sa 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 


rut we preach Christ crucified, wnto the Jews a stumbling- 

», block, and, unto the Greeks foolishness; but wnto them which 

wy «are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God— 
. 1 Cor. i: 23, 24. 


Sa Cw Det aioe 


or 
eS ee 


Arar ae "Ri no cin eneee. ahaa 


HAT contempt hath God poured upon the 
wisdom of this world! How that he brought 
it to naught, and made it appear as nothing. 
He has allowed it to work out its own con- 

'\k, clusions, and prove its own folly. Men boasted that 
they were wise; they say that they could find out 


ie 
i 
a. 
4 

i 
ey 
ne 
iad 


God to perfection; and in order that their folly 
might be refuted once and forever, God gave them 

the opportunity of so doing. He said, “ Wordly 
wisdom I will try thee. Thou sayest that thou 

art mighty, that thine intellect is vast and compre- 
hensive, that thine eye is keen, and thou canst tind 

| all secrets ; now, behold, J try thee ; I give thee one 
oreat problem to solve. Here is the universe ; stars 

? make its canopy, fields and flowers adorn it, and the 
floods roll o’er its surface; my name is written therein ; 
the invisible things of God may be clearly seen in the 
things which are made. Philosophy I give thee this 
problem—find Me out. Here are My works—tind Me 
out. Discover in the wondrous world which I have mae, 
the way to worship Me acceptably. I give thee space 


a stumbling: 
» them which 
wer of God— 


1 upon the 
he brought 
as nothing. 
ts own con- 
yoasted that 
uld find out 
their folly 
1 gave them 
d, “ Wordly 
t that thou 
and compre- 
bu canst tind 
Hive thee one 
iverse ; stars 
n it, and the 
ten therein ; 
geen in the 
e thee this 
ks—tind Me 
I have made, 
e thee space 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 33 
“| enough to do it—there are data enough. Behold the 
clouds, the earth, and the stars. I give thee time enough ; 
I will give thee four thousand years, and I will not in- 
terfere ; but thou shalt do as thou wilt with thine own 
world. I will give thee men enough; for I will make 
great minds and vast, whom thou shalt call lords of 
earth ; thou shalt have orators, thou shalt have philoso- 
'phers. Find Me out, Oh reason; find Me out, Oh wise 
~ dom; find Me out, if thou canst; find Me out unto per- 


ont 


God is wiser than the wisdom of men; yea, that the 
foolishness of God is wiser than men.” And how did 
‘the wisdom of man work out the problem? How did 
‘wisdom perform her feat? Look upon the heathen 
nations; there you see the result of wisdom’s researches. 
‘In the time of Jesus Christ, you might have beheld the 
‘earth covered with the slime of pollution, a Sodom on a 
arge scale—corrupt, filthy, depraved, indulging in vices 
rhich we dare not mention ; revelling in lust too abom- 
nable even for our imagination to dwell upon for a 
oment. We find the men prostrating themselves l efore 
locks of wood and stone, adoring ten thousand gods 
ore vicious than themselves We find, in fact, that 
eason wrote out her lines with a finger covered with 
lood and filth, and that she forever cut herself out from 
ll the glory by the vile deeds she did. She would not 
orship God. She would not bow down to Him, who is 
clearly seen,” but she worshipped any creature—the 
eptile that crawled, the crocodile, the viper—everything 
ght be a god; but not, forsooth, the God of Heaven. 
ice might be made into a ceremony, the greatest crime 
ight be exalted into a religion; but true worship she 
new nothing of. Poor reason! poor wisdom! how art 
hou fallen from Heaven; like Lucifer, thou son of the 
orning! thou art lost; thou hast written out thy con- 
Slusion, but a conclusion of consummate folly, “After 


* 
BS seach 


Vranoet 


es ed 


~~ 


stare tent nitedesinioteccom: Oe ee 
.* rene lb - 


lat ta 


B34 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


hat, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew 
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching 
to save them that believe.” 

Wisdom has had its time, and time enough: it had 
done its all, and that was little enough; it had made 
the world worse than it was before it stepped upon it, 
and “now,” says God, foolishness shall overcome wis- 
dom; now ignorance, as ye call it, shall sweep away 
science ; now (saith God), humble, child-like faith shail 
crumble to the dust all the colossal systems your hands 
have piled.” He calls His warriors. Christ puts His 
truinpet to His mouth, and up comes the warriors, clad 
in the fisherman’s garb, with the brogue of the Lake of 
Galilee, poor humble mariners Here are the warriors, O 
wisdom ! that are to confound thee ; these are the heroes 
who shall overcome thy proud philosophers; these men 
are to plant their standard upon thy ruined walls, and 
bid them fall forever ; these men and their successors are 
to exalt a Gospel in the world, which ye may laugh at 
as absurd, which ye may sneer at as folly, but which shall 
be exalted above the hills, and shall be glorious even to 
the hightest heavens. Since that day, God has always 
raised up successors of the apostles. I claim to be a suc- 
cessor of the apostles; not by any lineal descent, but be- 
cause I have the same roll and charter as any apostle, and 
am as much called to preach the Gospel as Paul himself ; 
if not as much owned by the conversion of sinners, yet 
in a measure, blessed of God; and, therefore, here I 
stand, foolish as Paul might be, foolish as Peter, or 
any of those fishermen, still, with the might of God, I 
grasp the sword of truth, coming there “to preach 
Christ and Him crucitied, unto the Jews a stumbling- 
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them 
which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the | 
power of God, and the wisdom of God.” 

Before I enter upon our text, let me very briefly tell | 
you what I believe preaching Christ, and Him crucified | 


m knew 
reaching 


» it had 
ad made 
upon it, 
yme WIS- 
Ep away 
ith shail 
yur hands 
puts His 
riors, clad 
» Lake of 
arriors, 
the heroes 
these men 
walls, and 
2egsors are 
y laugh at 
hich shall 
us even to 
as always 
pb be a suc- 
| t, but be- 
postle, and 
1 himself ; 
inners, yet 
bre, here I 
| Peter, or 


of God, I | 


to preach 


stumbling- — 
unto them — 
hrist, the | 


briefly tell 


m crucified 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 35 


is. My friends, I do not believe it is preaching Christ 
and Him crucified, to give people a batch of philosophy 
every Sunday morning and evening, and neglect the 
truths of this Holy Book. I do not believe it is preach- 
ing Christ and Him crucified, to leave out the main car- 
dinal doctrines of the Word of God, and preach a religion 
that is all a mist and a haze, without any definite truths 
whatever. I take it thut man does not preach Christ and 
[lim crucified, who can get through his sermon, without 
mentioning Christ’s name once ; nor does that man preach 
Christ and Him crucified, who leaves out the Holy Spirit’s 
work, who never says a word about the Holy Ghost, so 
that indeed the hearers might say, “ We do not so much 
as know whether there be a Holy Ghost.” And I have 
my own private opinion, that there is no preaching Christ 
and Him crucified, unless you preach what now-a-days 
is called Calvinism. I have my own ideas, and those 
I always state boldly. It is a nickname to call it Cal- 
vinism. Calvinism is the Gospel, and nothing else. I 
do not believe we can preach the Gospel, if we do not 
preach justification by faith without works; nor unless 
we preach the sovereignity of God in His dispensation of 
grace, nor unless we exalt the electing, unchangeable, 
eternal, immutable, conquering love of Jehovah; nor, I 
think, can we preach the Gospel, unless we base it upon 
the peculiar redemption which Christ made for His elect 
and chosen people; nor can I comprehend a Gospel which 
lets saints fall away after they are called, and suffers the 
children of God to be burned in the fires of damnation, 
after having believed. Such a Gospel, I abhor. The 
Gospel of the Bible is not such a Gospel as that. We 
preach Christ and Him crucified in a different feshion, 
and to all gainsayers we reply, “ We have not so learned 
Christ.” 

There are three things in the text: first, a gospel re- 
jected, “Christ crucitied, to the Jews a stumbling-block, 
and to the Greeks foolishness ;” secondly, a gospel trium- 


rll «8. 


~ 


= * nate te 3 enpeeaieatcoriieed 
8 PN eT PE TBI SA nw Senge oe — = aes 


rR PS Maint: le i 9, oi 


ER MRSA ah. Paine = 


36 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


phant, “unto those who are called, both Jews and Greeks,” 
and thirdly, a gospel adinired; it is to them who are called, 
“the power of God and the wisdom of God.” 

I. First, we have here @ gospel rejected. One would 
have imagined that, when God sent His gospel to men, 
all men would meekly listen, and humbly receive its 
truths. We should have thought that God’s ministers 
had but to proclaim that life is brought to light by the 
gospel, and that Christ is come to save sinners, and every 
ear would be attentive, every eye would be fixed, and 
every heart would be wide open to receive the truth. We 
should have said, judging favourably of our fellow-crea- 
tures, that there would not exist in the world a monster 
so vile, so depraved, so polluted, as to put so much as a 
stone in the way of the progress of truth; we could not 
have conceived sucha thing; yet that conception is the 
truth. When the gospel was preached, instead of being 
accepted and admired, one universal hiss went up to hea- 
ven; men could not bear it : ; its first preacher they drag- 
ged to the brow of the hill, and would have sent him down 
headlong ; yea, they did more—they nailed him to the 
cross, and there they let him languish out his dying life 
in agony such as no man hath borne since. All his chosen 
ministers have been hated and abhorred by worldlings ; 
instead of being listened to, they have been scoffed at; 
treated as if they were the offscouring of all things, and 
the very scum of mankind. Look at the holy men in the 
old times, how they were driven from city to city, perse- 
cuted, afflicted, tormented, stoned to death, wherever the 
enemy had power to do so. Those friends of men, those 
real philanthropists, who came with hearts big with love, 
and hands full of mercy, and lips pregnant with celestial 
fire, and souls that burned with holy influence; those men 
were treated asif they were spies in the camp, as if they 
were deserters from the common cause of mankind ; as if 
they were enemies, and not, as they truly were, the best 
of friends. Do not suppose, my friends, that men like 


recks _ 
: called, 


would 

oOo men, 
eive its 
\inisters 

t by the 

id every 
ced, and 
th. We 
ow-crea- 
monster 
uch as a 
ould not 
ion is the 
of being 
p to hea- 
rey drag- 
im down 
m to the 
lying life 
is chosen 
orldlings ; 
offed at; 
ings, and 
en in the 
ty, perse- 
brever the 
en, those 
ith love, 
h celestial 
those men 
as if they 
ind ; as if 
», the best 
men like 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 37 
the gospel any better now than they did then. There is 
an idea that you are growing better. I do not believe it. 
You are growing worse. In many respects men may be 
better,—outwardly better; but the heart within is still 
the same. The human heart of to-day dissected, would 
be just like the human heart a thousand years ago; the 
gall of bitterness within that breast of yours, is Just as 
bitter as the gall of bitterness in that of Simon of old. We 
have in our hearts the same latent opposition to the truth 
of God; and hence we find men, even as of old, who scorn 
the gospel. 

I shall, in speaking of the gospel rejected, endeavour to 
point out the two classes of persons who equally despise 
the truth. The Jews make it a stumbling-block, and the 
Greeks account it foolishness. Now these two very res- 
pectable gentlemen—the Jew and the Greek—I am not 
going to make these ancient individuals the object of my 
condemnation, but I look upon them as members of a great 
parliament, representatives of a great constituency, and I 
shall attempt to show that if all the race of Jews were 
cut off, there would be still a great number in the world 
who would answer to the name of Jews, to whom Christ 
is a stumbling-block, and that if Greece were swallowed 
up by some earthquake, and ceased to be a nation, there 
would still be the Greek unto whom the gospel would be 
foolishness, I shall simply introduce the Jew and the 
Greek, and let them speak a moment to you, in order 
that you may see the gentlemen who represent you; the 
representative men ; the persons who stand for many of 
you, who as yet are not called by divine grace. 

The first is a Jew, to him the gospel is a stumbling- 
| block. A respectable man the Jew was in his day; all 
' formal religion was concentrated in his person; he went 
* up to the temple very devoutly; he tithed all he had, 
| even to the mint and the cummin. You would see him 
fasting twice in the week, with a face all marked with 

} sadness and sorrow. If you looked at him, he had the 


~ 


ats ees 


sheer eteene ee ee 
MESS De 


Tete sili 
B.C SL aa pratinttae J 


Sm 


TPR PS 


: a 
= A oe 


Panetta tie aps 


1S mm 


I ae abe = Sagan? Bie f 8 At 


> BS 
hata Tah ay 


i oli 
yee 2S A Ae cpl esha ee a 
nein a sa aS 


Le 
i 

Log 
a 


Me Ba tates coe 
wtp 
RE BRE S 


eo od 
ga hilt 
oa 


, : 
Wale Messi ae ne 


LESS EEE SERED ee ee oe ee 


38 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


law between his eyes; there was the phylactery, and the 
borders of his garments of amazing width, that he might 
never be supposed to be a Gentile dog; that no one might 
ever conceive that he was not a Hebrew of pure des- 
cent. He had a holy ancestry; he came of a pious fam- 
ily ; a right good man was he. He could not like those 
Sadducees at all, who had no religion. He was thoroughly 
a religious man; he stood up for hissynagogue; he would 
not have that temple on Mount Gerizim; he could not 
bear the Samaritans, he had no dealings with them; he 
was a religionist of the first order, a man of the very 
finest kind ; a specimen of a man who is a moralist, and 
who loves the ceremonies of the law. Accordingly, when 
he heard about Christ, he asked who Christ was. “The 
son of a carpenter.” “Ah!” “The son of a carpenter, 
and his mother’s name was Mary, and his father’s name 
Joseph.” “That of itself is presumption enough,” said he; 
“ positive proof, in fact, that he cannot be the Messiah.” 
And what does he say? Why, he says, “ Woe unto you 
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites.” “That won’t do.” 
Moreover, he says, “It is not by the works of the flesh 
that any man can enter into the kingdom of heaven.” The 
Jew tied a double knot in his phylactery at nce; he 
thought he would have the borders of his garment made 
twice as broad. He bow to the Nazarene! No, no; and 
if so much as a disciple crossed the street, he thought the 
place polluted, and would not tread in his steps. Do you 
think he would give up his old father’s religion, the reli- 
gion which came from Moun? ‘inai, that old religion that 
lay in the ark and the overshadowing cherubim? He give 
that up! not he. A vile impostor—that is all Christ was 
in his eyes. He thought so. “A stumbling-block to me 
I cannot hear about it; I will not listen to it.” Accord 


ingly, he turned a deaf ear to all the preacher's eloquence, | 
and listened not at all. Farewell, old Jew! Thou sleepest | 
with thy fathers, and thy generation is a wandering race 7 
still walking the earth. Farewell! I have done with | 


nd the 
, might 
’ might 
re des- 
us fam- 
ce those 
roughly 
ie WoUlt 
yuld not 
hem 3; he 
the very 
list, and 
ly, when 
«The 
arpenter, 
ers name 
” said he, 
Messiah.” 
unto you 
vont do.” 
the flesh 
en.” The 
nee; he 
nent made 
0, no; an 


ought the 
k Do you 
bn, the reli- 
bligion that 
? He give 
Christ was 
lock to me; 
»  Accord- 
g eloquence, 
hou sleepest 
dering race. 
done with 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 39 


thee. Alas! poor wretch, that Christ who was thy stum- 
bling-block, shall be thy judge, and on thy head shall be 
that loud curse. ‘“ His blood be on us and on our chil- 
dren.” But I am going to find out Mr. Jew here in Exe- 
ter Hall—persons who answer to this description—to 
whom Jesus Christ is a stumbling-block. Let me intro- 
duce you to yourselves, some of you. You were of a pious 
family too, were you not? Yes. And you have a religion 
which you love; you love it so far as the chrysalis of it 
goes, the outside, the covering, the husk. You would not 
have one rubric altered, nor one of those dear old arches 
taken down, nor the stained glass removed, for all the 
world; and any man who should say a word against such 
things, you would set down as a heretic at once. Or, 
perhaps, you do not go tosuch a place of worship, but you 
love some plain old meeting-house, where your forefathers 
worshipped, called a dissenting chapel. Ah! itis a beau- 
tiful plain place ; you love it, you love its ordinances, you 
love its exterior; and if any one spoke against the place, 
how vexed you would feel. You think that what they 
do there, they ought to do everywhere; in fact, your 
church is a model one ; the place where you go is exactly 
the sort of place for everybody ; and if I were to ask you 
why you hope to go to heaven, you would perhaps say, 
“ Because I am a Baptist,” or, “ Because I am an Episco- 
palian,” or whatever other sect you belong to. There is 
yourself ; I know Jesus Christ will be to you a stumbling- 
block. If I come and tell you, that all your going to the 
house of God is good for nothing; if I tell you that all 


| those many times you have been singing and praying, all 
; pass for nothing in the sight of God, because you are 4 


hypocrite and a formalist. If I tell you that your heart 
is not right with God, and that unless it is so, all the ex- 
ternal is good for nothing, I know what you will say,— 
“I shan’'t hear that young man again.” Itisastumbling- 
block. If you had stepped in anywhere where you had 


j heard formalism exalted; if you had been told “ thig 


40 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. = 


inciea Domini 
Las iae as 
oer wiieg 


SIAN NE GO it “ ‘ 


must you do, and this other must you do, and then you 
will be saved,” you would highly approve of it. But how 
many are there externally religious, with whose characters 


0 I RI hk on I RIT RE NE BS ISTO AEES 


i" i you could find no fault, but who have never had the re- 

} i generating influence of the Holy Ghost; who never were © 
, i | made to lie prostrate on their face before Calvary’s cross; 

i a who never turned a wistful eye to yonder Saviour cruci- 
ol fied ; who never put their trust in him that was slain for 

if the sons of men. They love a superficial religion, but ~~ 
er when a. man talks deeper than that, they set it down for — # 
4 cant. You may love all that is external about religion, 


just as you may love a man for his clothes—caring noth- 
ing for the man himself. If so, I know you are one of | 
those who reject the gospel. You will hear me preach ; 
and while I speak about the externals, you will hear me ] 

ig with attention; whilst I plead for morality, and argue ] 
| 38 against drunkenness, or show the heinousness of Sabbath- c 
4 t breaking, all well and good, but if once I say, “ Except ye 

| 

| 


Ps 


i Rong 


WP a 


= 
tes SS 


be converted, and become as little children, ye can in no 
wise enter into the kingdom of God;” if once 1 tell you 
that you inust be elected of God: that you must be pur- 7 hy 
chased with the Saviour’s blood—that you must be con- “Fg 
verted by the Holy Ghost—you say, “He is a fanatic! — 
Away with him, away with him! Wedo not want to hear 7 } 
that any more.” Christ crucified, is to the Jew—the cere- 9h, 
| monialist—a stumbling-block. WS al 
| But there is another specimen of the Jew to be found. —“¥ijg 
| He is thoroughly orthodox in his sentiments. As for “By, 
| forms and ceremonies, he thinks nothing about them. ~~ 
| 


a ree 


Es 


Bee 


He goes to a place of worship where he learns sound doc- 
hy trine. “He will hear nothing but what is true. He likes 7 
| that we should have good works and morality. He isa [ay 

good man, and no one can find fault with him. Here he 7 

is, regular in his Sunday pew. In the market he walks jf 
before men in all honesty—so you would imagine. Ask 7% 
him about any doctrine, and he can give you a disquis't/on 
upon it. In fact, he could write a treatise upon anything 7 


° 


_ 


~ 


ee 
— 


< 
oo 


{ 
‘a 
| 


then you 
But how 
haracters 
id the re- 
sver were 
"y’S CrOSS; 
our cruci- 

; slain tor 
igion, but 
down for 
it religion, 
ring noth- 
ure one of 
1e preach ; 
ll hear me 
and argue 
f Sabbath- 
. Except ye 
can in no 
1 tell you 
ust be pur- 
ust be con- 
a fanatic | 
ant to hear 
—the cere- 


ts. 


gine, 


o be found. 
As for 
bout them. 
; sound doc- 
He likes 
He is a 
n. Here he 
et he walks § 
Ask § 
disquis't.on | 
on anything %& 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 41 
in the Bible, and a great many things besides. He knows 
almost everything; and here, up in this dark attic of the 
head, his religion has taken up its abode; he has a best 
parlor down in his heart, but his religion never goes there 
—that is shut against it. He has money in there—Mam- 
mon, worldliness; or he has something else—self-love, 
pride. Perhaps he loves to hear experimental preaching; 
he admires it all; in fact, he loves anything that is sound. 
But then, he has not any sound in himself; or rather, it is 
all sound, and there is no substance. He likes to hear 
true doctrine; but it never penetrates his inner man. 
You never see him weep. Preach to him about Christ 
crucified, a glorious subject, and you never sce a tear roll 
down his cheek; tell him of the mighty influence of the 
~ Holy Ghost—he admires you for it, but he never had the 
~ hand of the Holy Spirit on his soul; tell him about 
+ communion with God, plunging in Godhead’s deepest sea, 
~ and being lost in its immensity—the man loves to hear, 
a but he never experiences, he has never communed with 
~ Christ; and accordingly, when you once begin to strike 
~ home; when you lay him on the table, take out your dis- 
secting knife, begin to cut him up, and show him his own 
heart, let him see what it is by nature, and what it must 
become by grace—the man starts; he cannot stand that; 
he wants none of that—Christ received in the heart, and 
accepted. Albeit that he loves it enough in the head, it 
His to him a stumbling-block, a: | he casts it away. Do 
you see yourselves here, 2.5 f1.ends? See yourselves as 
others see you? See yourselves as God sees you? For se it 
us, here be many of whom Uirist is as much a stumbliny- 
iblock now as ever he was. ) ye formalists! I spe. .o 
syou; O ye who have the iiutshell, but abhor the kerne! ; 
60 ye who like the trappings and the dress, but care not 
Mor that fair virgin who is clothed therewith; O ye who 
ike the paint and the tinsel, but abhor the soiid gold, I 
speak to you; I ask you, does your religion sive you 
lid comfort? Can yoii stare deati: in the face with it, 
C 


thickener 


is 


EER SON a Rite SRS ae ine ae RO Sete 


ST SEER: 


> mci oF Bay Aad, dete < 
ey ; 


SS ee eee og 
ee eee 5 


eee 


— lien es ae ee. eee Agi v= 


IOS ee Soe 


ce ne ee 


aa 
<r — 


ST ee 
FE et eager 


SPS nery war gghienan ee 


— 


_ 


a a me 


NORMS RE ee a ve tee eis, 


ar 


Se ee nt ae 
ener nen er 


42, SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


and say, “I know that my Redeemer liveth?” Can you 
close your eyes at night, and your vesper song shall be: 


“*T to the end must endure, 
As sure as the earnest is given?” 


Can you bless God for affliction? Can you plunge in, 
accoutred as ye are, and swim through all -the floods of 
trial ? Can you march triumphant through the lion’s den, 
laugh at affliction, and bid defiance to hell? Can you? No! 
Your gospel is an effeminate thing—a thing of words and 
sounds, and not of power. Cast it from you, I beseech 
you: it is not worth your keeping; and when you come 
before the throne of God, you will find it will fail you, 
so that you shall never find another; for lost, ruineu, 
destroyed, you will find that Christ, who is now a stumb- 
ling-block, will be your judge. 

I have found out the Jew, and I have now to discover 
the Greek. He is a person of quite a different exterior 
to the Jew. As to the phylactery, to him it is all rubbish ; 
and as to the broad-hemined garment, he despises it. He 
does not care for the forms of religion; he has an intense 
aversion, in facet, to broad-brimmed hats, or to everything 
which looks like outward show, He likes eloquence ; he 
admires a smart saying; he loves a quaint expression ; he 
likes to read the last new book; he is a Greek, an’. to 
him the gospel is foolishness. The Greek is a gentleman 


found everywhere, now 


where, 
a shop, rides in a carriage ; he 
is everywhere, even in court, He is thoroughly wise. 
Ask him any thing, and he knows it. Ask for a quotation 
from any of the old poets, or any one else, and he can give 
it you. 
of your religion, he will hear you very patiently, But if 
you are a Christian, and taik to him of Jesus Christ, “Stop 


a ali Aa i alia a at 


If you are a Mohammedan, and plead the claims, 


: -a-days; manufactured sometimes 
in colleges, constantly made in schools, produced every- J 
He is on the exchange, in the market; he keeps 7 
is noble, a gentleman ; he @ 


plunge in, 

. floods of 
lion’s den, 

you? No! 
words and 
mt beseech 
you come 
A fail you, 
ost, yuineu, 
w a stumb- 


to discover 
nt exterior 
all rubbish ; 
ises it. He 
s an intense 
everything f 
uence ; he 
pression ; ; he 
reek, an’. to 
gentleman 
1 sometimes 
luced every- 7@ 
t; he keeps in 
itleman 5 he @ 
ughly wise. 
a “quotation 
1 he can give 
d the claim: 
htly, But if 
‘hrist, “Stop 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 43 
your cant,” he says, “I don’t want to hear anything about 
that.” This Grecian gentleman believes all philosophy 
except the true one; he studies all wisdom except the 
wisdom of God; he likes all learning except spiritual 
learning; he loves everything except that which God 
approves; he likes everything which man makes, and 
nothing which comes from God; it is foolishness to him, 
confounded foolishness. You have only to discourse 
about one doctrine in the Bible, and he shuts his ears; he 
wishes no longer for your company—it is foolishness. I 
have met this gentleman a great many times. Once, 
when I saw him, “he told me he did not be lieve in any re- 
ligion at all; and when I said I did, and had a hope that 
when I died I should go to heaven, he si iid he dared say it 
was very comfortable, but he did not believe in religion, and 
that he was sure it was best to live as nature dictated, 
Another time he spoke well of all religions, and believed 
they were very good in their place, and all true; and he 
had no doubt that, if a man were sincere in any kind of 
religion, he would be all right at last. I told him I did 
not think so, and that I believed there was but one e religion 
revealed of God—the religion of God’s elect, the religion 
which is the gift of Jesus. He then said I waya bigot, 
and wished me good-morning, It was to him foolishness, 


Ile lias 3 thing to do with meat all. He either liked no 
religion, or overy religion, Another time I held him by 
the \.at-Kutton, and I discussed with him a_ little about 


faite, ‘Ls said, “It is all very well, I believe that is true 
Protestint dectrine.? But presently T said something 
about election, and he said, “I don’t like that ; many 


people have preached that, and turned it to bad account.” 

I then hinted something about free grace; but that he 
could not endure, it was to him foolishness. He was a 
lished Greek, and thought that if he were not chosen, 
Fe ought to be, He never liked that passage, “ God hath 
chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the 
wise, wnd the things which are not, to bring to naught 


DP PRL ACE cS eS ta Ban cee 
tial pic Btls re 


be nes 


BEB RI 


PRE BS 


RRR AT Re ota ahha eas oR 


Mt HS EFS hee 


sa 

fi 4 
H 4 
. aa 
y ays 
| 


= 


PI PI ee ie SO 
a 


ne ae 


OE ge 


sae os 


ee ee ee ee ae 


= 


et 


44, SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


things that are.” He thought it was very discreditable 
to the Bible; and when the book was revised, he had no 
doubt it would be cut out. To such a man—for he is 
here this morning, very likely come to hear this reed 
shaken of the wind—I have to say this: Ah! thou wise 
man, full of worldly wisdom ; thy wisdom will stand thee 
here, but what wilt thou do in the swellings of Jordan ? 
Philosophy may do well for thee to lean upon whilst thou 
walkest through this world; but the river is deep, and 
thou wilt want something more than that. If thou hast 
not the arm of t! » Most High to hold thee up in the flood 
and cheer thee w: ') t:romises, thou wilt sink, man; with 
all thy philosophy, wi: wilt aint ; with all thy learning, 
thou shalt sink, and © washed into that awful ocean of 
eternal torment, where thou shalt be forever, Ah! Greeks, 
it may be foolishness. to you, but ye shall see the man 
your judge, and then shall ye rue the day that e’er ye 
said that God’s gospel was foolishness. 

If. Having spoken thus far upon the gospel rejected, I 
shall now brietly speak upon the gospel triumphant. 
“Unto us who are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is the 
power of God, and the wisdom of God.” Yonder man 
rejects the gospel, despises grace, and laughs at it as a de- 
lusion, Here is another man who laughed at it too; but 
God will fetch him down upon his knees, Christ shall 
not aie for nothing. The Holy Ghost shall not strive in 
vain. God hath said, “My word shall not return unto 
me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and 
it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.” “ He 
shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be abundantly 

satisfied.” If one sinner is not saved, another shall be. 
The Jew and the Greek shall never depopulate heaven. 
The choirs of glory shall not lose a single songster by all 
the a aa of Jews and Greeks ; for God hath said it ; 
some shall be called; some shall be samed ; some shall 
be rescued, 


editable 
» had nso 
or he is 
his reed 
10u wise 
and thee 
Jordan ? 
ilst thou 
leep, and 
hou hast 
the flood 
un ; with 
learning, 
| ocean of 
! Greeks, 
the man 
nt eer ye 


rejected, I 
umphant. 
s, it is the 
der man 
t as a de- 
too; but 
rist. shall 
, strive in 
turn unto 
lease, and 
it.’ “He 
undantly 
» shall be. 
e heaven. 
ster by all 
h said it; 
ome shali 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED, 


‘* Perish the virtue, as it ought, abhorred, 
And the fool with it, who insults his Cord. 
The atonement a Redeemer’s love has wrought 
Is not for you—the righteous need it not. 
Seest thou yon harlot wooing all she meets, 
The worn-out nuisance of the public streets, 
Herself from morn to night, from night to morn, 
Her own abhorrence, and as much your scorn : 
The gracious shower, unlimited and free, 
Shall fall on her, when Heaven denies it ther, 
Of all that wisdom dictates, this the drift, 
That man is dead in sin, and life a gift.” 


If the righteous and good are not saved, if they reject 
the gospel, there are others who are to be called, others 
who shall be rescued ; for Christ will not lose the merits 
of his agonies, or the purchase of his blood. “ Unto us 
who are called.” I received a note this week asking me 
to explain that word, called ; because in one passage it 
says “many are called, but few are chosen,” while in 
another it appears that all who are called must be chosen. 
Now, let me observe that there are two calls. As my old 
friend, John Bunyan, says, the hen has two calls, the 
common cluck, which she gives daily and hourly, and the 
special one, which she means for her little chickens. So 
there is a general call, a call made to every man; every 
man hears it. Many are called by it; all you are called 
this morning in that sense, but very few are chosen. The 
other is a special call, the children’s call. You know how 
the bell sounds over the workshop, to call the men to 
work—that is a general call. <A father goes to the door 
and calls out, “John, it is dinner-time’:-—that is the 
special call, Many are called with the general call, but 
they are not chosen; the special call is for the children 
only, and that is what is meant in tho text, “ Unto us 
who are called, both Jews and Greeks, the power of God 
and the wisdom of God.” That call is always a special 
one, While I stand here and call men, nobody comes; 
while I preach to sinners universally, no good is done ; it 


on w on — Wenge wpm 


LOR LN RT OC A AR A 


Se Mae pre agers ONES IR Rs ia kaart a etn RN 


Sere eae oan emer ane —— 


i ea e 


pe saa 


tem 


ee eee Serer ce Geet oe gtd 
Pes ae Nh ile Rl, 


grey. § 


ae: me 
a ee ee es 


NRE BARE RE SA Ey 


St a cate 


ir eRe a ie pains ia? Sct. 


46 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


is like the sheet lightning you sometimes see on the sum- 
mer’s evening, bes vutiful, “erand ; but who ever heard of 
anything being struck by it? But the special call is the 
forked flash from heaven ; it strikes somewhere ; it is the 
arrow sent in between the joints of the harness. The 
eall which saves is like that of Jesus, when he said, 
“Mary,” and she said unto him, “ tabboni.” Do you 
know anything about that special call, my beloved ? 
Did Jesus ever call you by name? Canst thou recollect 
the hour when he whispered thy name in thine ear, when 
he said, “Come to me?” If so, you will grant the truth 
of what Tam going to say next about it—that it is an 
effectual call. There is no resisting it. When God calls, 
with his special call, there is no standing out. Ah! I 
know I laughea at religion; I despised, | abhorred it; 
but that call! Oh, I would not come. But God said, 
“Thou shalt «ne. “ll that the Father giveth to me 
shall come.” “ Lord, I will not.’ “But thou shalt,” 
said God. And I have gone up to God’s house some- 
times almost with a resolution that I would not lis- 
ten, but listen I must. Oh, how the word caine into my 
soul! Was there a power of resistance? No; I was 
thrown down; each bone seemed to be broken;.I was 
saved by effectual grace. I appeal to your experience, 
my friends. When God took you in hand, could you 
withstand him? You stood against your minister times 
enough, Sickness did not bre: uk you down ; disease did 
not bring you to God’s feet ; eloquence did not convince 
you; but when God puts his hand to the work, ah! then 
what a change. Like Saul, with his horses going to Da- 
mascus, that voice from heaven said, “J am Jesus whom 
thou persecutest.” “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou 
me?” There was no going further then, That was an 
effectual call. Like that, again, which Jesus gave to 
Zaccheus, when he was up in the tree ; stepping under 
the tree, he said, “ Zacchcus, come down, to-day I must 
abide in thy house.” Zaccheus was taken inthe net; he 


the sum- 
heard of 
all is the 
it is the 
ss. The 
he said, 
Do you 
beloved ? 
recollect 
sar, When 
the truth 
4 it is an 
God calls, 
» Ah! I 
orred 1 
God said, 
th to me 
yu shalt,” 
ise some- 
1 not lis- 
e into my 
5 [ was 
1;.1 was 
<pericnce, 
ould you 
ster times 
isease did 
convince 
ah! then 
ng to Da- 
sus whom 
test thou 
t was an 
gave to 
ng under 
hy ’ I must 
»net; he 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED, 47 


heard his own name ; the call sank into his soul; he could 
not stop up in the tree : for an almighty impulse drew 
nim down. And I could tell you some singular instances 
of persons going to the house of God and having their 
characters descr ‘ibed, limned out to perfection, so that they 
have said, “ He is painting me, he is painting me.” Just 
as I might say to that young man here, who stole his 
master’s gloves yesterday, that Jesus éalls him to repen- 
cance. It may be that there is such a person here; and 
when the call comes to a peculiar character, it generally 
comes with a special power, God gives his ministers a 
brush, and shows them bow to use it in painting life-like 
portraits, and thus the sinner hears the special call. J 
cannot give the special call; God alone ean give it, and If 
leave it with him. Some must be called. Jew and Greek 
may laugh, but still there are some who are called, both 
Jews and Greeks. 

Then, to close up this second point, it is a great mercy 
that many a Jew has been made to drop his se Tt righteous- 
ness; many a legalist has been made to drop his legalism, 
and come to Christ ; and many a Greek has bowed his 
cenius at the throne of God’s gospel. We havea few such, 
As Cowper says: 


‘* We boast some rich ones whom the gospel sways, 
And one who wears a coronet, and prays ; 
Like gleanings of an olive tree they show, 
Here and there one upon the topmost bough.” 


III. Now we come to our third point, @ gospel ad- 
mired ; unto us who are called of God, it is the power 
of God, and the wisdom of God. Now, beloved, this 
must be a matter of pure experience between your souls 


and God. If you are 
will know it. 
has to say: 


ealled of God this morning, you 
I know there are times when a Christian 


‘Tis a point I long to know, 
Oft it causes anxious thought ; 
Do I love the Lord or no? 
Am I His, or am I not ?”’ 


 aaciaeener ammmmnmielas ie ain ET IS aa - a es ————— 

— eS ca ates agi nog eae et emeigs ee % 
ae re ot = x 5 
> - aa 5H sie ere “ ms tage a ee ee 


Ph AAPM LE SLE RAI ENR ia A ANE ED Na 
+ pitied” ete - 


Sn a 


48 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


But, if a man never in his life knew himself to be a 
Christian, he never wa: a Christian. If he never had a 
moment of confidence, when he could say, “ Now I know 
in whom I have believed,” I think I do not utter a harsh 
thing when I say, that that man could not have been born 
again; for I do not understand how a man can be born 
again and not know it; I do not understand how a man 
can be killed and then made alive again, and not know 
it; how a man can pass from death unto life, and not 
know it; how a man can be brought out of darkness into 
marvelous liberty without knowing it. Tam sure 1 know 
it when I shout out my old verse: 


‘* Now freed from sin, I walk at large, 
My Saviour’s blood’s my full discharge $ 
At His dear feet content I lay, 

A sinner saved, and homage pay.” 


There are moments when the eyes glisten with joy; 


and we can say, “we are persuaded, confident, certain.” 
I do not wish to distress any one who is under doubt. 
Often gloomy doubts will prevail; there are seasons when 
you fear you have not been called, when you doubt your 
interest in Christ. Ah! what a mercy it is that it is not 
your hold of Christ that saves you, but his hold of you! 
What a sweet fact that it is not how you grasp his hand, 
but his grasp of yours, that saves you. Yet I think you 
ought to know, some time or other, whether you are 
called of God. If so, you will follow me in the next part 
of my discourse, which is a matter of pure experience ; 
unto us who are saved, it is “Christ the power of God, 
and the wisdom of God.” 

The gospel is, to the true believer, a thing of power. 
It is Christ, the power of God. Power, sir! Aye, there 
is a power in God’s gospel. Power, sir! Aye, a mighty 
power, Once I, like Mazeppa, bound on the wild horse 
of my lust, bound hand and foot, incapable of resistance, 
was galloping on with hell’s wolves behind me, howling 


‘to be a 
er had a 
vy | know 
r a harsh 
yeen born 
1 be born 
ow a man 
not know 
, and not 
kness into 
re | know 


with joy ; 
, certain.” 
der doubt. 
sons when 
loubt your 
t it is not 
ld of you! 
» his hand, 
think you 
r you are 
next part 
Xperience ; 
by of God, 


of power. 
Aye, there 
a mighty 
ild horse 
esistance, 
, howling 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 49 


for my body and my soul, as their just and lawful prey. 
There came a mighty hand which stopped that wild horse, 
cut my bands, set me down, ani brought me into liberty. 
Is there power, sir? Aye, therc is power; and he who 
has felt it, must acknowledge it. There was a time when 
I lived in the strong old castle of my sins, and rested on 
my works. There came a trumpeter to the door, and 
bade me open it. I with anger chid him from the porch, 
and said he ne’er should enter. There came a goodly 
personage, with loving countenance; his hands were 
marked with scars, where nails were driven, and his feet 
had nail-prints too; he lifted up his cross, using it as a 
hammer; at the first blow the gate of my prejudice 
shook ; at the second it trembled more, at the third down 
it fell, and in he came; and he said, “Arise, and stand 
upon thy feet, for I have loved thee with an everlasting 
love.” A thing of power! Ah! It is a thing of power, 
I have felt it here, in this heart; I have the witness of 
the Spirit within, and know it is a thing of might, be- 
cause it has conquered me; it has bowed me down, 


‘* His free grace alone, from the first to the last, 
Hath won my affection, and held my soul fast,” 


The Gospel, to the Christian, is a thing of power. What 
is it that makes the young man devote himself, as a mis- 
sionary, to the cause of God, to leave father and mother, 
and go into distant lands? It is a thing of power that 
does it; it is the gospel. What is it that constrains yon- 
der minister, in the midst of the cholera, to climb up that 
creaking staircase, and stand by the bed of some dying 
creature who has that dire disease? It must be a thing 
of power which leads him to venture his life; it is love 
of the cross °f Christ which bids him do it. What is that 
which enables one man to stand up before a multitude of 
his fellows, wll unprepared it may be, but determined that: 
he will spe.k nothing but Christ, and him crucified ? 


50 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


What is it that enables him to ery, like the war horse of 

| Job, in battle, Aha! and move glorious in might? It is 
a thing of power that does it: it is Christ crucified. And [ee 
what emboldens that timid female to walk down that 
dark lane some wet evening, that she may go and sit be- « 
side the victim of acontagious fever? Whatstrengthens | 
her to go through that den of thieves, and pass by the 
profligate and profane? What influences her to enter in- 
to that charnel house of death, and there sit down and 
whisper words of comfort? Does gold make her do it ? 
They are too poor to give her gold. Does fame make her 
do it? She shall never be known or written among the 
mighty women of this earth, What makes her do it ? Is 
it love of merit? No; she knows she has no desert be- 
fore high heaven. What impels her to it? It is the 
power, the thing of power; it is the cross of Christ: she 
loves it, and she therefore says : 


Non Se ree RIES OE 


Sched GEV eke 


ee ie 


** Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were a present far too smail ; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 

Demands my soul, my life, my all.” 


But { behold another scene. A martyr is going to the 
stake ; the halberd men are around him; the crowds are 
mocking, but he is marching steadily on. See, they bind 
him, with a chain around his middle, to the stake; they 
heap fagots all about him ; the flame is lighted up ; listen 
to his words: “ Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is 
within me, bless his holy name.” The flames are kindling 
round his legs ; the fire is burning him even to the bone ; | 
see him lift up his hands and say, “I know that my Re- [ay A 
deemer liveth, and though the fire devour this body, yet | 
in my flesh shall I see the Lord.” Behold him clutch the | t] 
| take and kiss it, as if he loved it, and hear him say, “For § 
a very chain of iron that man girdeth me with, God shall [a a, 
bil | sive me a chain of gold, for all these fagots, and this 
aie ignominy and shame, he shall increase the weight of 


& 
Fa 
u 
ay 
i 
X 
& 
; 
i 


: 
i 
| 
i 


27: 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 51 


norse of iny eternal glory.” See, all the under parts of his body 
2 Itis are consumed; still he lives in the torture; at last he 
|. And bows himself, and the upper part of his body falls over ; 
wn that and as he falls you hear him say: “Into Thy hands I 
1 sit be- commend my spirit.” What wondrous magic was on 
ngthens him, sirs? What made that man strong? What helped 


him to bear that cruelty ?. What made him stand un- 
inoved in the flames? It was the thing of power: it 
was the cross of Jesus crucified. For “unto us who are 
saved it is the power of God.” 

But behold another scene far different. There is no 
crowd there; it is a silent room, There is a poor pallet, 
a lonely bed: a physician standing by. There isa young 
girl: her face is blanched by consumption ; long hath 
the worm eaten her cheek, and though, sometimes, the 
flush came, it was the death flush of the deceitful con- 
sumption. There she lieth, weak, pale, wan, worn, 
dying, yet behold a smile upon her face, as if she had 
seen an angel, She speaketh, and there is music in her 
voice, Joan of Are of old was not half so mighty as 
that girl, She is wrestling with dragons on her death- 
bed; but see her composure, and hear her dying sonnet : 


s by the 
ter in- 
ywn and 
ay do it ? 
nake her 
nong the 
lo it ? Is 
esert be- 
It is the 
ist: she 


ng to the 
fowds are 


‘* Jesus, lover of my soul, 
Let me tothy bosom fly, 


hey bind While the nearer waters roll, 
ke ; they While the tempest still is high. 


Hide me, O my Saviour, hide, 
Till this storm of life be past, 
Safe into the haven guide, 


; listen 
hil that is 


kindling §& O, receive my soul at last.” 

he bone; |& 

tmy Re- | And with a smile she shuts her eye on earth, and opens 
body, yet it in heaven, What enables her to die like that? It is 
Hutch the the thing of power; it is the cross; it is Jesus crucified. 


nay, “ For 
God shall 
and this 


veight of 


I have little time to discourse upon the other point, 
and it be far from me to weary you by a lengthened and 
prosy sermon; but we must glance at the other state- 


CoD Sa BER ac LR CAL OR Ris a fac S ROME 
2 ti eS eee “rl * 


te oF 


boils ier ak Ss thamees Ys oe a ne 


bmn gE Mia! 


ROT MR 


eee TSS Pai aR 


52 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


ment: Christ is, to the called ones, the wisdom of God as 
well as the power of God. To a believer the Gospel is 
the perfection of wisdom, and if it appear not so to the 
ungodly, it is because of the perversion of judgment con- 
sequent on their depravity. 

An idea has long possessed the public mind, that a 
religious man can scarcely be a wise man. It has been 
the custom to talk of infidels, atheists, deists, as men of 
deep thought and comprehensive intellect, and to tremble 
for the Christian controversialist, as if he must surely 
fall by the hand of his enemy. But this is purely a 
mistake ; for the Gospel is the sum of wisdom; an epi- 
tome of knowledge; a treasure-house of truth; and a 
revelation of mysterious secrets. In it we see how jus- 
tice and mercy may be married; here we behold inexor- 
able law entirely satisfied, and sovereign love bearing 
away the sinner in triumph. Our meditation upon it 
enlarges the mind, and as it opens to our soul in succes- 
sive flashes of glory, we stand astonished at the profound 
wisdom manifest in it. Ah, dear friends! if ye seek 
wisdom, ye shall see it displayed in all its greatness ; 
not in the balancing of the clouds, nor the firmness of 
earth’s foundations ; not in the measured march of the 
armies of the sky, nor in the perpetual motions of the 
waves of the sea; not in vegetation, with all its fairy 
forms of beauty, nor in the animal with its marvellous 
tissue of nerve, and vein, and sinew; nor even in man, 
that last and loftiest work of the Creator. But turn 
aside and see this great sight!—an incarnate God upon 
the cross; a substitute atoning for mortal guilt; a sacri- 
fice satisfying the vengeance of Heaven, and delivering 
the rebellious sinner. Here is essential wisdom; enthroned, 


crowned, glorified. Admire, ye men of earth, if ye be not @ 


blind; and ye who glory in your learning bend your 


heads in reverence, and own that all your skill could not | 


have devised a gospel at once so just to God, so safe to 
man. 


God as 
ospel is 
o to the 
ent con- 


| that a 
has been 
s men of 
tremble 
+ surely 
purely a 
- an epl- 
1; and a 
how jus- 
ld inexor- 
e bearing 
1 upon it 
in succes- 
| profound 
ye seek 
preatness ; 
rmness of 
reh of the 
ons of the 
1 its fairy 
arvellous 
nin man, 
But turn 
God upon 
t; a sacri- 
delivering 
enthroned, 


f ye be not & 

bend your 

1 could not 
go safe to 


CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 53 


Remember, my friends, that while the gospel is in itself 
wisdom, it also confers wisdom on its students; she 
teaches young men wisdom and discretion, and gives un- 
derstanding to the simple. A man who is a believing ad- 
mirer and a hearty lover of the truth as it is in Jesus, is 
in a right place to follow with advantage any other branch 
of science. I confess Ihave a shelf in my head for every- 
thing now. Whatever I read I know where to put it ; 
whatever I learn I know where to stow it away. Once 
when I read books, I put all my knowledge together in 
vlorious confusion ; but ever since I have known Christ, 
I have put Christ in the centre as my sun, and each 
science revolves round it like a planet, while minor 
sciences are satellites to these planets. Christ is to me 
the wisdom of God. I can learn everything now. The 
science of Christ crucified is the most excellent of sciences, 
she is to me the wisdom of God. O, young man, build 
thy studio on Calvary! there raise thine observatory, and 
scan by faith the lofty things of nature. Take thee a 
hermit’s cell in the garden of Gethsemane, and lave thy 
brow with the waters of Siloa. Let the Bible be thy 
standard classic—thy last appeal in matters of contention. 
Let its light be thine illumination, and thou shalt become 
more wise than Plato, more truly learned than the seven 
sages of antiquity. 

And now, my dear friends, solemnly and earnestly, as 
in the sight of God, I appeal to you. You are gathered 
here this morning, I know, from different motives; some 
of you have come from curiosity ; others of you are my 
regular hearers; some have come from one place, and 
some from another. What have you heard me say this 
morning? I have told you of two classes of persons who 
reject Christ; the religionist, who has a religion of ferm 
and nothing else; and the man of the world, who calls 
our gospel foolishness. Now, put your hand upon your 
heart, and ask yourself this morning, “Am I one of 
these?” If you are, then walk the earth in all your 


CE Natit 


Sere a 
EE OTS iy, Ve 


sea elles es ene ae 


CPSP MRT ir Sal MOEA GSS a lb tA, e Bt = So ory = 2 aa <% 


Oe AE ATI LOM 1 NODES aL NTA TY LE ERE SE 


so-stmmine niente eee nt ON Pt A RN, Ae Hi 


54 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


pride; then go as you came in: but know that for all this 
the Lord shall bring thee unto judgment; know thou that 
thy joys and delights shall vanish like a dream, “ and, 
like the baseless fabric of a vision,” be swept away forever. 
Know thou this, moreover, O man, that one day in the 
halls of Satan, down in hell, I perhaps may see thee among 
the myriad spirits who revolve forever in a perpetual cir- 
cle with their hands upon their hearts. If thine hand be 
transparent, and thy flesh transparent, I shall look through 
thy hand and flesh, and see thy heart within. And how 
shall I see it? Set ina case of fire—in a case of fire! 
And there thou shalt revolve forever, with a worm gnaw- 
ing within thy heart, which ne’er shall die—a case of fire 
around thy never-dying, ever-tortured heart. Good God! 
let not these men still reject and despise Christ; but let 
this be the time when they shall be called. 

To the rest of you who are called, I need say nothing. 
The longer you live, the more powerful will you find the 
gospel to be; the more deeply Christ-taught you are, the 
more you live under the constant influence of the Holy 
Spirit, the more you will know the gospel to be a thing 
of power, and the more also will you understand it to be 
a thing of wisdom. May every blessing rest upon you; 
andl may God come up with us in the evening! 


all this 
ou that 
1, «“ and, 
forever. 
y in the 
e among 
tual cir- 
hand be 
through 
And how 
e of fire ! 
‘mM gnaw- 
ise of fire 
ood God ! 
b; but let 


nothing. 
u find the 
bu are, the 

the Holy 
be a thing 
d it to be 
upon you; 


; 
a 


K. > 

al, ™ 

ead dy 49.04 LP ald 2» 
ie ¥s Fa Ke 

"a , a, vs bh 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE -IMITATORS OF HIM. 


“Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and 
pevcewved that they were vadearned and ignorant men, they mar 
velled 5 and they took knowledge of them that they had been with 
Jesus.”—Acts iv : 13. 


EHOLD! what a change divine grace will 
work in aman, and in how short a time, That 
ye saine Peter who followed his Master afar off; 

: rat and with oaths and curses denied that he knew His 
i name, is now to be found, side by side with the 
\e loving John, boldly declaring that there is salvation 
45 in none other name save that of Jesus Christ, and 
preaching the resurrection of the dead, through the 
sacrifice of his dying Lord. The Scribes and 
Pharisees soon discover the reason of his boldness, 
Rightly did they guess that it rested not in his 
learning, or his talents, for neither Peter nor John 

had been edue: ated ; théy had been trained as fisner- 

t men; their education was a knowledge of the sea 
" —of the fishermen’s craft: none other had they : 
their boldness could not therefore spring from the self- 
sutticiency of knowledge, but from the Spirit of the liv- 
ing God. Nor did they acquire their courage from their 
station; for rank will confer a sort of dignity upon @ 
man, and make him speak with a feigned authority, 


eT TT 


Ol em 


Tae 


Se a ees 


SRLS HO RT SR DE 


56 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


even when he has no talent or genius; but these men 
were, as it says in the original text, idiotai, private men, 
who stood in no official capacity ; men without rank or 
station. When they saw the boldness of Peter and 
John, and perceived that they were unlearned and priv- 
ate individuals, they marvelled, and they came to a right 
conclusion as to the source of their power—they had 
been dwelling with Jesus. Their conversation with the 
Prince of light and glory, backed up, as they might also 
have known, by the influence of the Holy Spirit, with- 
out which even that eminently holy example wou’ ' ‘iave 
been in vain, had made them bold for their M.uster’s 
cause. Oh! my brethren, it were well if this condemna- 
tion, so forced from the lips of enemies, could also be 
compelled by our own example. If we could live like 
Peter and John; if our lives were “living epistles of 
God, known and read of all men ;” if, whenever we were 
seen, men would take knowledge of us, that we had 
been with Jesus, it would be a happy thing for this 
world, and a blessed thing for us. It is concerning that 
I am to speak to you this morning; and as God gives 
me grace, I will endeavour to stir up your minds by 
way of remembrance, and urge you so to imitate Jesus 
Christ, our heavenly pattern, that men may perceive that 
you are disciples of the Holy Son of God. 

First, then, this morning, I will tell you’ what a Chris- 
tian should be ; secondly, I will tell you when he should 
be so; thirdly, why he should be so; and then, fourthly, 
how he can be so. 

I, As God may help us then, first of all, we will speak 
of what a believer should be. A Christian should be a 
striking likeness of Jesus Christ. You have read lives of 
Christ, beautifully and eloquently written, and you have 
admired the talent of the persons who could write so 
well; but the best life of Christ is his living biography, 
written out in the words and actions of his people. If we, 
my brethren, were what we profess to be; if the Spirit of 


ort ie 


. men 
, men, 
nk or 
r and 
| priv- 
Y toh 
y had 
ith the 
ht also 
, with- 
‘ave 
.aster’s 
demna- 
also be 
ve like 
stles of 
ve were 
we had 
for this 
ing that 
od gives 
inds by 
te Jesus 
ive that 


e Chris- 
» should 
rourthly, 


ill speak 
ld be a 
lives of 
ou have 
yrite so 
wraphy, 
. It we, 
Spirit of 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—-IMITATORS OF HIM. 


57 


the Lord were in the heart of all his children, as we could 
desire ; and if, instead of having abundance of formal pro- 
fessors, we were all possessors of that vital grace, I will 
tell you not only what we ought to be, but what we 
should be; we should be pictures of Christ, yea, such stri- 
king likenesses of him that the world would not have to 
hold us up by the hour together, and say, “ Well, it seems 
somewhat of a likeness;” but they would, when they 
once beheld us, exclaim, “ He has been with Jesus; he 
has been taught of him ; he is like him; he has caught 
the very idea of the holy Man of Nazareth, and he ex- 
pands it out into his very iife and every day actions.” 

In enlarging upon this point, it will be necessary to 
premise, that when we here affirm that men should be 
such and such a thing, we refer to the people of God. We 
do not wish to speak to them in any legal way. We are 
not under the law, but under grace. Christian men hold 
themselves bound to keep all God’s precepts; but the 
reason why they do so is not because the daw is binding 
upon them, but because the gospel constrains them ; they 
believe, that having been redeemed by blood divine ; 
having been purchased by Jesus Christ, they are more 
bound to keep his commands, tian they would have been 
if they were under the law; they hold themselves to be 
ten thousand fold more debtors to God than they could 
have been under the Mosaic dispensation. Not of force ; 
not of compulsion; not through fear of the whip; not 
through legal bondage; but through pure, disinterested 
love and gratitude to God, they lay themselves out for 
his service, seeking to be Israelites indeed, in whom there 
is no guile. This much IT have declared lest any man 
should think that Iam preaching works as the way to 
salvation ; I will yield to none in this, that I will ever 
maintain that by grace we are saved, and not by our- 
selves; but equally must I testify, that where the grace 
of God is, it will produce fitting deeds, To these i) amt 
ever bound to exhort you, while ye are ever expected to 
D 


Ssh: eel A REE, OF te EET 


Ts oh as BOA Mn: 


58 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


have good works for necessary purposes. Again, I do not, 
when I say that a believer should be a striking likeness 
of Jesus, suppose that any one Christian will perfectly 
exhibit all the features of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ ; yet, my brethren, the fact that perfection is be- 
yond our reach, should not diminish the ardour of our de- 
sire after it. The artist, when he paints, knows right 
well that he shall not be able to excel Apelles; but that 
does not discourage him; he uses his brush with all the 
greater pains, that he may, at least in some humble mea- 
sure, resemble the great master. So the sculptor, though 
persuaded that he will not rival Praxiteles, will hew out 
the marble still, and seek to be as near the model as pos- 
sible. Thus so the Christian man; though he feels he 
never can mount to the heights of complete excellence, 
and perceives that he never can on earth become the 
exact image of Christ, still holds it up before him, and 
measures his own deficiencies by the distance between 
himself and Jesus. This will he do; forgetting all he has 
attained, he will press forward, crying, Hacelsior ! going 
upwards still, desiring to be conformed more and more to 
the image of Christ Jesus. 

First, then, a Christian should be like Christ in his 
boldness. This is a virtue now-a-days called impudence, 
but the grace is equally valuable by whatever name it 
may be called. I suppose if the Scribes had given a de- 
finition of Peter and John, they would have called them 
impudent fellows. 

esus Christ and his disciples were noted for their cou- 
rage. ‘“ When they saw the boldness of Peter and John, 
they took knowledge of them, that they had been with 
Jesus.” Jesus Christ never fawned upon the rich; he 
stooped not to the great and noble; he stood erect, a man 
before men—the prophet of the people—speaking out 
boldly and freely what he thought. Have you never ad- 
mired that mighty deed of his, when going to the city 
where he had lived and been brought up? Knowing that 


“a 
mK. 
is 
a 
a 
ag 
f) 
a! 
Br) 
a 
i 


do not, 
ikeness 
orfectly 

yr Jesus 
1 is be- 
our de- 
vs right 
put that 
1 all the 
ble mea- 
-, though 
hew out 
21 as pos- 
feels he 
xcellence, 
come the 
him, and 
, between 
all he has 
yr! going 
d more to 


ist in his 
npudence, 
r name it 
hven a de- 
lled them 


their cou- 
and John, 
been with 
| rich ; he 
et, a man 
king out 
never ad- 
the city 
wing that 


"4 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM 59 
a prophet had no honour in hi 
was put i i 8 own country, t! 
Mie si ania heeae (he had but then on chee Mi 
rma oy ee tremor he unrolled the penn 
bere eign ee ‘ id he take for his text? Most men 
. ante . a vo have chosen 
at what doctri oa A ste, In order to earn 
Ni abuts did J esus preach that morning ? pee 
sf elestion. ‘He 3 a ear and hated—the “doctrin 
thus Many ie ae the Scriptures and began to sa 
when the heaven ig ede a Jeree) 1H SHe days of Elias 
Sereda ea as shut up three years and six months, 
none of than Ww ” Bia throughout all the land; but u i: 
Saince ani as Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a cit : . 
lepers were tty Taviel that was a widow. And oe 
and none of them “s “ ee OF EEG IBS prophet ; 
Syrian.” Then he open cleansed, saving Naaman the 
ha pleased, and reset aoe to tell, how God saveth whom 
ed dake : cues whom he chooses. Ah! how tl 
saat Whe eeth upon him, dragged him out my 
you not ee eel from the brow of the hill, Do 
ynallags he ies is rare ea hg He saw their ‘te th 
PT le i hee nN their hearts were hot with sant 
TAN hac cened ee : foamed with revenge and ae ; 
he feared them nee faitht i shut the lions’ mouths ; 
knew to be the truth of Go y he proclaimed what he 
them all. So, in hi . od, and still read on, despit 
Phartees © hs A os sae If he saw a Scribe ie . 
of the price, but poke gation, he did not keep back part 
you, Scribes and fy \nia-d his finger, he said, “ Woe i t 
yer came, saying _ Maste hy pocrites ;” and when a tat : 
demnest us Naot ] aster, in speaking thus, thou “aiid 
you, lawyers for bi turned round and said, “ Woe ear 
ye yourselves rl ind heavy burdens upon men while 
af vour-tizmens pale them with so much as a 
knew the fear of m at ealt out honest truth; he nev : 
out Cadlesalh an; he trembled at none hh " 
chosen, whom he had anointed above his felt 
s fel- 


ee ee ee ee <2 ou 


wok ace aia ide ih eat ctl 


; 


60 


SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


lows, careless of man’s esteem. My friends, be like Christ 
in this. Have none of the time-serving religion of the 
present day, which is merely exhibited in evangelical 
drawing-rooms,—a religion which only flourishes in a hot- 
bed atmosphere, a religion which is only to be perceived 
in good company. No; if ye are the servants of God, be 
like Jesus Christ, bold for your master; never blush to 
own your religion; your profession will never disgrace 
you—take care you never disgrace that. Your love to 
Christ will never dishonour you; it may bring some 
temporary slight from your friends, or slanders from your 
enemies ; but live on, and you shall live down their calum- 
nies; live on, and ye shall stand amongst the glorified, 
honoured even by those who hissed you, when he shall 
come to be glorified by his angels, and admired by them 
that love him. Be like Jesus, very valiant for your God, 
so that when they shall see your boldness, they may say, 
“ He has been with Jesus.” 

But no one feature will give a portrait of a man; so 
the one virtue of boldness will never make you like 
Christ. There have been some who have been noble men, 
but have carried their courage to excess; they have thus 
been caricatures of Christ, and not portraits of him. We 
must amalgamate with our boldness the loveliness of Jesus’ 
disposition. Let courage be the brass, let love be the gold. 

‘Let us mix the two together; so shall we produce a rich 
Corinthian metal, fit to be manufactured into the beautiful 
gate of the temple. Jet your love and courage be mingled 
together, The man who is bold may indeed accomplish 
wonders. John Knox did much, but he might perhaps 
have done more if he had had a little love. Luther was 
a conqueror—-peace to his ashes, and honor to his name! 
—still, we who look upon him at a distance, think that if 
he had sometimes mixed a little mildness with it—if, 
while he had the fortiter in re, he had been also suaviter 
am modo, and spoken somewhat more gently, he might 
have done even more good than he did, So brethren, 


men, 
thus 
We 
Fesus 
gold, 
“rich 
Lael 
le 
plish 
rhaps 
r was 
ame ! 
hat if 
t—if, 
aviter 
\ ight 
thren, 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE 


IMITATORS OF HIM. 61 


while we too are bold, let us ever imicate the loving 
Jesus. The child comes to him; he takes it on his knee, 
saying, “Suffer little children to come unto me, and for- 
bid them not.” A widow has just lost her only son: he 
weeps at the bier, and with a word, restores life to the 
dead man. He sees a paralytic leper, or a man long con- 
fined to his hed: he speaks, they rise and are healed. He 
lived for others, not for himself. His constant labors 
were without any motive, except the good of those who 
lived in the world. And to crown all, ye know the 
mighty sacrifice he made, when he condescended to lay 
down his life for man—when on the tree, quivering with 
agony, and hanging in the utmost extremity of suffering, 
he submitted to die for our sakes, that we might be saved. 
3ehold in Christ love consolidated! He was one mighty 
pillar of benevolence. As God is love so Christ is love. 
Oh, ye Christians, be ye loving also. Let your love and 
your beneficence beam out on all men. Say not, “ Be ye 
warmed, and be ye fille !,” but “vive a portion to seven, 
and also to eight.” If ye cannot imitate Howard, and 
unlock the prison doors—if ye cannot visit the sad house 
of misery, yet cach in your proper sphere, speak kind 
words, do kind actions ; live out Christ again in the kind- 
ness of your life. If there is one virtue which most com- 
mends Christians, it is that of kindness; it is to love the 
people of God, to love the church, to love the world, to 
love all. But how many have we in our churches of 
Crab-tree Christians, who have mixed such a vast amount 
of vinegar, and such a tremendous quantity of gall in 
their constitutions, that they can scarcely speak one 
word to you: they imagine it impossible to defend good 
religion except by passionate ebullitions; they cannot 
speak for their dishonored Master without being angry 
with their opponent; and if anything is awry, whether it 
be in the house, the church, or anywhere else, they con- 
ceive it to be their duty to set their faces like flint, and 
to defy everybody. They are like isolated icebergs, no 


62 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


one cares to go near them. They float about on the sea 
of forgetfulness, until at last they are melted and gone; 
and though good souls, we shall be happy enough to meet E 
them in heaven, we are precious glad to get rid of them “4 
from the earth. They were always so unamiable in dis- 
position, that we would rather live an eternity with them 
in heaven than five minutes on earth. Be ye not thus, 4 
my brethren. Imitate Christ in your loving spirits; 4 
speak kindly, act kindly, and do kindly, that nen mnay ; 
say of you, “ He has been with Jesus.” 
Another great feature in the life of Christ was his deep 

and sincere humility; in which let us imitate him. Whi's 
we will not cringe or bow (far from it; we are the free- 
men whom the truth makes free; we walk through this 
world equal to all, inferior to none) yet we would en- 
deavour to be like Christ, continually humble. Oh, thou ! 
ade Christian (for though it be a paradox, there must 

e some, I think; I would not be so uncharitable as to 
pay that there are not some such persons), if thou art a 
Christian, I bid thee look at thy Master, talking to the 
children, bending from the majesty of his divinity to speak 
to mankind on earth, tabernacling with the peasants of 
Galilee, and then—aye, depth of condescension unparal- 
leled—washing his disciples’ feet, and wiping them with 
a towel after supper. This is your Master, whom ye pro- 
fess to worship; this is your Lord, whom ye adore. And 
ye, some of you who count yourselves Christians, cannot 

speak to a person who is not dressed in the same kind of 
clothing as yourselves, who have not exactly as much 
money per year as you have. In England, it is true that 

a sovereign will not speak to a shilling, and a shilling 

will not notice a sixpence, and a sixpence will sneer at a 
penny. But it should not be so with Christians. We 
ought to forget caste, degree, and rank, when we come 

into Christ’s church. Recollect, Christian, who your Mas- 

ter was—a man of the poor. He lived with them; he ate 64 
with them, And will ye walk with lofty heads and stiff ¥ 


7 RLS SER — - - 
DS Ste Neat a oes os Lees ld 
a vied i : ©”. 
Sigua adie ere seat 2g a : : 


I Bian as 


BES POEM SESE TE ATEN he tae EE 7 
GE AS OE TS ON ITIL ln AN ee 
— _— haoasinnibiainde at eee 


ie a Se 


ee one 


° a 
‘ 2, 
x 
* 
% 
} 
; 
( 
W 


ae: GR og eae Se ek em ee ee 


them 
1 dis- 
them 

thus, 
yirits 5 
may 


3 deep 
Whi's 
e free- 
yh this 
iid en- 
1, thou 
» must 
e as to 
u art a 
to the 
.) speak 
hnts of 
nparal- 
nm with 
e pro- 
ind 
cannot 
zind of 
sg much 
ye that 
shilling 
er at a 
gs, We 
re come 
ir Mas- 
he ate 
nd stiff 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 63 


necks, looking with insufferable contempt upon your 
meaner fellow-worms? What are ye? The meanest of 
all, because your trickeries and adornments make you 
proud. Pitiful, despicable souls ye are! How small ye 
look in God’s sight! Christ was humble ; he stooped to do 
anything which. might serve others. He had no pride ; 
he was an humble man, a friend of publicans and sinners, 
living and walking with them. So, Christian, be thou 
like thy Master—one who can stoop; yea, be thou one 
he thinks it no stooping, but rather esteems others bet- 

r than himself, counts it his honour to sit with the 
ca of Christ’s people, and says, “ 1f my name may be 
but written in the obscurest part of the book of life, it is 
enough for me,so unworthy am I of his notice!” Be like 
Christ in his humility. 

So might I continue, dear brethren, speaking of the 
various characteristics of Christ Jesus; but as you can 
think of them as well as I can, I shall not do go. It is 
easy for you to sit down and paint Jesus Christ, for you 
have him drawn out here in his word. I find that time 
would fail me if I were to give you an entire likeness of 
Jesus; but let me say, imitate him in his holiness. Was 
he zealous for his master? So be you. Ever go about 
doing good. Let not time be wasted. It is too precious, 
Was he self-denying, never looking to his own interest ? 
So be you. Was he devout? So be you fervent in your 
prayers. Had he deference to his Father's will? So sub- 
mit yourselves to him, Was he patient? So learn to en- 
dure. And best of all, as the highest portraiture of Jesus, 
try to forgive your enemies as he did; and let those sub- 
lime words of your Master, “Father, forgive them, for 
they know not what they do,” always ring in your ears, 
When you are prompted to revenge; when hot anger 
starts, bridle the steed at onee, and let it not dash forward 
with you headlong. Remember, anger is temporary in- 
sanity. Forgive as you hope to ‘be forgiven. Heap coals 
of fire on the head of your foe by your kindness to him, 


( 


. af 
1 
i 
a 
a} 
Mi 
a 
if 
| 
= 
.-% 


ee eee 


hc PES EY ten INE ge RTOS ONS NE eng 


pte we 


7 moe 
ee, aed ae ae ee 


se 


ace 


ie a 


i car peace dts 


Mee 
~~ 


64 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


Good for evil, recollect, is god-like. Be god-like, then; 
and in all ways, and by all means, so live that your ene- 
mies may say, “ He has been with Jesus,” 

II. Now, when should Christians be thus? For there 
is an idea in the world that persons ought to be very 
religious on a Sunday, but it does not matter what they 
are on a Monday. How many pious preachers are there 
on a Sabbath-day, who are very impious preachers during 
the rest of the week! How many are there who come 
up to the house of God with a solemn countenance, who 
join the song and profess to pray, yet have neither part 
nor lot in the matter, but are “in the gall of bitterness 
and in the bonds of iniquity!” This is true of some of 
you who are present here. When should a Christian, 
then, be like Jesus Christ ? Is there a time when he may 
strip off his regimentals—when the warrior may unbuckle 
his armour, and become like other men ? Oh! no; at all 
times and in every place let the Christian be what he 
professes to be. I remember talking some time ago with 
a person who said, “I do not like visitors who come to 
my house and introduce religion; I think we ought to 
have religion on the Sabbath-day, when we go to the 
house of God, but not in the drawing-room.” I suggested 
to the individual that there would be a great deal of 
work for the upholsterers, if there should be no religion 
except in the house of God. “How is that?” was the 

uestion. “Why,” I replied, “we should need to have 
beds fitted up in all our places of worship, for surely we 
need religion to die with, and consequently, every one 
would want to die there.” Aye, we all need the consola- 
tions of God at last; but how can we expect to enjoy 
them unless we obey tie precepts of religion during life ? 
My brethren, let me say, be ye like Christ at all times. 
Imitate him in public. Most of us live in some sort of 

ublicity ; many of us are called to work before our fel- 
Rssieat every day. We are watched; our words are 
caught; our lives are examined, taken to picces. The 


1eN } 
ene- 


here 
very 
they 
here 
ring 
Pome 
who 
part 
rness 
ne of 
stian, 
) may 
uckle 
at all 
iat he 
with 
ne to 
ht to 
o the 
ested 
vl of 
ligion 
s the 
have 
y we 
y one 
nsola- 
enjoy 
t life ? 
imes. 
ort. of 
ir fel- 
is are 
The 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 65 
eagle-eyed, argus-eyed world observes everything we do, 
and sharp cr itics are upon us. Let us live the life of 
Christ in public. Let us take care that we exhibit our 
Master, and not ourselves—so that we can say, “It is no 
longer I that live, but Christ that liveth in me.” Take 
heed that you carry this into the chur:h too, you who are 
church-members. Be like Christ in the church. How 
many there are of you like Diotrephes, seeking pre-emi- 
nence? How many are trying to have some dignity and 
power over their fellow Christians, instead of remember- 
ing that it is the fundamental rule of all our churches, 
that there all men are equal—alike brethren, alike to be 
received as such. Carry out the spirit of Christ, then, in 
your churches, wherever ye are; let you fellow members 
say of you, “ He has been with Jesus,” 

But, most of all, take care to have religion in your 
houses, A religious house is the best proof of true piety. 
It is not my cha apel, it is my house—it is not my minister 
it is my home-companion who can best judge me; it is 
the servant, the child, the wife, the friend, that can dis- 
cern the most of my real character. A good man will 
improve his household. Rowland Hill onee said, he would 
not believe a man to be a true Christian if his wife, 
his children, the servants, and even the dog and eat, 
were not the better for it. That is being religious. If 
the household is not the better for your Christianity—if 
men cannot say, “This is a better house than others,” 
then be not deceived—ye have nothing of the grace of 
God. Let not your servant, on leaving your employ, say, 
“Well, this is a queer sort of a religious family; there 
was no prayer in the morning, I began the day with my 
drudgery ; there was no prayer at night, I was kept at 
home all the Sabbath- day. Once a for tnicht, perhaps, I 
was allowed to go ot in the afternoon, when there was 
nowhere to go where I could hear a gospel sermon. My 
master and mistress went to a place where of course they 
heard the blessed gospel of God—that was all for them, 


66 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


as for me, I might have the dregs and leavings of some 
overworked curate in the afternoon.” Surely Christian 
men will not act in that way. No! Carry out your god- 
liness in your family. Let everyone say you have prac- 
tical religion. Let it be known and read in the house, as 
well as in the world. Take care of your character there ; 
for what we are there, we really are. Our life abroad is 
often but a borrowed part, the actor’s part of a great, 
scene, but at home the wizard is removed, and men are 
what they seem. Take care of your home Caties. 

Yet again, my brethern, before I leave this point, imi- 
tate Jesus in secret. When no eye seeth you except the 
eye of God, when darkness covers you, when you are 
shut up from the observation of mortals, even then be ye 
like Jesus Christ. Remember His ardent piety, his sec- 
ret devotion—how after laboriously preaching the whole 
day, he stole away in the midnight shades to cry for 
help from His God. Recollect how His entire life was 
constantly sustained by fresh inspirations of the Holy 
Spirit, derived by prayer. Take care of your secret life: 
let it be such that you will not be ashamed to read at 
the last great day. Your inner life is written in the 
book of God, and it shall one day be open before you. 
If the entire life of some of you were known, it would 
be no life at all: it would be a death. Yea, even of 
some true Christians, we would say it isscarce a life. It 
is a dragging on of an existence—one hasty prayer a 
day—one breathing—just enough to save their souls 
alive, but no more. O, my brethren, strive to be more 
like Jesus Christ. These are times when we want more 
secret prayer. I have had much fear all this week. I 
know not whether it is true; but when I feel such a 
thing I like to tell it to those of you who belong to my 
own church and congregation. I have trembled les 
being away from our own place, you have ceased to.) 
as earnestly as you once did. I remember your eari 
groans and petitions—how you would assemble together 


some 
stian 
god- 
prac- 
e, as 
nere ; 
ad is 
great, 
n are 


, imi- 
yt the 
u are 
be ye 
is sec- 
whole 
ry for 
fe was 
Holy 
t life: 
ead at 
n the 
e you. 
fe 
ren of 
e. It 
yer & 
souls 
more 
more 
bk, I 
buch & 
omy 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 67 
in the house-of prayer in multitudes, and cry out to God 
to help His servant. We cannot meet in such style at 
present; but do you still pray in private? Have you 
forgotten me? Have you ceased to ery out to God? 
Oh! my friends, with all the entreaties that a man can 
use, let me appeal to you. Recollect who I am, and what 
I am—a child having little education, little learning, 
ability or talent, and here am I called upon, week after 
week, to preach to this crowd of people. Will ye not, 
my beloved, still plead for me? Has not God been 
pleased to hear your prayers ten thousand times? And 
will ye now cease, when a mighty revival is taking place 
in many churches? Will ye now stop your petitions ? 
Oh! no: go to your houses, fall upon your knees, cry 
aloud to God to enable you still to hold up your hands 
like Moses on the hill, that Joshua below may fight and 
overcome the Amalekites. Now is the time for victory : 
shall we lose it? This is the high tide that will float us 
over the bar; now let us put out the oars, let us pull, by 
earnest prayer, crying for God the Spirit to fill the sails! 
Ye, who love God, of every place, and every denomina- 
tion; wrestle for your ministers; pray for them; for why 
should not God even now put out His Spirit? What is 
the reason why we are to be denied Pentecostal seasons ? 
Why not this hour, as one mighty band, fall down before 
Him and entreat Him, for His Son’s sake, to revive His 
drooping church? Then would all men discern that we 
are verily the disciples of Christ. 

III, But now, thirdly, why should Christians imitate 
Christ? The answer comes very naturally and easily, 
Christians should be like Christ, first, for their own sakes. 
For their honesty’s sake, and for their credit’s sake, let 
them not be found liars before God and men. For their 
own healthful state, if they wished to be kept from sin 
and preserved from going astray, let them imitate Jesus, 
For their own happiness’ sake, if they would drink wine 
on the lees well refined; if they would enjoy holy and 


ited ad 


valon. 


nhac east Sak opp lama toe 


nner tiny Snare ay . 


SO SGOT IR OO LL CLO Ps 


Thine es ath 


teeter ct rat Font 


Peer > wen 


+ rae — rm 


. 2 “ ope henner: 
~~ aE A AE EEA AO EL ELE AR A ALA LE LL OE = a 


ee eae 


re 7 
* s 
bd ~~ 
a ALL SE TEE, Ta: PSR SEAS © aT SS me 


68 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


happy communion with Jesus; if they would be lifted up 
above the cares and troubles of this world, let them imi- 
tate Jesus Christ. Oh! my brethren, there is nothing 
that can so advantage you, nothing can so prosper you, so 
assist you, so make you walk towards heaven rapidly, so 
keep your head upward towards the sky, and your eyes 
radiant with glory, like the imitation of Jesus Christ. It 
is when, by the power of the Holy Spirit, you are en- 
abled to walk with Jesus, in his very footsteps, and tread 
in his ways, you are most happy and you are most known 
to be the sons of God. For your own sake, my brethren, 
I say, be like Christ. 

Next, for religion’s sake, strive to imitate Jesus. Ah! 
poor religion, thou hast been sorely shot at by cruel foes, 
but thou hast not been wounded one-half so much by 
them as by thy friends. None have hurt thee, O, Chris- 
tianity, so much as those who profess to be thy followers. 
Who have made these wounds in this fair hand of godli- 
ness? I say, the professor has done this, who has not 
lived up to his profession; the man who with pretences 
enters the fold, being naught but a wolf in sheep's clothing. 
Such men, sirs, injure the gospel more than others: more 
than the laughing infidel, more than the sneering critic, 
doth the man hurt our cause who professes to love it, but 
in his actions doth belie his love. Christian, lovest thou 
that cause? Is the name of she dear Redeemer precious 
to thee? Wouldst thou see the kingdoms of the world 
become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ? Dost 
thou wish to see the proud man humbled and the mighty 
abased? Dost thou long for the souls of perishing sin- 
ners, and art thou desirous to win them, and save “their 
souls from the everlasting burning? W ouldst thou pre- 
vent their fall into the regions of the damned? Is it thy 
desire that Christ should see the travail of his soul, and 
be abundantly satisfied? Doth thy heart yearn over thy 
fellow-immortals? Dost thou long to see them forgiven ! 
Then be consistent with thy religion Walk be fore God 


ees 


beg SARE, 


vers. 
od li- 
s not 
nees 
ing. 
nore 
“i tic, 
but 
hou 
i0Us 
orld 
ost 
rhty 
sin- 
heir 
pre- 
thy 
and 
thy 
yen ! 


God 


hep eA ARR Se. 


CHRISTS PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 69 


in the land of the living. Behave as an elect man should 
do. Recollect what manner of people we ought to be in 
all holy conversation and godliness. This is the best way 
to convert the world; yea, such conduct would Go more 
than even the efforts of missionary societies, excellent as 
they are. Let but men see that our conduct is superior 
to others, then they will believe there is something in 
our religion; but, if they see us quite the contrary to 
what we avow, what will they say? “These religious 
people are no better than others! Why should we go 
amongst them?” And they say quite rightly. It is but 
common-sense judgment. Ah! my fr iends, if ye love re- 
ligion for her own sake, be consistent, and walk in the 
love of God. Follow Christ Jesus, 

Then, to put it in the strongest form I can, let me say, 
for Christ's sake, endeavour to be like him. Oh! could 
[fetch the dying Jesus hear, and let him speak to you! 
My own tongue is tied this morning, but | would make 
his blood, his sears, and his wounds speak. Poor dumb 
mouths, I bid each of them plead in his behalf. How 
would Jesus, standing here, show you his hands this 
morning! “ My friends,” he would say, “behold me! 
these hands were pierced for you; and look you here at 
this my side, It was opened as the fountain of your sal- 

vation, See my feet! there entered the eruel nails, Each 
of these bones were dislocated for your sake. 
gushed with torrents of tears. ‘This head was crowned 
with thorns. These cheeks were sinitten; this hair was 
plucked ; my body became the centre and focus of agony. 
| hung quivering in the burning sun; and all for you, my 
people. And will ye not love me now. I bid you be like 
me. Is there any fault in me? Oh! no. Ye believe 
that I am fairer than ten thousand fairs, and lovelier than 
ten thousand loves, Have I injured you? Have I not 
rather done all for your salvation? And do I not sit at: 
my Father’s throne, and e’en now intercede on your be- 
half? If ye love me,’—Christian, hear that word; let the 


These eyes 


Sere 


PARI ry 
LRAT ERE A On Ae pn = 


> hh EN ges eT. 
et 


70 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


sweet syllables ring forever in your ears, like the prolonged 
sounding of silver-toned bells ;—“ if ye love me if ye love 
me, keep my commandments.” O Christian, let that “it” 
be put to thee this morning. “If ye love me.” Glorious 
Redeemer ! is it an “if” at all? Thou precious, bleeding 
Lamb, can there be an “if?” What, when I see thy 
blood gushing from thee; is itan “if?” Yes, Y weep to 
say it is an “if.’ Oft my thoughts make it “if,” and oft 
my words make it “if.” But yet methinks my soul feels 
it is not “if,” either. 


‘* Not to mine eyes is light so dear, 
Nor friendship half so sweet.” 


“ Yes, I love thee, 1 know that I love thee. Lev, thou 
knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee,” can 
the Christian say. “ Well then,” says Jesus, lonking 
down with a glance of affectionate approbation, “ since 
thou lovest me, keep my commandments.” O beloved, 
what mightier reason can I give than this? It is the 
argument of love and affection. Be like Christ, since 
vratitude demands obedience; so shall the world know 
that ye have been with Jesus. 

IV. Ah! then ye wept; and I perceive ye felt the 
force of pity, and some of you are inquiring, “ How can 
I imitate him?” It is my business, then, before you de- 
part, to tell you how you can become transformed into 
the image of Christ. 

In the first place, then, my beloved friends, in answer 
to your inquiry, let me say, you must know Christ as 
your Redeemer before you can follow him as your Exem- 
plar. Much is said about the example of Jesus, and we 
scarcely find a man now who does not believe that our 
Lord was an excellent and holy man, much to be admired. 
But excellent as was his example, it would be impossible 
to imitate it, had he not also been our sacrifice. Do ye 
this morning know that his blood was shed for you ? 
Can ye join with me in this verse ?— 


thou 
can 
Ks ing 
aince 
ywed, 
s the 
since 
now 


the 

y can 
de- 
into 


iswer 
st as 
xem- 
d we 
{ our 
ired, 
ssible 

oye 
you ? 


8 RESP SN SY 


CHRIST'S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 71 


**Q, the sweet wonders of that cross, 
Where God the Saviour lov’d and died ; 
Her noblest life my spirit draws 
From his dear wounds and bleeding side.” 


If so, you are in a fair way to imitate Christ. But do 
not seek to copy him antil you are bathed in the foun- 
tain filled with blood drawn from his veins. It is not 
possible for you to do so; your passions will be too 
strong and corrupt, and you will be building without a 
foundation, a structure, which will be about as stable 
asa dream. You cannot mould your life to his pattern 
until you have had his spirit, till you have been clothed 
in His righteousness, ‘“ Well,” say some, “we have pro- 
ceeded so far, what next shall we do? We know we 
have an interest in Him, but we are still sensible of 
manifold deficiencies.” Next, then, let me entreat you 
to study Christ’s character. This poor Bible is become 
an almost obsolete book, even with some Christians. 
There are so many magazines, periodicals, and such like 
ephemeral productions that we are in danger of neglect- 
ing*to search the Scriptures. Christian, wouldst thou 
know thy Master? Look at Him. There is a wondrous 
power about the character of Christ, for the more you 
regard it the more you will be conformed to it. I view 
myself in the glass, I go away, and forget what I was. 
I behold Christ, and I become like Christ. Look at Him, 
then; study Him in the evangelists, studiously examine 
His character. “ But,” says you, “we have done that 
and we have proceeded but little farther.” Then, in 
the next place, correct your poor copy every day. At 
night, try and recount all the actions of the twenty-four 
hours, scrupulously putting them under review. When 
I have proof-sheets sent to me of any of my writings, I 
have to make the corrections in the margin, I might 
read them over fifty times, and the printers would still 
ut in the errors if I did not mark them. So must you 
> if you find anything faulty at night, make a mark 


2 che ee oe = 


* . “4 — 
79 inn apawigiendiiiatete westerns har “z <n 
a nn we 


72 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


in the margin, that you may know where the fault is, 
and to-morrow may amend it. Do this, day after day, 
continually noting your faults, one by one, so that you 
may better avoid them. It was a maxim of the old 
philosophers, that, three times in the day, we should go 
over our actions. So let us do; let us not be forgetful ; 
let us rather examine ourselves each night, and see 
wherein we have done amiss, that we may reform our 
lives. 

Lastly, as the best advice I can give, seek more of the 
Spirit of God; for this is the way to become Christ-like. 
Vain are all your attempts to be like Him, till you have 
sought His spirit. Take the cold iron, and attempt to 
weld it if ‘you can into a certain shape. How fruitless 
the effort! Lay it on the anvil, seize the blacksmith’s 
hammer with all your might, let blow after blow fall 
upon it, and you shall liave done nothing. Twist it, 
turn it, use all your implements, but you shall not be 
able to fashion it as you would. But put it in the fire, 
let it be softened and made malleable, then lay it on the 
anvil, and each stroke siall have a mighty effect, so that 
you may fashion it into any form you may desire. ‘So 
take your heart, not cold as it is; not stony as it is by 
nature, but put it into the furnace ; there let it be molten, 
and after that it can be turned like wax to the seal, and 
fashioned into the image of Jesus Christ. 

Oh, my brethren, what can I say now to enforce my 
text, but that, if ye are like Christ on earth, ye shall be 
like Him in heaven? If, by the power of the Spirit, ye 
become followers of Jesus, ye shall enter glory. For at 
heaven’s gate there sits an angel, who admits no one 
who has not the same features as our adorable Lord. 
There comes a man with a crown upon his head, “ Yes,” 
he says, “thou hast a crown, it is true, but crowns are 
not the medium of access here.” Another approaches, 
dressed in robes of state and the gown of learning. 
“Yes,” says the angel, “it may be good, but gowns and 


— ~ jw rp _, . st 


Rn | 


CHRIST’S PEOPLE—IMITATORS OF HIM. 73 


learning are not the marks that shall admit you here.” 
Another advances, fair, beautiful and comely. “ Yes,” 
saith the angel, “ that might please on earth, but beauty 
is not wanted here.” There cometh up another, who is 
heralded by fame, and prefaced by the blast vf the 
clamour of mankind; but the angel saith, “It is well 
with man, but thou hast no right to enter here.” Then 
there appears another, poor he may have been ; illiterate 
he may have been; but the angel, as he looks at him, 
smiles and says, “ It is Christ again ; a secor’ edition of 
Jesus Christ is there. Come in, come in, Eternal glory 
thou shalt win. Thou art like Christ; in heaven thou 
shalt sit, because thou art like him.” Oh! to be like 
Christ is to enter heaven; but to be unlike Christ is to 
descend to hell. Likes shall be gathered together at 
last, tares with tares, wheat with wheat. If ye have 
sinned with Adam and have ‘lied, ye shall lie with the 
spiritually dead forever, unless ye rise in Christ to new- 
ness of life, then shall we live with him throughout 
eternity. Wheat with wheat, tares with tares. “Be 
not deceived; God is not mocked: whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap.” Go away with this one 
thought, then, my brethren, that you can test yourselves 
by Christ. If you are like Christ, you are of Christ, 
and shall be with Christ. If you are unlike him, you 
have no portion in the great inheritance. May my poor 
discourse help to fan the floor, and reveal the chaff; yea 
may it lead many of you to seek to be partakers of the 
inheritance of the saints in light, to the praise of his 
grace. To him be all honour given! Amen, 


FAITH. 


“ Without faith it is impossible to please God.” 
— HEBREWws vi: 6. 


HE old Assembly’s Catechism asks, “ What is 

the chief end of man?” and its answer is, 

4 “To glorify God, and to enjoy him forever.” 

The answer is exceedingly correct; but it might 

have been equally truthful if it had been shorter. 

The chief end of man is “to please God ;” for, in so 
doing—we need not say it, because it is an un- 
doubted fact--in so doing he will please himself. 

The chief end of man, we believe, in this life and 

in the next, is to please God his Maker. If any 

man pleases God, he does that which conduces most 

to his own temporal and eternal welfare. Man can- 

not please God without bringing to himself a great 
amount of happiness; for, if any man pleases God, 

it is because God accepts him as a son, gives him the 
blessings of adoption, pours upon him the bounties of 
his grace, makes him a blessed man in this life, and in- 
sures him a crown of everlasting life which he shall wear, 
and which shall shine with unfading lustre, when the 
wreaths of earth’s glory have all been melted away ; 
while, on the other hand, if a man does not please God, 


= a a 
Sep - 


go me Se 


That is 
wer 18, 
rever.” 
might 
horter. 
', in so 
An un- 
imself, 
fe and 
If any 
s most 
n can- 
great 
bs God, 
im the 
ies of 
nd in- 
| wear, 
n the 
way ; 


e God, 


FAITH. 75 


he inevitably brings upon himself sorrow and suffering 
in this life; he puts a worm and a rottenness in the core 
of all his joys; he fills his death-pillow with thorns, and 
he supplies the eternal fire with fagots of flame which 
shall forever consume him. He that pleases God is, 
through divine grace, journeying onward to the ultimate 
reward of all those that love and fear God; but he who 
is ill-pleasing to God must, for Scripture has declared it, 
be banished from the presence otf God, and consequently, 
from the enjoyment ot happiness. — If, then, we be right 
in saying that to please God is to be happy, the one im- 
portant question is, how can I please God ? and there is 
something very solemn in the utterance of our text, 
“ Without faith it is impossible to piease God.” That is 
to say, Do what you may, strive as earnestly as you can, 
live as excellently as you please, make what sacrifices you 
choose, be as eininent as you can for everything that is 
lovely ‘and of good repute, yet none of these things can 
be pleasing to God unless ti: ey be mixed with faith, As 
the Lord said to the Jews, “ With all your sacritices you 
must offer salt,” so he says to us: “With all your doings 
you must bring faith, or else ‘without faith itis impossible 
to please God.’” 

This is an old law; it is as old as the first man, No 
sooner were Cain and Abel born into this world, and no 
sooner had they attained to manhood, than God gave a 
practical proclamation of this iw, that “without faith it 
is impossible to please him.” Cain and Abel, one bright 
day, errected an altar side by side with each other. Cain 
fetched of the fruits of the trees and of the abundance of 
the soil, and placed them upon his altar; Abel brought of 
the firstlings of the tlock, and laid it upon his altar, It 
was to be decided which God would accept. Cain had 
brought his best, but he brought it without faith; Abel 
brought his sacrifice, but he brought it with faith” in 
Christ. Now, then, which shall best succeed ? The offer-: 
ings are equal in value; so far as they themselves are 


as ; 


eH. at aa 


76 


concerned, they are alike good. 


SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


Upon which will the 
heavenly fire descend? Which will the Lord God con- 
sume with the fire of his pleasure? O! I see Abel’s offer- 
ing burning, and Cain’s countenance has fallen ; for, unto 
Abel and unto his offering the Lord had respect, but unto 
Cain and his offering the Lord had no respect It shall 
be the same till the last man be gathered mto heaven. 
There shall never be an acceptable offering which has not 
been seasoned with faith. Good though it may be, as 
apparently good in itself as that which has faith, yet un- 
less faith be with it, God never can and never will accept 
it; for he here declares, “ Without faith it is impossible 
to please God.” 

I shall endeavour to pack my thoughts closely this 
morning, and be as brief as I can, consistently with a full 
explanation of the theme. I shall first, have an exposition 
of what is faith; secondly, I shall have an argquinent, 
that, without faith it is impossible to be saved; and, 
thirdly, I shall ask a question,—Have you that faith 
which pleases God? We shall have, then, an exposition, 
an argument, and a question. 

J, First, for the EXPosITION. What is faith ? 

The old writers, who are by far the most sensible—for 
you will notice, that the books that were written about 
two hundred years ago by the old Puritans have more 
sense in one line than there is in a page of our new books, 
and more in a page than there is in a whole volume of 
our modern divinity—the old writers tell you that faith 
is made up of three things: first knowledge, then assent, 
and then what they call aftiance, or, the laying hold of 
the knowledge to which we give assent, and making it 
our own, by trusting in it, 

1. Let us begin, then, at the beginning. The first thing 
in faith is kuowledge. A man cannot believe what he 
does not know. That is a clear, self-evident axiom. If 
I have never heard of a thing in all my life, and do not 
know it, I cannot believe it. And yet there are some 


eet, 


for 
pout 


10re 
oks, 
a of 
aith 
sent, 
of 
g it 


ling 
he 
If 
not 
some 


FAITH. "7 


persons who have a faith like that of the fuller, who, 
when he was asked what he believed, said, “I believe 
what the Church believes.”—* What does the Church be- 
lieve ?—“ The Church believes what I believe.” —“ And 
pray what do you and the Church believe ?”—* Why, we 
both believe the same thing.” Now, this man believed 
nothing, except that the C ‘hureh was right ; but in what, 
he could not tell. It is idle fora man to say, “Tama 
believer,” and yet not to know what he believes; but yet 
I have seen some persons in this position. A violent ser- 
mon has been preached which has stirred up their blood ; 
the minister has cried, “ Believe! Believe! Believe!” and 
the people on a sudden have got it into their heads that 
they were believers, and have walked out of their place 
of worship and said, “I am a believer.” And if they 
were asked, “Pray, what do you believe?” they could 
not give a reason for the hope that was in them. They 
believe they intend to go to chapel next Sunday; they 
intend to join that class of people; they intend to 
be very violent in their singing, and very wonderful in 
their rant; therefore they believe they shall be saved ; 
but what they believe they cannot tell. Now, I hold no 
man’s faith to be sure faith, unless he knows what he 
believes. If he says, “I believe,” and does not know 
what he believes, how can that be true faith ? The apostle 
has said, “ How can they believe on him of whom they 
have not heard? and how can they hear without a 
preacher? and how can they preach except they be 
sent?” It is necessary, then, to true faith, that a man 
should know something of the Bible. Believe me, this 
is an age when the Bible is not so much thought of as it 
used to be. Some hundred years ago, the world was 
covered with bigotry, cruelty, and superstition. We al- 
ways run to extremes, and we have just gone to the other 
extreme now. It was then said: “One faith is right ; 
down with all others, by the rack and by the sword |” 
Now it is said, “ However contradictory our creeds may 


~atee 


= 


RI SE cn 


——— 


ile - 


78 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


he, they are all right.” If we did but use our common 
sense, we should know that it is not so. But some reply, 
“Such-and-such a doctrine need not be preached, and 
need not be believed.” Then, sir, if it need not be preached, 
it need not be revealed. You impugu the wisdom of 
God, when you say a doctrine is unnecessary ; for you do 
.as much as say, that God has revealed something which 
was not necessary, and h:; would be as unwise to do more 
than was necessary as if he had done less than was neces- 
sary. We believe that every doctrine of God's Word 
ouvht to be studied by men, and that their faith should 
lay hold of the whole matter of the Sacred Scriptures ; 
and more especially upon all that part of the Scripture 
which concern the person of our all-blessed Redeemer. 
There must be some degree of ‘knowledge before tnere 
can be faith. “Search the Scriptures,” then, “for in them 
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which 
testify of Christ ;” and, by searching and reading, cometh 
knowledge, and by knowledge cometh faith, and through 
faith cometh salvation. 

But a man may know a thing, and yet not have 
faith, 1 may know a thing, and yet not believe it. 
Therefore, assent must go with faith: that is to s say, what 
we know we must also agree unto, as being most cert tainly 
the verity of God. Now, in order to have faith’ it is neces- 
sary that I should not only read the Scriptures ‘and under- 
stand them, but that should receive them in my soulas be- 
ing the very truth of the living God, and should devoutly, 
with my whole heart, receive the whole of Scripture as 
being inspired of the Most High, and the whole of the 
doctrine which he requires me to believe to my salvation. 
You are not allowed to halve the Scriptures, and to be- 
lieve what you please; you are not allowed to believe the 
Scriptures with a half-heartedness; for, if you do this 
wilfully, you hive not the faith which looks alone to 
Christ. True faith gives its full assent to the Scriptures ; 
it takes a page and says, “ No matter what is in the page, 


; 


>_> 


s 


res 5 
sure 
ner. 
nere 
hem 
hich 
neth 
yugh- 


1ave 
e it. 
vhat 
inly 
CeS- 
der- 
s be- 
utly, 
re as 
the 
tion. 
be- 
the 
this 
he to 
Tres } 
age, 


FAITH, 79 


I believe it;” it turns over the next chapter and says: 
“ Herein are some things hard to be understood, which 
they that are unlearned and unstable do wrest, as they 
do also the other Scriptures, to their destruction; but, 
hard though it be, I believe it.” It sees the Trinity; it 
cannot understand the Trinity in Unity, but it believes 
it. It sees an atoning sacrifice ; there is something diffi- 
cult in the thought, but it believes it; and, whatever it 
be which it sees in revelation, it devoutly puts its lips to 
the book, and says: “i love it all; I give my full, free, 
and hearty assent to every word of it, whether it be the 
threatening, or the promise, the proverb, the precept, or 
the blessing. I believe that, since it is all the Word of 
God, it is all most assuredly true.” Whossever would be 
saved, must know the Scriptures, and must give fuli as- 
sent unto them. 

3. But a man may have all of this, and yet not possess 
true faith; for the chief part of faith lies in the last head, 
namely, in an affiance to the truth; not the believing it 
merely, but the taking hold of it as being ours, and in 
the resting on it for salvation. Recumbency on the truth 
was the word which the old preachers used. You will 
understand that word. Leaning on it: saying, “ This is 
truth; I trust my salvation on it.” Now, true faith in 
its very essence rests in this—a leaning upon Christ. 
It will not save me to know that Christ is a Saviour; but 
it will save me to trust him to be my Saviour. I shall 
not be delivered from the wrath to come, by believing 
that his atonement is sufficient; but I shall be saved, by 
making that atonement my trust, my refuge, and my all. 
The pith, the essence, of faith lies in this,—a casting one- 
self on the promise. It is not the life-buoy on board the 
ship that saves the man when he is drowning, nor is it 
his belief that it is an excellent and successful invention. 
No! he must have it around his loins, or his hand upon 
it, or else he will sink. ‘To use an old and hackneyed il- 
lustration: Suppose a fire in the upper room of a house, 


ai 
: 


Sie ae wet ee 
ee 


SO SERMONS BY SPURG®HON. 


zs 


Oe eee Ba 


and the people gathered in the street. A child is in the 
upper story : how is he to eseape ? He cannot leap down 
—that were to be dashed to pieces. A strong man comes 
beneath, and cries, “ Drop into my arms.” It is a part of 
faith to know that the man is there; it is another part of 
faith to believe that the man is strong; but the essence 
of faith lies in the dropping dewn into the man’s arms. 
M That is the proof of faith, amd the real pith and essence 
| of it. So, sinner, thou art to know that Christ died for 
oi sin; thou art also to understand that Christ is able to 
save, and thou art to believe that; but thou art not saved, 
unless, in addition to that, thou puttest thy trust in him 
to be thy Saviour, and to be thine forever. As Hart says 
in his hymn which really expresses the gospel— 


on ee el ae ee 


‘* Venture on him, venture wholly ; 
Let no other tewst intrude ; 

None but Jesus, none but Jesus, 

Can do helpless sinners good.” 


This is the faith which saves; and, however unholy may 
have been your lives up to this hour, this faith, if given to 
you at this moment, will blot out all your sins, will change 
your nature, make you a mew man in Christ Jesus, lead 
you to live a holy life, and make your eternal salvation 
| as secure as if an angel shou'd take you on his bright 
L! wings this morning, and carry vou immediately to heaven. 
Have you that faith? That 1s the one all-important 
question; for, while with faith, men are saved, without it, 
A, men are damned. As Brookes hath said, in one of his 
HY | admirable works: “He that believeth on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, shall be saved, be his sins never so many; but he 
that believeth not on the Lord Jesus, must be damned, 
be his sins never so few.” Hast thou faith? For the 
text declares, “ Without faith it is impossible to please 
God.” 

II. And now we come to the ARGUMENT,—why, with- 
out faith, we cannot be saved 


Ree ati ae x 
ees eee Q 


Hab 


oreo a -Siiean o8 
SN 


ds lie a 


ee 


FAITH. 81 
Now, there are some gentlemen present who are say- 
ing, “ Now we shall see whether Mr. Spurgeon has any 
logic in him.” No, you won't, sirs, because I never pre- 
tend to exercise it. I hope I have the lo; gic which can 
appeal to men’s hearts ; but I am not very prone to use the 
less powerful logic of the head, when I can win the heart 
in another manner. But, if it were needful, I should not 
be afraid to prove that I know more of logic, and of many 
other things, than the little men who undertake to cen- 
sure me. It were well if they knew how to hold their 
tongues, which is at least a fine part of rhetoric. My 
argument shall be such as, [ trust, will appeal to the 
heart and conscience, although it may not exactly please 
those who are always so fond of syllogistic demonstration. 


‘6 Who could a hair divide 
Between the west and northwest side.” 


1. “ Without faith it is impossible to please God.” And 
I gather it from the fact, that there never has been the 
case of a man recorded in Scripture who did please God 
without faith. The 11th chapter of Hebrews is the 
chapter of the men who pleased Ueu. Listen to their 
names: “By faith Abel offered unto God a more 
excellent savrifice;” “ By faith Enoch was translated ;” 
By faith Noah built an ark;” By faith Abraham went 
out into a place that he should afterwards receive ;” 
“ By faith he sojourned in the land of promise ;” “ By 
faith Sarah bwre Isaac ;” “By faith Abraham offered up 
Isaac ;” By faith Moses gave up the wealth of Egypt ;” 
“ By faith Isaac blessed Ji acob ;” “ By faith Jacob blessed 
the sons of Joseph;” “By faith Joseph, when ie died, 
made mention of the departure of the children of Israel ;” 
“ Bv faith the Red Sea was dried up;” By faith the w alls 
of Jericho fell;” “By faith the harlot Rahab was 
saved;” “And ‘what shall I more say ? for the time 
would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sam- 


82 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


son, and of Jephthah, of David also, and Samuel, and of 
the prophets.” But all these were men of faith. Others 
mentioued in Scripture have done something ; but God 
did not accept them. Men have humbled themselves, and 
yet God has not saved them. Ahab did, and yet his sins 
were never forgiven. Men have repented, and yet have 
not been saved, because theirs was the wrong repentance. 
Judas repented, and went and hanged himself, and 
was not saved. Men have confessed their sins, and have 
not been saved. Saul did it. He said to David, “I have : 
sinned against thee, my son David ;” and yet he went on 
as he did before. Multitudes have confessed the name of 
Christ, and have done many marvellous things, and yet 
they have never been pleasing to God, for this simple rea- 
son, that they had no faith. And, if there be not one men- 
tioned in Scripture, which is the history cf some thousand 
years, it is not likely that, in the other two thousand 
years of the world’s history, there would have been one, 
when there was not one during the first four thousand. 

2. But the next argument is: faith is the stooping 
grace, and nothing can make a man stoop without faith. 
‘ht Now, unless a man does stoop, his sacrifice cannot be ac- 

f cepted. The angels know this. When they praise God, 


| they do it veiling their faces with their wings. The re- 
Taw deemed know it. When they praise God, they cast 
nn their crowns before his feet. Now, a man who has not 


faith, proves that he cannot stoop; for he has not faith, 
for this reason, because he is too proud to believe. He 
declares, he will not yield his intellect, he will not be- 
come a child, and believe meekly what God tells him to 
believe. He is too proud, and he cannot enter heaven, 
because the door of heaven is so low that no one can 
enter in by it unless they will bow their heads. There 
\ never was a man who could walk into salvation erect. 
bh We must go to Christ on our bended knees; for though 
he is a door big enough for the greatest sinner to come 
in, he is a door so low that men must stoop if they 


FAITH. 


would be saved. Therefore it is, that faith is necessary, 
because a want of faith is certain evidence of absence of 
humility. 

3. But now for other reasons, faith is necessary to sal- 
vation, because we are told in Scripture that works can- 
not save. To tell a very familiar story, that even the 
poorest may not misunderstand what [ say: A minister 
was one day going to preach. He climbed a hill on his 
road. Beneath him lay the villages, sleeping in their 
beauty, with the corn-fields motionless in the sunshine, 
but he did not look at them, for ao attention was 
arrested by a woman standing at her door, and, who, 
upon secing him, came up to him with the greatest an- 
anxiety, and said ; “QO! sir, have you any keys about 
you? I have broken the key of my drawers, and there 
are some things that 1 must get directly.” Said he, “I 
have no keys,” She was disappointed, expecting that 
every one would have some keys. “ But suppose,” he 
said, “I had some keys, they might not fit your loek, 
and therefore you could not get the articles you want. 
But do not distress yoursr/f; wait till some one else 
comes up. But,” said he, wishing to improve the ocea- 
sion, “have you ever heard of the key of heaven ?’ 

“Ah! yes,” she said, “I have lived long enough, and 
I have gone to church long enough, to know that, if we 
work hard, and get our bread by the sweat of our brow, 
and act well towards our neighbours, and behave as the 
Catechism says, lowly and reverently to ail our betters, 
and if we do ovr duvy in that station of life in which 
it has pleased G.x. to place us, and say our prayers regu- 
larly, we shall be saved,.”--“Ah!” said he, “my good 
woman, that is a broken key, for you have broken the 
commandments ; you have not fulfilled all your duties. 
lt is a good key, but you have broken it.” “ Pray, sir,” 
said she, believing that he understood the matter, and 
looking frightened, “What have I left out ?”—* Why, ; 
said he, “the all- -important thing, the bleed of Jesus 


2a ape ee 


84 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


Christ. Don’t you know it is said, the key of heaven is 
at his girdle; he openeth, and no man shutteth ; he shut- 
teth, and no man openeth ?” And, explaining it more 
fully to her, he said, “ It is Chris}, and Christ alone, that 
can open heaven to you, and not your good works.”— 
‘“ What ¢ minister,” said she,” “are our good works use- 
‘ess, then ?”—“ No,” said he, “not after faith. If you 
believe first, you may have as many good works as you 
please , but if you believe, you will never trust in them, 
for, if you trust. in them, you have spoilt them, and 
they are not good works any longer. Have as many 
wood works as. you please ; still, put your trust wholly 
in the Lord Jesus Christ; for, if you do not, your key 
will never unlock heaven's cate,” So then, my hear- 
ers, we must have true faith, because the old key of 
work 3 is so broken by us all, that we never shall enter 
Paradise by it. If any of you pretend that you have 
no sins, to be very plain with you, you deceive your- 
selves, and the truth is not in you, If you conceive 
that, by your good works, you shall enter heaven, never 
was there a more fell delusion ; and you shall find, at 
the last great day, that your hopes were worthless, and 
that, like sere leaves from the autumn trees, your noblest 
doings shall be blown away, or kindled into a flame, 
wherein you, yourselves, must suffer forever, Take 
heed of your good works; get them after faith, but re- 
member, the way to be saved is simply to believe in 
Jesus Christ. 

4. Again: without faith it is impossible to be saved, 
and to please God; because, without faith, there is no 
union to Christ. Now, 0 to Christ is indispensable 
to our salvation, If I come before God's throne with my 
prayers, I shall never get them answered, unless I bring 
Christ with me, The Molossians of old, when they eould 
not get a favour from their king, adopted a singuiwr 
— nt: they took the king’s only son in their arms, 
and, falling on their knees, cried, “O king, for thy son’s 


FAITH. 85 


sake grant owr request.” He smiled, and said, “I deny 
nothing to those who plead my son’s name.” 

It is so with God. He will deny nothing to the man 
who comes, having Christ at his elbow; but, if he come 
aione, he must be cast away. Union to Christ is, after 
all, the great point in salvation. Let me teil you a story 
to illustrate this: the stupendous Falls of Niagara have 
been spoken of in eve ry part of the world ; but, while they 
are marvellous to hear of, and wonderful as a seeniaale 
they have been very destructive to human life, when by 
accident any have been carried down the cataract. Some 
years ago, two men, a bargeman and a collier, were in @ 
boat and found themselves unable to manage it, it being 
carried so swiftly down the current that they must both 
inevitably be borne down and dashed to pieces. Persons 
on tne shore saw them, but were unable to do much for 
their rescue. At last, however, one man was saved by 
floating a rope out to him, which he grasped. The same 
instant that the rope came into his hand, a log Hoated by 
cue other man. The thoughtless and confused bargeman, 
instead of seizing the rope, laid hold on the log. It was 
a fatal mistake; they were both in imminent peril, but 
the one was drawn to shore, because he had a connection 
with the people on the land; whilst the other, clinging to 
the log, was borne irresistibly along, and never heard of 
afterwards. Do you not see that here is a practical illus- 
tration? Faith is a connection with Christ. Christ is on 
the shore, so to speak, holding the rope of faith, and if we 
lay hold of our confidence, he pulls us to shore; but our 
good works, having no connection with Christ, are drifted 
along down the gulf of fell despair. Grapple them as 
tightly as we may, even with hooks of steel, they cannot 
avail us in the least degree. You will see, I am sure, 
what I wish to show to you. Some object to anecdotes ; 
T shall use them till they have done objecting to them. 
The truth is never more powerfully set forth to men than 
by telling them, as Christ did, a story of a certain man 


= 


at a alo MeN clin ent gt Ga eas 
Sept Sa Ss, ear has -— si 


86 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


with two sons, or a certain householder, who went a 
journey, divided his substance, and gave to some ten 
talents, to another one. 

Faith, then, is an union with Christ. Take care you 
have it; for, if not, cling to your works, and there you go 
Hoating down the stream! Cling to your works, and you 
go dashing down the gulf! Lost, because your works 
have no hold on Christ, and no connection with the 
blessed Redeemer! But thou, poor sinner, with all thy 
sin about thee, if the rope is round thy loins, and Christ 
has a hold of it, fear not ! 


‘* His honour is engaged to save 
The meanest of His sheep ; 
All that His Heavenly Father gave 
His hand securely keeps.” 


5. Just one more argument, and then I have done with 
it. “ Without faith it is impossible to please God,” be- 
cause it is impossible to persevere in holiness without 
faith, What a multitude of fair-weather Christians we 
have in this age! Many Christians resemble the nautilus, 
which, in fine, smooth weather, swims on the surface of the 
sea, in a splendid little squadron, like the mighty ships ; 
but, the moment the first breath of the wind ruflles the 
waves, they take in their sails, and sink into the depths. 
Many Christians are the same. In good company, in 
evangelical drawing-rooms, in pious parlours, in chapels 
and vestries, they are tremendously religious; but, tf they 
ive exposed to a little ridicule, if some should sinile at 
them, and call them Methodist, or Presbyterian, or some 
name of reproach, it is all over with their religion till the 
next fine day, Then, when it is fine weather, and reli- 
gion will answer their purpose, up go their sails again, 
and they are as pious as before. Believe me, that kind 
of religion is worse than irreligion, I do like @ man to 
be thoroughly what he is,—a downright man; and, if a 


FAITH. 87 


man does not love God, do not let him say he does ; but if 
he be a true Christian, a follower of Jesus, let him say it 
and stand up for it; there is nothing to be ashanied of in 
it; the only thing to be ashained of is to be hypocritical. 
Let us be honest to our profession, and it will be our 
glory. Ah! what would you do without faith in times 
of persecution? You good and pious people that have no 
faith, what would you “do if the stake were again erected 
in Smithtield, and if once more the fires consumed the 
saints to ashes? if the L--"'ards’ tower were again opened, 
if the rack were again pued, or if even the stocks were 
used, as they have been used by a Protestant Church— 
as witness the persecution of my predecessor, Benjamin 
Keach, who was once set in the stocks at Aylesbury, for 
writing a book against Infant baptism. If even the mild- 
est form of persecution were revived, how would the peo- 
ple be scattered abroad! And some of the shepherds 
would be leaving their flocks, Another anecdote now, 
and I hope it will lead you to see the necessity of faith, 
while it may lead me on insensibly to the last part of my 
discourse. A slaveholding American, on one occasion, 
buying a slave, said to the person of whom he was pur- 
chasing him, “ Tell me honestly what are his faults ?” 
Said the seller: ‘ He has no faults, that I am aware of, 
but one: that one fault is, he will pray.’ Ah!” said the 
purchaser, ‘1 don’t like that ; but [ know something that 
will cure him of it pretty soon,” So, the next night, Cuf- 
fey was surprised by his master in the plantation while 
in earnest prayer, praying for his new master, and his 
master’s wite and family. The man stood and listened, 
but said nothing at the time; but the next morning he 
called Cuffey, and said, “I do not want to quarrel with 
you, my man, but I ll have no praying on my premises : 


so you Just drop it.”’—- Massa,” said he, “me canna leave 
off praying ; me must pray.’ —‘ lll teach you to pray, if 
you are going to keep on at it.”——“ Massa, me must keep 


on, —" W ell, then, I'll give you Ave and twenty lashes a 


88 SERMONS BY SPURGEON, 


day till you leave off.’—“ Massa, if you give me fifty, I 
must pray.”—“ If that’s the way you are saucy to your 
master, you shall have it directly.” So, tying him up, he 
gave him five-and-twenty lashes, and asked him if he 
would pray again. “ Yes, massa, me must pray always; 
me canna leave off.” The master looked astonished; he 
could not understand how a poor saint could keep on 
praying, when it seemed to do no good, but only brought 
persecution upon him, He told his wife of it. His wife 
said: ‘Why can’t you let the poor man pray? He does 
his work very well; you and I do not care about pray- 
ing, but there’s no harm in letting him pray, if he gets 
on with his work.”’—** But I don’t like it,” said the mas- 
ter, “he almost frightened me to death, You should see 
how he looked at me,’—‘* Was he angry ?”—‘* No, I 
should not have minded that; but after I had beaten 
him, he looked at me with tears in his eyes, as if he pitied 
me more than himself.” That night the master could not 
sleep; he tossed to and fro on his bed; his sins were 
brought to his remembrance ; he remembered he had per- 
secuted a saint of God. Rising in his bed, he said, “* Wife, 
will you pray for me ?”—‘*] never prayed in my life,” 
said she; “J eannot pray for you.” “I am lost,” he said, 
sad somebody does not pray for me; I cannot pray for 
myself.”-—* T don’t know any one on the estate that knows 

how to pray, except ( ‘ufley,” said his wife. ‘The bell was 
rung, and Cuffey was brought in. ‘Taking hold of his 
black servant's hand, the master said, “Cuffey, ean you 
pray for your master ¢”—‘ Massa,” anid he, ‘me been 
pony ing for you eber since you flogged me, and me mean 
to pray always for you.” Down went Cutley on his knees, 
and poured out his soul in tears, and both husband and 
wife were converted. That negro could not hawe done 
this without faith. Without faith he would hawe gone 
away directly, and said, ‘* Massa, me leave off praying ; 
me no like de white man’s whip.” But beeause he perse- 
vered through his faith, ve Lord honoured him, and gave 
him his master’s soui for his hive. 


FAITH. 89 


I IIT, And now, in conclusion, THE QUESTION, the vital 
ur question. Dear hearer, have you faith ? Dost thou be- 
he lieve on the Lord Jesus Christ with all thy heart? If so, 
he ' thou mayest hope to be saved. Aye, thou mayest conclude 
85 with absolute cert emmy that thou shalt never see perdi- 
he tion. Have you faith? Shall I help you to answer that 
on question? I will give you three tests, as briefly as ever 
ht I can, not to weary you; and then farewell this morning, 
ife ™ He that has faith has renounced his own righteousness. 
eS i If thou puttest one atom of trust in thyself, thou hast no 
> 4 faith; if thou dost place even a particle of reliance upon 
ots any ‘thing else but what Christ did, thou hast no faith. If 
AS- i thou dost trust in thy works, then thy works are anti- 
3e€ christ, and Christ and antichrist can never go together. 
cal Christ will have all or nothing; he must be a whole 
en Saviour, or no Saviour at all. If, then, you have faith, 
ied you can say: 
106 : ** Nothing in my hand | bring, 
re Simply to the cross I cling.” 
er- , . : 
ife, Then true faith may be known by this, that it begets a 
@.” great esteem for the person of Christ. Dost thou love 
id, Christ? Couldst thou die for him? Dost thou seek to 
for serve him? Dost thou love his people? Canst thou say: 
Ws , 
vin 7 ae I love thy charming name, 
: 18 Lausic to my ear, 
lis 
ou Oh, if thou dost not love Christ, thou dost not believe in 
vie him; for to believe in Christ begets love. And yet more : 
~_ he that has true faith will have true obedience. Ifa 
=, man says he has faith and has no works, he lies; if any 
d man declares that he believes on Christ, and yet does not 
ae lead a holy life, he makes a mistake ; for while we do not 
_ trust in good works, we know that faith always begets 
Ss good works. Faith is the father of holiness, and he has 
in not the parent who loves not the child. God’s blessings 
€ 


are blessings with both his hands, In the one hand he 
F 


See Se a SS = 


[aa 


90 SERMONS BY SPURGEON. 


gives pardon, but in the other hand he always gives holi- 
ness ; and no man can have the one, unless the “other. 
And now, dear hearers, shall I down upon my knees, 
and entreat you for Christ’s sake to answer this question 
in your own silent chamber: Have you faith? O! an- 
swer it, Yes—or No. Leave off saying, “ I do not know, 
or I do not care.” Ah! you will care, one day, when the 
earth is reeling, and the world is tossing to and fro; ye 
will care, when God shall summon you to judgment, ‘and 
when he shall condemn the faithless and the unbelieving. 
O! that ye were wise,—that ye would care now; and if 
any of you feel your need of Christ, let me beg of you, for 
Christ’s sake, now to seek faith in him who is exalted on 
high to give repentance and remission, and who, if he has 
given you repentance, will give you remission too, Q, 
sinners who know your sins ! “ believe on the Lord Jesus, 
and ye shall be saved.” Cast yourselves upon his love 
end blood, his doing and his dying, his miseries and his 
merits ; and if you do this you shall never fall, but you 
shall be saved now, and saved in that great day when 
not to be saved will be horrible indeed.“ Turn ye, turn 
ye; why will ye die, O house of Israel?” Lay hold on 
him, touch the hem of his garment, and ye shall be healed. 
May iod help you so to “do ; for Christ's sake! Amen 
and Amen. 


ee 


ee ie aS Se Re oe 


ee 


i ae 


Mans 


YY SS SSX SS 
\% AR 
SS 


DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY. 


DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY. 


R. D. L. MOODY was born in Northfield, Mass., on 
the 5th day of February, 1837. When but four years 
of age, his father died suddenly, leaving the widowed 

mother with a family of seven (Dwight being the sixth), the 

% eldest but thirteen years of age. The widow’s sole possession 

& was the homestead and about two acres of land, on which was 

a mortgage, It can easily be understood that the home was 


not provided with many luxuries, but it had the greatest of all 
treasures, a Christian Mother who did her utmost to train her 
children aright. The early life of the young lad was marked 
/ by many vicissitudes, but, with a strong constitution and in- 
‘ domitable energy he overcame all obstacles, It was evident 
k to all that he had *‘ something in him,” but that something 

seemed to be almost anything else rather than a preacher of 
the Gospel. At the age of seventeen, young Moody started from 


heme to seek his fortune in the great world, He found his way to 


VV »~ yo 
Ve Nx é ay des 
Ww heo° 
ki “a Ye * 
w,% 
Ih’ AGE EVALUATION NE 
Tu -T TARGET (MT-3) 
| LO shes 2s 
= ik i 
| Ay We 
as ILS. 
Ize AA Us 
& 
aA 


“ WS 
Photographic as" 
Scenes EET 
Corporation 


) 


Vy; YY 
y 


DA DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY, 


Poston, where he entered the service of his uncle, Samuel Holton, 
a dealer in boots and shoes. One of his uncle’s conditions of en- 
gagement with him was that he should regularly attend the Mount 
Vernon Church and Sabbath School. In that Sabbath School he 
was placed in the Bibie Class of Mr, Hd. Kimball, under whose 
careful and loving insti uctions the young man’s heart began to soften. 
One day Mr. Kimball called on him at the store, and putting his 
hand on his shoulder, asked if he would not give his heart to Christ. 
That question awakened him and led to his conversion. Mr. Moody 
has often been heard to say, ‘‘ I co. feel the touch of that man’s 
hand on my shoulder even yet.” 

The enthusiasm which had marked his life up to that time was 
now manifested in his religion. He became a member of Mount 
Vernon Church. In September, 1865, young Moody moved to 
Chicago, and entered the employ of Mr. Urswill, in the same busi- 
ness as that of his uncle Holton. Here he entered heartily into 
church work. He started a mission school, and it grew rapidly, and 
great interest was aroused in his work, After about four or five 
years’ business career in Chicago, he decided to enter entirely into 
Christian work, and that in simple trust upon God to supply his 
needs, In 1870, at the International Convention of the Young 
Men’s Christian Association, held in Indianapolis, U. S., he first 
met with and enlisted into service with Mr. Ira D, Sankey, the 
‘Sweet Singer” and from that time to this the names of Messrs, 
Moody and Sankey became as familiar ag ‘* household words” in 
every part of the world. 

Mr. Moody paid a couple of visits to England, previous to 1872, 
an’ during his second visit in the spring of that year, Mr. Sankey 
had full charge of the work in Chicago, When Mr. Moody returned 
to America the two workers again entered the field, but their preach- 
ing and singing became marked by a more Biblical and scriptural 
love, and the work was much blessed to the conversion of souls, 
In June, 1872, the two evangelists sailed from Now York for Eng. 


4 


ht 


‘al 


It 


DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY, 95 


land, and before starting they decided to take no salaries in any 
form, to ask no collections, to engage in no business, but to devote 
themselves solely to the work of God, and to rely upon Him for all 
things requisite and necessary, as well for the body as for the soul. 

A short time before Mr. Moody’s departure, he was asked, ‘‘ Why 
do you go to England again so soon?” “To win ten thousand 
souls to Christ,” was the reply. With this great hope in his heart 
he started. The first meeting held in York was not very assuring. 
In a small room of the Y. M. %. A., were gathered eight persons. 
But he was not daunted. A vhole week passed without much 
interest being manifested, The econd week was more encouraging, 
and from that time the barriers seemed to break down, and as a 
result of the month’s labour 250 persons professed to find Christ. 
The chief difficulty in the way at the outset was the coldness with 
which the workers were received by the clergymen and ministers, 
a coldness which would have disheartened men of ordinary determi- 
nation, but Moody was never the man to retire from a field because 
others did net receive him with open arms. 

Sunderland was his next point, and here he again met with cold- 
ness and opposition, in fact so marked was it that one person wrote, 
‘Mr, Moody had one whole minister, three-fourths of another, 
and nothing, or next to nothing of all the rest to help him in his 
meetings.” But the fire was kindled, and when he left Sunderland 
for Newcastle be found the field more inviting, and from this point 
increased blessing, rich and abundant, marked the labours of the two 
faithful workers. 

In 1873 they visited Scotland, where, having preached in different 
cities, they finally on the 21st November reached Edinburgh. From 
the first, no place in the city could contain the crowds which gathered 
to hear them. From Edinburgh they went to Glasgow, where they 
were received with the same enthusiasm by the people, and great 
good resulted from the visit. After a tour through the north of 
Scotland, they next visited Ireland, At Belfast, Londonderry and 


96 DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY. 


Dublin, the Gospel was preached with power and blessing. They 
next returned to England, where, after work at Manchester, Shef- 
field, Birmingham and Liverpool, they, on the 9th March, 1875, 
entered for the first time upon the long contemplated visit in Lon- 
don. Of the work in that great city, the world knows full well. 

His visit to Toronto, in December, 1884, though only for a few 
days, proved a time of refreshing from God, and many homes were 
gladdened by the preaching of Mr. Moody, and by the entry of 
that peace which the world cannot give nor take away. 


a re 


THE 


FOUR GREAT PREACHERS. 


RANA WAAAY 


SERMONS BY D. L. MOODY, 


——_— ms -—-— 


“WHERE ART THOU?” 


——————— 


2, 

i 
3 
§ 
* 
tb 


“And the Lord God called wito Adam, and said unto him, 
ue ‘Where art thou 2?” —GENEsIs : iii, 9, 


HE very first thing that happened after the 
news reached heaven of the fall of man, was 
that God came straight down to seek out the 

lost one. As he walks through the garden in 

the cool of the day, you can hear him calling, “Adam! 

Adam! Where art thou?” It was the voice of grace, 

of mercy, and of love. Adam ought to have taken the 

seeker’s place, for he was the transgressor. He had 
fallen, and he ought to have gone up and down Eden 
erying “My God! my God! where art thou?” But 

, God left heaven to seek through the dark world for 

J the rebel who had fallen—not to hurl him from the 

face of the earth, but to plan him an escape from the 
misery of his sin, And he finds him—where? Hid- 
ing from his Creator among the bushes of the garden. 
The moment a man is out of communion with God, even 
the professed child of God, he wants to hide away from 


— 


- am ts ieee 
mien GI CBee ee 


a ee ee 


98 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


Him. When God left Adam in the garden, he was in 
communion with his Creator, and God talked with him ; 
but now that he has fallen, he has no desire to see his 
Creator, he has lost communion with his God. He cannot 
bear to see Him, even to think of Him, and he runs to 
hide from God. But to his hiding-place his Maker fol- 
lows him. “ Where art thou, Adam? Where art thou ?” 

Six thousand years have passed away, and this text 
has come rolling down the ages. I‘ doubt whether there 
has been any one of Adam’s sons who has not heard it at 
some period or other of his life—sometimes in the midnight 
hour stealing over him—‘ Where am I? Who am I? 
Where am I going ? and what is going to be the end of 
this?” I think it is well for a man to pause and ask 
himself that question. I would have you ask it, little boy ; 
and you, little girl; and you, old man with locks turn- 
ing gray, and eyes growing dim, and natural force abating, 
you who will soon be in another world. I do not ask you 
where you are in the sight of your neighbours; I do not 
ask you where you are in the sight of your friends; I do 
not ask you where you are in the sight of the community 
in which youlive. It is of very little account where we 
are in the sight of one another, it is of very little account 
what men think of us; but it is of vast importance what 
God thinks of us—it is of vast importance to know where 
men are in the sight of God; and that is the question 
now. Am TI in communion with my Creator, or out of 
communion? If I am out of communion, there is no 
peace, no joy, no happiness. No man on the face of the 
earth, who was out of communion with his Creator, ever 
knew what peace, and joy, and happiness, and true com- 
fort are. He isa foreigner to it. But when we are in 
communion with God, there is light all around our path, 
So ask yourselves this question, Do not think I am 
preaching to your neighbours, but remember I am trying 
to speak to you, to everyone of you as if you were alone, 
It was the first question put to man after his fall, and it 


+ Seema 


an 
h 
fis 
A 
ay. 
pf 
i 
+ 
i 
oo 


; 
5 
4, 
i 34 


“WHERE ART THOU ?” 99 


was a very small audience that God had—Adam and his 
wife. But God was the preacher; and although they 
tried to hide, the words came home to them. Let them 
come home to you now. You may think that your life is 
hid, that God does not know anything about you. But 
He knows our lives a great deal better than we do; and 
His eye has been bent upon us from our earliest child- 
hood until now. 

“Where art thou?” I should like to divide my audi- 
ence into three classes—the professed Christians, the 
Backsliders, and the Ungodly. 

First, I would like to ask the professors this question, 
or rather let God ask it—Where art thou? What is my 
position in the church, and among my circle of acquain- 
tance ? Do my friends know me to be, out and out, on 
the Lord’s side? You may have been a professing Chris- 
tian for twenty years, perhaps thirty, perhaps forty years. 
Well, where are you to-night ? Are you making pro- 
gress towards heaven? And can you give a reason for 
the hope that is within you? Suppose I were to ask 
those who are really Christians here to rise, would you 
be ashamed to sinnd up? Suppose I should ask every 
professed, child of God here, “If you should be cut 
down by the hand of death, have you good reason to be- 
lieve you would be saved?” Would you be wiiling to 
stand up before God and man, and say that you have 
good reason to believe that you have passed from death 
unto Jife ? Or would you beashamed? Run your mind 
back over the past years: would it be consistent for you 
to say, “Iam a Christian;” and would your life corre- 
spond with your profession? It is not what we say so 
much as how we live. Actions speak louder than words. 
Do your shopmates know that you are a Christian? Do 
your family know? Do they know you to be out and out 
on the Lord’s side? Let every professed Christian ask, 
Where am I in the sight of God? Is my heart loyal to 
the king of heaven? Is my life here as it should be in 


100 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


the community I live in? Am I a light in this dark 
world? Christ says, “ Ye are my witnesses.” Christ 
was the Light of the world, and the world would not 
have the true Light; the world rose up and put out the 
Light, and now Christ says, “I izave yow down here to 
testify of Me; I leave you down here as My witnesses,” 
That is what the apostle meant when he said that Chris- 
tians are to be living epistles, known and read of all 
men, Then, am I standing up for Jesus, as I should in 
this dark world? If a man is for God, let him say so. 
If a man is for God, let him come out and be on God’s 
side; and if he is for the world, let him be in the world. 
This serving God and the world at the same time—this 
being on both sides at the same time—is just the curse 
of Christianity at the present time. It retards the pro- 
cress of Christianity more than any other thing. “If 
any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and 
take up his cross daily, and follow Me.” 

I have heard of a great many people who think if 
they are united to the church, and have made one pro- 
fession, that will do for all the rest of their days. But 
there is a cross for every one of us daily. Oh, child of 
God, where are you? If God should appear to you to- 
night in your bed-room, and put the question, what 
would be your auswer? Could you say “ Lord, I am 
serving Thee with my whole heart and strength ; Iam 
improving my talents, and preparing for the kingdom to 
come?” When I was in England, in 1867, there was a 
merchant who came over from Dublin, and was talking 
with a business man in London; and as I happened to 
look in, he introduced me to the man from Dublin. 
Alluding to me, the latter said to the former, “Is this 
young man allO O?” Said the London man, “ What 
do you mean by OO?” Replied the Dublin man, “Js 
he Out-and-Out for Christ?” I tell you it burned down 
into my soul. It means a good deal to be 0 O for 
Christ ; but that is what all Christians ought to be, and 


wey 
= : —_ - 
wii oc tale i j a ierhs ss 
A dc I a ROR Rice 


cra les eedts PTE 
Stenson oe att 


this dark 
” Christ 
rould not 
it out the 
n here to 
itnesses,” 
at Chris- 
ad of all 
should in 
mM say sO. 
on God’s 
he world. 
me—this 
the curse 
the pro- 
ng. “If 


self, and 


think if 
one pro- 
s. But 
child of 
you to- 
, what 
1, I am 
1; Tam 
rdom to 
was a 
alking 
ned to 
Dublin, 
Is this 
What 

n, “Js 

down 

O for 

e, and 


x 
$ 
R 
5 
t 
z 
* 
4 
F; 
a 
is 
+ 
3 


“WHERE ART THOU 2” 101 


their influence would be felt on the world very soon, if 
men who are on the Lord’s side would come out and take 
their stand, and lift up their voices in season, and out of 
season. As I have said, there are a great many in the 
church who make one profession, and that is about all 
you hear of them; and when they coine to die you have 
to goand hunt up same musty old church records to 
know whether they were Christians or not. God won't 
do that. I have an idea that when Daniel died, all the 
men in Babylon knew whom he served. There was no 
need for them to hunt up old books. His life told his 
story. What we want is men with a little courage to 
stand up for Christ. When Christianity wakes up, and 
every child that belongs to the Lord is willing to speak 
for Him, is willing to work for Him, and, if need be, 
willing to die for Him, then Christianity will advance, 
and we shall see the work of the Lord prosper. There 
is one thing which I fear more than anything else, and 
that is the dead, cold formalism of the Church of God. 
Talk about theisms! Put them all together, and I do 
not fear them so much as dead, cold formalism. Talk 
about the false isms! There is none so dangerous as 
this dead, cold formalism, which has come right into the 
heart of the Church. There are so many of us just sleep- 
ing and slumbering while souls all around are perishing. 
I believe honestly that we professed Christians are all 
half-asleep. Some of us are beginning to rub our eyes 
and to get them half-opened, but as a whole we are 
asleep. 

There was a little story going the round of the Ameri- 
can press that made a great impression upon me as a 
father. A father took his little child out into the field 
one Sabbath, and, it being a hot day, he lay down under 
a beautiful shady tree. The little child ran about gather- 
ing wild flowers and little blades of grass, and coming to 
its father and saying, “Pretty! pretty!” At last the 
father fell asleep, and while he was sleeping the little 


102 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


child wandered away. When he awoke, his first thought 
was, “ Where is my child?” He looked all around, but 
he could not see him. He shouted at the top of his 
voice, but all he heard was the echo of his own voice. 
Running to a little hill, he looked around and shouted 
again, ‘No response ! ‘Then going to a precipice at some 
distance, he looked down, and there upon the rocks and 
briars, he saw the mangled form of his loved child. He 
rushed to the spot, took up the lifeless corpse and hugged 
it to his bosom, and accused himself of being the mur- 
derer of his child. While he was sleeping his child had 
wandered over the precipice. JI thought as I heard that, 
what a picture of the church of God . 

How many fathers and mothers, how many Christian 
men, are sleeping now while their children wander over 
the terrible pr ecipice right into the bottomless pit of hell. 
Father, where is your boy to-night? It may be just out 
there in some public-house; it may be reeling through the 
streets; it may be pressing onwards to a dr unkard’s 
grave. Mother, where is your son? Is he in the house 
of the publican, drinking away his soul—everything that 
is dear and sacred to him? Do you know where your 
boy is? Father, you have been a professed Christian for 
forty years; where are your children to-night? Have 
you ‘ived so godly, and so Christ-like, that you can say, 
Follow me as I followed Christ? Are those children 
walking in wisdom; are they on their way to glory ; have 
they been gathered into the fold of Christ; are their 
names written in the Lamb’s Book of Life? How many 
fathers and mothers to-day would be able to answer? Did 
ee ever stop to think that you were to blame ; that. you 

ad not been faithful to your children ? Depend upon it, 
as long as the church is living so much like the world, we 
cannot expect our children to be brought into the fold. 
Come, O Lord, and wake up every mother, and may every 
one of us who are parents feel the worth of the souls of 
the children that God has given us, May they never 


SS a ee a ee 


ought 
d, but 
of his 
voice. 
outed 
, some 
cs and 
He 
ugged 
mur- 
d had 
1 that, 


ristian 
y Over 
of hell. 
ist out 
oh the 
) k ar ad S 
house 
Te that 
your 
ian for 
Have 
n say, 
ildren 
; have 
their 
many 
2 Did 
pat. you 
pon it, 
‘Id, we 
p fold. 
every 
uls of 
never 


“WHERE ART THOU ?” 108 


bring our grey hairs with sorrow to the grave, but may 
they | become a blessing to the church and to the world. 
Not long ago the only daughter of a wealthy friend of 
mine sickened and died. The father and mother stood 
by her dying bed. He had spent all his time in accumu- 
lating wealth for her; she had been introduced into gay 
and fashionable society ; but she had been taught noth- 
ing of Christ. As she came to the brink of the river of 
death, she said, “ Won’t you help me; it is very dark, 
and the stream is bitter cold.” They wrung their hands 
in grief, but could do nothing for her; and the poor girl 
died in darkness and despair. What was their wealth to 
them? And yet, you mothers and fathers are doing the 
same thing in London to-day, by ignoring the work God 
has given you to do. I beseech you, “then, each one 


of you, begin to labour now for the souls of your chil- 


dren ! 

A young man, some time ago, lay dying, and his mother 
thought he was a Christian. One day, passing his room 
door she heard him say, “Lost! lost! lost!” The mother 
ran into the room and cried, “ My boy, is it possible you 
have lost your hope in Christ, now you are dying?” “ No, 
mother, it is not that; I have a hope beyond the grave, 
but I have lost my life. I have lived twenty-four years, 
and done nothing for the Son of God, and now I am dy- 
ing. My life has been spent for myself; I have lived for 
this world, and now, while I am dying, I have given my- 
self to Christ ; but my life is lost.” Would it not be said 
of many of us, if we should be cut down, that our lives 
have been almost a failure—-perhaps entirely a failure as 
far as leading any one else to Christ is concerned? Young 
lady ! are you working for the Son of God? Are you try- 
ing to win some soul to Christ? Have you tried to get 
some friend or companion to have her name written in 
the book of life? Or would you say, “Lost lost! long 
"he have rolled away since I became a child of God, and 

have never had the privilege of leading one soul to 


a en a ee ea 


0 a ee te a ae a nn 


104 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


Christ ?” If there is one professed child of God who never 
had the joy of leading even one soul into the kingdom of 
God, oh! let him begin at once. There is no greater privi- 
lege on earth. And I believe, my friends, there has never 
been a time, in our day, at least, when work for Christ 
was more needed than at present. I do not believe there 
ever was in your day or mine a time when the Spirit of 
God was more poured out upon the world. There is not 
a part of Christendom where the work is not being 
carried on; and it looks very much as if the glad tidings 
Were just going to take, as it were, a fresh start, and go 
round the globe. Is it not time that the Church of God 
should wake up and come to the help of the Lord as one 
man, and strive to beat back those dark waves of death 
that roll through our streets, bearing upon their bosom 
the noblest and the best we have ? Oh, may God wake up 
the Church! And let us trim our lights, and go forth and 
work for the kingdom of His Son. 


Now, Secondly, let me talk a little while to those who 
have gone back into the world—to the Backslider. It 
may be you came to some great city a few years agoa 
professed Christian. You were amember of a church onee, 
and a teacher in the sabbath-school, perhaps; but when 
you came among strangers you thought you would just 
wait a little—perhaps take a class by and by. So you 
gave up teaching in the Sunday-School; you gave up all 
work for Christ. Then in your new church you did not 
receive the attention or the warm welcome that you ex- 
pected, and you got into the habit of staying away. You 
have gone so far now, that you are found in the theatre, 
perhaps, and the companion of blasphemers and drunk- 
ards, Perhaps I am speaking now to some one who has 
been away from his father’s house for many years, Come, 
now, backslider, tell me are you happy? Have you had 
one happy hour since you left Christ? Does the world 
satisfy you, or those husks that you have got in the far 


+ 


eh ous Lewes Vole: 


Lari ar 


o never 
‘dom of 
vw privi- 
is never 
- Christ 
ve there 
spirit of 
‘e is not 
t being 
tidings 
, and go 
. of God 
d as one 
of death 
r bosom 
wake up 
orth and 


ose who 
der. It 
rs ago a 
ch once, 
t when 
uld just 
So you 
e up all 
did not 

ou ex- 
: You 
theatre, 

drunk- 
who has 

Come, 
you had 
ep world 
the fa 


‘ 
a 
a 
«# 
i 
¥ 

* e| 


“WHERE ART THOU 2?” 105 


country ? I have travelled a good deal, but I never found 
a happy backslider in my life. I never knew a man who 
was really born of God that ever could find the world 
satisfy him afterwards. Do you think the Prodigal Son 
was satisfied in that foreign country ? Ask the prodigals 
in this city if they are truly happy. You know they are 
not. “There is no peace, saith my God to the wicked.” 
There is no joy for the man in rebellion against his 
Creator. Suppose he has tasted the heavenly g cift, and 
been in communion with God, and had sweet fellowship 
with the King of Heaven, and had pleasant hours of 
service for the Master, but has backslidden, is it possible 
that he can be happy ? If he is, it is good evidence he was 
never really converted. Ifa man has been ‘orn again 
and has received the heavenly nature, this world can 
never satisfy the cravings of his nature. Oh, backslider, 
I pity you! But I want to tell you that the Lord Jesus 
pities you a good deal more than any one else can, 
He knows how bitter your life is; ,.He knows how 
dark your life is; He wants you to come home. Qh, 
backslider, come home to-night! I have a loving mes- 
sage from your Father. The Lord wants you, and 
calls you back to-night “Come home, oh wanderer, 
this night; return from the Gark mountains of. sin.” 
Return, and your Father will give you a warm welcome. 
I know that the devil has told you that God won’t have 
anything to do with you, because you have wandered 
away. If that is true, there would be very few men in 
heaven. David backslid; Abraham and Jacob turned 
away from God; I do not believe there is a saint in 
heaven but at some time of his life with his heart has 
backslidden from God. Perhaps not in his life, but in his 
heart. The prodigal’s heart got into the far country be- 
fore his body got there. Backslider! to-night come home. 
Your Father does not want you to stay away. Think 
ou the prodigal’s father was not anxious for him to come 
hig all oe long years he was there? Every year the 


106 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


father was looking and longing for him to return home. 
So God wants you to come home. I do not care how far you 
have wandered away; the great Shepherd will receive you 
back into the fold to-night. Did you ever hear of a 
backslider coming home, and God not willing to receive 
him? I have heard of earthly fathers and mothers not 
being willing to receive back their sons; but I defy any 
man to say he ever knew a really honest backslider want 
to get home, but God was willing to take him in. 

A number of years ago, before any railway came into 
Chicago, they used to bring in the grain from the Wes- 
tern prairies in waggons for hundreds of miles, so as to 
have it shipped off by the Lakes. There was a father 
who had a large farm out there, and who used to preach 
the gospel as well as attend to his farm. One day, when 
church business engaged him, he sent his son to Chicago 
with grain. He waited and waited for his boy to return, 
but he did not come home. At last he could wait no lon- 
ger, so he saddled his horse and rode to the place where 
his son had sold the grain. He found that he had been 
there and got the money for the grain; then he began to 
fear that his boy had been murdered and robbed. At 
last, with the aid of a detective, they tracked him to a 
gambling den, where they found that he had gambled 
away the whole of his money. In hopes of winning it 
back again, he then had sold the team, and lost that mo- 
ney too. He had fallen among thieves, and like the man 
who was going to Jericho, they stripped him, and then 
they cared no more about him. What could he do? He 
was ashamed to go home to meet his father, and he fled. 
The father knew what it all meant. He knew the boy 
thought he would be very angry with him. He was 
grieved to think that his boy should have such feelings 
towards him, That is just exactly like the sinner. He 
thinks because he has sinned God will have nothing to 
do with him, But what did that father do? Did he say, 
“ Let the boy go?” No; he went after him. He ar- 


home. 
‘ar you 
ve you 
r of a 
receive 
ars not 
fy any 
Yr want 


ne into 
ie Wes- 
o as to 
1 father 
preach 
y, when 
Chicago 
y return, 
no lon- 
» where 
ad been 
began to 
ad. At 
m to a 
rambled 
ning it 
nat mo- 
he man 
d then 
? He 
re fled. 
the boy 
ue was 
reelings 
r. He 
ing to 
@ say, 


e@ ar- 


“WHERE ART TOU ?” 107 
ranged his business and started after the boy. That man 
went from town to town, from city to city. He would 
get the ministers to let him preach, and at the close he 
would tell his story. ‘‘I have got a boy who is a wan- 
aerer on the face of the earth somewhere.” He would 
describe his boy and say, “If you ever hear of .him or 
see him, will you not write tome?” At last he found 
that he had gone to California, thousands of miles away. 
Did that father say, “Let him go?” No; off he went to 
the Pacific coast, seeking the boy. He went to San Fran- 
cisco, and advertised in the newspapers that he would 
preach at such a church on such a day. When he had 
preached he told his story, in hopes that the boy might 
have seen the advertisement and come to the church. 
When he had done, away under the gallery there was a 
young man who waited until the audience had gone out; 
then he came towards the pulpit. The father looked, and 
saw it was that boy, and he ran to him, and pressed him 
tohis bosom. The boy wanted to confess what he had 
done, but not a word would the father hear. He forgave 
him freely, and took him to his home once more. 

Oh, prodigal, you may be wandering on the dark moun- 
tains of sin, but God wants you to come home. The devil 
has been telling you lies about God; you think He will 
not receive you back. I tell you, He will welcome you 
this minute if you will come. Say, “I will arise and go 
to my Father.” May God incline you to take this step. 
There is not one whom Jesus has not sought far longer 
than that father. There has not been a day sinee you 
left Him but he has followed you. I do not care what 
the past has been, or how black your life, he will receive 
you back. Arise then, O backslider, and come home once 
more to your Father’s. house. 

Not long ago, in Edinburgh, a lady who was an earnest 
Christian worker, found a young woman whose feet had 
taken hold of hell, and wko was pressing onwards to a 
harlot’s grave. The lady begged her to go back to her 


103 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


home, but she said no, her parents would never receive 
her. This Christian woman knew what a mother’s heart 
was; so she sat down and wrote a letter to the mother, 
telling her how she had met her daughter, who was sorry, 
and wanted to return, The next post brought an answer 
back, and on the envelope was written, “ Immediately— 
immediately !” That was a mother’s heart. They opened 
the letter. Yes, she was forgiven. They wanted her 
back, and they sent money for her to come immediately. 
Sinner, that is the proclamation, “Come immediately.” 
That is what the great and loving God is saying to every 
wandering sinner—immediately. Yes, backshder, come 
home to- -night. He will give you a warm welcome, and 
there will be joy in heaven over your return. Come now, 
for everything is ready. 

A friend of mine said to me some time ago, Did you 
ever notice what the prodigal lost by going into that 
country ? He lost his food. That is what every poor 
backslider loses, They get no manna from heaven, The 
Bible is a closed book to them ; they see no beauty in the 
Word of God. 

Then the prodigal lost his work, He was a Jew, and 
they made him take care of swine; that was all loss for 
a Jew. So every | ackslider loses his work, He cannot 
do anything for God; he eannot work for eternity. He 
is a stumbling: block to the world, My friend, do noi ‘et 
the world stumble over you into hell. 

The prodigal alse lost his testemony. Who believed 
him? I can imagine some of these men came along, na- 
tives of that country, and they saw this poor prodigal in 
his rags, bare-footed and bare-headed, There he stands 
among the swine, and some one says to another, “ Look at 
that poor wretch.” “ What,” he says, “do you eall me a 
poor wretch ¢ My father is a wealthy man; he has got 
more clothes in his wardrobe than you ever ‘saw in your 
lif’. My father is a man of great wealth and position i 
Do you suppose these men would believe him? “'Thas 


recelve 
s heart 
nother, 
3 SOrry, 
answer 
itely— 
opened 
ed her 
liately. 
iately.” 
) every 
r, come 
ne, and 
1e now, 


id you 
to that 

poor 
. The 
r in the 


w, and 
oss for 
cannot 


’ He 


not ‘et 


hlieved 
ng’, na- 
ial in 
‘tands 
ok at 
me a 
is got 
your 


ti Or 
Thave 


“WHERE ART THOU ?” 109 
poor wretch the son of a wealthy man!” Not one of 
them would believe him. “If he had got such a wealthy 
father he would go to him.” So with the backslider rs; 
the world does not believe that they are the sons of a 
King. They say, “ Why don’t they go to Him, if there 
is bread enough and to spare ? W hy don’t they go 
home ?” 

Then, another thing the prodigal lost was his home. 
He had no home in that foreign country, As long as his 
money lasted, he was quite popular in the publie- house 
and among his ac quaintances ; he had proftessed friends, 
but as soon as his money was gone, where were his 
friends? That is the condition of every poor backslider 
in London. 

But now I can imagine some one saying, “There would 
be little use of me attempting to come back. Ina few 
days I should just be where I was again. I should like 
very much to go to my Father's home again, but I’m 
afraid I wouldn't stay there.” Well, just. picture this 
seene, The poor prodigal has got home, and the father 
had killed the fatted calf; and there e they are, sitting at 
the table eating. [ can imagine that was about the sweet- 
est morsel he ever got—perhaps the nicest dinner he ever 
had in his life. His father sits opposite; he is full of joy, 
and his heart is leaping within him, All at once he sees 
his boy weeping. ‘* My son, what are you weeping for ? 
Are you not glad to have wot home?” “ Oh, yes, father ; 
I never was so glad as I am to-day: but I am so afraid I 
will go back into that foreign country!” Why, you can- 
not imagine such a thing! "When you have got one meal 
in your Father’s house, you will never be inclined to wan- 
der away again. 

Now let me speak to the Third class, “If the righteous 

varcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner 

appear?” Sinner, what is to become of you? How shall 
you escape? “ Where art thow?” Is it true that you 
are living without God and without hope in the world 4 


110 S2nMONS BY MOODY. 


Did you ever stop to tii’ what would become of your 
soul if you should be taioa away by a sudden stroke of 
illness—where you wouia stand in eternity ? I read that 
the sinner is without Ged, without hope, and without ex- 
cuse. If you are not saved, what excuse will you have 

to give? Youcannot say that it is God’s fault. He is 
only too anxious to save you. I want to tell you to-night 
that you can be saved if you will. If you reallv want to 
pass from death to life, if you want to become an heir of 
eternal life, if you want to become a child of God, make 
up your mind this night that you will seek the kingdom 
of God. 1 tell you, upon the authority of this Word, that 
if you soc. the kingdom of God you will find it. No 
man ever soaeht “hiist with a heart to find Him who 


did now fins Ehim, never knew a man make up his 
mind to iiys Chey sostion settled, but it was settled soon, 
This last year oe: oie been a solemn feeling stealing 
over me. IT am in what they call in the middle of life, in 
the prime of life. To lvos upon life as a man who has 
reached the top of a hi!!, and just begins to go down the 
other side, I have got to the top of the hill, if I should 
live the full term of life—threescore years and ten—and 
am just on the other side. I am speaking to many now 
who are also on the top of the hill, and I ask you, if you 
are not Christians, just to pause a few minutes, and ask 
yourselves where you are. Let us look back on the hill 
that we have been climbing. What do we sec? Yonder is 
the cradle. It is not far away. How short life is! It 
all seems but as yesterday, Look along up the hill, and 
yonder is a tombstone; it marks the resting-place of a 
loved mother. When that mother died, did you not 
promise God that you would serve Him? Did you not 
say that your mother’s God should become your God ? 
And did you not take her hands in the stillness of the dy- 
ing hour, and say, “ Yes mother, I will meet you in 
heaven!” And have you kept that promise? Are you 
trying to keep it ? Ten years have rolled away : fifteen 


f your 
oke of 
d that 
yut ex- 
u have 
He is 
p-night 
vant to 
heir of 
|, make 
ingdom 
rd, that 
it. No 
im who 
> up his 
ed soon. 
stealing 
f life, in 
vho has 
ywn the 
should 
mn—and 
ny now 
1, if you 
and ask 
the hill 
onder is 
is! lt 
hill, and 
lace of a 
you not 
you not 
r God? 
the dy- 
you in 
Are you 
: fifteen 


S 
Fi 
a 


“WHERE ART THOU ?” 111 


years are you any nearer God? Did the promise 
work any improvement in you? No, your heart is get- 
ting harder; the night is getting darker; by and by death 
will be throwing its shadows around you. My friend, 
Where art thou? Look again. A little further up the 
hill there is another tombstone. It marks the resting- 
place of a child. It may have been a little lovely girl— 
perhaps her name was Mary; or it may have been a 
little boy—Charley ; and when the little boy was taken 
from you, did you not Sela God, and did you not 
promise the child, that you would meet it in heaven? Is 
the »yromise kept ? Think! Are you still fighting 
against God? Are you still hardening your heart? Ser- 
mons that would have moved you tive years ago—do they 
touch you now ? 

Once more look down the hill. Yonder there is a grave ; 
you cannot tell how many days, or weeks, or years it is 
away; you are hastening towards that grave. KEven 
should you live the life allotted to man, many of you are 
near the end, you are getting very feeble, and your locks 
are turning grey. It may be the cottin is already made 
that this body shall be laid in; it may be that the shroud 
is already waiting. My friends, is it not the height of 
madness to put off salvation so long ? Undoubtedly I 
am speaking to some who will be in eternity a week 
from now. In a large audience like this, during the are 
week death will surely come and snatch some away ; 1 
may be the speaker, or it may be some one who is ee 
ing. Why put off the question another day? Why say 
to the Lord Jesus again to-night, “Go thy way for this 
time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for 
thee?” Why not let him come to-night ’ Why not open 
your heart, and 8 say, “ King of Glory, come in?” 

Will there ever bea better opportunity ? Did not you 
promise tea, fifteen, twenty, thirty years ago that you 
would serve God? Some of you said you would do it 
when you got married and settled down; some of you 


SERMONS BY MOODY. 


said you would serve Him when you were your own 
master. Have you attended to it ? 

You know there are three steps to the lost world ? let 
me give you their names. The first is Neglect. Alla 
man has to do is to neglect salvation, and that will take 
him to the lost world. Some people say, “ What have [ 
done!” Why, if you merely neglect salvation, you will 
be lost. Iam ona swift river, and lying in the bottom 
of my little boat. Down yonder, ten miles below, is the 
great cataract. Hvery one that goes over it perishes, 
I need not row the boat down ; [have only to pull in the 
oars, and fold my arms and neglect. So all that a man 
has to do is to fold his arms in the current of life, and he 
will drift onwards and be lost. 

The second step is Refusal. If I met you at the door 
and pressed this question on you, you would say, “ Not 
to-night, Mr. Moody, not to-night ;” and if I repeated, 
“J want you to press into the Kingdom of God,” you 
would politely refuse: “ I will not become a Christian to- 
night, thank you; I know I ought, but I won’t to-night.” 

Then the last step is to Despise it. Some of you have 
already got on the lower round of the ladder. You des- 
pise Christ, you hate Christianity; you hate the best 
people on the earth, and the best friends you have got ; 
and if I were to offer you the Bible, you would tear it 
up and put your foot upon it. Oh, despisers! you will 
soon be in another world. Make haste and repent and 
turn to God. Now, on which step are you, my friend ; 
neglecting, or refusing, or despising ? Bear in mind that 
a great many are taken off from the first step ; they die 
in neglect. Anda great many are taken away refusing. 
And a great many are on the last step, despising salva- 
tion. 

A few years ago they neglected, then they got to re- 
a ; and now they despise Christianity and Christ. 

‘hey hate the sound of the church bell; they hate the 


Bible and the Christian; they curse the very ground 


“WHERE ART THOU 2” 113 


r own that we walk on. But one more step, and they are gone. 
Oh, ye despisers, I set before you life and death; which 

d? let will ye choose? When Pilate had Christ on his hands, 
Alla he said “ What shall I do with Him?” and the multi- 

ll take tude cried out “ Away with Him! Crucify Him ?” 
have I Young men, is that your language to-night? Do you 
yu will say, “ Away with this Gospel! Away with Christian- 
»ottom ity! Away with your prayers, your sermons, your Gos- 
_is the pel sounds! I do not want Christ!” Or will you be 
rishes, wise and say, “ Lord Jesus, I want Thee, I need Thee, I 
in the will have Thee?” Oh, may God bring you to that de- 


a man 4 cision ! 
and he 4 


1e door 
, “Not 
peated, 
1,” you % 
ian to- 4 
night.” ; 
u have 
bu des- 
e best “yl 
e got; a 
tear it 
bu wil! 
nt and 
riend ; 
d that 
ey die 
fusing. 
salva- 


to re- 
Yhrist. 
te the 
rround 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE.” 


“Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesua 
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no 
difference.” —RoMmaAns iii: 22. 


ee T is one of the hardest truths man has to 
We are apt to think that we are just 
éy) a little ‘better than our neighbours, and if we 
ay find that they are a little better than our- 
selves, we go to work and try to pull them down to 
our level. If you want to find out who and what 
man is, go to the third chapter of Romans, and 
there the whole story is told. “ There is none right- 
eous, no not one.” “ All have sinned and come 
short.” Add. Some men like to have their lives 
written before they die; if any of you would like 
to read your biography, turn to this chapter, and 
you will tind it already written. 

I can imagine some one saying, “ I wonder if 
he really pretends to say that ‘there is no difference,’ ” 
The teetotaller says, “Am I no better than the drunk- 
ard?” Well, I want to say right here, that it is a good 
deal better to be temperate than intemperate ; a good 
deal better to be honest than dishonest ; it is better for a 
man to be upright in all his transactions than to cheat 
right and left, even in this life. But when it comes to the 


ith of Jesua 
y there is 10 


yan has to 
re are just 
and if we 
han our- 
1 down to 
and what 
ans, and 
one right- 
and come 
heir lives 
ould like 
ppter, and 


wonder if 
terence.’ ” 
1e drunk- 

is a good 
bs a good 
tter for ¢ 

to cheat 
nes to the 


“THERE IS NO DIFF!:RENCE.” 


115 


great question of salvation, that does not touch the ques- 
tion at all, because “all have sinned, and come short of 
the glory of God.” Men are all bad by nature; the old 
Adam-stock is bad, and we cannot bring forth good fruit 
until we are grafted into the one True Vine. If I have 
an orchard, and two apple trees in it, which both bear 
some bitter apples, perfectly worthless, does it make any 
difference to me that the one tree has got perhaps five 
hundred apples, all bad, and the other only two, both 


bad? There is no difference; only one tree has more 
fruit than the other. But it is all bud. So it is with 
man. One thinks he has got one or two very little sins 


—Goid won't notice that; why that other man has broken 
every one of the ten commandments! No matter, there 
is no difference; they are both guilty; they have both 
broken the law. The law demands complete and perfect 
fulfilment, and if you cannot do that, you are lost, as far 
as the law is concerned. “ Whosoever shall kcep the 
whole law, aud yet offend in one point, he is guilty of 
all.” Suppose you were to hang up a man to the roof 
with a chain of ten links; if one were to break, does it 
matter that the other nine are all sound and whole? 
Not the least. One link breaks, and down comes the 
man, DButis it not rather hard that he should fall when 
the other nine are perfect, when only one is broken? 
Why, of course not; if one is broken, it is just the same 
to the man, as if all had been broken; he falls. So the 
man who breaks one commandment is guilty of all. He 
is a criminal in God’s sight. Look at yonder prison. 
with ils thousand victims. Some are there for murder, 
some for stealing, some for forgery, some for one thing 
and some for another. You may classify them, but 
every man is a eriminal. They. have all broken the 
law, and they are all paying the penalty. So the law 
has brought every man in a criminal in the sight of 


God. 


116 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


If a man should advertise that he could take a correct 
photograph of people’s hearts, do you believe he would 
find a customer? There is not a man among us whom 
you could hire to have his photograph taken, if you coula 
photograph the real man. We go to have our faces taken, 
and carefully arrange our toilet, and if the artist flatters 
us, we say, “Oh, yes, that’s a first-rate likeness,” as we 
pass it around among our friends. But let the real man 
be brought out, the photograph of the heart, and see if a 
man. will pass that round among his neighbours. Why, 
you would not want your own wife tosce it! You would 
be frightened even to look at it yourself. Nobody knows 
what is in that heart but Christ. We are told that “the 
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; 
who can know it?” We do not know our own hearts ; 
none of us have any idea how bad they are. Some bit- 
ter things are written against me, but I know a good 
many more things about myself that are bad than any 
other man. There is nothing good in the old Adam na- 
ture. We have gota heart in rebellion against God by 
nature, and we do not even love God unless we are born 
of the S Spirit. Ican understand why men do not like 
this third chapter of Romans—it is too strong for them 
It speaks the truth too plainly. But just because we do 
not like it, we shall be all the better for having a look at 
it; very likely we shall find that it is exactly what we 

want, after all. It’s a truth that men do not at all like, 
but I have noticed that the medicine we do not like is 
the medicine that will do us most good. If we do not 
think we are as bad as the description, we must just take 
a closer look at ourselves. Here is a man who thinks he 
is not just so bad as it makes him out to be. He is sure 
he is a little better than his neighbour next door; why, 
he goes to church regularly, and his neighbour never goes 
to church at all! “Of course,” he congratulates himself 
“Tl certainly get saved easier.” But there is no use 
trying to evade it. (Cod has given us the law to measure 


a correct 
e would 
is whom 
‘ou cowld 
es taken, 
t+ flatters 
"hy as we 
real man 
1 see if a 
Ss. Why, 
ou would 
ly knows 
that “ the 
y wicked; 
n hearts ; 
Some bit- 
w a good 
than any 
dam na- 
it, God by 
b are born 
not like 
for them 
ise we do 
a look at 
what we 
t all like, 
ot like is 
e do not 
just take 
thinks he 
He is sure 
bor; why, 
ever goes 
himself 


s no use 


y measure 


aT Pa 
ee Poke ae fs Aeae das 
Ee al alae: 


“THERE 18 NO DIFFERENCE,” 117 


ourselves by, and by this most perfect rule “ we have all 
sinned and come short,” and “there is no difference.” 
Paul brings in the law to show man that he is lost and 


ruined. God, being a perfect God, had to give a perfect 
law, and the law was given not to save men, but to mea- 
sure them by. I want you to understand this clearly, 
because I believe hundreds and thousands stumble there. 
They try to save themselves by trying to keep the law: 
but it was never meant for men to save themselves by. 
The law has never saved a single man since the world 
began. Men have been trying to keep it, but they have 
never succeeded, and never will. Ask Paul what it was 
viven for. Here is his answer, “ That every mouth might 
be stopped, and the whole world become guilty before 
God.” In this third chapter of Romans the world has 
been put on its trial, and found guilty. The verdict has 
been brought in against us all—these ministers and elders 
and church members, just as much as the prodigal and 
the drunkard—*“ All have sinned and come short.” 

The law stops every man’s mouth. God will have a 
man humble himself down on his face before Him, with 
not a word to say for himself. Then God will speak to 
him, when he owns that he is a sinner, and gets rid of all 
his own righteousness. I can always tell a man who has 
got near the kingdom of God: his mouth is stopped. If 
you will allow me the expression, God always shuts up a 
man’s lips before He saves him. Job was not saved un- 
til he stopped talking about himself. Just see how God 
dealt with him. First of all, He afflicts him, and Job be- 
gins to talk about his own goodness. “I delivered the 
poor,” he says, “and the fatherless, and him who had 
none to help him, I was eyes to the blind, and feet was 
I to the lame, I was a father to the poor!” Why, they 
would have made Job an elder, if there had been elders 
in those days! He had been a wonderfully good man! 
But now God says, “ Vil put a few questions to you. 
Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of 


118 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


thee, and answer thou me.” And Job is down directly ; 
Ht he is ashamed of himself; he cannot speak of his works 
if any more. “ Behold,” he cries, “Iam vile; what shall I 
i answer Thee? [ will lay mine hand upon my mouth.” 
But he is not low enough yet, perhaps, and God puts a 
few more questions. “Ah!” says Job, “I never under- 
Bit stood these things before—I never saw it in that light.” 
Bil He is thoroughly humbled now; he can’t help confessing 
ane it. “I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear: but 
Eial now mine eye seeth Thee, Wherefore I abhor nvyself, 
| and repent in dust and ashes.’ Now he has found his 
\ right position before God, and now God can talk to 
| him. And God helps him and raises him up, and gives 
him the double of all that he had before. The clouds, 
and the mist, and the darkness round his path are driven 
aiid away, and light from eternity bursts into his soul when 
Ht] he sees his nothingness in the sight of a pure and holy 
Bi God. 
Bil} This, then, is what God gives us the law for—to show 
us ourselves in our true colours.” 
I said to my little family, one morning, a few weeks 
= before the Chicago fire, “Iam coming home this after- 
AHI noon to give you a ride,’ My little boy clapped his 
Va ait hands. “Oh, papa, will you take me to see the bears in 
aa Lincoln Park ¢” “ Yes.” You know boys are very fond 
of seeing bears. I had not been gone long when my little 
Bit tt boy said, “Mamina, I wish you would get me ready.” 
ai hy “Oh,” she said, “it will be a long time before papa 
Hae, comes.” “But I want to get ready, mamma.” At last 
| HW he was ready to have the ride, face washed, and clothes 
all nice and clean. “Now you must take good care and 
not get yourself dirty again,” said mamma. Oh, of 
course he was going to take care; he wasn’t going to get 
dirty. So offhe ran to watch for me. However, it was 
a long time yet until the afternoon, and after a little he 
began to play. When I got home, 1 found him outside, 
with his face all covered with dirt. “I can’t take you to 


3 — oo 3 
~~ . cay | 
ee 


one 


9 


ectly ; 
works 
hall I 
outh.” 

uts a 
Fler: 
light.” 
‘essing 
r: but 
nvyself, 
ind his 
alk to 
1 gives 
clouds, 
driven 
1 when 


id holy 
o show 


r weeks 

after- 
ed his 
ears in 
ry fond 
y little 
ready.” 
e papa 
At last 
clothes 
hre and 
Oh, of 
r to get 
1 it was 
ittle he 
butside, 

you to 


a 
€ 


Ua yi 
os x ae > 


es SR la ee a Ze 


Pets 


= 


a 


¢ t 


ee 


Yous 
Sek 


ha 


® THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE,” 119 


the Park that way Willie.” Why, papa? you said you 
would take me.” “Ah, but I can’t; you're all over 
mud; I couldn’t be seen with such a dirty little boy.” 
“Why, I’se clean, papa; mamma washed me.” “ Well, 
you've got dirty since.” But he began to ery, and I could 
not convince him that he was dirty. “ T’se clean; main- 
ma washed me!” he cried. Do you think I argued with 
him? No. I just took him up in my arms, and carried 
him into the house, and showed him his face in the look- 
ing-glass. He had not a word to say. He could not 
take my word for it; but one look at the glass was 
enough ; he saw it for himself. He didn’t say he wasn’t 
dirty after that! 

Now the looking-glass showed him that his face was 
dirty—but I did not take the looking-glass te wash it; 
of course not. Yet that is just what thousands of people 
do. The law is the looking-glass to see ourselves in, to 
show us how vile and worthless we are in the sight of 
God: but they take the law, and try to wash themselves 
with it! Man has been trying that for six thousand 
years, and has miserably failed. By the deeds of the law 
there shall no flesh be justified in His sight. Only one 
Man ever lived on the earth who could say He had kept 
the law, and that was the Lord Jesus Christ. If He had 
committed one sin, and came short in the smallest degree, 
His offering Himself for us would have been useless. But 
men have tried to do what He did, and have failed. In- 
stead of sheltering under His righteousness, they have of- 
fered God their own. And God knew what a miserable 
failure it would be. “There is none that doeth good, no, 
not one.” 

I don’t care where you put man, everywhere he has 
been tried he has proved a total failure. He was put in 
Kden on trial; and some men say they wish they had 
Adam’s chance. If you had, you would go down as 
quickly as he did. You put five hundred children into 
this hall, and give them ten thousand toys; tell them they 


120 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


ean run all over the hall, and they can have anything 
they want except one thing, placed, let us say, in one of 
the corners of Mr. Sankey’s organ. You go out for a lit- 
tle while, and do you think thé at is not the * very first place 
iit they will go to? Why, nothing else in the room would 
Bath have any attraction for them but just the thing they 
a) were told not to touch. And so let us not think Adam 
1B aie was any worse than ourselves. Adam was put on trial, 
ait and Satan walks into Kden. T donot know how long he 
! was there, but I should think he had not been there 
taventy minutes before he stripped Adam of everything 
ent he had. There he is, fresh from the hands of his Crea- 
tor; Satan comes upon the scene, and presents a tempta- 
tion, and down he goes. J1e was a failure. 
| Then God took man into covenant with Him. He said 
wei to Abraham, “ Look yonder at the stars in the heavens 
and the sands on the seashore; I will make your seed 
like that. L will bless thee and multiply thee upon the 
earth.” But what a stupendous failure man was under 
the covenant. Go back and read about it. 
They are brought out of Egypt, see many signs and 
’ wonders, and stand at last at the foot of Mount Sinai. 
Then God’s holy law is given them. Did they not pro- 
inise to keep it? “O yes,” they ery, “we'll keep the law, 
| certainly |!” To hear them talk you might think it was 
th going to be all right now. But just wait till Joshua and 
Moses have turned their backs!" No sooner have their 
leaders gone up the mountain to have an interview with 
God than they begin saying, “ Wonder what’s become of 
it this man Moses? We don’t know where he’s got to. 
Come, Jet us make unto us another God. Aaron! make = § 
Rh us a golden culf; here are the golden ornaments we got 
from ‘the Kayptians, come and make us another God. ? 
So when it is made, the people raise a great shout, and 
fall down and worship it. “Hark! listen; what shout § 
{ is that I hear ¢” says Moses, as he comes down the moun- 
: tain side, “ Alas,” says Joshua, “ there’s war in the camp, 


. anything 
in one of 

t for a lit- 
first. place 
om would 
hing they 
ink Adam 
it on trial, 
ow long he 
been there 
everything 
his Crea- 
s a tempta- 


m. He said 
ee heavens 
» your seed 
e upon the 
was under 


signs and 
Lount Sinai. 
ey not pro- 
ep the law, 
hink it was 
Joshua and 
have their 
srview with 
s become of 
he’s got to. 
ron! make 
ents we got 
other God.” 

shout, and 
what shout 


n the moun- 
in the camp, 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE,” 121 
it is the shout of the victor.” “ Ah, no,” says Moses, “ it 
isn’t the shout of victory or of war, Joshua, it is the ery 
of the idolaters, They have forgotten the God who de- 
livered them from the Kgyptiahs, who led them through 
the Red Sea, who fed them with bread from hcaven— 
angel’s food. They have forgotten their promises to keep 
the commandments. Already the first two of them are 
broken, ‘no other gods, ‘no graven image. They’ve 
made them another god—a golden god!” And _ that’s 
what men have been doing ever since. 

‘There are more men in the land worshipping the gol- 
den calf than the God of heaven, Look around you. 
They bring before it health, and happiness, and peace. 
“Give me thirty pieces of silver, and I will sell you 

Christ,” is the world’s ery to-day. “Give me fashion, and 
[ will sell you Christ!” “I will sacrifice my wife, my 
children, my life, my all, for a little drink. I will sell 
my soul for drink!” It is easy to blame these men for 
worshipping the golden calf. But what are we doing 
ourselves? Ah, man was a fuclure then, and he has been 
a failure ever since, 

Then God put him under the judges, and wonderful 
judges they were; but once more, what a failure he was! 
After that came the prophets, and what a failure he was 
under them! Then came the Son from heaven himself, 
right out of the bosom ot the Father. He left the throne 
and came down here, to teach us how to live. We took 
Him and murdered Him on Calvary! Man was a failure 
in Christ’s time. 

And now we are living under the dispensation of 
grace—a wonderful dispens: ation. God is showering down 
blessings from above. But what is man under grace? A 
stupendous failure. Look at that man reeling on his way 
toa drunkard’s grave, and his soul to a drunkard’s hell. 
Look at the wretched harlots on your streets. Look at 
the profligacy, and the pauperism and the loathsome sick- 
ness, Look at the vice and crime that festers every- 

H 


122 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


where, and tell me is it not true that man isa failure 
under grace ? 

Yes, man is a failure. I can see right down the other 
side of the millennium; Christ has swayed his sceptre 
over the earth for a thousand years ; but man is a failure 
still. For “when the thousand years are expired, Satan 
shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go out to 
deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the 
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle 
miu ..eeee.-and they compassed the camp of the saints 
| about, and the beloved city ; and the fire came down from 


eT ESR ERR ES - 


tod out of heaven, and devoured them.” What man 
wants is another nature; he must be born again. What 
a foolish saying “ Experience teaches.” Man has been a 
long time at that school, and has never learned his lesson 
yet—his own weakness and inability. He still thinks 
i great things of his own strength. “Iam going to stan] 
after this,’ he says, “I have hit upon the right plan this 
time. Iam able to keep the law now.” But the first 
temptation comes and he is down. Man will not believe 
in God’s strength. Man will not acknowledge himself a 
failure, and surrender himself to Christ to save him 
| | from his sins. 

WIE. | | But is it not better to find out in this world that we 
4 are a failure, and to go to Christ for deliverance, than to 
sleep on. and go down to hell without knowing we are 
sinners ? 

I know tuis doctrine that we have all failed, that we 
have all sinned and come short, is exceedingly objection- 
able to the natural man, If I had tried to find out the 


most disagreeable verse in the whole Bible, perhaps | 
could not have fastened upon one more universally dis- 
IN} liked than “ There is no difference..” 

Hi I can imagine—and I think I have a right to imagine 
| it—Noah, leaving his ark and going off preaching for 
once ina while, As the passers-by stop to listen, there is 
no sound of the hammer or the plane, Noah has stopped 


" . sate 
"iA cea RRR enh ec rma 


— 


= = 


failure 


he other 
; sceptre 
a failure 
od, Satan 
ro out to 
AS of the 
to battle 
he saints 
own from 
Vhat man 
in. What 
has been a 
| his lesson 
till thinks 
1g to stan’ d 
1c plan this 
t the first 
mot believe 
himself a 
save him 


‘ld that we 
sce, than to 
ing we are 


ed, that we 
objection- 

‘nd out the 
perhaps 


rersally dis- 


to imagine 
eaching for 
sten, there 1s 
has stopped 


4 


srs o's 
3 


“THERE 1S NO DIFFERENCE.” 123 
work, fe has gone off on a preaching tour to warn his 
countrymen, Perhaps he was telling them that there was 
a great deluge coming to sweep away all the workers of 
iniquity ; perhaps he was warning them that every man 
who was not in the ark must perish ; that there would be 
no difference. I can imagine one man saying, “ You had 
better go back and finish your work, Noah, rather than 
come here preaching. You don’t think we are going to 
believe in such nonsense as that. You tell us that all 
are going to perish alike? Do you really expect us to 
believe that the kings and governors, the sheriffs and the 
princes, the rulers, the begears and thieves and harlots, 
are all going to be ‘alike lost?” “ Yes,” says Noah; “ the 
deluge that is coming by and by will take you all away 
—every man that is not in the ark must die. There 
will be no difference.” Doubtless they thought Noah had 
gone raving mad. But did not the flood come and take 
them all away ? Princes and paupers and knaves, and 
kings—was there any difference? No difference. 

When the destroying angel was about to pass through 
Keypt, no doubt the haughty Kgyptian laughed at the 
poor Israelite putting the blood on his door-post and 
lintel, “ What a foolish notion,” he would say derisively, 
“the very idea of sprinkling blood on a door-post! If 
there were anything coming, that would never keep it 
away, I don’t believe there is any death coming at all ; 
and if it did, it might touch these poor people, but it 
would certainly never come near us.” But when the 
night came, there was no difference. The king in his 
palace, the captive in his prison, the beggar by the way- 
side—they were all alike. Into every house the king ot 
terrors had come, and there was universal mourning in 
the land. In the home of the poor and the lowly, in the 
home of the prince and the noble, in the home of the 
governor and ruler, the eldest son lay dead, Only the 
poor Israelite escaped who had the blood on the door-post 
and lintel. And when God comes to us in judgment, if 


iif 


as oases 


ee 


es 
ore ate ae 


—— 


PRR =~ = 


Se a 


124 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


we are not in Christ, all will be alike. Learned or un: 
learned, high or low, priest or scribe—there will be no 
difference. 

Once more, I can imagine Abraham going down from 
the hills to Sodoin. He stands up, let us say, at the cor- 
ners of the streets, before Sodom was destroyed—“ Ye 
men of Sodom, I have a message from my God to you.” 
The people stand and look at the old man—you can see 
his white locks as the wind sweeps through them—* I 
have a warning for you,” he cries. “God is going to de- 
stroy the five cities of the plain, and every man who does 
not escape to yonder mountain must perish. When he 
comes to deal in judgment with you there will be no dif- 
ference; every man must die. The Lord Mayor, the 
princes, the chief men, the mighty men, the judges, the 
treasurers—all must perish. ‘The thief and the vagabond 
and the drunkard—yes, all must perish alike. There can 
be ‘no difference.” But these Sodomites answer, “ You 
had better go back to your tent on the hills, Abraham. 
We don’t believe a word of it. Sodom was never so 
prosperous; business was never so flourishing as now. 
The sun never shone any brighter than it does to-day. 
The lambs are skipping on the hills, and everything mov- 
ing on as it has done for centuries. Don’t preach that 
stuff to us; we don’t believe it.” A few hours pass, and 
Sodom is inashes! Did God make any difference among 
those who would not believe? No, God never utters any 
opinion; what he says is there is no difference. I read 
of a deluge of fire that is going to roll over this earth, 
and when God comes to deal in judgment, there will be 
no difference, and every man who is out of Christ must 
perish. 

It was my sad lot to be in the Chicago fire. As the 
flaines rolled down our streets, destroying everything in 
their onward march, I saw the great and the honourable, 
the learned aud the wise, fleeing befure the fire with the 
beggar, and the thief, and the harlot. All were alike 


or un: 


ll be no 


m froiw 
the cor- 
d—* Ye 
to you.” 
can see 
rem— I 
ig to de- 
vho does 
Vhen he 
e Hho dif- 
vyor, the 
yes, the 
vagabond 
There can 
er, “ You 
Abraham. 
never sO 
y as now. 
bs to-day. 
ing mov- 
each that 
pass, and 
hee among 
itters any 
I read 
his earth, 
re will be 
irist must 


», As the 
‘ything in 
snourable, 
e with the 
rere alike 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE,” 125 


As the flames swept through the city it was like the 
judgment day. The mayor, nor the mighty men, nor wise 
men could stop these flames. They were all on a level 
then, and many who were worth hundreds of thousands 
were left paupers that night. When the day of judg- 
ment comes, there will be no difference. When the de- 
luge came there was no difference ; Noah’s ark was worth 
more than all the world. The day before, it was the 
world’s laug’ 1:¢-stock, and if it had been put up to auc- 
tion, you cou not have got anybody to buy it except 
for firewood. But the deluge came, and then it was 
worth more than all the world together. And when the 
day of judgment comes, Christ will be worth more than 
all this world, more than ten thousand worlds. And if 
it was a terrible thing in the days of Noah to die out- 
side the ark, it will be far more terrible for us to go down 
in our sins to a Christless grave. 

Now I hope that you have seen what I have been try- 
ing to prove—that we are all sinners alike. If I have 
failed to prove that, then the meeting to-night has been 
a failure. I should like to use another illustration or 
two. I should like to make this truth so plain that a 
child might know it. In the olden times in England, we 
are told, they used to have a game of firing arrows 
through a ring on the top of a pole. The man that fail- 
ed to get ail his arrows through the ring was called a 
“sinner.” Now I should like for a moment to take up 
that illustration. Suppose our pole to be up in the gal- 
lery, and on the top of it the ring. I have got ten arrows, 
let us say, and Mr, Sankey has got another ten. I take 
up the first arrow, and take a good aim, Alas! I miss 
the mark. Therefore I am a “sinner.” “ But,” I say, 
“T will do the best I can with the other nine; I have 
only missed with one.” Like some men who try to keep 
all the commandments but one! I fire again and miss 
the mark a second time, “Ah, but,” I say, “I have got 
eight arrows still,” and away goes another arrow—ntiss, 


SERMONS BY MOODY. 


I fire _ the ten ar rows and do not get one through the 
ring, Well, I was a “sinner” after the first miss, “and I 
can only be a “sinner” after the tenth. Now Mr. Sankey 
comes with his ten arrows. He fires and gets his first 
arrow through. “Do you see that?” he says. “ Well,” 
I reply, “go on; don’t boast until you get them all 
through.” — He takes the second arrow and gets that 
through. “Ha! do you see that?” “Don’t ‘boast,” [ 
repeat, “until all ten are through;” if a man has not 
broken the law at all then he has wot something to boast 
of! Away goes the third, and it goes through. Then 
another and another all right, and another until nine are 
through. “ Now,” he says, “one more arrow, and I am 
not asinner” He takes up the last arrow, and his hand 
trembles a little; he just misses the mark. And he is a 
“sinner” as wellas lam. My friend, have you never 
missed the mark ? Have you not come short? I should 
like to see the man who never missed the mark. He 
never lived, 

Let me give you just one more illustration. When 
Chicago was a small town, it was incorporated and made 
acity. When we got our charter for the city, there was 
one clause in the constitution that allowed the Mayor to 
appoint all the police. It worked very well when it was 
a sinall city; but when it had three or four hundred thou- 
sand inhabitants, it put too much power in the hands of 
one man. So our leading citizens got a new bill passed 
that took the power out of the hands of the Mayor, and 
put it into the hands of Commissioners appointed by Gov- 
ernment, ‘There was one clause in the new law that no 
man should be a policeman who was not a certain height 
—5 feet 6 inches, let us say. When the Commissioners 
got into power, they advertised for men as candidates, 
aud in the advertisement they stated that no man need 
apply who could not bring good credentials to recommend 
him, I remember going past the oftice one day, and there 
was a crowd of them waiting to get in, They quite 


ih the 
sand I 
Sankey 
his first 
« Well,” 
hem all 
rots that 
boast,” I 
has not 
to boast 
. Then 
nine are 
and T am 
his hand 
id he is a 
you never 
T should 
hark. He 


in, When 
and made 
there was 
Mayor to 
hen it was 
dred thou- 
e hands of 
bill passed 
layor, and 
od by Gov- 
w that no 
tain height 
ymissioners 
candidates, 
b man need 
recommend 
, and there 


They quite 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE,” 127 
blocked up the side of the street; and they were com- 
paring notes as to their chances of success. One says to 
another, “JT have got a good letter of recommendation 
from the Mayor, and one from the supreme judge.” Ano- 
ther says. “And I have got a good letter from Senator 
So-and-so; I’m sure to get in.” The two men come on 
together, and lay their letters down on the Commis- 
sioners’ desk. “ Well,’ say the officials, “you have cer- 
tainly a good many letters, but we won't read them till 
we measure you.” Ah! they forgot all about that. So 
the first man is measured, and he is only five feet. “No 
chance for you, sir; the law says the men must be 5 feet 
6 inches, and you don’t come up to the standard.” The 
other says, “ Well, my chance is a good deal better than 
his. I’m a good bit taller than he i is,’—he begins to mea- 
sure himself by the other man. That is what people are 
always doing, measuring themselves by others. Measure 
yourselves by the law of God, or by the Son of God Him- 
self; and if you do that, you will find you have come 
short. He goes up to the officers, and they measure him ; 
he is 5 feet 5 inches and nine-tenths of an inch. “No 
good,” they tell him; “youre not up to the standard.” 
“But Pm only one- tenth of an inch short,” he remon- 
strates. “It’s no matter,” they say; “ there’s no differ- 
ence.’ He goes with the man who was five feet. One 
comes short six inches, and the other only one-tenth of 
an inch, but the law cannot be changed. And the law of 
God is that no man shall go into the kingdom of heaven 
with one sin on him, He that has broken the least law 
is guilty of all. 

“Then, is there any hope for me?” you say. “ What 
star is there to relieve the midnight darkness and gloom ? 
What is to become of me? If all this is true, [am a poor 
lost soul. I have committed sin from my earliest child- 
hood.” Thank God, my friends, this is just where the 
gospel comes in. “He was made sin for us who knew no 
sin.’ “ He was wounded for our transgressions. He was 


PT Be = — 


em 


—— == 


= 


: SS eee a oy a ee = = 
J z = Tez Tissaeaes te ~ os : aieiienle Mi ~ een ea * PET RNG ee Re 
eee — == aS TSS Se rm ee eS ie 


128 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


bruised for our iniquities ; the chastisement of our peace 
was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed.” 
“We all like sheep have gone astray, we have turned 
every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid upon 
Him the iniquity of us all.” 

You ask me what my hope is; it is, that Christ died 
for my sins, in my stead, in my place, and therefore I 
can enter into life eternal. You ask Paul what his hope 
was. “Christ died for our sins according to the Scrip- 
ture.” This is the hope in which died all the glorious 
martyrs vf old, in which all who have entered heaven’s 
gate have found their only comfort. Take that doctrine 
of substitution out of the Bible, and my hope is lost. 
With the law, without Christ, we are all undone. The 
law we have broken, and it can only hang over our head 
the sharp sword of justice. Kven if we could keep it 
from this moment, there remains the unforgiven past. 
“Without shedding of blood there is no remission.” 

He only is safe for eternity who is sheltered behind the 
finished work of Christ. What thelaw cannot do for us, 
He can do. He obeyed it to the very letter, and under 
His obedience we can take our stand. For us he has suttered 
all His penalties, and paid all that the law demands. 
“ His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree.” 
He saw the awful end from the beginning ; He knew 
what death, what ruin, what misery lay before us if we 
were left to ourselves. And He came from heaven to 
teach us the new and living way by which “all that 
believe are justified from all things from which they could 
not be justified by the law of Moses.” 

There is a well-known story told of Napoleon the First’s 
time. In one of the conscriptions, during one of his 

many wars, a man was ballotted as a conscript who did 
not want to go, but he had a friend who offered to go in 
his place. His friend joined the regiment in his name, 
and was sent off to the war. By and by a battle came 
on, in which he was killed, and they buried him on the 


peace 
valed. 
burned 
1 upon 


st died 
‘efore I 
is hope 
» Serip- 
glorious 
eaven’s 
loctrine 
is lost. 
ie, The 
yur head 
| keep it 
en past. 
” 
hind the 
jo for us, 
nd under 
s sutfered 
lemands. 
the tree.” 
e knew 
h us if we 
eaven to 
“all that 
hey could 


he First’s 
me of his 
t who did 
d to go in 
his name, 
ttle came 
Lim on the 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE.” 129 


battle-field. Some time after the Emperor wanted more 
men, and by some mistake the first man was ballotted the 
second time. They went to take him but he remon- 
strated. “Youcannot take me.” “Why not!” “I am 
dead,” was the reply. “You are not dead; you are alive 
and well.” “But I amdead,” he said. “ Why, man, you 
must be mad. Where did youdie?” “ At sucha battle, 
and you left me buried on such a battle-field.” “You 
talk like a mad-man,” they cried; but the man stuck 
to his point that he had been dead and buried some 
months. “ You look up your books,” he said, and see 
if it is not so.” They looked and found that he was 
right. They found the man’s name entered as drafted, sent 
to the war and marked off as killed. “Look here,” they 
said, “ you didn’t die; you must have got some one to go 
for you; it must have been your substitute.” “TI know 
that,” he said; “he died in my stead. You cannot touch 
me; I died in ‘that man, and I go free. The law has no 
claim against me,” T hey would not recognize the doctrine 
of substitution, and the case was carried to the Emperor. 
3ut he said that the man was right, that he was dead and 
buried in the eyes of the law, and that France had no 
claim against him. 

The story may be true, or it may not, but one thing I 
know to be true, that the Emperor of heaven recognizes 
the doctrine of substitution. Christ died for me; that is 
my hope of eternal life. “There is no condemnation to 
them which are in Christ Jesus.” If you ask me what 
you must do to share this blessing, I answer, go and deal 
personally with Christ about it. Take the sinner’s place 
at the foot of the cross. Strip yourself of all your own 
righteousness, and put on Christ’s, Wrap yourself up in 
His perfect robe, and reccive Him by simple trust as your 
own Saviour, Thus you inherit the price ‘less treasures that 
Christ hath purchased with his blood. “ As many as re- 
ceived Him, to them qave He power to become the sons of 
od.” Yes, sons of God; powcr to overcome the world, 


130 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


the flesh, and the devil; power to crucify every besetting 
sin, passion, lust ; power to shout in triumph over every 
trouble and temptation of your life, “I can do all things 
through Christ which strengtheneth me.” 

I have been trying to tell you the old, old tale that men 
are sinners. I may be speaking to some one, perhaps, 
who thinks it a waste of time. “God knows I'm a sin- 
ner,” he cries; “ you don’t need to prove it. Since I could 
speak, I’ve done nothing but break every law of earth 
and heaven.” Well, my friend, Ihave good news for you. 
It is Just as easy for God to save you, who have broken 
the whole decalogue, as the man who has only broken 
one of the commandments. Both are dead—dead in sins, 
It is no matter how dead you are, or how long you have 
been dead; Christ can bring you to life just the same. 
There is no difference. When Christ met that poor widow 
coming out of Nain, following the body of her darling boy 
to the grave—he was just newly dead—His loving heart 
could not pass her; he stopped the funeral, and bade the 
dead arise. He was obeyed at once, and the mother was 
clasped once more in the living embrace of her son. And 
when Jesus stood by the grave of Lazarus, who had been 
dead four days, was it not just as easy for Him to say, 
“Lazarus, come forth?” Was it not as easy for Him to 
bring Lazarus from his tomb, who had been dead four 
days, as the son of the widow, who had been dead but one ? 
Yes, it was just as easy; there was no difference. They 
were both alike dead, and Christ saved the one just as 
easily, and as willingly, and as lovingly as the other. And 
therefore, my friend, you need not complain that Christ 
cannot save you. Why, Christ died for the wngodly. 
And if you turn to Him at this moment with an honest 
heart, and receive Him simply as your Saviour and your 
God, I have the authority of His Word for telling you 
that He will im no wise cast you out. 

And you who have never felt the burden of your sin— 
you who think there is a great deal of difference—you 


etting 
every 
things 


aut men 
erhaps, 

1 a sin- 

T eould 
yf earth 
ror you. 
broken 
broken 

| in sins. 
rou have 
he same. 
yr widow 
‘ling boy 
Ing ‘heart 
pade the 
pther was 
bn, And 
had been 
m to say, 
br Him to 
dead four 
but one ? 
xe, They 
ne just as 
her. And 
at Christ 

ungodly. 
an honest 

and your 
elling you 


our sin— 
ence—you 


“THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE.” 13] 
who thank God that you are not as other men——beware. 
God has nothing to say to the self-righteous. And unless 
you humble yourself before Him in the dust, and confess 
before Him your iniquities and sins, the cate of heaven, 


which is open only for sinners, saved by grace, must be 
shut against you for ever. 


GOOD NEWS 


“Moreover. brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which 1 
preached unto you, which also ve have received, and wherein ye 
staund.—1 ConinTHIANS, xv; 1, 


DO not think there is a word in the English 
language so little understood as the word 
“cospel.” We hear it every day, and we 
have heard it from our earliest childhood, yet 
there are many people, and even many Christians, 
who do not really kuow what it means. I believe 
I was a child vf God along time before I really 
knew. The word “gospel” means “ God’s spell,” or 
good spell, or in other words. “good news.” The 
gospel is good tidings of great joy. No better news 
; ever came out of heaven than the gospel. No bet- 
J 


"4 


| 


ter news ever fell upon the ears of the family of 

man than the gospel. When the angels came down 

f to proclaim the tidings, what di. they say to those 
shepherds on the plains of Beilhichem ¢ “ Behold I 
bring you sad tidings?” No! © Behold, [bring you bad 
news?” No! “ Behe'id, I bring you good tidings of great 
joy, which shall be to all people; for unto you is born 
this day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” If those 
shepherds had been like a good many people at the pre- 
sent time, they would have said, “ We do not believe it is 


auhich 1 


herevw Ye 


English 
e word 
ind we 
od, yet 
ristians, 
believe 
T really 
pell,” or 
;” The 
ter news 
No bet- 
amily of 
e down 
to those 
Behold I 
you bad 
sof great 
1is born 
If those 
the pre- 
lieve it ks 


GOOD NEWS, 133 
These angels want tc 
These angels are trying to excite us, 
That is what Satan is saying 
“Don’t you believe the gospel is good news; it 
He knows the moment 
And no 


It is all excitement. 
get up a revival. 
Don’t you believe them.” 
now. 
wil] only make you miserable.” 
aman believes good news, he just receives it. 
one who is under the power of the devil really believes 


good news. 


that the gospel is good news. But these shepherds be- 
lieved the message that the angels brought, and their 
hearts were filled with joy. If a boy came with a de- 
spatch to some one here, could you not tell by the re- 
ceiver’s looks what kind of a message it was? If it 
brought good news you would see it in his face in a mo- 
ment, If it told him that his boy, away in some foreign 
land, a prodigal son, had come to himself, like the one in 
the 15th of Luke, do you not think that father’s face 
would light up with j joy? And if his wife were here, he 
would not wait till they got home, or till she asked for it, 
he would pass it over to her, and her face would brighten 
too, as she shared his joy. But the tidings that the gos- 
pel brings are more glorious than that. We are dead in 
trespasses and sins, and the gospel offers life. We are 


enemies to God, and the gospel offers reconciliation, The 
world is in darkness, and the gospel offers light. Because 


man will not believe the gospel that Christ is the light 
of the world, the world is dark to-day. But the moment 
a man believes, the light from Calvary crosses his path 
and he walks in an unclouded sun. 

I want to tell you why I like the gospel. It is because 
it has been the very best news I have ever heard. That 
is just why I like to preach it, because it has done me so 
much good. No man can ever tell what it has done for 
him, but I think I can tell what it has undone. It has 
taken out of my path four of the bitterest enemies I ever 
had. 

There is that terrible enemy mentioned in 1 Cor. xv., 
the last enemy, Death. The gospel has taken it out of 


1 hi A 
ea! 
if (of if 

te ‘| t 
i HF hs lH j : 
i i Hit | 

Bh [We 


TE Sa 


ee 


134 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


the way. My niind very often rolls back twenty years 
ago, before | was converted, and I think how dark it 
used to seem, as [ thought of the future. I well remem- 
ber how I used to look on death as a terrible monster, 
how he used to throw his dark shadow across my path ; 
how I trembled as I thought of the terrible hour when he 
should come for me; how I ¢ hought i should like to die 
of some lingering dises we, such as consumption, so that I 
might know when he was coming. It was the custom in 
our village to toll from the old church bell the age of any 
one who died. Death never entered that village and tore 
away one of the inhabitants but I counted the tolling of 
the bell. Sometimes it was seventy, sometimes cighty ; 
sometimes it would be away down among the teens; 
sometimes it would toll out the death of some one of my 
ownage. It made asvlemn impression upon me. I felt 
a coward then. I thought of the cold hands of death 
feeling for the cords of life. [thought of being launched 
forth to spend my eternity in an unknown land. 

As I looked into the grave and saw the sexton throw 
the earth on the coftin-lid, “arth to earth; ashes to 
ashes; dust to dust,” it seemed like the death knell of my 
soul, But that is all changed now. The grave has lost 
its terror. As [ go on towards heaven I can shout, “O 
death! where is thy sting?” and I hear the answer 
rolling down from Calvary—* buried in the bosom of the 
Son of God.” He took the sting right out of death for 
me, and received it into His own bosom. Take a hornet 
and pluck the sting out; you are not afraid of it after 
that any more than of a ily. So death has lost its sting. 
That last enemy has been overcome, and I can look on 
death as a crushed victim. All that death can get now 
is this old Adam, and I do not care how quickly I get rid 
of it. Ishall get a glorified body, a body much better 
than this. Suppose death should’ come stealing up into 
this pulpit, and lay his icy hand upon my heart, and it 
should cease to throb, I should rise to the better world to 


rears 
kk it 
nem- 
ister, 
yath ; 
en he 
0 clie 
shat I 
om in 
yf any 
d tore 
ing of 
ihity 3 ; 
teens} 
of mV 
I felt 
| death 


inched 


throw 
shes to 
lof my 
as lost 
ut, *O 
answer 
of the 
ath for 
hornet 
it after 
s sting. 
look on 
et now 
get rid 
h better 
ap into 
, and it 
orld to 


GOOD NEWS. 135 


be present with the King. The gospel has made an 
enemy a friend. Whata glorious thought, that when you 
die you but sink into the arms of Jesus, to be borne to 
the land of everlasting rest! “To die the apostie says is 
gain.” I can imagine ‘when they laid our Lord in Joseph’s 
tomb one might have seen death sitting over the sepul- 
chre saying, “I have Him, He is my victim. He said he 
was the resurrection ad the life. Now I hold him in 
my cold embrace. They thought he was never going to 
die; but see Him now. He has had to pay tribute to 
me.” Never! The glorious morning comes, the Son of 
man bursts asunder the bands of death, and rises, a Con- 
queror, from the grave. “ Because I live,’ He shouts, 
“ye shall live also.” Yes, ye shall live also—is it not good 
news? Ah, my friends, there is no bad news about the 
gospel, which makes it so sweet to live, so sweet to die. 

Another terrible enemy that troubled me was Sin. 
What a terrible hour I thought it would be, when my 
sins from childhood, every secret thought, every evil de- 
sire, every thing done i in the dark should be brought to 
the light, and spread out before an assembled universe! 
Thank God, these thoughts are gone. The gospel tells 
me my sins are all put away in Christ. Out of love to 
ine He has taken all my sins and cast them behind his 
back. That isa safe place for them. God never turns 
back ; He always marches on, i..s will never see your 
sins if they are behind his 'achk -+hat is one of his own 
illustrations, Satan hes to get behind God to find them. 
How faraway are thoy. .d can they never come back 
again? “ As far as the east as from the west, so fav hath 
He removed our transgressions from us.” Not some ot 
them; He takes them al! away. You may pile up youi 
sins till they rise like a dark mountain, and then multi- 
ply them by ten thousand for those you cannot think of ; 
and after you have tried to enumerate ali the sins you 
have ever committed, just let me bring one verse in, and 
that mountain will meit away: “ The vived of Jesus 


136 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.” In Ireland, 
some time ago, a teacher asked a little boy if there was 
anything God could not do; and the little fellow said, 
“Yes; He cannot see my sins through the blood of 
Christ.” That is just what He cannot do. The blood 
covers them. Is it not good news that you can get rid 
of sin? You come to Christ a sinner, and if you re- 
ceive His gospel your sins are taken away. You are 
invited to do this; nay, he intreats you to doit. You 
are invited to make an exchange ; to get rid of all your 
sins, and to take Christ and His righteousness in the place 
of them. Is not that good news ? 

There is another enemy which used to trouble mea 
great deal—Judgment. I used too look forward to the 
terrible day when I should be summoned before God. 
I could not tell whether I should hear the voice of Christ 
saying. “ Depart from Me, ye cursed,” or whether it would 
be, “ Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” And I thought 
that till he stood before the great white throne, no man 
could tell whether he was to be on the right hand or the 
left. But the gospel tells me that is already settled: 
“There is now no condemnation to them which are in 
Christ Jesus.” “ Verily, Verily’—and when you see that 
word in Scripture, you may know there is something very 
important coming—“ Verily, Verily, | say unto you, he 
that heareth My word, and believeth on Him that sent 
Me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condem- 
nation, but is passed from death unto life.” Well, now, 
I am not coming into judgment for sin. It is no open 
question. God’s word has settled it. Christ was judged 
for me, and died in my stead, and I go free. He that 
believeth hath—h-a t-h, hath. Is not that good news ? 
A man prayed for me the other day that I might obtain 
eternal life at last, I could not have said Amen to that. 
If he meant it in this sense, I obtained eternal life nine- 
teen years ago, when I was converted. What is the gift 
of God, if it is not eternal life? And what makes the 


Jand, 
e was 
, said, 
od of 
blood 
ret rid 
ou re- 
pu are 
_ You 
]] your 


e place 


le me a 

1 to the 

re God. 

f£ Christ 

it would 
thought 
no man 

id or the 
settled : 

eh are in 

i see that 

ing very 

oO you, he 
hat sent 
conden 
Vell, now, 
no open 
as judged 
He that 
od news ? 
ht obtain 
in to that. 
life nine- 
is the gift 
nakes tue 


GOOD NEWS. 137 


gospel such good news? Is it not that it offers eternal 
life to every poor sinner who will takeit? If an angel 
came straight from the throne of God, and proclaimed 
that God had sent him here to offer us any one thing we 
might ask—that each one should have his own petition 
granted—what would be your cry? There would be but 
oe response, and the cry would make heaven ring : 
“ Kternal life? eternal life!” Everything else would float 
away into nothingness. It is life men want, men value 
most. Let aman worth a million dollars be on a wrecked 
vessel, and if he could just save his life for six months 
by giving that million, he would give it in an instant. 
But the gospel is not a six months’ gift. “The gift of 
God vs eternal life.” And is it not one of the greatest 
marvels that men have to stand and plead, and pray and 
beseech their fellow men to take this precious gift of 
God ? “0 

My friends, there is one spot on earth where the fear 
of Death, of Sin, and of Judgment, need never trouble us, 
the only safe spot on earth where the sinner can stand— 
Calvary. Out in our western country, in the autumn, 
when men go hunting, and there has not been any rain 
for months, sometimes the prairie grass catches fire. Some- 
times, when the wind is strong, the flames may be seen 
rolling alowig twenty feet high, destroying man and beast 
in their on war rush. When the frontiersmen see what 
is comi”:», what du they do to escape ? They know they 
cannot “us 2 fast as the fire can run. Not the fleetest 
horse can eseape iv. They just take a match and light 
the gress aronid them, The flames sweep onwards ; they 
take their stand in the burnt district, and are safe. They 
hear the flames roar as they. come along; they see death 
bearing down upon them with resistless fury, but they 
do not fear. They do not even tremble as the ocean of 
flame surges around them, for over the place where they 
stand th» firs has already passed, and there is no danger. 


There is nothing for the fire to burn. And there is one 
1 


Seer weepiereees eae ei <= 


SSS 


= 


C4 
= —— = = == 


———— 


eae a a pean naaantiinnrmennnmnrins 


138 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


spot on earth that God has swept over. Eighteen hun- 
dred years ago the storm burst on Calvary, and the Son 
of God took it into his own bosom, and now, if we take 
our stand by the Cross, we are safe for time and for eter- 
nity. 

Sinner, would you be safe to-night? Would you be 
free from the condemnation of the sins that are past, 
from the power of the temptations that are to come? 
Then take your stand on the Rock of Ages. Let death, 
let the grave, let the judgment come, the victory is 
Christ’s and yours through Him, Oh, will you not receive 
this gospel to-night- ‘his wonderful message. 

Some people, whe» the gospel is preached, put on a 
long face, as if they hia «© attend a funeral, or witness 
an execution, or hear sou: ‘ry, stupid lecture or sermon. 
It was my privilege to go into Richmond with General 
Grant’s army. I had not been long there before it was 
announced that the negroes were going to have a jubilee 
meeting. ‘These eoloured people were just coming into 
liberty ; their chains were falling off, and they were just 
awakening to the fact that they were free. I thought it 
would be a great event, and I went down to the African 
Church, one of the largest in the South, and found it 
crowded. One of the coloured chaplains of a northern 
regiment had offered to speak. I have heard many elo- 
quent nen in Europe and in America, but I do not think 
I ever heard eloquence such as 1 heard that day. He 
said, “ Mothers! you rejoice to-day; you are for ever 
free! That little child has been torn from your embrace, 
and sold off to some distant state for the last time. Your 
hearts are never to be broken again in that way: you 
are free.” The women clapped their hands and shouted 
at the top of their voices. “Glory, glory to God.” It 
was good news to them, and they believed it. It filled 
them full of joy. Then he turned to the young men and 
said, “ Young men! you rejoice to-day ; you have heard 
the erack of the slave-driver’s whip for the last time ; 


hun- 
Son 
take 
eter- 


ou be 
past, 
come $ 
death, 
ory 38 
yecelve 


ut on & 
witness 
sermon. 
General 
eit was 
a jubilee 
ing into 
ere just 
sought it 
African 
found it 
northern 
many elo- 
not think 
lay. He 
for ever 
» embrace, 
me. Your 
way: you 
1d shouted 
Go a” It 


GooD NEWS, 139 
your posterity shall be free; young men rejoice to-day, 
you are for ever free!” And they clapped their hands, 
and shouted, “ Glory to God!” They believed the good 
tidings. ‘“ Young maidens!” he said, “ you rejoice to- 
day. You have been put on the auction-block and sold 
for the last time; you are free—for ever free!” They 
believed it, and lifting up their voices, shouted, “ Glory 
be to God!” I never was in such a meeting. They be- 
lieved that it was good news to them. 
My friends, I bring you better tidings than that. No 
coloured man or woman ever had such a mean, wicked, 
cruel master as those that are serving Satan. Do I speak 
to a man who is a slave to strong drink? Christ can 
vive you strength to hurl the cup from you, and make 
you a sober man, a loving husband, a kind father. Yes, 
poor wife of the drunkard, He gives you good news; 
your husband may become a sober managain, And you, 
poor sinner, you who have been so rebellious and way- 
ward, the gospel brings a message of forgiveness to you. 
God wants you to be reconciled to Him. “Be ye recon- 
ciled unto God.” It is His message to you—a message of 
friendship. Here is a little story of reconciliation which 
I was told lately ; perhaps it may help you a little: 
There was an Englishman who had an only son; and 
only sons are often petted, and humoured, and ruined. 
This boy became very headstrong, and very often he and 
his father had trouble. One day they had a quarrel, and 
the father was very angry, and so was the son; and the 
father said he wished the boy would leave home and never 
come back. The boy said he would go, and would not 
come into hts father’s house again till he sent for him. 
The father said he would never send for him. Well, 
away went the boy. But when a father gives up a boy, 
a mother does not. You mothers will understand that, 
but the fathers may not. You know there is no love on 
earth so strong as a mother’s love. A great many things 
may separate a man and his wife; a great many things 


140 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


may separate a father from a son; but there is nothing in 
the wide world that can ever separate a true mother from 
her child. ‘To be sure, there are some mothers that have 
drunk so much liquor, that they have drunk up all their 
affection. But I am talking about a true mother; and 
she would never cast off her boy. 

Well, the mother began to write, and plead with the 
boy to write to his father first, and he would forgive him ; 
but the boy said, “I will never go home till father asks 
me.” Then she pled with the father, but the father said, 
“No, I will never ask him.” At last the mother came 
down to her sick-bed, broken-hearted, and when she was 
given up by the physicians to die, the husband, anxious 
to gratify her last ~ish, wanted to know if there was 
nothing he could do for her before she died. The mother 
gave him a look ; he well knew what it meant. Then she 
said, “ Yes, there is one iuing you can do. You can send 
for my boy. That is the only wish on earth you can 
gratify. If you do not pity him and love him when lam 
dead and gone, who will?” “ Well,” said the father, “I 
will send word to him that you want to see him.” “ No,” 
she says, “ you know he will not come for me. If ever I 
see him you must send for him. At last the father went 
to his oftice and wrote a despatch in his own name, ask- 
ing the boy to come home. As soon as he got the invita- 
tion from his father he started off to see his dying mother. 
W hen he opened the door to go in he found his mother 
dying, and his father by the bedside. The father heard 
the door open, and saw the boy, but instead of going to 
meet him he went to another part of the room, and re- 
fused to speak to him. His mother seized his hand—how 
she had longed to press it! She kissed him, and then 
said, “ Now, my son, just speak to your father. You speak 
first, and it will all be over.” But the boy said, “No, 
mother, I will not speak to him until he speaks to me.” 


She took her husband’s hand in one hand and the boy’s in ' 


the other, and spent her dying moments in trying to bring 


Pai Me as See go areas he oes Sed OE ok 


or in 
from 
have 
their 
and 
h the 
> him ; 
rr asks 
yy said, 
r came 
he was 
ynxio0us 
ere was 
mother 
‘hen she 


If ever | 
er went 
nme, ask- 
e invita- 
g mother. 
is mother 
er heard 
going to 
and re- 
»nd—how 
and then 
ou eee 
said, ‘ ‘No, 
ks to me. 
ne boy's in | 
g to bring 


GOOD NEWS. 141 


about a reconciliation. Then just as she was expiring— 
she could not speak—-so she put the hand of the wayward 
boy into the hand of the father, and passed away! The 
boy locked at his mother, and the father at his wife, and 
at last the father’s heart broke, and he opened his arms, 
and took that boy to his bosom, and by that body they 
were reconciled, Sinner, that is only a faint type, a poor 
illustration: because God is not angry with you. I bring 
you to- night to the dead body of Christ. I ask you to 
look at the wounds in his hands and feet, and the wound 
in his side. And Task you, “ Will you not be reconciled ?” 
When He left heaven, He went down into the manger, 
that He might get hold of the vilest sinner, and put the 
hand of the wayward prodigal into that of the Father, 
and He died that you and I might be reconciled. If you 
take my advice you will not sleep to-night until you are 
reconciled. “ Be ye reconciled.” Oh, this gospel of re- 
conciliation ! My friends, is it not a glad gospel ? 

And then it is a free gospel; any one may have it. You 
need not ask, “For whom is this good news.” It is for 
yourself, If you would like Christ’s own word for it, 
come with me to that scene in Jerusalem where the dis- 
ciples are bidding Him farewell. Calvary with all its 
horrors is behind Him; Gethsemane is over, and Pilate’s 
judgment hall. He has passed the grave, and is about 
to take His place at the right hand of the Father, 
Around Him stands His little band of disciples, the little 
Church He was to leave behind Him to be His wit- 
nesses. The hour of parting has come, and He has some 
“last words” for them. Is He thinking about Himself 
in these closing moments? Is He thinking about the 
throne that is waiting Him, and the Father's smile that 
will welcome Him to heaven? Is He going over in 
memory the scenes of the past; or is He thinking of the 
friends who have followed Him s0 far, who will miss 
Him so much when He is gone? No, ‘He is thinking 
about you. You imagined He would think of those 


142 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


who loved Him? No, sinner, He thought of you then, 
He thought of His enemies, those who shunned Him, 
those who despised Him, those who killed Him—He 
thought what more he could do for them. He thought 
of those who would hate Him, of those who would bave 
none of His Gospel, of those who would say, it was too 
good to be true, of those who would make excuse that 
He never died for them. And then, turning to His disci- 
ples, his heart just bursting with compassion, He gives 
them His farewell charge, “Go ye into ALL the world 
and preach the Gospel TO EVERY CREATURE.” They are 
almost His last words “ to every creature.” 

I can imagine Peter saying, “ Lord, do you really mean 
that we shall preach the Gospel to every creature ?” 
“Yes, Peter.” “Shall we go back to Jerusalem, and 
preach the Gospel to those Jerusalem sinners who mur- 
ered you?” “ Yes, Peter, go back and tarry there 
until you are endued with power from on high, Offer 
the Gospel to them first. Go search out that man who 
spat in my face ; tell him J forgive him; there is nothing 
in My heart, but love for him. Go, search out the man 
who put that cruel crown of thorns on my brow; tell 
him I will have a crown ready for him in My kingdom, 
if he will accept salvation; there shall not be a thorn in 
it, and he shall wear it for ever and ever in the kingdom 
of his Redeemer, Find out that man who took the reed 
from My hand, and smote My head, driving the thorns 
deeper into My brow. If he will accept salvation as a 
gift, I will give him a sceptre, and he shall sway it over 
the nations of the earth. Yes, I will give him to sit 
with Me upon My throne. Go, seek that man who 
struck Me with the palm of his hand; find him and 
preach the Gospel to him; tell him that the blood of 
Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin, and My blood was 
shed for him freely.” Yes, I can imagine Him saying, 
“Go, seek out that poor soldier who drove the spear 
into My side; tell him that there is a nearer way to My 


Px 
ey 
i 
i 
ae 
ety 

‘ x 

ie 


Ps ak 


then, 
Him, 
—He 
yught 
have 
43 too 
» that 
disci- 
, gives 
world 
ey are 


y mean 
ture 3” 
m, and 
10 mur- 
there 
_ Offer 
han who 
nothing 
the man 
ow ; tell 
ingdom, 
thorn in 
kingdom 
the reed 
e thorns 
tion as a 
it over 
m to sit 
jan who 
him and 
blood of 
blood was 
rn saying, 
the spear 
ay to My 


By a er Calais ull 


GOOD NEWS. 143 


heart than that. Tell him that I forgive him freely ; and 
tell him I will make him a soldier of the cross, and My 
banner over him shall be love. 

I thank God that the Gospel is to be preached to 
every creature. I thank God the commission is so free, 
There is no man so far gone, but the grace of God can 
reach him; no man so desperate or so black, but He 
can forgive him. Yes, I thank God I can preach the 
Gospel to the man or the woman who is as black as hell 
itself. I thank God for the “ whosoevers” of the invi- 
tations of Christ. “God so loved the world that He 
gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on 
Him should ‘not perish, but have everlasting life,” and 
“ Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” 

IT heard of a woman once who thought there was no 
promise in the Bible for her, they were all for other 
people. One day she got a letter, and when she opened 
it, found it was not for her at all, but for some other 
woman of the same name, It led her to ask herself, “ If 
I should find some promise in the Bible directed to me, 
how should I know that it meant me, and not some other 
woman?” And she found out that she must just take 
God at His word, and include herself among the “ who- 
soevers” and the “every creatures” to whom the Gos- 
pel is freely preached. I know that word “ whosoever” 
ineans every man, every woman, every child in this wide 
world. It means that boy down there, that grey-haired 
man, that maiden in the blush of youth, that young 
ian breaking a mother’s heart, that drunkard steeped in 
misery and sin, Oh, my friends, will you not believe 
this good news? Will you not receive this wonderful 
Gospel of Christ? Will you not believe, poor sinner, 
that it means you ? Will you say it is too good to be 
true ? 

I was in Ohio a few years ago, and was invited to 
preach in the State prison. Eleven hundred convicts 
were brought into the chapel, and all sat in front of me 


144 


time = 


SERMONS BY MOODY. 


After I had got through the preaching, the chaplain said 
to me: “Mr. Moody, I want to tell you of a scene which 
occurred in this room. A few years ago, our commission- 
ers went to the governor of the State, and got him to 
promise that he would pardon five men for good beha- 
viour. The governor consented, with this understanding 
—that the record was to be kept secret, and that at the 
end of six months the five men highest on the roll should 
receive a pardon regardless of who or what they were. At 
the end of six months the prisoners were all brought into 
the chapel; the commissioners came up, and the Presi- 
dent stood up on the platform, and putting his hand in his 
pee brought out some papers, and said, ‘I hold in my 
1 


and pardons for five men. 


99) 


The chaplain told me he 


never witnessed anything on earth like it. Every man 
was as still as death ; many were deadly pale, and the sus- 
pense was awful ; it seemed as if every heart had ceased 
to beat. The commissioner went on to tell them how 
they had got the pardon; but the chaplain interrupted 
him. “ Before you make your speech, read out the names, 


This suspense is awful.” 


So he read out the first name, 


“Reuben Johnson wiil come and get his pardon ;” and 
he held it out, but none came forward. He said to the 
governor, “ Are all the prisoners here?” The governor 


told him they were all there. 


Then he said again, “ Reu- 


ben Johnson will come and get his pardon. It is signed 
and sealed by the governor. He is a free man.” Not one 
moved, The chaplain told me he looked right down where 
Reuben was; he was well known; he had been nineteen 
years there, and many were looking round to see him 
But he himself was looking round to 
see the fortunate man who had got his pardon, Finally, 
the chaplain caught his eye, and said, “ Reuben, you are 
the man.” Reuben turned round and looked behind him 


spring to his feet. 


to see where Reuben was. 
time, “ Reuben, you are the man ;’ 
he looked round, thinking it must be some other Reuben, 


b] 


The chaplain said the second 


and the second time 


said 
hich 
310n- 
m to 
jeha- 
1ding 
it the 
hould 
re, At 
4 into 
Presi- 
in his 
in my 
me he 
y man 
he sus- 
ceased 
m how 
rrupted 
b names, 
4 name, 
” and 
d to the 
rovernor 
P ' “ Reu- 
g signed 
Not one 
where 
nineteen 
see him 
round to 
Finally, 
Rivet 
hind him 
ne secon 
ond time 
Reuben. 


HAAS Er ech 


GOOD NEWS. 145 
So men do not believe the gospel is for them. They think 
it is too good, and pass it over their shoulders to the next 
man. But you are the man to-night. Well, the chaplain 
could see where Reuben was, and he had to say three 
times, “ Reuben, come and get your pardon.” At last the 
truth began to steal over the old man; he got up and 
caine along down the hall, trembling from head to foot, 
and when he got the pardon he looked at it, and went 
back to his seat, and buried his face in his hands and wept. 
When the prisoners got into the ranks to go back to the 
cells, Reuben got into the ranks too, and the chaplain had 
to call to him, “ Reuben, get out of the ranks; you are a 
free man, you are no longer a prisoner.” And Reuben 
stepped out of the ranks. He was free! That is the way 
men make out pardons. They make them out for good 
character or good behaviour. But God makes out pardons 
for men who have not got any character, who have been 
very, very bad. He offers a pardon to every sinner on 
earth if he will take it. I do not care who he is, or what 
he is hke. He may be the greatest libertine that ever 
walked the streets, or the greatest blackguard who ever 
lived, or the greatest drunkard, or thief, or vagabond ; 
but I come to-night with glad tidings, and preach the 
gospel to every creature, 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST? 


*€ Saying, What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They say 
ss wnto him, The son of David.—Marr, xxii: 42. 


SUPPOSE there is no one nere who has not 
thought, more or less, about Christ. You have 
heard about Him, and read about Him, and 
heard men preach about Him. For eighteen 
hundred years, men have been talking about Hin, 
and thinking about Him; and some have their 
| minds made up about who He is, and doubtless 
Mh some have not. And although all these years have 
rolled away, this question comes up, addressed to 
) each of us, to-day, “ What think ye of Christ ?” 

|, I donot know why it should not be thought a 
\ proper question for one man to put to another. If 
‘h f I were to ask you what you thipk of any of your 


a 


prominent men, you would already have your mind 
made up about him. If I were to ssk you what you 
think of our President, you would speak right out, and 
qi | tell me your opinion in a minute. If I were to ask about 
aie ite your governor, you would tell me freely what you had 
et | for or against him. And why should not people make up 
a their minds about the Lord Jesus Christ, and take their 
ie | stand for or against Him? If you think well of Him, 
ae why not speak well of Him, and range yourselves on His 


aE CTS meine 


‘hey Say 


has not 
yu have 
m, and 
ighteen 

t Hin, 
re their 
ubtless 
rs have 
ssed to 
Y) ” 
ought a 
her. If 
of your 
ur mind 
hat you 
out, and 
sk about 
you had 
make up 
ke their 
of Him, 
bs on His 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST ? 147 


side? And if you thing ill of Him, and believe Him to 
be an impostor, and that He did not die to save the 
world, why not lift up your voice, and say you are against 
Him? It would be a happy day for Christianity if men 
would just take sides—if we could know positively who 
was really fur Him, and who was against Him. 

It is of very little importance what the world thinks of 
any one else. All the great ones, all the noble people of 
this world must soon be gone. Yes; it matters little com- 
paratively what we think of them. Their lives can only 
interest a few; but every living soul on the face of the 
earth is concerned with this Man, ‘The question for the 
world is, “ What think ye of Christ?” I do not ask you 
what you think of the Episcopal Church, or of the Pres- 
byterians, or the Baptists, or the Roman Catholics; I do 
not ask you what you think of this minister or that, of 
this doctrine or that; but I want to ask you what you 
think of the living person of Christ ? 

I should like to ask, Was He really the Son of God— 
the great God-man? Did He leave heaven and come 
down to this world for a purpose? Was it really to seek 
and to save? I should like to begin with the manger, 
and follow Him up through the thirty-three years He 
was here upon earth. I should ask you what you think 
of His coming into this world, and teing born in a man- 
ger when it might have been a palace; why He left the 
grandeur and the glory of heaven, and the royal retinue 
of angels; why He passed by palaces and crowns and do- 
inion, and came down here alone ? 

I should like to ask what you think of Him as a 
teacher ? He spake as never man spake. I should like to 
take Him up asa preacher. I should like to bring you 
to that mountain side, that we might listen to the words 
as they fall from His gentle lips. Talk about the preach- 
ers of the present day! I would rather a thousand times 
be five minutes at the feet of Christ, than listen a life- 
time to all the wise men in the world. He used just to 


—————" | 


" 
~ 


148 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


hang truth upon anything. Yonder is a sower, a fox, a 
bird, and He just gathers the truth round them, so that 
you cannot see a fox, a sower, or a bird, without thinking 
what Jesus said. Yonder is a lily of the valley, you can- 
not see it without thinking of His words, “ They toil not, 
neither do they spin.” He ‘mnakes the little sparrow chirp- 
ing in the air preach to us. How fresh those wonderful 
sermons are, how they live to-day! How we love to tell 
them to our children, how the children love to hear! 
“Tell me a story about Jesus,” how often we hear it; 
how the little ones love his sermons! No story-book in 
the world will ever interest them like the stories that He 
told. And yet how profound He was; how He puzzled 
the wise men; how the Seribes and the Pharisees could 
never fathom Him! Oh, do you not think He was a 
wonderful preacher ? 

I should like to ask you what you think of Him as a 
physician. A man would soon have a reputation as a 
doctor if he could cure as Christ did. No ease was ever 
brought to Him but what He was a match for. He had 
but to speak the word, and disease tled before Him. Here 
comes a man covered with leprosy. “ Lord, if Thou wilt 
Thou canst make me clean,” he cries. “I will,” says the 
Great Physician, and in an instant the leprosy is gone. 
The world has hospitals for incurable diseases; but there 
were no incurable diseases with Hin. 

Now see Him in the little home at Bethany, binding 
up the wounded hearts of Martha and Mary, and tell me 
what you think of Him as a comforter. He is a husband 
to the widow, and a father to the fatherless. ‘The weary 
may find a resting place upon that breast, and the friend- 
less may reckon Him their friend. He never varies, He 
never fails, He never dies. His sympathy is ever fresh. 
His love is ever free. O widow and orphans, O Sorrow- 
ing and Mourning, will you not thank God for Christ the 
comforter ¢ 


ti 


yx, & 
that 
king 
can- 
| not, 
shirp- 
lerful 
o tell 
hear ! 
ar it; 
ook in 
iat He 
uzzled 
~eould 
was a 


im as a 
on as a 
as ever 
He had 
Here 
fou wilt 
ays the 
is gone. 
t there 


binding 
tell me 
susband 
e weary 
, friend- 
ries, He 
er fresh. 
Sorrow- 
irist the 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST ? 149 


But these are not the points I wish to take up. . Let 
us go to those who knew Christ, and ask what they 
thought of Him. If you want to tind out what a man is 
now-a-days, you inquire about him from those who know 


him best. J do not wish to be partial; we will go to his 
enemies and to his friends. We will ask them, What 
think ye of Christ? We will ask his friends and his 
enemies. If we only went to those who liked Him, you 
would say, “Oh he is so blind; he thinks so much of the 
man that he can’t see his faults. You can’t get any thing 
out of him, unless it be in his favour; it is a one-sided 
affair altogether.” So we shall go in the first place to 
his enemies, to those who hated. Him, persecuted Him, 
cursed and slew Him, I shall put you in the jury-box, 


and call upon them to tell us what they think of Him. 


First among the witnesses, let us call upon the Phari- 
sees. We know how they hated Him. Let us puta few 
questions to them. Come, Pharisees, tell us what you 
have against the Son of God. What do you think of 
Christ? Hear what they say! This man receiveth sin- 
ners. What an argument to bring against Him! Why, 
it is the very thing that makes us love Him. It is the 
glory of the gospel. He receives sinners. If He had not, 
what would have become of us? Have you nothing 
more to bring against Him than this? Why, it is one ot 
the greatest compliments that was ever paid Him. Once 
more, when He was hanging on the tree, you had this 
to say of Him, “He saved others, Himself He cannot 
save.’ And so He did save others, but He could not save 
Himself and save us too. So He laid down His own life 
for yours and mine, Yes, Pharisees, you have told the 
truth for once in your lives! le saved others. He died 
for others. He was a ransom for many; so it is quite 


true what you think of Him—He saved others, Himself 
He cannot save 


150 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


Now let us call upon Caiaphas. Let him stand up here 
in his flowing robes; let us ask him for his evidence. 
“ Caiaphas, you were chief priest when Christ was tried ; 
you were president of the Sanhedrim; you were in the 
council-chamber when they found Him guilty; you your- 
self condemned Him. ‘Tell us, what did the witnesses 
say? On what grounds did you judge Him? What 
testimony was brought against Him ? 

“He hath spoken blasphemy,” says Caiaphas. “He 
said, ‘Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting 
the right hand of power, and coming in the cloud: of 
heaven. When I heard that, I found Him guilty of 
blasphemy; I rent my mantle, and condemned Him to 
death.” Yes all that they had against Him was that He 
was the Son of God; and they slew Him for the promise 
of His coming for His bride. 

Now, let us summon Pilate. Let him enter the wit- 
ness-box. Pilate, this man was brought before you; you 
examined Him; you talked with Him face to face, what 
think you of Christ? “I find no fault in Him,” says Pilate. 
“ He said He was the King of the Jews” (just as he wrote 
it over the cross); “but I find no fault in Him.” Such 
is the testimony of the man who examined Him! And, 
as he stands there, the centre of a Jewish mob, there comes 
along a man, elbowing his way, in haste. He rushes up 
to Pilate, and, thrusting out his hand, gives him a mes- 
sage. He tears it open; his face turns pale as he reads— 
“ Have thou nothing to do with this gust man, for I have 
suffered many things this day in a dream because of 
Him.” It is from Pilate’s wife—her testimony to Christ. 
You want to know what His enemies thought of Him ? 
You want to know what a heathen thought? Well, 
here it is, “no fault in Him;” and the wife of a heathen, 
“this just man !” 

And now, look—in comes Judas. He ought to make a 
good witness. Let us address him, “Come, tell us, 
Judas, what think you of Christ. You knew the Master 


yp here 
idence. 
. tried ; 
in the 
1 your- 
tnesses 


What 
; “He 


tting 

loud: of 
uilty of 
Him to 
that He 
promise 


the wit- 
you, you 
‘ace, what 
uys Pilate. 
he wrote 
in.” Such 
m! And, 
here comes 
rushes up 
im a mes- 
e reads— 
for I have 
ecause of 
to Christ. 
it of Him ¢ 
nt? Well, 


a heathen, 


to make a 
e, tell us, 
the Master 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST ? 151 


well; you sold Him for thirty pieces of silver; you be- 
trayed Him with a kiss; you saw Him perforin those 
miracles; you were with Him in Jerusalem. In Bethany, 
when He summoned up Lazarus, you were there. What 
think you of Him?” I can see him as he comes into the 
presence of the chief priests; I can hear the money ring 
as he dashes it upon the table—“ J have betrayed in- 
nocent blood!” Here is the man who betrayed Him, 
and this is what he thinks of Him! Yes, my friends, 
God has made every man who had anything to do with 
the death of His Son put their testimony on record that 
He was an innocent man. 

Let us take the Centurion, who was present at the exe- 
cution. He had charge of the Roman soldiers. He had 
told them to make Him carry His cross; he had given 
orders for the nails to be driven into His feet and hands, 
for the spear to be thrust in His side, Let the Centurion 
come forward. “Centurion, you had charge of the exe- 
cutioners ; you saw that the order for His death was car- 
ried out; you saw Him die; you heard Him speak upon 
the cross. Tell us, what think you of Christ?” Hark! 
Look at him; he is smiting his breast as he cries, “ Truly, 
this was the Son of God!” 

I might go to the thief upon the cross, and ask what 
he thought of Him. At first he railed upon Him and re- 
viled Him. But then he thought better of it. “This 
man hath done nothing amiss,” he says. I might go fur- 
ther, I might summon the very devils themselves and 
ask them for their testimony. Have they anything to 
say of Him? Why, the very devils call Him the Son of 
God! In Mark we have the unclean spirit crying, “ Jesus, 
Thou Son of the most High God.” Men say, O, I believe 
Christ to be the Son of God, and because I believe it in- 
tellectually, I shall be saved. I tell you the devils did 
that, And they did more than that, they trembled, 

Let us bring in His friends. We want to hear their 
evidence, Let us call that prince of preachers, Let us 


Sa Se 


Sa a ae eS 


152 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


hear the forerunner, the wilderness preacher, John. Save 
the Master Himself, none ever preached like this man— 
this man who drew all Jerusalem and all Judea into the 
wilderness to hear him; this man who burst upon the 
nations like the flash of a meteor. Let John the Baptist 
come with his leathern girdle and his hairy coat, and 
let him tell us what he thinks of Christ. His words, 
though they were echoed in the wilderness of Palestine, 
are written in the Book forever, “ Behold the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world.” This is 
what John the Baptist thought of Him. “I bear record 
that He is the Son of God.” No wonder he drew all 
Jerusalem and Judea to him, because he preached Christ. 
And whenever men preach Christ, they are sure to have 
plenty of followers. 

Let us bring in Peter, who was with Him on the 
mount of transtiguration, who was with Him the night 
He was betrayed. “Come, Peter, tell us what you think 
of Christ. Stand in this witness-box and testify of Him. 
You denied Him once. You said, with a curse, you did 
not know Him. Was it true, Peter? Don’t you know 
Him?” “Know Him!” I can imagine Peter saying: 
“Tt was a lie I told them. I did know Him.” After- 
wards [can hear him charging home their guilt upon 
these Jerusalem sinners. He calls Him “both Lord and 
Christ.” Such was the testimony on the day of Penti- 
cost. “God hath made that same Jesus both Lord and 
Christ.” And tradition telJs us that when they came to 
execute Peter, he felt he was not worthy to die in the 
way his Master died, and he requeste-? to be crucified 
his head downwards. So much did Peter think of 

im! 

Now let us hear from the beloved disciple John. He 
knew more about Christ than any other man. He had 
laid his head on his Saviour’s bosom. He had heard the 
throbbing of that loving heart. Look into his gospel if 
you wish to know what he thought of Him. 


bee} 
that 
hati 
B 
pers 
Bre 
wh 
have 
you 
do 
“Wi 
who 
of H 
Jesu 
View 
: I ha 
but 
the § 
Bu 
into { 
what 
of th 


Save 
an— 
o the 
n the 
aptist 
Pend 
words, 
estine, 
umb of 
This 1S 
record 
rew all 
Christ. 
to have 


on the 
he night 
ou think 
of Him. 
ou did 
lou know 
saying : 
» After- 
ilt upon 
Lord and 
of Penti- 
Lord and 
, came tO 
ie in the 
erucifie: 
r think of 


ohn. He 

He hal 
heard the 
. gospel it 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST? 1538 


Matthew writes of Him as the Royal King come from 
his throne. Mark writes of Him as the servant, and Luke 
as the Son of Man. John takes up his pen, and with 
one stroke, for ever settles the question of Unitarianism. 
He goes right back before the time of Adam. “In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, 
and the Word was God.” Look into Revelation. He calls 
Him “the bright and the Morning Star.” So John 
thought well of Him—because he knew Him well. 

We might bring in Thomas, the doubting disciple. 
“You doubted Him, Thomas? You would not believe 
He had risen, and you put your fingers into the wound 
in His side. What do you think of Him?” “ My Lord 
and my God!” says Thomas. 

Then go over to Decapolis and you will find Christ has 
been there casting out devils, Let us call the men of 
that country and ask what they think of Him. “Ze 
hath done all things well,” they say. 

But we have other witnesses to bring in. Take the 
persecuting Saul, once one of the worst of His enemies. 
Breathing out threatenings, He meets him, “Saul, Saul, 
why persecutest thou Me?” says Christ ; and He might 
have added, “ What have I done to you? Have I injured 
you in any way? Did I not come to bless you?) Why 
do you treat Me thus, Saul?” And then Saul asks, 
“Who art Thou, Lord?” “I am Jesus of Nazareth, 
whom thou persecutest.” You see, He was not ashamed 
of His name; although He had been in heaven, “I am 
Jesus of Nazareth.’ What a change did that one inter- 
view make to Paul! <A few years after we hear him say, 
“T have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them 
but dross that I may win Christ.” Sucha testimony to 
the Saviour ! 

But I shall go still further. I shall go away from earth 
into the other world. I shall summon the angels and ask 
what they think of Christ. They saw Him in the bosom 


of the Father before the world was. Before the dawn of 
J 


PII WH 


154 SERMONS BY MOODY, 


creation; before the morning stars sang together, He was 
there. They saw Him leave the throne and come down 
to the manger. What a scene for them to witness! Ask 
these heavenly beings what they thought of Him then. 
For once they are permitted to speak ; for once the silence 
of heaven is broken. Listen to their song on the plains 
of Bethlehem, “ Behold, I bring you good tidings of great 
joy which shall be to all people. For unto you is born 
this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ 
the Lord.”* He leaves the throne to save the world. Is 
it a wonder the angels thought well of Him ? 

Then there are the redeemed saints—they that see 
Him face to face. Here on earth He was never known, 
no one seemed really to be acquainted with Him; but 
He was known in that world where He had been from 
the foundation. What do they think cf Him there? If 
we could hear from heaven, we should hear a shout which 
would glorify and magnify His name. We are told that 
when John was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and being 
caught up, he heard a shout around him, ten thousand 
times ten thousand, and thousands and thousands of 
voices. “Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, 
and glory, and blessing!” Yes, He is worthy of all this. 
Heaven cannot speak too well of Him. Oh, that earth 
would take up the echo, and join with heaven in singing, 
“ WortTHY to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and 
strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing !” 

But there is yet another witness, a higher still. Some 
think that the God of the Old Testament is the Christ of 
the New. But when Jesus, came out of Jordan, baptized 
by John, there came a voice from heaven, God, the Father, 
spoke. It was His testimony to Christ: “ This is My 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Ah, yes! 
God the Father thinks well of the Son. And if God is 
well pleased with Him, so ought we. If the sinner and 
God are well pleased with Christ, then the sinner and 


WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST ? 155 


> was God can meet. The moment you say, as the Father said, 
down “T am well pleased with Him,” and accept Hitn, you are 
Ask | wedded to God. Will you not believe the testimony ? 
then. Will you not believe this witness, this last of all, the 
ilence Lord of hosts, the King of kings, Himself? Once more 
plains He repeats it, so that all may know it. With Peter and 
F great James and John, on the mount of transfiguration, He 
is born | cries again, “ This is my beloved Son; hear Him.” And 
Christ that voice went echoing and re-echoing through Pales- 
Jd. Is tine, through all the earth from sea to sea, yes, that voice 
is echoing still, Hear Him! Hear Him! 

hat see My friend, will you hear Him to-day? Hark! what 
known, is He saying to you? “Come unto Me, all ye that labour 
im; but and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my 
en from yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and 
ore? i lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
ut which For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” Will you 
told that =§ not think well of such a Saviour? Will you not believe 
nd being Him? Will you not trust in Him with all your heart 
thousand = and mind? Will you not live for Him? If He laid 
sands of § cown His life for us, is it not the least we can do to lay 
o receive | down ours for Him? Jf He bore the Cross and died on 
| honour, it for me, ought I not to be willing to take it up for 
fallthis. § Him? Oh, have we not reason to think well of Him. 
at earth Do you think it is right and noble to lift up your voice 
singing, avainst such a Saviour? Do you think it is just to cry, 


‘dom, and “Crucify Him! crucify Him!” Oh, may God help all 
of us to glorify the Father, by thinking well of His 


only-begotten Son, 


1, Some 
Christ of 
baptized 
e Father, 
his is My 
Ah, yes! 
if God 1s 
sinner al 
inner and 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 


“The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was 
lost.”—LuKE xix: 10. 


O me this is one of the sweetest verses in the 
whole Bible. In this one little short sentence 
we are told what Christ came into this world 

for. He came for a purpose; He came to do 
a work, and in this little verse the whole story is 
told. He came not to condemn the world, but that 
the world, through Ilim, might be saved. 

A few years ago, the Prince of Wales came to 
America, and there was great excitement about this 
Crown Prince coming to our country. The papers 
took it up, and began to discusss it, and a great 
many were wondering what he came for. Was it 
to look into the republican government ? Was it for 
his health ? Was it to see our institutions? or for 

this, or for that ? He came, and went, but he never told 
us what he came for. But when the Prince of Heaven 
came duwn into this world, He told us what He came for. 
God sent Him, and He came to do the will of His Father. 
What was that? “To seek and to save that which was 
lost.” And you cannot find any place in Scripture where 
a man was sent by God to do a work in which he failed. 


+ See Spa eS 


» was 


n the 
tence 
vorld 
to do 
ory is 
t that 


me to 

t this 
papers 
great 
as it 

5 it for 
or for 
er told 
eaven 
me for. 
Vather. 
ch was 
» where 
s failed. 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 157 


God sent Moses to Egypt to bring three millions of bonds- 
men up out of the house of bondage into the promised 
land. Did he fail? It looked, at first, as if he were 
going to. If we had been in the Court when Pharaoh 
said to Moses, “ Who is God, that I should obey Him ?” 
and ordered him out of his presence, we might have 
thought it meant failure. But did it? God sent Elijah 
to stand before Ahab, and it was a bold thing when he 
told him there should be neither dew nor rain; but 
didn’t he lock up the heavens for three years and six 
months ? Now here is God sending His own beloved Son 
from His bosom, from the throne, down into this world. 
Do you think He is going to fail? Thanks be to God, 
He can save to the uttermost, and there is not a man in 
this city who may not find it so, if he is willing to be 
saved. 

I find a great blessing to myself in taking up a pas- 
sage like this, and looking all around it, to see what 
brought it out. If you look back to the close of the 
eighteenth chapter, you will find Christ coming near the 
city of Jericho. And, sitting by the wayside, was a poor, 
blind beggar. Perhaps he has been there for years, led 
out, it may be, by one of his children, or perhaps as we 
sometimes see, he had got a dog to lead him out. There 
he had sat for years, and his cry had been, “ Please give 
a poor blind man a farthing.” One day, as he was sitting 
there, a man came down from Jerusalem, and seeing the 
poor, blind man, took his seat by his side, and said, “ Bar- 
timeus, I have good news for you.” “What is it?” said 
the blind beggar. “There is a man in Israel who is able 
to give you sight.” “Oh, no!” said the blind beggar, 
“ there is no chance of my ever receiving sight. I was born 
blind, and nobody born blind ever got sight. I shall never 
see in this world ; I may in the world to come; but I must 
go through this world blind.” “ But,” said the man, “ let 
me tell you, I was at Jerusalem the other day, and the 
great Galilean prophet was there, and I saw a man who 


He 
é Wii 
Pe 
e | 
, aah! 
baie: , 
ee (pt 
Hie fe it) 
Bie me th 
ee 
ihe { 4 
ae | i 
a a 
‘a ‘ t 
ir. 
Me \t 
ia 
} | 
at 
Q ih} 
SH 
a 
NW HW} 
”") } 
A { ' 
é ie it! | 
bet 
Ife 
Ae ig 
it 


158 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


was born blind that had received his sight ; and T never 
saw aman with better sicht. He does not need to use 
glasses ; he can see quite clear.” Then for the first time, 
hope rises in the poor man’s heart, and he asks, “ How 
was it done?” Why, Jesus spat on the ground and made 
some clay, and ancinted his eyes,” (why, that is enough 
to put a man’s sight out, even if he can see !) “and sent 
him to wash in the pool of Siloam, and while he was do- 
ing so, he got two good eyes. Yes, it is so. I talked with 
him, and I didn’t see a man in all Jerusalem who had 
better sight.” “What did he charge ?” says Bartimeus. 
i“ Nothing. There was no fee or doctor’s bill; he got his 
sight for “nothing. You just tell Him what you want ; 
you don’t need to have an influential committee to call 
on Him, or any important deputation. The poor have as 
much influence with Him as the rich; all are alike.” 
“What is his name?” asks Bartimeus, “Jesus of Naza- 
reth. And if He ever comes this way, don’t you let Him 
by, without getting your case laid before Him.” And the 
blind man says, “ “That you may be sure of; He shall 
never pass this way without my seeking Him.” 

A day or two after, he is led out, and takes his seat at 
the usual place, still crying out for money. All at once 
he hears the footsteps of a coming multitude, and begins 
to cry, “ Who is it?” “Tell me, who is it?” Some one 
snid that it was Jesus of Nazareth thas was passing by. 
The moment he hears that, he says to himself, “ Why, that 
is the man who gives sight to the blind,” and he lifted up 
his cry, “Jesus, thou Son of David, have merey upon 
me!” I don’t know who it was—perhaps it was Peter— 
who said to the man, “ Hush! keep still.” He thought 
the Lord was going up to Jerusalem to be crowned King, 
and He would not like to be disturbed by a poor blind 
beggar. Oh, they did not know the Son of God when 
He was here! He would hush every harp in heaven to 
hear a sinner pray ; no music delights Him so much, But 
Bartimeus lifted up his voice louder, “ Thou Son of David. 


ever 

) use 
sme, 
How 
nade 
ough 
sent 
US do- 
with 
() had 
meus. 
ot his 
want ; 
to call 
ave as 
alike.” 
Naza- 
t, Him 
nd the 
» shall 


seat at 
t once 
begins 
ne one 
ing by. 
ry, that 
fted up 
upon 
Peter— 
hought 
1 King, 
r blind 
when 
aven to 
th. But 
David. 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 159 


have merey on me.” His prayer reached the ear of the 
Son of God, as prayer always will, and His footsteps were 
arrested. He told them to bri ing the man. “Bar timeus,” 
they said, “be of good cheer, arise, He calleth thee ;” and 
He never called any one, but He had sor: \ething good i in 
store for him. Oh, sinner! remember that to- night, They 
ied the blind man to Jesus. The Lord says, “ What shail 
I do for you?” “Lord, that I may receive my sight.” 
“ You shall have it,” the Lord said; and straightway his 
eyes were opened. 

I should have liked to have been there, to see that won- 
derful scene. The first object that met his gaze was the 
Son of God Himself, and now among the shouting multi- 
tude, no one shouts louder than the poor blind man that 
has got his sight. He glorifies God, and I faney I can hear 
him shouting, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” more 
sweetly than Mr. Sankey can sing. 

Pardon me, if I now draw a little on my imagination. 
Bartimeus gets into Jericho, and he says, “I will go and 
see my wife, and tell her about it.” A young convert al- 
ways wants to talk to his friends about salvation. Away 
he goes down the street, and he meets a man who passes 
him, goes on a few yards, and then turns round and says, 
“ Bartimeus, is that you?” “Yes.” “ Well, I thought 
it was, but I could not believe my eyes. How have you 
got your sight?” “Oh, I just met Jesus of Nazareth 
outside the city, and asked Him to have mercy on me.” 
“ Jesus of Nazareth! What, is He in this part of the coun- 
try?” “Yes. Heis right here in Jericho. He is now 
going down to the western gate.” “TI should like to see 
Him,” says the man, and away he runs down the street ; 
but he cannot catch a glimpse of Him, even though he 
stands on tiptoe, being little of stature, and on account of 
the great throng around Him. “ Well, he says, “I am not 
going to be disappointed ;” so he runs on, and climbs up 
into a sycamore tree. “If I can get on to that branch, 
hanging right over the highway, He cannot pass without 


| 
i 
i 
! 
‘ 


Sa Re TEE St ER ge Sars 


5 Sa Pe 


re 


as 


cd Tiel an iin Nair 


160 SERMONS BY MOODY. 

my getting a good look at Him.” That must have been 
a very strange sight to see the rich man climbing up a 
tree like a boy, and hiding among the leaves, where he 
thought nobody would see him, to get a glimpse of the 
passing stranger! There is the crowd bursting out, and 
he looks for Jesus. He looks at Peter ; “ That’s not Him.” 
He looks at John; “That’s not Him.” At last, his eye 
rested on One fairer than the sons of men ; “ That’s Him!” 
And Zaccheus, just peeping out from among the branches, 
looks down upon the wonderful God-man in amazement. 
At last the crewd comes to the tree; it looks as if Christ 
were going by; but He stops right under the tree, looks 
up, and says, “ Zaccheus, make haste and come down.” I 
can imagine, the first thought in his mind was, ‘‘ Who told 
Him my name? I was never introduced to Him.” Anh! 
He knew him. Sinner, Christ knows all about you. He 
knows your name and your house. You need not try to 
hide from Him, He knows where you are, and all about 
you. 

Some people do not believe in sudden conversion. I 
should like them to answer me when was Zaccheus con- 
verted ? He was certainly in his sins when he went up 
into that tree; he certainly was converted when he 
came down. He must have been converted somewhere 
between the branch and the ground. It didn’t take a 
long while to convert that publican! “ Make haste and 
come down. I shall never pass this way again; this is 
my last visit.” Zaccheus made haste, and came down 
and received Him joyfully. Did you ever hear of any 
one reeeiving Christ in any other way? He received 
Him joyfully. @hrist brings joy with Him. Sin, gloon 
and darkness flee away ; light, peace and joy burst iu 
the soul. May there be many that shall come doy 
from their high places, and receive Christ to-night ! 

Some one may ask, “How do you know he was con- 
verted?” I think he gave very good evidence. I would 
like to see as fruitful evidence of conversion here to« 


et oi oa ee ee ee er eee 


ry to 
about 


bn. =I 
3 con- 
nt up 
mn he 
vhere 
rake a 
e and 
his is 
down 
f any 
eived 
gloon 
st 1 
doy 


S con- 
would 
re to« 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS, 161 


aight. Let some of you rich men be converted, and 
give half your goods to feed the poor, and people will 
believe pretty quickly that it is genuine work! But 
there is better evidence even than that. “If I have 
taken anything from any man falsely, J restove him four- 
fold.” Very good evidence that. You say if people are 
converted suddenly, they won’t hold out. Zaccheus held 
out long enough to restore four-fold. We should like to 
havea work which reaches men’s pockets. I can imagine 
one of his servants going to a neighbour next morning, 
with a check for $100, and handing it over. “ What is 
this for?” Oh, my master defrauded you of $25 a few 
years ago, and this is restitution money.” That would 
give confidence in Zaccheus’ conversion! I wish a few 
cases like that would happen now, and then people would 
stop talking against sudden conversions. 

The Lord goes to be the publican’s guest, and while 
He is there the Pharisees began to murmur and complain. 
It would have been a good thing if Pharisees had died 
off with that generation; but, unfortunately, they have 
left a good many grand-children, living down here in the 
afternoon of this nineteenth century, who are ever com- 
plaining, “This man receiveth sinners.” But while the 
Pharisees were complaining, the Lord uttered the text 
I have to night, “I did not come to Zaccheus to make 
him wretched, to condemn him, to torment him; I came 
to bless and save him. Zhe Son of man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost.” 

If there is a man or woman in this audience to-night 

) believes that he or she is lost, I have good news to 
tell you—Christ is come after you. I was at the Fulton 
Stet prayer meeting, a good many years ago, one Satur- 
day night, and when the meeting was over a man came 
to me and said, “I would like to have you go down to 
the city prison to-morrow, and preach to the prisoners. 
I said I woud be very elad to go, There was no chapel 
in connection with that prison, and I was to preach to 


sm PS Ege EE RS COUR AT LOE AE I 


ba Seem RDP Dee sah kaneis atin, oS 


Speier a ie ae pt pats 


it 


Sle cen 


ee 
penne: 


162 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


them in their cells. I had to stand at a little iron railing 
and talk down a great, long, narrow passage-way, to some 
three or four hundred of them, I suppose, all out of sight. 
It was pretty difficult work; I never preached to the 
bare walls before. When it was over I thought I would 
like to see to whom I had been preaching, and how they 
had received the Gospel. I went to the first door where 
the inmates could have heard me best, and looked in at 
a little window, and there were some men playing cards. 
i suppose they had been playing all the while. “ How is 
it with you here?” I said. “Well, stranger, we don’t 
wan't you to get a bad ideaof us. False witnesses swore 
a lie, and that is how we are here.” “Qh,” I said, 
“Christ cannot save anybody here, there is nobody lost.” 
I went to the next cell. “ Well, friend, how is it with 
you?” “Qh,” said the prisoner, “the man that did the 
deed looked very much like me, so they caught me, and I 
am here.” He was innocent too! I passed along to the 
next cell. ‘“ How is it with you?” “ Well, we got into 
bad company, and the man that did it got clear, and we 
got taken up, but we never did anything.” I went along 
to the next celi. “How is it with you?” “Our trial 
comes on next week, but they have nothing against us, 
and we'll get free.” I went round nearly every cell, but 
the answer was always the same—they had never done 
anything. Why, I never saw so many innocent men to- 
gether in my life! There was nobody to blame but the 
magistrates, according to their way of it, These men 
were wrapping their filthy rags of self-righteousness 
about them. And that has been the story for six thous- 
and years. I got discouraged as I went through the 
prison, on, and on, and on, cell after cell, and every man 
had an excuse. If he hadn't one the devil helped him to 
make one, I had got almost through the prison, when I 
came to a cell and found a man with his elbows on his 
knees, and his head in his hands, ‘Two little streams of 
tears were running down his cheeks; they did not come 
by drops that time. 


iling 
some 
sieht. 
he 
vould 
they 
vhere 
in at 
cards. 
Low is 
don’t 
swore 
[ said, 
lost.” 
| with 
jid the 
,and I 
to the 
rot into 
and we 
t along 
y trial 
inst us, 
ell, but 
er done 
men to- 
but the 
se men 
housness 
k thous- 
gh the 
ry man 
him to 
when | 
on his 
eams of 
hot come 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 


“What’s the trouble?” I said. He looked up, the 
picture of remorse and despair. “Oh, my sins are more 
than I can bear.” “Thank God For that” I replied. 
“ What,” said he, “ you are the man that has been preach- 
ing to us, ain't you?” “Yes.” “I think you said you 
were a friend?” “Tam.” “And yet you are glad that 
my sins are more than I can bear!” “I will explain,” I 
said; “if your sins are more than you can bear, won’t you 

cast them on One who will bear them for you?” Who’ 8 
that?” “The Lord Jesus.” “He won't bear my sins.” 
“Why not?” “Ihave sinned against Him all my life.” 
“T don’t care if you have; the blood of Jesus Christ, God's 
Son, cleanses from all sin.” Then [ told him how Christ 
had come to seek and save that which was lost; to open 
the prison doors and set the captives free. It was like a 
cup of refreshment to find a man who believed he was 
lost, so I stood there, and held up a erucified Saviour to 
him. “Christ was delivered for our offences, died for our 
sins, rose again for our justification.” Fora long time 
the man could not believe that such a miserable wretch 
could be saved. He went on to enumerate his sins, and 
I told him that the blood of Christ could cover them all. 
After I had talked with him I said, “ Now let us pray.’ 
He got down on his knees inside the cell, and I got down 
outside, and I said, “You pray.” “Why,” he “said, “it 
would be blasphemy for me to call on God.” “ You call 
on God,” I said. He knelt down, and like the poor 
publican, he lifted up his voice and said, “God be merci- 
ful to me, a vile wretch!” [put my hand through the 
window, and as I shook hands with him a tear fell on my 
hand that burned down into my soul. It was a tear of 
repentance. He believed he was lost. Then I tried to 


get him to believe that Christ had come to save him, I 


left him still in darkness, “I will be at the hotel,” I said, 
“between nine and ten o'clock, and J will pray for you,” 

Next morning, I felt so much interested in him, that I 
thought I must see him before I go back to Chicago, No 


163 


' 
§ 


Sa NES 


] 
q 
4 
| 
4 
' 
4 


it 
fF 4 
Bi 
(it 
al 
{ 
a 
4 
it 


FSS 


<= 


Smee = 


SSS 


164 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


sooner had my eye lighted on his face, than I saw remorse 
and despair had fled away, and his countenance was 
beaming with celestial light; the tears of joy had come 
into his eyes, and the fears of despair were gone, The 
Sun of Righteousness had broken out across his path ; 
his soul was leaping within him for joy; he had received 
Christ, as Zaccheus did, joyfully. “Tell me about it,” I 
said. “ Well, I do not know what time it was; I think 
it was about midnight. I had been in distress a long 
time, when all at once my great burden fell off, and now 
T believe Iam the happiest man in New York.” I think 
he was the happiest man I saw, from the time I left 
Chicago till I got back again. His face was lighted up 
with the light that comes from the celestial hills. I bade 
him good-by, and I expect to meet him in another world. 

Can you tell me why the Son of God came down to 
that prison that night, and, passing cell after cell, went 
to that one and set the captive free? It was because the 
man believed he was lost. 

But you say, “J do not feel that.” Well, never mind 
your feelings; believe it. Just ask yourself, “Am I saved, 
or am [ lost?” It must be one or the other. There is no 
neutrality about the matter. A man cannot be saved 
and lost at the same time; it is impossible. Every man 
and woman in this audience must either be. saved or lost, 
if the Bible be true; and if I thought*it was not true, I 
should not be here preaching, and I would not advise you 
people to come; but if the Bible is true, every man and 
every woman in this room must either be in the ark or 
out of it, either saved or lost. 

I do not believe there would be a dry eye in this city 
to-night, if we would but wake up to the thought of 
what it is to be lost. The world has been rocked to sleep 
by Satan, who is going up and down and telling people 
that it doesn’t mean anything. I believe in the ota 
fashioned heaven and hell. Christ came down to save 
us from a terrible hell, and any man who is cast down to 


orse 
was 
ome 
The 
ath ; 
rived 
it,” I 
shink 
long 
now 
think 
I left 
ed up 
[ bade 
world. 
wn to 
, went 
ise the 


» mind 
saved, 
e is no 
saved 
y man 
or lost, 
true, | 
ise you 
awar and 
ark or 


ris city 
ught of 
o sleep 
| yey 
1e old- 
to save 
lown to 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 165 


hell from this land must go in the full blaze of the gos- 
pel, and over the mangled body of the Son of God. 

We hear of a man who has lost his health, and we 
sympathize with him, and we say it is very sad. Our 
hearts are drawn out insympathy. Here is another man 
who has lost his wealth, and we say, “ That is very sad.” 
Here is another man who has lost his reputation, his 
standing among men. “That is sadder still,” you say. 
We know what it is to lose health and wealth, and repu- 
tation, but what is the loss of all these things compared 
with the loss of the soul ? 

I was in an eye-infirmary in Chicago some time ago, 
before the great fire. A mother brought a beautiful 
little babe to the doctor—a babe only afew month’s old 
—and wanted the doctor to look at the child’s eyes. He 
did so, and pronounced it blind-—blind for life—it will 
never see again. The moment he said that, the mother 
seized it, pressed it to her bosom, and gave a terrible 
scream. It pierced my heart, and I could not but weep. 
What a fearful thought to that mother! “Oh, my dar- 
ling,” she cried, “are you never to see the mother that 
gave you birth? Oh, doctor, I cannot stand it. My 
child!” It was a sight to move any heart. But what is 
the loss of eyesight to the loss of a soul? I had a thou- 
sand times rather have these eyes taken out of my head 
and go to the grave blind, than lose my soul. I have a 
son, and no one but God knows how | love him; but I 
would see those eyes dug out of his head to-night rather 
than see him grow up to manhood and go down to the 
grave without Christ and without hope. The loss of a 
soul! Christ knew what it meant. That is what brought 
Him from the bosom of the Father; that is what brought 
Him from the Throne; that is what brought Him to Cal- 
vary. The Son of God was in earnest. When he died on 


Valvary it was to save a lost world; it was to save your 
soul and mine, 


es 


et a ee me I nce ete Speen pine me 


‘? 


2 
owas = > Ses > wei 
oo NO ODN LAS SPE IE ELE AMGED SN RTI a I eters ype — 
» ba 7% ‘ a > 
- on ga 


ge ee a Se ee 


166 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


O the loss of the soul—how terrible itis! If you are 
lost to-night, I beseech you do not rest until you have 
found peace in Christ, /athers and mothers, if you have 
children out of the Ark, do not rest until they are brought 
into it. Do not discourage your children from coming to 
Christ. JI am glad to see those little boys and girls here. 
Dear children, remember the sermon is for you. The Son 
of Man came for you as much as for that old gray-haired 
man, yonder. He came for all, rich and poor, young and 
old. Young man, if you are lost, may God show it to 
you, and may you press into the kingdom. The Son of 
Man is come to seek and to save you. 

There is a story told of Rowland Hill. He was once 
preaching in the open air to a vast audience. Lady Anne 
Erskine was riding by, and she asked who it was that 
was addressing the vast assembly. She was told that it 
was the celebrated Rowland Hill. Says she, “I have 
heard of him; drive me near the platform, that I may 
listen to him.” The eye of Rowland Hill rested on her ; 
he saw that she belonged to royalty, and, turning to some 
one, he inquired who she was. He went on preaching, 
and all at once he stopped.“ My friends,” he said, “ I have 
got something here for sale.” Everybody was startled to 
think that a minister was going to sell something in his 
sermon. “I am going to sell it by auction, and it is worth 
more than the crowns of all Europe: it is the soul of Lady 
Anne Erskine. Will any one bid for her soul? Hark! 
methinks I hear a bid. Who bids? Satan bids. What 
will you give? I will give riches, honour and pleasure ; 
yea, I will vive the whole world for her soul. Hark ! I 
hear another bid for this soul. Who bids? The Lord 
Jesus Christ. Jesus, what will you give for this soul / 
I will yive peace, and joy; and comfort that the world 
knows nol of ; yea I will give eternal life for her soul.” 
Turning to Li idy Anne Erskine, he said, “You have 
heard the two bidders for your soul—which shall have 
it?” She ordered the footman to open the door, and 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS. 167 


u are 
have 
have 
pught 
ng to 
here. 
e Son 
haired 
gr and 
vy it to 
Son of 


gs once 

, Anne 

as that 
that it 

I have 
I may 

bn her ; 

o some 
aching, 

‘ Thave 
‘tled to 
py in his 

worth 
of Lady 
Hark ! 
What 
easure ; 
ark! I 
re Lord 
is soul / 
le world 
yy soul.” 
pu have 
all have 


oor, and 


iy ushing her way through the crowd, she says, “ The Lord 
esus shall have my soul, if He will accept it.” That may 
be true, or it may not; but. there is one thing I know to 
be true—there are two bidders for your soul to-night, It 
is for you to decide which shall have it. Satan offers you 
what he cannot give ; he is a liar, and has been from the 
foundation of the world. I pity the man who is living 
on the devil’s promises. He lied to Adam, and deceived 
him, stripped him of all he had, and then left him in his 
lost, ruined condition. And all the men since Adam, liv- 
ing on the devil's lies, the devil’s promises have been dis- 
appointed, and will be down to the end of the chapter. 
But the Lord Jesus Christ is able to give all He offers, 
and He offers eternal life to every lost soul here. “The 
gift of God is eternal life.” Who will have it? Will 
any one flash it over the wires, and let it go up to the 
throne of God that you want to be saved? As Mr. 
Sankey sang of that shout around the throne, my heart 
went up to God, that there might be a great shout for 
lost ones brought home to-night. 

Last night, a young man told me he was anxious to be 
saved, but Christ had never sought for him. I said, 
“What are you waiting for?” “ W hy,” he said, “I am 
waiting for Christ to call me: as soon as He calls me, I 
am coming.” There may be others here who have cot 
the same notion. Now, Ido not believe there is a man 
in the city that the Spirit of God has not striven with at 
some period of his life. I do not believe there is a person 
in this audicnee but Christ has sought after him. Bear 
in mind, He takes the place of the secker, Every man who 
has ever been saved through these six thousand years was 
sought after by God. No sooner did Adam fall, than God 
sought Him. He had gone away frightened, and hid 
himself away among the bushes in the garden, but God 
took the place of the Seeker; and from that day to this, 
God has always had the place of the Seeker. No man 
or woman in this audience has been saved but that He 
sought them first, 


tc cma cic Bin Aa ach 


168 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


What do we read in the fifteenth chapter of St. Luke ? 
There is a shepherd bringing home his sheep into the 
fold. As they pass in, he stands and numbers them. I 
can see him counting one, two, three, up to ninety-nine. 
“ But,” says he, “I ought to havea hundred; I must have 
made a iiisteke;” and he counts them over again. 
“There are only ninety-nine here; I must have lost one.” 
He does not say, “I will let him find his own way back.” 
No! He takes the place of the Seeker; he goes out into 
the mountain, and hunts until he finds the lost one, and 
then he lays it on his shoulder and brings it home. Is it 
the sheep that finds the shepherd? No, it is the shep- 
herd that finds and brings back the sheep. He rejoiced 
to find it. Undoubtedly the sheep was very glad to get 
back to the fold, but it was the shepherd who rejoiced. 
and who called his friends and said, “ Rejoice with me.” 

Then there is that woman who lost the piece of money. 
Some one, perhaps, had paid her a bill that day, giving her 
ten pieces of silver. As she retires at night, she takes 
the money out of her pocket and counts it. “ Why,” she 
says, “I have only got nine pieces; I ought to have ten.” 
She counts it over again. “Only nine pieces! Where 
have I been,” she says, “since I got that money? I am 
sure 1 have not been out of the house.” She turns her 
pocket wrong side out and there she finds a hole in it. 
Does she wait until the money gets backs into her pock- 
et? No. She takes a broom, and lights a candle, and 
sweeps diligently. She moves the sofa and the table and 
the chairs, and all the rest of the furniture, and sweeps in 
every corner until she finds it. And when she has found 
it, who rejoices? The piece of money? No; the woman 
who finds it. In these parables, Christ brings out the 
great truth that God takes the place of Seeker. People 
talk of finding Christ, but it is Christ who first finds 
them. 

Another young man told me last night that he was too 
great a sinner to be saved. Why, they are the very men 


in 
bou 
new 
Was 


’ 


le and 
peps in 
found 
woman 
it the 
People 
t finds 


vas toc 
y men 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS., 169 


Christ came after. “ This man receiveth sinners, and 
eateth with them.” The only charge they could bring 
against Christ down here was that He was receiving bad 
men. They are the very kind of men He is willing to 
receive. All that you have got to do is to prove that 
you are a sinner, and I will prove that you have got a 
Saviour. And the greater the sinner, the greater need 
you have of a Saviour. You say your heart is hard ; 
well, then, of course, yourwant Christ to soften it. You 
connot do it yourself, The harder your heart, the more 
need you have of Christ; the blacker you are, the more 
need you have of a Saviour. If your sins rise up before 
you like a dark mountain, bear in mind that the blood of 
Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. There is no sin so 
big, or so black, or so corrupt and vile, bre the blood of 
Christ can cover it. So I preach the old Gospel again, 
“The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which 
was lost.” 

It was Adam’s fall, his loss, that brought out God’s 
love. God never told Adam when he put him into Eden, 
that he loved him. It was his fall, his sin that brought 
it out. A friend of mine, from Manchester, was in 
Chicago, a few years ago, and he was very much in- 
terested in the city—a great city with its 300,000, or 

400,000 inhabitants, with its great railway centres, its 
lumber market, its pork market, and its grain market. 
He said he went back to Manchester and told his friends 
about Chicago. But he could not get anybody very 
much interested in it. It was a great many hundreds of 
miles away; and the people did not seem to care for hear- 
ing about it. But one day there came flashing along the 
wire the sad tidings, that it was on fire; and my friend 
said the Manchester people became suddenly interested 
in Chicago! Every despatch that came they read; they 
bought up the papers, and devoured every particle of 
news. And at last, when the despatch came that Chicago 
was burning up. that 100,000 people were turned out of 

K 


» 
{ 
i 
; 


NE RRL te ae hia acpi > 4, . ot 


GT TAIT EEN,. 2 


170 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


house and home, then every one became so interestea 
that they began to weep for us. They came forward and 
laid down their money—some gave hundreds cf dollars 
for the relief of the poor sufferers. It was the calamity 
of Chicago that brought out the love of Manchester, and 
of London, and of Liverpool. I was in that terrible fire, 
and I saw men that were wealthy stripped of all they 
had. That Sunday night, when they retired, they were 
the richest men in Chicago. Next morning they were 
paupers. But I did not see a man weep. But when the 
news came flashing along the wire, “ Liverpool gives ten 
thousand dollars ; Manchester sends five thousand dollars ; 
London is ,giving money to aid the city;” and as the 
news kept flashing that help was coming, our city was 
broken-hearted. I saw men weep then. The love that 
was shown us broke our hearts. So the love of God 
ought to break every heart in this city. It was love that 
brought Christ down here to die for us. It was love 
made Him. It was love that made Him leave His place 
by the Father’s throne and come down here to seek and 
to save that which was lost. , 

But now for the sake of those men who believe Christ 
never sought them, perhaps it would be well to say how 
He seeks. There are a great many ways in which He 
does so. Last night I found a man in the Inquiry-room, 
and the Lord had been speaking to him by the prayers 
of a godly sister, who died a while ago. Her prayers 
were answered. He came into the Inquiry-room trem- 
bling from head to foot. T talked to him about the plan 
of salvation, and the tears trickled down his cheeks, and 
at last he took Christ as his Saviour. The Son of Man 
sought out that young man through the prayers of his 
sister, and then through her death. 

Some of you have godly, praying mothers, who have 
prayed whole nights for your soul, and who have now 
gone to heaven, Did not you take their hand and 
promise that you would meet them there? That was 


ted 
und 
lars 
ity 
and 
fire, 
they 
we>re 
were 
n the 
s ten 
llars ; 
g the 
was 
a that 
f God 
e that 
is love 
5 place 
k and 


Christ 
ny how 
ich He 
-room, 
rayers 
rayers 
trem- 
e plan 
ss, and 
bf Man 
5 of his 


o have 
ve now 
nda and 
hae was 


CHRIST SEEKING SINNERS, 171 


the Son of God seeking you by your mother’s prayers, 
and your mother’s death. Some of you have got faith- 
ful, godly ministers, who weep for you in the pulp! t, and 
plead with you to come to Christ. Ycu have heard 
heart-searching sermons, and the truth has gone down 
deep into your heart, and tears have come down your 
cheeks. That was the Son of God seeking you. Some 
of you have godly, praying Sabbath-school teachers and 
superintendents urging you to come to Christ. Some of 
you, perhaps, have gut young men converted round you, 

and they have talked wish you aud pleaded with you to 
come:to Christ. ‘iat was the Son of God seeking after 

your soul, Some of you have had a tract put in your 
hand with a startling title, “Eternity: Where will You 
spend it?” and the arrow has gone home, That was 
the Son of God seeking after you. Many of you have 
been laid on a bed of sickness, when you had time to 
think and meditate. And in the silent watches of the 
night, when everybody was aslcep, the Spirit of God has 

come into your chamber, has come to your bedside, and 

the thought came stealing through your mind that you 

ought to be a child of God and an heir of heaven. That 

was the Son of God seeking after your lost soul. Some 

of you have had little children, and you have laid them 

yonder in the cemetery. When that little child was 

dying you promised to love and serve God (ah, have you 

kept: that promise?) That was the Son of God seeking 
you. He took that little child yonder to draw your 
affections heavenwards. 

It would take me all night to teil the different ways in 
which the Lord seeks. Can you rise in this hall to-night 
and say that the Son of God never sought yow ? I do not 
believe there is a man or woman in this audience, or in 
the whole city, who could do it. My friend, He has been 
calling for you from your earliest childhood, and He has 
put it into the hearts of God’s own people just to call you 
together in this hall. Prayer is going up all over the 


sins cso hit il le 


172 SERMONS BY MOODY. 


Christian world for you. Perhaps there has never been 
a time in the history of your life when so many were 
praying for you as at the present time. That is the Son 
of God seeking for your soul through the prayers of the 
Church, through the prayers of ministers, through the 
prayers of the saints, not on.y about you, but throughout 
the world. I am receiving letters almost daily from both 
sides the ocean, saying continual prayer is going up to 
God for this work. What does it mean? God has laid 
it upon the heart of the Church throughout the world to 
pray for this work. It must be that God has something. 
good in store for us here ; the Son of Man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost; and I pray that the 
Good Shepherd may enter this hall tu-night, and may 
come to many a heart, and that you may hear the still 
small voice: “ Behold I stand at the door and knock ; If 
any man hear My voice, and open the door, I will come in 
to him and will sup with him, and he with Me.” O friends, 
open the door to-night, and let the heavenly Visitor in. 
Do not turn Him away any longer. Do not say with 
Felix, “Go thy way this time, and when I have a conve- 
nient season I will call for thee.” Make this a convenient 
season; make this the night of your salvation. Receive 
the gift of God to-night, and open the door ot your heart, 
and say, “ Weleome, thrice welcome into this heart of 
mine,” 


rr 


i 
1 
I i 
t 
ay 
ti 


ae 


ane 


Sha tt ten hate a ie 


THOMAS DE WITT TALMAGE, 


REV, 


~ 2 At ow * - ae > _ Rt 


SSS thas Wehr reesris  -: 
ane 0 RE ce 
wus moe H 


HE REV. MR. TALMAGE was born in New Jersey, 

United States, on the 7th J:  -y, 1832. He was 

the youngest of twelve children, five girls and seven 

boys. Three of his brothers preceded him in the Min- 

istry. His parents are said to have been persons of excellent 

Christian character. Hie was educated at the New York 

University, and graduated from the Theological Seminary of 
New Brunewick, in his native State. 

He leeame a Christian when eighteen years of age, and 
entered the Ministry at Belleville, New Jersey, where he 
remained about three years. He then took a charge at 
Syracuse, New York State, and after labouring there for 
other three years, removed to Philadelphia, Penn., where 

he preached forseven years, his congregation being the largest in 
that city. During this time his preaching was very fruitful in 
spiritual results. Afterwards he removed to Brooklyn, New York, 
and undertoook charge of a church with only nineteen voting 
members. 


6 ie ee rr sa Bucs 


as jasper ila z re ee ee ee 
ninth Sa io als TS ii As mains we ae, ms tains 


m 


ee eee ee 


aa 


ee a : - 


Se ee = = — 


eee ee 


= 


0 


oer 


> 


PEs TRESS 


na at el get: “— . 
ee me 
| 


Sentient ee 


ered ee 


SO YE oe a 


~ ye 


ray REV. THOMAS DE WITT TALMAGE, 


Mr. Talmage had already set his heart upon trying to build up 
a free church. When it became necessary to procure more accom- 
modation for the people who attended his services, he laid before 
his trustees his plan for free seats, and offered to make his salary 
dependent upon its success, His proposition was accepted, and 
the plans for the ‘‘ Tabernacle” were prepared and the seats soar- 
ranged that all should have an equal opportunity to see and hear 
the speaker, and be brought into the closest possible relation with 
him, 

Tnis ‘‘Tabernacle” was built in 1870, and although it would 
accommodate about three thousand people, it had svon to be en- 
larged, It was destroyed by fire in December, 1872. Mr, Tal- 
mage and his farily were on their way to Church when the 
news of its destruction reached him. He was not the least dis- 
mayed, and simply remarked ;—‘* Well, the building was never 
large enough; now the people throughout the country will help 


’ During the fire nis church 


us to build a more roomy structure,’ 
trustees met and resolved to erect a larger building. 

Mr. Talmage is an extraordinary preacher. He preaches tho 
Gospel, literally as he finds it, with a simplicity and thoroughness 
that withhold nothing, and he defers to no prejudiced interest or 
ism. He feels the closest sympathy with humanity, and possesses 
descriptive powers of the highest order and has great fortility in 
illustration. 

Personally, Mr. Talmage is one of the most unassuming of men. 
He is of vivacious temperment, of pleasant addvess, easy to ap- 
proach, is jovial with his associates, and a strauger would not take 


him to be a world-renowed preacher, 


up 

m- 

ore 

ary 
and 
oar- 
hear 


with 


ould 
5 en: 
Tal- 
i the 
t dis- 
never 


FOUR GREAT PREACHERS. 


AAAS AAASAAASSAAASASAAAAAL 


SERMONS BY T. DE WITT TALMAGE. 


— +... -— 


CHRIST EVERYTHING. 


 (hrist is all and in all.”—Cou, ii: 11, 


VERY age of the world has had its historians, 
its philosophers, its artists, its thinkers, and its 
teachers. Were there histories to be written ? 
there has boon uany a Moses, or a Herodotus, 

or a Xenophon, or a fosephus, to write them. Were 
\. there poems to |» constructed ? there was always 
‘a Job, or a Homer to construct thom, Were there 
thrones lustrous and powerful to be lifted ? there 
has always been a David or a Cwwsar to raise them ? 
Were there teachers demanded for the intelleet and 
the heart? there has been a Soerates, and a Zeno, and 
Y a Cleanthes, and a Marcus Antonius coming forth 
+ on the grand and glorious mission, Every age of 
the world has had its triumphs of reason and moral- 
‘ ity. There has not been a single age of the world 
which has not had some decided system of religion; the 


Sg RES ams 


stn stam 


a a 


3 agi Ts pees Sg 8 Raa oa 
las gehts tay AONE time iinet. 


> — 


ne ee 


in 


Spe 


178 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


Platonism, Orientalism, Stoicism, Brahminism, and Bud- 
dhism, considering the ages in which they were established, 
were not lacking in ingenuity and force. Now, in this 
line of beneficent institutions and of noble men, there ap- 
peared a personage more wonderful than any predecessor. 
He came from a family without any royal or aristocratic 
pretension. He became a Galilean mechanic. He had no 
advantage from the schools. ‘There were people beside 
him, day after day, who had no idea that He was going 
to be anything remarkable, or do anything remarkable. 
Yet, notwithstanding all this, and without any title, or 
scholary pretension,.or flaming rhetoric, He startled the 
world with the strangest anouncements, ran in collision 
with solemn priests and proud rulers, and with a voice 
that rang through temple and palace, and over ship’s deck 
and mountain top, exclaimed: “I am the light of the 
world!” Men were taken all aback at the idea that that 
hand, yet hard from the use of the axe, and saw, and adze, 
and hatchet, should wave the sceptre of authority; and that 
upon that brow, from which they had so often seen Him 
wipe the sweat of toil, there would yet come the crown of 
unparalleled splendour and of universal dominion. We 
all know hov difficult it is to be anything great or famous ; 
and no wonder that those who had been boys with Christ 
in the streets of Nazareth, and seen Him in after years in 
the days of His complete obscurity, should have been very 
slow to acknowledge Christ’s wonderful mission. 
From this humble point the stream of life flowed out. 
At first it was just a faint rill, hardly able to find its way 
down the rock ; but the tears of a weeping Christ added 
to its volume, and it flowed on until by the beauty and 
greenness of its banks you might know the path the 
crystal stream was taking; on and on, until the lepers 
were brought down and washed off their leprosy, and the 
dead were lifted into the water that they might have life, 
and pearls of joy and promise were gathered from the 


brink, and innumerable churches gathered on esther bank ; 


voice 
deck 
: the 
that 
adze, 
l that 
Him 
vn of 
We 
10US 5 
‘hrist 
YS in 
very 


out. 
bs Way 
hdded 
y anc 
h the 
epers 
eh the 
e life 
ft the 
bank ; 


CWRIST EVERYTHING. 179 


and the tide ffows on deeper, and stronger, and wider, 
until it rolls into the river from under the throne of God, 
mingling billow with billow, and brightness with bright- 
ness, amd joy with joy, and hosanna with hosanna ! 

1 was looking a few days ago at some of the paintings 
of the late artist, Mr. Kensett. I saw some pictures that 
were just faint outlines; in some piaces you would see 
only the branches of a tree and no trunk, and in another 
case, the trunk and no branches. He had not finished the 
work. It would have taken him days, and months, per- 
haps, to have completed it. Well, my friends, in this world 
we get only the faintest outlines of what Christ is. It 
will take all eternity to fill up the picture; so loving, so 
kind, so merciful, so great! Paul does not in this chapter 
say of Christ, He is good, or He is loving, or He is patient, 
or He is kind; but in his exclamation of the text he em- 
br everything when he says: “Christ is all and in 
all 

I remark in the first place, Christ is everything in the 
Bible. Ido not care where I open the Bible, I find Jesus, 
In whatever path I start, [ come, after awhile, to the 
Bethlehem manger. I go back to the old dispensation 
and see a lamb on the altar and say: “Behold the Lamb 
of God that taketh away the sin of the world.” Then I 
go and see the manna provided for the Israelites in the 
wilderness, and I say: “Jesus, the bread of life.” Then 
| look at the rock which was smitten by prophet’s rod, 
and, as the water gushes out, | say: “It is Jesus, the 
fountain opened for sin and uncleanness.” 1 go back and 
look at the writings of Job, and I hear him exclaim: “1 
know that my Redeemer liveth.” Then I go to Ezekiel, 
and I find Christ presented there as “a plant of renown ;” 
and then I turn over to Isaiah, and Christ is spoken of 
“as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He opens not 
His mouth,” It is Jesus all the way between Genesis and 
Malachi, Then I turn over to the New Testament, and 
it is Christ in the parable, it is Christ in the miracle, it is 


i, 


sa: icaagi esoncase jpasMtiac cg ga 


180 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


Christ in the Evangelists’ story, it is Christ in the apostles’ 
epistles, and it is Christ in the trumpet peal of the Apoc- 
alypse. 

I know there are a great many people who do not find 
Christ in the Bible. Here is a man who studies the Bible 
us an historian. Well, if you come as an historian, you 
will tind in this book how the world was made, how the 


ay seas fled to their places, how empires were established, 
\ e a ° ° . ° ° ° ° 
it how nation fought with nation, javelin ringing against 


harbegeon, until the earth was ghastly with the dead. 
You will see the coronation of princes, the triumph of 
conquerors, and the world turned upside down, and back 
again, and down again, cleft and scarred with great 
| | agonies of earthquake, and tempest, and battle. It is a 
‘aR wonderful history, putting to the blush all others in the 


waa accuracy of its recital, and in the stupendous events it 
Pe || records. Homer, and Thucydides, and Gibbon, could 
Sut i ft make great stories of little events; but it took a Moses to 
Bet tell how the heavens and the earth were made, in one a 
0 chapter, and to vive the history of thousands of years up- 
a on two leaves. . a 
ian cae There are others who comme to the Bible merely as anti- al 
ea! quarians, Tf you come as an antiquarian, you will find th 
eR ieal a great many odd things in the Bible; pecularities of a 
La ie dress—tunies, saudals, crisping pins, amulets and girdles, 
ae and tinkling ornaments. If you come to look at military . - 
4h | arrangements, you will find coats of mail, and javelin: M 
Hh and engines of war, and circumvolutions, and encam)- er 
tA) Hi | ments. If you look for peculiar musical instruments, you an 
ME ee on wiil find psalteries, shigionaths, and rams’ horns.  Tiv th 
Hod antiquarian will find in the Bible curiosities in agricultur: , th 
ty 1 | | and in commerce, and in art, and in religion, that Wit an 
yt | bh i keep him absorbed a great while. There are those wh the 
i haa come to the Bible as you would to a cabinet of curiosities poi 
© aa and you pick up this and say. “ What a strange swor inf 
By Stel that is;” and “ What a peculiar hat this is;” and“ What JR hee 


an unlooked for lump that is;” and the Bible to such 
becomes a British Museum, 


»stles’ 
A poc- 


t find 
Bible 
n, you 
yw the 
lished, 
ainst 
. “dead. 
aph of 
d bac ‘k 
gre al 
It is ral 
; in the 
rents it 
, could 
loses to 
in Ole 
ars up- 


as anti- 
ill fins! 
Mities of 
girdles, 
nilitars 
avelin: 
pncamp- 
nts, you 
=. Th 
cultur: 
hat wii 
ye wh 
‘Jositit 
» sword 


- W hat 


to Suc 


CHRIST EVERYTHING, 18] 


Then there are others who find nothing in the Bible 
but the poetry. Well, if you come as a poet, you will find 
in this book faultless rhythm, and bold imagery, and 
startling antithesis, and rapturous lyric, and sweet pas- 
toral, and instructive narrative, and devotional psalm- 
thoughts, expressed in a style more solemn than that of 
Montgomery, more bold than that of Milton, more terrible 
than that of Dante, more natural than that of Wordsworth, 
more impassioned than that of © ollock, more tender than 
that of Cowper, more weird than that of Spenser, This 
great poem brings all the gems of the earth into its coro- 
net, and it weaves the flames of judgment in its garlands, 
and pours eternal harmonies in tts rhythm. Everything 
this book touches it makes beautiful from the plain stones 
of the summer threshing-tloor to the daughters of Nahor 
filling the trough for the camels ; and the tish pools of 
Heshbon ; up tu the psalmist praising God with diapason 
of storm and whirlwind, and Job leading forth Orion, 
Arcturus and the Pleiades. It is a wonde rful poem, and 
a great many people read it as they do Thomas Moore's 
“Lalla Rookh,” and Walter Scott’s “Lady of the Lake,” 
and Southey’s “Curse of Gehenna.” They sit down and 
are so absorbed in looking at the shells on the shore, that 
they forget to look off on the great ocean of God’s mercy 
and salvation. 

Then there are others who come to this book as sceptics. 
They marshal passage after passage, and try to get 
Matthew and Luke in a quarrel, and would have a cis- 
crepancy between what Paul and James say about faith 
and works; and they try the account of Moses concerning 
the creation by modern decisions in science, and resolve, 
that in all questions between the scientific explorer and 
and the inspired writer, they will give the preference to 
the geologist. These me n—these spide vs [ will say—suek 
poison out of the sweetest flowers. They fatten their 
infidelity upon the truths which have led thousands to 
heaven, and in their distorted visions, prophet seems to 


182 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


war with prophet, and evangelist with evangelist, and 
apostle with apostle; and if they can find some bad trait 
of character ina man of God mentioned in that Bible, 
these carrion crows caw and flap their wings over the 
carcase, Because they cannot understand how the whale 
swallowed Jonah, they attempt the more wonderful feat 
of swallowing the monster whale of modern scepticism. 
They do not believe it possible that the Bible story should 
be true which says that the dumb ass spake, while they 
themselves prove the thing possible by their own utter- 
ances! I am amused heyond bound when I hear one of 
these men talking about a future life. Just ask a man 
who rejects that Bible what heaven is, and hear him be- 
fog your soul. He will tell you that heaven is merely the 

development of the internal resources of a man; it is 
efflorescence of the dynamie forces into a state of ethereal 
and transcendental lucubration in close juxtaposition to 
the ever present “was,” and the great “to be,” and the 
everlasting “no”! Considering themselves to be wise, they 
are fools for time and eternity. 

Then, there is another class of persons, who come to the 
Bible as controversialists, They are enormous Presby- 
terians, or fierce Baptists, or violent Methodists, They 
cut the Bible to suit their creed, instead of cutting their 
creed to suit the Bible. If the Seripture thinks as they 
do, well; if not, so much the worse for the Seriptures 
The Bible is merely the whetstone on which they sharpen 
the dissecting-knife of controversy. They come to it as 
a government in time of war comes to armories or arsen 
als for weapons and munitions. They have declared 
everlasting war against all other sects; and they want so 
many broad swords, so many muskets, so many howitzers 
so many columbiads, so much grape and canister, so man) 
field pieces, with which to take the field of dispute, for 
they mean to get the vietory though the heavens } 
deebened with smoke and the earth rend with the thun 
der, What do they cure abeut the religion of the Lord 


pe an 


nd 
‘ait 
ble, 
the 
1ale 
reat 
ism. 
yuld 
they 
tter- 
ie of 
man 
n be- 
y the 
it is 
vereal 
on to 
d the 
, they 


o the 
resby- 
They 
their 
; they 
tures 
arpen 
) it as 
arsen 
clarea 
ant sv 
itzers 
man) 
te, for 
ns 
thun 
b Lora 


CHRIST EVERYTHING. 183 


Jesus Christ! I have seen some such men come hack from 
an ecclesiastical massacre as proud of their achievement 
as an Indian warrior boasting of the number of scalps he 
has taken. I have more admiration for a man who goes 
forth with his fists to get the championship—for a Heenan 
or a Morrisey—than I have for these theological pugilists, 
who make our theological magazines ring with their horri- 
ble warery. There are men who seem to think the only use 
of the sword of truth is to stick somebody. There is one 
passage of the Scriptures that they like better than all 
others, and that is this: “ Blessed is the Lord which teach- 
eth my hands to war and my fingers to fight.” Woe to 
us if we come to God’s word as controversialists, or as 
sceptics, or as connoissewrs, or as fault-finders, or merely 
as poets. Those only get into the heart of God’s truth 
who come seeking for Christ. Welcome all such. They 
will find, coming out from behind the curtain of pro- 
phecy, until He stands in the full light of New Testament 
disclosures, Jesus the Son of God, the Saviour of the 
world. They will find Him in genealogical table and 
chronological calculation, in poetic stanza and in historical 
narrative, in profound parable and in startling miracle. 
They will see His foot on every sea, and his tears in the 
drops of dew on Hermon, and hear His voice in the wind, 
and behold His words all abloom in the valley between 
mount Olivet and Jerusalem, There are some men who 
come and walk around this temple of truth and merely 
see the outside. There are others who walk into the 
porch and then go away. There are others who come in 
and look at the pictures, but they know nothing what are 
the chief attractions of the Bible. It is only the man 
who comes and knocks at the gate, saying: “I would see 
Jesus”—for him the glories of that book open, and he goes 
in and finds Christ; and with Him, peace, pardon, life, 
comfort, and heaven, “ All in all is Jesus” in the Bible, 

Lremark again, that Christ is everything in the great 
plan of redemption, Weare slaves; Christ gives deliver- 


eee momen Tm Ae 


<a pie Ee 


Becta We 


184 


anee to the captives. 
of salvation to slake our thirst. 
says: “lam the bread of life.” 


SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


We are thirsty; Christ is the river 
We are hungry ; Jesus 
We are condemned to 
die; Christ says: “Save that man from going down to 
the pit. Iam the ransom.” We are tossed on a sea of 
troubles; Jesus comes over it saying: It is I, be not 
afraid.” We are in darkness; Jesus says: “I am the 
bright and morning star.” We are sick; Jesus is the 
balm of Gilead. We are dead; hear the shrouds rend and 
the grave hillocks heave, as He cries: “I am the resur- 
rection and the life, he that believeth in me though he 
were dead, yet shall he live.’ We want justification : 
“being justitied hy faith, we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ.” We want to exercise faith ; 
“Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved.” I want to get from under condemnation; “There 
is now, therefore, no condemnation to them who are in 
Christ Jesus.” The cross—He earried it. The flames of 
hell—He suffered them. The shame—He endured it. 
The crown—He wore it. The heights of heaven sing it, 
and worlds of light to worlds of light, all around the 
heavens cry: “Glory! glory!’ 

Let us go forth and gather the trophies for Jesus. 
From Goleonda mines we gather the diamonds; from 
Ceylon banks we gather the “pearls ; from all lands and 
kingdoms we gather precious stones; and we bring the 
glitter’ ing burdens and put them down at the feet of Jesus, 
and say: “All these are thine. Thou art worthy.” We 
go forth again for more trophies, and into one sheaf we 
cather all the seeptres of the Cesars, and the Alexanders, 
and the C zars, and the Sultans of all royalties and domin- 
ions, and then we bring the sheaf of sceptres and put it 
at the feet of Jesus, and say: “Thou art King of kings, 
and these thou hast conquered.” And then we go forth 
again to gather more trophies, and we bid the redeemed 
of all ages, the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty, 
to come. We ask them to come and offer their true 


man 
bite 
to he 
find 1 
How 


river 
Jesus 
ad to 
yn to 
tere of 
e not 
n the 
is the 
d and 
resur- 
gh he 
‘ation : 
hrough 
faith ; 
alt’ be 
«There 
are in 
umes of 
red _ it. 
sing it, 
nd the 


Jesus. 
from 
ds and 


eaf we 
anders, 
domin- 
put it 
kings, 
o forth 
jJeemed 


CHRIST EVERYTHING. 185 


thanksgivin ss, and the hosts of heaven bring crown, and 
palm, and sceptre, and here by these bleeding feet, and by 
this riven side, and by this wounded heart, ery: “ Bless- 
ing, and honour, and glory and power be unto Him that 
sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and for 
ever.” ‘Tell me of a tear he did not weep, of a burden 
that He did not carry, of a battle He did not fight, of a 
victory that He did not achieve. “All in all is Jesus” in 
the great plan of redemption. 

I remark again: Christ is everything to the Christian 
in time of trouble. Who has escaped trouble? We must 
all stoop down and drink out of the bitter lake. The 
moss has no time to grow on the buckets that come up 
out of the heart’s well, dripping with tears, Great trials 
are upon our track as certain as grey-hound pack on the 
scent of deer, From our hearts, in every direction, there 
are a thousand cords reaching out, binding us to loved 
ones, and ever and anon some of those tendrils snap. The 
winds that cross this sea of life are not all abaft. The 
clouds that cross our sky are not feathery and afar, stray- 
ing like flocks of sheep in heavenly pastures, but wrath- 
ful, and sombre, and gleaming with terror; they wrap the 
mountains in tire, and come down braying with their 
thunders through every gorge. The richest fruits of 
blessing have a “prickly shell. Life here is not lying at 
anchor, it is weathering a gale, It is not sleeping in a 
soldier’s tent, without arms stacked; it is a bayonet 
charge. We stumble over grave-stones, and we drive on 
with our wheel deep in the old rut of graves. Trouble 
has wrinkled your brow and it has frosted your head. 
lalling in the battle of life, is there no angel of mercy to 
hind our wounds? Hath God made this world with so 
many things to hurt and none to heal? For this saake- 
bite of sorrow is there no herb growing by all the brooks 
to heal the poison? Blessed be God that in the gospel we 
find this antidote. Christ has bottled an ocean of tears. 
How many thorns He has plucked out of humaa agony. 
L 


ik 2 RN EIEIO ATLAS RIE Ee 


menage ne 


186 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


: Oh, He knows too well what it is to carry a cross, not to 
i help us carry ours. He knows too well what it is to climb 
i the mountain, not to help us up the steep. He knows too 
well what it is to be persecuted, not to help those who § 
are imposed upon. He knows too well what it is to be 
sick, not to help those who suffer, Aye! He knows too 


oe): well what it is to die, not to help us in our last extremity. 
it Blessed Jesus, Thou knowest it all. Seeing Thy wounded 
| | side, and Thy wounded bands, andThy wounded feet, and 
Hi Thy wounded brow, we are sure Thou know st all. Oh, 

when those on whose bosom we used to breathe ou 
ih sorrows are snatehed from us, blessed be God, the heart o! 
y | Jesus still beats; and when all other lights go out, and the 
ie world gets dark, then we see coming out from behind a 
cloud something so faint we hardly know what it is; but 


at last we desery it—star of hope, herald of the morning. 

There are different kinds of hands. The hand of care 
may smite you, and the hand of bereavement may crush 
you into the dust, and the hand of temptation may push 
you back into the darkness; but there is a hand amidst 
it so gentle, and it isso kind that it wipeth away all tears 
from all faces. 


* - in © s ee 
BRS ee. ae 
- « = ns 


2 


= 


s, not to 
to climb 
10Ws too 
ose who 
, is to be 
1OWS boo 
<tremity. 
wounded 
feet, anil 
all. Oh, 
athe ou! 
e heart o! 
t, and the 
behind a 
it is; but 
-morning. 
1d of care 
nay crush 


may pus sh 
vd amidst 


y all tears 


LIFE AT HOME. 


** Let them learn first to show piety at home.”—1 Tim. vi: 4, 


CHURCH within a church, a republic within 

a republic, a world within a world, is spelled 

by four letters—Home! If things go right 

there, they go right everywhere; if things go wrong 

there, they go wrong everywhe re, The door- sill of 

the dwelling- house is the foundation of church and 

state. A man never gets higher than his own gar- 

ret, or lower than his own cellar. In other words, 

domestic life overarches and underguides all other 

life. The highest house of congress is the domestic 

circle; the rocking-chair in the nursery is higher 

than a throne. Ge sorge Washington commanded the 

forces of the United “Stutes, but Mary Washington 

commanded George. Chry sostom’s mother made 

his pen for him. If a man should start out and run 

seventy years in a straight line, he could not get out 

from under the shadow of his own mantelpiece, T there- 

fore talk to you this morning about a matter of infinite 
and eternal moment when I speak of your home. 

As individuals, we are fragments. God makes the 

races in parts, and then He gradually puts us together. 

What I lack, you make up; what you lack, I make up ; 


Ns 
S 


Ya WZ Vy NN . & 
Ww NX fe. 
\F VG oe 
© Rn 8 
é \F VG ke Pg 
y Nae" 
\¥ IMAGE EVALUATION Xe 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 
| LO (Nae as 
== |, (le 
l a Mee 
ee (L8 
22 Wid Wee 
” Aa 
YY ZN 
N 
aN we & 
Cj lx 
ty” @, ‘ a 
Nn ® 
\S 4 a 


| Photographic ae ‘ 
7 Scots RES 
Corporation 


\ " 


188 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


our deficits and surpluses of character being the wheels 
in the great social mechanism, One person has the 
patience, another has the courage, another has the plac- 
idity, another has the enthusiasm ; that which is lacking 
in one is made up by another, or made up by all. But- 
faloes in herds ; grouse in broods; quails in flocks ; the 
human race in circles. God has mast beautifully arranged 
this. It isin this way that He balances society—this con- 
servative and that radical keeping things even. Every 
ship must have its mast, cutwater, taftrail, ballast. Thank 
God, then for Princeton and Andover for the opposites. 
T have no more right to blame a man for being different 
from me than a driving wheel has a right to “blame the 
iron shaft that holds it to the centre., John Wesley bal- 
ances Calvin’s institute, Dr. M‘Cosh gives to Seotland 
the strong bones of the ology. Dr. Guthrie clothes them 
with a throbbing heart and warm flesh. The difficulty 
is that we are not satisfied with just the work that God 
has given us to du. The water-wheel wants to come in- 
side the mill and grind the grist, and the hopper wants 
to go out and dabble in the water. Our usefulness and 
the welfare of society depend upon our staying in just 
the place that God has put us, or intended we should oc- 
enpy. For more compactness, and that we may be more 
useful, we are gathered in still smaller circles in the 
home group. And there you have the same varieties 
again, brothers, sisters, husband and wife—all different 
in temperaments and tastes. It is fortunate that it 
should be so. If the husband be all impulse, the wife 
must be all prudence. If one sister be sanguine in her 
temperament, the other must be lymphatic, Mary an 
Martha are necessities. There will be no dinner for 
Christ if there be no Martha; there will be no audiences 
for Jesus, if there be no Mary. The home organization 
is most beautifully constructed. Eden has, gone; the 
bowers are all broken down; the animals that Adam 
stroked with his hand that morning when they came up 


nes 
rou. 
(re; 
mer 
thor 


190 SERMONS BY TALMAGE., 


worst revolution that France ever saw. It was only the 
first course in that banquet of hell; and I teli you what 
you know as well as I do, that wrong notions on the sub- 
ject of Christian marriage are the cause at this day of 
more moral outrage before God and man than any other 
cause. 

There are some things that I want to bring before you. 
I know there are those of you who have had homes 
set up for a great many years, and notwithstanding the 
hardships and trials that come to them you would not 
surrender them ; and then there are those here who have 
just established their home. They have only been in it 
a few months, or a few years. Then there are those who 
will, after a while, set up for themselves a home, and it 
is right that I should speak out upon these themes. 

My first council to you is: have Jesus in your new 
home, if it is a new home; and let him who was a guest 
at Bethany be in your household; let the Divine bless- 
ing drop upon your every hope, and plan, and expecta- 
tion. ‘Those young people who begin with God, end with 
heaven. Have on your right hand the engagement ring 
of the Divine affections. If one of you be a Christian, 
let that one take the Eible, and read a few verses in the 
evening time, and then kneel down and commend your- 
self to Him who setteth the solitary in families, I want 
to tell you that the destroying angel passes by without 
touching or entering the door-post sprinkled with the 
blood of the everlasting Covenant. Why is it that in 
some families they never get along, and in others they 
always get along well? I have watched such cases, and 
have come to a conclusion. In the first instance, nothing 
seeu.ed to go pleasantly,and after a while there came de- 
vastation, domestic disaster or estrangement. Why ? 
They started wrong. In the other case, although there 
were hardships, and trials, and some things that had to 
be explained, still things went on pleasantly until the 

very last. Why? They started right 


the 
ihe 
» sub- 
lay of 
other 


e you. 
homes 
ng the 
uld not 
o have 
nin it 
ge who 
and it 
a; 
ur net 
a guest 
e bless- 
xpecta- 
d with 
bnt ring 
rristian, 
g in the 
d your- 
IT want 
vithout 
ith the 
that in 
avs they 
ses, and 
nothing 
ame de- 
Why ! 
rh there 
t had to 
atil the 


LIFE AT HOME. 191 


My second advice to you in your home is, to exercise 
to the very last possibility of your nature the law of fore- 
bearance., Prayers in the household will not make up 
for everything. Some of the best people in the world 
are the hardest to get along with. There are people who 
stand up in prayer meetings and pray like an angel, who 
at home are uncompromising and cranky. You may not 
have everything just as you want it. Sometimes it will 
be the duty of the husband, and sometimes of the wife 
to yield; but both stand punctiliously on your rights, 
and you will have a Waterloo with no Blucher coming 
up at nightfall to decide the conflict. Never be ashamed 
to apologise when you have done wrong in domestic 
affairs, Let that be a law of your household. The 
best thing I ever heard of my grandfather, whom I never 
saw, was this: that once having unrighteously rebuked 
one of his children. he, himself, having lost his patience, 
and, perhaps, having been misinformed of the child’s 
doings, found out his mistake, and, in the evening of the 
same day, gathered all his family together, and said: 
“ Now, I have one explanation to make, and one thing to 
say. ‘shomas, this morning, I rebuked you very un- 
fairly. Iam very sorry for it. I rebuked you in the 
presence of the whole family, and now I ask your for- 
giveness in their presence.” It must have taken some 
courage to do that. It was right, was it not? Never be 
ashamed to apologise for domestic inaccuracy. Find out 
the points—what are the weak points, if I may call it so 
—of your companion, and then stand aloof from them, 
Do not carry the fire of your temper too near the gun- 
powder. If the wife be easily fretted by disorder in the 
household, let the husband be careful where he throws 
his slippers. If the husband comes home from the store 
with his patience all exhausted, do not let the wife un- 
necessarily cross his temper; but both stand up for your 
rights, and I will promise the everlasting sound of the 
war-whoop. Your life will be spent in making up, and 


: 


a eee 


192 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 
marriage will be to you an unmitigated curse. Cowper 


said : 
‘*The kindest and the happiest faith 
Will find occasion to forbear ; 
And something every day they live 
To pity and, perhaps, forgive,” 


T advise, also, that you make your chief pleasure circle 
around about that home. It is unfortunate whez it is 
otherwise. If the husband spends the most of his nights 
away from home, of choice, and not of necessity, he is 
not the head of the household; he is only the cashier, 
If the wife throw the cares of the household into the 
servant's lap, and then spend five nights of the week 
at the opera or theatre, she may clothe her children 
with satins, and laces, and ribbons that would confound 
a French milliner, but they are orphans. Oh, it is sad 
when a child has no one to say its prayers to, because 
mother has gone off to the evening entertainment. In 
India, they bring children and throw them to the croco- 
diles, and it seems very cruel; but the jaws of New 
York and Brooklyn dissipation, are swallowing down 
more little children to day than all the monsters that 
ever crawled upon the banks of the Ganges. I have 
seen the sorrow of a Godless mother on the death of a 
child she neglected. It was not so much grief that she 
felt from the fact that the child was dead, as the fact 
that she had neglected it. She said: “If I had only 
watched over and cared for the child, I know God would 
not have taken it.” The tears came not. It was a dry, 
blistering tempest—a scorching simoon of the desert. 
When she wrung her hands, it seemed as if she would 
twist her fingers from their sockets; when she seized 
her hair, it seemed as if she had, in wild terror, grasped 
a coiling serpent with her right hand. No tears! Com- 
rades of the little one came in and wept over the coftin ; 
neighbours came in, and the moment they saw the still 
face of the child, the shower broke. No tears for her. 


owper 


circle 
i 1b 1s 
nights 
, he is 
ashier. 
to the 
week 
hildren 
nfound 
is sad 
yecause 
nt. In 
croco- 
nf New 
down 
rs that 
I have 
h of 
hat she 
he fact 
d only 
would 
Ba dry, 
desert. 
would 
seize 
prasped 
Com- 
coftin ; 
he still 
for her. 


LIFE AT HOME, 193 


God gives tears as the summer rain to the parched soul ; 
but in all the universe, the dryest, the hottest, the most 
scorching, and consuming thing is a mother’s heart, if 
she has neglected her child when once it is dead. God 
may forgive her, but she will never forgive herself, The 
memory will sink the eyes deeper into the sockets, cain 
pinch the face and whiten the hair, and eat up the hear 
with vultures that will not be satisfied, forever ai 
deeper their iron beaks. Oh, you wanderers from your 
home, go back to your duty! The brightest flowers in 
all the earth are those which grow in the garden of 
a Christian household, clambering over the porch of a 
Christian home. 

I advise you also to cultivate symputhy of occupation, 
Sir James M‘Intosh, one of the naost eminent and elegant 
men that ever lived, while standing at the very height of 
his eminence, said to a great company of scholars: “ My 
wife made me.” The wife ought to be the advising part- 
ner in every firm. She ought to he interested in all the 
losses and gains of shop and store. She ought to havea 
right—sl.¢ } has a right to know everything, If a man 
goes into a business transaction that he dare not tell his 
wife of, you may depend that he is on the way either to 
bankruptcy or moral ruin. There may be some things 
which he does not wish to trouble his wife with, but if 
he dave not tell her, he is on the road to discomfiture. 
On the other hand, the husband ought to be sympathetic 
with the wife’s occupation. It is no easy thing to keep 
house. Many a woman that could have endured martyr- 
dom as well as Margaret, the Scotch girl, have actually 
been worn out by “house man: igement, There are a 
thousand martyrs of the kitchen, It is very annoying, 
after the vexations of the day, around the stove, or the 
table, or in the nursery, or parlour, to have the husband 
say: “You know nothing about trouble; you ought to 
ve in the store half-an-hour.” Sympathy of oce upation | 
lf the husband's work cover him with the soot of the 


.) ji 
aa 
aay 
Hy 
7; 
a 


194 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


furnace, or the odours of leather, or soap factories, let not 
the wife be easily disgusted at the begrimed hands or 
unsavoury aroma, Your gains are one, your interests are 
one, your losses are one; lay hold of the work of life 
with both hands. Four hands to tight the battles. Four 
eyes to watch for the danger, Four shoulders on which 
to carry the trials. It isa very sad thing when the painter 
has a wife who does not like pictures. It is a very sad 
thing for a pianist when she has a husband who does not 
like music. It is a very sad thing when a wife is not 
suited unless her husband has, what is called, a “genteel 
business.” As far as I understand a “genteel business,” 
it is something to which a man goes at ten o’clock in the 
morning, and comes home at two or three o'clock in the 
afternoon, and gets a large amount of money for doing 
nothing, That is, I believe, a “genteel business ;” and 
there has been many a wife who has made the mistake 
of not being satisfied until the husband has given up the 
tanning of hides, or the turning of the banisters, or the 
building of the walls, and put himself in circles where he 
has nothing to do, but smoke cigars and drink wine, and 
get himself into habits that upset him, going down in 
the maelstrom, taking his wife and children with him. 
There are a good many trains running from earth to 
destruction. They start all the hours of the day, and all 
the hours of the night. There are the freight trains, 
they go very slowly, and very heavily; and there are 
the accommodation trains going on towards destruction, 
and they stop very often, and let a man get out when he 
wants to. But genteel idleness is an express train : 
Satan is the stoker, and Death is the engineer; and 
though one may come out in front of it, and swing the 
red flag of “danger,” or the lantern of God’s word, it 
makes just one shot into perdition, coming down the 
embankment with a shout, and a wail, and a shriek— 
crash, crash! There are two classes of people sure of 
destruction ; first, those who have nothing to do ; secondly 


LIFE AT HOME. 195 


those who have something to do, but who arc too lazy, or 
too proud to do it. 

I have one more word of advice to give to those who 
would have a happy home, and that is: let love preside 
im ut. When your behaviour in the domestic circle 
becomes a mere matter of calculation—when the caress 
you give is merely the result of deliberate study of the 
position you occupy, happiness lies stark dead on the 
hearth-stone. When the husband's position as head of 
the household is maintained by loudness of voice, by 
strength of arm, by fire of temper, the republic of domes- 
tic bliss has become a despotism that neither God nor 
man will abide. Oh, ye who promised to love each other 
at the altar, how dare you commit perjury? Let no 
shadow of suspicion come on your affection. It is easier 
to kill that Hower, than it is to make it live again. The 
blast from hell that puts out that light leaves | you in the 
blackness of darkness for ever. 

Here is a man and wife; they agree in nothing else, 
but they agree thevewill have a home. They will have 

splendid house, and they think that if they have a 
house they willhave a home. Architects make the plan, 
and the mechanics execute it; the house to cost one hun- 
dred thousand dollars. It is done. The carpets are 
spread ; lights are hoisted ; curtains are hung; cards of 
invitation sent out. The horses in gold- -plated harness 
prance at the gate ; guests come in and take their places ; 
the flute sounds ; the dancers go up and down; and with 
one grand whirl, the wealth and the fashion, and the 
mirth of the great town wheel amid the pictured walls. 
Ha! this is happiness. Float it on the smoking viands ; 
sound it in the music; whirl it in the dance; cast it on 
the snow of sculpture; sound it up the brilliant stair- 
way; flash it in the chandeliers. Happiness indeed! 
Let us build on the centre of the parlour floor, a throne 
to happiness ; let all the guests, when come in, bring their 
flowers; and pearls, and diamonds, and throw them on 


i f 
{ 
i 

ii 


ee 


igremprcmnnecormantie Sat Rica a 9 Sg ead tise 


me Res 


Sa eI 


196 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


this pyrainid, and let it be a throne; and then let Hap- 
piness, the Queen, mount the throne, and we will stand 
around, and all chalices lifted, we will say, “ Drink, oh 
Queen, live for ever!” But the guests depart, the flutes 
are breathless, the last clash of the impatient hoofs are 
heard in the distance, and the twain of the household 
come back to see the Queen of Happiness on the throne 
amid the parlour floor. But, alas, as they come back the 
flowers have faded, the sweet odours have become the 
smell of the charnei-house, and instead of the Queen of 
Happiness, there sits there the gaunt form of Anguish, 
with bitter lip and sunken eye, and ashes in her hair. 
The romp of the dancers who have left seems crumbling 
yet, like jarring thunders that quake ‘the floor and rattle 
the glasses of the feast, rim to rim. The spilt wine on 
the floor turns into blood! The wreaths of plush have 
become wriggling reptiles. Terrors catch tangled in the 
canopy that overhangs the couch. A strong gust of 
wind comes through the hall, and the drawing-room, 
and the bed-chamber, in which alle the lights go out. 
And from the lips of the wine-beakers come the words . 
“ Happiness is not in me!” And the arches respond : 
“It is not in me!” And the silenced instruments of 
music, thrummed on by invisible fingers answer: “ Hap- 
pes is not in me!” And the frozen lips of Anguish 

ree.k open, and seated on the throne of wilted flowers, 
she strikes her bony hands together, and groans: “ It is 
not in me!” 

That very night, a clerk with a salary of a thousand 
dollars a year—only one thonsand—goes to his home, set 
up three months ago, just after the marriage-day. Love 
meets him at the door; love sits with him at the table; 
love talks over the work of the day; love takes down 
the Bible, and reads of Him who came our souls to save; 
and they kneel, and while they are kneeling—right in 
that plain room, on that plain carpet—the angels of God 
build a throne, not out of flowers that perish and fade 


LIFE AT HOME, 197 


away, but out of garlands of heaven, wreath on top of 
wreath, amaranth on amaranth, until the throne is done. 
Then the harps of God sounded, and suddenly there 
appeared one who mounted the throne -with eye so 
bright, and brow so fair, that the twain knew it was 
Chrisuian love. And they knelt at the foot of the throne, 
and putting one hand on each head, she blessed them, 
and said : “ Happiness is with me!” And that throne of 
celestial bloom withered not with the passing years ; and 
the Queen left not the throne till one day the married 
pair felt stricken in years—felt themselves called away, 
and knew not which way to go, and the Queen bounded 
from the throne, and said: “ Follow me; and I will 
show you the way up to the realm of everlasting love.” 
And so they went up to sing songs of love, and walk on 
eae of love, and to live together in mansions of 
ove, and to rejoice for ever in the truth that God ts love 


| 
rd a a RO NR EEN pag ann nt a Et =] 
“ ‘ uidiotets 


Re CE ET 


a aside atte ees 


THE FATHER'S KISS. 


‘© When he was yet a great way off his father saw him and 
had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and 
kissed him.”—St. Luke xv: 20. 


> 
BF HAVE often described to you the going away 
of this prodigal son from his father’s house and 
I have showed you what a hard time he had 
down in the wilderness, and what a very great 
mistake it was for him to leave so beautiful a home 
for such a miserable desert. But he did not always 
stay in the wilderness; he came back after a while. 
We don’t read that his mother came to greet him. 
I suppose she was dead. She would have been the 
first to come out. The father would have given the 
second kiss to the returning prodigal; the mother 
the first. It may have been for the lack of her ex- 
ample and prayers that he became a prodigal. Some- 
times the father does not know how to manage the 
children of the household ; the chief work comes up- 
on the mother. Indeed, no one ever gets over the calam- 
ity of losing a mother in early life. Still, this young 
man was not ungreeted when he came back. However 
well appareled we may be in the morning, when we start 
out on a journey, before night, what with the dust and 
the jostling, we have lost all cleverness of appearance, 


, and 


way 
»and 
had 
rreat 
home 
vays 
hile. 
him. 
the 
the 
ther 
r eX- 
yMe- 
the 
: up- 
am- 
pung 
ever 
start 
and 
nce, 


THE FATHER’S KISS, 199 


But this prodigal, when he started from his swine-trough, 
was ragged and wretched, and his appearance after “ho 
had gone through days of journeying and exposure, you 
can more easily imagine than describe. As the people 
see the prodigal coming on homeward, they wonder who 
he is. They say: “I wonder what prison he has broken 
out of. I wonder what lazaretto he has escaped from. 
I wonder with what plague he will smite the air.” <Al- 
though these people may have been well acquainted with 
the family, yet they don’t imagine that this is the very 
young man who went off only a little while ugo with 
quick step and ruddy cheek and beautiful apparel. The 
young man, I think, walks very fast. He looks as though 
he were intent upon something very important. The peo- 
ple stop; they look at him; they wonucr where he came 
from ; they wonder where he is going. You have heard 
of a son who went off to sea and never returned. All the 
people in the neighbourhood thought that the son would 
never return, but the parents came to no such conclusion, 
They would go by the hour and day and sit upon the 
beach, looking off upon the water, expecting to see the 
sail that would bring home the long absent boy. And 
so, I think, this father of my text sat under the vine 
looking out towards the ro»d on which his son had de- 
parted; but the father has changed very much since we 
saw him last. His hair has become white, his cheeks are 
furrowed, his heart is broken. What is all his bountiful 
table to him when his son may be lacking bread? What 
is all the splendour of the wardrobe of that homestead 
when the son may not have a decent coat? What are al) 
the sheep on the hillside to that father when his pet 
lamb is gone? Still he sits and watches, looking out on 
the road, and one day he beholds a foot traveller. He 
sees him rise above the hills, first the head, and after a 
while the entire body, and as soon as he gets a fair glance 
at him he knows it is his recreant son. He forgets the 
erutch and the cane and the stiffness of the joints, and 


200 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 
bounds away. I think the people all around were amazed. 
They said: “ It is only a foot-pad ; it is only an old tramp 
of the road; don’t go out to meet him.” The father knew 
better. The change in the son’s appearance could not hide 
the marks by which the father knew the boy. You know 
that persons of a great deal of independence of character 
are apt to indicate it in their walk. For that reason the 
sailor almost always has a peculiar step, not only because 
he stands much on shipboard, amid the rocking of the sea, 
and he has to balance himself, but he has for the most part 
an independent character, which would show itself even if 
he never went on the sea, and we know what transpired 
afterward and from what transpired before that this prod- 
igal son was of an independent and frank nature, and I 
suppose that the characteristics of his mind and heart 
were the characteristics of his walk. And so the father 
knew him. He puts out his withered arms toward him. 
He brings his wrinkled face against the pale cheek of his 
son. He kisses the wan lips) He thanks God that the long 
agony is over. “ When he was yet a great way off his father 
saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck 
and kissed him,” 

Oh, don’t you recognize that father? Who was it? 
It is God! Ihave no sympathy with that cast iron the- 
ology which represents God as hard, severe, and vindictive. 
God is a futher, kind, loving, lenient, gentle, long-suffer- 
ing, patient, and he flies to our immortal rescue. Oh, 
that we might realize it to-day. A wealthy lady in one 
of the eastern countries was going off for some time and 
she asked her daughters for some memento to carry with 
her. One of the daughters brought a marble tablet, 


beautifully inscribed, and another daughter a beautiful . 


wreath of flowers. The third daughter came and said: 
“ Mother, I brought no flowers or tablet, but here is my 
heart. I have inscribed it all over with your name, and 
wherever you go it will go with you.” ‘lhe mother re- 
cognized it as the best of all the mementos, Qh, that 


dd. 
up 
ew 
ide 
ow 
ter 
the 
use 
sea, 
art 
os if 
ired 
rod- 
nd I 
yeart 
ither 
him. 
yf his 
- long 
ather 
neck 


g it? 
» the- 
tive. 
uffer- 
Oh, 
one 
b and 
with 
blet, 


said : 
5B my 
, and 
r re- 
that 


tifal - 


THE FATHER’S KISS. 901 


to-day our souls might go out towards the Lord Jesus 
Christ, towards our Father—that our hearts might be 
written all over with the evidences of his loving kind- 
ness, and that we might never again forsake him. Lord 
God, this day by thy Holy Spirit move upon our affec- 
tions ! 

In the first place, I notice in this text, the father’s eye- 
sight; in the second place, I notice the father’s haste; and 
in the third place, I notice the father’s kiss. 

To begin: The father’s eye-sight. “ When he was yet 
a great way off his father saw him.” You have noticed 
how old people sometimes put a book off on the other 
side of the light; they can see at a distance a great deal 
easier than they can close by. I don’t know whether he 
could see well that which is near by, but I do know that 
he could see a great way off. “His father saw him.” 
Perhaps he had been looking for the return of that boy, 
especially that day. I don’t know but that he had .been 
in prayer and that God had told him that that day the 
recreant hoy would come home. “The father saw him a 
great way off.” 

I wonder if God’s eye-sight can descry us when we are 
coming back to him? The text pictures our condition— 
we are a great way off. That young man was not far- 
ther off from his father’s house, sin is not farther off 
from holiness, nell is no farther from heaven—than we 
have been by our sins, away from God; aye, so far off 
that we could not hear his voice, though vehemently he 
has called us year after year. I don’t know what bad 
habits you may have formed, or in what evil places you 
have been, or what false notions you may have enter- 
tained ; but you are ready to acknowledge, if your heart 
has not been changed by the grace of God, that you are 
a great way off, aye, so far that you cannot get back of 
yourselves. You would like to come back. Aye, this 
moment you would start if it were not for this sin, and 


that habit, and this disadvantage. But I am to tell you 
M 


202 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


of the Father’s eyesight. “He saw him a great way off.” 
He has seen all your frailties, all your struggles, all your 
disadvantages. He has been longing for your coming. 
He has not been looking at you with a critic’s eye, or a 
bailiff’s eye, but with a Father's eye, and if a parent ever 
pitied a child, God pities you. You say: “Oh, I had so 
many evil surroundings when I started life.” Your 
Father sees it. You say: “I haveso many bad surround- 
ings now and it is very difficult for me to break away 
from evil associations.” Your Father sees it, and if this 
moment you should start heavenward, as I pray you may, 
your Father would not sit idly down and allow you to 
struggle on up toward Him. Oh, no! Seeing you a great 
way off, he would fly to the rescue. How long does it 
take a father to leap into the middle of the highway if 
his child be there and a swift vehicle is coming and may 
destroy him. Five hundred times longer than it takes 
our heavenly Father to spring to the deliverance of a lost 
child. “ When he was a great way off his father saw 
him.” 

And this brings me to notice the father’s haste. The 
Bible says he ran. No wonder, He didn’t know but 
that the young man would change his mind and go back. 
He didn’t know but that he would drop down from ex- 
haustion. He didn’t know but something fatal might 
overtake him before he got up to the door-sill, and so the 
father ran. The Bible, for the most part, speake of God 
as walking. “In the fourth watch of the night,” it says, 
“Jesus came unto them walking on the sea.” ‘‘ He walk- 
eth upon the winds.” Our first parents heard the voice 
of the Lord, walking in the garden in the cool of the day ; 
but when a sinner starts for God, the father runs to meet 
him, Oh, if a man ever wants help it is when he tries to 
become a Christian, The world says to him, “back with 
you, have more spirit, don’t be hampered with religion, 
time enough yet; wait until you get sick, wait until you 
get old.” Satan says, “ back with you; you are so bad 


off.” 


your 
ning. 
or a 
ever 
ad so 
Your 
ound- 
away 
f this 
may, 
rou to 
: great 
oes it 
way if 
dd may 
t takes 
f a lost 
er saw 


», The 
pw but 
o back. 
om e@X- 
might 
go the 
of God 
it says, 
e walk- 
g voice 
e day; 
o meet 
tries to 
k with 
eligion, 
til you 
80 


THE FATHER’S KISS, 903 


that God will have nothing to do with you,” or, “ you are 
good enough and need no “Redeemer. ‘Take thine ease ; 
eat, drink, and be merry.” ‘Ten thousand voices say: 
“back with you. God isa hard master. The church is 
a collection of hypocrites. Back into your sins, back into 
your evil indulgences, back to your prayerless pillow. 
The silliest thing that a young man ever does is to come 
home after he has been wander ing.” Oh, how much help 
a man does want when he tries to become a Christian. 
Indeed the prodigal can’t find his way home to his father’s 
house alone. Unless some one comes to meet him he had 
better have staid by the swine-trough chewing the carobs 
of the desert. When the sea comes in at full tide you 
might more easily with your broom sweep back the surges 
than you could drive back the ocean of your unforgiven 
transgressions. What are we to do? Are we to “fight 
the battle alone and trudge on with no one to aid us, and 
no rock to shelter us, and no word of encouragement 
to cheer us. Glory be to God we have in the text the 
announcement: “ When he was yet a great way off his 
father ran.” When the sinner starts for God, God starts 
for the sinner. God does not come out with a slow 
and hesitating pace; the infinite spaces slip beneath 
His feet and He takes worlds at a bound. “ The father 
ran |” 

Oh, wonderful meeting, when God and the soul come to- 
gether. “The father ran!” You start for God and God 
starts for you, and this morning and this house is the 
time and the place when you meet, and while the angels 
rejoice over the meeting, your long injured father falls 
upon your neck with attestation of compassion and _par- 
don. Your poor wandering, sinful, polluted soul and the 
loving, the eternal Father’s have met, 

I remark upon the father’s kiss. “ He fell on his neck,” 
my text says, ‘and he kissed him.” It is not every father 
that would have done that way. He would have scolded 
him and said: “here, you went off with beautiful clothes, 


504 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


but now you are all in tatters ; you went off healthy and 
come back sick and wasted with your dissipations.” He 
didn’t say that. The son, all haggard and ragged, and 
filthy and wretched, stood before his father. The father 
charged him with none of his wanderings; he just received 
him, he just kissed him. His wretchedness was a recom- 
mendation to that father’s love. Oh, that father’s kiss! 
How shall I describe the love of God? The ardour with 
which he receives a sinner back again ? Give me a plum- 
met with which I may fathom this sea; give .1e a ladder 
with which I can scale this height; give me words with 
which I can describe this love. The apostle says in one 
place: “unsearchable ;” in another, “past finding out.” 
Height overtopping all height, depth plunging beneath 
all depth, breadth compassing all immensity. Oh, this 
love. Don’t you kelieve it? Has he not done everything 
to make you think so? He has given you life, health, 
friends, home, the use of your hands, the sight of your 
eye, the hearing of your ear; He has strewn your path 
with mercies, He has fed you, clothed you, sheltered you, 
defended you, loved you, importuned you, all your life 
long. Don’t you believe He loves you? Why, this morn- 
ing, if you should start up from the wilderness of your 
sin, he would throw both arms around you. To make 
you believe that he loves you he stooped to manger, and 
cross, and sepulchre. With all the passions of his holy 
nature roused he stunds before you to-day and would 
coax you to happiness and heaven, Oh, this father’s kiss! 
There is so much meaning, and love, and compassion in it 
—so much pardon in it—so much heaven in it. I pro- 
claim Him the Lord God merciful and gracious, long- 
suffering and abundant in goodness and truth. Lest you 
would not believe him, he goes up Golgotha, and while 
the rocks are rending, and the graves are opening, and the 
mobs are howling, and the sun is hiding, he dies for you. 
See him, See him on the mount of Crucifixion, the sweat 
on his brow tinged with the blood exuding from his 


in one 
io out.” 
jeneath 
Yh, this 
rything 
health, 
of your 
r path 
‘ed you, 
our life 
3 morn- 
of your 
o make 
per, and 
is holy 
would 
r’s kiss ! 
on in it 
I pro- 
s, long- 
est you 
d while 
and the 
or you. 
e sweat 
om his 


THE FATHER’S KISS, 205 


lacerated temples. See his eyes swimming in death, 
Hear the loud breathing of the sufferer as he pants with a 
world on his heart. Hark to the fall of blood from brow 
and hand, and foot on the rock beneath—drop, drop, drop! 
Look ut the nails! How wide the wounds are—wider do 
they gape as his body comes down upon them. Qh, this 
crucifixion agony. ‘Tears melting into tears; blood fow- 
ing into blood; darkness droping on darkness; hands of 
men joined with the hands of devils to tear apart the 
heart of the son of God! Oh, will he never speak again ? 
Will the crimson face ever light up again? He will speak 
again, while the blood is sutfusing his brow, and reddening 
his cheek, and gathering on nostril and lip, and you think 
he is exhausted and cannot speak; he cries out until all 
the ages hear him: “ Father, forgive them, they know not 
what they do!” Is there no emphasis in such a scene as 
that to make your dry eyes weep, and your hard heart 
break ? Will you turn your back upon it and say by 
your actions what the Jews said by their words: “ His 
blood be on us, and on our children?” What does it all 
mean, my brother, my sister? Why, it means that for our 
lost race there was a Father's kiss. Love brought him 
down; love opened the gate; love led to the sacrifice ; 
love Shattered the grave; love lifted him up in resur- 
rection—sovereign love, omnipotent love, infinite love, 
bleeding love, everlasting love. 


Oh, for this love let rocks and rills 
Their lastieg silence break, 

And all harmonious human tongues, 
The Saviour’s praises speak, 


Now will you accept that Father’s kiss? The Holy 
Spirit asks you to. The Holy Spirit comes to you this 
morning with his arousing, melting, alarming, inviting, 
vivifying influence. Hearer, what creates in thee that 
unrest? It is the Holy Ghost. What sounds in your ears 
to-day, the joys of the saved and the sorrows of the con- 


ig Se NL RO SRE TE EN en ae. Tay = ye ee v = aon 


— SS 


te FM! 


en ket aed 


pease Sa She 


206 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


demned? Itis the Holy Chost. What influence now 
tells thee that it is time to fly, that to-morrow may be 
too late, that there is one door, one road, one cross, one 
sacrifice—one Jesus? It is the Holy Ghost. Don’t you 
think he is here? I see it in these solemn looks; I see 
it in these tearful eyes; I see it in these blanched cheeks ; 
T see it in the upturned face of childhood and the earnest 
gaze of old age. I know it from this silence like the 
grave. The Holy Ghost is here, and while I speak the 
chains of captives are falling, and the dungeons of sin are 
opening, and the prodigals coming, and the fathers run- 
ning, and angels are shouting and devils are trembling. 
Oh, it is a momentous hour. It is charged with eternal 
destinies. The shadows of the eternal world flit over this 
assemblage. Hark! I hear the songs of the saved—I 
hear the howlings of the damned. Heaven and hell 
seem to mingle and eternity poises on the pivot of this 
hour. Thy destiny is being decided, thy doom is being 
fixed. The door of merey so wide open begins to close. 
It trembles on its hinyes and soon will be shut. These go 
into life and those go into death. These have begun to 
march to heaven and those have commenced to die. 
These have begun to rise and those have begun to sink— 
Hallelujah! Hallelujah ! Woe! Woe! It seems to me as 
if the judgment were past. I imagine it is past. I ima- 
gine that all the sentences have been awarded, the right- 
eous enthroned, the wicked driven away in his wicked- 
ness. Shut all the gates of heaven; there are no more 
to come in, Bolt all the gates of darkness—no more to 
be allowed to come out. Hark! the eternal ages have 
begun their unending tramp ! tramp | 


now 
Ly be 
,, one 
t, you 
I see 
eeks 5 
arnest 
-e the 
ik the 
‘in are 
s run- 
abling. 
oternal 
ver this 
ved—I 
1d hell 
of this 
5 being 
o close. 
hese go 
pun to 
to die. 
sink— 
o me as 
I ima- 
e right- 
ricked- 
o more 
10re to 
bs have 


WOMAN'S acti OVER A WASTED 
) FE, 


Wy ‘* How have I hated instruction and my heart despised reproof.” 
Nee —Prov. v: 12, 


N this world, women are in a large majority. 
They outnumber us in the family, in the 
Church, in the State. In Massachusetts they 
have 70,000 majority. In the State of New 

York they have 140,000 majority. They ought to 

be preached to. They decide eternal destinies, They 

adorn or blast the domestic circle. They help or 
they hinder the State. Where there is one sermon 
preached to men, there ought to be two sermons 
preached te women. The trouble is that, for the 
most part religious counsel comes too late. We 
stand on Staten Island, and we see a ship go out 

* through the “ Narrows,” and we say: “I could have 

; suggested something better in regard to that ship if 

I had only known it in time; but it is too late.” 

The only time to have suggested anything in regard to 

the construction of that vessel was before it came away 

from the hammers of the shipwright. So we come out, 
and we accost men and women in regard to the things of 
eternity. We speak to them after they have started on 
the voyage of life, and are sailing far out toward the 


Sp RE 


oeaee SS SS 
TT RUA RGA LE LUTE AN IE EEN 


208 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


ocean of eternity. We are five years too late, ten years 
too late, forty years too late. Let the young women of 
this generation be evangelized, and the world’s redemp- 

tion is done. Literature will be right; the laws will be 

right ; the Church will be right; the State will be right. 

Failing here we fail everywhere. The character and posi- 

tion of women decide the character and position of the 

State. In Turkey, woman is imbruted, and the empire is 

imbruted. In France, woman is an embellishment, and 

it is a nation of embellishments. A God-loving, God-fear- 

ing womanhood will make a God-loving, God-fearing na- 

tionality: so that if you will tell me the position, the 

moral and Christian position, occupied by women in any 

land, or in any part of any land, I will tell you the char- 

acter of the.law, the character of the literature, the char- 
acter of the Church, the character of the State. 

Having in several discourses told woman what I believe 
to be her opportunity for being and doing something 
grand and Christ-like, I shall in this morning’s sermon 
make manifest what will be a woman’s lamentation over 
a wasted lifetime, if it indeed be found, at the last, to have 
been wasted. And, in the first place, I will suppose that 
a young woman omits her opportunity of making home 
happy. So surely as the years roll around, that home in 
which you now dwell will become extinct. The parents 
will be gone, the property will go into other possession, 

ou yourself will be in other relationships, and that home 
which, last Thanksgiving Day, was full of congratulation, 
will be extinguished. When that period comes, you will 
look back to see what you did or what you neglected to 
do in the way of making home happy. It will be too late 
to correct mistakes. If you did not smooth the path of 
your parents toward the tomb ; if you did not make their 
last days bright and happy; if you allowed your brother 
to go out into the world, unhallowed by Christian and 
sisterly influences ; if ‘you allowed the younger sisters of 
your family to come up without feeling that there had 


years 
on of 

lemp- 

ill be 

right. 

-posi- 
f the 
pire is 
t, and 
|-fear- 
1g na- 
n, the 
in any 
> char- 
. char- 


believe 
.ething 
sermon 
bn Over 
o have 
se that 
r home 
ome in 
parents 
session, 
t home 
lation, 
ou will 
ted to 


oo late 
path of 
ke their 
brother 
an and 

ters of 
bre had 


WOMAN'S LAMENTATION OVER A WASTED LIFE. 209 
been a Christian example set them on your part, there 
will be nothing but bitterness and lamentation. That 
bitterness will be increased by all the surroundings of 
that home; by every chair, by every picture, by the old- 
time mantel-ornaments, by everything you can think of 
as connected with that home. All these things will rouse 
up agonizing memories. Young woman, have you any- 
thing to do in the way of making your father’s home 
happy? Now is the time to attend to it, or leave it for- 
ever undone. Time is flying very quickly away. I sup- 
pose you notice the wrinkles are gathering and accumu- 
lating‘on those kindly faces that have so long looked upon 
you ; there is frost in the locks ; the foot is not as firm in 
its step as it used to be; and they will soon be gone. The 
heaviest clod that ever falls on a parent’s coffin-lid is the 
memory of an ungrateful daughter. O, make their last 
days bright and beautiful. Do not act as though they 
were in the way. Ask their counsel, seek their prayers, 
and, after long years have passed, and you go out to see 
the grave where they sleep, you will find growing all over 
the mound something lovelier than cypress, something 
sweeter than the rose, something chaster than the lily— 
the bright and beautiful memories of filial kindness per- 
formed ere the dying hand dropped on you a benediction, 
and you closed the lids over the weary eyes of the worn- 
out pilgrim. Better that, in the hour of your birth, you 
had been struck with orphanage, and that you had been 
handed over into the cold arms of the world, rather than 
that you should have been brought up under a father’s 
care and a mother’s tenderness, at last to scoff at their ex- 
ample, and to deride their influence; and on the day when 
you followed them in long procession to the tomb, to find 
that you are followed by a still larger procession of un- 
filial deeds done and wrong words uttered. The one pro- 
cession will leave its burden in the tomb, and disband; but 
that longer procession of ghastly memories will forever 
march and forever wail. O,it is a good time for a young 


210 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


woman when she is in her father’s house. How careful 
they are of her welfare. How watchful those parents 
are of all her interests. Seated at the morning repast, 
father at one end of the table, children on either side 
and between; but the years will roll on, and great 
changes will be effected, and one will be missed from one 
end of the table, and another will be missed from the 
other end of the table. God pity that young woman's 
soul who, in that dark hour, has nothing but regretful re- 
collections ! 

Again: I will suppose that a young woman spends her 
whole life, or wastes her young womanhood, in selfish dis- 
play. Worldliness and frivolity may seem to do very 
well while the lustre is in the eye, and the flush is on the 
cheek, and the gracefulness is in the gait ; but when years 
and trouble have clipped off those embellishments, what 
a life to think of! O,if there be nothing to remember 
but flowers that faded, and splendid apparel that is worn 
out, and brilliant groups that are scattered |! Belshazzar’s 
feast is full of sport until the tankards are upset and the 
enemy marches in, and nothing is left but torn garlands, 
and the slush of the wine cup, and the rind of despoiled 
fruit, and fright, and terror, and woe! Alas! Alas! 
Alas! then, Better than that sinful banqueting, a plain 
table, with a plain loaf; and a plain companionship, with 

a blessing at the start, and a thanksgiving at the close of 
the meal. When the trinkets are all gone! when the gay 
feet have halted; when the revel is done—what then ? 
What then? I go into herdying room. I see that there 
are lace-fans to cool her cheek, and gorgeous upholstery 
to shield her eyes, and a godless group to look down on 
the scene ; but no pleasant memory of the past, no hope- 
ful consideration of the future. She worshipped her own 
eye, or cheek, or wardrobe, and her God has cast her off. 
Like Queen Elizabeth in the last hour, she writhes on the 
couch, and clutches the air, and cries: “A kingdom for 
an hour!” In the theatre, it is the tragedy first, and it is 


reful 
rents 
past, 

side 
ereat 
1 one 
1 the 
man’s 
ul re- 


ls her 
h dis- 
very 
mn the 
years 
what 
ember 
; worn 
ZZaY S 
d the 
lands, 
poiled 
Alas ! 
plain 
, with 
ose of 
1e gay 
then 2? 
there 
Istery 
n on 
hope- 
r own 
er off. 
bn the 
n for 
d it is 


WOMAN'S LAMENTATION OVER A WASTED LIFE. 211 


the farce afterward ; but that young woman has reversed 
the order in her life. It is first the farce of a useless ex- 
istence, followed by the tragedy of a lost eternity. The 
actress asked in her closing moments that all the jewels 
might be brought that had been presented to her by for- 
eign courts; and as they were brought in the casket, and 
with her pale and dying hand she turned over the dia- 
monds, she said: “O, you dear jewels, what a pity it is 
that I have to part with you so soon!” The pleasures, the 
adornments, the riches of this world are a poor satisfaction 
to us in the last hour! We want something grander, 
deeper, better. 

Again: I will suppose that a young woman wastes her 
opportunity of doing good. There is no age in life when 
a woman can accomplish so much for Christ, I believe, as 
between sixteen and twenty-five. But now suppose those 
years have passed along, and she has come to the after- 
noon of life, or to the eternal world, and she looks back 
und says. “O, how much sickness there was in that day 
in which I lived my girlhood life: how much sickness 
there was: and [ never alleviated amy of it. There were 
all those children that 1 might have picked out of the 
street fifteen years ago, but who are to- -day in houses of 
abandonment, because I did not, while they were in 
childhood, come to the rescue, There are twenty, thirty, 
forty years, which I might have made tell for the welfare 
of the world which I then lived in, all gone for nothing 
and worse than nothing.” Can you tell me any place 
dark enough for such a soul to weep in? “To think: 
there was that city of Brooklyn, with scores of them, and 
thousands and thousands of them; and I lifted no hand of 
help, I uttered no word of comfort.” O, to crawl away 
into eternity without a crown or a plaudit, when you 
ea have entered, hailed by a bannered procession and 

a great shout from all the battlements. I would to God 
that all the young women of this congregation might rise 
up in soul to-day, and say: “O Lord, “here I am for time 


212 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 

and eternity. If there is anything in my arm, anything 
in my look, anything in my soul, anything in my vivacity, 
itis all Thine, and Thine forever.” 

Again: I will suppose that a young woman omits her 
opportunity of personal salvation. A great multitude of 
women have gone into heaven, led on by Deborah, ard 
Hannah, and Abigail, and Elizabeth, and Mary, of Bible 
story, and the gates of heaven are open for women’s en- 
trance. The Lord never yet thrust one out. He who 
pitied the Syrophcenician woman, and who raised the 
damsel to life, is ready to-day to give resurrection to 
every woman’s soul. But suppose now that you cast all 
these things behind your back, and in the close of life, or 
in the eternal world, you look back upon this state of 
things, and this state of opportunity, how will you feel ? 
Do you suppose there will be any organ with wailing 
stops enough to utter your lamentation? Howstrange it 
is that there are intelligent women who will just trample 
under foot the jewels of their immortal souls, and travel 
on in darkness and in sin when God’s chariots are har- 
nessed to wheel them up the king’s highway! O, to sit 
down at the close of life and to feel: “ All my opportuni- 
ties are gone. No Cross. No Christ. No God. No hea- 
ven. With a lifetime that might have been made a tri- 
umphal march to glory, I have despoiled everything with 
selfishness and with sin.” O God! what will such an one 
do? What apology will such an one make? Having 
fought back and fought down all the advantages of a life- 
time, such an one will stand on the banks of the cold 
river, wringing the hands while tears drop into the foam- 
ing flood, crying: “How have I hated instruction and my 
heart despised reproof. The harvest is past, the summer 
is ended, and I am not saved.” What can soothe such a 
grief as that? Could all the music of the earth play 
down that dirge? Could all the flowers of the earth, 
gathered in one garland and flung on the soul, bury up 
that sepulchre of dead hope? Could all the pearls, and 


ling 
sity, 


her 
e of 
ard 
ible 
s en- 
who 
| the 
yn to 
st all 
fe, or 
te of 
feel ? 
ailing 
nge it 
mple 
ravel 
har- 
to sit 
\ tuni- 
) hea- 
a tri- 
with 
n one 
3 ving 
pn, life- 
cold 
oam- 
d my 
omer 
ch a 
play 
barth, 
y up 
Y ant 


. are immorta You are going to live. 


WOMAN’S LAMENTATION OVER A WASTED LIFE. 213 


diamonds, and jewels of the earth buy her out of that 
captivity? Nay. Nay. Opportunity gone, is gone for- 
ever. Privileges wasted, wasted forever. The soul lost, 
lost forever. 

I come out this morning, just to avert that catastrophe. 
O, young woman, this is the year, this is the month, this 
is the day, this is the hour, tiiis is the minute in which 
you ought to take Jesus Christ as your personal Saviour. 
You are immortal. The stars shall die and the sun be 
snuffed out like a candle; but you are immortal. King- 
doms shall fade and thrones perish, and the islands of the 
sea fly at the presence of the Lord, and all the world will 


burn up, and the ages strike their death-knell; but you 


Death cannot stop 
your existence. The judgment will not bound your life. 


Ages, on ages, on ages. Forever! Forever! Forever } 
Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! O, young woman! Jesus 
Christ died for you. He bore the shame and the cross. 
The heavens palled with blackness at the martyrdora of 
a God, and He stretches out to-day His torn and bleed- 
ing hand, that He may lift you out of the deep damna- 
tion of your sin into that place where angels sing and 
conquerors forever triumph. It seems to me this morn- 
ing, that though the air is full of storm, it is full also of 
mercy. Messenger angels seem to poise mid-air in the 
Taberracle, wing to wing; and as when the atmosphere 
is struck through with Christmas chimes, so it seems to 
me as if all the air were musical with mercy, mercy, mercy, 
merey. For you, the harp is already strung, the crown 
already burnished, the throne already hoisted, and the 
bell-man of God, with silver hammer lifted, ready at the 
first news to strike the triumph and let all heaven know 
that your soul is free. I proclaim it fulland fair. Baisam 
for all wounds. Resurrection for all graves. Eternal 
Fatherhood for all orphanage. Sunrise for all darkness, 
Calmness for all rough seas. Emancipation for all that 
are bound ; and the Lord, long-suffering, and patient, and 


a 


‘ 
& 

, 
& 4 
a 
f 
¥ 
rs 
i 
ft, 
i 
ey 
4 
} + 
# 
¥ 


FR ECAR 


214 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


merciful, and good, and kind, and loving, and sympathet- 
ic, and gentle, for all who will accept His grace. Away 
with your money, this grace is free. Other embellish- 
ments fade, other music will hush, other grandeur will 
wither; but I tell you to-day of something that no frosts 
can chill, and no fires can burn, and no floods can drown, 
and death cannot kill, and eternity itself cannot exhaust. 
The Arab crossing the desert was starving, and suddenly 
his eye fell upon a bundle in the desert. It had been 
dropped by a passing caravan. He said: “I suppose that 
sack is full of figs or dates.” He ran to it and tore it 
open with great avidity, and found that they were dia- 
monds, and he burst into a flood of tears, and said: “ No- 
thing but diamonds! and I thought they were figs and 
dates.” And all the treasures of this world, my friends, 
will at last be poor satisfaction to that soul that wants 
bread—that bread which comes down from heaven—-that 
bread of which, if you eat, you shall never again hunger. 
O woman ! there are some things that you ought to have, 
there are some things that you may have, there are some 
things that you will have; but there is one thing that 
you must have, and that is the grace of God. You can- 
not with your arm, beat your way throug! the trials of 
life. Your heart is notiron, Your nerves are not brass. 
Your brow is not adamant. O, when the storms come, 
when the lights go out, when a messenger from the other 
world stands in your room and says: “This hour you 
must be off,” and you stand on the brink of the great sea, 
without helm, or pilot, or compass, will you then, do 
you think, with your two weak arms, amid the thunder 
and the darkness, be able to pull away to the other 
beach ? 

I stand before you this morning with a message from 
the skies. If you at last miss heaven, will I be to blame ? 
No, I offer you full and free salvation through the blood 
of my Lord Jesus Christ. I offer it not only to those of 
you who have been brought up in respectable and Chris- 


vathet- 
Away 
yellish- 
ir will 
» frosts 
drown, 
<haust. 
ddenly 
d been 
se that 
tore it 
are dia- 
: “ No- 
igs and 
friends, 
; wants 
n—-that 
hunger. 
o have, 
re some 
ng that 
ou can- 
rials of 
t brass. 
s come, 
1e other 
bur you 
eat sea, 
hen, do 
thunder 
e other 


ge from 


blame ? 
e blood 
hose of 


1 Chris- 


WOMAN’S LAMENTATION OVER A WASTED LIFE. 215 


tian circles, and who have been admired and applauded ; 
bnt if there be in this house to-day one soul that has 
wandered in from the outside, an outcast and forlorn 
spirit, wandered away from your Father’s house, no one 
to pray for you, and none to pity you, the Spirit of God 
having brought ycur wandering feet to this place, and 
you sit, and no one knows where you sit, and your heart 
is broken, and the wing of a starless night i is overspread- 
ing all your soul—even to you | preach pardon, and 
peace, and eternal salvation, the pity of Christ for Mary 
Magdalen, and a home in heaven amid shining seraphim. 
May God take your feet off the burning marl of hell 
where they are travelling, and set them on the road to 
heaven. But what I say to you, I say to all. O mothers, 
wives, sisters, and daughters—the charm of the home cir- 
cle—choose, with Ruth, the Christian choice, and say 
with her: “Thy people shall be my people, thy God my 
God; where thou diest will I die, and there will I be 
buried. The Lord do so to me, and more also, if aught 
but death part thee and me.” I want you, in the last 
day, to be amid the great sisterhood of the elect. In that 
hour, when stout hearts will fail, and ruddy cheeks be 
blanched, I want you to be as calm as the face of Jesus 
into which you will then be called to look. When the 
mountains are falling, I want you to stand firm. O, what 
a day that will be for a Christian woman! her kingdom 
come, her robe glistening in the light of an unsetting 
sun, Let her have coronation, and 1 reign queen forever. 
‘The snow was very deep, and it was still falling rapidly, 
when, in the first year of my Christian ministry, I has- 
tened to see a young woman die. It was a very humble 
home, She was an orphan; her father had been ship- 
wrecked on the banks of Newfoundland. She had earned 
her own living. As I entered the room I saw nothing at- 
tractive. No- pictures. No tapestry. Not even a cush- 
ioned chair. The snow on the window casement was not 
whiter than the cheek of that dying girl. It was a face 


RSE Oe Dr a pe 


gees 
es pp Re op oe 


hea 


ev eapley tee atiae Soninnengeret 


See 


Pm a stenting 


it 


eieheiete send pera betaine Nees net 


ea 


FS EERE A a IOI LEIS POS TEBE + 


co 


2 ST SOP one ne come mae ~ ps Lom tb peel pee gh sl 
lt tee iii MN - aap fe 


916 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


never to be forgotten. Sweetness, and majesty of soul, 
and faith in God, had given her a matchless beauty, and 
the sculptor who could have caught the outlines of those 
features, and frozen them into stone, would have made 
himself immortal. With her large, brown eyes she looked 
calmly into the great eternity. I sat down by her bed- 
side and said: “ Now, tell me all your troubles, and sor- 
rows, and struggles, and doubts.” She replied: “I have 
no doubts or struggles. It is all piain to me. Jesus has 
smoothed the way for my feet. teth when you go to 
your pulpit next Sunday, you would tell the young peo- 
ple that religion will make them happy. ‘O Death, where 
is thy sting?’ Mr. Talmage, I wonder if this is not the 
bliss of dying?” I said: “Yes, I think it must be.” I 
lingered around the couch, The sun was setting and her 
sister lighted a candle. She lighted the candle for me. 
The dying girl, the dawn of heaven in her face, needed 
no candle. I rose to go and she said: “I thank you for 
coming. Good-night! When we meet again it will be in 
heaven—in heaven. Good-night! good-night!” For her, 
it was good-night to tears, good-night to poverty, good- 
night to death; but when the sun rose again, it was 
good-morning. The light of another day had burst in 
upon her soul, Good- -morning ! The angels were singing 
her welcome home, and the hand of Christ was putting 
upon her brow a garland, Good-morning! Her sun 
rising. Her palm waving. Her spirit exulting before 
the throne of God. Good- morning! good-morning! The 
white lily of poor Margaret's cheek had blushed into the 
rose of health immor tal, and the snows through which we 
carried her to the country graveyard were symbols of that 
robe which she wears, so white that no fuller on earth 
could whiten it, 

My sister, my daughter, may your last end be like hers ! 


soul, 


r, and 
those 
made 
ooked 
r bed- 
1d sor- 
I have 
us has 
go to 
ig peo- 
where 
10t the 
be.” I 
nd her 
for me. 
needed 
you for 
ll be in 
or her, 
, good- 
it was 
burst in 
singing 
putting 
er sun 
before 
r | The 
nto the 
ich we 
of that 
h earth 


e hers ! 


wa = lb ime i 


pieces 


THE WRATH OF THE SEA. 


‘And so it came to pass, and they escaped all safe to land.”— i 
Acts xxvii: 44, i 


NE November day, lying snugly in port at ; 


Fair Havens, was an Alexandrian corn-ship. i 

These Alexandrian corn-ships stood amidst Ht 

the ancient shipping, as the Cunarders stand 
now amidst mnodern steamers, Respect was paid to a 


them especially ; and they were the only vessels that 
had a right to go into any port without lowering | 
their top-sail. 

On board that vessel at Fair Havens are two dis- 
tinguished passengers: one, Josephus, the historian, iit 
as we have strong reason to believe, the other a 
convict, one Paul by name, who was going to prison 
for upsetting things, or, as they termed it, “turning 
the world upside down.” This convict had gained 
the confidence of the captain, Indeed I think that 
Paul knew almost as much about the sea as did the cap- i 
tain. He had been shipwrecked three times aiready; he | 
had dwelt much of his life amidst capstans, and yard- 
arms, and cables, and storms; and he knew what he was AW 
talking about. Seeing the equinoctial storm was coming, lift 
and perhaps noticing something unseaworthy in the ves- t 
sel, he advised the capain to stay in the harbour, But 


N 


ii Pa pr er = 


<A STATA. can aneyeertay terse ee eng aourr arene mance ee Sena ommeee ne 
; aie f * r ; 


218 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


I hear the captain and first mate talking together. They 
say, “ we cannot afford to take the advice of this lands- 
man, and he a minister. He may be able to preach very 
well, but I don’t believe he knows a marline-spike from 
a luff-tackle. All aboard! Cast off! Shift the helm for 
headway! Who fears the Mediterranean!” They had 
gone only a little way out when a whirlwind, called 
Euroclydon, made the torn sail its turban, shook the 
mast as you would brandish a spear, and tossed the hulk 
into the heavens. Overboard with the cargo! It is all 
washed with salt-water, and worthless now; and there 
are no marine insurance companies. All hands ahoy, and 
out with the anchors! 

Great consternation comes on crew and passengers. 
The sea-monsters snort in the foam, and the billows clasp 
their hands in glee of destruction. In a lull of the storm 
I hear a chain clank. It is the chain of the great apostle 
as he walks the deck, or holds fast the rigging amidst 
the lurching of the ship—the spray dripping from his 
long beard as he cries out to the crew: “ Now I exhort 
you to be of good cheer; for there shall be no loss of 
man’s life among you, but of the ship. For there stood 
by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom 
I serve, saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought 
before Ceesar; and lo, God hath given thee all them that 
sail with thee.” 

Fourteen days have passed, and there is no abatement 
of the storm. It is midnight. Standing on the look-out, 
the man peers into the darkness, and, by a flash of light. 
ning, sees the long white line of the breakers; and knows 
they must be coming near to some country; and fears 
that in a few moments the vessel will be shivered on the 
rocks, The ship flies like chaff in the tornado, They 
drop the sounding-line, and by the light of the lantern 
they see it is twenty fathoms. Speeding along a little 
farther, they drop the line again, and by the light of the 
lantern they see it is fifteen fathoms. Two hundred 


They 
lands- 
h very 
e from 
lm for 
sy had 

called 
xk the 
ye hulk 
t is all 
id there 
Oy; and 


sengers. 
ws clasp 
1e storm 
b apostle 
o amidst 
from his 
I exhort 
o loss of 
bre stood 
nd whom 
brought 
hem that 


atement 
look-out, 
of light- 
d knows 
bnd fears 
d on the 
). They 
b lantern 
y a little 
t of the 
hundred 


THE warn Or THE SEA, 219 


ve ac six souls within a few feet of awful shi 
via a rh managers of the vessel, pretending reat 
das ah < over the side of the ship and underg ird id 
Pal sll ne capri boat, expecting in it to esca va Ty 
chin Tage sies 1 the sham, and he tells them that if tl be 
sel Aviles | ‘The ploak be the death of them, T Re ve 
° ° : ANKS spring ! The . ~ S- 
ne saapige s m the thundering mut Ok ee ‘ 
“lnele : PP es g or life ! Here they leap from sini § 
cen oe ae ey Non go under as if they would nev : 
panting on it eae eme of a timber, come floating al 
ae oe ae mi each. Here, strong swimmers spre id 
sand, and the dis the waves until their chins plough the 
ie enol When up and wring out their wet lock ye 
dred and ee ; eis ipa cae hun. 
so,’ says my tex Ee answer to their names. “A 
pe aE ext, at came to pass that they escaped “ 
Naaman this subject: 
ir’ a aig) F 
m hae He Bey ee get us into trouble will not st 
Ra eat aege ee | ae ge Paul out of Fair 
9 as as » tary co 
upon them, they wanted to go off in tho prapll bent oy 
yi poe Ne or what became of Paul and the passe ~ : 
a tenets eae Dature ia the same in all ages, "Phew 
who ae . th ehestates never stop to help us out, They 
hig itv ; laugt young man in a life of dissipation will bo 
ech nt ug vat his imbecility, and to drop him out t 
of ing se vm Gamblers always make fun of the los fe 
fists noice “J vill Whe tempt you into the contests with 
Tank x She le back you,’ will be the first tet 
names of those i Saracen of your life, and count ‘hp 
and tell mo the maces ctne hah ovay alo on ct 
r : ever ND ? 
b ee a dab to get you out Nee tee ia vi 
baste ith damaged rigging you tried to get i valle 
our, did they hold for you a plank, or hay . 
’ : ou a 


SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


rope? No one. Satan has got thousands of men inta 
trouble, but he never got one out. He led them into 
theft, but he would not hide goods or bail out the defen- 
dant. The spider shows the fly the way over the gossa- 
mer bridge into the cobweb; but it never shows the fly 
the way out of the cobweb over the gossamer bridge. I 
think that there were plenty of fast young men to help 
the prodigal to spend his money; but when he had 
wasted his substance in riotous living, they let him go 
to the swine-pastures, while they betook themselves to 
some other new-comer. They whotake Paul out of Fair 
Havens will be no help to him when he gets into the 
breakers of Melita. Hear it, young man, hear it! 

I remark, again, as a lesson learned from the text, that 
it 1s dangerous to refuse the cownsel of competent advisers. 
Paul told them not to go out with that ship. They thought 
he knew nothing about it. They said, “ He is only a 
minister!” They went, and the ship was destroyed. 
Thete are a great many people who now say c* ministers, 
“They know nothing about the world. They can not 
talk tous!” Ah! my friends, it is not necessary to have 
the Asiatic cholera before you can give it medical treat- 
ment in others. It is not necessary to have your own 
arm broken before you can know how to splinter a frac- 
ture. And we whostand in the pulpit, and in the office of 
a Christian teacher, know that there are certain styles of 
belief and certain kinds of behaviour that will lead to de- 
struction as certainly as Paul knew that if that ship went 
out of Fair Havens it would go to destruction. “ Rejoice, 
oh, young man! in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer 
thee in the days of thy youth! but know thou that for 
all these things God will bring thee into judgment.” We 
may not know much, but we know that. 

Young people refuse the advice of parents. They say, 
“Yather is over-suspicious, and mother is getting old.” 
But those parents have been on the sea of life. They 
know where the storms sleep, and during their voyage 


inta 
into 
sfen- 
ossa- 
e fi 
et 
help 
had 
im go 
ves to 
f Fair 
to the 


t, that 
isers. 
1ought 
only a 
troyed. 
misters, 
an not 
o have 
treat- 
r own 
a frac- 
pffice ‘ 
les 0 
= de- 
Pp went 
Rejoice, 
t cheer 
hat for 


voyage 


THE WRATH OF THE SEA. 221 
have seen thousands of battered hulks marking the place 
where beauty burned, and intellect foundered, and moral- 
ity sank, They are old sailors, having answered many a 
signal of distress, and endured great stress of weather, 
and gone scudding under bare poles; and the old folks 
know what they are talking about. Look at that man— 
in his cheek the glow of infernal fires. His eye flashes, 
not as once with thought, but with low passion. His 
brain is a sewer through which impurity floats, and his 
heart the trough in which lust wallows and drinks. Men 
shudder as the leper passes, and parents cry, “ Wolf! 
wolf!” Yet he once said the Lord’s Prayer at his mo- 
ther’s knee, and against that iniquitous brow once pressed 
a pure mother’s lip. But he refused her counsel. He 
went where Euroclydons have their lair. He foundered 
on the sea, while all hell echoed at the roar of the wreck 
-——Lost Pacifics! Lost Pacifics ! 

Another lesson from the subject is, that Christians are 
always sife. 

There did not seem much chance for Paul getting out 
of that shipwreck, did there? They had not, in those 
days, rockets with which to throw ropes over foundering 
vessels. Their life-boats were of but little worth. And 
yet, notwithstanding all the danger, my texts says that 
Paul escaped safe to land. And so it will always be with 
God’s children. They may be plunged into darkness and 
trouble, but by the throne of the Eternal God, I assert it, 
“they shall all escape to land.” 

Sometimes there comes a storm of commercial disaster. 
The cables break. The masts fall. The cargoes are 
scattered over the sea, Oh! what struggling and leaping 
on kegs, and hogsheads, and cornbins, and store-shelves ! 
And yet, though they may have it very hard in commer- 
pooped the goou, trusting in God, all come safe to 
and, 

Wreckers go out on the ocean’s beach, and find the 
shattered hulks of vessels; and on the streets of our great 


aie sas 


NERO ter tcp x 


222 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


cities there is many awreck. Mainsail slit with banker's 
pen. Hulks abeam’s-end on insurance counters. Vast 
credits sinking, having suddenly sprung a leak. Yet ail 

of them who are God’s children shall at last, through His 

goodness and mercy, escape safe to land. The Scandi- 

navian warriors used to drink wine out of the skulls of 

the enemy they had slain. Even so, God will help us 

out of the conquered ills and disasters of life, to drink 

sweetness and strength for our souls. 

You have, my friends, had illustrations, in your own 
life, of how God delivers His people. I have had illustra- 
tions in my own life of the same truth. 

Two weeks ago, last Thursday, the steamer Greece, of 
the National line, swung out into the River Mersey at 
Liverpool, bound for New York. We had on board seven 
hundred, crew and ypassengers. We came together 
strangers—Englishmen, Jrishmen, Italians, Swedes, Nor- 
wegians, Americans. 'I'wo flags floated from the masts— 
British and American ensigns. So may they ever float, 
and no red hand of war snatch either of them down. In 
the same prayer that we put up for our national pros- 
perity, we will send up the petition, “God save the 
Queen!” We had a new vessel, or one so thoroughly re- 
modelled that the voyage had around it all the uncer- 
tainties of a trial trip. The great steamer felt its way 
cautiously out into the sea. The pilot was discharged ; 
and committing ourselves to the care of Him who holdeth 
the winds in His fist, we were fairly started on our 
voyage of three thousand miles. It was rough nearly all 

the way--the sca with strong buffeting disputing our 
path. But one week ago last night, at eleven o'clock, 
after the lights had been put out, a cyclone—a wind just 
made to tear ships to pieces—caught us in its clutches. 
It came down so suddenly that we had not time to take 
in the sails or fasten the hatches, You may know that 
the bottom of the Atlantic is strewn with the ghastly 
works of cyclones. Oh! they are cruel winds, They 


nk er’s 

Vast 
Tet ail 
+h His 
candi- 
ulls of 
elp us 
! tink 


ar own 
lustra- 


reece, of 
rsey at 
d seven 
ogether 
a8, Nor- 
masts— 
er float, 
vn. In 
pal pros- 
ve the 
rhly re- 
uncer: 
its way 
harged ; 
holdeth 
on our 
arly all 
ing our 
(@) clock, 
ind just 
lutches. 
to take 
ow that 
bated 
They 


THE WRATH OF THE SEA, 223 


save hot breath, as though they came up from infernal 
furnaces. Their merriment is the cry of affrightened 
passengers. Their play is the foundering of steamers, 
And, when a ship goes down, they laugh until both con- 
tinents hear them. They go in circles, or, as I describe 
them with my hand—rolling on! rolling on! With fin- 
ger of terror writing on the white sheet of the wave this 
sentence of doom: “Let all that come within this circle 
perish! Brigantines go down! Clippers go down! Steam- 
ships go down!” And the vessel, hearing the terrible 
voice, crouches in the surf, as the water gurgles through 
the hatches and port-holes, it lowers away, thousands “of 
feet down, farther and farther, until at last it strikes the 
bottom ; and all is peace, for they have landed. Helms- 
man, dead at the wheel! Engineer, dead amidst the ex- 
tinguished furnaces! Captain, dead in the gangway! 
Passengers, dead in the cabin! Buried in the great cem- 
etery of dead steamers, beside the City of Boston, the Lex- 
ington, the President, the Cambria—waiting for the 
archangel’s trumpet to split up the decks, and wrench 
open the cabin doors, and unfasten the hatches. 

I thought that I had seen storms on the sea before; but 
all of them together might have come under one wing of 
that cyclone. ” We were > only eight or nine hundred miles 
from home, and in high expectation of soon seeing our 
friends, for there was no one on board so poor as not to have 
a fr iend, But it seemed as if we were to be disappointed. 
The most of us expected then and there to die. There 
were none who made light of the peril, save two: one 
was an Englishman, and he was drunk ; and the other was 
an American, and he was a fool! Oh! what a time it 
was! A night to make one’s hair turn white. We came 
out of the ber ths, and stood in the gangway, and looked 
into the steerage, and satin the cabin. While seated there, 
we heard overhead something like minute-guns. It was 
the bursting of the sails. We held on with both hands 
to keep our places. Those who attempted to cross the 


Seth: tenement ents match 


224 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


floor came back bruised and gashed. Cups and glasses 
were dashed to fragments; pieces of the table getting 
loose, swung across the saloon. It seemed as if the hur- 
ricane took the great ship of thousands of tons and stood 
it on end and said, “Shall I sink it, or let it go this once?” 
And then it came down with such force that the billows 
trampled over it, each mounted of a fury. We felt that 
everything depended on the propelling screw. If that 
stopped for an instant, we knew that the vessel would 
fall into the trough of the sea and sink; and so we prayed 
that the screw, which three times since leaving Liverpool 
had already stopped, might not stop now. Oh! how 
anxiously we listened for the regular thump of the ma- 
chinery, upon which our lives seemed to depend. After 
awhile some one said, “ The screw is stopped!” No; its 
sound had only been overpowered by the uproar of the 
tempest, and we breathed easier again when we heard 
the regular pulsation of the over-taxed machinery, going 
thump, thump, thump. At three o'clock in the morning 
the water covered the ship from prow to stern, and the 
sky lights gave way! The deluge rushed in, and we felt 
that one or two more Waves like that must swamp us for 
ever.. As the water rolled back and forward in the 
cabins, and dashed against the walls, it sprang half-way 
up to the ceiling. Rushing through the sky-lights as it 
came in with such terrific roar, there went through the 
cabin a shriek of horror which I pray God I may never 
hear again. I have dreamed the whole scene over again, 
but God has mercifully kept me from hearing that one 
cry. Into it seemed to be compressed the agony of ship- 
wreck. It seemed to say “I shall never get home again! 
My children shall be orphaned, and my wife shall be 
widowed! Iam launching now into eternity! In two 
minutes I shall meet my God !” 

There were about five hundred and fifty passengers in 
the steerage ; and as the water rushed in and touched the 
furnaces, and began violently to hiss, the poor creatures 


usses 
sting 
hur- 
‘tood 
ce?” 
lows 
that 
that 
vould 
payed 
pool 
how 
e ma- 
After 
0; its 
of the 
heard 
going 
rning 
nd the 
e felt 
us for 
n the 
f-way 
sas it 
rh the 
never 
again, 
at one 
ship- 
again } 
all be 
n two 


rers in 
ed the 
atures 


THE WRATH OF THE SEA. 225 
in the steerage imagined that the boilers were giving way 
Those passengers writhed in the water and in the mud 
some praying, some crying, all terrified. They made a 
rush for the deck. An officer stood on deck, and beat 
them back with blow after blow. It was necessary. 
They could not have stood an instant on the deck. Oh! 
how they begged to get out of the hold of the ship! One 
woman, with a child in her arms, rushed up and caught 
hold of one of the officers, and cried, “ Do let me out! I 
will help you! do let me out! I cannot die here!” Some 
got down and prayed to the Virgin Mary, saying, “O 
blessed Mother, keep us! Have mercy on us!” Some 
stood with white lips and fixed gaze, silent in their ter- 
ror. Some wrung their hands and cried out, “OQ God! 
what shall I do? what shall I do?” The time came 
when the crew could no longer remain on deck, and the 
ery of the officers was, “ Below! all hands below!” Our 
brave and sympathetic Captain Andrews—whose praise 
I shall never cease to speak while I live—had been swept 
by the hurricane from his bridge, and had escaped very 
narrowly with his life. The cyclone seemed to stand on — 
the deck, waving its wing, crying, “This ship is mine! 
I have captured it! Ha! ha! IF will command it! If 
God will permit, I will sink it here and now! Bya 
thousand shipwrecks I swear the doom of this vessel !” 
There was a lull in the storm; but only that it might 
gain additional fury. Crash! went the life-boat on one 
side. Crash! went the life-boat on the other side. The 
great booms got loose, and, as with the heft of a thunder- 
bolt, pounded the deck and beat the mast—the jib-boom, 
studding-sail boom, and square-sail boom with their 
strong arms, beating time to the awful march and music 
of the hurricane. 

Meanwhile the ocean became phosphorescent The 
whole scene looked like fire. The water dripping from 
the rigging, there were ropes of fire ; and masts of fire ; and 
there was a deck of fire. <A ship of fire sailing on a sea 


ilies 


aos a cctstt = oo - 
ep arteries sceyrnegcteohtch berlin hae ow 


ase 


eptateisaly 


PATI TIA MeCN aescenanaeepnliaale mapa 


226 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


O my God! let me never 


of fire, through a night of fire. 
see anything like it again. 

Everybody prayed. A lad of twelve years of age got 
down and prayed for his mother. “If I should give it 
up,’ he said, “I do not know what will become of mother.” 
There were men who, I think, had not prayed for thirty 
years, who got down on their knees. When a man who 
has neglected God all his life feels that he has come to 
his last time, 74 makes a very busy night. All our sins 
and shortcomings passed through our minds. My own 
life seemed utterly unsatisfactory. I could only say, 
“ Here Lord, take me asl am. I can not mend matters. 
Lord Jesus, thou didst die for the chief of sinners. That’s 
me! Into thy hands I commit myself, my wife, and my 
children at home, the Tabernacle, the College—all the 
interest of Thy kingdom. It seems, Lord, as if my work 
is done, and poorly ‘done, and upon Thy infinite n ercy I 
east myself, and in this hour of shipwreck and darkness 
commit myself and her whom I hold by the hand to thee, 
O Lord Jesus! and praying it may be a short struggle in 
the water, and that at the same instant we may both 
arrive in glory!’ Oh! I tell you a man prays straight 
to the mark when he has a cyclone above him, an ocean 
beneath him, an eternity so close to him that he can feel 
its breath on his cheek. 

The night was long. At last we saw the dawn look- 
ing through the port-holes. As in the olden time, in the 
fourth watch of the night, Jesus carne walking on the sea, 
from wave-cliff to wave-cliff; and when he puts his foot 
upon a billow, though it may be cessed up with might, it 
goes down. He cried to the winds, hush! They knew 
His voice. The waves knew His foot. They died away. 
And in the shining track of His fect I read these letters 
on scrolls of foam and fire, “'The earth shall be filled with 
the knowledge of God as the waters cover the sea.” The 
ocean calmed. The path of the steamer became more 
and more mild; until, on the last morning out, the sun 


lever 


e got 
ive it 
her.” 
hirty 
. who 
me to 
r sins 
r owl 


say, 
utters. 
[That’s 
id my 
ill the 
work 


letters 
with 

The 
more 


ne sun 


THE WRATH OF THE SEA. 227 


shrew round about us a glory such as I never witnessed 
before. God made a pavement of mosaic, reaching 
from horizon to horizon, for all the splendours of earth 
and heaven to walk upon—a pavement bright enough for 
the foot of a seraph—bright enough for the wheels of the 
archangel’s chariot. As a parent embraces a child and 
kisses away its grief, so over that sea, that had been 
writhing in agony in the tempest, the morning threw its 
arms of beauty and of benediction: and the lips of earth 
and heaven met. 

As I came on deck—it was very early, and we were 
nearing the shore—I saw a few sails against the sky. 
they seemed like the spirits of the night walking the 
billows. I leaned over the taff-rail of the vessel, and 
said, “Thy way, O God, is in the sea, and Thy path in 
the great waters.” 

It grew lighter. The clouds were hung in purple clus- 
ters along the sky; as in those purple clusters were 
pressed into red wine and poured out upon the sea, every 
wave turned into crimson. Yonder, fire-cleft stood oppo- 
site to fire-cleft ; and here, a cloud rent and tinged with 
light, seemel like a palace, with flames bursting from the 
windows. The whole scene lighted up, until it seemed 
as if the angels of God were ascending and descending 
upon stairs of fire, and the wave crests changed into jas- 
per and crystal, and amethyst, as they were flung toward 
the beach, made me think of the crowns of heaven cast 
before the throne of the great Jehovah. I leaned over 
the taff-rail again, and said, with more emotion than be- 
fore, “Thy way, O God, is in the sea, and Thy path in 
the great waters.” 

So, I thought, will be the going off of the storm and 
night of the Christian’s life. The darkness will fold its 
tents and away. 

The golden feet of the rising morn will ¢ me skipping 
upon the mountains, and all the wonderful billows of the 
world’s woe break into the splendour of eternal joy. 


eaten arnnen spon ae pena 


srt, san Ser ao 


228 SERMONS BY TALMAGF, 


And so we came into the harbour. The cyclone behind 
us. Our friends before us. God, who is always God, all 
around us! And if the roll of the crew and the passen- 
gers had been called, seven hundred souls would have 
answered to their names “And so that we all escaped 
safe to land.” 

To that God who delivered me and my comrades, I 
commend you. Wait not for the storm before you fly to 
Him. Goto Him now, and seek His pardon. Find refuge 
in his mercy. 

And may God grant when all our Sabbaths on earth 
are ened, we may tind that, through the mercy of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, we all have weathered the gale! 


‘Into the harbour of heaven we now glide, 

Home at last! 

Softly we drift on the bright silver tide, 
Home at last ! 

Glory to God! All our dangers are o’er ; 

We stand secured on the glorified shore, 

Glory to God ! we will shout evermore, 
Home at last ! 
Home at last !” 


Sia 


y 


hind 
d, all 
ssen- 
have 
saped 


des, I 
fly to 


‘efuge 


THE COMING SERMON. 


of our 66 Go thou and preach the kingdom of God.”—LukKE ix : 60, 


earth 


HE Gospel is to be regnant over all hearts, all 
circles, all governments, and ell lands. The 
kingdom of God spoken of in the text is to 

be a universal kingdom, and just as wide as 

that will be the realm sermonic. “Go thou and 
preach the kingdon of God.” 

We hear a great deal in these days about the com- 
ing man, and the coming woman, and the coming 
time. Some one ought to tell us of the coming ser- 

mon. It isa simple fact that everybody knows that 

the sermon of to-day does not reach the world. Of 

our own city, as moral # ity as there is on the planet 

—of our 600,000 0» ‘lation, not 100,000 come into 

the churches, a: ot the 100,000 supposed to be in 

the churches, f /}.) not think that 20,000 carry away 
practical help and inspiration. 

The sermon of to-day carries along with it :.. dead- 
wood of all ages. Hundreds of years ago it was decided 
what a sermon ought to be, and it is the attempt of many 
theological seminaries, and doctors of divinity, to hew the 
modern pulpit utterances into the same old style propor- 
tions. Booksellers will tell you they dispose of » hundred 
histories, a hundred novels, a bundrea poems to one book 
of sermons, 


230 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


What is the matter? Some say the age is tne worst 
of all the ages. It is better in many respects. Some say 
religion is wearing out, when it is wearing in. Some say 
there are so many who despise the Christian religion, I 
answer, there never was an age when there were so many 
Christians, or so many friends of Christianity as this age 
has—our age—as to others a hundred to one. What is 
the matter, then ? It is simply because our sermon of to- 
day is not suited to the age. It is the canal-boat in an 
age of locomotive and electric telegraph. The sermon 
will have to be shaken out of the old grooves, or it will 
nob be heard and it will not be read. 

The sermon must be converted before the world is con- 
verted. You might as well go into the modern S@dan or 
Gettysburg with bows and arrows, instead of rifles, and 
bombshells, and parks of artillery as to expect to conquer 
this world for God by the old styles of sermonology. 
Jonathan Edwards preached the sermons most adapted 
to the age in which be lived, but if those sermons were 
preached now they would divide an audience into two 
classes : those sound asleep and those wanting to go home, 

But there is a coming Guspel sermon, Who will preach 
it I have no idea, in what part of the earth it will be born 
I have no idea, in which denomination of Christians it 
will be delivered I cannot guess. That coming sermon 
may be born in the country meeting-house on the banks 
of the St. Lawrence, or the Oregon, or the Ohio, or the 
Tombigbee, or the Alabama. The person who shaii de- 
liver it may this moment lie in a cradle under the shadow 
of the Sierra Nevadas, or in a New England farm house, 
or amid the rice fields of Southern s.vannas, Or this mo- 
mgnt there may be some young men in some of our theo- 
logical seminaries, in the junior, or middle, or senior class 
shaping that weapon of power, Or there may be coming 
sume new baptism of the Holy Ghost on the churches so 
that some of us who now stand in the watch-towers of 
Zion, waking to the realization of our present ineftliciency, 


orst 
“say 
say 
1. ot 
1any 
sage 
at 1s 
if to- 
n an 
rmon 
, will 


; con- 
an or 
, and 
nquer 
vlogy. 
apted 
were 
o two 
home. 
preach 
» born 
ans it 
symon 
vanks 
r the 
ii de- 
hadow 
10uUse, 
s mo- 
theo- 
class 
yming 
1e8 SO 
ers of 
ency, 


THE COMING SERMON, 231 


may preach it ourselves, That coming sermon may not 
be fifty years off’ And let us pray God that its arrival 
may be hastened, while I announce to you what I think 
will be the chief characteristics of that Sermon when it 
does arrive ; and I want to make my remarks appropriate 
and suggestive to all classes of Christian workers, and 
there are hundreds, if not thousands here. 

I. I remark here that that coming sermon will be full 
of a Living Ciirist, in contradistinction to didactic techni- 
calities, A sermon may be full of Christ, though hardly 
mentioning His name, and a sermon may be “empty of 
Christ while ev ery sentence is a repetition of His titles, 
The world wants a living Christ, not a Christ standing at 
the head of a formal system of theology, but a Christ who 
means pardon, and sympathy, and condolence, and brother- 
hood, and life,and heaven. A poor man’s Christ. An over- 
worked man’s Christ. An invalid’s Christ. A farmer’s 
Christ. A merchant’s Christ. An artisan’s Christ. An 
every man’s Christ. 

A. symmetrical and fine-worded system of theology is 
well enough for theological classes, but it has no more 
business in a pulpit than have the technical phrases of an 
anatomist or a physiologist, or a physician in the sick- 
room of a patient. The world wants help, immediate and 
worl’ »n-lifting, and it will come through a sermon in 
which ‘‘hrist shall walk right down into the immortal 
suvlend take everlasting possession of it, filling it as full 
ve) ! as is this noonday firmament, 

That sermon of the future will not deal with men in 
the threadbare illustrations of Jesus Christ. In that com- 
ing sermon there will be instances of viearious sacrifice 
taken right out of every-day life, for there is not a day 
but somebody is dying for others. 

As the physician, saving his diphtheritic patient by sac- 
vificing his own life; as the ship captain, going down 
\ith lus vessel, while he is getting his passengers into the 
lité-beat; as the fireman, consuming in the burning build- 


232 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


ing, while he is taking a child out of a fourth story win- 
dow ; as this summer the strong swimmer at Long Branch, 
or Cape May, or Lake George, himself perished trying to 
rescue the drowning ; as the newspaper-boy this summer, 
supporting his mother for some years, his invalid mother, 
when offered by a gentleman fifty cents to get some 
especial paper, and he got it, and rushed up in his anxiety 
to deliver it, and was - crushed under the wheels of the 
train, and lay on the grass with only strength enough to 
say, “Oh, what will become of my poor, sick mother 
now ?” 

Vicarious sufferir: “he world is full of it. An engi- 
neer’ said to mepn a ior :iotive in Dakota the cuher day : 
“We men seem to be couuag to better appreciation than 
we used to do. Did you see that account the other day 
of an engineer who, to save his passengers, stuck to his 
place, and when he was found dead in the locomotive, 
which was upside down, he was found still smiling, his 
hand on the air-brake?” And as the engineer said it to 
me, he put his hand on the air-brake to illustrate his 
meaning, and I looked at him and thought, “You would 
be just as much of a hero in the same crisis.” 

Oh, in that coming sermon of the Christian Church 
there will be living illustrations taken out from everyday 
life of vicarious suifering—illustr ations that will bring to 
mind and enforce the chastlier sacrifice of Him who in 
vhe high places of the tield, on the cross fought our bat- 
tles, and wept our griefs, and endured our struggle, and 
died our death. 

A German sculptor made an image of Christ, and he 
asked his little child, two years old, who it was, and she 
said, ‘‘ That must be some very great man.” The sculptor 
was displeased with the criticism, so he got another block 
of marble and chiselled away on it two or three years, and 
then brought in his little child, four or five years of age, 
and he said to her, “Who do you think that is ?” She 
said, “ That must be the One who took little children in 


y win- 
ranch, 
ing to 
mmer, 
rother, 
; some 
nxilety 
of the 
ugh to 
mother 


n engi- 
r day : 
n than 
ler day 
- to his 
motive, 
ing, his 
id it to 
ate his 
| would 


Church 
reryday 
ring to 
who in 
yur bat- 
zle, and 


and he 
and she 
sculptor 
ar block 
ars, and 
of age, 
” She 
ldren in 


THE COMING SERMON, 233 


wants is nota 
cold Christ, not an intellectual] Chri 
magisteria] Christ, but a | 


arms of Sympathy to preg 


oving Christ, Spreading out His 
heart 


S the whole world to His loving 


Il, But I remark again, that the coming sermon of the 
Christian Church will be a short sermon, 
ondensation jg demanded by the age in which we live, 
© more need of long introductions and long applications 
and so many divisions to a discourse that it may be said 
to be hydra-headed, In other days men got all their in- 
formation from the pulpit. Th 


times there was 


to warm himself up to the subj 
But what Was a& necegsj 


Congregations are full of knowledg 


Christian 
frame and then we preach them out of it. € forget 
that every auditor has go much ¢ 


apacity of attention, and 
when that ig exhausted he is restless, That accident on 


last Tuesday night came from 


want locomotive power an 

same time stout brake 

tis a dismal thing af 
p : 


SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


whole subject to hear a man say, “ now, to recapitulate,” 
and “afew words by way of application,” and “once 
more,” and “ finally,” and “ now to conclude.” 

Paul preached until midnight, and Eutychus got sound 

asleep and fell out of a window and broke his neck. Some 
would say, “ Good for him.” I would rather be sympa- 
thetic like Paul, and resuscitate him. That accident is 
often quoted now in religious cirelzs as a warning against 
somnolence, but Paul mi ade a mistake when he kept on 
until midnight, He ought to have stopped at eleven 
o'clock, and there would have been no accident, If Paul 
might have gone to too great length, let all those of us 
who are now preaching the Gospel remember that there 
13 a limit to sious discourse, or ought to be, and that 
in our time we have no apostolic power of miracles. 

Napoleon I .in an address of seven minutes, thrilled his 
army and thrilicd kurope. Christ’s sermon on the mount, 
the model sermon, was less than eighteen minutes long 
at ordinary mode of delivery. It is not electricity scat- 
tered all over the sky that strikes, but electricity gathered 
into a thunderbolt and hurled; and it is not religious 
truth scattered over, spread out over a vast reach of t time, 
but religious truth projected in compact form that flashes 
light upon the soul and rives its indifference. 

When the coming sermon arrives in this land and in 
the Christian Church, the sermon which is to arouse the 
world and startle the nations, and usher in the kingdom, 
it will be a brief sermon. Hear it, all theological students, 
all ye just entering upon religious work, all ye men and 
women who in Sabbath Schools and other departments 
are toiling for Christ and the salvation of immortuls, 
Brevity ! ” Brevity ! 

IIJ. But I remark also that the coming sermon of which 
I speak will be a popular sermon, There are those in 
these times who speak of a popular sermon as though 
there must be something wrong about it. As these critics 
are dull themselves the world. gets the impression that a 


9 
tulate,’ 
— © once 


t+ sound 
Some 
-sympa- 
cident 18 
r against 
kept on 
t, eleven 
If Paul 
yse of us 
hat there 
and that 
eles. 
yrilled his 
he mount, 
utes long 
icity scat- 
gathered 
religious 
h of time, 
at flashes 


d and in 
hrouse the 
kin gdom, 
1 students, 

men and 
partments 
mmortuls. 


of which 
e those in 
as though 
ese critics 
sion that a 


THE COMING SERMON, 235 


sermon is good in proportion g3 it is stupid. Christ was 
the most popular preacher the world ever saw, and con- 
sidering the small number of the world’s population, had 
the largest audiences ever gathered. He never preached 
anywhere without making a great sensation. People 
rushed out in the wilderness to hear Him, reckless of 
their physical necessities. So great was their anxiety to 
hear Christ, that taking no food with them, they would 
have fainted and starved had Christ not performed a mira- 
cle and fed them. 

Why was Christ so popular? Why did so many peo- 
ple take the truth at Christ’s hands? Because they all 
understood it. He illustrated His subject by a hen and 
her chickens, by a bushel measure, by a handful of salt, 
by a bird’s flight, and by a lily’s aroma. All the people 
knew what He meant, and they flocked to Him. And 
when the coming sermon of the Christian Church appears, 
it will not be academic, or thevlogic, or philosophic, but 
Olivetic—plain, practical, uniqe, earnest, comprehensive, 
of all the woes, sins, sorrows, and necessities of an audi- 
tory. 

But when that sermon does come, there will a thou- 
sand gleaming scimitars to charge on it. ‘There are in so 
many theological seminaries professors telling young men 
how to preach, themselves not knowing how, and I am 
told that if a young man in some of our theological semi- 
naries says anything quaint, or thrilling, or unique, faculty 
and students tly at him, and set him right, and straighten 
him out, and smooth him down, and chop him off until 
he says everything just as everybody else says it. 

Oh, when the coming sermon of the Christian Church 
arrives, all the churches of Christ in our great cities will 
be thronged. Every church and chapel will be filled. 
The world wants spiritual help. All who have buried 
their dead want comfort. All know themselves to be mor- 
tal and to be immortal, and they want to hear about the 
great future, I tell you, my friends, if the people of these 


236 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


great cities who have had trouble only thought they could 
get practical and sympathetic help in the Christian Church, 
there would not be a street in New York, or Brooklyn, 
or Chicago, or Charlestown, or Philadelphia, or Boston, 
whici would be pass:ble on the Sabbath-day, if there 
were a church on it; for all the people would press to 
that asylum of mercy, that great house of comfort and 
“consolation. 

A mother with a dead babe in her arms came to the 
god Veda, and asked to have her child restored to life. 
The god Veda said to her: “ You go and get a handful of 
mustard-seed from a house in which there has been no 
sorrow and in which there has been no death, and I will 
restore your child to life.” So the mother went out, and 
she went from house to house, and from home to home, 
looking for a place where there had been no sorrow, and 
where there had been no death, but she found none. She 
went back to the god Veda and said: “ My mission is a 
failure; you see 1 iaven’t brought the mustard-seed ; I 
can’t find a place where there has been no sorrow and no 
death.” “Oh,” says the god Veda, “ understand that your 
sorrows are no worse than the sorrows of others; we all 
have our griefs and all have our heart-breaks,” 


“* Laugh, and the world laughs with you, 
Weep, and you weep alone; 
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth, 
3ut has trouble enough of its own.” 


We hear a great deal of discussion now all over the 
land about why people do not go to church. Some say 
it is because Christianity is slowly dying out, and because 
people do not believe in the truth of God’s Word, and all 
that. They are. false reasons. The reason is because our 
sermons are not interesting and practical, and sympthetic 
and helpful. Some one might as well tell the whole truth 
on this subject, and so I will tell it, The sermon of the 
fyture, the Gospel sermon to come forth and shake the 


v could 
‘Yhurch, 
ooklyn, 
Boston, 
f there 
press to 
‘ort and 


e to the 
1 to life. 
ndful of 
been no 
nd ] will 
out, and 
to home, 
row, and 
yne, She 
ssion iS & 
d-seed ; I 
w and no 
that your 
s; wea 


over the 
ome say 
d because 
d, and all 


ole truth 
on of the 
shake the 


THE COMING SERMON, 237 


nations and lift people out of darkness, will be a popular 
sermon just for the simple reason, that it will meet the 
woes and the wants and the anxieties of the people. 

There are in all our denominations ecclesiastical mum- 
mies sitting around to frown upon the fresh young pul pits 
of America, to try to awe them down, to cry out, “ Tut, 
tut, tut ! sensational !” 

They stand to-day, preaching in churches that hold a 
thousand people, and there are a hwndred persons present, 
and if they cannot have the world saved in their way it 
seems as if they do not want it saved at all. 

I do not know but the old way of making ministers of 
the Gospel is better. A collegiate educa ition and an ap- 
prenticeship under the care and home attention of some 

earnest, aged Christian minister, the young man getting 
the patriarch’ s spirit and assisting him in his religious 
service, Young lawyers study with old lawyers, young 
physicians study with old physicians, and I believe it 
would be a great help if every young man studying for 
the Gospel ministry could put himself in the home and 
heart and sympathy and under the benediction and per- 
petual presence of a Christian minister, 

IV. But Tremark again: the sermon of the future will 
be an awakening sermon, [rom pulpit-rail to the front 
doorstep, under that sermon an audience will get up and 
start for heaven. It will not be a lullaby ; it will bea 
battle-charge. Men will drop their sins, for they will feel 

the not breath of pursuing retribution on the back of their 

necks, It will be a sermon sympathetic with all the 

ohyalenl distresses, as well as the spiritual distresses of the 

world. Christ not only preached, but He healed paralysis, 

an He healed epilepsy, and Ife healed the dumb, and the 
blind, and ten lepers. 

V. That sermon of the future will be an every Guy ser- 
mon, going right down into every man’s life, and it will 
teach him how to vote, how to bargain, how to plough, 
how to do any work he is called to, how to wield trowel, 


~ - wtrscina eet chictnearenibiencsimnte sini 
“ cere i Nm aio NaS me : “ 


238 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


and pen, and pencil, and yardstick, and piane. Andit will 
teach women how to preside over their houscholds, and 
how to educate their children, and how to imitate Miriam 
and Ksther,and Vashti,and Eunice, the mother of ‘Timothy ; 
and Mary, the mother of Christ; and those women who 
on Northern and Southern battle-fields were mistaken by 
the wounded for angels of inercy, fresh from the throne 
of God. 

VI. Yes, I have to tell you the sermon of the future 
will be a reported sermon. 

If you have any idea that printing was invented simply 
to print secular books, and stenography and phonography 
were contrived merely to set forth secular ideas, you are 
mistaken. The printing-press is to be the great agency 
of Gospel proclamation. It is high time that good men, 
instead of denouncing the press, employ it to scatter forth 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. ‘The vast majority of people 
in our citics do not come to church, and nothing but the 
printed sermon can reach them and call them to pardon, 
and life, and peace, and heaven. 

So I cannot understand the nervousness of some of my 
brethren of the ministry. When they see a newpaper 
man eoiming in, they say: “Alas! there is a reporter!” 
Livery a:lded reporter is ten, twenty, fifty, a hundred, a 
thousand immortal souls added to the auditory. Timo 
will come when all the village, town, and city newspapers 
will reproduce the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and sermons 
preached on the Sabbath will reverberate all around the 
world, and, some by type, and some by voice, all nations 
will be evangelized. 

The practical bearing of this is upon those who are en- 
gaged in Christian work, not only upon theological stu- 
dents and young ministers, but upon all who preach the 
Gospel, and that is all of you if you are doing your duty. 

Do you exhort in prayer-meeting ? Be short and be 
spirited. Do you teach in Bible-class? Though you have 
to study every night, Le interesting, Do you accost peo- 


dit will 
ylds, and 
» Miriam 
‘imothy ; 
nen who 
taken by 
ie throne 


he future 


.d simply 
nography 
3, you are 
it agency 
rood men, 
itter forth 
of people 
g but the 
o pardon, 


me of my 
newpaper 
eporter ! s 
hundred, a 
ry. Timo 
wspapers 

sermons 
round the 
ll nations 


ho are en- 
gical stu- 
reach the 
our duty. 
rt and be 
you have 
ccost peo- 


THE COMING SERMON. 239 


ple on the subject of religion in their homes, or in public 
places, study adroitness and use common sense. The 
most graceful, the most beautiful thing on earth is the 
religion of Jesus Christ, and if you awkwardly present 
it, it is defamation. We must do our work rapidlv, and 
we must do it effectively. Soon our time for work will 
be gone. 

A dying Christian took out his watch and gave it toa 
friend, and said: “take that watch, I have no more use 
for it: “time is ended for me and eternity begins.” O 
my friends, when our watch has ticked away for us the 
last moment, and our clock has struck for us the last 
hour, may it be found we did our work well, that we did 
it in the very best way, and whether we preached the 
Gospel in pulpits, or taught Sabbath-classes, or adminis- 
tered to the sick as physicians, or bargained as merchants 
or were busy as artisans, or as husbandmen, or as me- 
chanics, or were like Martha, called to give a meal toa 
hungry Christ, or like Hannah, to make a coat for a pro- 
phet, or like Deborah, to rouse the courage of some timid 
Barak in the Lord’s contlict, we did our work in such a 
way that it will stand the test of the Judgment! And 
in the long procession of the redeemed that march around 
the throne, may it be found there are many there brought 
to God through our instrumentality, and in whose rescue 
we are exultant! 

But oh, you unsaved, you people without Christ, wait 
not for that coming sermon. It may come after your 
obsequies. It may come after the stonecutter has chiselled 
your name on the grave-slak. Do not wait for a great 
steamer of the Cunard or White Star Line to talc «ou 
off the wreck, but hail the first craft with however iow a 
mast, and however small a huik, and however poor a rud- 
der, and however weak a captain. Better a disabled 
schooner that comes up in time than a full-rigged ship 
that comes up after you have sunken, 


240 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


Instead of waiting for that coming sermon—it may be 
years off—take this plain invitation of a man who, to 
have given you spiritual eyesight, would be glad to be 
called the spittle, by the hand of Christ, put on the eves 
of a blind man, and who would consider the highest com- 
pliment of this service, if at the close five hundred men 
should start from these doors, saying: “ Whether he be a 
sinner or no,I knownot. This one thing I know, whereas 
I was blind, now I see.” 

Swifter than shadows over the plain, quicker than birds 
in their autumnal flight, hastier than eagles to their prey, 
hie you to asympathetic Christ. The orchestra of heaven 
have already strung their instruments to celebrate your 
rescue. 


‘* And many were the voices around the throne : 
Rejoice, for the Lord brings back His own.” 


ay be 
ho, to 
to be 
2 eves 
; com- 
d men 
e be a 
hereas 


. birds 
r prey, 
1eaven 
e your 


THo FED CORD IN THE WINDOW. 


* 4nd she bound the scarlet line in the window.” 
—JOsHUA ii.: 21. 


F you have any idea that | have chosen this 
text because it is odd, you do not know me 
nor the errand on which [ come. Eternity is 
too near, and life is too short for men to take 
texts merely because they are peculiar. I take this 
\* because it is full of the old Gospel. 

There is a very sick and sad house in the city of 
Jericho. What is the matter? Is it poverty? No. 
Worse than that. Is it leprosy? No. Worse then 
that. Is it death? No. Worse than that. A 
daughter has forsaken her home. By what infernal 
plot she was induced to leave, I know not; but they 

looked in vain for her return. Sometimes they hear 

i a footstep very much like hers, and they start up 
and ‘say: “She comes!” but only to sink back 
again into disappointment. Alas! Alas! The father 
sits by the hour with his face in his hands, saying not 
one word, The mother’s hair is becoming grey too fast, 
and she begins to stoop so that those who saw her only a 
little while ago in the street know her not now as she 
passes, The “brothers clench their fists, swear ing ven- 


4 

Ry ii 
i 
aes 
i i 


242 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


geance against the despoiler of the home. Alas! will the 
poor soul never come back? There is a long, deep 
shadow all over the household. Added to this there is 
an invading army six miles away, just over the river, 
coming on to destroy the city; and what with the loss 
of their child, and the coming on of that destructive 
army, I think the old people wished they coulddie. That 
is the first scene in this drama of the bible. 

In a house on the wall of that city is the daughter. 
That is her home now. Two spies have come from the 
invading army to look around through Jericho, and see 
how best it may be taken. Yonder is the lost child, in 
that dwelling on the wall of the city. The police hear 
of it, and soon there is the shuffling of feet all around 
about the door, and the city government demands the 
surrender of those two spies. First, Rahab—tor that 
was the name of the lost child—tirst, Rahab secrets the 
two spies, and gets their pursuers off the track; but 
after awhile she says to them: “I will make a bargain 
with you. I will save your life if you will save my 
life, and the life of my father and my mother, and my 
brothers, and my sisters, when the victorious army comes 
upon the city.” O,she had not forgotten her home yet, 
you see. ‘The wanderer never forgets home. Her heart 
breaks now to think of how she has maltreated her 
parents, and she wishes she were back with them again, 
and she wishes she could get away from her sinful en- 
thralment ; and sometimes she looks up in the face of 
the midnight, bursting into agonizing tears. No sooner 
have these two spies promised to save her life, and the 
life of her father and mother, and brothers and sisters, 
than Rahab takes a scarlet cord and ties it around the 
body of one of the spies, brings him to the window, and 
as he clambers out--nervous lest she have not strength to 
hold him—with muscular arms such as woman seldom 
has, she let him down, hand over hand, in safety to the 
ground, Not being exhausted, she ties the cord around 


will the 
1g, deep 
there 1s 
ne river, 
the loss 
structive 
e That 


Jaughter. 
from the 
>», and see 
, child, in 
olice hear 
J] around 
nands the 
—tor that 
ecrets the 
rack; but 
a bargain 
save my 
r, and my 
my comes 
home yet, 
Her heart 
eated her 
em again, 
sinful en- 
he face of 
INO sooner 
e, and the 
nd sisters, 
round the 
dow, and 
trength to 
an seldom 
ety to the 
rd around 


eos 


THE RED CORD IN THE WINDOW. 943 


the other spy, brings him to the window, and just as 
successfully lets him down to the ground. No sooner 
have these men untied the scarlet cord from their bodies 
than they look up and say: “ You had better get all your 
friends in this house—your father, your mother, your 
brothers, and your sisters; you had better get them in 
this house. And then, after you have them here, take 
this red cord which you have put around our bodies, and 
tie it across the win‘ow; and when our victorious army 
comes up, and see that scarlet thread in the window they 
will spare this house, and all who are in it. Shall it be 
so?” cried the spies. “ Aye, aye,” said Rahab, from the 
window, “it shall be so.” That is the second scene in 
this Bible drama. 

There is a knock at the door of the old man. He looks 
up, and says: “ Come in,” and lo! there is Rahab, the 
lost child, but she has no time to talk. They gather in 
excitement around her, and she says to them “ Get ready 
quickly, and go with me to my house. The army is 
coming! The trumpet! Make haste! Fly! The 
enemy!” That is the third scene in this Bible drama. 

The hosts of Israel are all around about the doomed 
city of Jericho. Crash, goes the great metropolis, heaps 
on heaps. The air suffocating with the dust, and horrible 
with the screams of a dying city, All the houses flat 
down. All the people dead. Ah, no, no. Ona crag of 
the wall—the only piece of the wall left standing—there 
is a house which we must enter, There is a family there 
that have been spared. Who are they? Let us go in 
and see. Rahab, her father, her mother, her brothers 
her sisters all safe, and the only house left standing in 
all the city. What saved them? Was the house more 
firmly built? O no, it was built in the most perilous 
place—on the wall; and the wall was the first thing that 
fell, Was it because her character was any better than 
any of the other population of the city? O,no. Why 
then was she spared, and all her household ? Can you 


ee 


944 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 


tell me why ? O, it was the scarlet line in the window. 
That is the fourth scene in this Bible drama. 

When the destroying angel went through Egypt it 
was the blood of the lamb on the door-posts that saved 
the Israelites; and now that the vengeance has come 
upon Jericho, it is the same colour that assures the 
safety of Rahab, and all her household. My friends, 
there are foes coming upon us, more deadly and more 
tremendous, to overthrow our immortal interests. They 
will trample us down and crush us out for ever, unless 
there be some skiliul mode of rescue open. The, .1ce 
of death already begin to clamour for our surrender ; but 
blessed be Cod’ there is a way out. It is through the 
window, and by a rope so saturated with the bloc dof the 
cross, that it is as red as that with which the spies were 
lowered ; and if once our souls shall be delivered, then 
the scarlet cord stretched across the window of our escape, 
we may defy all bombardment, earthly and satanic. 

In the first place, carrying out the idea of my text, we 
must stretch this scarlet cord across the window of owr 
vescue. There comes a time when a man is surrounded. 
What is that in the front door of his soul? It is the 
threatenings of the future. What is that in the back 
door of his soul? It is the sins of the past. He cannot 
get out of either of these doorways. If he attempts it 
he will be cut to pieces. What shall he do? Escape 
through the window of God’s mercy. That sunshine has 
been pouring in for many a day. God’s inviting mercy. 
Gods pardoning mercy, God's all-conquering mercy. 
God’s everlasting mercy. But you say the window is so 
high. Ah, there is a rope, the very one with which the 
cross and its victim were lifted. That was strong enough 
to hold Christ, and it is strong enough to hold you. Bear 
all your weight i a it, all your hopes for this | life, all 
your hopes “for the life that is to come. {scape now 
through the window. “But,” you say, “that cord is too 
small to save me; that salvation will never do at all for 


OW. 


t it 
ved 
ome 
the 
nds, 
nore 
“hey 
ness 
1ce 
- but 
. the 
f the 
were 
then 
ape, 


t, we 
f our 
ided. 
s the 
back 
nnot 
pts it 
scape 
e has 
ercy. 
ercy. 
is SO 
1 the 
ough 
Bear 
e, all 
now 
s too 
ll for 


THE RED CORD IN THE WINDOW. 


such a sinner as I have been.” I suppose that the rope 
with which Rahab let the two spies to the ground was 
not thick enough, but they took that or nothing. And, 
my dear brother, that is your alternative. There is only 
one scarlet line that can save you. There have been 
hundreds and thousands who have been borne away in 
safety by that scarlet line, and it will bear you away in 
safety. Do you notice what a very narrow escape those 
spi2zs had? I supposu they came with flustered cheek 
and with excited heart. They had a very narrow escape. 
They went in the broad door of sin; but how did they 
come out? They came out of the window. They went 
up by the stairs of stone; they came down on a slender 
thread. And so, my friends, we go easily and unabash- 
edly into sin, and all the doors are open; but if we get 
out at all, it will be by being let down over precipices, 
wriggling and helpless, the strong grip above keeping us 
from being dashed on the rocks beneath. It is easy to 
get into sin, young man. It is not so easy to get out of 
It. 

A young man to-night goes to the marble counter ot 
the bar-room of the Fifth Avenue hotel. He asks for a 
brandy smash—called so, I suppose, because it smashes 
the man that takes it. There is no intoxication in it, 
As the young man receives it, he does not seem to be at 
all excited. It does not give any glossiness to the eye. 
He walks home in beautiful apparel, and all his prospects 
are brilliant. That drink is not going to destroy him, 
but it is the first step on a bad road. Years have passed 
on, and I see that young man after he has gone the whole 
length of dissipation. It is midnight, and he is in a hotel 
—perhaps the very one where he took the first drink. 
He is on the fourth story, and the delirium is on him. 
He rises from the bed, and comes to the window, and it 
is easily lifted; so he lifts it. Then he pushes back the 
blinds and puts his foot on the window-sill. Then he 
gives one spring, and the watchman finds his disfigured 


246 SERMONS BY TALMAGE. 


body, unrecognizable on the pavement. O, if he had 
only waited a little—if he had come down on the scarlet 
ladder that Jesus holds from the wall for him, and for 
you, and for me; but no, he made one jump, and was 
gone. <A minister of Christ was not long ago dismissed 
from his diocese for intoxication, and in a public meeting 
at the West, he gave this account of his sorrow. Hesaid: 
“Thad a beautiful home once ; but strong drink shattered 
it. I had beautiful children; but this fiend of rum took 
their dimpled hands in his, and led them to the grave. 
I had a wife—to know her was to love her; but she sits 
in wretchedness to-night while I wander over the earth. 
I had a mother, and the pride of her life was me; but 
the thunderbolt struck her. I now have scarcely a friend 
in the world. Taste of the bitter cup I have tasted, and 
then answer me as to whether I have any hatred for the 
agency of my ruin. Hate it! Ihate the whole damning 
traffic. I would to God to-night that every distillery was 
in flames, for then in the glowing sky I would write in 
the smoke of the ruin: ‘Woe to him that putteth the 
bottle to his neighbour’s lips!’” That minister of the 
Gospel went in through the broad door of temptation ; 
he came out of the window. And when I see the temp- 
tations that are about us, and when I know the proclivity 
to sin in every man’s heart, I see that if any of us escape 
it will be a very narrow escape. O, if we have, my friends, 
got off from our sin, let us tie the scarlet thread, by which 
we have been saved, across the windew. Let us do it in 
eo of Him, whose blood dyed it that colour. Let it 

¢ in announcement of the fact, that we shall no more be 
fatally assaulted. ‘There is no condemnation for them 
that are in Christ Jesus.” Then let all the forces of this 
world come up in cavalry charge, and let spirits of dark- 
ness come on an infernal storming party, attempting to 
take our soul, this rope twisted from these words: “ ‘The 
blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin,” will hurl 
them back defeated for ever, 


ne had 
scarlet 
and for 
nd was 
smissed 
meeting 
Te said : 
hattered 
im took 
le grave. 
, she sits 
he earth. 
me; but 
a friend 
sted, and 
.d for the 
damning 
illery was 
write in 
tteth the 
er of the 
ptation ; 
he temp- 
proclivity 
us escape 
y friends, 
by which 
g do it in 
Y. Let it 
9 more be 
for them 
es of this 
} of dark- 
bey, to 
«'The 
sat hurl 


THE RED CORD IN THE WINDOW. 247 


Still further: we must take this red cord of the text, 
aud stretch it across the window of our households. 
When the Israelitish army came up against Jericho, they 
said: “ What is that in the window?” Some one said: 
“ That isa scarlet line.’ “QO,” said some one else, “ that 
must be the house that was to be spared. Don’t touch 
it.” That line was thick enough, and long enough, and 
conspicuous enough to save Raliab, her father, her mother, 

her brothers and her sisters—the entire family. Have 
our households as good protection? You have bolts on 
the front door, and on the back, and fastenings to the 
window, and perhaps burglar-alarms, and perhaps an 
especial watchman blowing his whistle at midnight be- 
fore your dwelling; but all that cannot protect your 
household. Is there on our houses the sign of a Savi- 
our’s sacrifice and mercy? Is there a scarlet line in the 
window ? Have your children been consecrated to Christ ? 
Have you been washed in the blood of the atonement? 
In what room do you have family prayers? Show me 
where it is you are accustomed to kneel. The sky is 
black with the coming deluge. Is your family inside or 
outside of the ark? It is a sad thing for a man to reject 
Christ; but to lie down in the night of sin, across the 
path to heaven, so that his family come up, and trip over 
him into an infinity of horrors—that is the longest, the 
deepest, the mightiest. It is a sad thing for a mother to 
reject Christ ; but to gather her family around her, and 
then take them by the hand, and lead them out into 
paths of worldliness, away from God and heaven—J, it 
will take all the dirges of earth and hell to weep out that 
again, I suppose there are in this church to-night fam- 
ilies represented where there has not been an audible 
prayer offered for ten years. There may be geranium 
cactus in the window, and upholstery hovering over it, 

and childish faces looking out of it; but there is no 

scarlet thread stretched across it. though that house 

may seem to be on the finest street in all the city, it is 


248 SERMONS BY TALMAGE, 
really on the edge of a marsh across which sweep most 
poisonous malarias, and it has a sandy foundation, and 
its splendour will come down, and great will be the fall 
of it. A home without God! A prayerless father! An 
undevout mother! Awful! Awful! Isthat you? Will 
you keep on, my brother, on the wrong road, and take 
your loved ones with you? May God arrest you before 
you complete the ruin of those whom you ought to save. 
You see I talk plainly to you, just as I would have you 
talk plainly to me. Time is so short that we cannot 
waste any of it on apologies, or indirections, or circum- 
locutions, You owe to your children, O father, O mother, 
more than food, more than clothing, more than shelter— 
you owe them an example of a prayerful, consecrated, 
pronounced, out-and-out Christian life. You cannot afford 
to keep it away from them. 
Now, as I stand here, you do not see any hands out- 
stretched towards me, and yet there are hands on my 
brow, and hands on both my shoulders, They are hands 
of parental benediction. It is quite a good many years 
ago now since we folded those hands as they began the 
last sleep on the banks of the Raritan, in the village 
cemetery; but those hands are stretched out towards me 
to-night, and they are just as warm, and they are just as 
gentle as when I sat at their knee at five years of age. 
And I shall never shake off those hands. I do not want 
to. They have helped me so much a thousand times 
already, and I do not expect to have a trouble or a trial 
between this and my grave where those hands will not 
help me. Jt was not a very splendid home, as the world 
calls it; but we had a family Bible there, well worn by 
tender perusal ; and there was a family altar there, where 
we knelt morning and night: and there was a holy Sab- 
bath there ; and stretched in a straight line or hung in 
loops or festoons, there was a scarlet line in the window. 
O, the tender, precious, blessed memory of a Christian 
home! Is that the impression you are making upon 


most 
1, and 
.e fall 
! An 

Will 
1 take 
before 


oO save. 

ve you 

cannot 
sircum- 
mother, 
elter— 
ecrated, 
yt afford 


nds out- 
s on My 
e hands 
years 
scan the 
village 
ards me 
e just as 
3 of age. 
hot want 
nd times 
ra trial 
will not 
he world 
worn by 
e, where 
oly Sab- 
hung in 
window. 
hristian 
ng upon 


THE “RED CORD IN THE WINDOW. 249 
your children? When you are dead—and it will not be 
long before you are—when you are dead, will your child 
say: “If there ever was a good, Christian father, mine 
was one. If there ever was a good Christian mother, 
mine was one!” Will they say that after you are dead ? 
Standing some Sabbath night in church preaching the 
glorious “Gospel, as I am trying to do, will they tell the 
people i in that day how there are hands of benediction 
on their brow, and hands of parental benediction on both 
their shoulders ? 

Still further: we want this scarlet line of the text 
drawn across the window of our prospects. I see Rahab, 
and her father, and her mother, and her brothers, and 
sisters, looking out over Jericho, the city of palm trees, 
and across the river, and over at the army invading, and 
then up to the mountains and the sky. Mind you, this 
house was on the wall, and I suppose the prospect from 
the window must have been very wide. Besides that, 
I do not think that the scarlet line at all intertered 
with the view of the landscape. The assurance it gave 
of safety must have added to the beauty of the country. 
To-night, my friends, we stand, or sit, in the window of 
earthly prospects, and we look off towards the hills of 
heaven and the landscape of eternal beauty. God has 
opened the window for us, and we look out; but how 
if we do not get there? If we never get there, better 
never to have had even this faint glimpse of it. We 
now only get a dim outline of the inhabitants. We 
now only here and there catch a note of the exquisite 
harmony. 

But blessed be God for this scarlet line in the window. 
That tells me that the blood of Christ bought that home 
for my soul, and I shall go there when my work is done 
here. And as I put my hand on that scarlet line, every- 
thing in the future brightens. My eyesight gets better, 
and the robes of the victors are more lustrous, and our 


loved ones, who went away some time ago—they do not 
P 


250 SERMONS BY TALMAGE.’ 


stand any more with their backs to us, but their faces 
are this way, and their voices drop through this Sabbath 
air, saying with all tenderness and sweetness: “Come! 
Come! Come!” And the child that you think of as 
only buried—why, there she is, and it is May-day in 
heaven ; and they gather the amaranth, and they pluck 
the lilies,and they twist them into a garland for her 
brow, and she is one of the May queens of heaven. O! 
do you think they could see our wavering to-night? It 
is quite a pleasant night out-doors, pretty clear, not many 
clouds in the sky, quite starlight. J wonder df they can 
see ws from that good land? I think they can. If from 
this window of earthly prospects we can almost see them, 
then from their towers of light, I think they can fully 
see us. And so I wave them the glory, and I wave them 
the joy, and I say: “ Ilave you got through with all your 
troubles ?” and their voices answer: “God hath wiped 
away all tears from our eyes.” I say, “Is it as grand 
up there, as you thought it would be ?” and the voices 
answer: “Kye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath 
it entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath prepared for those that love Him.” I say, “ Do you 
have any more struggle for bread?” and they answer: 
“We hunger no more, we thirst no more.” And I say: 
“Have you been out to the cemetery of the golden 
city ?” and they answer “There is no death here.” And 
LT look out through the night heavens, and I say : “ Where 
do you get your light from, and what do you burn in the 
temple?” and they answer; “There is no night here, 
and we have no need of candle or of star.” And I say: 
“What book do you sing out of?” and they answer: 
“The Hallelujah Chorus.” And I say: “In the splen- 
dour and magnificence of the city, don’t you ever get 
lost!” and they answer: “The Lamb which is in the 
midst of the throne leadeth us to living fountains of 
water,” QO! how near it seems to night. Their wings— 
do you not feel them? Their harps—do you not hea 


heir faces 
: Sabbath 
: “Come! 
ink of as 
v -day in 
ve pluck 
d for her 
wen. O! 
ight? It 
not many 
F they can 
If from 
/see them, 
7 can fully 
vave them 
th all your 
ath wiped 
t as grand 
the voices 
sither hath 
which God 
. ‘“ Do you 
y answer: 
And I say: 
the golden 
ere.” And 
y: * Where 
9urn in the 
night here, 
And I say: 
2y answer: 
1 the splen- 
u ever get 
h is in the 
ountains of 


eir i 
yu not hea 


THE RED CORD IN THE WINDow, 


' €ver. Is it too 
» because it reminds you 
een, because jt makes you think of 
ack, because It has in it the shadows 
take the scarlet because it shall make 
ice that was paid for my soul. O) the 
‘the blood of the Lamb that taketh 

gh it we e 
Will you let it, 
and you will live. Re 
Ou uccept it, or wil] you pull over on 
you the eterna] calamity of rejecting it! 

I see where you are. You are at 
night. The Next step decides everyth 
you take it; but do not pause 

od’s justice slam shut the doo 
Open so long. 


I hear the thunder of God’s artillery, J 
hear the blast of the 


at wakes the dead. Look 
out! Look out! or in that ay, and in our ¢] 
moment on earth, 
ricade, however hi 
little, thin, scarlet 


glaring 
of the Sky ; or the gr 

the foliage ; or the bl] 
of the night ? 


€ reach heaven, 
you? Believe jn it 


you die, Wij] y 


Stupendous, wil] 
window 


ae not afraid, only believe,” 


ARVVVLVVVVVVVVVD 


My faith looks up to Thee, 
Thou Lamb of Calvary, 
Saviour divine : 
Now hear me while I pray ; 
Take all my guilt away ; 
O let me from this day 
Be wholly Thine ! 


May Thy rich grace impart 

Strength to my fainting heart, 
My zeal inspire ; 

As Thou hast died for me, 

O may my love to Thee 

Pure, warm, and changeless be, 
A living fire. 


While life’s dark maze I tread, 
And griefs around me spread, 
Be Thou my guide ; 
Bid darkness turn to day, 
Wipe sorrow’s tears away, 
Nor let me ever stray 
From Thee aside. 


When ends life’s transient dream, 
When death’s cold sullen stream 
Shall o’er me roll, 
Blest Saviour, then, in love, 
Fear and distrust remove ; 
O bear me safe above, 
A ransomed soul, 


ae 


ra 
| 
iss} 
o 
f 
ce) 
r=] 
A 
2 
< 
E 
> 
re 
z 
fa 
tr 
> 
[:>4 
am 


REV. HENRY WARD BEECHER, 


HE Rev. Mr. Beecher was born in Litchfield, Con- 
necticut, United States, in 1813. Mr. Beecher’s 

father, Rev. Lyman Beecher, was born in New Haven, 
Connecticut, in October, 1775. He devoted himself to 
Theology, and after holding the pastorate of Congregational 
churches at Litchfield and at Boston, he was, in 1832, ap- 
pointed president of the newly founded Lane Theological 
Seminary, near Springfield. He became celebrated as a power- 
ful preacher and platform orator, and died at Brooklyn, in 
January, 1863. Rev. Henry Ward Beecher, his second son, 
received his early education at Amherst College, Connecticut, 
and after graduating, studied Theology with his father at Lane 
Seminary. After ten years pastorship of two churches in the 
State of Indiana, he removed to Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, New 
York, an ‘organization of Orthodox Congreyational believers.” 


pa 
~ 
4 
f 
d 
b 
\ 
« 
} 
/ 


setenmsiiliy ee ee oe sie Se 
= + . - - 


256 REV. HENRY WARD BEECHER, 


He has one of the largest congregations in the United States, and 
his popularity as a pulpit speaker and a lecturer speedily became 
prodigious, owing partly to his rich fund of illustration, his dra- 
matic manner, and his keen sense of humor. 

For nearly twenty years Mr, Beecher was editor of the New York 
Independent, a religions newspaper, and for nearly twelve of the 
Christian Union, another paper of the same class. Although dur- 


ing his long public career he has experienced a good deal of trouble, 


yet his influence is said hardly to have suffered, and the fidelity of 
his congregation still remaing unshaken in him, 

Mr. Beecher’s Sermons, known as the “‘ Plymouth Pulpit,” his 
“Lectures to Young Men,” ‘‘ Life Thoughts,” ‘‘ Life of Christ,” 
and ‘* Yale Lectures on Preaching” have been largely read all over 
the world. 

Mr. Beecher, though now well advanced in years, is still vigorous 
and strong, and continues to attract as large crowds of people at 
Plymouth Church as he did when he first took charge of it asa 
young man, 


es, and 
became 
his dra- 


ew York 
e of the 
ugh dur- 
trouble, 
delity of 


pit,” his 
> Christ,” 
1 all over 


] vigorous 
people at 
of itasa 


FOUR GREAT PREACHERS. 


RWWA AAA 


SERMONS BY REV. H. W. BEECHER, 


Se Se Sed 


THE OLD AND THE NEW. 


“And for this cause he is the mediator of the New Testament, 
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions 
1 that were under the first testament, they which are called mig't 
receive the promise of eternal inheritance.” 

Hebrews ix : 15, 


RifPERE there is a contrast between the Old and 
Gia the New Testament of God. This contrast 
is not incidental. It was a part of the 
mission of the Apostles not to transfer the 
allegiance of the Jews from one god to another, 
but to teach them how to serve the same God in a 
higher dispensation, under a noble disclosure of His 
character and attributes by new and better methods. 
It was to be the same heart and the same God; but 
there was a new and living way opened. The Old 
was good, the New was better, The’ New was not 
an antagonism of the Old, but only its outgrowth, 
related to it as the blossom and the fruit are to the 
root and the stalk. We could scarcely conceive of 
Christianity as a system developed in this world, 
if it had not been preceded hy the Mosaic economy—by 
the whole teaching of the Old Testament, 


i Fact eyesore 


258 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


There are striking differences between the Old and the 
New; but no opposition. The Old was local and national 
in its prime intents, and in its results. The New was for 
all ages. It is true that the seeds of the truth in the Old 
Testament had their adaptations, and that there were 
possibilities of a universal application, under the genius 
of the system. And the genera! effects of the system 
were tu produce national character. It was religion de- 
veloped for the Jew. ‘The New Testament dispensation, 
the New Testament of Christ Jesus, was for mankind. 
There was to be neither Jew now Gentile; neither bond 
nor free, neither male nor female. All were to be one in 
Christ. 

The Old was a system of practices, It aimed at con- 
duct—of course implying a good cause of conduct. The 
New is a system of principles, and yet, not principles in 
a rigid philosophical sense, but principles that are great 
moral imp ilses or tendencies of the heart. I do not mean 
that the Old Testament had no principles, but that these 
were not its characteristics. They were incidental. It ° 
was, “Do this, and live;” or, “Disobey, and die.” It 
was a system of rules and regulations adapted admirably 
for certain specific results which were attained, but not 
broadly adapted to the ultimate wants of the whole de- 
veloped race. For a system of practices is never flexible 
and therefore not adaptable. Ordinances which fit one 
age and one race, on that very account cannot fit another 
age and another race. Principles are infinitely flexible. 
Retaining the same heart, they are susceptible of a hun- 
dred different developments, plastic and movable. Prin- 
ciples are adapted to the universal need. Ordinances, 
forms, methods, rules, practices, must of necessity be 
manacles for a time, to those that wear them; and they 
must be dispossessed and broken to pieces, if the world is 
to goon and grow. The Old Testament was not alto- 
sibs bound up in ordinances, nor in types, nor in sacri- 
tices ; but still, these were the central elements, 


1d the 
tional 
was for 
he Old 
e were 
genius 
system 
ion de- 
nsation, 
ankind. 
er bond 
e one in 


1 at con- 
ct, The 
ciples in 
are great 
not mean 


die.” It 
dAmirably 
, but not 
hole de- 
Yr tlexible 
1 fit one 
another 
flexible. 
of a hun- 
e, Prin- 
dinances, 
ssity be 
and they 
s world 18 
not alto- 
in sacri- 


THE OLD AND THE NEW. 259 


The Old built men for this world. Therefore it hardly 
looked beyond this world. It is mournful to see how 
death was regarded at the end; as the dark slumberous 
chamber ; as the final extinction of hope and life. I do 
not mean that there were not traces in the Old Testament 
of the dawning doctrine of futurity and immortality ; 
but certainly it was no part of the Mosaic economy. It 
never was employed as a sanction, nor as a motive. It 
fell out incidentally, as it were, like some poetic flash, or 
some divine inspiration, as the experience of a devotee or 
a prophet, But in the formal and methodized work in 
which the nations were to be trained, the great power 
which Christianity has was utterly ignored. The whole 
force of the New dispensation, or Testament, is derived 
from that which scarcely appeared at all in the Old—its 
supereminent doctrine of the future. That is its very en- 
ginery. The aims of Christianity are supramundane. 
The aims are drawn from immortality—its Joys, its hon- 
ours, its promises, its rewards. The fervour of the apostle 
scarcely designed, except incidentally, to refer to earthly 
fruitions and enjoyments. Not that the New Testament 
utterly discards these things; not that it is silent in re- 
spect to them; but the genius of the New Testament is 
in the future, looking on, looking up, looking forward, 
looking ever beyond this present state of existence. 

The Old addressed the conscience through fear, and 
soon overreached its aim, losing some by under-action, 
and others—and the better natures—by over-action., 
What the law could not do, in that it was weak, it is de- 
clared, God sent His own Son to do. ‘The law was found 
—e to reach beyond a certain point of development 
in human experience. Indeed, it may be said to have 
been scarcely more than a secular polity. It fitted men 
to be virtuous in this life. It taught them to fulfil their 
civic duties, It set up before them, to be sure, a God to 
be worshipped and to be obeyed; but the fruit was to be 
seen in this mortal state, in character, in conduct, and in 


(PREC TemNenRe en rr tae sare Bee 


260 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


condition. The New aims at the very springs of moral 
power in the soul, and that through love. It is a total 
change, it is an absolute difference, in this regard. I do 
not mean that the love principle was left out in the Old 
Testament; but it was not the characteristic and work- 
ing principle. Ido not mean that fear was not known in 
the New Testament. In the vast choral harmony, you 
now and then hear the thunderous undertones of fear ; 
but, after all, we are to be saved by the power of love, 
and not by the impulsion of fear. This is the peculiar 
element of Christianity—that it appeals to love, and 
teaches it to predominate over all other powers, and holds 
all other elements in subjection to it. It is that faith 
which works by love that is to save the soul. 

The Old sought to build up around the man physical 
helps. It was a system of crutches and canes. It was as 
a nursery to teach children to walk, with all appliances 
to hold up their feeble and trembling limbs, As a re- 
ligious system of education, it was purely physical and 
artificial—full of symbols and ordinances, It taught men 
how to use their senses so as to find out something super- 
sensuous. It taught them through bodily organs and 
agencies to rise above the body a little way; which was 
the best, probably, that could then have been done for 
man. But the New, counting that the time has come 
for something higher and better than this, strikes straight 
for character, by the force of a man’s own will. It is the 
power of the inward man that is evermore appealed to— 
the new man: not the new man alone; but the new man 
enlightened and inspired by the spirit of God, and made 
mighty for all change and for all acquisition. While the 
Oid taught men how to observe days and months, how to 
maintain signs, and symbols, how through types and 
shadows to discern substances, the New brushes all these 
away, and says, “ Neither in this mountain, nor yet in 
Jerusalem ; not in any consecrated place, nor in any par- 
ticular place, but anywhere and everywhere, every man 


of moral 
is a total 
rd. ] do 
the Old 
nd work- 
known in 
1ony, you 
s of fear ; 
er of love, 
e peculiar 
love, and 
and holds 
that faith 


n physical 
It was as 
appliances 
. Asa re- 
ysical and 
aught men 
hing super- 
yrg’ans and 
which was 
hn done for 
e has come 
es straight 
It is the 
yealed to— 
e new man 
, and made 
While the 
ths, how to 
types and 
es all these 
nor yet in 
in any par- 
every man 


THE OLD AND THE NEW. 961 


may be his own priest, and stand worshipping God, and 
call Him Father.” 

The Old Testament was not wholly withou} its natural 
religion. Indeed, the most eminent natural religion that 
can be found in literature is that which is contained in 
the recorded piety of the Old Testament. We have not 
yet in our times advanced, anywhere near so far as the 
prophets and the sweet singer of Israel liad advanced, or 
as the Hebrew mind had advanced, to whom nature itself 
was one vast symbolism; to whom storms, and seasons, 
and mountains, and plains, and rivers, and seas, and day 
and night, the processions of nature, were all mighty 
symbols significant of certain great truths behind them. 
There was a vast store of natural religion held up in the 
Old Testament, so that over and above the specialities of 
the temple and of the Mosaic economy, there was a larger 
spirit of worship. Nevertheless, the system was charac- 
terized by ordinances. And every system that multiplies 
ordinances, every system that runs after rites and cere- 
monies, runs back to Judaism—that is, runs back to 
childhood. It is not a question as to whether men may 
or not. Certainly they may. May not men write their 
prayers, and recite them? May not men make their 
services to consist in elaborate ceremonials? Certainly 
they may. There is no law that prevents adults wearing 
babies’ clothes. There is no law that prevents a man’s 
going back to his spelling book. There is no law that 
prevents a man’s gamboling again in the street, just as he 
did when he was six years old Men may become child- 
ren. Men may be children in social and in fiscal matters ; 
and they may be children in matters of religion. When 
eagles are once hatched, they remain eagles. It is men 
that, having been hatched, try to go back again into the 
egy—and a sorry business they make of it! 

With a far lower aim in character, the Old kept men in 
bondage. With immeasurably higher aim and larger 
requisition, the New yields liberty. It would seem 4s 


262 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 
though if there was less to do, and it were easier of 
attainment, there would be greater freedom, and as 
though if you multiplied tasks, and set higher standards, 
and increased the force of motives, men would lag be- 
hind. But it comes to pass the other way. For no men 
were ever so much in bondage as those who attempted to 
perfect manhood under the old ritualistic system; and no 
micn are so free as thuse who attempt manhood under the 
spiritual system of the New ‘Testament are so free as 
those whose idea of manhood is the amplest. No man is 
so free as he that aims the highest. It is a simple and 
absolute natural law, as I believe, that bondage goes with 
the baser faculties, and that liberty goes with the moral 
sentiment. Itis a part of the genius, I will not say of 
Christianity, except as Christianity is a part of God’s 
universal nature, but of creation; it is a part of the 
peculiar developinent of God’s thought in the human 
constitution, that if you live by the use of the reason 
and the higher moral sentiments, through faith and 
hope and love, you live in the realm and by faculties 
whose essential nature it is to work out liberty. Your 
idea comes by faith, and your attainment still lags, as 
under any system it will; yet, after all, the spirit has the 
very remuneration and the very atmosphere of liberty. 
No man is free but he who lives in the very highest 
realms of religious life. As a man goes down toward the 
lower and economic faculties, and as he goes down 
through these to the passions and appetites, and says to 
them, “ Ye are our God,” more and more he goes down in 
circumscription; more and more he is limited; and more 
and more he works toward bondage. Bondage is of the 
flesh, and liberty is of the spirit. 

The Old was a dispensation of secular morals, It lived 
in the past. The New is a system of aspirations. It 
lives in the future. The Old said, ‘ Remember all the 
way in which the Lord hath led thee.” It recited law 
and ordinance and government It chanted, in the sub- 


asier of 
and as 
andards, 
lag be- 
*no men 
npted to 
> and no 
inder the 
» free as 
fo man is 
nple and 
rOes with 
the moral 
ot say of 
of God’s 
‘t+ of the 
e human 
he reason 
‘aith and 
faculties 
y. Your 
| lags, as 
it has the 
rf liberty. 
y highest 
ward the 
es down 
d says to 
s down in 
and more 
bh is of the 


It lived 
tions. It 
er all the 
cited law 

the sub- 


THE OLD AND THE NEW. 263 


lime strains either of the singer or of the prophet, the 
national history of deliverances. The New says, “For- 
getting the things that are behind, press forward to those 
things which are before.” The Old said, “Rising up or 
sitting down, teach your children God’s mighty acts.” 
The New says, “Set your affections on things above. Go 
out, and up, and beyond.” 

The Old was a system, therefore, in which men remem- 
bered, and the New is a system in which men aspire. 
Not that there was not aspiration in the Old—drawings 
of it, elements of it, collateral and incidental; but the 
working force was not that. Not that there are not in 
the New Testament the elements also of consideration, of 
reflection; not that there is not to be memory of past 
experiences and past deeds; but that the characteristic 
drift and inspiration of the New Testament is toward tho 
future. 

It is a system vitalizing and life-giving. 1t does not 
take so much account of the granary as it does of the 
sowing of the seed. It is not the reaping that it empha- 
sizes: it is the harvesting. 

The Old, I might say, had a muffled God. Sinai, all in 
robes of darkness, the earth shaking, thunders and 
trumpets, a voice of terror, a God invisible, commencing 
with his priest or servant Moses—that is the God of the 
Old Testament. Jesus litted up before all the people, a 
sufferer for others, pure himself, and without spot, pour- 
ing his life out freely, that the whole world might have 
life, with clear features lifted up against the sky, that all 
men might see him-~he is the visible God of the New 
Testament. The Old Testament was God hidden; and 
the New Testament is God made known through Jesus 
Christ—a living force: not an idea, not an imagination, 
certainly not an abstraction, but a living force. You will 
recollect how much emphasis is put upon the thought of 
a living God. He is the living Head, he is the living 
Way, as we are told, It is not a God that is concealed, it 


264 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


is not a God that we draw near to through types and 
ordinances and shadows: it is the actual revelation of a 
God with whom we may hold personal communion; to 
whom the heart finds its way; on whose bosom it rests: 
with whom it speaks. It is a living Saviour, companion- 
able, communicable, ever-present. 

We are the children of the New Testament, and not of 
the Old. Woe be to us if, living in these later days, we 
find ourselves groping in the imperfections of the Old 
Testament, instead of springing up with all the vitality 
and supereminent manhood which belongs to the New 
Testament. We are the children of a living Saviour. We 
are a brood over which he Stretches his wings, He is 
our Brother, he is our elder Brother, he is our Saviour, 
and our Deliverer, and our everlasting Friend. 

We ought to have more than a creed which is only a 
modern representation of an old ordinance or institution. 
We ought to have something more than an ordinance. 
We are not Christians because we keep the Sabbath day, 
nor because we pray, nor because we read the Bible, nor 
because we perform duties, They are Christians through 
whose soul is struck that vitalizing influence by which 
the soul says, “ Father,’ and beholds God. To be a dis- 
ciple of the New Testament is to have a living Head. It 
is to have a vital connection with that Head. It is to be 
conscious, while all nature speaks of God, and while all 
the exercises of religion assist indirectiy, that the main 
power of a true religion in the sou! is the soffl’s connec- 
tion with a living God. 

Is there such a connection in you? You would: scorn 
the imputation of being Jews, and Mosaic Jews. I would 
that some of you were as good. You would scorn going 
back tc the cast-off rubbish of those far-off days ; and yet 
they are all of them shadows of your beliefs, In what 
respect do you differ from those of the old dispensation, 
if there is to you no personal Saviour, no absolute com- 
munication between your soul and God? If all that you 


types and 
lation of a 
1union; to 
ym it rests: 
-ompanion- 


and not of 
or days, we 
of the Old 
he vitality 
>» the New 
viour, We 
gs, He is 
r Saviour, 


1 is only a 
institution. 
ordinance. 
bbath day, 
Bible, nor 
ns through 
by which 
o bea dis- 
Head. It 
It is to be 
d while all 
_ the main 
l’s connec- 


ould: scorn 
i ak would 
corn going 
3; and yet 

In what 
spensation, 
olute com- 
1 that vou 


THE OLD AND THR NEw, 265 
et, you get by the direct infiuence of Christian; ty through 
society, Society stands for you as the temple and the ritual- 
istic system stood for them, [4 was the peculiarity of the 

ewis dispensation that instead of a direct approach to 
God, they came through ordinances, and through govern- 
ments, and through ministers ; and jf you come to mo- 
rality only through the household and through iyi] 


1 what Respect are you 


erent national name, 
you stand religiously under the same System. But if you 


are more than that, if you have grown out of your child- 

ood, and you stand in the ful] manhood of modlern days, 
it is not because you have left these things behind you, 
suffering them to do what they may, but because there is 
‘AIS power of a living faith in a 


ave you that faith ? Do you live by faith of the Son 
you, and gave Himself for you ? Then 

are you the disciples of the New, and not the followers of 
the Old. Tg your life for the secular 
ous future 2” The Jew live 
old Possessions ; to gee his household multi 


is father’s God bestowed 
upon him. That was the sanction and promise of the Old 
Testament dispensation, But the New goes beyond that, 
t promises the hereafter, 


re all your aims and ambitions then centered in this 
earthly horizon ? Are vou living for this World ; for j 
gifts and goods ; for its friendships and joys; for its am- 
itions and its power ; for its pleasures ? ~ Aro these the 
Whole? Is the world clear and Vivid ? and is the horizon- 
line the end of anything distinct ? and is all that is be- 
yond nebulous, vague, Something yet to be revealed? Or, 
is heaven clear? Is God real? is the future the sphere 
in which your thoughts move * If yeare the disciples of 
the New, your life lies in the future 
even in the present, If your life j 
Q 


266 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


in these lower things, then ye are yet the disciples of the 
Old, and not the New, 

Do you still aim at conduct, or is it character after 
which you strive? It was conduct that belonged to the 
Old dispensation ; and through that, character was to be 
wrought out. Is: the New dispensation, it is character 
that is to be wrought out; and conduct is to flow from 
that. Conduct is to be spontaneous. When a man’s heart 
is right, he will let go everything else. Then conduct 
will always go right. Are you living under certain 
schemes of moral excellence ? or have you the conception 
of a Christian manhood? Is this the glowing ambition ? 
Is this the earnest desire ? Is this the daily strife ? 

Standing, as we do, on the first Sunday of the year, I 
have been led into this train of thought, I suppose, by a 
sort of fugitive analogy between the Old and the New as 
represented by the departed year and the coming year. I 
know not by what other suggestion I fell upon it. I am 
moved to speak to you to-night, if I cam with some motive, 
some propelling power toward the future. 

I cannot bear, myself, to go into the coming year just 
as I came out of the old one. I would fain believe each 
year to be a mother, and that I am born into the next 
year, that I may,as it were, with renewed childhood have 
a fresh start, and go forward with the experience and 
the strength of the past year. I would fain believe that 
1 might take a new life, as it were, each year. In my 
fraternal relations to you, I fain would have your com- 
panionship in entering upon this new year, upon whose 
threshold we stand—only three days of which have 
elapsed. I fain would have you, in the spirit of the New 
Testament, look forward, cast your life forward, and take 
steps of purpose and inspired will, which shall lead you 
to greater eminence in the year that is to come, than you 
have attained in the year that is passed. Let me help 
you, therefore, somewhat, 


268 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


i am not content with my oflicial life among you. It 
is most meagre, it is more barren than I would have it. 
By this I do not mean merely that I do not preach as 
well as I would—though I do not; or that I do not ex- 
ert as much or as noble influence as | would—though that 
is true. I try to preach, and I do preach, as well as I 
cam, unless I am a better mas There is the trouble. It 
is the want of essential grece and goodness. It is the 
want of a higher type of spiritual life. It is the want of 
depth. It is the want of power. It is, in short, the want 
of grace in me, the hope of glory. I should preach better, 
and work more effectually, if | had more of that. I am 
not content. 

How is it with you, my Christian brother? How is it 
with you, my Christian sister? Are you content with 
the character which you brought out of the old year, and 
with which you are setting forward upon the new year ? 
How is it in this matchless clement, in this very divinity 
of love, that subdues all the mind, and brings it into a 
sweet submission to God? Have you enough of it? 

Is not this, then, a time for you to revive your char- 
acter, and see what are the elements of it, how you are 
shaping it, what you mean by it, and what you have ob- 
tained thus far? Is it not a time for you to look into 
the future? No matter how old you are, it is not too 
late for you to learn in the school of Christ, surely. And 
it is a noble ambition with which you should begin the 
year—not to swell your coffers, not to have more of 
this world’s good, (though that you may have also,) but 
to begin the year chiefly with the ambition to be more 
like Christ, and to have the power of God resting upon 
you, and to know the will of God, and so to live that 
whosoever meets you shall know that you have been with 
Christ. 

Out of this spirit what blessings will flow! Oh! if you 
were holier, how much happier would you be! Oh! if 
y ou were holier, how would fall down from you straightway 


g you. It 
ld have it. 
; preach as 
do not ex- 
ough that 
s well as I 
ouble. It 

It is the 
he want of 
t, the want 
ach better, 
hat. Iam 


How is it 
ntent with 
l year, and 
new year 4 
ry divinity 
oS it into a 
of it ? 
your char- 
ow you are 
yu have ob- 
0 look into 
, is not too 
rely. And 
1 begin the 
e more of 
e also,) but 
to be more 
sting upon 
to live that 
> been with 


Oh! if you 
ye! Oh! if 
traightway 


vhose diseon te 


those jl] 
much ha 
enjoymer 
you are 
dwells in 
very pres 
wil 
boldly cry 


What man sh 


Sit no 


Ing of those 


bridled ? 
How seldom does a man 
oughly proud man ;” and h 


In danger, say ittohim! 
destroyed, So that it falls 


will say it, 


that dare tell 1 


ough intere 


10 says 


have grown rich ?” 
Come excessive] 
Y €xcess beeo 


Senerosity of 


never leave thee 


-wills, and those 


ve snared you, and 


the days that 
hot good, that you 


1t in 


the secret of the 
ence of Christ, ea 
, nor 
’, the Lord is 
all do unto m 
ba time, on the 

» With yj 


e. 


Ince our moth 
1s our faults, 
Sted in us to 


nce, 


to you, “You h 
Who says 
Y Vain?” 
ming sordid ?” 
Your youth js evay 


THE OLD AND THE NEW, 


nts, and those c 


threshold 


Say to himself, 
Ow seldom does 


powerle: - 


ave crown 


Who 5 


SO much } 


forsake thee, 


my helper, and 


to you, 


0rating like ¢} 


ares, and thos 
thousand tormen 
ave marre, 
are passed ? 
are not happy. 
Almighty, 


y, he th 
n say, “My Mas 


Selfish as Vy 
“ou 


269 


e frets, and 
ts which so 
1 your 
It is ecaAUse 
For he that 
at lives in the 
ter had said, I 
so that I ean 
I will not fear 


it nota time 


net understand- 
trained, to be 


“Tama thor- 


- ou 
have be- 


» “You are 


you, “The 


'@ Morni ng 


+3 
S 


Soe 
ee. erste aaa ee ‘ ¢ 


ae 


Se Ce 


270 SERMUNS BY BEECHER. 


cew, and you are growing up into life with a coarse 
strength, and not with a fine strength ?” Who ineasures, 


who explores, and who makes known to us our faults ¢ 

We may go to our physician, and he can examine the 
lungs and : sound the chest, and report their condition ; he 
can tell us the state of the he: art; he can teil us the con- 
dition of our whole nervous sy stem. But where is the 
physician that can make an examination of the spiritual 
man, and give us a diagnosis of our spiritual life? If it 
is done, must it not be done by ourselves? And is there 
any other time when a man should apply himself to this 
work with so much vigour as upon the very threshold of 
the year 

You have this year before you. Do you want to know 
the truth about yourself ? Do you want to feel the whole 
weight and importance of the truth? Lf a man could 
enter into the secret chamber where character is, and set 
in order before you; if the Spirit of God should knock 
at the door of the soul, and would fain bring in the light 
by which you should see which were evi! and which were 
divine elements, would you want to know your condition? 
Mostly, no. Men do not want to know all these things. 
Men are like bolting-cloths, that separate the wheat and 
the bran, and throw one this way, and the other that way. 
All that is pleasant; all that ministers to self-indulgence 
~-that they fain would have; but that which is critic: ul, 
and exact, and painful; that which cuts into imperfec- 
tion or faults, like a surgeon's knife into fungi or gan- 
grenous flesh, they do not want to know or feel. 

Is there anything in this world that ought to be so 
precious to aman as his manhood? I love to see a man 
own his estate. I love to see him decorate it. He cannot 
make it more beautiful than L approve. Plant it royally. 
Beautify it with landscape pictures. He cannot build 
his mansion too regally, nor furnish it too exquisitely, if 
it be conformable to his means and position, And I will 

walk with him through the tesselated halls; and I will 


1 COATSE 
easures, 
ults 4 
nine the 
‘ion; he 
the con- 
ve is the 
spiritual 
e4 If it 
| is there 
1f to this 
eshold ot 


,to know 
the whole 
nan could 
1S, and set 
uld knock 
the light 
hich were 
sondition 
ise things. 
yheat and 
that way. 
ndulgence 
is critical, 
impertec- 
yo or gan- 
bi 
it to be so 
see a man 
He cannot 
it royally. 
mot omg 
uisitely, 1 
nad | a 
and I will 


THE OLD AND THE NEW. 271 


look with him upon the art which adorns the apartment ; 
I will look through the alcoves of his library, and I will 
applaud, and be happy asheis happy. It is not this that 
| disapprove. But that a man should till his ground, 
and let his soul go fallow ; that he should build his costly 
inansion, and let his spiritual dwelling be ruthlessly 
beaten in upon by every drifting storm; that he should 
take care of his substance, and let his soul go to eternal 
damnation—this is that which I marvel at. 

Now, is this not a time for forethought ? Is it nota 
time for earnest thought? Is it not a time for searching 
thought? Ishall be called to your funeral before long, 
and then it will be too late? What if my tongue be 
plain? What if it seems bitter? What if it thresh like 
a flail? It isa better kindness than the tongue of the 
flatterer. If I make you discontented, it is a discontent 
that has love init. It is better that you should condemn 
yourself than that God should condemn you. It is better 
that I should put you upon an inspired life by making 
you discontented with the one that you have followed, 
than that by following it you should go down to shame 
and everlasting contempt. 

Ye are the children of the New and not of the Old. Let 
your life mount up toward God, And remember who is 
your Father. Remember whom ye hope to be companions 
with. Ye are going “ to the general assembly and church 
of the first-born ;” te saints; to “the spirits of just men 
made perfect.” See that ye are habited gloriously for that 
royal abode, And ts it not the time now to begin such a fit 
work for the yew? You have exchanged salutations of 
good-fellowship one with another; and thatis a beautiful 
practice. It is a beautiful practice for a man to lay aside 
all animosities at the beginning of the year, and to reach 
forth an open palm to everyone that he meets, as if he 
said, “ Let the past bury the past. Let us begin anew.” 
That is right noble between man and man. But there are 
thousands of guardian angels about you, Do you greet 


272 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


them? “The Spirit and the bride say Come.” You are 
beheld by innamerable spectators beyond. All heaven is 
near to you. Do you give greetings to them? To your 
little child that you se ent lume to glory, and for whom 
your heart has yearned, oh! how much! do you say, dare 
you say, “All hail! I ‘veach out hands of gratulation to 
you. I am changing; I am drawing near?” Can you 
say to your mother (methinks mine walks high up among 
the saintly throng—she who, by God's grace, has been 
sent to be my cuardian, [ doubt not ; who has brooded over 
my life, and whom I behol l, oh! how much higher than 
I am !)—ean you say to your mother, with heart true and 
sincere to- night, “I bid you joy of the ne w year; and my 
heart is coming to meet thine 2” And “Jesus the medi- 
ator of the new Covenant ;” he who bought us with His 
own precious blood ; He w hose love to us is greater than 
all the heat and light that the sun sheds through ages on 
the globe; He of the great and royal heart; He in whom 
is our hope—can : you stand at the beginning of the yea 
and reach heart and hand to Him, and ; with new cove- 
nant and new pact, say, “ Thine—living or dying, thine /” 

I linger; and yet | know it is in vain, by added words, 
or by intenser expressions, to reach the heart. My dear 
brethren and friends, I am joined to you, to-night in sym- 
pathy. J am joined to you in love. We are pilgrims to- 
gether. We are moving on, Of this we are conscious. 
My sight grows dimmer. Whiteness is coming on these 
locks, And you are keeping company. I observe it. 
Those that were little children when I came here, are 
now carrying their little children in their arms. The 
young men with whom I took counsel are now speaking 
with their grandchildren. 

We are all moving on together. Thank God, we have 
moved together in the dear and sweet sympathy of love. 
But let us now take one step in advanee, one step up, 
for the new year Let us look up, let us look away, be- 
yond, where Christ sitteth, and set our affections there 


Tou are 
aven is 
‘o your 
r whom 
Ly; dare 
ation to 
Jan you 
among 
as been 
ded over 
her than 
‘true and 
: and my 
vhe medi- 
with His 
ater than 
rh ages on 
. in ‘whom 
the yea 
new cove- 
a, thine! 2 
jed wor ds, 
My dear 
ht in sym- 
ilyrims to- 
c sonscious. 
¢ on these 
»bserve it. 
» here, are 
wrms. ‘The 
iV speaking 


1, we have 


hy of love. 


e ste p up, 


away, be- 
Hons there 


FHE OLD AND THE NEW. 273 


And as we have lived together, and are living, and shall 
yet live, by God's good ‘providence, let us have a com- 
mon faith, and a e¢ommon hope, and a common consecra- 
tion, until the day of departure comes (happy is he to 
whom it comes first) ), and the heart hears God saying, 
. Long enough from home, O my child, come up, come 
up,” and the angels fly to meet the em ancipated spirit. 
If you go first, 1 shall thank God for you; if you fol- 
low, I shall give gratulation to your victory, and if I 
ZO first, do ye thank God for my release, and for my vic- 
tory. And may may God grant that then, in the heavenly 
land, when these clogs and these hindrances are all laid 
aside. in a better summer, with a better teacher, with a 


holier companionship, we may hold on together in eternal 
Llessedness.— Amen, 


arate nh enw 


i salina Att AS LCA, MTR 


iy 


sl a ll A 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR 
OTHERS. 


€ Who gave himself for us, that he might releem us from all 
iniquity and purity unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of 
Wy good works,”—Tirvs ii: 14, 


HO gave Himself for us. Weare familiar with 
the expression that Jesus Christ gave His 
life for man. I would not take anything 
away from the meaning and magnitude of 

the act of dying; but I should be glad to give more 
emphasis and power to the fact that Christ gave 
His life as much while He was living as while He 
was dying, and that to give life may mean either to 
use it or to lay it down, ‘lo yield up life to disease, 
to old age, to any of the ordinary influences which 
destroy human life; to do it reluctantly; to fight 
against it, and strive for life—this has no moral 
f meaning. Death is a part of the organic condition of 


a 
} i 


creation; and dying has no moral force unless it be- 
comes voluntary. A man may accept death as a 
testimony to his faith; or, as a better alternative than be- 
traying a trust; or, in the defence of a cause, a family, 
ora country, This is heroic. It is the highest single 
action which a man can achieve, It is retrospective and 


pete atedernerene ae 


_ 


¢ 
{ 


is from all 


zealous o} 


iar with 
pave His 
anything 
iitude of 
rive more 
bist gave 
while He 
either to 
o disease, 
‘es which 
to fight 
no moral 
idition of 
less it be- 
ath as @& 
»than be- 
a family, 
ist single 
etive and 


¥ 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE’S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 275 
inclusive of all the great reasons which make life desir- 
able. When one consents to die, he does not consent 
simply to take the pain of death—for that usually is 
very little. In half the deaths there is no more pain than 
in falling asleep. It is seldom that men do not suffer in 
single days or weeks, while pursuing their avocations, as 
much or more uneasiness and pain, fourfold, than death 
inflicts. In some cases death is preceded by great sutter- 
ing; but these cases are exceptional. Commonly it is 
balm, not anguish, In/‘gestion, and its train of horrors ; 
neuralgia, and its war, «nd woof of fiery threads ; rheu- 
matism, ¢ and many other ills that are common to man, are 
a hundredfold harder to bear than dying. It may be 
said generally, that life suffers, and that death soothes 
The moral worth, then, of dying, if by no means to be 
measured by its sufieving, as if to take on so much suffer- 
ing was an act of transcendent heroism. 

It is that which one gives up, also, that in part is to 
enter into the moral estimate of a voluntary dying. For 
to die willingly, for a reason, is to offer the sum total of 
life, and all its hopes, joys, and aspirations, to that reason 
All pleasures of life, all innocent enjoyments, all aftee- 
tions, all honours and inspirations, all things which one 
would count riches in life, are voluntarily given up when 
we give, not yield life. In this view, dyi ing is really the 
offering a sacrifice of one’s liv ing—that is, of all the ele- 
ments which make life desirable ; and the moral signifi- 
cance of the act is to be measured by the value of life, in 
all its pursuits, honours, enjoyments and dignities, to the 
victim, 

But you have noticed, in the passage whence we have 
taken our text, that it is said that Christ gave, not His life, 
but Himself, He gave Himself in dying ; but He also 
gave Himself in living. Ail His life was a giving. Al- 
though comprehensively viewed, it was a single wilt, yet 
it was a continuous gift, developing in every direction 


It was a multiple force, ever varying. It was one pro 


nin ie - aitnns ie ee 
ge, Met el IES Cr eh SS Lote lll a —aceieeads 


% 


i, Da ls < At 0 


276 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


longed giving of Himself Away to others. For He lived 
not for Himself. He sought not His own. He did not 
employ His reason, nor His moral sentiments, nor His ac- 
tive forces, nor His time, nor His power, for Himself. 
He honoured His Father, and sought the welfare of men. 
And three years, or nearly three, that preceded His death, 
were in some respects a far more remarkable gift than 
was the death itself! And in the case of our divine Lord, 
He gave Himself both while living and while dying. 

It is true that there entered into the death of Christ 
other elements than those which belong to any, even the 
vreatest, man’s death; that there were in it avowed, 
though unexplained, relations to the visible world, and to 
moral influences. I believe that the death of Christ had 
some intluence that was far different from anything which 
Wwe appreciate, and other than anything that we know. 
What it is I cannot tell. It is declared simply as a fact, 
and left there. These influences men dying do not need. 
It isnot necessary that in their death for others they 
should have a relation to the universe, as Christ had. 
The salient fact which we put forward is this: that 

Christ gave Himself, living and dying, for the world. He 
used His life for others as re ally as he laid it down for 
them. He gave His life while it was in His own keep- 
ing, as really as when it was taken away from Him. And 
the gift of Christ is the gift in its totality, in all the vari- 
ations of His experience. Though on some accounts the 
tragic circumstances of His death lift it wp inte conspicu- 
ity, though by reason of man’s fears and man’s education, 
there is given to it a sombre importance that belongs to no 
single act of His life. yet I think we become elearer in 
our moral perceptions, and finer in our nature, and learn 
not only not to disesteem that part of Christ’s example, 
but also to go back and give far more emphasis to the 
other part, and to lift up the daily conversations. the 
daily patience, the daily love, the ten thousand fidedities 
which belong to so great a life, carried wholly fer its 


Ie lived 
did not 
His ac- 
Himself. 
of men. 
is death, 
rift than 
ne Lord, 
ing. 
of Christ 
even the 
avowed, 
d, and te 
hrist had 
ng g which 
e know. 
as a fact, 
not need. 
hers they 
hrist had. 
his: that 
orld. He 
down for 
wn keep- 
lim. And 
Lthe vari- 
ounts the 
conspicu- 
education, 
ongs to no 
elearer in 
and learn 
example, 
Sis to t) a 
tions, the 
| feeds lities 
lly for its 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 277 


benefit upon others, and not at all for His own mere per- 
sonal convenience or gain. We learn to give to this an 
emphasis which it lacks too often. 

So the lesson to be derived, it seems to me, from many 
of the descriptions of Christ’s gift of Himself, is a lesson 
to be pondered in regard to the use of our lives, rather 
than in regard to their termination. We give our life 
best, not when we die, but while yet we are living. 

It is true that men often give their lives in some sense 
as Christ did; but the more obvious aid the more com- 
mon and attainable imitation of the Lord Jesus Christ is 
that which seeks to imitate His life, rather than His 
death. No man can give his life for the world as Christ 
did, Though a man may give his life for the world, no 
man can stand sin! eSS ; but He did. No man is related 
to God as was the Saviour. From no man reaches out 
those threads which connect him with the spiritual and 
invisible realm as Christ was connected with it. What 
the other-side intluence was I have said we do not know; 
but that there was one we are told. And this we cannot 
have. Here is a grand official difference. There is a uni- 
versal character belonging to the influence of the death 
of Christ which does not and cannot belong to that of 
any man, Yet, in so far as moral influence is exerted by 
one’s death on his fellow-men, it is possible, though in a 
far lower sphere, and in a far less degree, that we should 
follow and imitate our Lord by giving our life for one 
another. 

Kivery patriot who is sacrificed, on account of the heroic 
fidelity of his life, to the public weal; every martyr 
whose blood is shed as a seal and witness of that holy 
faith by which he would illumine and bless the world ; 
every prisoner lingering in dungeons, and with long 
dying, suffering unseen and forgotten by the multitudes 
fur whose welfare his life is spent; every man that goes 
forth to lands of fever and malaria, and to early death, 
knowing that he carries religion, ci lization, and liberty 


Tact: Tp mee AES ~ 


I ae 


St al eee 


ma AI. in 


278 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


to the ignorant, at the price of his own life, and cheerfully 
dies in the harness there, where men, being most degraded 
and thankless, are on that very account more needful of 
this very sacrifice of some one—all these, and all others 
whose death is brought about by persistent adhesion to 
the welfare of man, follow their Lord not less really be- 
cause the sphere is lower and narrower. They follow 
their Lord in death, and through death. For, does not 
the little tive year-old child follow his father because it 
requires three of his little footsteps to measure a single 
stride of his father? He follows him in speech, though he 
prattles. He follows him though it be in weakness, and 
more slowly and wearisomely. And all who willingly 
yield life for the sake of a moral cause, or a beneticent 
influence, follow their Lord and Master just so far as these 
things are concerned. 

And so, too, in their humbler sphere, do all those follow 
Christ who cheerfully put their life in jeopardy, or offer 
it up in the fulfilment of their public duties. 

Every humble watchman, guarding the peace of the 
city, and its property, who falls down bleeding under the 
brutal strokes of thieves or burglars; every faithful 
policeman, who, to preserve the public peace, is slain in 
neighbourhood tussles or public riots, is a martyr to duty, 
and to public duty. Nor should the obscurity of their 
name lead us lightly to esteem this great gift, which they 
otter to society, of life. 

There are men of wealth in New-York, honored, 
because prosperous, who heap up riches, and hoard them, 
and live in a magnificent selfishness. They use the 
whole of society as a cluster to be squeezed into their 
cup. They are neither active in any enterprise of good, 
except for their own prosperity, nor generous to their 
fellows. They build palaces, and fill them sumptuously ; 
but the poor starve and freeze around about them, No 
struggling creature of the army of the weak ever blesses 
them, And yet their names are heralded, They walk 


rerfully 
eur ‘aded 
edful of 
| others 
esion to 
rally be- 
y follow 
does not 
ecase it 
» a& single 
hough he 
ness, ant 
willingly 
jyeneticent 
ras these 


ose follow 
y, or offer 


ce of the 
under the 
faithful 
is slain in 
r to duty, 
y of their 
Which they 


honored, 
yard them, 
, use the 
into their 
fe of good, 
s to their 
uptuously ; ; 
them. No 
ver blesses 


They walk 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS, 279 


in specious and spectacular honor. Men flatter them, and 
fawn upen them. Dying, the newspapers, like so many 
trumpets in procession, go blaring after them to that 
grave over which should be incribed the text of Serip- 
ture, “The name of the wicked shall rot.” But in his 
very ward, and right under the eves of his dwelling, 
walks an honest and faithful policeman, who guards 
him and all his neighbours. And when villainy grows 
bold and defiant, and this faithful man is attacked, and 
falls wounded, and dies, a moment’s shock, a morning 
paragraph, is ali the honor that is given to this obscure 
hero, who did all that man can do, ‘He gave his life for 
the peace of the city; and dead he is a monument of 
honor to that city more than scores and thousands that 
live. How much greater is he than the cocooned rich 
man! How much nobler is his death than the whole 
gorgeous uselessness of the selfish millionaire! 

In this class of noble martyrs who give their lives for 
others, I rank, also, all those gentle nurses who wear out 
in sick- -rooms, watching the. suffering, and undermining 
their own health, for the sake of chil lren, of brothers, of 
sisters, of companions, of parents. T hey exemplify the 
truth which is symbolized by the bird mythical which 
plucks feathers from its own breast to make the nest soft 
for its young. 

And what shall I say of all those who have followed 
armies; who have buffeted storms; who have ventured 
into the infernal edge of battle; who have toiled night 
and day in military hospitals—those faithful surgeons, 
who, while others smote to destroy, cut only to make 
alive who bore the heat and burden of campaigning, the 
perils of climate, and of battle, and finally fell willing t 
die, but not willing to relinquish their humane and noble 
devotion to the suffer ing ? 

And what shall I say of heroic chaplains who, in the 
leisure of the camp, are instructors and servants of all, 
and who, like the noble Butler of New-Jersey, in battle, 


ers ae ME APs. baleen + am 


wens ™ —s a 
a sabi aoa Re NED hI AO SERIE AE TEE! 


Toate te ete Niecy nt mate ti " 


280 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


kept up with the line of fire, drawing out the wounded 
from among the dead, until he, too, fell dead, pierced to 
the heart ¢ 

And how shall I worthily enough speak of those angel 
bands of women who gave themselves, and in scores of 
instances gave their lives, to the unwearied performance 
of the duties of humanity? They cownted not their lives 
dear unto them. They offered up their souls unto God, 
in hospitals, in fields far from home, and among strangers, 
that they might be joined to their Lord, in giving their 
lives for others. 

Among the poor and lowly, among servants, and 
humbly laborers, how many have given their lives in 
affectionate fidelity to others! In the noise of the great 
grinding world their name and acts are not heard; but 
they are all marked in heaven. Not one in all the annals 
of time, nor in all the races of men, has ever given life for 
others willingly, that God did not mark and register and 
remember. 

While, then, it is impossible, literally, to give our life 
for others, and while we may sometimes be called in the 
performance of our duty to do it, so that we shall not say 
that dying for others is antiquated; yet, in the main, if 
we are to follow our Lord, and to give our lives for 
others, it must be by the use which we make of those 
lives, 

Now, he who devotes the active hours of his life to 
those spheres of which Providence calls men, is really 
giving himself for others. Jt is not necessary that a man 
should go apart from life in order to do the work of 
piety. Piety is the right performance of a common duty, 
as well as the experience of a special moral emotion, Too 
often men think that religion, like music, is something 
that belongs to a department which is exceptional and 
quite outside of the ordinary routines of life. We leave 
religion to go to our work and duty. We forsake work 
and duty, at appropriate periods and pauses, to go back 


vounded 
ierced to 


ose angel 
scores O 

formance 
heir lives 
into God, 
strangers, 
ving their 


ants, and 
r lives in 
the great 
eard; but 
the annals 
ven life for 
ogister and 


e our life 
lied in the 
all not say 
he main, if 
r lives for 
e of those 


his life to 
h, is really 
hat a man 
e work of 
imon duty, 
tion. ‘Too 
something 
‘tional and 
We leave 
sake work 
o go back 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 281 


to religion. Buta better conception of religion is that it 
is the conduct of a man’s disposition im work by work. 
It is that which is inseparable from his identity. It is 
his nature, his carriage. It is the fibre of his feeling, and 
the sphere in which it develops itself. It is not upon 
holydays, but upon common days more than upon any 
others that it acts. For though upon special days his 
distinctively moral feelings may flame up and have more 
measure and conspicuity than upon others, they are not 
therefore his best days, 

I have noticed that the slender brook which earries the 
mill is more musical on Sunday than on any other day ; 
because the mill stands still, and the brook, having no- 
thing to do with its water, gurgles over the rocks, and 
it flounders over the dam, and makes a thousand times 
more merry noise than on any other day. But Monday 
comes, and the gates are hoisted, and the mill runs, and 
the brook is not so musical; but the mill is more so. 
The mill did nothing on Sunday; and the brook is doing 
more on Monday than it did on Sunday. It played on 
Sunday, but it works on Monday. And Christians, as it 
were, play in the spirit, and have a holy jolity, on Sun- 
day. It isa holiday for them. Nor would I undervalue 
their experience or joy. But [ say that they are not so 
busy when they sing and pray and rejoice in the sanc- 
tuary, as when by the power of some moral emotion, and 
resisting pride, and overcoming selfishness, and building 
again the kingdoms of this world with the holy stones 
of the New Jerusalem. Then when piety costs; then, 
when it means bearing, heroism, and achievement; not 
then when it seeks joy, but when it seeks battle— 
then men are nearest to God, and most like Christ. 
When a man stands upon the deck, and at the bench, 
and by the forge, and in the furrow, and in the colliery 
—then, if ever, if he has to live of true piety, is the 
time; and there, at the post of duty, is the place. 
Yor, all the humblest avocations and employments are so 
R 


SN 


F - Vy y 


G 2 


IMAGE E /ALUATION 
1ST TAK: ET (MT-3) 


16 


14 


1.25 


6” 


Ye 

A= = 
ESS 

eee) 
BES 
on ‘ 
CAS 
= CO 


os 
<s 
YY 
A+ 
ey Vy. Y oy 
ey X\ 
Oy 


; fi 282 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


arranged that, while they serve to support the actor, they 
do a hundred times as much for the community as they do 
for him that follows them. It is unfortunate that our 
habits of thought have not been more christianized, and 
that our phrase has not been converted, as well as the 
people who use it. For, we are accoustined to speak of 
trades, various manual employments, and professions, in 
their lowest relations. If we speak of the carpenter's 
business, it is either as a toil or as a support. It is a toil, 
and it 7s a support: and these in their relative positions 
are not unworthy of consideration; but that is not the 
whole, nor the half—that is the least part. What aman 
himself derives from the cunning craft that he pursues, is 
not half so important, as it is not half so much, as what 
he gives by it. 

The carpenter that builds a mansion, rearing it through 
the whole season, receives a few thousand dollars, and is 
supposed to be well paid, and is himself satisfied. And 
men seem to think that it is the whole that he has done. 
He has worked diligently during the summer, he has 
earned his thousands to support his family ; and perhaps 
a thousand or two is laid up tor the time to come. And 
what has he ‘one? Earned his money? Yes, he has 
earned his money, but he has built a mansion in which a 
family shall be sheltered through a hundred years. He 
has built a temple where the old patriarch shall offer sacri- 
i) fice and incense of devotion in the presence of coming 
Hi generations many. He has built the halls where social 
it joy shall be. Here is the room that grief shall fill with 
Hh funeral ; and here is the room that joy shall fill with wed- 
AA ding. Here is the room where children shall sport through 
HN the livelong year. Here are the threads of life, dark or 
EL light, gold and silver or black, to be wrought out and 

Hh, woven together. And here, when he is dead, and his 
children die, his work stands, and is the home of peace, 
and comfort, and piety—the very temple of God. He built 
one, and ten, and twenty, and it may be a hundred of 


» actor, they 
y as they do 
ate that our 
ianized, and 
well as the 
| to speak of 
rofessions, 
@ carpenter's S 
It is a toil, 
Live positions 
ut is not the 
What a man 
he pursues, is 
nuch, as what 


ing it through 
dollars, and} is 
atisfied. And 
t he has done. 
mmer, he has 
» and perhaps 
ocome. An 
Yes, he has 
Fon in which a 
d years. He 
iall offer sacri- 
ce of coming 
g where sae 
shall fill with 
fill with wed- 
sport throu gh 
bf life, dark or 
ught out and 
dead, and his 
home of peace, 
od. He built 
a hundred of 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS, 283 


a 


such dwellings; and he got what? A few pitiful thou- 
sands of dollars. And he gave what? he gave to the 
community benefits, opportunities, instruments, influences, 
In his skill, in his mind, or incarnated in timber or in 
metal, he gave to the community priceless gifts. And are 

we to take these pee inwardnesses of men which are 
imbedded in their labour, and to think of them only in 
the poor, pitiful light of pelf, of what they brought back 
to the pocket, and not of what through them, the man 
brought back to the community. 

Why, that old smith, rugved himself, almost as the 
storms he prepares to combat, hammers mor ning and nisht 
upon the links that form the chain which clasps the cable. 
It may be, as in the olden time, yet more ponderously, 
that he is in the stithy works on the huge shank of the 
anchor ; and when his summer’s work or winter’s toil is 
done, and it is sold for the ship, men ask him, “ What 
got you for your labour?” Nobody ever thinks of say- 
ing to him, “ You have worked a whole winter to make 
RY cif: what have you given to the community ; What 
has he given? It may not be known for a long time. On 
voyage ‘after voyage the ship goes, and there lies his gift, 
useless and unsuspected, Some day, the ship bears back 
i thousand precious souls, among them mothers whose 
flowers lie at home waiting for them to return; fathers, 
who cannot be spared from the neighhourhood ; public 
men of signal service—the very salt of the times in which 
they live; heroes and patriots many. Then it is that the 
storm beats down and seeks to whelm them all in the sea, 
and to whelm the community in mourning. Then it is 
that, when every other effort has been made in vain, the 
anchor is thrown out, And now the storm rages with in- 
creased violence, as if it were yet move angry because it 
is thwarted. But the good blacksmith’s work holds, 
Sinking far out of sight, and grappling the foundations 
of the earth, it will not let go. Aud we, for the first time, 
see the value of his gift, Kvyery link has been properly 


Se RET Retin et es Be SS 


284 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


welded ; and, though the wind howls, and the sea wages 
a fierce and desperate battle, and the strain is tremendous, 
the storm passes by, and there rides the gallant ship safe ! 
There is what he gave. He gave a chain, an anchor, to 
the community, and salvation to all on board the ship, 
and joy and peace where the tidings come of souls saved 
from the remorseless deep. And yet how many men think 
simply that he made an anchor, and got so many hundred 
dollars for it! He made an anchor and saved a hundred 
lives. 

So men that fill our houses with conveniences, with 
comforts, with various instruments by which our time is 
redeemed to higher and-nobler uses; men that make im- 
plements—-they give my brain a gift. He that makes a 
machine emancipates me. For if matter cannot be made 
to toil upon matter, then men must toil upon it. And 
just in proportion as you make slaves—the only slaves 
that are fit for this world—machine slaves—just in that 
proportion you redeem the mind to greater leisure, and 
to a larger sphere for the moral functions of manhood. 
And all men that labour thus productively and skilfully 
are real benefactors of the community. And why do not 
they know it? Why do not they feel the honour ? Why 
do not men preach it to them? Why are they not told 
that they should not look upon the mere self-side of their 
avocations? The merchant, the mechanic, the day-labourer, 
bearing endless benefactions to the community—why do 
they not regard their labours in a higher light ? Why do 
they not feel that they are contributing to the welfare ot 
their fellow-men, as well as to their own welfare, and so 
that they are following Christ? If they only did their 
life-work on purpose to follow Christ, if they only did it 
because it was following Christ, if they only joyed in 
following Him, and if the consciousness of following Him 
was their reward, then they would rise to the dignity of 
some remote i:nitation of the Master; whereas they are 
without the reward, even though they do the same thine, 
if they do it only for selfish pitiful palf, 


sea wages 
remendous, 
t ship safe! 
, anchor, to 
d the ship, 
souls saved 
y men think 
ny hundred 


1 a hundred 


ences, with 
our time is 
at make 1m- 
hat makes a 
not be made 
yon it, And 
only slaves 
—just in that 
r leisure, and 
of manhood. 
nd skilfully 
why do not 
nour? Why 
hey not told 
-side of their 
day-labourer, 
ity—why do 
ht? Why do 
he welfare ot 


lfare, and so 


nly did their 


onl did it 
fy joyed in 
lowing Him 
he dignity of 
reas they are 
e same thing, 


TILE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 


Let every man, then follow the occupation that God 
has given him, and understand that in following it he is 
rendering a service to lus fellow-men; and let ‘him fe el, 
“I am honoured in these appointed ‘channels of God's 
providence, that Iam permitted to give my life for my 
fellow-men— that is, to live it for them.” 

The accumulations of industry, of skill, and of enter- 
prise; the power which comes from them, and the power 
which comes from study, from experience, and from re- 
finement, are all of them but so much which men have 
the means of giving for their fellow-men. Too often, now, 
as men grow wiser, they despise the vulgar and the igno- 

rant. As men grow richer, they cannot consort with com- 
mon people. As men grow finer, the vulgarity and the 
coarseness of the rude is insufferable to their morbid re- 
finement. As men become better, it is said—I say worse 

—they go further and further from the example of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who brovght with Him the glory of 
that nature which He could not relinquish: “ Who,” 
though He “ thought it not robbery to be equal with God,” 
“made Himself of no ao and took upon Him the 
form of a servant, and humbled Himself, and beeame obe- 
dient unto death, even the death of the cross: wherefore 
God hath exalted Him.” 

Now, in proportion as you are. noble, in proportion as 
God has made you wise aud stronger than anybody else, 
in proportion as study and opportunity have refined you 
and cultured you—in that proportion God requires that 
you should give the benefit of your gifts and attainments 
to the whole community. You cannot follow Christ ex- 
cept you do it, Do I not see men who think they follow 
Christ, but who manifest none of the spirit of Christ ? 

Vhat is the nature of that religion which satisfies itself 
with empty compliance of the sanctuary? Do I not see 
many men who honour the Sabbath, but care nothing for 
those people for whom the Sabbath was made ? Many 
men honour the sanctuary, they really love prayer, they 


285 


a icine tap ht eee airing Re eG SP DIG om gg9Bw wae 


286 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


really glow under the hymn, they delight in taking official 
part in the services and duties of religion ; nevertheless, 
so soon as they have performed their own * duty to God, 
what becomes of their life? How many there are e that 
began life as the worm begins it, and fed voraciously un- 
til “they were full, and then silently sloughed their werm- 
skin, and spun around them a silken house ! They retired 
from life. And you shall find a great many such Chris- 
tian worms, that have had the benefit of the whole sum- 
mer, and have retired to some out of the way place, where, 
suspended, as it were, from the limbs of trees in thes» 
silk-wound cocoons the chrysalis waits for the next. 

The chrysalis is not a fool. There is a next summer 
for him. But if a man attempts to do the same thing; is 
he feeds upon all God’s bounties, and only succeeds in 
spinning out of his own bowels for himself a silken dwel- 
ling, and then wraps himself up in that, there is no next 
summer to him. He will never come to be a buttertly, 
though the chrysalis will, and will rise up in judgment 
against him. He will be damned! For that which is 
very well for a bug, is very poor for a Christian. And 
yet, how many men there are who hold themselves bound 
by arguments, and bound by doctrines, and bound by 
churches, and bound by all the various prescriptive rights 
which are innocent enough in themselves—which, if they 
do not do any good, do not do much harm—how many 
there are that spend their lives in the midst of all the 
pleasing trifles of that vast museum of curiosities which 
are labelled “religious,” and think themselves Christians ! 
Here are all the forces of the understanding ; here are all 
the populous thoughts that have been trained to go 
forth; here are all the mighty agencies and _ inspira- 
tions of the moral nature ; here is the whole wealth of the 
affections ; here is a soul that stands as a light-house on 
the dark promontory, and casts its beams far out over the 
troubled sea, to men that need guidance thereby ; and yet 
how many there are who never think of living for their 


cing official 
svertheless, 
ity to God, 
re are that 
ciously un- 
cheir werm- 
‘hey retired 
such Chris- 
whole sum- 
lace, where, 
es in thes» 
> next. 
ext summeé! 
me thing; 1 
succeeds in 
silken dwel- 
re is no next 
.a buttertly, 
in judgment 
iat which is 
istian. And 
selves bound 
d bound by 
iptive rights 
hich, if they 
\—how many 
st of all the 
osities which 
bs Christians ! 
; here are all 
rained to go 
and inspira- 
wealth of the 
ght-house on 
out over the 
eby ; and yet 
ing for their 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 287 


fellow-men! I do not know but that they will die mar- 
tyrs; for to be a martyr requires a great deal of obsti- 
nacy as well as grace. There have been a great many 
stuffy martyrs. There have been martyrs outside of the 
Christian religion, as well as inside of it. It is not very 
hard for a man to die, if he is built right. A great many 
men would rather die than give up. I tell you, it is not 
hard for a man to die for Christ, nor for his faith, nor for 
his party, nor for his side. It is ten thousand times harder 
to live eight than to die right. It is not difficult for a 
man to give his life up through the chamber of death. 
But to give your life while you hold it, yes, and to use it 
so that it is a perpetual benefaction all through—that is 
hard, and that is the special Christian duty. To live in 
such a way that, as from the stars by night and from the 
sun by daylight and guidance are issuing, so from you 
shall proceed an influence that comforts, cheers, instructs, 
and alleviates the troubles and sufferings of life—this is 
a true following of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Contrast with this idea, also, the life of moral men who 
think they are good, and good enough, because they simply 
avoid evil. A moral man, as distinguished from a Chris- 
tian man, is one who is negative. A Christian is one who 
is positive. A Christian is a fruit-bearer. A moral man 
is a vine that does not bear fruit. But then, it bears 
everything else—good leaves, a good, strong stem, a h2al- 
thy root, everything that is good and nice in it, except 
the fruit. A Christian man is one that develops graces 
into positivity. He acts out of himself and upon others. 
A moral man is one that:simply defends himself from the 
action of evil. A moral man is like an empty bottle, well 
corked, so that no defilement can get into it, so that it 
may be kept pure within. Pure? And what is the use 
of a bottle that is pure, if it is empty and corked up? A 
moral man, I repeat, is negative. He does not swear, and 
he does not steal, and he does not murder, and he does 
not get drunk, and his whole life is not. His law is, 


Hi 
l 


2388 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


“Thou shalt not.” and “Thou shalt not,” and “Thou shalt 
not.” He is not all over, and nothing more! He is not 
positive. There is no aversness to him. 

Stakes are very goou ; but they are better made of dead 
wood than of living. Moral men are stakes, put up for 
uses. There are no banches and there is no shade to 
them. We can draw lines of iemareation by them; we 
can doa great many things with them; but these are 
lower uses, they are servile uses. Moral men are geod, 
they are admirable, and are to be encouraged ; not, how- 
ever, for these lower uses which they serve, but in the 
hope that by and by, by pruning, by teaching, and by in- 
spiration, they may be so trained that they shall bear 
fruit. He that lives through his whole life, concentrating 
upon himself all the bounties of God, and gives nothing 
to his fellow-men, in not a Christian, though he may be a 
very moral man. 

Lastly, consider the wickedness of what seldom passes 
for a wicked life. I am not speaking of a life of vice and 
of crime, which is the diseased form of all wickedness— 
wickedness carried to its most morbid condition. But 
see how, all through life, men of repute, men of standing, 
men of influence, men that are praised while they live 
and are eulogized when they die, are men that are given 
to the lust of pride and vanity. They live inordinately 
for themselves. They do not actually do harm, it may be; 
but they are men who are full of ambition all for them- 
selves. They are like the oak which stands in the night 
to gather dew for itself, and then, if the wind in the 
morning shakes it, it is willing to part with the few drops 
that it really cannot hold on to; and they call themselves 
benevolent ! There are men that spread abroad gigantic 
arms, and gather the wealth of heaven—whatever God's 
bounty can give them—meaning it all for themselves ; 
and a few accidental drops of kindness here and there 
give them some claim to generosity and benevolence. 
But where are the channels into which their life flows ? 


Thou shalt 
He is not 


ide of dead 
put up for 
) shade to 
them; we 
, these are 
n are geod, 
- not, how- 
‘but in the 
and by in- 
shall bear 
neentrating 
ves nothing 
1e may be a 


ldom passes 
of vice and 
ickedness— 
Hition. But 
of standing, 
ile they live 
at are given 
inordinately 
,itmay be; 
nj] for them- 
n the night 
vind in the 
e few drops 
themselves 
pad gigantic 
r saves Cae 
themselves ; 
e and there 
benevolence. 
r life flows ? 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS. 285 
Where are the uses that these great forces, concentrating 
in them, subserve? They live for pride, for vanity—the 
meanest of all feeling when it is in excess—and for self. 
They live for everything but others. Now and then a 
stray benefaction alleviates their conscience; now and 
then a doucewr, as it were, they give to the Lord, that He 
may not bring accusation against them: but the vast 
mine which they work from day to day; the wide spread- 
ing net by which they drag the depths of the wondrous 
ocean; the vast harvest-ficld which they reap—these are 
all for self. Revengeful, jealous, full of rivalries and 
competitions, and full of injuries to other men in thought 
or in deed, or in both, they live through life, and are at 
death mourned over as being men that had some flaws, 
but that, after all, were very excellent men. 

Ah, when a man is dead, and you are sure that he is 
out of the way, you can afford to praise him. It is when 
men are living that we are not so charitable about it. I 
have not the least particle of prejudice against the thistles 
that were on iy place last year. Jt is those that are 
there now that Ido not like. The nettles that 1 remem- 
ber when I was a boy 1am very charitable toward; but 
the nettles that were in my hands last week I do not feel 
so about. When [ look at the stramonium that is swell- 
ing on the bloated ground, when I look at the thistles 
and the various noisome pestilent wéeds that spring up 
from the dunghill, and see how rank they are, filling the 
air with vapour, and how they subsist on that which be- 
longs to nutritious plants, how I abhor them ! 

There is many a man in Raymond Street jail who is 
better than many a man that goes honoured and praised 
in your midst; and God has more complacency in the 
former than in the latter. He has not much in the 
former: but He has nonce at all in the latter. 

A bloated self-indulgent man, a man who keeps with- 
in the bounds of the law only because there is safety, be- 


Seca ce me 


UES ARBOR PGT NCES SO saci 


Panera mae Seas abe 


290 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 
cause there he may more abundantly indulge his selfish- 
ness ; the obese, prospered man, that lives for his lower 
nature, and yet is counted not far froin the kingdom of 
heaven—what shall we say of such men, and of lives such 
as theirs ? 

You need not be a criminal, you need not bea very 
wicked man, you may neither riot or debauch, you may 
neither steal nor gamble; and yet you may live stained, 
leprous, spotted, and hideous before God, before all holy 
angels, and befure right-thinking men. Your life may 
be a vast activity; and yet it may be a huge vortex 
where everything tends to that centre—self. And that 
is to be wicked enough. You do not need to be any 
wickeder. And yet you may be as wicked as that, and 
still be very respectable in the eyes of men. 

My dear Christian brethren, this question comes home 
very nearly to us. What we are doing for others, is to 
measure our following the Lord Jesus Christ; and not 
what we are doing of necessity, but what we are doing 
on purpose, what we are doing consciously, what we are 
striving to do, what we put our heart and soul into. 

If there be any of you, then, that desire to follow the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and to give yourselves for others, as 
He gave Himself for our comfort, living or dying ye are 
the Lord’s—living or dying, and the one as much as the 
other. - 

Aud now my sermon is done. We are accustomed, on 
the first Sunday after my return from the summer va- 
cation, to hold a Communion—fit and beautiful service 
for our reunion; and we shall to-day sit down together 
as a Christian family to break the bread that signifies the 
broken body of our Lord, and to take the wine that sig- 
nifies His blood which was shed fur us. And can you do 
it without making a more solemn and earnest consecra- 

tion of yourselves to His life and example than you have 
made before? In that consecration will you not, par 


is selfish- 
his lower 
ngdom of 
lives such 


be a very 

, you may 
ve stained, 
re all holy 
r life may 
ige vortex 
And that 
to be any 
is that, and 


comes home 
others, 1s to 
st; and not 
e are doing 
what we are 
1 into. 

o follow the 
by others, a3 
Lying ye are 
nuch as the 


lustomed, on 
summer va- 
iful service 
wn together 
signifies the 
ne that sig- 
can you do 
pst consecra- 
an you have 
bu not, par 


THE DUTY OF USING ONE'S LIFE FOR OTHERS, 291 
poscly, from this hour, endeavour so to carry all that 
which God gave you in the royal making of your nature, 
that you shall be a light, a staff, a fortress, and a refuge, 
that you shall be a cloud Jaden with rain, a summer of 


hounty, immeasurable, and constant to the very end, to 
those that are around about you ? 


THE VALUE OF DEEP PEELINGS. 


“Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are 
forgiven, for she loved mach, but to whom li tle is foryiven, the 
same loveth litile.’—Luxe 7: 47. 


Ss Abd 
(y 
he E el rt HIS whole scene, which I have read in the 


Jos Sl opening service, is one of the most touching 
‘ and one of the most instructive in the whole 
history of our Lord; although I observe, as one 
after another comes up for review, I am in the habit 

of saying this in respect to them all. The last one 

whose flavour lingers on the lip, seems the sweetest 
i of these remarkable scenes of the life of our Saviour. 


~—~~ 


He had been preaching. Among those that heard 
Him, as usual, were a great many that were outcasts. 
They not only were esteemed to be very wicked by 
\ the religious community, but they were wicked. On 
one of these occasions a Pharisee who had listened to 
Him apparently with patronizing kindness, invited 
Him to dinner. He accepted the invitation. In the train 
of His disciples entered with Him a woman, who had been, 
and up to that time probably was,a greatsinner. She had 
been profoundly stirred by His teaching. It had reached 
the very secret of her moral sense. She was s0 absorbed, 
apparently, in herown thought and feeling, that she was 
quite unconscious of all that went on around her. 


Ass 


a 
We 


?, Many, are 
, ae } 
‘orgtvent, Ure 


nad in the 
t touching 
the whole 
rve, as one 
the habit 
e last one 
e sweetest 
r Saviour. 
hat heard 
2 outcasts. 
vicked by 
ked. On 
listened to 
ss, invited 
the train 
had been, 
She had 
d reached 
absorbed, 
t she was 
br, 


> 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 293 

It was the custom of Orientals to recline at dinner. 
They did not lie parallel with the edge of their tables, 
but on wide couches, nearly square in form. They were 
accustomed to lie with their head near to the table, and 
with their feet thrown away from it, leaning on their 
left arm, and serving themselves thus with their right. 
Consequently, to the servants, or to anyone that ap- 
proacned them, the feet of the guests lay outermost and 
were most accessible. 

This woman, whose heart had been touched by His 
searching discourse, for a time seems to have restrained 
herself; but finally, having doubtless seen how those who 
sought instruction of the Rabbis were accustomed to throw 
themselves down before them and clasp their feet, em- 
ployed the little that she knew about religion: service 
towards this great Teacher. She clasped His icet. He 
bore without remarks the familiarity. Overcoine, as 
people often are, Ly the first effort at religious service, 
she burst into uncontrollable tears. And seeing that they 
coursed down her cheek and spattered and covered His 
feet, she sought, in her helpless way, as it were to repair 
the mischief, the inconvenience, the annoyance; and she 
wiped them off with the hair of her head. 

As the desire to do grows with the doing, she took that 
which she had been accustomed to employ in her bad 
vocation to perfume herself and render herself grateful 
and attractive, and poured it out upon the feet of Him 
whom now she was beginning to look upon as a Saviour. 

To one that beheld this from without, it would certainly 
have been a remarkable scene. The host noticed it. He 
seems to have been a moral and a good man, in many re- 
spects, but observing the patience of Christ under this 
infliction of grateful love, he reasoned with himself thus: 
“ Tf this man were what He professes to be—a prophet— 
He would have insight into character. He wonld know 
who this woman was. “e would not allow her to touch 


Him, 


} 
iP 
ib 
+ 
f 
if 


1 
1s 


a ed — " . 
: 
58 “ ee 


: @ < 
eres hibeplate tk. alitemenaeneieentetld 
Ss 7 


294 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


You will observe the very striking instance here of the 
difference between natual feeling and conventional feel- 
ing. To this man, who may be supposed to have been a 
fairly good man, the violation of a conventional ecclesias- 
tical arrangement, which made it improper for a religious 
Jew to be touched by an impure person, the touching of 
Christ (that was what he found fault with) seemed ex- 
traordinary. But to see a woman broken-hearted, to see 
her pouring out her very soul, unconscious of everything 
round about her—in other words, this most wonderful 
development of nature, and grace struggling with nature 
did not seem to have attracted his attention at all. 

There are thousands of people in the world who are 
just like that. There are thousands of persons who feel 
shocked at the violation of a canon of the church, but 
who look with complacency upon the wickedness of a 
faculty. There are many persons who would not dese- 
crate, by wearing the hat, any cathedral or church, but 
who are not troubled by sin in their own souls—by 
pride, malice, envy or uncharitableness, There are mul- 
titudes of persons who think that if a man keeps the 
Sabbath day, anél is sound in his creed, and belongs to a 
respectable communion, and does nothing to thwart the 
end and object of church association, he is a Christian 
and a hopeful man, although he may be a very wordly 
and a very proud man, But if a man is full of love and 
gentleness, and forgives his enemies, and is reverent 
toward God, but does not belong to any communion, or 
to the wrong one, because he has not this external con- 
formity with ecclesiastical arrangement they do not per- 
ceive the beauty, the divinity that is in his soul. 

This woman was heart-broken in the presence of the 
Saviour, the contract of whose purity and truth threw 
such a light of revelation upon her own past life; but in 
all her feelings, so strikingly manifested, the Pharisee 
saw nothing. And that such a woman touched Christ-— 
that she touched His feet even—and that He permitted 


here of the 
rtional feel- 
have been a 
al ecclesias- 
ya religious 
touching 0 
) seemed ex- 
arted, to see 
f everything 
sb wonderful 
with nature 
at all. 
rorld who are 
sons who feel 
e church, but 
‘kedness of a 
ysuld not dese- 
r church, but 
m souls—by 
here are mul- 
an keeps the 
belongs to a 
to thwart the 
sy a Christian 
very wordly 
ll of love and 
is reverent 
ommunion, or 
external con- 
py do not per- 
soul. 
resence of the 
truth threw 
‘+ life; but in 
the Pharisee 
ched Christ-— 
He permitted 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 


it—that was an evidence to this man that Christ was not 
the man that he had taken Him to be, or that He had 
made Himself appear to be. O poor blind human nature ! 
Then came that imaginary instance by which our 
Saviour sought to reveal to the man the real truth and 
merit of this case. “I have something to say to thee.” 
“ Master, say on.” Prompt, as an innocent and consciously 
pure man would be. “Of two persons that owed a man, 
one five hundred pence, and another fifty, and neither 
having anything to pay, he frankly forgave both: which 
of these would most love the nan?” Said Simon, “I sup- 
pose the man that had been forgiven most.” “ Yes,” said 
the Master. “Which of you two, then, would naturally love 
most? You,a Pharisece: you, that profess to have had no 
debts of God to pay or to forgive; you, that pride your- 
self upon your purity, and upon your excellence; you, 
that think, therefore, that you have no need of me or my 
Father—you must needs love but little. But this poor 
creature, who knows that she is deeply indebted to divine 
mercy, and whose sins look her in the face, and blast all 
her hopes—if she is forgiven, oh! what love will her’s be! 
And this 7s her love. She has sinned much, she is con- 
sciously forgiven much, and she loves much,” This was 
the teaching. 


Let us, then, pursue this thought in some of its practi- 
cal relations to ourselves. 

1. In the beginning it must not be supposed that love 
is to be derived only from a sense of benetit conferred, 
and that the conscious benefit of forgiven sin is the true 
fountain of the highest love. For love will be in propor- 
tion to the strength of the love-principle in the subject of 
it. Nevertheless, it is that love which, in the nature of 
things, must precede all other experiences—the conscious- 
ness of God’s goodness to us in saving us. We do not 
love God merely on account of what He has done for us, 
We begin to love God by a perception of His great merey 


296 SERMONS BY REECHER, 


tous, This is the first step in the experience, but not the 
whole of it. It then goes higher, and widens and purities 
itself. 

2. Nor must we reason falsely upon the implications of 
this passage. for we might say, “If love is to be in pro- 
portion to the forgiveness of sins, then men should sin 
treely in order that they may love greatly.” 

Paul had precisely the same case presented to his mind 
by an objector. He had been urging that God’s grace was 
in proportion to a man’s sin; and the objector said, “ Must 
we, then, go on and sin that grace may abound?” “ No, 
God forbid !” said the apostie. “ That would be contrary 
to the very nature of love. It is impossible for a man 
who loves to go on sinning for the sake of loving more, 
or for the sake of winning more grace. The two ideas 
are practically incompatible with each other.” 

Nor are we to say, “ As I have not been a great sinner, 
Iam not bound to love much, Externally a man may 
have been preserved ; but there is no man that lives who 
can say, if he takes a heart-account, “I have not been a 
great sinner.’ And aside from that, every nature, every 
moral nature, not tarnished by sin—even admitting that 
one is not sinful—should have a tendency to love even 
more than if it had been tarnished. 

3. But not to speak. longer upon these possible perver- 
sions of this truth here, I proceed further to say that it is 
a truth which opens for consideration the question of the 
value of greet feelings, deep feelings—especially a pro- 
found experience of personal sinfulness incident to a 
Christian life. 

There is a powerful effect wrought upon a man’s moral 
nature by the mental experience through which he goes, 
If a man has had such a struggle with himself that he is 
profoundly impressed with the might of evil in him; if 
there has been in his experience a revelation of the de- 
structive tendencies of sin; if he has been made to feel 
thoroughly that he was utterly undone not only, but that 


+4 not the 
d purities 


cations of 
be in pro- 
should sin 


y his mind 
grace was 
uid, “ Must 
gi Mo, 
e contrary 
for a man 
ving more, 
two ideas 


reat sinner, 
1» man may 
t lives who 
not been a 
ture, every 
itting that 
love even 


ible perver- 
Ly that it is 
stion of the 
ally a pro- 
ident to a 


an’s moral 
ich he goes. 
f that he is 
in him; if 
of the de- 
made to feel 
ly, but that 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 297 


his ruin would 
1 go on to be eternal; and i 
; if h 
ee eee he was helpless, without se sia 
ak vivid! , e this experience would tend to prod i 
His sense 4 cw most powerfully, a sense of Gods ome 
alah ae ae is to be measured by this apenl anos 
“ as a low conception of sin wi ; 
very ju eotes dene of grace. God's reaide: cake We ¢ 
foeinen ion to your conscious peril, How mucl ty 5 ve 
a - you will be determined by how muck ghee 
abet) ah been in debt. If you seem to ns 1 te 
oe ety ba good life, what is there re Hina - 
to have been ad ne @ If your heart seems to a 
bad heart sah > atte a ae pet eeenees ihis 
leart, See o be distigured by si 7} 
parte ed has spared your life, forgiven es eh Hy 
eget aN grace and to holiness, then the debt ee 
: you owe. And gratitude ma er 
to fo proportion to the sense of ee 
A on it make a great difference whether 
while a.shallow: fooling of Onell: the matter of snfulnes 
ae g of one’s own sinf 
ae a shallow Christian shavanter pa ef Aer - 
oe ian a eS and a profound sense of ome a 
i aa pe to produce a profound sense of oltieealon 
eae! ye on the other hand, the popular Smiemtencen 
ae i ihe hipubene.§ ri? a practical matter nifaien 
at eminent ex eri 
° profound convictions of sin, ad vied ae bet out 
5 le dn of sin, and stopped there. Men be Ae point 
; altel ' sha onwodt influences, under the thdireot th 
e preaching of the Gospel, t rerhotia: 
vee aed ae oe choughifaly then, there te 1 
urpose In them to enter upon a bett eli 
ey bea to correct some of hese sins, An pei Me 
em. And at last, per 
themselves in communicati at last, perhaps, they put 
; munication with Christian danahiit bt 


en 


298 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


with Christian brethren. But they go no further, they 
say to you, “I have no sense of sin as others have. I 
cannot be Christ’s unless I am convicted. But I am pray- 
ing that God will show my sins to me. I am praying 
that God will convict me deeply and profoundly.” 

So, round about this point of conviction men are lying, 
just as in the instance recorded in the gospels, men were 
iving sick around the pool of Bethesda, waiting for an 
angel to come down and stir the waters that they might 
goin. I have known men to wait for weeks and months 
for a more profound sense of their sinfulness. The mis- 
take consists in waiting. It may be that you save not 
lenovgh conviction of sin; you have enough to begin a 
fife of reformation with. It may be that the amount oi 
teeling and conviction is not yet grown to anything like 
the degree that it should, or that it will; but the ques- 
tien is not this: “Should a man have all his conviction 
instantly after conversion ?” The question is simply this: 
“What in the beginning is conviction of sin good for but 
to break a man away from his sins?” You have enough 
for that. Begin with that. What is it good for but to 
press a man from sin toward a Christian life? Begin a 
Christian life. Then what will happen? In proportion 
as aman goes toward that which is right, his conscience 
becomes firm, his moral sense becomes stronger, and con- 
viction of sin, like every other Christian experience, will 
develope and grow. And there are thousands of men 
who begin a Christian life with a faint and feeble sense 
of sinfulness, but who, after years of Christian life, gradu- 
ally come to that; so that the sum total of their experi- 
ence amounted to a profound conviction of personal un- 
worth and sinfulness, The question is, whether a man 
shall stop for conviction of sin as a capital, and the whole 
of it at once, before he takes the first step in a Christian 
life; or whether having feeling enough to show him what 
is wrong, he shall begin to break away from it, ani 
whether, having enough feeling to show him the right 


rther, they 
‘s have. 

Iam pray- 
am praying 
lly. »”? 

n are lying, 

, men were 
iting for an 

‘they might 
and months 
;, The mis- 
ou save not 
h to begin a 
e amount 0i 
nything like 
ut the ques- 
is conviction 
; simply this: 
good for but 
have enough 
od for but to 
fe? Begin a 
n proportion 
1is Conscience 
ger, and con- 
perience, will 
ands of men 
feeble sense 
bn life, gradu- 
their expel! 

ersonal un- 
hether a man 
nd the whole 
n a Christian 
how him what 


from it, ani 
im che right, 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS. 299 


he shall begin to seek it, and then, by prayer, by fidelity, 
with the blessing of God upon iustruction, press forward, 
receiving more “and more. day by day, of tenderness of 
conscience, and of sensibility in the interpreting moral 
sense, by which he shall see what he is and what his life 
has been. 

Let the sense of sin grow as you grow. <A profound 
experience of unworth will open more and more upon 
you, as you go on in the divine life. The magnitude of 
the debt that has been forgiven you, will constitute a 
growing practical Christian experience. It is a bad sign 
to see men living professedly in the Christian church 
who have less and less sensibility to sin. It is the ex- 
pectation—or should Lbe—of every one that enters upon a 
Christian life, that his sense of sin will be as the sense of 
sound is in a musical education, finer and finer the more 
you cultivate the ear and the more you cultivate the 
voice. 

If there are those, then, who have been thinking of a 
Christian life, and meaning, as soon as they should feel 
that they bad cleansed themselves by profound conviction 
of sin, to enter upon it, let me say, You have mistaken 
the whole function of conviction. You have not mis- 
taken the fact that a man should have a profound con- 
viction of sin, but you have mistaken the time and place 
for it. 

Many persons think they are not Christians because 
they cannot say that they have had any overmastering 
experience of this kind. Have you ever had such a con- 
viction of sin as led you to be discontented with your 
daily life? Have you ever experienced so much dissatis- 
faction with yourself that you felt that your life must be 
reformed? Have you ever had such a sense of sin that 
you felt that God must help you, and that it was a case 
which was beyond mere human power? Have you ever 
had such a sense of sin that you felt, “If I might, I would 
begin to-day to live a different life?” Have you ever 


Sem ee eg Ae tb ae Sol ony 


300 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


had such a sense of sin that you made it a part of your 
daily business to correct the faults and to resist the temp- 
tations to which you were subject? Have you ever had 
such a sense of sin that it seemed hateful to you to do 
wrong, even when you were doing it—more hateful then 
than at any other time? Have you ever had such a 
sense of the repellency of sin that you earnestly longed to 
live a pure, noble, Christian, devout, devoted life? Have 
you ever had those impulses? Why have you not obeyed 
them then? You are like a child that wants to read a 
book, but will not learn his letters because he does not 
want to touch a book till he can go off all at once You 
must learn your letters before you can read. Many men 
who want to be Christians would be glad if there was a 
process by which they could be taken and cleansed, as a 
tilthy garment is cleansed. Ail white it was; all soiled 
and stained it is. It is sent to the dyer, and he puts it in 
a vat; and there it is swung round, and washed, and 
cleansed; and when it comes out it shall be white as ful- 
ler’s soap can make it. And many people would like to 
have God’s work performed in the same way. They 
would be glad to have all their evil habits, all their 
passions and appetites, all their flagrant faults corrected 
by God’s lightning hand. They would like to be seized 
and plunged into the bath of conviction, as it were, and 
swung round and cleansed, so as to be able to say, when 
they come out, “I was a sinner; but now I am washed, 
and am clean and white as snow.” 

‘There is no such experience as that. There never will 
be such an experience. A man’s heart is very much like 
a man’s tree. It grew up from some chance seed thrown 
out near the house. It is beginning to bear; and when 
it bears, there is no man or beast that can eat the sour 
stuff that grows on it. The farmer says, “It is good 
stock; it is tough; it grows rampantly; so I will graft 
it.” He cuts off a few branches, and grafts them this 
year, The other branches continue to grow; but he kept 


t of your 
she temp- 
ever had 
you to do 
eful then 
d such a 
longed to 
»? Have 
ot obeyed 
to read a 
does not 
mce You 
Many men 
here was & 
ansed, as a 
all soiled 
> puts it in 
ashed, and 
nite as ful- 
uld like to 
ray. They 
_ all their 
5 corrected 
b be seized 
were, and 
say, when 
m washed, 


never will 
much like 
ed thrown 
and when 
t the sour 
It is good 
will graft 
them this 
but he kept 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 301 


down the water-shoots that are round about the grafts 
If they were neglected for one summer, the new shoots 
would overgrow the grafts, and the grafts would come to 
nothing; but he keeps the shoots down, and the grafts 
grow, and they make a good growth the first year. The 
next year he cuts off w few more; and the third year he 
cuts off the rest. Then the whole tree is grafted. But 
the old stock is in the tree; and if there come out water- 
shoots below the grafts, and they were allowed to grow, 
they will bear the old apple, and not the new one. 
Therefore everything must be watched, and all the shoots 
that do not belong to the graft must be rubbed off. Then 
the natural power of the tree shall run into these new 
grafts, and at last, after two, three, four or five years, th 

‘tree will have made itself a new head. 

Did you ever see a man that could take a knife and cut 
off a branch of an old tree, and slap in a scion, and have 
it instantly shoot out, bearing new and precious apples ? 
And did you ever see a man that, when he had been 
going wrong, could, with the excision of the Holy Ghost, 
cut off a habit so that it should never bleed, and put in a 
graft, and, without requiring any time for growth, de- 
velope new fruit instantaneously and miraculously? That 
is not according to your observation; nor is it according 
to mine. That is not the way that God's Spirit works, 
We see that it is notso. Men begin at the seminal point, 
and devolope from that, and devolope just in proportion 
to the means of grace which they have, and the enterprise 
which they address to their new life. 

I have, on my little farm, a tree that bore poor apples, 
but that has now been grafted with a choice sweet 
variety. A friend put in the grafts for me, and I forgot 
all about them. It was done last year; and when I went 
back this year and saw a rousing top to the tree, and re- 
collected that it had been grafted, I went to examine it, 
and found that almost all the grafts had “taken,” but 
that the old tree had been there too, and overgrown them, 


ORES Pu TE 


SITET TE EC AE REE SOE ASE AN ENED 


302 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


and that they were lying hid in the branc! es, so that I 
would have defied any man to see them at a distance of 
ten feet off. And I said, “O my professor of religion | 
you are just like hundreds that I have in my church. 
They all have grafts in them; but the natural tree has 
overgrown the grafts, so that you cannot find them.” 

So it is. The experience of every trait, of every 
element of Christian life, is an experience that begins 
small and waxes larger, and by and by comes like a 
branch of a tree in full top. And that which is true r 
every other feeling is true of this one—namely, conviction 
of sin. 

If, then, you have enough feeling to condemn you, you 

have enough for yeast. lf you have enough feeling to 
break off one sin, then you have enough sin to raise a 
sail; and the less wind there is, the more sail nye the 
ship-master raise. If, therefore, you have enough feeling 
to show you which is the right and which is the wrong 
course, do not wait till it becomes stronger, Feelings do 
not become stro onger by waiting, but by using. 

I say to every man who is within the heari ing of my 
voice, if there are any of you who have made up your 
inind that you will be Christians when God shall enlight- 
en your consciences, and shall enabie you to judge” be- 
tween right and wrong, and who are waiting for such en- 
lightenment, you are waiting needlessly. For there is not 
aman in this congregation who does not, in regard to the 
great essentials of life, knowing what is right and what 
is wrong. In the large departments of life you are just 
as sure of what is right and what is wrong as you ever 
will be. Heaped up your conclusions have been. You 
have stores of conclusions on this subject. The trouble 
is, that you want motive power. And there are hundreds 
of men who, if they would forsake the evil that they 
know, and perform the right that they know, would fiud 
the first result to be the feeling that their convictions, 
their moral sense, had beecume more powerlul and sen- 
sitive, 


s, so that I 
distance of 
£ religion | 
ay church. 
ul tree has 
them.” 

of every 
hat begins 
mes like 
.is true of 
, conviction 


In you, you 
1 feeling to 

to raise a 
il does the 
ugh feeling 

the wrong 
Feelings do 


‘ing of my 
le up your 
all enlight- 
») judge be- 
or such en- 
here is not 
gard to the 
and what 
pu are just 
Ss you ever 
een. You 
he trouble 
e hundreds 
that they 
would fiud 
convictions, 
1 and sen- 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 303 


4, Very wicked men ought to become very eminent 
and active Christians. I do not mean by this that men 
who have been brought up religiously, in the “ nurture 
and admonition of the Lord,” ought not to become emi- 
nent Christians. They ought; though for other reasons. 
But there are especial reasons, why men who have lived 
«very wicked course of life should become eminently 
Christian men. Some of these reasons I will develope. 

Usually, men who have been very wicked, are men 
who have very strong natures. Men who have been dis- 
sipated, are men who have very strong passions and 
appetites, Men who have been cruel, are usually men 
who have very strong governing faculties, who could not 
bear to be thwarted and who erushed all opposition, Men 
who have been very stingy, and very grasping, are usu- 
ally men who have very strong commercial instincts, 
Strength is characteristic, usually, of wickedness. There 
is, however, a form of wickedness called “meanness,” 
which does not require strength. That is the peculiar 
wickedness of weakness. It is the slave’s way,it is the 
coward’s way, it is the sneak’s way, of being wicked. It 
indicates, not a prolific nature, but a mousing nature. 
It works down toward the inferior animals. I have 
great hope of a wicved man; slender hope of a mean one. 
A. wicked man may be converted, and become a pre- 
eminent saint. A mean man ought to be converted six 
or seven times, one right after the other, to give him a 
fair start, and put him on an equality with a bold wicked 
man ! 

Usually, a wicked man is a man of power and audacity, 
if he is very wicked; but where there is great power to 
do wrong, there is a eveat power to react “from wr ong ; 
and if a ian has been going away from God with vigour, 
that same vigour should supply him with the elements 
by which to Yeturn, Ifa man has been holding his own 
way with amplitude of being, with stress of faculty, and 
with fruitfulness of endeavour, even the ordinary concep- 


304 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


tion of society would say to him, “If you are going over 
to the other side, you ought to labour as energetically as 
you did on this.” It is a pitiful sight to see a man vali- 
ant for Satan, and very softly spoken for God. It is 
pitiful to see a man fruitful, energetic, from day to day, 
and constantly diversifying his experience in wickedness, 
but sterile, and close, and formal, and proper when he 
becomes a Christian. That man has not entered into the 
fundamental conceptions of religion, who, while he is a 
bad man, is at the same time generous and free, but who, 
when he is converted, is spoiled, so that people say of 
him, “I would not give a farthing for his society now. 
I used to enjoy being with him, and liked to hear him 
talk, but. since he became a Christian, I do not care 
haif so much about it.” I have seen a great many men 
who were spoiled by going into the church; but I never 
saw a man who was spoiled by coming into the spirit of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. For Christ is simply an inocula- 
tion of the Divine Spirit in the soul, and all men should 
make it bear fruit. It should spring up in men, and 
under its influence they should work vigorously, and 
work in right directions. 

When, therefore, I see a man that has been a bold, 
wicked man become a Christian, I watch him with solici- 
tude, “Is he going now to be as large in the right as he 
was in the wrong? There is all that power, what is he 
going to do with it? Suppress it, hold it in check ?” 
Ah; your passions are never doing their work unless 
they are like locomotives behind a train. Your moral 
sentiments want energizing, and the function is to go 
behind conscience and love, and make them powerful and 
fruitful. And when a man has been a wicked man, and 
you convert him, you expect him to be as good as he was 

ad; and the expectation is a reasonable one. 

Bad men also are usually acquainted with human life. 
They know the dispositions of their fellow-men; and 
whatever knowledge there is of bad men they have. And 


ing over 
‘ically as 
nan vali- 
dd. It is 
y to day, 
ckedness, 
when he 
into the 
le he is @ 
but who, 
ole say of 
fet now. 
hear him 
not care 
nany men 
it I never 
e spirit of 
n inocula- 
en should 
men, and 


usly, and 


n a bold, 
ith solici- 
ight as he 
that is he 
check ?” 
rk unless 
our moral 
is to go 
erful and 
man, and 
as he was 


uman life. 
nen 5 and 
ve, And 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS. 305 


such men are bound to consecrate their knowledge, and 
to bring it into the knowledge of the Lord Jesus “hrist, 
who has forgiven them, and renewed their life, if they 
are born again. No man ought to be so glad to pluck 
men out of the burning as those men who have been 
themselves brands in the burning and have been rescued. 
1f a man has been rescued from drunkenness, he ought to 
take a special interest in those who are in that burning 
realm. Ifa man has been a gambler, and is converted 
from his wicked way, that ought to be a sphere in which 
he feels peculiarly called to labour. Ifa man has been a 
dissipated man, he more than all others, ought to feel 
that he is an apostle to the Gentiles in that regard. Ifa 
man has from his youth gone step by step down toward 
wickedness, when he is converted he ought not to be 
ashamed of his past life in such a way that he will not 
use it for the good of others. I have known persons, 
who having gone through much wickedness, did not like 
to have it thrown up to them. There is one side on 
which it is an amiable experience, and there is another 
side on which it is not. If you look back upon your 
own past course, you see that there are tens of thousands 
who are going in the same way; and God calls you, by 
that experience, sanctified, and brought to the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to go after them. You are an apostle ordained of 
God to those who are in the same peril that once you 
were in and that came near wrecking your soul. There 
are fleets that are running toward w reck ; ; and who shall 
save them but you? 

I have known men who thought the object of conver- 
sion was to clean them, as a garment is cleaned, and that 
when they were converted they were to be hung up in 
the Lord’s wardrobe, the door of which was to be shut, 
s0 that no dust could get at them. A coat that is not 
used the moths eat; and a Christian that is hung up so 
that he shall not be tempted—the moths eat him; and 
they have pvor food at that! 


306 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


When a man is called out of a worldly and wicked life 
into the service of the Lord Jesus Christ, he is not to for- 
swear his old company, he is not to forsake his acquain- 
tance; he is not to say, “ That time of my life I cannot 
bear to look upon.” God calls you to be a workman in 
the respects in which you are best educated, and in which 
you have the most vigour. 

There is also a sense of divine goodness that ought to 
go with eases of conversions of bad men, and that ought to 
be specially affecting and influential. When a man looks 
with an enlightened consvience and a glorified under- 
standing along his past life, if he has been a very wicked 
man, how wonderful to him must seem the divine good- 
ness! Because when men are wicked, heady, obstinate 
and under the full impetus of sin, they do not consider. 
That is one of the peculiar traits of wickedness. “ My 
people doth not consider.” They do not weigh their 
moral conduct. Ifaman has been snatched as a brand 
from the burning, how appropriate, how philosophically 
wise it is that man should go back and sce through what 
perils he has passed, and who shielded his he sad what 
imminent dangers there were, and who rescued him from 
them, who lifted his feet from the snare ; what precipices 
there were ; down which if he had fallen he would have 
been dashed to pieces, and who plucked him away from 
those precipices. Are there not men who in many memo- 
rably notable instances, have been saved from shipwreck, 
diserace, and ruin?. If you had been found out, if you 
had been exposed, you would have been destroyed years 
ago, and the grave would have closed over you. How 
many men are there who owe their life to God’s kind pro- 
vidence, their respectability to God’s sparing mercy ; and 
at last, when they are converted, oh ! what sparing mercy, 
oh! what saving grace, would they see themselves to Le 
indebted for, if they would be true to their own actual 
life-experience ! Shall not a man, all of whose life in the 
past rises up before him, so that on one side he sees 


ee a 
- “ See eee 


Se oa 


Boney 
ae 


Ft: 


— 


icked life 
ot to for- 
acquain- 
I cannot 
rkman in 
in which 


, ought to 
t ought to 
nan looks 
ol under- 
ry wicked 
vine good- 
“obstinate 
, consider. 
ess. “ My 
eigh their 
as a brand 
sophically 
ough what 
sad; what 
| him from 
precipices 
rould have 
nway from 
ny memo- 
shipw reck, 
but, if you 
by 60 years 
OU. How 
kind pro- 
Icy } and 
ng merey, 
lves to be 
n actual 
ife in the 
e he sees 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS. 807 


monuments of wickedness, and on the other side monu- 
ments that testify of the amazing grace, goodness, and 
kindness of God—shall not such a man say, “ In propor- 
tion as [have been a sinner and have been forgiven, must 
I now love: much I have been forgiven; much I love.” 
The reason why many who have been mighty in wicked- 
ness fall back after their reformation, is that, having been 
impetuous in life, and thus having succeeded in wicked- 
ness, they attempt a mild gradualism in the life upon 
which ies enter. There is ‘nothing that a man needs to 
break off so absolutely from as that in which he has been 
thoroughly worldly and thorougly wicked. There is no 
place ina man’s whole life where he needs to be so abrupt, 
so peremptory, as ‘2 breaking off from wickedness ; and 
there is no place w..ere impetus should be such a means 
of grace as in attempting to live a right life. If there is 
anybody that may be mild and quiet and gentle, it is the 
person who has not been betrayed into great wickedness, 
If there are those here who are conscious that they are 
very wicked before God, no mild course will do for you, 
I see a great many persons who try to serve God softly, 
The devil pute excuses into their mouths like these: “I 
ought not to meddle with sacred things. I ought not to 
put on airs in religion, or give people reason to suppose 
that Ido” And under these cuises they do but little, 
and very soon wither and go ‘back to their old state. 
Now, no matter how wicked you have been, make haste 
to redeem the hours that God gives you when you 
are converted, to serve him with energy and faithfulness. 
Oh! how unmanly and dishonourable it is that a great 
sinner should accept grace, and then be a dwarf in God's 
work, when he has been a giant in the work of sin! How 
peculiarly mean it is, how ungrateful it is, that a man 
should have served the world with vigour, and great suc- 
cess, and shown himsclf to be a master-workman in wick- 
edness, but that, when he becomes a Christian, he should 
begin to plead caution, and over-sensitiveness of con- 


308 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


science, and every other excuse by which he may be 
dwarfed, and become unfruitful. 

If, therefore, within the hearing of my voice, there are 
those who are thinking about a Christian life, I open the 
door of the church to you—but on this condition ; come 
m with all your might! If you have been a swearing 
man, your lips must not be dumb now in the praise of 
that God whom you have been blaspheming all your life. 
Have you, in all the ports of the world, known all iniquity ? 
Then wherever you go now, you are, to be sure, to “ eschew 
evil;” but are you not going to be a witness for good ? 
Ten thousand men have known you to be a wicked man! 
and is there to be no signal by which they shall know 
that you have abandoned sin and left the dominion of 
Satan? It is bad enough for a man to hang outa piratical 
flag; but when he has hear tily repented, ‘and come back 
to “allegiance, and is engaged in lawful commerce, shall 
he be ashamed to hoist the flag of his own country and 
carry it ? and are you ashamed of the colours of Him who 
is your salvation? Are you ashamed to speak for Christ 
—to wrestle with men, and plead with them, in his behalf? 
Ought you not, in all places, and in all company, freely, 
boldly, and manfully to say, “ Christ is my Master. Once 
the devil was, and all men know it: now Christ is, and I 
mean that all men shall know it, by the grace of God.” 
There are a great many men who have been brought out 
of unbelief ; ‘there are many who have been brought out 
of atheism and scepticism ; but nobody would know it 
from anything that they say. They shut it up as a se- 
cret in their bosoms. Ah! that is not fair. 

If you were sick, and your case had been given over by 
all the physicians, anda stranger should come to your town, 
and should examine into your difficulty, and should say 
“It is a strugele with death itself, but [ am in possession 
of knowledge “by which I think I can heal you;” and he 
should never leave you day nor night, but should cling to 
you through weeks and weeks, and at last raise you to 


may be 


there are 
open the 
mm; come 
swearing 
praise of 
your life. 
iniquity ? 
“eschew 
for good % 
ked man ! 
yall know 
Minion O 
a piratical 
»ome back 
erce, shall 
untry and 
‘Him who 
for Christ 
is behalf? 
ny, freely, 
ter. Once 
t is, and I 
" of God.” 
ought out 
fought out 
1 know it 
p as a se- 


n over by 
our town, 
hould say 
yossession 
i and he 
d cling to 
ise you to 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS. 309 


health, would it not be contemptibly mean if you should 
be ashamed to acknowledge him to be your physician, 
and testify to what he had done for you? If I was that 
physician, would I not have a right to have my name and 
my skill made known by you ? 

Everywhere there are thousands of men who seem 
ashamed of nothing so much as to mention that name 
that is their hope; that name that hovered over them, 
though they did not know it, in all the days of their wick- 
edness; that name in which they secretly trust, but 
which they did not avow; that name which is to save 
them in death ; that name before which all eternity shall 
thunder praises; and that name which, above all others, 
they should speak. 

I know that I appeal to the sense of manliness in every- 
one of your bosoms. There is not a man here who does 
not say, “Ifa man has been a sinner, and has become a 
Christian, he ought to let it be known.” Then what is 
the reason you are hiding it? There are some here among 
you to-day who have sometimes thought that they were 
Christians ; and yet they will not come into the church, 
No; they are going to have religion like a dark-lantern, 
and carry it in their pocket, where nobody but themselves 
can get any good from it. May God put out your dark- 
lantern, for you! When a man becomes a Christian, he is 
a light, not for his own feu alone, but to make the path 

plain, so that those who are on the road may see the right 
way, and follow after. Away with your hopes that are 
locked up in the cuphoard of your soul! Away with that 
extraordinary delicacy that leads you to have silent 
thoughts and secret purposes which you do not disclose, 
because you do not want to make a profession till you 
know whether you are going to hold out! Away with 
that super-refinement by which a man stys, “ When I have 
lived thirty or forty years, J shall have established my 
character for godliness by my life. I want men to see that 
I am a Christian, and not to hear me say that I am one }” 


4 
i 
+ | 
| 
ii 


310 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


Why do you not do both—let them see that ycu area 
Christian, and hear you say it? You are not afraid of 
confessing anything else, as you are afraid of confe-sing 
that you are a Christian. You are not afraid to have 
men know that you are prosperous. If you have been 
sick, and you are better, you are not afraid to say, “I am 
better.” 

A man, from one cause and another, has become dis- 
eased and is run down, and everybody has noticed it, and 
has pitied hin; end at last, having tried a thousand 
things in vain, he says, “I am going to drink Missisquoi 
water; and he goes to the springs, and spends the whole 
summer, and drinks the water, and his health improves, 
and the colour returns to his cheek, and by the autumn 
he is quite strong. And suppose on his way home, he 
should say, “ When my friends meet me, and say, ‘ How 
are you?’ I am going to say, ‘ Not very well? I am not 
going to tell anybody that I am getting well. Iam going 
to let them sce that I am getting well.” Would that be 
natural? Under such circumstances, when your friends 
met you and said, “ Why, old fellow! I am glad to see 
you looking so rosy,” would you not say, “I am better. 
I have not been so strong in many a day. Thank God, I 
am going to get well. I begin to feel like myself again ?” 
That is what you would say about your bodily health. 

And where God has done everything for your soul; 
when you have drunk, not the water of medicinal springs, 
but the “water of life,” and you are being healed all 
through, are you not the very man that ought to speak 
out and say, “Gow is airing me. I feel better. I am 
not well yet, but I am going to get well!” This is the 
profession which a man makes when he joins the church 
—“T am better, not I am good, but I am better, and I 
am going to get well.” 

Some of you ask me, “ Do you think that a man who 
has been wicked ought to rush right into the administra- 
tion of holy things? Is wickedness so harmless that 


u are a 
ifraid of 
nfe-sing 
to have 
Lve been 
‘ “ I am 


ome dis- 
sd it, and 
thousand 
Lissisquol 
he whole 
improves, 
e autumn 
home, he 
ay, ‘ How 
LT am not 
Tam going 
ld that be 
ur friends 
rlad to see 
nin better. 
nk God, I 
f again?” 
health. 
‘our soul , 
al springs, 
healed all 
t to speak 
er. Lam 
his is the 
he church 
tter, and | 


man who 
lministra- 
nless that 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, sl] 


when a man has wallowed in it for years, and then come 
out of it, he is as fit to be a preacher, a teacher, and what 
not as if he bad been religious from his childhood up ?” 
Oh! no. I do not say that because a man has entered 
upon a Christian life, he is ready to attempt everything 
in the administration of a Christian life. A man may 
not himself be fit for a physician because he has been 
cured; but he may point men to the physician that cured 
him. It does not follow because a man has been relieved 
from disease, that he is to be a general medical practi- 
tioner. It does not follow, because a man is converted, 
that he is to be a minister, or that he ought to be sent 
out as a public teacher, It is the nature of vice or crime 
that it takes away moral stamina; that it destroys the 
fibre of a man’s better parts; and wicked men when con- 
verted, are not, except in extraordinary cases, qualified to 
be guides in matters of conscience to other people, be- 
cause their own consciences are blunted. 

But that does not touch the question that there are yet 
left other spheres where you can do very great good, I 
can, as a reformed drunkard, go down and plead with 
drunkards, although I may not be a proper teacher for 
temperate men that never were intemperate. I, as a re- 
formed thief, may plead with men who are tempted with 
dishonesties, although L may not be a proper moral teacher 
in college, or seminary, or family, in respect to all verities, 
It does not follow that you are to become a teacher of 
everything, because God has rescued your soul; but you 
may become a witness of that which he has done for you, 
anda worker with him in the rescue of those that are 
imperilled as you were. 

5, Men who have sinned, not by their passions, but by 
their higher faculties, if they would be true Christians, 
must have just the same spiritual momentum—though 
for different reasons—as those who have sinned by their 
lower faculties, 


312 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


There are many men who have been dreamers in life. 
It is as if a man having a farm should let it grow up to 
thorns and thistles and weeds. There are many men 
who have been spiritually self-indulgent all their lives. 
They had no great impulse to abnormal conduct; they 
had no inordinate passions, they were surrounded by in- 
stitutions, household and social customs which held them 
up; and they lived simply to make themselves happy. 
There are many who have lived fastidious lives, Instead 
of conscience they have had taste. They have valued 
things in proportion as they conformed to the law of 
beauty, and not in proportion as they conformed to the 
law of purity, or love of goodness. Many have had a 
cautious and superstitious conscience, and they have lived 
a life that was barren—not fruitful, not useful. Thou- 
sands of men are like a wax-candle in a solitary room, 
which some one has kindled and placed there. It spends 
its whole life in burning itself out, and does good to none. 
Many a man commences and burns the wick of life, using 
it up and throwing his light out upon nobody. He isa 
light to himself—that is all. 

Now, I say that when such men who have been tempted, 
and have given way to outrageous transgressions, to overt 
sins, are converted, they ought to enter upon the Christ- 
ian life with a spiritual momentum in proportion to the 
goodness of God in delivering them from these uncon- 
sidered and imminently dangerous tendencies to sin 

Although the sins of our passions are more obvious, 
and in some sense more disorganizing than the sins of 
our higher faculties, yet the sins of the higher faculties 
are more dangerous, because on are not suspected—be- 
cause they do their work secretly and silently, without 
being watched or medicated. Whichever place a man 
starts from, let him begin the Christian life with this con- 
ception: that it is a lite of higher activity—not of quies- 
cence; that it is a life of rebound from wickedness, 
within and without, that it is a life which is to grow 


; in life. 
w up to 
ny men 
oir lives. 
ot; they 
.d by in- 
eld them 
s happy. 
Instead 
re valued 
e law of 
ed to the 
ve had a 
iave lived 
1. Thou- 
ary room, 
It spends 
d to none. 
life, using 
He isa 


tempted, 
s, to overt 
he Christ- 
ion to the 
bse uncon- 
o sin 

e obvious, 
he sins of 
faculties 
cted—be- 
y, without 
e a man 
this con- 
of quies- 
ckedness, 
to grow 


— 


THE VALUE OF DEEP FEELINGS, 3138 
more fruitful by the breaking in of divine summer upon 
the human soul. 

6. Let every man who is going to begin a Christian 
life pursue the same course that she pursued whose name 
has been made memorable, and whose soul this day 
chants before her Beloved in heaven—or she is one of those 
of whom Christ says: “The publicans and the harlots 
go into the kingdom of God before you,” Pharisees. Let 
every. man whose ear has been reached by the truth, and 
whose conscie.. and heart have been touched by the 
Spirit of God, reform as she reformed. How was that ? 
Did she—this child of a guilty life—after hearing the 
Master, go away to the silence of her own chamber, and 
say, “I will return to virtue?” No. Without asking 
permission, with the intrusiveness of a heart bent on 
purity, she mingled herself at once with the train of 
Christ’s disciples. and all unasked and unwanted too, she 
pressed through the portals of the proud man’s dwelling 
as Christ, her Lord sat at meat; and, while, filled with a 
sense of her own deep need, stood waiting, until at last, 
surcharged, she broke forth in an anguish of tears. When 
she came to Christ first, she came to the right one; and 
going to Him, it was not to Him, nor to His heart, but 
to His feet, Come ye to Christ. Come to the feet of 
Christ. 

And, O friend! do as she did; for when she came she 
took the precious ointment, by which she made herself 
beautiful for sin—the instrument of her transgression— 
and consecrated it to holy uses, pouring it upon the feet 
of the Beloved, worshipping Him, and weeping as she 
worshipped, Bring whatever you have used before in 
the service of sin, and at the feet of the Beloved bow 
down yourselves, with holy desires, and consecrate your 

owers, within and without, to the service oi) Him, who 
foved you and redeemed you that he might present you 
spotless before the throne of His Father, and your Father. 

Come to Jesus, 

T 


eee 


toe)9,9, 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 


“© And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, 
for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so against the brethren, 
and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.” 

1 Cor. viii, ; 11, 12. 


ring in every age, and which, from the very 


nature of human society and of the human 
. mind, must continually recur. Mex in the 
beginning are educated largely by rules or by sym- 
bols; and this kind of instruction, though necessary 
from the nature of man, always involves more or 


less of limitation and of error, And as men rise in 
the scale, there will always be those who will shoot 
faster forward, and discern principles instead of 
rules, and will, therefore, be in a condition to drop a 
thousand instruments that are concerned in right 
living, while they hold on to the substantial spirit of 
right living. But while they are doing this, they are 
obliged to do it in tie presence and under the inter- 
retation of those that are lower than they are. A man 
all his life long has a superstitious notion regarding cer- 
tain observances which, when he comes to be twenty-five 
vr thirty years of age, he sees that he may dispense with ; 
that they were mere instruments; that there was no san- 
ity in them, though there was some use, 


RTH. 


other perish, 
+ the brethren, 
hrist.” 


ich is recur- 
om the very 
* the human 
Me: in the 
sor by sym 
yh necessary 
ves more OF 
men rise in 
o will shoot 
instead oO 
yn to drop a 
ed in right 
tial spirit of 
his, they are 
er the inter- 
nre. A man 
garding cer- 
rewenty-five 
ense wit 
was no ‘ann 


SUFFERING, THE maASURE OF WorRTH. 


But those that are below him, and round about him, 
have a superstitious feeling with respect to these things ; 
and his example is very apt, not so much to enlighten 
them, as to shock them; and they are led to feel that 
there is no wrong in certain things which before they al- 
ways supposed to be Wrong ; and things are right which 
to them are not right. And the apostle lays down this 
rule :—that it is a poor use to make of one’s superior in- 
telligence, and the liberty that goes with it, to set such 
an example as leads men to stumble to their hurt; as mis- 
leads their weaker judyinent. And he goes on tu instance, 
in the latter part of the chapter which I read in the 
opening service, how he took the sum total of his man- 
hood, and refused to use it for himself, according to his 
own perceptious—according to the high scale on which 
he saw the truth. He made himself anything and 
everything to his fellow-men. If he was with the Jews, 
he would not violate their prejudices. He preferred to 
conform to them in things that were not absolutely in 
themselves wrong, for the sake of keeping an influence 
upon them. When he went out from among them to 
the Gentiles—who had no such institutions, ordinances, 
and notions as the Jews hal, but who had a certain 
sort of natural theology, he arsumed their ground; but 
there was no inconsistency in him; for there was some 
truth in it. There is something of truth in everything. 
And wherever he went, he made himself all things to all 
men; because the business of his life was to save men— 
to do good to men. 

In this case, a man has taken the notion that the meat 
which has once been offered before an idol has received 
no moral taint, and is changed in no whit. He therefore 
sits down and eats such meat. At the same time he under- 
stands that he is not worshipping a god, or giving his assent 
to this pagan principle. But some weak brother, s seeing and 
knowing it, says, “ He eats that meat for an idol, and 
thinks it right to worship an idol;” and he goes in and 


316 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


eats the meat and worships the idol. And under such 
circumstances Paul says, “ Your knowledge misleads him, 
You act from one interior set of motives, and he inter- 
prets your action according to the motives which act on 
him; and so he misjudges you. But you have no right 
to make your superior excellence a snare.” 

This is the view which we are very apt to lose sight 
of—and the more because there is an opposite view. Men 
say, and say rightly, “If you never were to go faster 
and further than the ignorances and the prejudices of 
your fellow-men, society could never rise. Ifa man is 
enlightened, he must do something to enlighten other 
men.” That is true, and just as true as the other. Both 
these things are to be carried on together. It is only 
another illustration of the universal fact that all truths 
are in opposition——in opposite pairs. We have, in one 
way or another, to pull men up from a lower to a higher 
degree of knowledge, and character, and activity; and 
yet we are to do it all the time without eye and heart 
sensitive to this thing—That we are not to go faster than 
other men, or in such ways as to snare them into doing 
things that are wrong. We are not by our liberty or by 
our superior knowledge, to imperil them. So much for 
the introduction of the subject. 

The thing for which I selected this text is the phrase, 
“For whom Christ died.” Therein is the key-note of 
value. “Through thy knowledge shall the weak brother 
perish?” The “weak brother” is not of much value in 
himself; but he is made valuable by the fact that Christ 
died for him. Christ’s suffering for him is the measure 
of his value. 

This doctrine of Christ’s suffering has stirred the human 
mind with innocent activity, and opened illimitable 
ranges of thought in many directions; but it is not ex- 
hausted yet. W hy must he sutter? What was the na- 
ture of the suffering? Is it possible for the divine to 
suffer? Was it nct merely human nature that suffered ? 


der such 
ads him, 
he inter- 
sh act on 
no right 


lose sight 
w. Men 
go faster 
udices of 
aman is 
ten other 
er. Both 
It is only 
all truths 
ve, In one 
9 a higher 
vity ; “and 
and heart 
aster than 
nto doing 
prty or by 

much for 


he phrase, 
by-note of 
k brother 
value in 
at Christ 
e measure 


he human 
llimitable 
is not ex- 
s the na- 
divine to 
suffered ? 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 317 


Did the sufferings of Christ act upon the divine policy ? 
or upon the heavenly intelligence? or upon the human 
race? Were the sufferings of Christ a literal assumption, 
measure for measure, of anticipated human suffering ? 
Did His suffering solve unrevealed difficulties of adminis- 
tration ? 

These largely forensic questions have drawn out the 
heart and the reason of the Christian world, and rendered 
them extraordinary productive. The opinions have been 
exccedingly diverse, exceedingly combative, and exceed- 
ingly divisive. Again, on the ost precious point of the 
life of Christ, his garment has been divided, and almost 
endlessly ; but there is one view of the sufferi ing and 
death of Christ which has always been fruitful of good, 
and which can hardly be too much insisted upon, Leav- 
ing these other and more accustomed discussions in re- 
spect to the suffering of Christ, I purpose to call your 
attention to this view—I mean the moral effect which the 
suffering of Christ has had in determining the value and 
the dignity of buman nature. Christ’s death for all 
mankind has inspired the imagination and the under- 
standing of the world with a humanity, a justice, a con- 
siderate and active pity, which could hardly have sprung 
from any other source or view. 

Suffering, in its most comprehensive sense, is universally 
accepted as the measure of value which one puts upon an 
object. By suffering I do not mean simply pain; but 
care, labour, time, endeavour. How much of themselves 
men will give for one another, measures the worth in 
which ‘hat other is held. “I love you,” may mean only, 
“you are my plaything.” To say “I love you,” may mean 
only, “1 love myself.” But they that love truly, love 
under conditions in which they will be willing to give 
themselves for the object loved; and how much they es- 
teem, value, love, is measured by what they are willing to 
suffer, A man may love another without being obliged 
to suffer for him. That is, there may be no necessity ‘for 


318 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


putting the strenyth of his love to a test. But if one is 
brought into circumstances where his affection is to be 
proved and tested, it will be found that suffering is the 
measure of affection. In other words, how much of one’s 
self one will part with for another, indicates the value 
put upon that other. True love will give up for another's 
sake time and convenience. It will forsake its own course 
to take on care and activity for that other, It will con- 
tinue to do this through long periods, It will employ 
reason, moral sense, affection, and, in short, all the resour- 
ces of its being, for the sake of that friend, Tt will, as it 
were, stop the flow of life in the channels of one’s own 
being, and pour it into the life of another, to give him 
pleasure, power, honour, and happiness. And when, in 
some great exivency, all this will not avail, and nothing 
will do but to yield up the very substance of secular life, 
then love, in the glory of its power, goes to death as to 
the consummation of itself, and leaves a witness to itself 
which all mankind recognizes. For it is the universal in- 
stinct, and judement as well, that yreater love than this 
can no mew show: that he luy down his life for his 
friend. 

Even when this is the fruit of instinct, it is impressive. 
The bear that cies defending its cubs—who does not ad- 
mire it? The elephant that puts itself between the hunter 
and its grotesque little calf, bristling with spears all over, 
thrust into its hide, and marking every footstep with 
blood—-who can do other than admire it? The hound 
that pines and dies on its master’s grave—can any human 
being sce it unmoved? The little sparrow that fights 
the hawk and owl, not for itself but for its nest—whe 
but admires the bravery of the little hero? One must be 
heartless indeed, to feel no admiration for these fidelities 
of love, where love, after all, is but an instinct, and not a 
rational judgment. 

But how much more when one’s love and suffering spring 
from the perception of excellence in an object loved ? The 


if one is 
is to be 
ig is the 
“of one’s 
he value 
another's 
n course 
will con- 
1 employ 
1e resour- 
will, as it 
one’s own 
give him 
whet in 
1 nothing 
cular life, 
eath as to 
ss to itself 
iversal in- 
than this 
c for lis 


mpressive. 
bos not ad- 
he hunter 
‘gs all over, 
step with 
The hound 
human 
hat fights 
est—whe 
ke must be 
e fidelities 
and not a 


‘ing y spring 


ed ? The 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 319 


greater the nature that suffers, the higher is the estimate 
which his example gives of that for which he suffers, And 
by this analogue, the suffering and sacrifice of a Divine 
Being carries out the witness to its utmost conceivable 
extent. For it was supposed that Gol was manifest in 
the flesh, and that He meant His living, passion, and 
death to be the measure of His judgment of the value of 
mankind. What must be the testimony and the force 
brought to the value of man by such a Being’s suffering ? 

We see at once a new element in the hands of the apos- 
tles after this testimony of the Master. No sooner was 
He gone up, than they began to preach that man was 
valuable on account of what Christ suffered for him. A 
man for whom Christ died became a very different crea- 
ture in imagination from a man before Christ had died 
for him. The fact that Christ died for a man built bul- 
warks round about him, and made him worth protecting, 
if he was weak. It laid a shield before him, and made it 
worth while to keep him unpierced by temptation or by 
rude assault. Though he was ignoble and unknown, it 
was the mysterious power of this. testimony of this oveat- 
est Being that ever lived upon the earth, respecting each 
individual of the whole human family, t that he was in His 
sight of such value that he was worth suffering for, and 
worth doing for. It was this that gave man his true po- 
sition in history, and gives him his true dignity and his 
true position now. 

Although we have but begun to read this lesson, it is 
indispensable for all the purposes of instruction derived 
from this view that we should reflect that our Saviour 
died for the whole world. It was not simply because He 
despised pride aud luxury that He refused to be counted 
with the rich in life; it was not alone because He did not 
believe in dynasties: it was a part of [is life’s work to 
bear a testimony, not so much to individuals as to the 
race. He died for the world—not for those that then 
dwelt upon the earth, but for the whole human family in 


o 


ca 


cae yn SI 


£ 


>, Slave Sa 


Me See SBR 


sa 


iTS Seg RETR 


320 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


its entirety—in its whole historical development. Christ 
died to bear testimony to the worth that there was in 
mankind, Any man is intrinsically of such dignity, scope, 
value, that he is to be measured by nothing so worthily 
as by the love, the sufferings and the death of his God. 
This suffering was not founded, either, upon man’s char- 
acter. It would be a testimony to the value of good 
character if Christ had come to die for it; but that was 
the very point of conflict between Him and the Pharisees. 
They heid that Christ, as the divine Teacher, ought to 
suffer and identify Himself with them; but He most 
scornfully rejected that, and said, “ J did not come to seek 
the righteous: I came to call sinners to repentance.” Not 
simply because they were in peril, but because the testi- 
mony that He was bearing to mankind required that He 
should not identify Himself with a particular class, and 
that He should not on that account identify Himself with 
character. For he who identifies himself with character 
in this world ere long will be borne into a class. Our 
Master, therefore, says, “I died for the ungodly; for the 
un-ighteous; for My enemies. I came to give my life for 
the lowest and the worst men.” He more sharply than 
any other being that ever dwelt on the earth discrimi- 
nated between good character and bad character,and gave 
emphasis to the value of goodness, and heaped up terrible 
woes against wickedness, and made awful threats of its 
doom. Yet there was something behind character to 
which Christ was bearing witness, and that was the ab- 
stract original value which inheres in what we call human 
life—human being. The death of Christ is a testimony 
to the value of man in his very substunce, if 1 may so 
say; so that the least and the lowest, the most unde- 
veloped, have the essence of value in them. The Hotten- 
tot, the Nootka Sound Indian, the most degraded African 
tribes, the lowest races of men about which philosophers 
calmly and coolly talk as to whether they are men, or 
monkeys sprouted in the hotbed of extreme civilization 


,. Christ 
re was in 
ity, scope, 
worthily 
1is God. 
an’s char- 
e of good 
_ that was 
Pharisees. 
; ought to 
He most 
me to seek 
nee.” Not 
e the testi- 
ed that He 
- class, and 
imself with 
1 character 
lass. Our 
ly ; for the 
my life for 
parply than 
diserim1- 
br,and gave 
up terrible 
reats of its 
aracter to 
as the ab- 
call human 
» testimony 
I may so 
most unde- 
he Hotten- 
led African 
hilosophers 
re men, or 
civilization 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 321 


and growing a little way—these have their value. Of 
the whole human family, in allits diversities, there is this 
testimony—Christ died for them. You may separate men 
from each other by the shape of their heels; you may 
separate them by the peculiarity of their hair, or the colour 
of their skin; you may separate them by some trifling 
variation of bone structure; but there is no difference 
between one race and another in this—that every one of 
them has reason, and its special faculties ; the imagination 
and its special relations; the moral sense, and its special 
developments. The original elements are traceable in 
every human being; in every tribe upon the globe, how- 
ever low and undeveloped it may be. The rudiments of 
every faculty that the highest have are in all, and iden- 
tify them as one great brotherhood ; and for all, however 
despised, however degraded, however worthless in politi- 
cal economy they may be, there is this testimony, which 
stands directly through the ages—Christ died for them ; 
and death, as the highest exposition of suffering was the 
measure of value, as well as the measure of love. 

Let us look, then, after this annunciation of the prin- 
ciple, at the effect which this fact has of determining 
man’s place, his rights and his worth. 

Consider, first, what the world’s way of estimation has 
been in judging men. We estimate men’s value by 
measuring their power. Earliest, men measure physical 
power. They are the great men who are strong, and 
courageous withal. Men who had strength, and capacity 
to use the strength, were the first heroes, the first leaders, 
the first legislators, the first demigods and demidevils. 
Next came men that were fruitful, effect-producing in 
the next higher range of faculties—not in the physical 
elements, but in the civic and social elements, till they 
reached to what is called “ civilization,’ where we stand 
ourselves, And now the habit of society is to classify 
men into relative ranks of value by the eftects which 
they are able to produce and exhibit. The man that pro- 


322 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


duces the most effects is considered the most of a man; 
and insensibly we have sli! into this idea, that a man 
who cannot dc anything is not anything; that a man’s 
value lies in his productive power. In other words, be- 
cause this is a truth in the range of political economy, 
we have adopted it as the sole measure of men. Because 
we measure men rightly by this principle in their rela- 
tions to human society; because we rightly apply this 
principle in estimating their value to society organiza- 
tions, we have come to think that men are valuable only 
by what they are worth to society. Therefore, when a 
great man dies men say, “The world has met with a 
great loss.” It has met with a much greater loss than if 
a poor man had died. If a poor man dies men say, “ The 
world has one less incumbrance.” Regarding this wor'd 
as a mere organization of secular society, that too, is true ; 
but behind the pauper’s usclessness, deeper than the ques- 
tion of his eflect-producing power, there is a human 
nature. There is something in every man—the lowest 
and the least. If he cannot weave; if he cannot forge; 
if he cannot shove the plane, or hold the wheel, or the 
helm; if he cannot paint nor write; if he cannot reason 
with philosophy, nor adorn with art; even if he lie 
almost torpid, there is a substance in him. He is the 
rich undug ore of the mountain. And that is in itself 
absolutely the most valuable thing that there is on earth. 
The dog that hunts well is better than the pauper that 
does not do anything, in the estimation of men, A horse 
that is worth tifty thousand dollars in the market has 
more honour as well as more care bestowed on him, than 
a man that can neither turn at the lathe, nor work at the 
alembic, nor speak, nor do anything that is regarded as 
useful. We judge men by this standard of political econ- 
omy— by what they can do, and what they are worth: 
and when men contrast them even with the brute animals, 
their enthusiasm rises higher for these dumb creatures 
than for their fellow-men, There is no such contempt cu 


of a man; 
hat a man 
at a man’s 
words, be- 
economy, 
Jecause 
their rela- 
apply this 
7 organiza- 
uable only 
yre, When a 
1et with a 
loss than if 
say, “ The 
this world 
100, 1s true ; 
n the ques- 
gs a human 
-the lowest 
nnot forge ; 
heel, or the 
nnot reason 
1, if he he 
He is the 
is in itself 
is on earth. 
yvuper that 
A horse 
market has 
1 him, than 
ork at the 
regarded as 
litical econ- 
are worth’ 
ite animals, 
creatures 
ontempt Cu 


- 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 323 


the globe for anything as man has for man. If a tribe 
can do nothing, they are regarded as contemptously 
worthless. If a race are not able to hold their own 
against ageressive races, people say, “It is a pity that 
there should be any cruelty; but what else could you 
expect ? There is no way but that they should be swept 
from the face of the earth. They must all go.” Nations 
of men that are dull, that are gentle, that are kind—the 
Chinese, for instance, who are not aggressive—with what 
superlative contempt we have looked upon them! In 
inany respects they are more ingenious and skilful than 
we are, and yet what a pagan Anglo-Saxon spirit has 
gone out from us in respect to them! Weare Pagan in 
our notions. Our law is a law of power. He that has 
power is princely, and he that is weak is a fool, in our 
estimate of our fellows. 

We need therefore to go back to this testimony of our 
Master’s example, who came not to make the prince more 
authoritative ; who came not to make the philosopher 
more widely influential; who came not to make the rich 
man more an object of admiration; who came not to 
make the laborious and productive man more eminent ; 
but who came by his suffering and death to bear a testi- 
timony of that element in human nature which every 
inan has like every other. The king and the pauper; 
the great and the small; the strony and the weak ; the 
good and the bad—God causes His ©::n to rise on the one 
and the other; and the death of > brist is a testimony to 
the one as well as to the otiicr, that tie original, funda- 
mental, inherent elemenis °* luman nature are of trans- 
cendent value in the sighi of Cod. He despises no man. 
Man it is that despises nis feilow-man if he is not u 
creature of power and productiveness, 

Thus it is that we classify society in our thouglit. 
When you think of society, you think of its influential 
parts. When you think of country, and are proud of 
your race, and of your people, it is the strong ones chat 


324 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


subtly affect your imagiuation and your judgnient. There 
are very few men who carry in their thoughts and in 
their sympathy, the weak, the poor, the outcast, the 
neglected. It was our Saviour: that did that; and oh! 
how few there are that have learned yet even to under- 
stand—still less to imitate ! 

There is, then, this substratum of value in human 
nature. It is independent of character, independent of 
education, independent of what it can do, arising from 
what inherently it is—from its absolute universal value. 
And the testimony of that great fact is, Chrtst died for 
the wngodly. And there can be no estimate of value like 
that which is evinced by willingness to die for another. 

This view dimly interprets also the future. For if 
men may aot be estimated by what they can do here, we 
more than suspect that it must arise from the fact that 
the potential relations of men are not all developed 
here, and that they are creatures of another latitude, of 
another summer, with another chance in other spheres. 
It is more than dimly intimated that man lives again. 
That is “brought to light.” And from the treatment 
which we perceive that our Saviour administered to the 
bad, to the evil, in this world—to men, whose lives had 
been wasted here—we cannot but gather a sense of the 
value of men that inheres in those relations which are 
yet to take hold of higher realms, and to become more 
fruitful. 

It is not for me to say, here, whether in the great 
experiment which we are now making, we are making all 
of our experiment, I merely point to the general fact 
that a man in the lowest condition here is not the man 
that he is to be; and that when you have measured him, 
and weighed him, and ascertained just what he is worth 
to his family, to his nation, to the industry of the world, 
or to its affections or moral elements, you have not esti- 
mated what his value is. You have no estimate of what 
he is worth in the kingdom that is yet to come. He has 


nt. There 
its and in 
itcast, the 
5; and oh! 
1 to under- 


in human 
pendent of 
‘ising from 
ersal value. 
st died for 
t value like 
> another. 
re, For if 
do here, we 
he fact that 
- developed 
latitude, of 
her spheres, 
lives again. 
treatment 
ered to the 
se lives had 
ense of the 
which are 
come more 


the great 
making all 
reneral fact 
ot the man 
nsured him, 
Ine is worth 
the world, 
e not esti- 
hte of what 
e. He has 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 325 


before him another world, another orb, another clime; and 
we are told most solemnly by our Saviour that the men 
who are worth the most, and are the most honored, the 
most regarded, here, will be worth the least there. “ The 
first shall be last,” we are told, and “the last shall be 
first.” Therefore I believe that there is many an obscure 
and outcast race, that there is many a class in society, 
that there are individuals innumerable, whom men 
scarcely deign to notice, but who, when they come to 
take hold upon the other life, and when the relations 
which they sustain to that spiritual realm come to be 
known, will lift themselves mfvhtily above all others. In 
measuring men by what they are worth to us here, we 
mismeasure, we under-estimate, in every conceivable way, 
leaving out of site the blossoming period which is to come 
hereafter. 

There are many of the plants of our northern summer 
which come up quickly, which rush to their flowering 
periods, and do exceedingly well; but they are coarse and 
rank at that. And there are many seeds that I plant by 
the side of them every spring which in the first summer 
only grow a few leaves high. There is not sun enough in 
our hemisphere, nor heat enough in the bosom of my soil 
to make them do what it is in them to do. But if I take 
them end rut them in some sheltered hot-house, and give 
them the evr4,...0us growth of autumn and winter, and 
then again, wien June begins to burn in the next sum- 
mer, put chesa out once more, they gather strength by 
this second »icnting, and lift up their arms, and spread 
out the abundance of their blossoms, and are the pride 
and givry of the spring. The plants that grew quickest 
the year before, are now called weeds by their side. And 
I doubt not that there is many a man who rushes up to a 
‘unk growth in the soil of this world, and of whom men 
seeing him, say, “That is a great man,” but there are 
many starveling, poor, feeble and effectless creatures in 
this woiid who will be carried safely on and up, and 


326 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


rooted in a better clime; and then, lifting up their whole 
nature, they will come out into that glorious summer of 
fervent love in heaven, where they will be more majestic 
more transcendently beautiful in blossoms and more 
sweet in fruit, than those who so far surpass them 
here. “The last shall be first, and the first shall be last.” 

Do not despise men that are less than you are. Do not 
undervalue men because they are not of much account in 
this world. A man may be a very good man if he is not 
a carpenter, if he does not know how to wield the hand 
of skill, A man may not be able to make money, and yet 
he may be rich. Ai. .2 may not have the power to gen- 
erate thoughts here, fk‘ ' ~ and by he will. Birds do not 
sing the moment they ar: cut of their shell. They must 
have a season in which to iearn to sing. And men do not 
unfold their true natures, or sing their best songs, many 
of them, in this world. There is another world beyond; 
‘and there is no man that has appearance so much against 
him in this world that you can afford to despise him, to 
feel contempt for him, or to regard him as worthless. 
That term worthless, applied to unaccomplishing weakness 
in this world, is pagan! 

Next, let us point out with sume aegice of particularity, 
the effects which this doctrine, so far opened, will have 
upon our feelings, our conduct, and our relations to our 
fellow-mon. 

Let us assume that we have come into the full sym- 
pathy of Christ's doctrine, and that we have learned to 
measure man’s value as he did. Or, not being able to see 
it, as he did, let us suppose that we are in full possession 
of the Christian feeling—Christ died for that man. 
When we meet a man, now, how seldom does any other 
thought arise in our mind than of his physiological struc- 
ture, of his age, of his comeliness, and of his relation to 
society. Unconsciously, as we pass men, we look at their 
garb, at their port and movement, at their face; we study 
them altogether in the light of their lower education, in 


their whole 
summer of 
re majestic 
and more 
rpass them 
all be last.” 
re. Donot 
account in 
if he is not 
d the hand 
rey, and yet 
ywer to gen- 
Birds do not 
They must 
men do not 
songs, many 
rld “beyond ; 
uch against 
pise him, to 
s wor thiess, 
g¢ weakness 


articularity, 
, will have 
tions to our 


e full sym- 
learned to 
r able to see 
] possession 
that man. 
s any other 
gical struc- 
relation to 
bok at their 
; we study 
ucation, in 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. he 


the light of this world. How seldom, looking at a man. 
does the thought come into our mind, “ Christ died for 
him!” We think men to be worthy of our pause and 
our attention if they have some intrinsic value. But we 
that believe in Christ Jesus, and have his word in our 
hand, or volubly upon our lips, every day behold men; 
and the highest relationship, the one salient feature that 
belongs to human life is the very one that we almost 
never think of—n: unely, Christ died for them. 

No man but a Christian can enter into this spirit; and 
all Christians do not. That large sympathy with human 
nature which comes with fellow ship with Christ’s feeling ; 
that rising of your spirit until you come to the stand- 
point from which Christ, looking upon the human race, 
says of every one of them, at They are so valuable, poor 
and weak as they are, that they are worth my thought, 
my care my suffering, and my very death. And yet, how 


few Christian men there are that have any such vaiuation® 


of human nature! If, however, one has it, it will be 
powerful restraint upon lawless liberty, and will bring 
him into such universal sympathy with all his fellow- 
men, that, at the sacrifice of his own convenience and his 
own rights, it will be a privilege and a pleasure for him 
to serve them. 

Some men, if they are called deliberately to give up 
their rights, never can forget it. It is a solitary thing, it 
may be ‘that they are called to give up, which causes them 
a severe struggle; and the circumstances is emphasized 
in the journal of experience. If they are caught, for in- 
stance, and compelled to give, or to yield for another's 
sake, they will say, “T know what it is to give up my 
rights for another; for I had a struggle once and did it,” 
Have you ever geen a miser, in some ‘unexpected moment, 
betrayed into a charity ? He is amazed at himself after 
it is over; and he recounts the fact again and again. 
“ Give ?” he says, “ yes, I did give once. “I know what it 
is to give.” He tells it scores and scores of times, It is, 


rer bern SRO ELE NR NT Tr 


398 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


like an old man’s worn-out stories, repeated, repeated, re- 
peated. So that that which ought to be the easy carriage 
of a noble man’s nature, becomes, after all, the special, 
exceptional, and much-praised single instance. 

If I look upon my fellow-men as being all that they 
ought to be; if I consider myself at liberty to measure 
them simply by their moral development, by their intel- 
lectual development, or by their social development; if I 
feel myself at liberty to look upon tuem and classify 
them in this sphere, I go on the theory that we are all 
scrambling for development, that everybody is trying to 
devolope himself, and that the law of development is that 
in the struggle of life the weak must go under the strong. 
And so men go through life, saying, “I will take care of 
myself, and you mm. take care of yourself ;” and they 
feel that they have a right to go through life thus. 

Now can any mam that bas the first element of Christ’s 
spirit in him so look upon his fellow-men? Can anyone 
who has drunk deeply of the spirit of the Master, refuse 
to accept the injunction of the apostle, “We that are 
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak?” It is 
as if a strong swimmer should turn back and lend a help- 
ing hand to buoy up and lift across the flood one that 
was weaker or less able to swim than himself. We have 
no right to disregard, much less to hinder, the welfare of 
any human being. Have I a right to go tramp, tramp, 
tramp, according to the law of my physical strength, 
among little children? If I am where they are, I am 
bound so to walk as not to tread upon or injure them. 
If I have had better privileges than others, and have 
come to conclusions which they cannot understand, have 
[a right to scatter those sceptical notions through society ? 
I say sceptical notions, because advanced notions are to 
those whose notions are behind them always sceptical. 
Has a man a right to take any theory of Kfe which is in 
advance of the theories of his time, and which may 
be a safe theory five hundred years hence, and promul- 


330 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


themselves. They are poor sticks, and if J destroy five 
hundred of them in getting rich, I cannot help it. Iam 
strong enough; and if I do not do anything that is wrong, 
I have a perfect right to use them.” A man employs a 
hundred labourers in his factory, and instead of using his 
superior skill and talents, he keeps them down to the 
lowest condition, in order that he may make the greatest 
use of them. He does not recognize any brotherhood as 
existing between him and them, or any obligation on his 
part to nourish them from his abundance. But. that 
great law of fellowship which knits every man to every 
other man on the globe says not only, “ ‘Thou a:+ his 
brother, but “Thou art responsible for his weal as well 
as thine own. Thou shalt not in any wise harm him, 
or suffer him to be harmed by any cause which thou 
canst restrain—certainly not by any plans of thine own, 
Thou shalt look upon every human being as a part of thy- 
self, and as a part of thy God.” 

Would it not stop a gisat many operations of society 
if this law should become a part of orthodoxy ? Nowa 
man may fleece a hundred men during the week, and 
wipe his mouth and take the communion on Sunday, and 
nobody thinks that there is any violation of good-fellow- 
ship or of orthodoxy. A man applies for admission into 
the church, and he is examined. The question is asked 
him, “ Do you believe in the Trinity ?” He says, “ Well, 
it is so vast a subject that I have had my mind staggered 
in the contemplation of it, and I really do not understand 
God.” “Do not understand Him!” exclaimed the com- 
mittee. “ Brethren, this thing must be looked into. It 
is a fatal defection. If he is loose there, he is loose all 
the way through. You must be held over to another 
communion, that we may have time to examine you fur- | 
ther, What! do not believe in the fundamental doctrine 
of the Trinity and the Godhead }” 

Let the next candidate come up, He has lived in the 
Catechism. He believes it from beginning to end, Hg 


destroy five 
Ip it. Tam 
at is wrong, 
n employs a 
of using his 
own to the 
the greatest 
stherhood as 
‘ation on his 

But that 
1an to every 
Thou a> his 
weal as well 
e harm him, 
which thou 
of thine own. 
. part of thy- 


3 of society 
cy? Nowa 
» week, and 
Sunday, and 
good- fellow- 
|mission into 
tion is asked 
says, “ Well, 
nd staggered 
t understand 
ed the com- 
ced into. It 
re is loose all 
to another 


ine you fur- | 


ntal doctrine 


lived in the 
toend, Hs 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 351 


would believe ina hundred gods if it were necessary ! 
He believes in a total depravity ; he believes in the doc- 
trine of the Holy Spirit; he believes in baptism ; he be- 
lieves in all the ordinances ; he believes in anything that 
vou want him to believe in—and he seems to wait for more! 
He goes into the church; and people say, “ Ah that is the 
kind of confession. I like a man that is really well- 
informed, and that acquits himself well.” And that man 
goes to-morrow, and lays bis plans, knowing that they will 
run down this poor widow’s estate; knowing that they will 
ruin a dozen young men who are straggling on the thres- 
hold of life for the liberty to get food. He goes as an 
elephant would go through a foundling hospital, never 
Jooking where he steps, and without any consciousness 
that he is bound to give any heed to the infantile crea- 
tures among which he stalks. He crushes one here and 
another there, saying, “I must tike care of Number One; 
and if you would do as 1 do, you would get along all 
right.” He has no sense of the obligations of humanity. 
He would not put a pin into a» man—not at all; but he 
would put a p/an into him, and pierce him to the heart. 
He would not pit his hand into a man’s pocket; but he 
would take stocks in the street, and influence them in 
such a way as to destroy five hundrel men, without even 
erying, “Stand from under!” He goes through life mak- 
ing his commercial power the means of tripping: men up 
to their ruin. 

Such men are not producers, they are confusers, They 
are not men who are working in society ta increase em- 
bodied thought or skill, They are not men who are build- 
ing up the community inany way. They are men that use - 
men, “In allowable ways, itis said, Allowable? Yes, 
so far as cold law is concerned; but the man that hugs 
the law hugs damnation ! The law? Do you supp 
the law can ever be enough to measure honour? Can it 
ever be more than enough to mark its coarse features ? 
A man that does not live higher than the law, 9 man 


332 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


that has not more truth, more honesty, more purity, than 
the law requires, is searcely fit to be ranked among our 
fellow-men. And shall a man, all his life long, in the 
spirit and temper of his mind, be as a vintner who plucks 
grapes that he may crush them end extract the wine and 
put it in his cellar ? Sha!l aman pluck his fellow-men, and 
squeeze their blood out of their veins that he may make 
his own prosperity? There are sich men who believe in 
the Trinity, in the Holy Ghost, in the church, in baptism, 
in the Lord’s Supper, in everything that they can think of, 
and in everything that they ever heard about, pretty 
much, except that Christ died for sinners, and that sin- 
ners are unspeakably precious because Christ died for 
them. Woe be to that inhumanity which nestles in 
the heart of orthodoxy. If a man does not love his 
brother, do you believe that he loves God? I do not. 
This is one of the most precious of doctrines to those 
that look and long for 2 better period of the world. It 
was almost the only thing that we could urge when slav- 
ery rent our land; when it was habitually told us that 
the slave was not a man—at any rate that he was so low 
that the only condition in which he could profitably exist 
was this condition of circumscription. Because he was so 
low, he must not learn to read. Because he was so low, he 
must not learn the sacredness of marriage. Because he 
was so.low, he was stripped of every higher function. 
And in order to make their paganism more hideous, men 
enshrined it in the statute-books of the nation, that the 
slave was a creature that had no rights; that he was a 
chattel! And against this nefarious doctrine what had 
we to oppose? Here were these men of different hair, 
and different features, and a different coloured skin, and 
of a low degree of civilization; and we had but this to 
oppose to the efforts of men to keep them in a state of 
degradation—*“ Christ died for every one of them.” Tu 
every old mother nurse that prayed and wept for her 
scattered family; to every old grey-haired saint this: 


irity, than 
Among our 
ong, in the 
ho plucks 
> wine and 
v-men, and 
may minke 
believe in 
n baptism, 
un think of, 
out, pretty 
id that sin- 
+ died for 
nestles in 
yt love his 
' do not. 
1es to those 
. world. It 
when slav- 
old us that 
was so low 
itably exist 
e€ he was so 
s so low, he 
Because he 
r function. 
deous, men 
n, that the 
ht he was a 
what had 
erent hair, 
d skin, and 
but this to 
h a state of 
hem.” ‘To 


saint thiat 


pt for her 


SUFFERING, THE MEASURE OF WORTH. 333 


trusted in Christ; to every young man or maiden in 

anguish that looked up and cried, “ “Lord, remember me, 
the only argument we could give was, « Christ died for 
you.” The ‘single strand that held against the storins of 
avarice, and against the fire of lurid lusts, was the single 
arzument, “For these Christ died.” And that held ; ; and 
the most wonderful change toward regeneration that the 
world ever saw, has taken place, I think, by the simple 
operation of the great law, “A man for whom Christ 
died is of unspeakable value.” 

And what have we now for the weak races? I see how 
commerce is extending, and how open communication is 
bringing all the countries of the world together. I see 
how this land is going to be the battle-field of the world 
in respect to these great oppressions. I perceive that the 
weaker races are coming among us; as, for instance, the 
hordes of Chinamen that are swarming our western bor- 
ders. And I perceive that there are men of a hard heart, 
and an iron shod foot, who are preparing to tread these 
people down, and deny them their rights. And I take 
my stand by the side of every weak creature, whatever 
his nationality may be, and I say, “ For him Christ died.” 
Take him; respect him; educate him. Let him have a 
ehanee. Let no man despoil him. Keep the vulture from 
him. Bend down arrogant pride, and let no combination 
of men tyrannize over him, And the weaker he is, the 
more stand off. Christ died for him. He is the babe of 
providence. He is the infant of ages. Give men at tho 
bottom a chance tocome up. Shall the world for ever rolk 
with the same disastrous experiments? Shall the strong 
be made stronger by grinding the weak, and pouring out 
their blood? When shall we learn that while naturo 
makes the weak suffer for the strong, grace and God 
reverse it, and make it the duty of the strong to sufter 
for the weak? God, the highest, bowed down his head, 
and came upon the earth, and suffered for the weakest 
and the worst. There is the law of heaven, the law of 
the ages, the law of the universe. 


334 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


Christian brethren, we must arm ourselves betimes, 
The seeds of a better public sentiment must be sown. 

Then let no man be discouraged because he is labour- 
ing in humble circumstances ; because he is labouring 
with a very much neglected class; beeause he spends a 
ereat many hours on most unpromising materials, There 
is no material in this world that is unpromising. The 
fundamental value of human life is such that you cannot 
pick amiss. For, though some will disclose what you do 
in this world quicker than others, yet there is no one 
toward whom you can show the spirit of Christian brother- 
hood and fic lelity, that you will not meet by and by, where 
you will see that you have worked better than you knew, 

I have heard of somnainbulists that rose in the night 
and sat themselves down at their easel, and painted with 
that mystic fidelty and skill whicl» belongs to abnormal, 
or rather unknown conditions of po:ver. And when the 
morning light came, they 10se and looked upon their 
easel and said, “Who hath wrought this/” It was their 
own work in the hours of the unknowing night ; and in 
the morning they beheld it and marvelied. 

My dear brethren, you are somnambulists, walking in 
this darksome vale; and you, by every touch that you 
put upon the poor and needy and weak, are working out 
a portrait ; and when the bright morning of the resur- 
rection comes, you will be struck with aniazement, and 
will say, “ W ho hath wrought this?” And with effable 
joy, Christ shall say, “ This is your art taught of me, 
copied from my love, inspired by my fidelty ; and. inas- 
much as ye have done it unto me.” Every single tear, 
every single act of fidelity which you have bestowed upon 
the poor, you will see rising and making the character of 
Christ and the glory of God more eminent; and God 
will say, “ Ye did it unto me.” 

Work on; be patient; be believing; hope; hope to 
the end, and then go to your reward ! 


‘es betimes, 
be sown. 
1e is labour- 
s labouring 
he spends a 
jals. There 
using, The 
you cannot 
what you do 
‘6 is no one 
tian brother- 
ad by, where 
in you knew. 
in the night 
painted with 
to abnormal, 
nd when the 
upon. their 
It was their 
ight; and in 


, walking in 
ch that you 
working out 
f the resur- 
hzement, and 
with effable 
ught of me, 
y ; and inas- 

single tear, 
stowed upon 
character of 
ht; and God 


pe; hope to 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN. 


** But whoso shall offend one of these little ones, which believe 
in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about 
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depths of the sea. 
Woe wnto the world because of offences ! for it must needs be thar 
offences come, but woe to that man jrom whom the offence 


ue cometh {”—Marr, xviii; 6-7. 
s 


HIS is one of the most striking scenes in the 
whole life of the Saviour, one of the most 
striking instances of teaching, where he took 

a little child and set him in the midst of the 

disciples, and declared unto them, that of such was 

the kingdom of heaven; that unless they became as 

a little child—that is, were born again—they should 

AX 10 no case see the kingdom of heaven. And then he 
declared that whosoever should cause one of them to 
offend-—you will mark the difference ; not whosoever 
should offend one of them, in our sense of making him 
angry, was so culpable; but whoever should cause a 
child to go wrong; whosoever should so treat a child 

as to damage its moral constitution, its affectional 
nature, its present life or its prospect for the life to 
come—it were better for him not to have been born; it 
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about 
his neck, and that he were cast into the depth of the sea. 

You, of course, in interpreting this figure, are not to im- 

agine our millstones, which would seem rather ditticult to 


336 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


tie about one’s neck. The mills of the ancients were hand- 
mills; and the grinding was done with stones in basins ; 
and these stones were quite manageable, and of just about 
enough weight, if tied about one’s neck, to sink the head 
below the wave. This was—certainly in the time of 
Christ—a Roman punishment, and many were executed 
in the sea of Galilee in that way, by being sunk with 
stones attached to them. So that, dropping it as a specitic 
form of capita! offence, we may state that it is a capital 
offence in the judgment of our Saviour for one to so in- 
tluence a fellow-creature as to be harmful to him, as to 
do him an injury. 

This is not a consideration of those thousand injuries 
which we do to men, and which are external, as stealing 
from them, as putting them to pain, or as putting them to 
shame. It may involve all these ; but the point of offence 
which is here prominent, and which is the thing to be 
considered, is that it is some form of conduct, whether it 
be injurious or pleasant to persons, which causes them to 
offend ; which makes them worse than they were before. 
You are bound so to treat men as negatively not to hurt 
them, and so as positively to do them good, in their 
dispositions, in their nature, as well as in their external 
feelings and circumstances. 

The whole passage teaches, in an eminent manner, the 
value of children. Productively, they are of no value. 
It is supposed by commentators that this was a little 
orphan child. Some shade of the original language leads 
to that impression. A little child, and certainly one 
without parents and home, can return nothing for the 
service rendered to him. Of all things that you can 
think of, a child in its earlier years reaps the most of care 
bestowed, with the least remuneration received—unless 
you take your pay in loving. It can say but little. It 
can furnish little for the taste. Very little can its hands 
do. It has to be watched, rather than to watch. It has 
to be served, rather than toserve. It is the seed of hope; 
it is the prophecy of love; but as scciety reckons men’s 


e hand- 
basins ; 
st about 
he head 
time of 
xecuted 
nk with 
1 specitic 
1 capital 
to so 1n- 
im, as to 


injuries 
stealing 
ry them to 
f offence 
ing to be 
hether it 
s them to 
e before. 
t to hurt 
in their 
external 


ner, the 
o value. 
a little 
ge leads 
nly one 
for the 
you can 
t of care 
unless 
ttle. It 
ts hands 
It has 
of hope ; 


s men’s 


THE CRIME OF LCEGRADING MEN. 337 


value—namely, from their productive force—a child is 
about as valueless in political economy, as anything that 
you can imagine. Compared with men in power, men in 
place, and men of influence, it would seem as if children 
must get out of the way, and let their superiors pass by. 
But the Saviour takes a little child, in all its helplessness, 
and an orphan child at that, and says, “So far from great 
and swelling men being superior, unless they be converted, 
and become like this little child, they shall not see the 
kingdom of God.” 

If injuring the lowest possible state of human life is a 
capital offence, how much more wicked is it to injurea 
greater sum of being? Ifour Saviour had said that to 
destroy a king was a high crime, everybody would have 
believed that ; and without any profit to the rest of man- 
kind, because the king is a representative character. All 
men agree that it is evil to strike down an eminent and 
rich and counselling man, in whom the state itself bas an 
interest. Everybody would say, “Of course, a noble, a 
prince, a general, a president, a monarch, a philosopher, a 
genius, a poet, a painter—to slay these men is an out- 
rage.” But it is the painter that is slain; it 7s the king; 
it 7s the magistrate; it 7s the philosopher. 

Our Saviour wanted to show that with God, indepen- 
dent of these intrinsic reasons, there was something that 
was unspeakably precious in the mere element of man- 
hood, in the mere element of being; and therefore he 
goes to the very lowest type of man’s life. He takes not 
the king, nor the king’s child; he takes not the great 
man, nor the petted children of great men; he picks out 
the little orphan that had neither father nor mother alive, 
that nobody knew or cared for, apparently, and said, “ He 
that causes as much humanity as there is in this little 
child to offend, he that damages this little child, had 
better lose his life. It is a capital offence. 

Now, if beginning at the bottom, and putting such a 
measure to comprehenive manhood as is developed there 
in its least power, and in its lowest aspects ; if manhood is 


338 SERMUNS BY BEECHER. 


as valuable there as it is at every step in which it de- 
velopes itself; then every step of its ascent, every added 
virtue, every added stress of power, all that goes to de- 
velope a diviner model and nature in the soul, makes it 
more imperative that you-should be careful that you 
honour, and do not harm, human nature. 

Men need their dutics and dangers on this subject to 
be often and clearly pointed out. It is an unconscious 
damage that we are doing, and that we need most to have 
set before us, that we take heed. 

1. Parents are frequently the cause of many of ti 
faults which grow into great depravities in their children. 
It is true that there are children who receive a nature im- 
practicable—almost unmanageable. It is true that the sins 
of the fathers are in such a sense visited upon their chil- 
dren, and their children’s children ; and that parents fre- 
quently have to manage children that task their wisdom, 
and would task the highest wisdom. But these are excep- 
tional cases. Ordinarily, our children are very much 
what we make them. A great many bad men are made 
bad by the moral government and the mistakes of their 
parents. The very theory of family government fre- 
quently destroys the child. He is snubbed as if he had 
no feelings. He is frequently provoked—and to such a 
degree that the Scripture stepped in and said, “ Fathers, 
provoke not your children to anger, lest they should be 
discouraged,” and become desperate, and do not care how 
they act. 

We see that still. It grew out largely from the old 
. Roman and Oriental notion of sonship. For parents were 
the owners of their children, just as they were the own- 
ers of anything else that was their property. But we are 
living in communities where different ideas prevail ; and 
now, children will not submit as once they would have 
submitted. It is said that children are a world smarter 
than they used to be. They are; and you cannot help 
it. Society is different. The theory of society is differ- 
ent, Government does not mean the same to us that it 


ich it de- 
ry added 
yes to de- 
makes it 
that you 


subject to 
conscious 
t to have 


ry of ti 
‘children. 
ature im- 
ut the sins 
their chil- 
rents fre- 
r wisdom, 
are excep- 
pry much 
are made 
s of their 
ent fre- 
if he had 
to such a 
“ Fathers, 
should be 
care how 


m the old 
ents were 
the own- 
ut we are 
vail ; and 
uld have 
d smarte! 
nnot help 
r is differ- 
us that it 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN, 339 


meant to antiquity. And in such a liberalized commu- 
nity it is impossible to continue the old Roman doctrine 
of family government. If children are living in such an 
atmosphere, or are surrounded by such influences, it will 
lead to resistance and recrimination. Worse than that, it 
leads children to resistance and deceit. Being treated as 
slaves, they imbibe the vices of slaves, one of which is 
craft. Weakness always employs deceit against force. 
Since it cannot resist it openly and overthrow it, it under- 
mines it to its harm. 

In that way children are over-governed, and sinfully, 
almost brutally governed in the household. It is a mercy 
and a special providence of God if they grow up uncon- 
taminated. They are twisted, they are bent, they are 
fatally damaged ; and there is many and many parent, I 
doubt not, who in amazement will rise in the last day to 
hear the Judge declare, “The ruin of that child I lay at 
your door. Ye caused .him to offend !” 

On the opposite side is also the mischief and the in- 
jury done unintentionally, but nevertheless just as really, 
by those who love their children weakly, who love them 
without any sense of equity, who love them with such 
self-indulgence that they cannot bear to pain them even 
as much as is necessary to make them well-governed 
children. 

Over-severity and relaxation of government are the two 
extremes which meet in the common destruction of chil- 
dren; and the one and the other are crimes—not simply 
crimes against a technical law, but crimes against hu- 
manity, and crimes, too, of which the Saviour said, ‘‘ Whoso 
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, 
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about 
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the 
sea,” 

It isa very solelm and serious matter for you to be in- 


trusted with the care of God’s little children. One would ° 


think, to see the mating that goes on in society—and it 
is a beautiful thing in its way—that butterflies were let 


340 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


loose, so light, and gay, and happy are the hearts that 
sail together and play round each other. One would think 
to hear the cheerful congratulations that accompany the 
putting out of a young life in the family state, that there 
was no responsibility connected with the event. And 
when there begin to be “angels unawares” coming into 
the household, one after another , how joyous itis! And 
the silver cups and little congratulatory notes are plenty. 
But how few there are who feel that, from the time the 
door of life opens, and a child is born, God has drawn 
His hand out from near to His own heart and lent some- 
thing of Ilimself to the parent, and said, “ Keep it tid I 
come, take this, my own child, and educate it for ime, and 
bring it to heaven, and let its improving and its procing 
appear when ye e and it stand together -in the last day. 
2. Our pride and inconsideration may, and often do, 
result in a train of evils to the character of our servants, 
of our clerks, and of the working;men that are under our 
care. In the ordinance of society, it will always be that 
there will be the wise and not the wise, the strong and 
the weak, the superior and the inferior. It is not a dis- 
grace to be in a subordinate position ; and it ought not 
to be even painful. When society shall be thoroughly 
christianized, so that all parts shall be tempered together 
both in equity and in love, the inferior in society will be 
grieved no more than little children are in the household. 
The little child is a subordinate; bunt he does not feel that 
his low estate is a misfortune. And when the strong 
bear the infirmities of the weak, when the superior feel 
that upon them are laid high obligations, that they are 
benefactors, that they are light carriers, that they are 
sent for the defence of the feeble, that they are not to 
treat them us their prey, butas their wards, then swperior 
and inferior will be stripped of many invidious feelings 
and discriminations that now wait upon these terms, 
Too often, Christian men, as well others, do not con- 
sider either the interests or the feelings of those whom 
they employ. The whole transaction is summed up in 


that 
think 
y the 
there 
And 
x into 
And 
lenty. 
1e the 
lrawnoa 
some- 
til I 
a, and 
fiting 
day.’ 
en do, 
vants, 
‘ry our 
that 
“4 and 
a dis- 
t not 
ghly 
ether 
ill be 
hold. 
that 
rong 
feel 
are 
are 

t to 
rior 
ings 


on- 
om 
ID in 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN, 341 
this: “ For so much you serve me in such a sphere. Here 
are your wages, and here are your duties.” That is bar- 
barous. A man is not a machine that has no feelings, 
and that runs with so much falling water, or with so 
much steam. There is not a servant that you employ who 
is not just like you in conscience, in sympathy, in love, in 
hope, in ambition, in pride, and frequently in deiicacy 
of feeling. There is not one of them that does not, like 
you, desire recognition, praise, gentleness, forbearance, pa- 
tience. And to take such a one, and suppose that all your 
duties are discharged in those industrial relations which 
we sustain one to another, measuring so much service by 
so much money—is that to be a Christian? Is it to be 
even a large-minded man of the world? But too often 
men feel that there is no further duty incumbent upon 
them ; that they may procure the services of men for just 
as little requital as possible; that, having engaged them 
to perform certain duties, they are at liberty to put on 
the screw of requisition just as severely as they can; and 
that, in discharging their part of the obligation, they are 
to pay to the penny what they argee to pay, but are not 
called upon to return anything of generosity or sympathy. 

Under these circumstances, men, feeling that they are 
men, are perpetually tempted by this rigorous and exact- 
ing course, by this mechanism of justice, to take advant- 
age. ‘They very soon come to feel, “If this man does not 
care for me, why should I care for him? If my interests 
are nothing to him, then his interests are nothing to me. 
If he measures just so much service by so much money, 
then I will measure just so much money by so much 
service.” And after a time there comes to be a system of 
suppressed warfare between the employer and the em- 
ployed. We see it break out in a thousand forms, It 
exists throughout society where Christian feeling does 
not produce a different and a better result. And it will 
goon. Nothing but a larger Christian idea and practice 
will save us from more violent ruptures than any that 
have yet taken place, For inferior men in inferioy 


i 
i 
i 
i 
} 


342 SERMONS BY BEEUCHER, 


stations will be tempted to deceit, and will practice deceit. 
They will cover up facts. They will resort to false pre- 
tences. They will give short work for their wages. They 
will count every man that is superior to them as in some 
sense their enemy; and their superiors will be all the time 
treating them as if they were in some sense their enemies. 
Society is organized like two camps; and the two parties 
are watching each other perpetually. Fear, dislike, and 
avarice are their weapons. How far is this from that large 
Christian feeling which regards every man as a brother, 
and every man, before God, in some sense, as an equal ! 

3. By the inconsiderate use of our liberty we are in 
danger of causing men to offend, and of essentially dam- 
aging human nature. As society is made up of different 
classes, and as these classes have different advantages, 
some are more and some are less informed than others. 
In a loving Christian family, which is the true type of a 
generous commonwealth, all things gravitate to the cradle. 
If you can sing, then you have a song for the baby. If 
you can frolic, then you must frolic with the baby. If 
you are expert in making merriment, the baby must have 
the advantage of it. If the child is sick, the grown folks 
are the ones to be still. Every thing at the top goes to the 
bottom in the realm of love. But in society it is the re- 
verse. If a man is wise, he thinks all ignorant folks 
must follow his lead and beck. If a man is refined, he 
sits in judgment on all vulgar and unrefined people. A 
man in the kingdom of love goes down to serve by the 
amount of superiority which he has, hearing always, in 
his own moral nature, Christ saying to him, “ Ye that 
would be first become the servants of the rest ””—which 
is the true law. But in the kingdom of this world men 
put the crown on their own heads, because they are so 
strong, and look to the weak to come and serve them. 
They put the laurels on their head, and are angry with 
their fellow-men because they do not chant their praises. 
And so men use their liberty as a means of oppressing 
their fellow-men. : 


leceit. 
e pre- 
They 
some 
> time 
emies. 
yarties 
e, and 
b large 
“other, 
ual ! 
are 1n 
-dam- 
fferent 
ntages, 
others. 


to the 
the re- 
folks 
ed, he 
le. A 
by the 
AYS, in 
Saint 
which 
d men 
are sO 
them. 
r with 
raises. 
essing 


Be 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN. 345 


There are a thousand ways in which this is done; but 
those ways in which the strong lead those who are weak 
into temptation and mischief, are the cruel ways. Persons 
resent very much, frequently, the intrusion upon their 
liberty, when it is said, “You ought not, in this com- 
munity, to play cards.” Acard is nothing. In itself it 
is no more than a piece of newspaper. A game of cards 
is just as innocent as a game of checkers ; and a game of 
checkers is just as innocent as a game of backgammon. 
They are innocent in and of themselves, and are perfectly 
permissible in the majority of families here among our- 
selves; but there are circumstances and places in which 
they are prejudicial, and you could no go and sit and 
play a game of cards, being known as a professor of re- 
ligion, without producing the impression among the 
young people that they might do it. And they, by rea- 
son of loose instruction and narrow views, have the im- 
pression, also, that if they may play cards, they may 
gamble and drink wine, and give way to dissipation in a 
multitude of ways. It may be perfectly harmless to you, 
and you may say, “If every one would do as I do, what 
harm would there be in playing cards?” But they can- 
not do as you do. 

There are men that are, for various reasons, able to do 
things which those round about them are not able to do, and 
will perish in the doing; and yet these men go heedlessly 
on doing these things and saying, “ Oh! if they will only do 
as we do, they will not be harmed!” That is, you arro- 
gant, selfish men are taking the liberty that God gave 
you to despotise over those that are round about you. If 
one or the other must give way, you must. If you are 
enlightened, and are strong, and you can do these things 
without harm, remember that you are in the midst of those 
who cannot do them without harm. 

There are many persons who, in the same way, use 
their liberty in religion, I never go into a Catholic 
church ; though I have no fear that I should be injured by 
it. I never take holy water; though | might, and not be 


344 


harmed by it. In 


have no Objections to it. 


self 48 not. There 


vant in my family who was bro 


ever cross m 


is no harm 


necessary ag any } 
way from her that which 


would just as lief cros 
in it. But | h 


SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


yself, that T am aware of 
S my- 


is a kind 
And she 
> She does not read her 
break hep off from hey 


Y that, go long as the 


help them where they 


ce than we are, If 


RN aaa ve 


m aware of. 
sf cross my- 
have a ser- 
ut Catholic; 
hese things, 
touch thut 
s.” I have 
1d on, put 
taken from 
ich she has 
id which to 
stage of de- 
h is a kind 
And she 
ot read her 
ff from her 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN. 345 
then they do not understand me. I have never said a 
word against any other church, that I know of, since I 
have been a minister. I criticise beliefs freely, and al- 
ways will; but I never lifted my hand to proselyte a 
person. J never strove to take a person out of one reli- 
gion and put him into another. The kingdom of Christ 
is not protited by such a process, any more than I am by 
taking a ten-dollar bill out of one pocket and putting it 
into another. It may serve my vanity, it may gratify 
the carnal feeling of God’s so-called disciples; but it 
is not wise nor right. 1 never have done it, and never 


willdoit. @ 


4, Men det eriorate their fellow-men,and weaken society, 


| by such conduct as puts men in their commercial inter- 


course into very tempting relations to each other. I am 
afraid there is not much preaching on the subject of the 


' relative duties of buyer and seller; of manufacturer and 


ae sua om 


ir a BN Os i 


consumer; but there is a great kingdom of duty here, 
which of course I can only glance at, though it is worthy 
of analysis with innumerable particulars. I look upon 
the ways of men in this regard as being peculiarly 
unchristian. It ought to be so that a little child 
could take in its hand a sum of money, and go to any 
store for a commodity, and hand that money over the 
counter, and, telling what it wants, receive an article as 
much better than its own uninstructed judgment could 
choose as the knowledge of the merchant is superior to 
its knowledge; but I am afraid it would not be safe to 
go shopping in that way. Iam afraid that if you were 
no judge of material, and bought accordingly, you would 
have poor garments. I am afraid that if you had no 
soa of prices, you would pay inordinately for many 
things. .. 

But do not slander the merchant, I think it is the 
front part of the counter that corrupts the back part. 
Now and then, in the mercantile business, just as in any 
other relation, there are men who incline to fraud, to 
; V 


346 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


guile; but ordinarily men that sell are perverted by the bit 
men that buy. You go forth hunting for a merchant out dey 
of whom you can get a“ bargain.” Whatis a bargain ?has 
A true bargain is that tranaction in which you rencer an Ch 
equivalent “for what you get—in which you give thatsta 
which is worth as much as that which you receive. Butove 
what you call a bargain is going out and findi ng some onethe 
with whom you can trade, so that you can come homeleag 
conscious that you have got five times as much as younot 
have given. And strange as it may seem, men take pridehu 
in this thing! [tis part purpose, and part excitement. me 
For instance, you go into the store of a man who keeps dea 
musical instruments for sale. He has an old violin. Itdo 
is cracked, and has been mende|. You take it and go tostor 
the light, and Jooking down through the opening, you ther 
see, “ Amati, 1695.” You say to the man, “dow much isean 
this?” He says, “Twenty dollars,” You take it. Only And 
twenty dollars! You tremble for fear he wili look again. me 
You go home with your “ Amati,” and say, “That violin of 
is worth five hundred dollars, and I would not take two they 
hundred in gold for it!’ “ How much did it cost you ?” thei 
“Guess.” And you sit expectant like one waiting for his fello 
crown! At last you say, “I only gave twenty dollars forjmost 
it!” “No, you don’t mean that?” “It is a fact; that is’ 5. 
all it cost me.” And how happy you are! And youis co 
show that violin the rest of your life, congratulating of tl 
yourself that it was worth four or five hundred doliars Nev 
and that you got it for twenty. That is to say, you stolé arr: 
all the diiference between what you got it for and what it and 
was worth; and God will judge you so: of ac 
Ah! but as men say, frequently, “ There is a trickfan a 
worth two of that,” That violin was doctored and fixed wou. 
up on purpose to deceive, and it was not worth ten dollars. rend 
The man that sold you that instrument was happy too ;eoul 
and as you left his store, he chuckled and said, “I gotthin 
that violin for a dollar and a half, and that man thinksgoci 
it isan “ Amati.” 1 It 
Are men worms? Is life but a scene of crawling anain st 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN, 347 


rverted by thebiting? Is bargaining but this ignoble coining of the 
merchant outdepraved feelings? And is that what the blood of Christ 
is a bargain ?has produced in you? Have eighteen hundred years of 
you rencer an Christian teaching come to this, that professors of religion 
you give thatstart out in the morning to see who cin be the sharpest 
receive. Eutover the counter, who can pay the least money and get 
\ding some onethe most goods, or who can take most money and give the 
n come homeleast goods? Is not this a part of the play of liie? Do 
much as younot men go out shopping just as men go out fishing or 
nen take pridehunting, to see how much game they can get? Do not 
excitement. men pride themselves on their being shrewd in their 
an Who keepsdealings ? Are not clerks bothered and provoked ? and 
Id violin. Itdo not they know that if such persons come into their 
‘eit and go tostore they must fall from their price, or not sell? and 
opening, youtherefore do they not put their price so high that they 
‘dow much isean afford to fall? And thus are they not taught guile ? 
fake it. Only And are not persons that practice this kind of traffic often 
rili look again. members of the church, and persons that have a great deal 
“That violin of moral excellence ? Notwithstanding all their virtues, 
not take twothey are so inconsiderate in these things that they damage 
it cost you?’ their own consciences, and damage the consciences of their 
raiting for his fellow-men, and fill the relations of commerce with the 
ty dollars forgmost pernicious and unchristian feelings. 
fact; that is’ 5. Avarice—and that, too, in its most ignoble forms— 
! And youis continually tempting so-called good men to the injury 
ngratulating of their fellow-men. Perhaps you have noticed in some 
dred doliars IN ew York papers an investigation that has been quietly 
say, you stolaearried on as to the weights and measures and qualities 
r and what itand adulterations of things sold. I suppose the practice 
of adulterating food, and medicine even is carried on to 
re is a trickfan alarming extent, I suppose many a patient dies that 
d and fixed would be saved were it not that the medicines given are 
h ten dollars.rendered of no value whatever by adulteration, If you 
happy too ;¢ould see how much corruption there is in this regard, I 
aid, “I gotthink you would be almost afraid to deal with men in 
man thinksgociety. 
..| It is not, however, your injury in pocket, or your injury 
stomach, that I am now considering; what I am con- 


SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


sidering is the fact that men should allow in their 
business this element of fraud; that they shouid train 
not only themselves, but their clerks, their correspondents, 
those from whom you buy, those to whom they sell, every- 
body with whom they have to do, to a species of deception. 

Now, when a man sells eleven ounces for twelve, he 
makes a compact with the devil, and sells himself for the 
value of an ounce. And that is not all, ‘1e sells himself 
to as many devils as the number of times that he sells 
eleven ounces for twelve. I do not say that they under- 
value themselves in such asale as this. I think that they 
do not, ordinarily. But consider what a man will do for 
the’sake of a few pence. How such a man can look at 
himself in a glass, or bear to be alone with himself, I 
cannot imagine. A man that practices this system of 
petty frauds, in which he has trained young men, his 
correspondents, all that are connected with him in busi- 
ness, making them lawful, covering them over, so that 
they shall not excite alarm, and weaving nets and excuses 
to hide them; a man that goes on in this course from 
week to week, damaging and damaging people while he 
enriches himself all the way through—do you suppose 
that such a man can enter the kingdom of God? Would 
it not be kind if some angel were to sound the trumpet 
in his ear every single day, saying, “It were better that a 
millstone should be hanged about thy neck, than that 
thou shouldest have made this profit by such means?” 

Do you believe in a hereafter? Do you believe in a 
judgment seat? Do you believe that your victims and 
pupils will meet you there face to face, and that God will 
tear away all disguises, and that you will see things a; 
they are ? 

6. There is another relation (for since we have is- 
secting-table to night, and are using the knife in . orbid 
anatoma, we may as well go to the very root of things )-- 
there is another relation in which I perceive that greet 
damage is done by men professing godliness as well as 
men professing honesty, though not avowedly Christian, 


mus 
it, a 
that 


had 
amo! 
who 
bette 
pay 


their 
train 
dents, 
every- 
yption. 
ve, he 
for the 
imself 
e sells 
uncder- 
it they 
do for 
ook at 
iself, I 
tem of 
en, his 
n busi- 
so that 
PxXcuses 
e from 
hile he 
uppose 
Would 
umpet 
that a 
n that 
eans ?” 
ye in a 
ns and 
d will 
ngs ai 


iS- 
rbid * 
2s —— 
great 
ell as 
istian, 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN, O49 


by the injustice which lurks and is almost inherent in 
their vanity. There are very few men who have such 
essential justice in their very nature that they can say 
that they do not want anything that is not their own, 
nor any more than their own. There ave very few men 
who have that native good sense—I might almost cail ii 
grace——by which they say, “I do not want to appear any 
Letter than I am.” There is not one person in a thous- 
and that does not want to. Indee?, we almost never 
consider, or are taught to consider, that in the matter of 
dress, many of us are all our lives long seeking to appear 
better than we can afford to appear. Of course, when 
persons are wealthy, they can afford to dress to any de- 
gree either of ostentation or richness, as the case may be; 
but all the way down ere tise that are not able, and are 
not content not to do it, And so people want better 
goods than they can afford to wear. 

This is not equitable. You cannot afford to wear any 
better clothes than you can afford to pay for. It is a 
mark of true nobility for a young man to come into the 
city, and be introduced, it may be, into his employer's 
family, and stand up without blushing, in his plain home- 
made coat, and say, “I cannot afferd anything better. I 
must be an honest man, whatever Iam. I cannot afford 
it, and I shall not have it.” But oh! how few there are 
that can do that ?_ Young men feel that they must have 
that which shall make them look like their companions. 
And what is the result, too often ? 

In a large establishment in New York, a book-keeper, 
in whom was reposed unbounded trust, was found, at 
ast, to be a defaulter, and to have appropriated money 
from the establishment to his own use. Why? Was it 

inking? Was it any lustful dissipation! No. He 
had been made the leading member of a literary society, 
among rich people, and he had to live as they did with 
whom his “happy lot” was cast. He had to dress 
better than his circumstances would warrant. He had to 
pay many little incidental expenses, He had not tiie 


| 
| 
| 


390 SERMONS BY BEECHER, 


money; and yet he could not resist the temptation. So 
he stole it; he was found out; and he lost his place. I 
I do not know what has become of him. How dress, as 
in this instance, often tempts men! This is one reason 
why the young should be instructed. 

You wish to dress your wife better than your circum- 
stances will allow. She wants to have you. She is a 
woman of spirit, as it is said, and she does not mean to bo 
a drudge. ‘“ Why should our neighbours,” she says to 
her husband, “dress any better than we? They are made 
of the same flesh and blood that we are. See how they 
come out. -I'don’t think a man of any spirit would let his 
wife and children go to church dressed as you let us go. 
Look at these children. You would think that they had 
just come out of some slop-house! If I had married as 
I might have married, we should have had different times 
—I and my children!” How many men are stung to the 
quick by such remarks from their wives! Often-times, 
their moral sense revolts, at first, and they feel indigna- 
tion ; but “continual dropping wears a stone ;’ and by 
and by the man is dressed a little better than he can afford ; 
and his wife and children are dressed better than he can 
afford, and somebody must pay for the extravagance. I 
do not say that they are tempted to steal; but I do say 
that they grind. They mean somehow to get it out of 
the milliner, out of the dressmaker, or out of the mer- 
chant. They intend to make one hand wash the other 
somehow, and they go into petty meanness to bring it 
wbout. And this desire to dress better than they can 
afford is taking off the very enamel of their virtue, and 
taking out the very stamina of their religious life. Un- 
important as it seems, ostentatious vanity in dress has 
ruined many a family, and damned many a soul ! 

The same principle it is that largely corrupts trade. A 
man wants to build. He has money enough to build 
three houses ; but he wants to build five. He gets bids. 
And when it is understood what he wants to do, men say 
to him, “ You cannot build five houses with that amount 


ion. So 
lace. I 
dress, as 
e reason 


circum- 
She is @ 
an to be 
_ says to 
are made 
iow they 
ld let his 
let us go. 
they had 
arried as 
ent times 
ng to the 
en-times, 
indigna- 
and by 
n afford ; 
n he can 
gance. I 
I do say 
it out of 
the mer- 
the other 
bring it 
hey can 
rtue, and 
ife. Un- 
ress has 
! 
rade. A 
to build 
pets bids. 
men say 
- amount 


b 


THE CRIME OF DEGRADING MEN, 351 


of money. Bricks are so much, lumber is so much, and 
work is so much a day, and it will cost more than you 
propose to lay out.” Lut the man is determined to build 
five houses with his money, and he gets other buls; and 
by and by he finds a man that is Willing to undertake the 
job on the terms offered. The five houses are built; and 
they are built for that money. How is it done? By a 
system of cheating—-for builders are smart enough very 
often to make a man build five houses where he ought to 
build three. ‘The man that builds them is smarter than 
the man that employs him to build them. The latter 


does not know how the foundations are laid; he does not 


know how the partitions are filled up; he does not know 
how the plumbing is done, or how the glazing is done. 
The man meant to cheat the builder, and the builder 
cheated him. And every tenant that goes into the house 
will pay for it. 

And that which takes place in the building of the house 
takes place in the furnishing of the house. All the way 
through, men want more than is just. They are avari- 
cious, and they seck to get all they can out of other men. 

Men and brethren, am I speaking at random? Am I 
not telling things that you know better than I? Can you 
not, in looking in the store or in the shop, think of some 
whose cases I have described? Have you not been part- 
ners to a greater or less extent in the wrong courses 
which T have exposed? Can you not bear witness that I 
am speaking the truth, and that men in all avocations 
are violating not only the spirit, but the letter of the law 
of love? Are they not causing God’s little ones to offend 
—to stumble headlong into temptation and into woes. 

I will not speak of the intentional misleadings which 
go on in society, and of which there are many. I will 
stay the further progress of this discussion in its special 
applications, only to set before you, in the closing time 
that I have, the consideration of the value of man in the 


) sight of God. 


You are blinded ; and many of your mistakes arise from 


352 SERMONS BY BEECHER. 


the fact that you take your estimate of men as you find 
them in society. We judge of a man’s worth by what he 
can do. We speak of a man as we do of goods; and we 
speak of goods as being worth more or less according to 
what they will bring in tlfe market. We measure a man’s 
value by his position. We are not taught to think of 
men in regard to their intrinsic relations to God, nor in 
regard to their adaptibility to indefinite and eternal 
intercourse. The Glory of manhood is never seen in 
this world. What aman is you would not suspect from 
what you see of him here. Our summer is too short and 
too cold for that. Men do not blossom on the earth—at 
any rate, in their higher attributes, The live unknown 
and almost unseen, and die almost unwept and unla- 
mented, to rise into a better sphere, where they begin, 
under more auspicious circumstances, to take on a dignity 
and proportion of which we have no conception here, 
You damage a man here because he is of little value to 
society, and he passeth from your sight, and you think 
no more of him; but when you see him again he shall be 
a prince befure God. And Christ says, warning you, 
“The last shall be first, and the first shall be last.” 

You are living in the midst of terrible realities. But 
lands, and houses, and furniture, ships and goods, and 
governments—these are not the realities. These are 
transcient. The littl: child, the throbbing heart of a 
woman, the soul-natin2 of man—these are the durable 
things that we are living among, Every heart beats 
against some other heawt. Every thought is as the sculp- 
tors chisel. Your whole life is a mighty power in the 
midst of the various elemeits in this world; and the 
command of the Master is, ‘ Beware! beware! whoso shall 
cause to err the poorest man, the lowest man, the least 
man, and make him worse—it were better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were 
dvowned in the depth of the sea.” 


THE END. 


you find 
what he 
and we 
rding to 
a man’s 
think of 
1, nor in 

eternal 
seen in 
ect from 
nort and 
irth—at 
nknown 
id unla- 
y begin, 
. dignity 
on here, 
value to 
yu think 
shall be 


ng you, 


s. But 
ds, and 
ese are 
t of a 
durable 
beats 

b sculp- 
in the 
d the 
o shall 
e least 
that a 

b were 


